 Sevastopol was 180 meters ( 590 ft ) long at the waterline and 181 @.@ 2 meters ( 594 ft 6 in ) long overall . She had a beam of 26 @.@ 9 meters ( 88 ft 3 in ) and a draft of 8 @.@ 99 meters ( 29 ft 6 in ) , 49 centimeters ( 1 ft 7 in ) more than designed . Her displacement was 24 @,@ 800 tonnes ( 24 @,@ 400 long tons ) at load , over 1 @,@ 500 t ( 1 @,@ 500 long tons ; 1 @,@ 700 short tons ) more than her designed displacement of 23 @,@ 288 t ( 22 @,@ 920 long tons ) . 
 Sevastopol 's machinery was built by the Baltic Works . Ten Parsons @-@ type steam turbines drove the four propellers . The engine rooms were located between turrets three and four in three transverse compartments . The outer compartments each had a high @-@ pressure ahead and reverse turbine for each wing propeller shaft . The central engine room had two each low @-@ pressure ahead and astern turbines as well as two cruising turbines driving the two center shafts . The engines had a total designed output of 42 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 31 @,@ 319 kW ) , but they produced 52 @,@ 000 shp ( 38 @,@ 776 kW ) during her sister Poltava 's full @-@ speed trials on 21 November 1915 and gave a top speed of 24 @.@ 1 knots ( 44 @.@ 6 km / h ; 27 @.@ 7 mph ) . Twenty @-@ five Yarrow Admiralty @-@ type small @-@ tube boilers provided steam to the engines at a designed working pressure of 17 @.@ 5 standard atmospheres ( 1 @,@ 770 kPa ; 257 psi ) . Each boiler was fitted with Thornycroft oil sprayers for mixed oil / coal burning . They were arranged in two groups . The forward group consisted of two boiler rooms in front of the second turret , the foremost of which had three boilers while the second one had six . The rear group was between the second and third turrets and comprised two compartments , each with eight boilers . At full load she carried 1 @,@ 847 @.@ 5 long tons ( 1 @,@ 877 @.@ 1 t ) of coal and 700 long tons ( 710 t ) of fuel oil and that provided her a range of 3 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 6 @,@ 500 km ; 4 @,@ 000 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 Her main armament consisted of a dozen Obukhovskii 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) Pattern 1907 52 @-@ caliber guns mounted in four triple turrets distributed the length of the ship . The Russians did not believe that superfiring turrets offered any advantage as they discounted the value of axial fire and believed that superfiring turrets could not fire while over the lower turret because of muzzle blast problems . They also believed that distributing the turrets , and their associated magazines , over the length of the ship improved the survivability of the ship . Sixteen 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 119 mm ) 50 @-@ caliber Pattern 1905 guns were mounted in casemates to defend the ship against torpedo boats . She completed with two 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) 30 @-@ caliber Lender anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) guns mounted on the quarterdeck . Other AA guns were probably added during the course of World War I , but details are lacking , although Conway 's says that four 75 @-@ millimeter ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) were added to the roofs of the end turrets during the war . Four 17 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 450 mm ) submerged torpedo tubes were mounted with three torpedoes for each tube . 
 = = Service = = 
 Sevastopol was built by the Baltic Works in Saint Petersburg . Her keel was laid down on 16 June 1909 and she was launched on 10 July 1911 . She was commissioned on 30 November 1914 and reached Helsingfors late the next month where she was assigned to the First Battleship Brigade of the Baltic Fleet . Sevastopol and her sister Gangut provided distant cover for minelaying operations south of Liepāja on 27 August , the furthest that any Russian dreadnought ventured out of the Gulf of Finland during World War I. She ran aground on 10 September and was under repair for two months . On 17 October a half @-@ charge of powder was dropped and ignited when it impacted the floor of the forward magazine . Flooding the magazine prevented an explosion , but the fire killed two men and burned a number of others . She saw no action of any kind during 1916 , but hit underwater rocks twice that year , suffering minor damage each time . Her crew joined the general mutiny of the Baltic Fleet on 16 March 1917 , after the idle sailors received word of the February Revolution in Saint Petersburg . The Treaty of Brest @-@ Litovsk required the Soviets to evacuate their base at Helsinki in March 1918 or have them interned by newly independent Finland , even though the Gulf of Finland was still frozen over . Sevastopol and her sisters led the first group of ships out on 12 March and reached Kronstadt five days later in what became known as the ' Ice Voyage ' . 
 The crew of the Sevastopol joined the Kronstadt Rebellion of March 1921 . She returned fire when the Bolsheviks began to bombard Kronstadt Island and was hit by three 12 @-@ inch shells that killed or wounded 102 sailors . After the rebellion was bloodily crushed , she was renamed Parizhskaya Kommuna after the Paris Commune on 31 March 1921 . She was refitted several times before she was recommissioned on 17 September 1925 . She was refitted again in 1928 at the Baltic Shipyard , in preparation for her transfer to the Black Sea Fleet . Her forward funnel was raised and the upper part was angled aft in an attempt to keep the exhaust gases out of the control and gunnery spaces , while three 3 @-@ inch ' Lender ' AA guns were added to the roofs of the fore and aft turrets . She received some additional rangefinders and she was given a false bow to improve her sea @-@ keeping ability . She sailed for the Black Sea on 22 November 1929 , in company of the cruiser Profintern , encountering a bad storm in the Bay of Biscay . The open @-@ topped bow lacked enough drainage and tended to trap a lot of water which badly damaged both the false bow and the supporting structure . Parizhskaya Kommuna was forced to put into Brest for repairs , which included the removal of the bulwark that retained so much water . Both ships arrived at Sevastopol on 18 January 1930 and Parizhskaya Kommuna became the flagship of the Black Sea Fleet . 
 = = = Reconstruction = = = 
 She temporarily mounted an imported Heinkel aircraft catapult atop the third turret between 1930 and 1933 . It was transferred to the cruiser Krasnyi Kavkaz when Sevastopol began the first stage of her reconstruction in November 1933 . This was based on that done for her sister Oktyabrskaya Revolyutsiya , but was even more extensive . Her rear superstructure was enlarged and a new structure was built just forward of it which required the repositioning of the mainmast forward . This did not leave enough room for a derrick , as was fitted in Marat , and two large booms were fitted to handle aircraft while the existing boat cranes remained in place . The mast had to be reinforced by two short legs to handle the weight of the booms and their loads . Her false bow was reworked into a real forecastle like those fitted to her sisters . All twenty @-@ five of her old boilers were replaced by a dozen oil @-@ fired boilers originally intended for the Borodino @-@ class battlecruisers . The space saved was used to add another inboard longitudinal watertight bulkhead that greatly improved her underwater protection . 
 Her turrets were modified to use a fixed loading angle of 6 ° and fitted with more powerful elevating motors which increased their rate of fire to two rounds per minute . Their maximum elevation was increased to 40 ° which extended their range to 32 @,@ 320 yards ( 29 @,@ 550 m ) and they were redesignated as MK @-@ 3 @-@ 12 Mod . She landed her old ' Lender ' AA guns and replaced them with six semi @-@ automatic 45 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 8 in ) 21 @-@ K AA guns , three atop the fore and aft turrets . Three 76 @.@ 2 @-@ millimeter ( 3 @.@ 00 in ) 34 @-@ K each were mounted on platforms on the fore and aft superstructures as well as a total of twelve 12 @.@ 7 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 50 in ) <unk> machine guns . Her fire @-@ control system was completely revised with a pair of KDP @-@ 6 fire control director , equipped with two 6 @-@ meter ( 20 ft ) Zeiss rangefinders positioned atop both superstructures . Her original Pollen Argo Clock mechanical fire @-@ control computer was replaced with a copy of a Vickers Ltd fire @-@ control computer , designated <unk> by the Soviets , as well as a copy of a Sperry stable vertical gyroscope . She also received the first stabilized anti @-@ aircraft directors in the Soviet fleet , SVP @-@ 1s that were fitted on each side of the forward superstructure . They were manually stabilized and less than satisfactory as the men manning them had difficulties keeping their sights on the horizon while the ship 's motions were violent . 
 Parizhskaya Kommuna finished the first stage of her reconstruction in January 1938 with unresolved stability issues derived from all of the additional topweight . The options to cure this were discussed at length until Marshal Voroshilov , the People 's Commissar for Defense approved the addition of anti @-@ torpedo bulges in 1939 which would increase the ship 's underwater protection and rectify her stability problem . The second part of the reconstruction was carried out between December 1939 and July 1940 . A pair of bulges were fitted that extended from the forward magazine to the rear magazine that increased the ship 's beam by 5 @.@ 62 meters ( 18 @.@ 4 ft ) . They had an unusual form that consisted of an outer void compartment intended to weaken the explosive force of the torpedo backed by a relatively narrow section immediately adjacent to the original hull that extended from above the waterline to the bottom of the bilge . This was divided into two compartments ; the lower of which was kept full of either fuel oil or water to absorb splinters and fragments from the explosion while the upper compartment was filled with small watertight tubes intended to preserve the ship 's <unk> area and minimize flooding from gunfire hits around the waterline . The underwater torpedo tubes were incompatible with the bulges and were removed at this time . The bulges increased her standard displacement to 30 @,@ 395 tonnes ( 29 @,@ 915 long tons ; 33 @,@ 505 short tons ) , increased her metacentric height to 2 @.@ 03 meters ( 6 ft 8 in ) and reduced her speed to 21 @.@ 5 knots ( 39 @.@ 8 km / h ; 24 @.@ 7 mph ) . The Soviets took advantage of her extra stability to reinforce her deck armor by completely replacing her middle deck armor with 76 @.@ 2 @-@ millimeter ( 3 @.@ 00 in ) cemented armor plates originally intended for Admiral Nakhimov @-@ class cruisers . These were not ideal as they were harder than desirable for deck plates , but they did have the prime virtue of being free . At some point , the exact date is unknown , her 45 @-@ mm guns were removed and sixteen 37 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) 70 @-@ K automatic AA guns were added , three each on the fore and aft turret tops and twelve in the superstructures . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 Four of Parizhskaya Kommuna 's 120 @-@ mm guns were landed shortly before 22 June 1941 . When the Germans invaded she was in Sevastopol , but she was evacuated to Novorossiysk 30 October after the Germans had breached Soviet defensive lines near the Perekop Isthmus . During 28 – 29 November she bombarded German and Romanian troops south of Sevastopol with 146 12 @-@ inch and 299 120 @-@ mm shells . She steamed into Sevastopol 's South Bay on 29 December and fired 179 and 265 120 @-@ mm shells at German troops before embarking 1025 wounded and departing in company with the cruiser Molotov on the 31st . She bombarded German positions south of Feodosiya on the evening of 4 – 5 January 1942 and on 12 January . Parizhskaya Kommuna provided gunfire support during Soviet landings behind German lines along the southern coast of the Crimea three days later . She bombarded German positions west and north of Feodosiya on the nights of 26 – 28 February in support of an offensive by the 44th Army . She fired her last shots of the war at targets near Feodosiya during the nights of 20 – 22 March 1942 before returning to Poti , Georgia , to have her worn @-@ out 12 @-@ inch guns relined . By the time this was finished the Soviets were unwilling to expose such a prominent ship to German air attacks , which had already sunk a number of cruisers and destroyers . She returned to her original name on 31 May 1943 , but remained in Poti until late 1944 when she led the surviving major units of the Black Sea Fleet back to Sevastopol on 5 November . Lend @-@ Lease British Type 290 and 291 air @-@ warning radars were fitted during the war . She was awarded the Order of the Red Banner on 8 July 1945 . 
 She was reclassified as a ' school battleship ' on 24 July 1954 and stricken on 17 February 1956 . She was scrapped at Sevastopol in 1956 – 57 . 
 = Sherlock ( TV series ) = 
 Sherlock is a British @-@ American crime drama television series based on Sir Arthur Conan Doyle 's Sherlock Holmes detective stories . Created by Steven Moffat and Mark Gatiss , it stars Benedict Cumberbatch as Sherlock Holmes and Martin Freeman as Doctor John Watson . Ten episodes have been produced , with three @-@ part series airing in 2010 , 2012 and 2014 , and a special episode airing on 1 January 2016 . A fourth series has been commissioned , which began filming in April 2016 for an intended 2017 release . The series is set in the present day , while the one @-@ off special partly features a Victorian period fantasy resembling the original Holmes stories . Sherlock is a co @-@ production between the BBC and WGBH Boston for its Masterpiece anthology series on PBS , with Sue Vertue and Elaine Cameron of Hartswood Films serving as producers . The series is primarily filmed in Cardiff , Wales , with North Gower Street in London used for exterior shots of Holmes and Watson 's 221B Baker Street residence . 
 Critical reception has been highly positive , with many reviews praising the quality of the writing , performances , and direction . Sherlock has been nominated for numerous awards including : BAFTAs , Emmys , and a Golden Globe , winning several awards across a variety of categories . The show won in three categories at the 66th Primetime Emmy Awards including Outstanding Writing for a Miniseries , Movie or a Dramatic Special for Moffat , Outstanding Lead Actor in a Miniseries or a Movie for Cumberbatch , and Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Miniseries or a Movie for Freeman . In addition , the show was also honoured with a Peabody Award in 2011 . The third series has become the UK 's most watched drama series since 2001 . Sherlock has been sold to over 200 territories . 
 All of the series have been released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray , alongside tie @-@ in editions of selected original Conan Doyle stories and original soundtrack composed by David Arnold and Michael Price . In January 2014 , the show launched its official mobile app called Sherlock : The Network . 
 = = Premise = = 
 Sherlock depicts " consulting detective " Sherlock Holmes ( Benedict Cumberbatch ) solving various mysteries in modern @-@ day London . Holmes is assisted by his flatmate and friend , Dr John Watson ( Martin Freeman ) , who has returned from military service in Afghanistan with the Royal Army Medical Corps . Although Metropolitan Police Service Detective Inspector Greg Lestrade ( Rupert Graves ) and others are at first suspicious of Holmes , over time his exceptional intellect and bold powers of observation persuade them of his value . In part through Watson 's blog documenting their adventures , Holmes becomes a reluctant celebrity with the press reporting on his cases and eccentric personal life . Both ordinary people and the British government ask for his help . 
 Although the series depicts a variety of crimes and perpetrators , Holmes ' conflict with archnemesis Jim Moriarty ( Andrew Scott ) is a recurring feature . Molly Hooper ( Louise Brealey ) , a pathologist at St. Bart 's Hospital , occasionally assists Holmes in his cases . Other recurring roles include Una Stubbs as Mrs Hudson , Holmes and Watson 's landlady , and series co @-@ creator Mark Gatiss as Holmes ' elder brother Mycroft . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception and development = = = 
 Steven Moffat and Mark Gatiss , Sherlock Holmes fans with experience of adapting or using Victorian literature for television , devised the concept of the series . Moffat had previously adapted the Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde for the 2007 series Jekyll , while Gatiss had written the Dickensian Doctor Who episode " The Unquiet Dead " . Moffat and Gatiss , both Doctor Who writers , discussed plans for a Holmes adaptation during their numerous train journeys to Cardiff where Doctor Who production is based . While they were in Monte Carlo for an awards ceremony , producer Sue Vertue , who is married to Moffat , encouraged Moffat and Gatiss to develop the project themselves before another creative team had the same idea . Moffat and Gatiss invited Stephen Thompson to write for the series in September 2008 . 
 Gatiss has criticized recent television adaptations of the Conan Doyle stories as " too reverential and too slow " , aiming instead to be as irreverent to the canon as the 1930s and 1940s films starring Basil Rathbone and Nigel Bruce , which were mostly set in the then @-@ modern interwar era . Benedict Cumberbatch 's Sherlock uses modern technology , such as texting , the internet , and GPS , to solve crimes . Paul McGuigan , who directed two episodes of Sherlock , says that this is in keeping with Conan Doyle 's character , pointing out that " [ i ] n the books he would use any device possible and he was always in the lab doing experiments . It 's just a modern @-@ day version of it . He will use the tools that are available to him today in order to find things out . " 
 The update maintains some traditional elements of the stories , such as the Baker Street address and Holmes 's adversary Moriarty . Although the events of the books are transferred to the present day , some elements are incorporated into the story . For example , Martin Freeman 's Watson has returned from military service in Afghanistan . While discussing the fact that the original Watson was invalided home after serving in the Second Anglo @-@ Afghan War ( 1878 – 80 ) , Gatiss realised that " [ i ] t is the same war now , I thought . The same unwinnable war . " 
 Sherlock was announced as a single 60 @-@ minute drama production at the Edinburgh International Television Festival in August 2008 , with broadcast set for mid to late 2009 . The intention was to produce a series of six 60 @-@ minute episodes should the pilot prove to be successful . The first version of the pilot — reported by The Guardian to have cost £ 800 @,@ 000 — led to rumours within the BBC and wider media that Sherlock was a potential disaster . The BBC decided not to transmit the pilot , requesting a reshoot and a total of three 90 @-@ minute episodes . The original pilot was included on the DVD of the first series . During the audio commentary , the creative team said that the BBC were " very happy " with the pilot but asked them to change the format . The pilot , observes critic Mark Lawson when it was released on DVD , was " substantially expanded and rewritten , and completely reimagined in look , pace and sound " . In July 2009 , the BBC drama department announced plans for three 90 @-@ minute episodes , to be broadcast in 2010 . Moffat had previously announced that if a series of Sherlock was commissioned , Gatiss would take over the duties of executive producer so that he could concentrate on producing Doctor Who . 
 = = = Cast and characters = = = 
 Moffat and Vertue became interested in casting Cumberbatch as the title character after watching his performance in the 2007 film Atonement . The actor was cast after reading the script for the creative team . " Cumberbatch " , says The Guardian , " has a reputation for playing odd , brilliant men very well , and his Holmes is cold , <unk> , slightly <unk> " . Cumberbatch said , " There 's a great charge you get from playing him , because of the volume of words in your head and the speed of thought — you really have to make your connections incredibly fast . He is one step ahead of the audience and of anyone around him with normal intellect . They can 't quite fathom where his leaps are taking him . " Piers Wenger , Head of Drama at BBC Wales , described the series ' rendering of Sherlock as " a dynamic superhero in a modern world , an arrogant , genius sleuth driven by a desire to prove himself cleverer than the perpetrator and the police — everyone in fact " . Addressing changing social attitudes and broadcasting regulations , Cumberbatch 's Holmes replaced the pipe with multiple nicotine patches . The writers believed that Sherlock should not talk like " a completely modern person " , says Moffat , but were initially intent that " he never sounded like he 's giving a lecture " . Moffat turned the character " more Victorian " in the second series , capitalising more on Cumberbatch 's " beautiful voice " to make it sound like " he 's giving a lecture " . 
 In an interview with The Observer , co @-@ creator Mark Gatiss says that they experienced more difficulty finding the right actor to play Dr John Watson than they had for the title character . Producer Sue Vertue said , " Benedict was the only person we actually saw for [ the part of ] Sherlock ... Once Benedict was there it was really just making sure we got the chemistry for John [ Watson ] — and I think you get it as soon as they come into the room , you can see that they work together " . Several actors auditioned for the part of Watson , and Martin Freeman eventually took the role . Steven Moffat said that Matt Smith was the first to audition unsuccessfully . He was rejected for being too " barmy " , as the producers required someone " straighter " for Watson . Shortly after , Moffat cast Smith as the Eleventh Doctor in Doctor Who . 
 The writers said that Freeman 's casting developed the way in which Cumberbatch played Holmes . The theme of friendship appealed to both Gatiss and Moffat . Gatiss asserted the importance of achieving the correct tone for the character . " Watson is not an idiot , although it 's true that Conan Doyle always took the piss out of him , " said Gatiss . " But only an idiot would surround himself with idiots . " Moffat said that Freeman is " the sort of opposite of Benedict in everything except the amount of talent ... Martin finds a sort of poetry in the ordinary man . I love the fastidious realism of everything he does . " Freeman describes his character as a " moral compass " for Sherlock , who does not always consider the morality and ethics of his actions . 
 Rupert Graves was cast as DI Greg Lestrade . The writers referred to the character as " Inspector Lestrade " during development until Gatiss realised that in contemporary England the character would have the title " Detective Inspector " . Moffat and Gatiss pointed out that Lestrade does not appear often in the stories and is quite inconsistently portrayed in them . They decided to go with the version that appeared in " The Six Napoleons " : a man who is frustrated by Holmes but admires him , and whom Holmes considers as the best person at Scotland Yard . Several candidates took a comedic tack in their auditions , but the creative team preferred the gravitas that Graves brought to the role . His first name is revealed to be Greg in " The Hounds of Baskerville " . 
 Andrew Scott made his first appearance as Jim Moriarty in " The Great Game " . Moffat said , " We knew what we wanted to do with Moriarty from the very beginning . Moriarty is usually a rather dull , rather posh villain so we thought someone who was genuinely properly frightening . Someone who 's an absolute psycho . " Moffat and Gatiss were originally not going to put a confrontation between Moriarty and Holmes into these three episodes , but realised that they " just had to do a confrontation scene . We had to do a version of the scene in ' The Final Problem ' in which the two archenemies meet each other . " 
 The remainder of the regular cast includes Una Stubbs ( who has known Cumberbatch since he was four years old , as she had worked with his mother Wanda Ventham ) as Mrs Hudson and co @-@ creator Mark Gatiss as Mycroft Holmes . <unk> Robinson , Jonathan Aris and Louise Brealey play the recurring roles of Sergeant Sally Donovan , Philip Anderson and Molly Hooper , respectively . 
 Amanda <unk> , Freeman 's real @-@ life partner , plays Mary Morstan , Watson 's girlfriend and eventual wife . In Series 3 , Wanda Ventham and Timothy Carlton , Cumberbatch 's real @-@ life parents , are introduced as Sherlock and Mycroft 's parents . 
 Guest appearances included Phil Davis as Jefferson Hope , Paul Chequer as DI Dimmock , Zoe Telford as Sarah , Gemma Chan as Soo Lin Yao , John Sessions as Kenny Prince , Haydn Gwynne as Miss Wenceslas , Deborah Moore as one of Moriarty 's victims and Peter Davison as the voice @-@ over in the planetarium . Series two 's " A Scandal in Belgravia " featured Lara Pulver as Irene Adler , while " The Hounds of Baskerville " featured Russell Tovey as Henry Knight . In the final episode of series 2 , the role of Rufus <unk> was played by Edward <unk> , while Katherine Parkinson played journalist Kitty Riley . The first episode of series 3 featured Derren Brown . 
 = = = Production design and filming = = = 
 The show was produced by Hartswood Films for BBC Wales , while BBC Worldwide also provided co @-@ production funding . Production was also co @-@ produced by PBS , a network of public @-@ service broadcasters in the United States , for WGBH @-@ TV 's Masterpiece Mystery ! strand . Filming of the pilot episode , written by Moffat and directed by Coky Giedroyc , commenced in January 2009 . The following January ( 2010 ) , the first set of three episodes entered production . Paul McGuigan directed the first and third episodes and Euros Lyn directed the second . The three episodes were filmed in reverse order of their broadcast . 
 Gatiss says that they wanted to " <unk> modern London in the way that the period versions <unk> Victorian London " . Production was based at Hartswood Films ' Cardiff production unit , Hartswood Films West , which was opened in late 2009 to take advantage of the BBC 's planned Cardiff Bay " drama village " . Production of the first two series was based at Upper Boat Studios , where Doctor Who had been produced . Cardiff was more economical than in London , with some good matches for parts of London . Some architecture could not be faked , so location shooting in the English capital was necessary . The location shots for 221B Baker Street were filmed at 187 North Gower Street – Baker Street was impractical because of heavy traffic , and the number of things labelled " Sherlock Holmes " , which would need to be disguised . Executive producer Beryl Vertue explains how it was important to design the entirety of Sherlock 's flat as a contemporary set , yet still convey his eccentricity . He would not , she says , live somewhere " too suburban " or " too modern " . 
 Costumes for the pilot were designed by BAFTA Cymru award @-@ winning costume designer Ray Holman . Cumberbatch wore a £ 1 @,@ 000 <unk> coat in the series . Sarah Arthur , the series ' costume designer , explained how she achieved the detective 's look . " Holmes wouldn 't have any interest in fashion so I went for classic suits with a modern twist : narrow @-@ leg trousers and a two @-@ button , slim @-@ cut jacket . I also went for slim @-@ cut shirts and a sweeping coat for all the action scenes — it looks great against the London skyline . " 
 The writers say that they did not want to force modernity onto the story . There were some creative challenges , such as the decision to include the sign " 221B " on Holmes ' front door . Gatiss and Moffat reflect that in the modern world the door would only display the number of the house , and there would be doorbells for each flat . The full house number is so iconic that they felt unable to change it . The writers also decided that the lead characters would address each other by their first names , rather than the traditional Holmes and Watson . This was also reflected in the title of the series . Director Paul McGuigan came up with the idea of putting text messages on the screen instead of having cut @-@ away shots of a hand holding the phone . 
 The producers found it difficult to coordinate the schedules of the principal players and Moffat and Gatiss for a second series . Cumberbatch and Freeman both worked on the 2012 film The Hobbit : An Unexpected Journey , and Moffat continued as Doctor Who 's showrunner and head writer . In response to the time pressure , The Guardian asserted , the series " features reworkings of three of Conan Doyle 's most recognised tales " . Gatiss says that there had been an argument for producing these tales over three years , but Moffat explained that they rejected " deferred pleasure " . The relationship between Holmes and Watson developed during the second series , with Watson being less amazed by Sherlock 's deductive abilities ; Watson acted as the primary detective in the second episode , " The Hounds of Baskerville " . The cast and production team were more confident during the second series ' production following the positive audience and critical reaction to the first series . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The theme and incidental music were composed by David Arnold and Michael Price . Arnold explains that he and Price worked with the producers to " come up with a central theme and character " for the series , then found what was " going to be the defining sound of this show " . Pieces were often constructed using synthesizers , but the tracks used for the show were recorded using real musicians , Arnold says , to bring the music " to life " . Similarly , Price comments that the musicians can adapt their performance of a score by responding to footage from the show . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 Three series , each consisting of three episodes , have been produced . The first series was initially broadcast in July and August 2010 on the BBC , later premiering on Public Broadcasting Service ( PBS ) in the United States in October 2010 . A second series of three episodes was first broadcast in the UK in January 2012 , and then in the U.S. during May 2012 . The third series premiered in the UK on 1 January 2014 and in the US on 19 January 2014 . The series has been sold to over 200 territories . A special episode premiered on 1 January 2016 , on BBC One and PBS , marking the first time the series has aired on the same day in the UK and U.S. 
 = = = Series 1 ( 2010 ) = = = 
 The first episode , " A Study in Pink " , loosely based upon the first Sherlock Holmes novel A Study in Scarlet , was written by Moffat and directed by Paul McGuigan . The story depicts the introduction of Sherlock to John , and them entering a <unk> at Baker Street in London , and then their investigation into a series of deaths , initially believed to be suicides . Mycroft Holmes , Sherlock 's older brother , played by Mark Gatiss also appears for the first time . The episode was first broadcast simultaneously on BBC One and BBC HD on 25 July 2010 . 
 The second episode , " The Blind Banker " , was first broadcast on 1 August 2010 . Written by Stephen Thompson and directed by Euros Lyn , the episode depicts Holmes being hired by an old university acquaintance to investigate a mysterious break @-@ in at a bank in the City . 
 The first series concluded with " The Great Game " , first broadcast on 8 August 2010 . The episode introduces the character of archenemy James Moriarty ( played by Andrew Scott ) to the series , who sets Holmes deadlines to solve a series of apparently unrelated cases . Written by Mark Gatiss and directed by McGuigan , " The Great Game " ends with a cliffhanger in which Sherlock and Moriarty reach a standoff involving a bomb attached to a vest removed moments earlier from Watson . 
 = = = Series 2 ( 2012 ) = = = 
 After the high ratings for " A Study in Pink " , the BBC were reportedly eager to produce more episodes . On 10 August 2010 , it was confirmed that Sherlock had been renewed for a second series . At the 2011 convention , Gatiss confirmed which stories would be adapted , and that the writers of the first series would each write an episode for series two . Acknowledging that " A Scandal in Bohemia " , " The Hound of the Baskervilles " and " The Final Problem " are amongst the best @-@ known Holmes stories , Gatiss explained , " We knew after having a successful first run that the natural order would be to do three of the most famous [ stories ] . " " There 's the question of how to go out on a cliffhanger and then the thematic things of the three stories , where we were trying to get to and what Sherlock and John 's relationship is a little further on . You can 't just go back to : ' You have no emotions . ' ' I don 't care . ' You 've got to move on somewhere and make sure the other characters have something of a journey too . " Paul McGuigan directed the first two episodes , and Doctor Who director Toby Haynes handled the last one . The second series of three 90 @-@ minute episodes was initially planned to air in late 2011 , but was delayed until early January 2012 . 
 " A Scandal in Belgravia " , written by Steven Moffat and directed by Paul McGuigan , was first broadcast on 1 January 2012 . Loosely based on " A Scandal in Bohemia " , the episode depicts Holmes 's quest to retrieve compromising photos of a minor royal held on the camera phone of Irene Adler ( Lara Pulver ) , a ruthless and brilliant dominatrix who also trades in classified information extracted from her rich and powerful clients . 
 Mark Gatiss wrote " The Hounds of Baskerville " , which investigates the strange activities at a military base . Aware that The Hound of the Baskervilles , first published in 1902 , was one of the most famous of Conan Doyle 's original stories , Gatiss felt a greater responsibility to include familiar elements of the story than he does when adapting the lesser @-@ known stories . Russell Tovey appeared as Henry Knight , a man whose father was ripped apart by a gigantic hound on Dartmoor twenty years earlier . Directed by McGuigan , the episode was first broadcast on 8 January 2012 . 
 The second series concluded with " The Reichenbach Fall " . Steve Thompson wrote the episode , which was directed by Toby Haynes , who had previously directed many of Moffat 's Doctor Who episodes . First broadcast on 15 January 2012 , the episode follows Moriarty 's plot to discredit and kill Sherlock Holmes , concluding with Holmes faking his suicide . It was based upon Conan Doyle 's story " The Final Problem " , in which Sherlock and Moriarty are presumed to have fallen to their deaths from the Reichenbach Falls in Switzerland . Moffat felt that he and co @-@ creator Gatiss had outdone Conan Doyle in their version of Holmes ' fall and Moffat added that , in that much @-@ discussed sequence , there was still " a clue everybody 's missed " . 
 = = = Christmas mini @-@ episode ( 2013 ) = = = 
 BBC One premiered a seven @-@ minute Sherlock mini @-@ episode over the 2013 Christmas period entitled " Many Happy Returns " . The episode is available via BBC iPlayer , BBC Red Button service , and <unk> YouTube channel , and acts as a prequel to the third series . 
 The synopsis for the episode reads " Sherlock has been gone for two years . But someone isn 't quite convinced that he 's dead . " The ' someone ' turns out to be Anderson , the forensics technician from series 1 and 2 ( who has now lost his job due to his obsessive conviction that the detective still lives ) . He had a long @-@ standing mistrust of Sherlock , yet is now one of the few people who believes Sherlock is alive , and throughout the episode is trying to convince Lestrade . Anderson tracks him via various mysterious events from Tibet to New Delhi to Germany in which he seems to be involved and points out that the incidents are getting progressively closer to London . 
 = = = Series 3 ( 2014 ) = = = 
 After the end of the final episode of the second series , Moffat and Gatiss both announced on Twitter that a third series had been commissioned at the same time as series two , and a part of the resolution to " The Reichenbach Fall " was filmed concurrently with series two . Without revealing whether Moriarty also faked his own death at the end of series two , Moffat suggested that Moriarty will not feature heavily in future series of Sherlock . 
 " The Empty Hearse " , written by Mark Gatiss and directed by Jeremy Lovering , is the first episode of Series 3 and was first broadcast on 1 January 2014 . Inspired by " The Adventure of the Empty House " by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle , the episode follows Sherlock Holmes ' return to London and reunion with John Watson , and their subsequent solving of an underground terrorist network . The episode achieved an official rating of 12 @.@ 72 million viewers , making it the highest rated drama episode shown on UK television in 2014 . 
 In " The Sign of Three " , written by Stephen Thompson , Mark Gatiss and Steven Moffat , Watson and Mary Morstan get married . The episode takes place during the wedding reception and the story is told through flashbacks . The episode title is inspired by The Sign of the Four and was first broadcast on 5 January 2014 . 
 The final episode " His Last Vow " was first broadcast on 12 January 2014 , on BBC One , and written by Steven Moffat , directed by Nick Hurran and is based on Sir Arthur Conan Doyle 's " The Adventure of Charles Augustus Milverton " . This case leads Sherlock into conflict with Charles Augustus Magnussen ( Lars Mikkelsen ) , a " terrifying " villain who was introduced as an unnamed villain in episode one . Holmes and Watson try to get Magnussen arrested , but their attempt fails , and Holmes shoots Magnussen to stop him from blackmailing Mary Watson . Mycroft arranges that Sherlock will be exiled from the United Kingdom instead of being tried for murder . As Sherlock 's plane takes off , every video screen in London broadcasts the image of Moriarty , and Sherlock is recalled to deal with the crisis associated with Moriarty 's potential return . 
 The third series aired in the United States on PBS over a period of three weeks , airing late January to early February 2014 . 
 = = = Special ( 2016 ) = = = 
 On 2 July 2014 , it was announced there would be a special episode broadcast between the third and fourth series . Filming began on 5 January 2015 and wrapped on 10 February 2015 . Moffat confirmed the episode is set in Victorian London saying , " The special is its own thing . We wouldn ’ t have done the story we ’ re doing , and the way we ’ re doing it , if we didn ’ t have this special . It ’ s not part of the run of three episodes . So we had this to do it … It ’ s kind of in its own little bubble . " 
 In October 2015 , the title of the episode was announced as " The Abominable Bride " . It was broadcast on 1 January 2016 at 9 : 00 pm local time on BBC One in the UK , and on PBS in the US . The episode was simulcast in British cinemas on 1 January , and was shown on 5 and 6 January 2016 in selected cinemas throughout the US . Exclusive bonus material in the cinema presentation included a guided tour of 221B Baker Street from Steven Moffat and a look behind the scenes at how the special episode was made featuring all the lead cast and crew . 
 = = = Series 4 = = = 
 A fourth series has been commissioned , with scripts planned . Moffat told The Telegraph , " we 're all keen to continue , " but it has been difficult to co @-@ ordinate the lead actors ' schedules . Moffat continued , " And obviously Mark [ Gatiss ] and I have our other commitments too , but it 's just a matter of scheduling . " In July 2014 the BBC announced that filming for the series would take place in late 2015 , but Moffat announced in May 2015 that filming would not begin until April 2016 , with the series not expected to air until 2017 . Filming began on 4 April 2016 , scheduled to last until early August . In May 2016 it was announced that Toby Jones had been cast as a villain from Sherlock Holmes lore . 
 = = = Series 5 = = = 
 Moffat confirmed in January 2014 that Sherlock will return for a fifth series , with Cumberbatch confirming he was signed for a fifth series . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The show met with critical acclaim , sustaining positive reviews across its three series . Series one holds a Metacritic score of 85 / 100 , based on 17 reviews , and series two scored 91 / 100 , based on 24 reviews , while series three holds a score of 88 / 100 , based on 22 reviews . The first two series hold 100 % rating at critical aggregator site Rotten Tomatoes , and series three has a 97 % approval rating . The first episode rated highly on the Appreciation Index . The Observer said the show was " a cross between Withnail and I and The Bourne Ultimatum , there is also a hint of Doctor Who about the drama ; hardly surprising , since it has been written and created by Doctor Who writers Mark Gatiss and Steven Moffat . " The Guardian 's Dan Martin said , " It 's early days , but the first of three 90 @-@ minute movies , ' A Study In Pink ' , is brilliantly promising . It has the finesse of Spooks but is indisputably Sherlock Holmes . The deduction sequences are ingenious , and the plot is classic Moffat intricacy . " Tom Sutcliffe for The Independent wrote , " Sherlock is a triumph , witty and knowing , without ever undercutting the flair and dazzle of the original . It understands that Holmes isn 't really about plot but about charisma ... <unk> unfaithful to the original in some respects , Sherlock is wonderfully loyal to it in every way that matters . " The lead actors were commended . Critic Victoria Thorpe said , " Freeman 's dependable , capable Watson unlocks this modern Holmes , a man who now describes himself as ' a high @-@ functioning sociopath ' . " Following the second series ' opening episode , Sarah Crompton , for The Telegraph , asserts that " Cumberbatch is utterly credible as a man who lives entirely in his cerebellum with little regard for the world outside , mak [ ing ] Sherlock the perfect depiction of Holmes for our times " . 
 Conan Doyle fans were generally appreciative . Gwilym Mumford , for The Guardian , suggested that " this has to do with the fact that Moffat and Gatiss are enormously knowledgeable about Conan Doyle 's work , and their reimagining incorporates big- and small @-@ screen adaptations of Holmes , as well as the original stories . As Gatiss puts it : ' Everything is canonical . ' " Sarah Crompton , for The Telegraph , identifies some of the jokes and allusions intended for fans . Commenting specifically on the second series ' finale " The Reichenbach Fall " , The Guardian 's Sam Wollaston praised the show 's faithfulness to Conan Doyle , but also how " it will wander , taking in mobile phone technology and computer hacking ... But it doesn 't feel like cheating ; more like an open relationship , agreed by both parties . " 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 According to overnight data provided by the Broadcasters ' Audience Research Board ( BARB ) , the highest overnight figure from the first series of Sherlock was 7 @.@ 5 million for the opening episode , " A Study in Pink " , whereas the second series averaged over 8 million viewers . The three episodes of series two were the three most watched programmes on iPlayer , the BBC 's video @-@ on @-@ demand service , between January and April 2012 . Its opening episode , " A Scandal in Belgravia " , attracted controversy from the tabloid newspaper Daily Mail , which reported that Irene Adler 's nude scene early in the episode had been met with disapproval from some viewers who were concerned that it had been shown before the 9 : 00 pm watershed hour , before which adult @-@ orientated content is not supposed to air . Some critics also took exception to Moffat 's treatment of Irene Adler , arguing that she was sexualised , an argument rejected by others , including Moffat . The series ' conclusion , " The Reichenbach Fall " , in which Sherlock fakes his suicide by jumping from St Bartholomew 's Hospital , led to speculation on forums , social networking sites and in newspaper articles about its resolution . 
 The third series became the UK 's most watched drama series since 2001 . An average 11 @.@ 82 million people watched the series , with about 12 @.@ 72 million tuning in for the first episode . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 In the 2011 BAFTA awards , the show as a whole won the award for Best Drama Series , while Freeman ( as Dr Watson ) won the award for the Best Supporting Actor . Cumberbatch was nominated for Best Actor . The show was also nominated for the YouTube Audience Award . 
 Andrew Scott won 2012 's Best Supporting Actor , beating Freeman , for his work in the second series , which was nominated in other categories . 
 The first series also won the Arqiva award for the " best terrestrial show " at the 2011 Edinburgh International Television Festival . " A Study in Pink " and " A Scandal in Belgravia " were nominated for Emmy Awards in a variety of categories . The series won several BAFTA Cymru awards : television drama , Director : Fiction ( Euros Lyn ) , Director of Photography : Fiction ( Steve Lawes ) , Production Design ( <unk> Wyn Jones ) , and Make Up & Hair ( Claire Pritchard @-@ Jones ) . Charlie Phillips won the ' Editing : Fiction ' category at the British Academy Television Craft Awards . 
 The show received the most prizes at the 66th Primetime Emmy Awards including Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Miniseries or a Movie for Cumberbatch , Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Miniseries or a Movie for Freeman and Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Writing for a Miniseries , Movie or a Dramatic Special for Moffat . 
 = = Home release and merchandise = = 
 The first series was released on disc by 2entertain in the United Kingdom on 30 August 2010 , in Australia on 4 November , and the United States on 9 November 2010 . The release included the three episodes and several special features . " A Study in Pink " featured audio commentaries by Steven Moffat , Mark Gatiss and Sue Vertue , while Benedict Cumberbatch , Martin Freeman and Mark Gatiss comment on " The Great Game " . The release included the pilot episode , a 60 @-@ minute version of " A Study in Pink " directed by Coky Giedroyc . Critic Mark Lawson called the decision to include the pilot " commendable and brave " . The British Board of Film Classification rated the pilot and the three episodes as a 12 certificate for video and online exhibition . The release also contained a 32 @-@ minute documentary about the production called " Unlocking Sherlock " . " Unlocking Sherlock " is also the name of a different , but related , documentary ( 2014 , 56 @-@ minute ) which premiered on PBS @-@ TV on 12 January 2014 as a prelude to the third series episodes . 
 The second series disc was released in the United Kingdom on 23 January 2012 . The release included an audio commentary for " A Scandal in Belgravia " and " The Hounds of Baskerville " and a documentary called " Sherlock Uncovered " . The soundtrack album for the first series was released by Silva Screen on 30 January 2012 , and for the second series on 27 February 2012 . 
 BBC Books published some of Conan Doyle 's original collections and novels as tie @-@ in editions , with cover art featuring Cumberbatch and Freeman . A Study in Scarlet and The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes were released in Autumn 2011 , with introductions by Moffat and Gatiss respectively . The Hound of the Baskervilles , The Sign of Four and The Memoirs of Sherlock Holmes were released in March 2012 , with introductions by Cumberbatch , Freeman and Thompson respectively . Two more books , The Return of Sherlock Holmes and His Last Bow , were released in December 2013 , ahead of the premiere of the third series . They featured introductions by Gatiss and Moffat respectively . According to Radio Times , the popularity of Sherlock has led to a resurgence in the sales of the original Conan Doyle stories . 
 Sherlock : The Casebook , a companion book to the series written by Guy Adams , was published by BBC Books in the United Kingdom in October 2012 . The book was republished in the United States under the title The Sherlock Files : The Official Companion to the Hit Television Series in July 2013 . 
 In Japan , a manga adaptation of the series illustrated by Jay was serialised in Kadokawa 's Young Ace magazine from 4 October 2012 . The English translation of this manga series will be released by Titan Comics in the UK and US beginning on 8 June 2016 . In October 2012 , Winning Moves sold a Sherlock @-@ themed edition of Cluedo . 
 Publishers and retailers reported a 180 % rise in sales of Sherlock Holmes books during the first series ' broadcast . 
 The show 's popularity resulted in enquiries for coats similar to Sherlock 's , reported retailer Debenhams . Garment manufacturer <unk> put the wool trench coat worn by Benedict Cumberbatch back into production before the series had ended . The Independent reported , " designer Paul Costelloe moved to meet the demand , offering tailored coats and scarves based on the series , while Savile Row bespoke tailor John Pearse said many of his clients were inquiring about the actors ' clothes . " Journalist Alexis Petridis commented , " [ Y ] ou can see why men wanted to get the look . Perhaps they noted the effect Cumberbatch , by no means your standard telly hunk , had on lady viewers … and decided it must have something to do with the <unk> . So it is that Britain 's latest men 's style icon is a fictional asexual sociopath first seen onscreen hitting a corpse with a horse whip . Surely not even the great detective himself could have deduced that was going to happen . " 
 Speedy 's , the sandwich shop below the flat used as Holmes ' residence , reported a sharp rise in new customers who recognised it from the show . 
 BBC Online published several tie @-@ in websites relating to the show 's fictional world . These were written by Joseph Lidster , who had also contributed to the Doctor Who tie @-@ in websites . 
 Two websites – <unk> and <unk> – feature the events from the show in the form of puzzles and case @-@ summaries , often with comments ( for example , by John Watson 's sister , " Harry " ) . There are also several blogs about " unseen " cases that do not feature on television . Similar to the broadcast cases , these retain familiar elements from classic Arthur Conan Doyle stories : " The Geek Interpreter " instead of " The Greek Interpreter " , and " The Six Thatchers " instead of " The Six Napoleons " . On the websites , links can be found to Molly Hooper 's diary and the official website of Connie Prince . 
 In January 2014 , the show launched its official mobile app called Sherlock : The Network , which was created by The Project Factory in association with Hartswood Films . Benedict Cumberbatch and Martin Freeman appear in cameo roles as Holmes and Dr Watson , respectively . 
 = By the Way = 
 By the Way is the eighth studio album by American rock band Red Hot Chili Peppers . The album was released on July 9 , 2002 on Warner Bros. Records . It sold over 286 @,@ 000 copies in the first week , and peaked at number two on the Billboard 200 . ( Their next album would peak at number one ) The singles from the album included " By the Way " , " The Zephyr Song " , " Can 't Stop " , " <unk> " and " Universally Speaking " . The lyrical subject matter vocalist Anthony Kiedis addresses in By the Way is a divergence from previous Chili Peppers albums , with Kiedis taking a more candid and reflective approach to his lyrics . 
 By the Way was lauded by critics as a departure from the band 's previous styles , and is recognized for the melodic and subdued emotions given by the Chili Peppers . Guitarist John Frusciante is credited with writing most of the album 's melodies , bass lines , and guitar progressions , therefore changing the direction of the recording dramatically : " his warm , understated guitar work and his doo @-@ wop style vocal harmonies are king this time around . " By the Way contained very little of the signature punk @-@ funk fusion the band had become known for playing . Frusciante has stated that writing " By the Way [ was ] one of the happiest times in my life . " The album went on to sell over 8 million copies worldwide . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following a life @-@ threatening drug addiction that developed after leaving the Chili Peppers in 1992 , Frusciante made a full recovery after a month of drug rehabilitation in the early months of 1998 . Shortly thereafter he was asked to rejoin the Red Hot Chili Peppers . After several months of writing and recording , the Chili Peppers ' next album , Californication was released . The album went on to sell over 15 million copies worldwide , becoming the Chili Peppers ' most successful recording to date . Frusciante 's return generated much response from critics , who recognized the album as a commercial revitalization from their previous record , One Hot Minute . A two @-@ year @-@ long , international tour followed , which included several festival appearances , including Woodstock 1999 and Rock in Rio . 
 The writing and formation of By the Way began immediately following the culmination of Californication 's world tour , in the spring of 2001 . As with Californication , much of the creation took place in the band members ' homes , and other locations of practice , such as a recording studio stage . Kiedis recalled of the situation : " We started finding some magic and some music and some riffs and some rhythms and some jams and some grooves , and we added to it and subtracted from it and pushed it around and put melodies to it . " Frusciante and Kiedis would collaborate for days straight , discussing guitar progressions and sharing lyrics . For Kiedis , " writing By the Way ... was a whole different experience from Californication . John was back to himself and brimming with confidence . " Prior to recording By the Way , the Chili Peppers decided that they would again have Rick Rubin produce the album . Rubin had , in the past , granted the Chili Peppers creative freedom on their recording material ; this was something they thought essential for the album to be unique , and could only occur with his return . 
 = = Writing and composition = = 
 According to the 2010 book , The Red Hot Chili Peppers : An Oral / Visual History , Frusciante had originally intended for the album to be very different from how it was eventually completed . Frusciante wanted an album of two different types of songs : songs that were more " English @-@ sounding " and melodic , and songs that were more punk rock sounding . Frusciante 's punk inspiration came from listening to music by The Damned and Discharge , among others . Rick Rubin was not familiar with the latter bands and sound and thought that the melodic songs were original and more exciting , causing the band to focus mostly on the melodic material . However , one punk rock influenced song was recorded during these sessions , " Body of Water " but did not make the final cut and was instead included on " The Zephyr Song " single . Many of the more melodic inspired songs came from Frusciante being heavily into music by The Beach Boys and The Beatles along with doo @-@ wop groups and their harmonies . These new styles as well as Frusciante being especially prolific during this era came to alienate Flea , who had wanted the band to return to its earlier funk @-@ influenced sound . Frusciante felt the band had already thoroughly explored funk and was more interested in creating something new for the band . According to Kiedis , Flea felt his voice wasn 't being heard , and there was a point where he considered leaving the band . While speaking to Swedish paper Aftonbladet , Frusciante mentioned that he listened to guitarists such as John McGeoch for his work on the Magazine 's albums and Siouxsie and the Banshees ' Juju , Ron Mael of Sparks for Kimono My House , Johnny Marr of the Smiths , Vini Reilly of The Durutti Column and Keith Levine of PiL . He also credits XTC singer / guitarist Andy Partridge in the 2002 issue of Total Guitar magazine for being an influence on his guitar work for the album . 
 The album 's guitar and bass ensemble was primarily dictated by Frusciante , rather than a collaborative effort between him and bassist Flea . Therefore , the record took different direction than any previous Chili Peppers ' album . Frusciante sought to create an emotional and poignant soundscape throughout the recording . Drawing influences from musicians such as Vini Reilly of The Durutti Column and John McGeoch , Frusciante made use of textured and multilayered guitar progressions on By the Way , using tools such as the mellotron and various effects pedals throughout . In 2006 , while promoting the band 's subsequent studio album , Stadium Arcadium , Flea reflected on the composition of By the Way , stating : " John went to this whole level of artistry . But he made me feel like I had nothing to offer , like I knew shit . " 
 Kiedis was lyrically influenced by love , his girlfriend , and the emotions expressed when one fell in love . Songs written for the album such as " By the Way " , " I Could Die for You " , " <unk> " , " Warm Tape " , and the non @-@ album tracks " Someone " and " Body of Water " all digressed into the many sides of love . Drugs also played an integral part in Kiedis ' writings , as he had only been sober since December 2000 . Tracks like " This Is the Place " and " Don 't Forget Me " expressed his intense relationship with narcotics , the harmful physical and emotional effects they caused him and the ever @-@ present danger of relapse ( as Kiedis has suffered chronic relapse into drug @-@ dependency ) . He referenced early Chili Peppers guitarist Hillel Slovak in " This Is the Place " , and describes how drug use forced him to miss the funeral : " On the day my best friend died / I could not get my copper clean " . " Venice Queen " was composed lyrically as an ode to Kiedis ' drug rehabilitation therapist , Gloria Scott , who died shortly after he purchased her a home on California 's Venice Beach . It mourned her death as a painful loss : " We all want to tell her / Tell her that we love her / Venice gets a queen / Best I 've ever seen . " 
 By the Way diverged from the band 's previous styles , containing few funk @-@ driven songs . " Can 't Stop " and the title track were the only songs which revisited the Chili Peppers ' once trademark style of short , rapped verses . " Throw Away Your Television " , while not having any rapidly sung lyrics , also contained a funk @-@ oriented bass line , though hinted at experimental rock due to the heavy use of distortion throughout the verse and chorus . Other " experimental " tracks include the melodica @-@ based " On Mercury " . " <unk> " , the only track to be played entirely on acoustic guitar , has distinctive Latin influences . " Tear " and " Warm Tape " were keyboard based more so than guitar or bass , the latter being completely written on the instrument . Technically , By the Way saw the Chili Peppers employing several devices to distort and alter guitar and vocal sequences . " Don 't Forget Me " utilizes a mellotron , wah pedal , and echoing techniques to convey an emotive atmosphere , while Frusciante uses a Big Muff for the solos on " Minor Thing " . 
 = = Release = = 
 Feeling extremely confident in their album , the Chili Peppers issued the statement , " Greetings from the dimensions of invisible shapes and colors . The music on this record has expanded our space and made us bigger . Thank you for listening and being exactly where and who you are , " in a press release . Chad Smith commented that By the Way is " very honest , raw , emotional music . It 's a very dynamic , rich and lush album . Probably the best collection of Chili Peppers songs we 've ever put out . " Warner Bros. Records promoted the album heavily in the months prior to the record 's 2002 release , especially targeting the online market in order to steer customers away from illegal downloads . The record label implemented a campaign they colloquially title " A Song A Day " . This program , initiated on June 21 , was aimed at leaking one song per day until the album was released . Over 150 radio stations participated in broadcasting the band 's new daily material , along with MTV , VH1 , and digital music retailers like iTunes , as well as Cell phone companies . AOL featured the Chili Peppers as their " Artist of the Month " in June , streaming interviews and live performances of the band free of charge ; they also sold an MP3 of " By the Way " , the record 's first single , for ninety @-@ nine cents and raffled off tickets that gave fans a chance to see the band in Japan in November . 
 By the Way was released on CD and LP on July 9 , 2002 , under the Warner Bros. label , selling 281 @,@ 948 copies in the United States in its first week and 1 @.@ 8 million worldwide . It was certified gold just a few months later on October 26 , 2002 . Five singles were released from it ; of these , the title track " By the Way " was the most successful , peaking at No. 2 on the UK charts and No. 1 on the Billboard rock charts . Although the album sold fewer copies than Californication , By the Way managed to peak at No. 2 on the Billboard 200 , one spot higher than Californication . Around the world , the album debuted at number one in the UK , Switzerland , New Zealand , Austria , and Sweden ; and number two in France . In March 2006 , the Red Hot Chili Peppers ' albums were made available for download from the iTunes Music Store and other online retailers . By the Way included two previously unreleased tracks ( " Runaway " , and " Bicycle Song " ) , recorded during the 2004 Greatest Hits sessions . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The album received a positive reaction from critics , who praised By the Way for its melodic , multilayer and textured styles . AllMusic 's Zac Johnson said that the album was " sophisticated ... the Peppers have not sacrificed any of their trademark energy or passions for life , universal love , and ( of course ) lust " . Rolling Stone called the album " insanely melodic " and a " near @-@ perfect balance of gutter grime and high @-@ art aspiration " , comparing it to other works , such as The Beach Boys ' album Pet Sounds . Mojo applauded the recording , and considered it to be " the strongest Chili 's album since 1991 's Blood Sugar Sex Magik " . Giving the album 5 stars out of 5 , Q called By the Way " A fantastic record ; full of wonder . " Kimberly Mack of PopMatters commented on how the album " ... showcases a more sophisticated , lush sound that only today 's Peppers could have conceived " , and that " Anthony Kiedis ' lyrics are more personal than ever . " Frusciante was , in his eyes , " a musical talent to be reckoned with and is the undeniable X factor in the Red Hot Chili Peppers ' sound . " 
 However , the praise was balanced by certain critics . Blender considered By the Way to be an indistinguishable sequel to Californication , calling it " Californication 2 " . It further condemned the Chili Peppers for not varying their style and remaining extremely similar in sound . Jaime Lowe of The Village Voice panned Kiedis 's lyrics as " absolutely baffling " and commented that " it 's as if he picked up a rhyming dictionary and arbitrarily strung some phrases together . " The newspaper 's Robert Christgau was also critical of his songwriting , writing that " it 's not enough for Anthony Kiedis to get all mature — he 's supposed to say something interesting about maturity . " Entertainment Weekly praised By the Way for being well refined and a superb collaboration , but criticized the Chili Peppers for playing it safe and keeping the album 's energy mild ; for being " more fascinating for what it symbolizes than what it is . " 
 Allmusic considered the song " By the Way " to combine " fiery Hollywood funk , gentle harmonies , a little bit of singing about girls , [ and ] a little bit of hanging out in the streets in the summertime . " Rolling Stone commented on " how close this band has come to conjuring pure California sunshine " in " The Zephyr Song " . " Midnight " was highly regarded by several sources . It was chosen as one of By the Way 's " Allmusic Track Picks " . Kimberly Mack of Pop Matters considered it to have " hippie @-@ friendly lyrics " and to " evoke images of tie @-@ dyed T @-@ shirts and AM radio . " Mack also regarded " Venice Queen " as " a masterpiece ... Frusciante 's backing vocals are hauntingly beautiful . " In 2005 , By the Way was ranked number 375 in Rock Hard magazine 's book of The 500 Greatest Rock & Metal Albums of All Time . 
 = = By the Way tour = = 
 Flea was still upset over the problems he had with John during the making of the album . Flea felt that John was trying to take over the band and that he could no longer express himself in the context of the band . Flea decided that he would finish the album but quit prior to their tour . According to Chad Smith , Flea and Frusciante eventually had a sit @-@ down meeting with each other to air out their differences . Frusciante had no idea how Flea was feeling and had no intentions of taking over the band . Flea also credited practicing <unk> meditation along with Frusciante for helping the two repair their musical relationship . With their problems worked out , the band launched their promo tour to support the album on New York City 's Ellis Island . Sponsored by the rock radio station K @-@ Rock , the event was titled the " Pep Rally " . The band performed eight songs from By the Way , as well as tracks from Californication and Blood Sugar Sex Magik in front of 900 contest winners . The New York Post declared the show " one of the top concerts of the year . " The location was chosen in order to reinvigorate lower Manhattan after the September 11 , 2001 attacks and all proceeds were donated to pertinent charity organizations . Immediately following this , the Chili Peppers embarked on a world tour to support the album . Beginning in Europe , they also played at events such as the Fuji Rock Festival and Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival in between . The band eventually culminated their Europe leg of the tour in February 2003 , and commenced the United States leg on May 1 . The Chili Peppers played at Madison Square Garden in New York City on June 3 , 2003 to a sold @-@ out crowd and an enthusiastic response from critics . Kelefa Sanneh of The New York Times reported that " on Tuesday night , the [ Red Hot Chili Peppers ] came to Madison Square Garden for an extraordinary two @-@ hour performance ... On ' Don 't Forget Me ' , [ Flea ] strummed chords , while Mr. Frusciante contributed a gorgeous guitar line that bubbled and hissed like some sort of chemical reaction . " The US leg ended on June 21 ; the band took a small hiatus before performing at Slane Castle on August 23 , to a crowd of over 80 @,@ 000 . Live at Slane Castle , the result of the concert , would become the Chili Peppers ' second live DVD , after Off the Map . 
 Following several Japanese and Australian performances , the Red Hot Chili Peppers planned three nights at London 's Hyde Park . Over 240 @,@ 000 tickets were sold within hours , with roughly 80 @,@ 000 people attending each show on June 19 , 20 and 25 , respectively . It became the highest grossing concert at a single venue in history , accumulating an estimated $ 17 million gross revenue . Due to the success of the three shows , the band released their first live album Live in Hyde Park in Europe , Australia , Japan and New Zealand , excluding the United States . Later that year , the Chili Peppers played for the 2004 Democratic National Convention in support of their political beliefs , with Kiedis saying " Do what you gotta do " at the end of the band 's set . Finally , they played at the Rock am Ring festival as one of the final performances of the By the Way tour . 
 In 2006 , Flea revealed that he once again considered leaving the band whilst touring in support of the album , stating that " throughout the By the Way tour I would play a show and then go and sit on the end of my bed staring into space . " He planned to teach full @-@ time at the Silverlake Conservatory of Music , but ultimately decided to remain within the band . Flea later stated that " the most painful part of quitting , and the thing that stopped me , was the idea of telling Anthony . " 
 = = Artwork = = 
 All paintings , photography and art direction is credited to Julian Schnabel and the Red Hot Chili Peppers . The woman featured on the cover of By the Way is Stella Schnabel , Julian Schnabel 's daughter and Frusciante 's then @-@ girlfriend . Regarding the artwork , Frusciante noted : " My girlfriend 's father offered to do the album art , so we sent him rough mixes of eight songs , and he just got the vibe of the album from that . He said that he wouldn 't be offended if we didn 't like it , but we loved what he did . He 's also given us great covers for all the singles . He 's a true artist . " 
 Several pages of the album 's booklet , and single for " By the Way " contain paintings of a goat head . A somewhat blurry , black and white photograph of the band in a desolate field , and each band member individually , is also present . 
 The majority of the booklet 's artwork are various scenes of replica grass and plants , stars and indistinguishable objects , which appears to be a miniature pole , placed in dirt . Single covers for " The Zephyr Song " and " Can 't Stop " both feature this same background , although angled slightly differently . The lyrics for By the Way are placed on top of the landscape , hand written by Kiedis in pink lettering . 
 = = Accolades = = 
 The information regarding accolades attributed to By the Way is adapted from AcclaimedMusic.net. 
 ( * ) designates unordered lists . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Red Hot Chili Peppers . 
 = = Album outtakes = = 
 Many outtakes from the album have been released or exist . " Time " and a cover version of Dion and the Belmonts ' " Teenager in Love " were released on the " By the Way " single . " Body of Water " , " Out of Range " , " Someone " and " Rivers of Avalon " were all released on " The Zephyr Song " single . " Slowly Deeply " , which was featured on the " Universally Speaking " single , is an outtake from the Californication sessions . " Fortune Faded " , a song originally recorded during the album sessions was later re @-@ recorded in 2003 and released as a single along with the b @-@ side , " Eskimo " , another By the Way outtake . A cover version of the Ramones ' " Havana Affair " was also recorded and later released in 2003 on ' We 're A Happy Family : A Tribute to The Ramones . The single for " Can 't Stop " also features an alternate mix of the song with higher harmonies and a clearer bass line . In 2003 , the band re @-@ entered the studio to work on their Greatest Hits album . The sessions produced enough songs for a new album , many which have gone unreleased . Of the songs released , " Bicycle Song " and " Runaway " were released in 2006 as bonus tracks on the iTunes release of By the Way . 
 In August 2014 , unreleased tracks from the album 's recording sessions were leaked to the internet . Many of the album 's released songs and outtakes are in their earliest forms and feature improvised lyrics by Kiedis . The leak included three songs never heard before including " Goldmine " , " Fall Water " and " Rock & Roll " along with the original version of " Fortune Faded " . Many of the songs are featured under their working titles ( which prior to release were also mentioned in various interviews ) : Soul Train ( " By the Way " ) , <unk> ( " The Zephyr Song " ) , I Would Die ( " I Could Die For You " ) , Drone ( " This is the Place " ) , Throw Away ( " Throw Away Your Television " ) , Epic ( " Venice Queen " ) and New Wave ( " Rivers of Avalon ) " To date , " <unk> on D and J " , a song assumed to be an instrumental jam and that Frusciante mentioned during pre @-@ album release interviews , has never been released . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Red Hot Chili Peppers 
 Michael " Flea " Balzary – bass , trumpet , harmonica and backing vocals 
 John Frusciante – guitars , backing vocals , piano , keyboards and modular synthesizer 
 Anthony Kiedis – lead vocals 
 Chad Smith – drums , percussion 
 Recording personnel 
 Ryan Hewitt – Engineer 
 Marc Mann – Arranger 
 Ethan Mates – Recording engineer 
 Vlado Meller – mastering 
 Rick Rubin – production and engineering 
 Jim Scott – Mix engineer , recording engineer 
 Jason Wormer – Recording engineer 
 Additional personnel 
 Julian Schnabel and Red Hot Chili Peppers – art direction 
 = Cutbacks ( 30 Rock ) = 
 " Cutbacks " is the seventeenth episode of the third season of the American television comedy series 30 Rock , and the 53rd episode of the series overall . It was written by supervising producer Matt Hubbard and directed by Gail Mancuso . The episode originally aired on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) network in the United States on April 9 , 2009 . Guest stars in this episode include Roger Bart , Todd Buonopane , and Don Pardo . 
 In the episode , joy about the fiftieth episode for the fictitious show The Girlie Show with Tracy Jordan ( TGS ) turns to worry when word spreads about imminent budget cuts at the 30 Rock workplace . Before long , Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) must fire several employees to save money , NBC page Kenneth Parcell ( Jack McBrayer ) takes on new responsibilities , and Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) wheels and deals to spare her staffers from layoffs . Meanwhile , Jenna Maroney ( Jane Krakowski ) and Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) suspect that Kenneth is masking a deep dark secret . This episode of 30 Rock featured a number of cultural references to the legal crime thriller film The Pelican Brief ( 1993 ) , and Liz Lemon parodying Steve Jobs 's attire while giving a presentation . 
 " Cutbacks " has received generally positive reception from television critics . According to the Nielsen ratings system , the episode was watched by 6 @.@ 8 million households during its original broadcast , and received a 3 @.@ 1 rating / 8 share among viewers in the 18 – 49 demographic . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The TGS with Tracy Jordan crew have finished taping their fiftieth episode and decide to celebrate . Their boss , Vice President of East Coast Television and Microwave Oven Programming for General Electric , Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) , goes to the writers ' room and tells the show 's head writer , Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) , about how the whole company is undergoing cutbacks . After an unsuccessful presentation about TGS , Brad <unk> ( Roger Bart ) — one of the consultants in charge of the cutbacks — informs Liz that she needs to cut her annual budget by 25 percent . Liz , anxious about her employees losing their jobs , decides to use sexual bartering to solve the problem and asks Brad on a date , which he accepts . Liz dresses in the trashiest outfit she can find , and goes on her date . The next day , she discovers that cutbacks are still taking place at TGS , and confronts Brad . Realizing that he was being used , Brad charges Liz with sexual harassment and she is suspended from work for two weeks . Jack tells Liz that the budget review process will start over again , this time under his supervision . 
 Meanwhile , NBC page Kenneth Parcell ( Jack McBrayer ) becomes Jack 's office assistant , replacing his former assistant Jonathan ( Maulik Pancholy ) . Kenneth asks Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) to feed his bird , as he is busy with two jobs now . Kenneth asks Tracy not to enter his bedroom , a request that makes Tracy curious . Believing Kenneth might be a serial killer , he tells Jenna Maroney ( Jane Krakowski ) and they decide to investigate Kenneth 's bedroom . At Kenneth 's apartment , they discover a bug bomb in his room , and reaching the conclusion that Kenneth is trying to poison them and they run out of his apartment . They forget to close the door and the bug bomb ends up killing the bird . When they tell Kenneth about his bird , he is more upset by the fact that Tracy and Jenna did not trust him , than the death of his bird . Tracy and Jenna , feeling horrible about what they have done , arrange a surprise for Kenneth at his apartment . When Kenneth goes home , he finds an entire collection of birds . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Cutbacks " was written by series supervising producer Matt Hubbard , making it his seventh writing credit after " The Rural Juror " , " Hard Ball " , " The Collection " , " MILF Island " , " Reunion " , and " Larry King " . The episode was directed by Gail Mancuso , making it her sixth for the series . " Cutbacks " originally aired in the United States on April 9 , 2009 , on NBC as the seventeenth episode of the show 's third season and the 53rd overall episode of the series . 
 This episode of 30 Rock featured a guest appearance from actor Roger Bart , who played a man from a consulting firm in charge of the cutbacks in the 30 Rock workplace . Television announcer Don Pardo guest starred as Sid , the TGS announcer . Pardo was the announcer on the sketch comedy show Saturday Night Live ( SNL ) , a weekly sketch comedy series which airs on NBC in the United States . Series creator , executive producer and lead actress Tina Fey was the head writer on SNL from 1999 until 2006 . Fey and Tracy Morgan have both been part of the main cast of SNL . This was actor Todd Buonopane 's second appearance as the character Jeffrey Weinerslav , an NBC Human Resource mediator . In this episode , Jeffrey informs Liz that a sexual harassment lawsuit has been filed against her for sexual bartering . Buonopane appeared in " Believe in the Stars " and later in " Jackie Jormp @-@ Jomp " . 
 One filmed scene from " Cutbacks " was cut out from the airing . The scene was included on 30 Rock ’ s season three DVD as part of the deleted scenes bonus feature . In the scene , Kenneth is instructed by Jack to only interrupt his firing meetings if something important comes up . Kenneth believes that getting Showtime for three months from Time Warner Cable is something he should bring up to Jack , but Jack informs him that getting Showtime does not qualify as something important . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Throughout the episode , references are made to the 1993 legal crime thriller film The Pelican Brief . Kenneth tells Jack " I feel like I 'm in The Pelican Brief . Do I already know too much ? " after Jack explains to Kenneth what to do as his assistant . Later , Jack tells Liz to make her budget cuts , with Liz replying " What ? That 's it ? I thought you 'd tell me to cook the numbers or shred something or do some Pelican Brief stuff . " Finally , Tracy and Jenna decide to investigate Kenneth 's apartment , which leads them to compare themselves to actors Denzel Washington and Julia Roberts , the two leads from the movie . 
 In one scene of " Cutbacks " , Liz parodies business magnate Steve Jobs 's clothing attire while giving her presentation about TGS to Brad . Later , Tracy goes to Jenna with his suspicions that Kenneth might be a murderer . Jenna tells Tracy that she has knowledge when it comes to serial killers after playing a criminal profiler — named Jill St. Ferrari — in an original Lifetime miniseries <unk> <unk> . When Tracy and Jenna go to Kenneth 's apartment , they go to his bedroom and see a bug bomb in his room , which prompts Tracy to say " Oh no , Kenneth 's a killer , and the Riddler is coming ! " , the latter is a reference to the comic book villain who leaves behind riddles , puzzles , and word games so that they can be solved . 
 Star Wars is frequently referenced in 30 Rock , beginning with the pilot episode in 2006 where Tracy is seen shouting that he is a Jedi . Liz admits to being a huge fan of Star Wars , saying that she had watched it many times with Pete Hornberger ( Scott Adsit ) , and dressed up as the Star Wars character Princess Leia during four recent Halloweens , and while trying to get out of jury duty in Chicago and New York . Star Wars is also referenced when Tracy takes on the identity of the character Chewbacca . In this episode , the TGS crew tells Liz " Do something Liz , you 're our only hope " , in regards to the cutbacks . This line was said by Princess Leia in the Star Wars movies , in which she was played by actress Carrie Fisher , who guest @-@ starred in the season two episode " Rosemary 's Baby " . Tina Fey , a fan of Star Wars herself , said that the weekly Star Wars joke or reference " started happening organically " when the crew realized that they had a Star Wars reference " in almost every show " . Fey said that from then on " it became a thing where [ they ] tried to keep it going " , and that even though they could not include one in every episode , they still had a " pretty high batting average " . Fey attributed most of the references to executive producer and writer Robert Carlock , whom she described as " the resident expert " . At the end of the episode , when Kenneth enters his apartment and sees all the birds given to him by Jenna and Tracy , he declares he has some naming to do . The last two birds he names " Lorne " and " Michael " , a reference to the executive producer of Saturday Night Live , Lorne Michaels , who is credited on the screen during the line . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Cutbacks " was watched by 6 @.@ 8 million households , according to the Nielsen ratings system . It received a 3 @.@ 1 rating / 8 share among viewers in the 18 – 49 demographic , meaning that 3 @.@ 1 percent of all people in that group , and 8 percent of all people from that group watching television at the time , watched the episode . This was a decrease from the previous episode , " Apollo , Apollo " , which was watched by 7 @.@ 2 million American viewers . 
 IGN contributor Robert Canning opined that " Cutbacks " was " solid " , as it " included all the major players in familiar roles and provided some great laughs . " Canning complimented Roger Bart 's performance noting that he played the part " very straight until the very end . " In regards to the Tracy , Jenna , and Kenneth plot , he said that the overall ending was " a bit weak " but " the majority of the story worked well . " In conclusion , Canning gave the episode an 8 @.@ 3 out of 10 rating . Leonard Pierce of The A.V. Club noted that this episode was " broad as hell , with three incredibly <unk> plot threads all driven by one of the most venerable office sitcom tropes ( budget cuts ) , but it was redeemed not only by being funny as hell at its best , but by letting the <unk> of some of the main characters – sometimes inadvertent , sometimes not , provide some of the strongest laughs in ' Cutbacks ' . " Entertainment Weekly ’ s Margaret Lyons said that despite this episode not being " one of the show 's most sophisticated [ ones ] " she still enjoyed it , citing that it had " some pretty fantastic lines – and some really cute moments between Liz and Jack . " 
 Bob Sassone of AOL 's TV Squad said that " Cutbacks " was a " funny episode " , but stated that he disliked Liz 's actions , explaining that what she did was " creepy . " Sassone did not enjoy Tracy and Jenna believing that Kenneth was a murder " because of a wacky series of misunderstandings and assumptions " observing that this scenario has been played out " in every other sitcom since 1989 . " Television columnist Alan Sepinwall for The Star @-@ Ledger reported that he was " very unsatisfied " with this episode , though , noted that he preferred Liz 's plot over Tracy , Jenna , and Kenneth 's . Overall , Sepinwall said that the episode was " meh " . 
 = Grand Forks , North Dakota = 
 Grand Forks is the third @-@ largest city in the State of North Dakota ( after Fargo and Bismarck ) and the county seat of Grand Forks County . According to the 2010 census , the city 's population was 52 @,@ 838 , while that of the city and surrounding metropolitan area was 98 @,@ 461 . Grand Forks , along with its twin city of East Grand Forks , Minnesota , forms the center of the Grand Forks , ND @-@ MN Metropolitan Statistical Area , which is often called Greater Grand Forks or The Grand Cities . 
 Located on the western banks of the Red River of the North in a flat region known as the Red River Valley , the city is prone to flooding and was struck by the devastating Red River Flood of 1997 . Originally called Les Grandes Fourches by French fur traders , Grand Forks was founded in 1870 by steamboat captain Alexander Griggs and incorporated on February 22 , 1881 . Its location at the fork of the Red River and the Red Lake River gives the city its name . 
 Historically dependent on local agriculture , the city 's economy now encompasses higher education , defense , health care , manufacturing , food processing , and scientific research . Grand Forks is served by Grand Forks International Airport and Grand Forks Air Force Base . The city 's University of North Dakota is the oldest institution of higher education in the state . The Alerus Center and Ralph Engelstad Arena host athletic and other events , while the North Dakota Museum of Art and Chester Fritz Auditorium are the city 's largest cultural venues . 
 = = History = = 
 Prior to settlement by Europeans or Americans , the area where the city now sits – at the forks of the Red River and Red Lake River – had been an important meeting and trading point for Native Americans . Early French explorers , fur trappers , and traders called the area Les Grandes Fourches meaning " The Grand Forks " . By the 1740s , Les Grandes Fourches was an important trading post for French fur trappers . A U.S. post office was established on the site on June 15 , 1870 , and the name was changed to " Grand Forks " . Alexander Griggs , a steamboat captain , is regarded as " The Father of Grand Forks " . Griggs ' steamboat froze in the Red River on a voyage in late 1870 , forcing the captain and his crew to spend the winter camping at Grand Forks . Griggs platted the community in 1875 and Grand Forks was officially incorporated on February 22 , 1881 . The city quickly grew after the arrival of the Great Northern Railway in 1880 and the Northern Pacific Railway in 1887 . In 1883 , the University of North Dakota was established , six years before North Dakota was formally recognized as an independent state born from the Dakota Territory . The first half of the 20th century saw steady growth and the development of new neighborhoods farther south and west of Downtown Grand Forks . The 1920s saw the construction of the state @-@ owned North Dakota Mill and Elevator on the north side of the city . In 1954 , Grand Forks was chosen as the site for an Air Force base . Grand Forks Air Force Base brought thousands of new jobs and residents to the community . The military base and the University of North Dakota would become integral pieces of the city 's economy . The second half of the 20th century saw Grand Forks spreading further away from the older part of town . Interstate 29 was built on the western side of the city and two enclosed shopping malls – South Forks Plaza and Columbia Mall – were built on the south side . 
 The city was struck by a severe flood in 1997 , causing extensive damage . With Fargo upstream from the bulk of the waters and Winnipeg with its flood control structures , Grand Forks became the hardest hit city in the Red River Valley . During the height of the flooding , a major fire also destroyed eleven buildings in the downtown area . Many neighborhoods had to be demolished to make way for a new levee system , which was ultimately completed ten years later . The land bordering the Red River was turned into a massive park known as the Greater Grand Forks Greenway . Since the flood , Grand Forks has seen both public and private developments throughout town . Two new , large sports venues opened in 2001 , including the Alerus Center and the Ralph Engelstad Arena . In 2007 , the Winnipeg @-@ based Canad Inns hotel chain opened a 13 @-@ story hotel and waterpark adjacent to the Alerus Center . By 2007 Grand Forks had a larger population than it did before the 1997 flood , and area employment and taxable sales had also surpassed pre @-@ flood levels . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Grand Forks is located 74 miles ( 119 km ) north of the Fargo @-@ Moorhead area and 145 miles ( 233 km ) south of Winnipeg , Manitoba . Grand Forks is situated on the western bank of the Red River of the North in an area known as the Red River Valley . The term " forks " refers to the forking of the Red River with the Red Lake River located near downtown Grand Forks . According to the United States Census Bureau , the city has a total area of 20 @.@ 09 square miles ( 52 @.@ 03 km2 ) , of which , 19 @.@ 91 square miles ( 51 @.@ 57 km2 ) is land and 0 @.@ 18 square miles ( 0 @.@ 47 km2 ) is water . Since it is in one of the flattest parts of the world , the city has few differences in elevation . There are no lakes in the city limits of Grand Forks , but the meandering Red River and the English Coulee flow through the community and provide some break in the terrain . The Red River Valley is the result of an ancient glacier carving its way south during the last Ice Age . Once the glacier receded , it formed a glacial lake called Lake Agassiz . The ancient beaches can still be seen as rolling hills west of the city . 
 = = = Cityscape = = = 
 Grand Forks has several distinct neighborhoods . The area adjacent to the Red River developed first so this is where some of the oldest neighborhoods , including the downtown area , can be found . The area between downtown and the University of North Dakota campus was another early growth area and historic properties can be found here as well . 
 Downtown Grand Forks is the oldest part of the city and thus contains many historic buildings . It is the governmental center of the city and county . It is used as a gathering place for large events and festivals . Also , a farmer 's market is held every Saturday ( 9AM to 2PM ) from mid @-@ June to mid @-@ September in the Town Square on the corner of 3rd Street S. and <unk> Avenue . 
 Recently , city leaders and developers have announced plans to convert older buildings into high @-@ end condos and apartments , and to construct new buildings for the same purpose . Located directly south of downtown , the streets of the Near Southside Historic District are lined with classic houses . Reeves Drive was once one of the most fashionable neighborhoods in the city and , to this day , it is still the home of many old mansions exhibiting several unique architectural styles . Also in this neighborhood are areas of original <unk> paving , several historic churches , and the Lincoln Drive Park . The Near Southside neighborhood was granted the historic district designation by the National Register of Historic Places . 
 In general , the newer neighborhoods of Grand Forks are in the southern and western parts of town . The 32nd Avenue South corridor has been the commercial center of the city since the Columbia Mall opened in 1978 . Many big box stores and restaurants are now located along the avenue . A large strip mall , called the Grand Forks Marketplace , opened in 2001 near the Columbia Mall . University Village is a new commercial district that was built on vacant lands owned by the University of North Dakota . The centerpiece of the Village is the Ralph Engelstad Arena , which is used by the University 's North Dakota men 's ice hockey team . All the buildings in the Village have been built in a similar style to buildings on the nearby UND campus . The area now includes restaurants and stores , as well as the University bookstore . In 2006 , a new Wellness Center for UND students opened on the Village 's west side . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Due to its location in the Great Plains and its distance from both mountains and oceans , the city has a humid continental climate ( Köppen ( Dfb ) ) , USDA Plant Hardiness Zone 4a . This type of climate is distinguished by four very distinct seasons and great variation in temperatures over very short periods of time . As there are no nearby mountain ranges or bodies of water to ameliorate the climatic conditions , Grand Forks lies exposed to numerous weather systems including bitterly cold Arctic high pressure systems . The city experiences long , cold , and snowy winters . In sharp contrast , summers are often warm to hot and often quite humid with frequent thunderstorms . Although warm weather normally ends soon after Labor Day , a few warm days can , on rare occasions , be seen as late as October . Spring and autumn are short and highly variable seasons . Record temperature extremes range from − 43 ° F ( − 42 ° C ) on January 11 , 1912 to 109 ° F ( 43 ° C ) on July 12 , 1936 . The daily mean temperatures of the Grand Forks winters are associated with subarctic climates with frequent subzero temperatures , but due to the extended warm period of daily means above 50 ° F ( 10 ° C ) from May to September it stays within the humid continental temperature range . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 According to the 2006 @-@ 2008 American Community Survey , the racial composition was as follows : 
 White : 91 @.@ 6 % ( Non @-@ Hispanic Whites : 90 @.@ 4 % ) 
 Black or African American : 1 @.@ 6 % 
 American Indian : 3 @.@ 2 % 
 Asian : 1 @.@ 0 % 
 Pacific Islander : 0 @.@ 0 % 
 Some other race : 1 @.@ 1 % 
 Two or more races : 1 @.@ 5 % 
 Hispanic or Latino ( of any race ) : 2 @.@ 4 % 
 The top five European ancestry groups were the following : 
 Norwegian : 35 @.@ 7 % 
 German : 34 @.@ 3 % 
 Irish : 9 @.@ 5 % 
 Polish : 7 @.@ 4 % 
 French : 5 @.@ 4 % 
 = = = 2010 census = = = 
 As of the census of 2010 , there were 52 @,@ 838 people , 22 @,@ 260 households , and 11 @,@ 275 families residing in the city . The population density was 2 @,@ 653 @.@ 8 inhabitants per square mile ( 1 @,@ 024 @.@ 6 / km2 ) . There were 23 @,@ 449 housing units at an average density of 1 @,@ 177 @.@ 7 per square mile ( 454 @.@ 7 / km2 ) . The racial makeup of the city was 89 @.@ 7 % White , 2 @.@ 0 % African American , 2 @.@ 9 % Native American , 2 @.@ 2 % Asian , 0 @.@ 7 % from other races , and 2 @.@ 5 % from two or more races . Hispanic or Latino of any race were 2 @.@ 8 % of the population . 
 There were 22 @,@ 260 households of which 24 @.@ 3 % had children under the age of 18 living with them , 37 @.@ 3 % were married couples living together , 9 @.@ 7 % had a female householder with no husband present , 3 @.@ 7 % had a male householder with no wife present , and 49 @.@ 3 % were non @-@ families . 34 @.@ 8 % of all households were made up of individuals and 8 @.@ 6 % had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2 @.@ 21 and the average family size was 2 @.@ 87 . 
 The median age in the city was 28 @.@ 4 years . 18 @.@ 4 % of residents were under the age of 18 ; 24 @.@ 6 % were between the ages of 18 and 24 ; 25 @.@ 1 % were from 25 to 44 ; 21 @.@ 7 % were from 45 to 64 ; and 10 @.@ 1 % were 65 years of age or older . The gender makeup of the city was 51 @.@ 2 % male and 48 @.@ 8 % female . 
 = = = 2000 census = = = 
 As of the 2000 Census , there were 49 @,@ 321 people , 19 @,@ 677 households , and 11 @,@ 058 families residing in the city . The population density was 2 @,@ 563 @.@ 0 per square mile ( 989 @.@ 8 / km2 ) . There were 20 @,@ 838 housing units at an average density of 1 @,@ 082 @.@ 8 per square mile ( 418 @.@ 2 / km2 ) . 
 The racial makeup of the city was 93 @.@ 4 % White , 0 @.@ 9 % African American , 2 @.@ 8 % Native American , 1 @.@ 0 % Asian , 0 @.@ 1 % Pacific Islander , 0 @.@ 6 % from other races , and 1 @.@ 4 % from two or more races . Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1 @.@ 9 % of the population . The top six ancestry groups in the city were Norwegian ( 36 @.@ 4 % ) , German ( 34 @.@ 7 % ) , Irish ( 10 @.@ 6 % ) , French ( 6 @.@ 5 % ) , Polish ( 6 @.@ 2 % ) , English ( 6 @.@ 1 % ) . There were 21 @.@ 4 % of the population under the age of 18 , 22 @.@ 9 % from 18 to 24 , 27 @.@ 7 % from 25 to 44 , 18 @.@ 3 % from 45 to 64 , and 9 @.@ 8 % who were 65 years of age or older . The median age was 28 years . For every 100 females there were 102 @.@ 0 males . For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 100 @.@ 2 males . 
 Of the 19 @,@ 677 households , 28 @.@ 7 % had children under the age of 18 living with them , 43 @.@ 2 % were married couples living together , 10 @.@ 0 % had a female householder with no husband present , and 43 @.@ 8 % were non @-@ families . 31 @.@ 4 % of all households were made up of individuals and 8 @.@ 5 % had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2 @.@ 3 and the average family size was 3 @.@ 0 . The median income for a household in the city was $ 34 @,@ 194 , and the median income for a family was $ 47 @,@ 491 . Males had a median income of $ 30 @,@ 703 versus $ 21 @,@ 573 for females . The per capita income for the city was $ 18 @,@ 395 . About 9 @.@ 3 % of families and 14 @.@ 6 % of the population were below the poverty line , including 14 @.@ 6 % of those under age 18 and 7 @.@ 7 % of those age 65 or over . 
 The median income for a household in the city was $ 34 @,@ 194 , and the median income for a family was $ 47 @,@ 491 . Males had a median income of $ 30 @,@ 703 versus $ 21 @,@ 573 for females . The per capita income for the city was $ 18 @,@ 395 . About 9 @.@ 3 % of families and 14 @.@ 6 % of the population were below the poverty line , including 14 @.@ 6 % of those under age 18 and 7 @.@ 7 % of those age 65 or over . 
 = = Economy = = 
 The economy of Grand Forks is not dominated by any one industry or sector . While agriculture continues to play a role in the area 's economy , the city of Grand Forks now has a relatively diverse economy that includes public and private employers in sectors such as education , defense , health care , manufacturing , and food processing . The state and federal governments are two of the largest employers in the Grand Forks area . The University of North Dakota , located in the heart of the city , is the largest employer in the metropolitan area . Grand Forks Air Force Base , just west of the city , employs a large number of civilian workers in addition to its military personnel . Altru Health System is the largest private employer in Grand Forks . 
 = = = Largest employers = = = 
 According to the City 's 2013 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report , the largest employers in the city are : 
 Major manufacturers in Grand Forks include wind turbine manufacturer LM <unk> and small aircraft manufacturer Cirrus Design . Major food producers include potato processor J. R. <unk> Company and the state @-@ owned North Dakota Mill and Elevator which is the largest flour mill in the United States . Amazon.com and SEI Information Technologies both operate call centers in Grand Forks . Other large private employers in the city include the locally owned Alerus Financial branch of banks , Home of Economy , and the locally owned Hugo 's chain of supermarkets . 
 The retail and service sector is also an important part of the economy . The historic center of shopping in Grand Forks was the downtown area . Today , downtown is home to small shops and restaurants and south Grand Forks has become the major retail district in the city . Grand Forks has three large shopping centers . The oldest , Grand Cities Mall , is located on South Washington Street and contains mainly small , locally owned stores as well as a Kmart . With about 80 stores , the area 's largest indoor mall is Columbia Mall which is anchored by Macy 's , Sears , J.C. Penney , and a small food court . The newest major shopping center in the city is the Grand Forks Marketplace power center mall which features <unk> , Best Buy , Lowe 's , Gordmans , and several smaller stores . Depending on the relative strength of the Canadian dollar versus the American dollar , the Greater Grand Forks area attracts large numbers of tourist shoppers from Manitoba and especially from Winnipeg . 
 = = = Economic development = = = 
 The city government is actively involved in the economic development process , helping existing firms grow and attracting new ones . A portion of sales tax revenues is set aside for this , some of it going into the Grand Forks Growth Fund . Companies can request low @-@ interest loans or grants from this fund provided they meet certain criteria , such as paying a relatively high wage and doing most of their business outside the city 's trade region . The city also contributes to the Grand Forks Region Economic Development Corporation ( EDC ) , a public @-@ private organization that also receives funding from banks and other major businesses . The EDC plays a consulting role for businesses , such as identifying suitable sites for expansion or assembling public funding packages . Its other key role is to vet businesses to see if they are suitable for funding by the Growth Fund . 
 Community leaders have long seen UND as an " economic engine " for the city . Besides its regular faculty , it also has business @-@ like components such as the Energy and Environmental Research Center . UND hosts a technology incubator called the Center for Innovation . More recently , the University has been working to commercialize its research . A major thrust in that direction is the construction of a research park on the western fringes of the campus . Another potential economic opportunity for the city is the addition of the unmanned aerial vehicle ( UAV ) mission to Grand Forks Air Force Base . The base currently hosts KC @-@ 135 Stratotankers , which will gradually be transferred to other bases around the country . 
 = = Culture = = 
 = = = Arts and theatre = = = 
 Due at least in part to the presence of the University of North Dakota , Grand Forks offers a variety of arts and cultural events . The North Dakota Museum of Art , located on the UND campus , brings many nationally touring exhibits to Grand Forks as well as the work of regional artists . In addition to the Museum of Art , UND offers other gallery space for student art . UND also has active Theater Arts and Music departments . Students stage theater productions each year at the Burtness Theater on campus . UND 's Chester Fritz Auditorium also brings music and theater events to Grand Forks including national touring companies of Broadway musicals . 
 The Greater Grand Forks Symphony Orchestra has been performing since 1905 and the Grand Forks Master Chorale was formed in 1983 . Both groups stage productions each year at various locations in the community . The North Dakota Ballet Company is headquartered in Grand Forks and often performs at the Chester Fritz Auditorium . The Grand Forks City Band was formed in 1886 and still stages shows year round . 
 The Empire Arts Center , in downtown Grand Forks , is home to several cultural events throughout the year . The Empire , a 1919 movie theater , was restored after the Flood of 1997 and now includes performance space , a large movie screen , a gallery , and space for artists . The Fire Hall Theatre , also located downtown , is used by community members to put on several theater productions each year . The Summer Performing Arts Company ( SPA ) is a popular summer arts program for area K @-@ 12 students . SPA stages three major musicals mid @-@ July . The Myra Museum , on Belmont Road near the Greater Grand Forks Greenway , is a small history museum with exhibits that trace local history from the Ice Age , through settlement , and into the modern age . Other buildings on the Myra Museum grounds include the original 1868 Grand Forks Post Office , a 1917 one room school , and the historic Campbell House . 
 = = = Sports = = = 
 College sports are popular in Grand Forks , with an intense following for the University of North Dakota . The UND men 's ice hockey team competes in the NCAA Division I level and has been the Frozen Four championship team eight times and the runner @-@ up five times . The UND football team was the 2001 NCAA Division II champion and the 2003 runner @-@ up . In 2006 , the university announced that it would be moving its entire athletic program to Division I. 
 Grand Forks is home to two major indoor athletic arenas . The city @-@ owned Alerus Center opened in 2001 . The Alerus Center is home to the University of North Dakota football team and also plays host to a variety of other events including major concerts . The Alerus Center is the largest arena and convention center complex in the upper Midwest area . The University of North Dakota hockey teams compete in the Ralph Engelstad Arena , located in the University Village district of the UND campus . " The Ralph " , as it is commonly called , was funded by UND benefactor Ralph Engelstad and opened in 2001 at a cost of over $ 100 million . Adjacent to the Ralph Engelstad Arena is the smaller Betty Engelstad Sioux Center . " The Betty " is the home of the University of North Dakota basketball and volleyball teams . 
 = = = Recreation = = = 
 The Grand Forks Park District , established in 1905 , operates 14 neighborhood parks , 28 tennis courts , and a swimming pool . The parks include features such as playgrounds , baseball fields , softball fields , soccer fields , basketball courts , and picnic areas . <unk> Park includes a Japanese garden . The Park District also operates eleven outdoor skating rinks and indoor ice arenas : Purpur Arena , Eagles Arena , <unk> Club Arena , and <unk> Arena . The district also owns the Center Court Fitness Club . 
 There are several golf courses in the city and the surrounding area . The Park District operates the 18 @-@ hole , Arnold Palmer @-@ designed , links style King 's Walk Golf Course and the historic , 9 @-@ hole Lincoln Golf Course . The University of North Dakota operates the 9 @-@ hole Ray Richards Golf Course . The 18 @-@ hole Grand Forks Country Club is located directly south of the city . There are also golf courses in nearby East Grand Forks , Minnesota and Manvel , North Dakota . 
 The Greater Grand Forks Greenway is a large park that runs the length of the Red River in the city . It includes an extensive path system , large festival grounds , ski trails , and wildflower gardens . Including the Greenway , the Andrew Hampsten Bikeway System in Grand Forks is over 43 miles ( 69 km ) long . These paths are located in The Greenway , adjacent to major streets , and on the banks of the English Coulee . There are also two pedestrian / bicycle bridges that span the Red River . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 = = Media = = 
 The Grand Forks Herald is the major daily newspaper serving Grand Forks and is also the second most widely circulated newspaper in North Dakota with a daily circulation of around 31 @,@ 000 . The Exponent is a weekly newspaper published in East Grand Forks , Minnesota . The University of North Dakota also has its own student @-@ published newspaper called The Dakota Student , which is published twice weekly during the school year . 
 The major AM radio station in Grand Forks is <unk> 1310 , which is a news and talk station . The city 's FM stations include NPR affiliates KUND @-@ FM 89 @.@ 3 , KFJM 90 @.@ 7 , <unk> 91 @.@ 5 and <unk> 102 @.@ 7 . Commercial FM stations include rock station <unk> 107 @.@ 5 ; top 40 stations <unk> @-@ FM 92 @.@ 9 and <unk> 94 @.@ 7 ; and country stations <unk> 100 @.@ 3 and <unk> 97 @.@ 1 . 
 <unk> @-@ TV channel 8 , an ABC affiliate , is the only broadcast television station in Grand Forks that provides local news . All other major U.S. television networks are broadcast from Fargo . 
 = = Government = = 
 Grand Forks uses the mayor @-@ council model of municipal government . The mayor , who is elected every four years , has the power to oversee the daily administration of city government and to work directly with department heads to ensure the proper provision of services . The mayor of Grand Forks is obstetrician Dr. Michael Brown . He was first elected in 2000 and was re @-@ elected in 2004 and again in 2008 . 
 The city is divided into seven wards with each ward electing a single city council representative for a four @-@ year term . The council meets twice a month as the council proper and its two main committees , the Finance / Development Committee and Service / Safety Committee , each meets twice a month . All these meetings are broadcast on a local cable channel . 
 = = Education = = 
 = = = Higher education = = = 
 The University of North Dakota ( UND ) , the oldest university and home of the only schools of medicine and law in the state , is located at Grand Forks . Enrollment is about 15 @,@ 000 . UND is known for its John D. Odegard School of Aerospace Sciences which includes an Air Traffic Control Training program that in October 2009 was ranked No.1 in the nation for the second consecutive year by the FAA . UND and North Dakota State University make up the Red River Valley Research Corridor . 
 Northland Community and Technical College , a two @-@ year school , is located across the Red River in East Grand Forks . The University of Minnesota Crookston is in nearby Crookston , Minnesota . 
 = = = Primary and secondary schools = = = 
 The Grand Forks Public Schools system includes the Grand Forks and Grand Forks Air Force Base school districts . Enrollment is about 7 @,@ 600 . There are twelve elementary schools , four middle schools , and two high schools ( Central High and Red River High ) , an alternative high school , and an adult education program . Grand Forks Public Schools is governed by a nine @-@ member board of elected representatives , separate from the city and county governments . 
 There are several primary schools that are not part of the public school system including the state @-@ operated North Dakota School for the Blind . There are two Catholic schools offering classes from kindergarten through sixth grade . The only private high school in the metropolitan area is Sacred Heart High School , a Catholic school , in East Grand Forks . There is a non @-@ denominational Christian elementary and middle school operating in East Grand Forks . 
 = = Infrastructure = = 
 = = = Transportation = = = 
 = = = = Air = = = = 
 Grand Forks International Airport ( <unk> , <unk> ) is served by Delta Air Lines with several daily round trips to Minneapolis @-@ St. Paul International Airport ; and Allegiant Air , which operates flights a few times a week to Mesa , Arizona ( Phoenix @-@ Gateway ) , Sanford , Florida ( Orlando @-@ Sanford ) and Las Vegas , Nevada . A new passenger terminal was completed in early 2011 , adding additional space to allow more passengers to come through the airport as well as providing the airport with better circulation , a new baggage claim as well as addressing additional security and safety concerns necessary to complete the new terminal project . The airport is a major distribution center for FedEx , which conducts flights daily within the state and northern Minnesota . The airport is one of the busiest airports in the country , due in large measure to the presence of the John D. Odegard School of Aerospace Sciences of the University of North Dakota . 
 = = = = Rail = = = = 
 The BNSF Railway runs track in several directions in and around the city . Amtrak passenger service on the Empire Builder line heads westbound daily at 4 : 52 am and eastbound daily at 12 : 57 am . The Empire Builder stops at the Grand Forks Amtrak station . 
 = = = = Road = = = = 
 Three federal highways pass through Grand Forks : U.S. Route 2 , Interstate 29 , and U.S. Highway 81 . U.S. Highway 2 , known as Gateway Drive in the city , runs east to west through the northern part of town and is a four @-@ lane highway . The highway is the primary connection between Grand Forks , East Grand Forks , the Grand Forks Air Force Base , Grand Forks International Airport , and nearby Crookston , Minnesota . Interstate 29 runs north to south along the western part of the city , officially multiplexed with U.S. Highway 81 in the Grand Forks area . The U.S. Highway 81 business route , Washington Street and 32nd Avenue , runs through many of the city 's major commercial districts . 
 = = = = Local transportation = = = = 
 Within the city , roads that run from north to south are traditionally called " streets " and roads that run from east to west are traditionally called " avenues " . Streets are numbered in blocks west of the Red River . Avenues are numbered in blocks north or south of <unk> Avenue – the city 's historic dividing route adjacent to the rail yards . The city maintains a bus system called Cities Area Transit , also known by the acronym CAT . The system has operated since 1926 when it was introduced to replace an earlier trolley system . There are twelve bus routes including night service and service in the community of East Grand Forks . 
 = = = Health care = = = 
 With over 4 @,@ 100 employees and nearly 300 physicians and mid @-@ levels ( nurse practitioners and physician assistants ) , Altru Health System is the main provider of health care in Greater Grand Forks and the surrounding region . Serving more than 220 @,@ 000 residents in northeast North Dakota and northwest Minnesota , Altru provides an array of services to meet the needs of patients of all ages and levels of health . As the first member of the Mayo Clinic Care Network , Altru 's providers have access to clinically integrated tools extending Mayo Clinic 's knowledge and expertise to patients . Altru Health System is also the largest private employer in Grand Forks . Offering all private patient rooms , Altru 's Columbia Road Campus includes Altru Hospital ( 257 beds ) , Altru Rehabilitation Center ( 20 beds ) and multiple clinics . Altru 's South Washington Medical Park features Altru Specialty Center ( 45 beds ) , Altru Professional Center and <unk> Medical Essentials . The <unk> and Jerry Ryan Center for Prevention and Genetics , housed in Choice Health & Fitness , encourages individuals to think about their health through preventive measures before it becomes medically necessary to seek care . The first of its kind in the region , the Center provides a unique opportunity for individuals to take an active approach to a healthier life . <unk> Aesthetic Center , with multiple locations in Grand Forks , East Grand Forks and across the region , offers a variety of surgical and non @-@ surgical procedures , services and products to rejuvenate your look , provided under the support of Altru . Altru Health System is the result of a 1997 merger of United Hospital ( formerly Deaconess and St. Michael 's Hospitals ) and the Grand Forks Clinic . 
 = = Sister cities = = 
 Grand Forks has an active sister city program designed to encourage cultural and economic exchanges . Grand Forks ' first sister city was <unk> in the Soviet Union . The relationship with the Siberian city formally began in 1984 during the Cold War . Sometime in the late 1990s , however , political and economic turmoil in Russia ended the relationship . While the relationship with <unk> faded , Grand Forks found a new sister in Awano , Japan . An informal relationship began in 1994 when the school districts of both cities began exchanging students . In 1998 , the two formally proclaimed themselves sister cities . The most concrete evidence of the relationship between the two is a Japanese rock garden in Grand Forks ' <unk> Park and a sculpture of an American bison in an Awano park . However , the annexation of Awano by the larger city of Kanuma has led to the end of the sister city relationship . Grand Forks ' relationship with Dickinson , North Dakota , began in 2002 , when delegations from each city visited the other . Grand Forks Mayor Michael Brown has said he thinks having friends in western North Dakota , which typically has diverging interests from eastern cities , could help at the state legislature . Sarpsborg , Norway , became a sister city in 2005 following several exchanges among leaders from both cities . The city became interested in building a relationship with Sarpsborg because many Grand Forks residents have Norwegian heritage . 
 = HMS Empress of India = 
 HMS Empress of India was one of seven Royal Sovereign @-@ class pre @-@ dreadnought battleships built for the Royal Navy during the 1890s . The ship was commissioned in 1893 and served as the flagship of the second @-@ in @-@ command of the Channel Fleet for two years . She was transferred to the Mediterranean Fleet in 1897 , during which time Empress of India was assigned to the International Squadron blockading Crete during the uprising there . She returned home in 1901 and was briefly assigned as a coast guard ship in Ireland before she became the second flagship of the Home Fleet . The ship was reduced to reserve in 1905 and accidentally collided with the submarine HMS A10 the following year . Empress of India was taken out of service in early 1912 and accidentally struck a German sailing ship while under tow . She was sunk as a target ship in 1913 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The design of the Royal Sovereign @-@ class ships was derived from that of the Admiral @-@ class ironclad battleships , greatly enlarged to improve seakeeping and to provide space for a secondary armament as in the preceding Trafalgar @-@ class ironclad battleships . The ships displaced 14 @,@ 150 long tons ( 14 @,@ 380 t ) at normal load and 15 @,@ 580 long tons ( 15 @,@ 830 t ) at deep load . They had a length between perpendiculars of 380 feet ( 115 @.@ 8 m ) and an overall length of 410 feet 6 inches ( 125 @.@ 1 m ) , a beam of 75 feet ( 22 @.@ 9 m ) , and a draught of 27 feet 6 inches ( 8 @.@ 4 m ) . As a flagship , Empress of India 's crew consisted of 692 officers and ratings in 1903 . 
 The Royal Sovereigns were powered by a pair of three @-@ cylinder , vertical triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each driving one shaft . Their Humphrys & Tennant engines were designed to produce a total of 11 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 8 @,@ 200 kW ) and a maximum speed of 17 @.@ 5 knots ( 32 @.@ 4 km / h ; 20 @.@ 1 mph ) using steam provided by eight cylindrical boilers with forced draught . The ships carried a maximum of 1 @,@ 420 long tons ( 1 @,@ 443 t ) of coal which gave them a range of 4 @,@ 720 nautical miles ( 8 @,@ 740 km ; 5 @,@ 430 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 Their main armament consisted of four breech @-@ loading ( BL ) 13 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 343 mm ) guns mounted in two twin @-@ gun barbettes , one each fore and aft of the superstructure . Each gun was provided with 80 rounds . Their secondary armament consisted of ten quick @-@ firing ( QF ) 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) guns . 200 rounds per gun were carried by the ships . Sixteen QF 6 @-@ pounder ( 2 @.@ 2 in ( 57 mm ) ) and a dozen QF 3 @-@ pounder ( 1 @.@ 9 in ( 47 mm ) ) Hotchkiss guns were fitted for defence against torpedo boats . The two 3 @-@ pounders in the upper fighting top were removed in 1903 – 04 and all of the remaining light guns from the lower fighting tops and main deck followed in 1905 – 09 . The Royal Sovereign @-@ class ships mounted seven 14 @-@ inch ( 356 mm ) torpedo tubes , although Empress of India had four of hers removed in 1902 . 
 The Royal Sovereigns ' armour scheme was similar to that of the Trafalgars , as the waterline belt of compound armour only protected the area between the barbettes . The 14 – 18 @-@ inch ( 356 – 457 mm ) belt and transverse bulkheads 14 – 16 inches ( 356 – 406 mm ) thick closed off the ends of the belt . Above the belt was a strake of 4 @-@ inch ( 102 mm ) nickel @-@ steel armour closed off by 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) transverse bulkheads . The barbettes were protected by compound armour , ranging in thickness from 11 to 17 inches ( 279 to 432 mm ) and the casemates for the 6 @-@ inch guns had a thickness equal to their diameter . The thicknesses of the armour deck ranged from 2 @.@ 5 to 3 inches ( 64 to 76 mm ) . The walls of the forward conning tower were 12 – 14 inches ( 305 – 356 mm ) thick and the aft conning tower was protected by 3 @-@ inch plates . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 HMS Empress of India , named after a regnal title of Queen Victoria , was the first ship of her name to serve in the Royal Navy . She was ordered under the Naval Defence Act Programme of 1889 with the name of Renown and was laid down on 9 July 1889 at Pembroke Dockyard . The ship was renamed before she was launched on 7 May 1891 by Louise Margaret , Duchess of Connaught and Strathearn . One man was killed when a cable snapped the following day . The ship was then transferred to Chatham Dockyard , where she was completed in August 1893 , at a cost of £ 912 @,@ 612 . 
 Empress of India was commissioned at Chatham on 11 September 1893 to relieve the ironclad battleship Anson as the flagship of the second @-@ in @-@ command of the Channel Fleet . She participated in annual manoeuvres in the Irish Sea and English Channel as a unit of the " Blue Fleet " , 2 – 5 August 1894 . Sometime during the year , the ship was fitted with bilge keels to reduce her rolling . In June 1895 , Empress of India was among the ships representing the Royal Navy at the opening of the Kaiser Wilhelm Canal in Germany . That summer , the ship again took part in annual manoeuvres , held from 24 July to 30 August 1895 . She became a private ship in December 1895 and was paid off at Chatham on 7 June 1897 . The following day , Empress of India recommissioned for service with the Mediterranean Fleet . Before departing , she took part in the Fleet Review for the Diamond Jubilee of Queen Victoria at Spithead on 26 June . 
 The ship arrived at Malta to begin her Mediterranean service in August . In August and September 1898 , she was part of the International Squadron blockading Crete during the Greco @-@ Turkish uprising there . The ship was relieved by the battleship Implacable on 14 September 1901 and departed Gibraltar homebound on 3 October . On 12 October , Empress of India paid off at Devonport , but she recommissioned the next day under the command of Captain Henry Louis Fleet , to relieve the ironclad battleship Howe at Queenstown , Ireland , as both the coast guard ship there and as flagship to Rear @-@ Admiral Edmund Jeffreys , Senior Naval Officer , Coast of Ireland Station . The ship began an extensive refit at Plymouth in early March 1902 . During this refit her upper deck six @-@ inch guns received casemates to improve their protection . 
 Empress of India was assigned to the Home Fleet on 7 May 1902 , in which she served as flagship in port and as flagship of the second @-@ in @-@ command when the fleet was at sea . The ship participated in the Coronation Fleet Review of King Edward VII in August . Empress of India served as flagship of " B Fleet " during combined manoeuvres of the Home Fleet , Mediterranean Fleet , and Channel Fleets off Portugal from 5 August to 9 August 1903 , but her port engine broke down for 14 hours and the fleet had to leave her behind . Her sister ship Royal Oak relieved her as flagship of the second @-@ in @-@ command of the Home Fleet on 1 June 1904 , and she became a private ship . The battleship Hannibal relieved her on 22 February 1905 , and the ship paid off the next day . 
 That same day , Empress of India recommissioned in reserve at Devonport and relieved the battleship Barfleur as flagship of the new Fleet in Commission in Reserve at Home . In July 1905 she participated in Reserve Fleet manoeuvres . In September 1905 , the protected cruiser Aeolus relieved her of her duties , but she recommissioned on 31 October 1905 with a new nucleus crew to resume her Reserve Fleet duties . She then underwent a refit that lasted into 1906 . Empress of India collided with the submarine A10 in Plymouth Sound on 30 April 1906 . 
 When the Reserve Fleet was abolished in February 1907 and became the Home Fleet , Empress of India continued her service as flagship , but now for the Rear @-@ Admiral , Devonport Division . On 25 May she was relieved as flagship by the protected cruiser Niobe . Three days later , the ship recommissioned as a special service vessel . Empress of India relieved her sister ship Royal Oak as parent ship of the special service vessels in November 1911 . On 2 March , the ship left Portsmouth under tow by the armoured cruiser Warrior , en route to the Motherbank , where she was to be laid up , but she collided with the German barque <unk> en route and had to return to Portsmouth for repairs . She finally arrived at the Motherbank two months later and was laid up , awaiting disposal . 
 = = Sinking = = 
 On 4 November 1913 , Empress of India was used as a target ship in firing trials in Lyme Bay that were primarily intended to give officers and men an idea of the effect of live shell against a real target . A secondary objective was to look at the problems caused by several ships firing at the same target at the same time . The first ship to engage the stationary Empress of India was the light cruiser Liverpool , this was followed by two dreadnought battleships ( Thunderer and Orion ) and the pre @-@ dreadnought battleship King Edward VII , and finally four dreadnought battleships ( Neptune , King George V , Thunderer , and Vanguard ) . By 16 : 45 , " Empress of India was blazing furiously and down by the stern , sinking at " 18 : 30 . She had received forty @-@ four 12 @-@ inch ( 305 @-@ mm ) and 13 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 343 @-@ mm ) hits and " it is not surprising that an elderly ship sank , " though the intention had been to repeat the firing at longer range before she did . 
 When Empress of India sank , she settled upside @-@ down on the seabed , and some salvage was soon carried out by a Jersey company which owned the rights to the vessel . A big hole in her side was made not by a shell , but by salvage divers removing a condenser . " The wreck is accessible and is a deep dive for recreational divers . 
 Details of the firing are given in the table below . 
 = No. 77 Wing RAAF = 
 No. 77 Wing was a Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) wing of World War II . It formed part of No. 10 Operational Group ( later the Australian First Tactical Air Force ) at its establishment in November 1943 , when it comprised three squadrons equipped with Vultee Vengeance dive bombers . No. 77 Wing commenced operations in early 1944 , flying out of Nadzab , Papua New Guinea . Soon afterwards , however , the Vengeance units were withdrawn from combat and replaced with squadrons flying Douglas Bostons , Bristol Beaufighters and Bristol Beauforts . The wing saw action in the assaults on Noemfoor , Tarakan , and North Borneo , by which time it was an all @-@ Beaufighter formation made up of Nos. 22 , 30 and 31 Squadrons . It was to have taken part in the Battle of Balikpapan in June 1945 , but unsuitable landing grounds meant that the Beaufighter units were withdrawn to Morotai , sitting out the remainder of the war before returning to Australia , where they disbanded , along with the wing headquarters , in 1946 . 
 = = History = = 
 No. 77 Wing formed the attack component of No. 10 Operational Group ( No. 10 OG ) , which was established on 13 November 1943 . The group was to act as a mobile strike force capable of supporting Allied ground and naval units while they advanced against the Japanese in the South West Pacific Area ( SWPA ) , as distinct from the RAAF 's area commands in Northern Australia , which had a geographically based static defence function . Led by Wing Commander E.G. Fyfe , No. 77 Wing consisted of three flying squadrons operating Vultee Vengeance dive bombers , and various ancillary units . The Vengeances , which had only recently been acquired by Australia , equipped Nos. 21 , 23 and 24 Squadrons . They were to be protected on their attack missions by No. 10 OG 's fighter component , No. 78 Wing , operating Curtiss Kittyhawks . 
 Headquartered at Nadzab , Papua New Guinea , No. 77 Wing only became fully operational on 18 February 1944 , following the arrival of Nos. 21 and 23 Squadrons from Lowood , Queensland . However No. 24 Squadron , which was already based in the theatre of operations , was able to carry out its first sortie on 17 January , bombing targets along Shaggy Ridge in support of the Australian 7th Division . Throughout February the Vengeances , escorted by No. 78 Wing Kittyhawks , concentrated on harassing the retreating Japanese 20th Division , and attacking enemy airfields in the Madang Province . In March , a decision was made to withdraw the dive bombers from operations due to their inferiority to newer equipment . Three RAAF squadrons — No. 22 flying Douglas Bostons , No. 30 flying Bristol Beaufighters , and one other from No. 9 Operational Group flying Bristol Beauforts — were assigned to the wing as replacements . 
 Operating with its new squadrons and aircraft , No. 77 Wing took part in the Battle of Noemfoor , commencing in June 1944 . Wing headquarters relocated to Noemfoor Island in July , followed by Nos. 22 and 30 Squadrons the next month . This was No. 77 Wing 's composition on 25 October 1944 , when No. 10 OG 's name was changed to the Australian First Tactical Air Force , ostensibly to emphasise " the formation 's impressive size and ambitious purpose " . That month , the wing 's aircraft were credited with sinking 24 enemy transport ships and barges in support of the Allied landings during the Battle of Leyte . In November , the wing advanced to the island of Morotai , where it attacked Japanese airfields , shipping , and infrastructure on Celebes . By the end of the year , Wing Commander Charles Read had taken over command of No. 77 Wing , and the formation 's complement had been augmented by No. 31 Squadron , a Beaufighter unit previously based in Darwin , Northern Territory , as part of North @-@ Western Area Command . No. 22 Squadron was withdrawn to Noemfoor in December to re @-@ equip with Beaufighters ; upon its return No. 77 Wing became an all @-@ Beaufighter formation , operating three squadrons of the type . 
 During the first week of January 1945 , No. 77 Wing 's aircraft undertook 142 missions against targets in Halmahera , Celebes , and Morotai . In May , the Beaufighters provided air cover during Operation Oboe One , the Battle of Tarakan . In the days leading up to Operation Oboe Six , the Battle of North Borneo , No. 77 Wing surgically attacked enemy targets at Labuan , sometimes within only 100 metres of Allied demolition teams laying charges to breach obstacles on the beach prior to the landings . Read personally led No. 31 Squadron into action during the battle on 10 June 1945 . He became the first RAAF pilot to land at the newly operational Tarakan airfield on 28 June . The following month , No. 77 Wing was to have taken part in the final Allied offensive of the Borneo Campaign , Operation Oboe Two , the Battle of Balikpapan . However Tarakan proved to be unsuitable for the Beaufighters to operate from , and they were withdrawn to Morotai , where they largely sat out the rest of the Pacific War . No. 71 Wing headquarters transferred to Deniliquin , New South Wales , in December 1945 , and was joined there by Nos. 22 and 30 Squadrons , both of which disbanded in August 1946 . No. 31 Squadron transferred from Morotai to Williamtown , where it disbanded in July 1946 . No. 71 Wing headquarters disbanded at Deniliquin in November . 
 = Panic of 1907 = 
 The Panic of 1907 – also known as the 1907 Bankers ' Panic or Knickerbocker Crisis – was a United States financial crisis that took place over a three @-@ week period starting in mid @-@ October , when the New York Stock Exchange fell almost 50 % from its peak the previous year . Panic occurred , as this was during a time of economic recession , and there were numerous runs on banks and trust companies . The 1907 panic eventually spread throughout the nation when many state and local banks and businesses entered bankruptcy . Primary causes of the run included a retraction of market liquidity by a number of New York City banks and a loss of confidence among depositors , exacerbated by unregulated side bets at bucket shops . The panic was triggered by the failed attempt in October 1907 to corner the market on stock of the United Copper Company . When this bid failed , banks that had lent money to the cornering scheme suffered runs that later spread to affiliated banks and trusts , leading a week later to the downfall of the Knickerbocker Trust Company — New York City 's third @-@ largest trust . The collapse of the Knickerbocker spread fear throughout the city 's trusts as regional banks withdrew reserves from New York City banks . Panic extended across the nation as vast numbers of people withdrew deposits from their regional banks . 
 The panic might have deepened if not for the intervention of financier J. P. Morgan , who pledged large sums of his own money , and convinced other New York bankers to do the same , to shore up the banking system . At the time , the United States did not have a central bank to inject liquidity back into the market . By November , the financial contagion had largely ended , only to be replaced by a further crisis . This was due to the heavy borrowing of a large brokerage firm that used the stock of Tennessee Coal , Iron and Railroad Company ( TC & I ) as collateral . Collapse of TC & I 's stock price was averted by an emergency takeover by Morgan 's U.S. Steel Corporation — a move approved by anti @-@ monopolist president Theodore Roosevelt . The following year , Senator Nelson W. Aldrich , father @-@ in @-@ law of John D. Rockefeller , Jr . , established and chaired a commission to investigate the crisis and propose future solutions , leading to the creation of the Federal Reserve System . 
 = = Economic conditions = = 
 When U.S. President Andrew Jackson allowed the charter of the Second Bank of the United States to expire in 1836 , the U.S. was without any sort of central bank , and the money supply in New York City fluctuated with the country 's annual agricultural cycle . Each autumn money flowed out of the city as harvests were purchased and — in an effort to attract money back — interest rates were raised . Foreign investors then sent their money to New York to take advantage of the higher rates . From the January 1906 Dow Jones Industrial Average high of 103 , the market began a modest correction that would continue throughout the year . The April 1906 earthquake that devastated San Francisco contributed to the market instability , prompting an even greater flood of money from New York to San Francisco to aid reconstruction . A further stress on the money supply occurred in late 1906 , when the Bank of England raised its interest rates , partly in response to UK insurance companies paying out so much to US policyholders , and more funds remained in London than expected . From their peak in January , stock prices declined 18 % by July 1906 . By late September , stocks had recovered about half of their losses . 
 The Hepburn Act , which gave the Interstate Commerce Commission ( ICC ) the power to set maximum railroad rates , became law in July 1906 . This depreciated the value of railroad securities . Between September 1906 and March 1907 , the stock market slid , losing 7 @.@ 7 % of its capitalization . Between March 9 and 26 , stocks fell a further 9 @.@ 8 % . ( This March collapse is sometimes referred to as a " rich man 's panic " . ) The economy remained volatile through the summer . A number of shocks hit the system : the stock of Union Pacific — among the most common stocks used as collateral — fell 50 points ; that June an offering of New York City bonds failed ; in July the copper market collapsed ; in August the Standard Oil Company was fined $ 29 million for antitrust violations . In the first nine months of 1907 , stocks were lower by 24 @.@ 4 % . 
 On July 27 , The Commercial & Financial Chronicle noted that " the market keeps unstable ... no sooner are these signs of new life in evidence than something like a suggestion of a new outflow of gold to Paris sends a tremble all through the list , and the gain in values and hope is gone " . Several bank runs occurred outside the US in 1907 : in Egypt in April and May ; in Japan in May and June ; in Hamburg and Chile in early October . The fall season was always a vulnerable time for the banking system — combined with the <unk> stock market , even a small shock could have grave repercussions . 
 = = Panic = = 
 = = = Cornering copper = = = 
 The 1907 panic began with a stock manipulation scheme to corner the market in F. Augustus Heinze 's United Copper Company . Heinze had made a fortune as a copper magnate in Butte , Montana . In 1906 he moved to New York City , where he formed a close relationship with notorious Wall Street banker Charles W. Morse . Morse had once successfully cornered New York City 's ice market , and together with Heinze gained control of many banks — the pair served on at least six national banks , ten state banks , five trust companies and four insurance firms . 
 Augustus ' brother , Otto , devised the scheme to corner United Copper , believing that the Heinze family already controlled a majority of the company . He also believed that a significant number of the Heinze 's shares had been borrowed , and sold short , by speculators betting that the stock price would drop , and that they could thus repurchase the borrowed shares cheaply , pocketing the difference . Otto proposed a short squeeze , whereby the Heinzes would aggressively purchase as many remaining shares as possible , and then force the short sellers to pay for their borrowed shares . The aggressive purchasing would drive up the share price , and , being unable to find shares elsewhere , the short sellers would have no option but to turn to the Heinzes , who could then name their price . 
 To finance the scheme , Otto , Augustus and Charles Morse met with Charles T. Barney , president of the city 's third @-@ largest trust , the Knickerbocker Trust Company . Barney had provided financing for previous Morse schemes . Morse , however , cautioned Otto that he needed much more money than he had to attempt the squeeze and Barney declined to provide funding . Otto decided to attempt the corner anyway . On Monday , October 14 , he began aggressively purchasing shares of United Copper , which rose in one day from $ 39 to $ 52 per share . On Tuesday ( Oct. 15 ) , he issued the call for short sellers to return the borrowed stock . The share price rose to nearly $ 60 , but the short sellers were able to find plenty of United Copper shares from sources other than the Heinzes . Otto had misread the market , and the share price of United Copper began to collapse . 
 The stock closed at $ 30 on Tuesday and fell to $ 10 by Wednesday ( Oct. 16 ) . Otto Heinze was ruined . The stock of United Copper was traded outside the hall of the New York Stock Exchange , literally an outdoor market " on the curb " ( this curb market would later become the American Stock Exchange ) . After the crash , The Wall Street Journal reported , " Never has there been such wild scenes on the Curb , so say the oldest veterans of the outside market " . 
 = = = Contagion spreads = = = 
 The failure of the corner left Otto unable to meet his obligations and sent his brokerage house , Gross & <unk> , into bankruptcy . On Thursday , October 17 , the New York Stock Exchange suspended Otto 's trading privileges . As a result of United Copper 's collapse , the State Savings Bank of Butte Montana ( owned by F. Augustus Heinze ) announced its insolvency . The Montana bank had held United Copper stock as collateral against some of its lending and had been a correspondent bank for the Mercantile National Bank in New York City , of which F. Augustus Heinze was then president . 
 F. Augustus Heinze 's association with the corner and the insolvent State Savings Bank proved too much for the board of the Mercantile to accept . Although they forced him to resign before lunch time , by then it was too late . As news of the collapse spread , depositors rushed en masse to withdraw money from the Mercantile National Bank . The Mercantile had enough capital to withstand a few days of withdrawals , but depositors began to pull cash from the banks of the Heinzes ' associate Charles W. Morse . Runs occurred at Morse 's National Bank of North America and the New Amsterdam National . Afraid of the impact the tainted reputations of Augustus Heinze and Morse could have on the banking system , the New York Clearing House ( a consortium of the city 's banks ) forced Morse and Heinze to resign all banking interests . By the weekend after the failed corner , there was not yet systemic panic . Funds were withdrawn from Heinze @-@ associated banks , only to be deposited with other banks in the city . 
 A week later many regional stock exchanges throughout the nation were closing or limiting trading . For example , the Pittsburgh city 's stock exchange closed for three months starting on October 23 , 1907 . 
 = = = Panic hits the trusts = = = 
 In the early 1900s , trust companies were booming ; in the decade before 1907 , their assets had grown by 244 % . During the same period , national bank assets grew by 97 % , while state banks in New York increased by 82 % . The leaders of the high @-@ flying trusts were mainly prominent members of New York 's financial and social circles . One of the most respected was Charles T. Barney , whose late father @-@ in @-@ law William Collins Whitney was a famous financier . Barney 's Knickerbocker Trust Company was the third @-@ largest trust in New York . 
 Because of past association with Charles W. Morse and F. Augustus Heinze , on Monday , October 21 , the board of the Knickerbocker asked that Barney resign ( depositors may have first begun to pull deposits from the Knickerbocker on October 18 , prompting the concern ) . That day , the National Bank of Commerce where J.P. Morgan was a dominant factor , announced it would not serve as clearing house for the Knickerbocker . On October 22 , the Knickerbocker faced a classic bank run . From the bank 's opening , the crowd grew . As The New York Times reported , " as fast as a depositor went out of the place ten people and more came asking for their money [ and the police ] were asked to send some men to keep order " . Two van loads of notes were quickly unloaded , yet even this failed to calm the panic stricken depositors . Directors and other officials of the Trust forced their way through the crowd , assuring them that everyone would be paid . In less than three hours , $ 8 million was withdrawn from the Knickerbocker . Shortly after noon it was forced to suspend operations . 
 As news spread , other banks and trust companies were reluctant to lend any money . The interest rates on loans to brokers at the stock exchange soared to 70 % and , with brokers unable to get money , stock prices fell to a low not seen since December 1900 . The panic quickly spread to two other large trusts , Trust Company of America and Lincoln Trust Company . By Thursday , October 24 , a chain of failures littered the street : Twelfth Ward Bank , Empire City Savings Bank , Hamilton Bank of New York , First National Bank of Brooklyn , International Trust Company of New York , Williamsburg Trust Company of Brooklyn , Borough Bank of Brooklyn , Jenkins Trust Company of Brooklyn and the Union Trust Company of Providence . 
 = = = J.P. Morgan = = = 
 When the chaos began to shake the confidence of New York 's banks , the city 's most famous banker was out of town . J.P. Morgan , the eponymous president of J.P. Morgan & Co . , was attending a church convention in Richmond , Virginia . Morgan was not only the city 's wealthiest and most well @-@ connected banker , but he had experience with other similar financial crises — he had helped rescue the U.S. Treasury during the Panic of 1893 . As news of the crisis gathered , Morgan returned to Wall Street from his convention late on the night of Saturday , October 19 . The following morning , the library of Morgan 's brownstone at Madison Avenue and 36th St. had become a revolving door of New York City bank and trust company presidents arriving to share information about ( and seek help surviving ) the impending crisis . 
 Morgan and his associates examined the books of the Knickerbocker Trust , and decided it was insolvent so did not intervene to stop the run . Its failure , however , triggered runs on even healthy trusts , prompting Morgan to take charge of the rescue operation . On the afternoon of Tuesday , October 22 , the president of the Trust Company of America asked Morgan for assistance . That evening Morgan conferred with George F. Baker , the president of First National Bank , James Stillman of the National City Bank of New York ( the ancestor of Citibank ) , and the United States Secretary of the Treasury , George B. Cortelyou . Cortelyou said that he was ready to deposit government money in the banks to help shore up their deposits . After an overnight audit of the Trust Company of America showed the institution to be sound , on Wednesday afternoon Morgan declared , " This is the place to stop the trouble , then . " 
 As a run began on the Trust Company of America , Morgan worked with Stillman and Baker to liquidate the company 's assets to allow the bank to pay depositors . The bank survived to the close of business , but Morgan knew that additional money would be needed to keep it solvent through the following day . That night he assembled the presidents of the other trust companies and held them in a meeting until midnight when they agreed to provide loans of $ 8 @.@ 25 million to allow the Trust Company of America to stay open the next day . On Thursday morning Cortelyou deposited around $ 25 million into a number of New York banks . John D. Rockefeller , the wealthiest man in America , deposited a further $ 10 million in Stillman 's National City Bank . Rockefeller 's massive deposit left the National City Bank with the deepest reserves of any bank in the city . To instill public confidence , Rockefeller phoned Melville Stone , the manager of the Associated Press , and told him that he would pledge half of his wealth to maintain America 's credit . 
 = = = Stock exchange nears collapse = = = 
 Despite the infusion of cash , the banks of New York were reluctant to make the short @-@ term loans they typically provided to facilitate daily stock trades . Prices on the exchange began to crash , owing to the lack of funds to finance purchases . At 1 : 30 p.m. Thursday , October 24 , Ransom Thomas , the president of the New York Stock Exchange , rushed to Morgan 's offices to tell him that he would have to close the exchange early . Morgan was emphatic that an early close of the exchange would be catastrophic . 
 Morgan summoned the presidents of the city 's banks to his office . They started to arrive at 2 p.m. ; Morgan informed them that as many as 50 stock exchange houses would fail unless $ 25 million was raised in 10 minutes . By 2 : 16 p.m. , 14 bank presidents had pledged $ 23 @.@ 6 million to keep the stock exchange afloat . The money reached the market at 2 : 30 p.m. , in time to finish the day 's trading , and by the 3 o 'clock market close , $ 19 million had been loaned out . Disaster was averted . Morgan usually eschewed the press , but as he left his offices that night he made a statement to reporters : " If people will keep their money in the banks , everything will be all right " . 
 Friday , however , saw more panic on the exchange . Morgan again approached the bank presidents , but this time was only able to convince them to pledge $ 9 @.@ 7 million . In order for this money to keep the exchange open , Morgan decided the money could not be used for margin sales . The volume of trading on Friday was 2 / 3 that of Thursday . The markets again narrowly made it to the closing bell . 
 = = = Crisis of confidence = = = 
 Morgan , Stillman , Baker and the other city bankers were unable to pool money indefinitely . Even the U.S. Treasury was low on funds . Public confidence needed to be restored , and on Friday evening the bankers formed two committees — one to persuade the clergy to calm their congregations on Sunday , and second to explain to the press the various aspects of the financial rescue package . Europe 's most famous banker , Lord Rothschild , sent word of his " admiration and respect " for Morgan . In an attempt to gather confidence , the Treasury Secretary Cortelyou agreed that if he returned to Washington it would send a signal to Wall Street that the worst had passed . 
 To ensure a free flow of funds on Monday , the New York Clearing House issued $ 100 million in loan certificates to be traded between banks to settle balances , allowing them to retain cash reserves for depositors . Reassured both by the clergy and the newspapers , and with bank balance sheets flush with cash , a sense of order returned to New York that Monday . 
 Unbeknownst to Wall Street , a new crisis was being averted in the background . On Sunday , Morgan 's associate , George Perkins , was informed that the City of New York required at least $ 20 million by November 1 or it would go bankrupt . The city tried to raise money through a standard bond issue , but failed to gather enough financing . On Monday and again on Tuesday , New York Mayor George McClellan approached Morgan for assistance . In an effort to avoid the disastrous signal that a New York City bankruptcy would send , Morgan contracted to purchase $ 30 million worth of city bonds . 
 = = = Drama at the library = = = 
 Although calm was largely restored in New York by Saturday , November 2 , yet another crisis loomed . One of the exchange 's largest brokerage firms , Moore & Schley , was heavily in debt and in danger of collapse . The firm had borrowed heavily , using shares of the Tennessee Coal , Iron and Railroad Company ( TC & I ) as collateral . With the value of the thinly traded stock under pressure , many banks would likely call the loans of Moore & Schley on Monday and force an en masse liquidation of the firm 's stock . If that occurred it would send TC & I shares plummeting , devastating Moore and Schley and triggering further panic in the market . 
 To avert the collapse of Moore & Schley , Morgan called an emergency conference at his library Saturday morning . A proposal was made that the U.S. Steel Corporation , a company Morgan had helped form through the merger of the steel companies of Andrew Carnegie and Elbert Gary , would acquire TC & I. This would effectively save Moore & Schley and avert the crisis . The executives and board of U.S. Steel studied the situation and offered to either loan Moore & Schley $ 5 million , or buy TC & I for $ 90 a share . By 7 p.m. an agreement had not been reached and the meeting adjourned . 
 By then , John Pierpont Morgan was drawn into another situation . There was deep concern that the Trust Company of America and the Lincoln Trust might fail to open on Monday due to continuing runs by depositors . On Saturday evening 40 – 50 bankers had gathered at the library to discuss the crisis , with the clearing @-@ house bank presidents in the East room and the trust company executives in the West room . Morgan and those dealing with the Moore & Schley situation had moved to the librarian ’ s office . There Morgan told his counselors that he would agree to help shore up Moore & Schley only if the trust companies would work together to bail out their weakest brethren . The discussion among the bankers continued late into Saturday night but without much progress . Around midnight , J.P. Morgan informed a leader of the trust company presidents that keeping Moore & Schley afloat would require $ 25 million , and he would not commit those funds unless the problems with the trust companies could also be resolved . The trust company executives understood they would not receive further help from Morgan ; they would have to finance any bailout of the two struggling trust companies . 
 At 3 a.m. about 120 bank and trust company officials assembled to hear a full report on the status of the failing trust companies . While the Trust Company of America was barely solvent , the Lincoln Trust Company was probably $ 1 million short of what it needed to cover depositor accounts . As discussion ensued , the bankers realized that Morgan had locked them in the library and pocketed the key to force a solution , the sort of strong @-@ arm tactic he had been known to use in the past . Morgan then entered the talks and advised the trust companies they must provide a loan of $ 25 million to save the weaker institutions . The trust presidents were still reluctant to act , but Morgan informed them that if they did not it would lead to a complete collapse of the banking system . Through his considerable influence , at about 4 : 45 a.m. he persuaded the unofficial leader of the trust companies to sign the agreement , and the remainder of the bankers followed . Having received these commitments , Morgan allowed the bankers to go home . 
 On Sunday afternoon and into the evening , Morgan , Perkins , Baker and Stillman , along with U.S. Steel 's Gary and Henry Clay Frick , worked at the library to finalize the deal for U.S. Steel to buy TC & I and by Sunday night had a plan for acquisition . But one obstacle remained : the anti @-@ trust crusading President Theodore Roosevelt , who had made breaking up monopolies a focus of his presidency . 
 Frick and Gary traveled overnight by train to the White House to implore Roosevelt to set aside the application of the Sherman Antitrust Act and allow — before the market opened — a company that already held a 60 % share of the steel market to make a large acquisition . Roosevelt 's secretary refused to see them , but Frick and Gary convinced James Rudolph Garfield , the Secretary of the Interior , to bypass the secretary and arrange a meeting with the president . With less than an hour before the Stock Exchange opened , Roosevelt and Secretary of State Elihu Root began to review the proposed takeover and appreciate the crash likely to ensue if the merger was not approved . Roosevelt relented ; he later recalled of the meeting , " It was necessary for me to decide on the instant before the Stock Exchange opened , for the situation in New York was such that any hour might be vital . I do not believe that anyone could justly criticize me for saying that I would not feel like objecting to the purchase under those circumstances " . When news reached New York , confidence soared . The Commercial & Financial Chronicle reported that " the relief furnished by this transaction was instant and far @-@ reaching " . The final crisis of the panic had been averted . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The panic of 1907 occurred during a lengthy economic contraction — measured by the National Bureau of Economic Research as occurring between May 1907 and June 1908 . The interrelated contraction , bank panic and falling stock market resulted in significant economic disruption . Industrial production dropped further than after any previous bank run , while 1907 saw the second @-@ highest volume of bankruptcies to that date . Production fell by 11 % , imports by 26 % , while unemployment rose to 8 % from under 3 % . Immigration dropped to 750 @,@ 000 people in 1909 , from 1 @.@ 2 million two years earlier . 
 Since the end of the Civil War , the United States had experienced panics of varying severity . Economists Charles Calomiris and Gary Gorton rate the worst panics as those leading to widespread bank suspensions — the panics of 1873 , 1893 , and 1907 , and a suspension in 1914 . Widespread suspensions were forestalled through coordinated actions during both the 1884 and the 1890 panics . A bank crisis in 1896 , in which there was a perceived need for coordination , is also sometimes classified as a panic . 
 The frequency of crises and the severity of the 1907 panic added to concern about the outsized role of J.P. Morgan which led to renewed impetus toward a national debate on reform . In May 1908 , Congress passed the Aldrich – Vreeland Act that established the National Monetary Commission to investigate the panic and to propose legislation to regulate banking . Senator Nelson Aldrich ( R – RI ) , the chairman of the National Monetary Commission , went to Europe for almost two years to study that continent 's banking systems . 
 = = = Central bank = = = 
 A significant difference between the European and U.S. banking systems was the absence of a central bank in the United States . European states were able to extend the supply of money during periods of low cash reserves . The belief that the U.S. economy was vulnerable without a central bank was not new . Early in 1907 , banker Jacob Schiff of Kuhn , Loeb & Co. warned in a speech to the New York Chamber of Commerce that " unless we have a central bank with adequate control of credit resources , this country is going to undergo the most severe and far reaching money panic in its history " . 
 Aldrich convened a secret conference with a number of the nation 's leading financiers at the Jekyll Island Club , off the coast of Georgia , to discuss monetary policy and the banking system in November 1910 . Aldrich and A. P. Andrew ( Assistant Secretary of the Treasury Department ) , Paul Warburg ( representing Kuhn , Loeb & Co . ) , Frank A. Vanderlip ( James Stillman 's successor as president of the National City Bank of New York ) , Henry P. Davison ( senior partner of J. P. Morgan Company ) , Charles D. Norton ( president of the Morgan @-@ dominated First National Bank of New York ) , and Benjamin Strong ( representing J. P. Morgan ) , produced a design for a " National Reserve Bank " . 
 The final report of the National Monetary Commission was published on January 11 , 1911 . For nearly two years legislators debated the proposal and it was not until December 23 , 1913 , that Congress passed the Federal Reserve Act . President Woodrow Wilson signed the legislation immediately and the legislation was enacted on the same day , December 23 , 1913 , creating the Federal Reserve System . Charles Hamlin became the Fed 's first chairman , and none other than Morgan 's deputy Benjamin Strong became president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York , the most important regional bank with a permanent seat on the Federal Open Market Committee . 
 = = = Pujo Committee = = = 
 Although Morgan was briefly seen as a hero , widespread fears concerning plutocracy and concentrated wealth soon eroded this view . Morgan 's bank had survived , but the trust companies that were a growing rival to traditional banks were badly damaged . Some analysts believed that the panic had been engineered to damage confidence in trust companies so that banks would benefit . Others believed Morgan took advantage of the panic to allow his U.S. Steel company to acquire TC & I. Although Morgan lost $ 21 million in the panic , and the significance of the role he played in staving off worse disaster is undisputed , he also became the focus of intense scrutiny and criticism . 
 The chair of the House Committee on Banking and Currency , Representative Arsène Pujo , ( D – La . 7th ) convened a special committee to investigate a " money trust " , the de facto monopoly of Morgan and New York 's other most powerful bankers . The committee issued a scathing report on the banking trade , and found that the officers of J. P. Morgan & Co. also sat on the boards of directors of 112 corporations with a market capitalization of $ 22 @.@ 5 billion ( the total capitalization of the New York Stock Exchange was then estimated at $ 26 @.@ 5 billion ) . 
 Although suffering ill health , J. P. Morgan testified before the Pujo Committee and faced several days of questioning from Samuel <unk> . <unk> and Morgan 's famous exchange on the fundamentally psychological nature of banking — that it is an industry built on trust — is often quoted in business articles : 
 Associates of Morgan blamed his continued physical decline on the hearings . In February he became very ill and died on March 31 , 1913 — nine months before the " money trust " would be officially replaced as lender of last resort by the Federal Reserve . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 = Jurassic Park ( song ) = 
 " Jurassic Park " is a parody of Jimmy Webb 's single " MacArthur Park " written and performed by " Weird Al " Yankovic ; it was released both as a single and as part of Yankovic 's Alapalooza album in October 1993 . " Jurassic Park " was penned by Yankovic after he remembered the enjoyment he had when he combined a classic rock track with a recent movie topic with his 1985 song " Yoda " . Yankovic decided to combine the plot of the recent movie Jurassic Park — a film about a park on a fictional island where geneticists have succeeded in cloning dinosaurs . 
 The song was paired with an elaborately animated music video , which was created by Mark Osborne and Scott Nordlund almost entirely via claymation . The video did not receive extensive play on MTV , although it was popular on The Box , VH1 , and in Canada , where it was played on MuchMusic . The video , due to its animation , also later went on to be praised at various animation festivals worldwide . 
 " Jurassic Park " was met with mixed to positive reviews ; while many reviewers enjoyed Yankovic 's humor , others felt that the song did not satirize the source material , but instead merely recounted the plot to the movie . Webb himself was very pleased with the final result and has been known to sing the parody lyrics in concert . Although the single did not chart in the United States , it peaked at number 5 on the Canadian magazine The Record 's single chart . The video was also nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Short Form Music Video at the 37th Grammy Awards , although it did not win . 
 = = Writing = = 
 Yankovic was inspired to write the song after he heard The Kinks ' song " Lola " while driving in his car one day . He noted , " I was driving a rent @-@ a @-@ car through Florida when the song ' Lola ' came on the radio , and it got me thinking about how much fun I had doing ' Yoda ' [ a song from 1985 's Dare to Be Stupid ] where I took a then @-@ current topic and combined it with a classic rock tune . " He soon turned his attention to the film Jurassic Park — about a park on a fictional island , where geneticists have succeeded in cloning dinosaurs . The film is based on the 1990 novel of the same name by Michael Crichton — which had just come out and was already a blockbuster success . Yankovic decided to write a parody about the movie , and considered various songs that he could spoof . Eventually , he decided to parody the 1968 hit single " MacArthur Park " , which was performed by Richard Harris . Yankovic approached the original song 's writer , Jimmy Webb , who agreed to the idea . In fact , Webb was so amused by the parody that he penned a letter to Yankovic stating " Well , this [ the parody ] oughta [ sic ] bury that song once and for all ! " In addition , Yankovic received permission from Crichton and director Steven Spielberg to produce the track . 
 = = Recording and lyrics = = 
 Yankovic entered the studio to record " Jurassic Park " on July 16 , 1993 . Backing Yankovic were Jon " Bermuda " Schwartz on drums , Steve Jay on bass , and Jim West on guitar . " MacArthur Park " contained an actual orchestra complete with a strings section . " Jurassic Park " , however , features synth strings courtesy of keyboardist Brad Buxer , who programmed the section himself . Intermixed during the interlude are various dinosaur sound effects courtesy of Sandy Berman ; Berman had previously created dinosaur yells for a major theme park attraction , and loaned Yankovic the sound effects . At 3 : 53 in length , the song is considerably shorter than the original , which clocks in at 7 : 21 . Largely , this is due to the fact that the middle section featured in the original — the so called " After the Loves of My Life " section — is omitted from Yankovic 's parody . 
 The song itself recounts both the plot of the movie , and contains various in @-@ jokes and references therein . One line about lawyers — " A huge <unk> ate our lawyer / Well , I suppose that proves they 're really not all bad " — was deliberately placed in the song to be ambiguous , as it could either be referring to lawyers or dinosaurs as being " not all bad " . The song also makes various pop culture references , alluding to the idea of an E ticket and Barney . 
 = = Music video = = 
 When it came time for a video for " Jurassic Park " , Yankovic opted to use stop @-@ motion and claymation ; he joked during a Q & A that this was because " it 's just too hard to find real live dinosaurs these days . " " Jurassic Park " was Yankovic 's first video that was entirely animated — previous videos , such as " Money for Nothing / Beverly Hillbillies " and " Dare to Be Stupid " had featured elements of animation . The video was directed by Mark Osborne and Scott Nordlund . Yankovic initially heard of the duo from Bill <unk> , the leader singer of the comedy rock band Green Jellÿ . After being hired for the project , the two " basically turned a private residence in Los Angeles into a clay animation studio . " The two worked between July and August 1993 , and slept in shifts , so that the final project would be ready for its release in October 1993 . One critic noted that the music video seems to have been done in the style of Will Vinton 's Dinosaurs ! – A Fun @-@ Filled Trip Back in Time ! The video parodies scenes from , as well as the general plot of the 1993 movie , and contains a myriad of sight @-@ gags — as is usual for Yankovic 's videos — such as a claymation version of Steven Spielberg running from dinosaurs , Barney having his head ripped off , and a Velociraptor attempting to break down a door , only to realize it has a key . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 " Jurassic Park " was released as the lead single from Yankovic 's 1993 album Alapalooza . The single did not chart in the United States . However , the song was a sales success in Canada , and peaked at number 5 on the Canadian magazine The Record 's single chart . The video for " Jurassic Park " received light rotation on MTV . Yankovic later explained in an interview that " [ MTV ] played it a few times , and then just yanked it , because it wasn 't really part of their sound . " In contrast , the single was a success on The Box and they played it " incessantly " . Furthermore , in Canada , the song was a massive success on MuchMusic . Due to this , Alapalooza is Yankovic 's best selling album in Canada , with over 200 @,@ 000 units sold , according to Music Canada . However , the video was played and remained popular on VH1 well after its release ; it ranked within the Top 50 Most @-@ Played Clips during the months of August and September 1999 , according to Billboard magazine . The video for " Jurassic Park " was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Short Form Music Video at the 37th Grammy Awards , but lost to the video for " Love Is Strong " by The Rolling Stones . Nonetheless , it received attention in animation festivals worldwide for its use of claymation effects . 
 Jimmy Webb was particularly pleased with the finished product . According to Yankovic , several times during different concerts in New York and Los Angeles that Yankovic was in attendance , Webb would start to perform the original , feign forgetting the words , and then invite Yankovic on stage to help him sing " Jurassic Park " instead . For a Christmas present one year , Webb even sent Yankovic a rubber dinosaur mask as a joke . Yankovic later noted that Webb " was the coolest " . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Chris Hicks of the Deseret News called the single " absolutely hilarious " , and rhetorically asked " who else would think of adapting that ridiculously popular movie 's themes to new lyrics for Jimmy Webb 's classic ditty ' MacArthur Park ' ? " Hicks ' felt that the song 's funniest moments involved the jokes revolving around lawyers and the mention of Barney . Amanda Cohen of the Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette wrote that it combined " the schlock of the original song with schtick about the dinosaur movie " and proved that " Yankovic is as funny as ever " . Furthermore , she noted that it was evidence that " his voice improves with every new release " . In a review of the Spike and Mike 's Festival of Animation , Arthur Salm called the piece a " knockout " and praised the humor , specifically highlighting the claymation cameo of Steve Spielberg and the " goofy velociraptor " from the opening of the video . 
 Some critics felt that the song did not satirize the source material , but instead merely recounted the plot to Jurassic Park . Entertainment Weekly referred to the claymation video for the " Jurassic Park " as " clever but toothless " . The magazine argued that Yankovic 's parody did not satirize the original material , but instead transposed new elements on top of them . Rob Owen of Richmond Times @-@ Dispatch wrote that the song " does nothing but recount the plot of the hit movie " and that " dinosaurs don 't lend themselves to music " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 CD single 
 " Jurassic Park " – 3 : 53 
 " Frank 's 2000 " TV " – 4 : 04 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 " Weird " Al Yankovic – vocals , background vocals , production , arrangement 
 Jim West – guitar 
 Steve Jay – bass guitar 
 Jon " Bermuda " Schwartz – drums 
 Brad Buxer – keyboards , synthetic orchestration 
 Sandy Berman – dinosaur growls 
 Tony Papa – engineering 
 = Foster @-@ Payne House = 
 Foster @-@ Payne House is a historic house at 25 Belmont Street in Pawtucket , Rhode Island . Built in 1878 , the two @-@ story multi @-@ gabled house is distinguished by its clapboarded and exterior woodwork and opulent parlors in the interior . The property also has a matching carriagehouse with gable roof and copula . The house was originally constructed and owned by Theodore Waters Foster , but it was sold to George W. Payne in 1882 . The Foster @-@ Payne House is architecturally significant as a well @-@ designed and well @-@ preserved late 19th century suburban residence . It was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1983 . 
 = = History = = 
 The house was built in 1878 for Theodore Waters Foster , born on May 19 , 1847 , to Chauncey Foster and Ophelia Remington . He was educated in Pawtucket and joined the Rhode Island Cavalry in 1863 . He served in the American Civil War under Nathaniel P. Banks in the Red River Campaign . In 1873 , he formed a jewelry @-@ manufacturing partnership with Walter E. White and Samuel H. Baily , named White , Foster & Company . After White retired in 1878 , the company was renamed Foster & Bailey . During this time , Foster constructed the house and lived in it for a period of four years , commuting to his place of business in Providence , Rhode Island . Foster would continue to be successful in his jewelry manufacturing business and his son , Theodore Clyde Foster , would succeed him upon his death in 1928 . In 1882 , Theodore Foster sold the home to George W. Payne , the owner of the G. W. Payne & Company . 
 = = Design = = 
 Constructed in 1878 , the Foster @-@ Payne House is a two @-@ story home with a low @-@ pitched multi @-@ gabled roof . The house has a single story open porch on the western side , a kitchen ell that projects from the rear and a single @-@ story bay window that projects from the western bay of the front facade . The house is distinguished by its clapboard exterior and wooden trim under the gable peaks , the window trim and the porch brackets . There are three types of windows used on the house , single and paired one @-@ over @-@ one windows and two @-@ over @-@ two windows . 
 The small foyer on the western entry porch leads to the main stairhall that features a gently curving staircase with turned balusters and a curving rail . The first floor rooms are arranged in an " L " pattern on the southern and eastern sides with the kitchen placed on the northern ell . The interior of one room , not specified in the NRHP nomination , has been altered with a pressed tin ceiling . The second floor of the home was not described in the NRHP nomination . The interior of the rooms display late Victorian details , with the front parlor having a carved marble mantlepiece , a molded central ceiling medallion and a painted ceiling with scroll @-@ work . The back parlor has a marbleized slate mantlepiece with an over @-@ mounted mirror in a Renaissance Revival frame . On the back edge of the lot is a two @-@ story clapboarded carriagehouse with a Victorian cupola . This structure was not described in the NRHP nomination , but a photo from 2013 shows the cupola has been damaged . 
 = = Significance = = 
 The Foster @-@ Payne House is architecturally significant as a well @-@ designed and well @-@ preserved late 19th century suburban residence , with excellent interior detail and a matching carriagehouse . The area in which it is located was situated in an upper @-@ class suburban area , but since the late 19th @-@ century commercial and industrial buildings have entered the area . The property was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1983 . 
 = Tropical Storm Marco ( 1990 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Marco was the only tropical cyclone to make landfall on the United States during the 1990 Atlantic hurricane season . The 13th named storm of the season , Marco formed from a cold @-@ core low pressure area along the northern coast of Cuba on October 9 , and tracked northwestward through the eastern Gulf of Mexico . With most of its circulation over the western portion of Florida , Tropical Storm Marco produced 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) winds over land . However , it weakened to a tropical depression before moving ashore near Cedar Key . The cyclone combined with a cold front and the remnants of Hurricane Klaus to produce heavy rainfall in Georgia and the Carolinas . After interacting with the nearby Hurricane Lili , Marco continued northward until being absorbed by a cold front on October 13 . 
 In Florida , the cyclone triggered flooding of some houses and roadways . Rainfall across its path peaked at 19 @.@ 89 inches ( 505 mm ) in Louisville , Georgia , though several locations received over 10 inches ( 250 mm ) of precipitation . The flooding caused a total of 12 deaths , mostly due to drowning , as well as $ 57 million in damage ( 1990 USD , $ 103 million 2016 USD ) . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 By early on October 6 , a low pressure area and circulation persisted over eastern Cuba in the middle levels of the atmosphere . The low drifted westward , and interacted with Hurricane Klaus to its east . Initially cold @-@ core in nature , the system gradually built downward to the surface , and on October 9 , the low developed a low @-@ level circulation ; at 1200 UTC the National Hurricane Center classified it as Tropical Depression Fifteen while located near the Cuban city of <unk> , though the cyclone was initially subtropical in character . To its east , Tropical Storm Klaus continued to weaken ; the depression absorbed most of Klaus and became the dominant system . The storm tracked parallel to the coast of Cuba before veering northward and crossing the Florida Keys , where it intensified into Tropical Storm Marco about 35 mi ( 55 km ) south @-@ southeast of Key West , Florida . 
 After passing midway between Key West and the Dry Tortugas , Tropical Storm Marco adopted a steady northward track and quickly intensified , reaching peak winds of 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) on October 11 , while still southwest of Englewood , Florida . The center of the storm continued on its off @-@ shore parallel for another six hours after reaching its peak intensity , until it reached a position about six mi ( 10 km ) west of Bradenton Beach ; although the center of the storm remained offshore , much of its circulation was over land . Initially the storm still was forecast to move ashore between Fort Myers and Sarasota . However , the cyclone continued its northward trajectory , the center remaining offshore , and it weakened to a tropical depression prior to making landfall near Cedar Key early on October 12 . 
 After landfall , the cyclone accelerated in forward speed northward , weakening in intensity , and , by 1200 UTC on October 12 , Marco became an extra @-@ tropical cyclone . It turned to the northeast and east through South Carolina , following behind Hurricane Lili to its northeast . For a time , the system 's proximity to Lili resulted in hints of the Fujiwhara effect , in which two tropical cyclone appear to rotate around each other . The cold front that absorbed the weakening low was to the storm 's north on October 13 , though moisture from the remnants of Marco dropped heavy rainfall across the southeast United States for another day . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 A tropical storm warning was issued at some point during the existence of the cyclone for the west coast of Florida from Key West to Apalachicola . Additionally , a tropical storm warning was put in place for the east coast from Vero Beach northward to Fernandina Beach . Before the arrival of Marco , elementary schools were closed on the three barrier islands in Lee County . Florida governor Bob Martinez ordered the closure of state offices in the Tampa Bay area , and also decided not to open the University of South Florida and nearby community colleges . Public schools were not opened on the day of the storm 's passage in Manatee and Sarasota counties , though most other schools remained open . As the storm tracked northward , the National Weather Service issued a flood watch for much of Georgia . A flood watch was later issued for western portions of the Carolinas and for high elevations in Virginia and West Virginia . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = Florida = = = 
 With most of its circulation over the western portion of Florida during its existence , Tropical Storm Marco produced 39 – 74 mph winds across western Florida . As it brushed the coastline , the storm developed strong convective rain bands , leading to peak sustained winds of 69 mph ( 112 km / h ) with gusts to 85 mph ( 137 km / h ) on the Sunshine Skyway Bridge ; the bridge was closed after gusts reached 70 mph ( 115 km / h ) . Squalls from the storm spawned four tornadoes in the state , one of which struck the city of Crystal River , destroying a mobile home and left 2 @,@ 000 people without power for about an hour . Storm damage left about 25 @,@ 000 customers across the state without power and about 40 families temporarily homeless . 
 Paralleling the coastline , the storm produced a light storm surge that peaked at 2 @.@ 6 feet ( 0 @.@ 8 m ) above normal on Sanibel Island . In some locations , the surge rose rapidly , and , despite the unusual geography of the area , the levels varied only by as much as 9 @.@ 8 inches ( 250 mm ) than the predicted levels from the SLOSH model . The surge and waves caused minor beach erosion . Moderate to heavy rainfall fell across western Florida , peaking at 6 @.@ 14 inches ( 156 mm ) near Bradenton ; the rainfall was beneficial after a very dry summer , though , because it fell quickly , even this amount of precipitation failed to relieve water restrictions across the area . The storm resulted in some flooding in its path , including some several homes in Manatee County , roadways , and two U.S. highways . Statewide damage totalled $ 3 million ( 1990 USD , $ 5 @.@ 43 million 2016 USD ) , of which $ 1 million ( 1990 USD , $ 1 @.@ 81 million 2016 USD ) occurred in Manatee County . 
 = = = Elsewhere = = = 
 As the remnants of Marco entered Georgia , they combined with the remnant moisture from Hurricane Klaus and a slow @-@ moving cold front , which caused large amounts of precipitation to fall across the eastern portion of the state . Rainfall peaked at 19 @.@ 89 inches ( 505 mm ) at a weather station near Louisville , Georgia where over 16 inches ( 400 mm ) fell in a 24 ‑ hour period . In Augusta , 2 @.@ 79 inches ( 71 mm ) of rainfall fell in one hour , which forced the evacuation of about 300 people . Some roads in eastern Georgia were flooded up to 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) deep , and police officers in Augusta rescued people in flooded cars . The flooding resulted in some power outages . In the deluge , five people drowned , and 450 were left homeless . The remnants of the storm spawned a tornado in Brantley County , which destroyed 25 unoccupied homes . Damage in Georgia totaled $ 42 million ( 1990 USD , $ 76 @.@ 1 million 2016 USD ) . On October 19 , 1990 , President George H. W. Bush declared several counties in Georgia as federal disaster areas , which permitted the use of emergency funds for victims . 
 Heavy rainfall continued northward into the Carolinas . Much of South Carolina experienced over 7 inches ( 175 mm ) of precipitation ; statewide , the rainfall peaked at 13 @.@ 96 inches ( 355 mm ) in <unk> . The highest totals in 100 years in some locations also ended a severe drought . In the flooding , 80 bridges in the state failed ; in total , more than 120 bridges were either closed , damaged , or destroyed . In South Carolina , the system caused three drowning deaths ; damage totaled $ 12 million ( 1990 , $ 21 @.@ 7 million 2016 USD ) . In North Carolina , rainfall reached 10 @.@ 74 inches ( 273 mm ) in Albemarle . The storm directly caused two deaths in North Carolina , and indirectly caused two traffic deaths . 
 Rainfall from the combined remnants of Marco and Klaus extended into the Ohio Valley , with 3 @.@ 67 inches ( 93 mm ) recorded near Mountain City , Tennessee . Totals of 2 – 5 inches ( 50 – 125 mm ) spread across northwest Virginia , western Maryland , eastern West Virginia , and the Susquehanna Valley of Pennsylvania . In New York , the rainfall combined with moisture from Hurricane Lili , which triggered flooding that closed a portion of a railway line and a highway . 
 Tropical Storm Marco was the only storm to strike the United States during the 1990 hurricane season ; without Marco , the season would have been the first to have no tropical storm or hurricane make landfall in the US since the 1890 season . 
 = Django Unchained = 
 Django Unchained is a 2012 American Western film written and directed by Quentin Tarantino , starring Jamie Foxx , Christoph Waltz , Leonardo DiCaprio , Kerry Washington , and Samuel L. Jackson . Set in the Old West and antebellum South , it is a highly stylized variation of Spaghetti Westerns , and a tribute to the 1966 Italian film Django by Sergio Corbucci , whose star Franco Nero has a cameo appearance . 
 Development of Django Unchained began in 2007 when Tarantino was writing a book on Sergio Corbucci . By April 2011 , Tarantino sent his final draft of the script to The Weinstein Company . Casting began in the summer of 2011 , with Michael K. Williams and Will Smith being considered for the role of the title character before Foxx was cast . Principal photography took place from November 2011 to March 2012 in California , Wyoming and Louisiana . 
 Django Unchained premiered at the Ziegfeld Theatre in New York City on December 11 , 2012 , and was released on December 25 , 2012 in the United States . The film was nominated for several film industry awards , including five Academy Awards . Waltz won several awards for his performance , among them Best Supporting Actor at the Golden Globes , BAFTAs , and Academy Awards . Tarantino won an Academy Award , a Golden Globe , and a BAFTA award for writing the film 's original screenplay . The film grossed over $ 425 million worldwide in theaters against its $ 100 million budget , making it Tarantino 's highest @-@ grossing theatrical release . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 1858 Texas , the Speck brothers , Ace and Dicky , drive a group of black slaves on foot . Among the shackled slaves is Django , sold off and separated from his wife , Broomhilda von Shaft . The Speck brothers are stopped by Dr. King Schultz , a German dentist @-@ turned @-@ bounty hunter from Düsseldorf , who asks to buy one of the slaves . When he questions Django about his knowledge of the Brittle brothers , a group of outlaws for whom Schultz is carrying a warrant , Ace becomes irritated and threateningly aims his shotgun at Schultz . Schultz , a superior gunslinger , immediately kills Ace with a Fast draw . King insists on honourably paying Dicky a fair price for Django before leaving him at the mercy of the newly @-@ freed slaves , who kill him and follow the North Star to freedom . 
 As Django can identify the Brittle brothers , Schultz offers him his freedom in exchange for help tracking them down . King first takes Django to a small town where he immediately murders the sheriff . Before a Marshall can arrest them King explains that the sheriff was actually a wanted cattle rustler with a $ 200 bounty on him that the furious Marshall is now required to pay . After tracking and killing the <unk> , the liberated Django ( adopting the surname " Freeman " ) partners with Schultz through the winter and becomes his apprentice ; Schultz discovers that Django has a natural talent for <unk> . Schultz explains that he feels responsible for Django since Django is the first person he has ever freed , and felt morally obliged to help Django ( whom he described as a " real @-@ life Siegfried " ) reunite with Broomhilda . Django , now fully trained , collects his first bounty , keeping the handbill for good luck . 
 In 1859 , Django and Schultz travel to Mississippi , where they learn the identity of Broomhilda 's owner : Calvin J. Candie , the charming but cruel owner of the Candyland plantation , where slaves are forced to fight to the death in brutal wrestling matches called Mandingo fights . Schultz , expecting Candie will not sell Broomhilda if they ask for her directly , feigns interest in purchasing one of Candie 's prized fighters for far more than the normal price . Schultz and Django meet Candie at his gentleman 's club in Greenville and submit their offer . Intrigued , Candie invites them to his ranch at Candyland . After secretly briefing the German @-@ speaking Broomhilda , Schultz claims to be charmed by her and offers to buy her as well . 
 During dinner , Candie 's staunchly loyal house slave , Stephen ( Samuel L. Jackson ) , becomes suspicious of Schultz and Django 's motives . Deducing that Django and Broomhilda know each other and that the sale of the Mandingo fighter is a ruse , Stephen alerts Candie and admonishes him for his greed . Candie is angered at being fooled and having his time wasted , but contains his anger long enough to theatrically display his knowledge of phrenology , which he uses to theorize why slaves frequently fail to kill their owners , despite ample opportunity . 
 Candie 's bodyguard , Butch Pooch , bursts into the room with his shotgun trained on the two bounty hunters , and Candie explodes in anger . He offers an alteration of the original deal , with Broomhilda taking the Mandingo fighter 's place at the same price , and threatens her death should the deal be rejected . Schultz agrees , and the papers for her freedom are drawn up and signed . Candie smugly insists that the deal be sealed through a handshake , which Schultz initially refuses . When Candie threatens again to kill Broomhilda , Schultz snaps and kills Candie with a concealed derringer . Butch kills Schultz and Django kills him in turn , and an extensive gunfight begins . Django guns down a great number of his opponents , but surrenders when Broomhilda is taken hostage . 
 The next morning , Stephen tells Django that he will be sold to a mine and worked to death . En route to the mine , Django proves to his escorts that he is a bounty hunter by showing them the handbill that Schultz said was good luck from his first kill . He convinces them that there is a large bounty for criminals hiding at Candyland , and promises that they would receive the majority of the money if they free him . The escorts release him and give him a pistol , which he uses to kill them before stealing a horse and returning to Candyland with a bag of dynamite . 
 At the plantation , Django kills more of Candie 's henchmen , takes Broomhilda 's freedom papers from the dead Schultz 's pocket , bids goodbye to his late friend and frees his wife from a nearby cabin . When Candie 's mourners return from his burial , Django kills the remaining henchmen and Candie 's sister Lara Lee Candie @-@ <unk> , releases the two remaining house slaves , and kneecaps Stephen . Django then ignites the dynamite that he has planted throughout the mansion , and he and Broomhilda watch from a distance as the mansion explodes with the incapacitated Stephen inside , before riding off together . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Other roles include Russ Tamblyn as Son of a Gunfighter , Amber Tamblyn as Daughter of a Son of a Gunfighter , Don Stroud as Sheriff Bill Sharp , Bruce Dern as Old Man <unk> , M. C. Gainey as Big John Brittle , Cooper Huckabee as Lil Raj Brittle , Doc <unk> as Ellis Brittle , Jonah Hill as Bag Head # 2 , a member of a Ku Klux Klan @-@ like group ; Lee Horsley as Sheriff Gus ( Snowy Snow ) , Rex Linn as Tennessee Harry , Misty Upham as Minnie , Danièle Watts as Coco and Clay Donahue Fontenot as Luigi , Big Fred 's opponent in a Mandingo fight . Zoë Bell , Michael Bowen , Robert Carradine , Jake Garber , Ted Neeley , James Parks , and Tom Savini play Candyland trackers , while Michael Parks and John Jarratt , alongside Tarantino himself in a cameo appearance as Robert , play the <unk> Dickey Mining Company employees . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 In 2007 , Tarantino discussed an idea for a type of Spaghetti Western set in the United States ' pre @-@ Civil War Deep South . He called this type of film " a southern " , stating that he wanted " to do movies that deal with America 's horrible past with slavery and stuff but do them like spaghetti westerns , not like big issue movies . I want to do them like they 're genre films , but they deal with everything that America has never dealt with because it 's ashamed of it , and other countries don 't really deal with because they don 't feel they have the right to . " Tarantino later explained the genesis of the idea : " I was writing a book about Sergio Corbucci when I came up with a way to tell the story . ... I was writing about how his movies have this evil Wild West , a horrible Wild West . It was surreal , it dealt a lot with fascism . So I 'm writing this whole piece on this , and I 'm thinking : ' I don 't really know if Sergio was thinking [ this ] while he was doing this . But I know I 'm thinking it now . And I can do it ! ' " 
 Tarantino finished the script on April 26 , 2011 , and handed in the final draft to The Weinstein Company . In October 2012 , frequent Tarantino collaborator RZA said that he and Tarantino had intended to cross over Django Unchained with RZA 's Tarantino @-@ presented martial @-@ arts film The Man with the Iron Fists . The crossover would have seen a younger version of the blacksmith character from RZA 's film appear as a slave in an auction . However , scheduling conflicts prevented RZA 's participation . 
 One inspiration for the film is Corbucci 's 1966 spaghetti western Django , whose star Franco Nero has a cameo appearance in Django Unchained . Another inspiration is the 1975 film Mandingo , about a slave trained to fight other slaves . Tarantino included scenes in the snow as a homage to The Great Silence . " <unk> takes place in the snow . I liked the action in the snow so much , Django Unchained has a big snow section in the middle , " Tarantino said in an interview . 
 The title Django Unchained alludes to the titles of the 1966 Corbucci film Django ; Hercules Unchained , the American title for the 1959 Italian epic fantasy film Ercole e la regina di Lidia , about the mythical hero 's escape from enslavement to a wicked master ; and to Angel Unchained , the 1970 American biker film about a biker exacting revenge on a large group of rednecks . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Among those considered for the title role of Django , Michael K. Williams and Will Smith were mentioned as possibilities , but in the end Jamie Foxx was cast in the role . Smith later said he turned down the role because it " wasn 't the lead " . Tyrese Gibson sent in an audition tape as the character . Franco Nero , the original Django from the 1966 Italian film , was rumored for the role of Calvin Candie , but instead was given a cameo appearance as a minor character . Nero suggested that he play a mysterious horseman who haunts Django in visions and is revealed in an ending flashback to be Django 's father ; Tarantino opted not to use the idea . Kevin Costner was in negotiations to join as Ace Woody , a Mandingo trainer and Candie 's right @-@ hand man , but Costner dropped out due to scheduling conflicts . Kurt Russell was cast instead but also later left the role . When Kurt Russell dropped out , the role of Ace Woody was not recast ; instead , the character was merged with Walton Goggins 's character , Billy Crash . 
 Jonah Hill was offered the role of Scotty Harmony , a gambler who loses Broomhilda to Candie in a poker game , but turned it down due to scheduling conflicts with The Watch . Sacha Baron Cohen was also offered the role , but declined in order to appear in Les Misérables . Neither Scotty nor the poker game appear in the final cut of the film . Hill later appeared in the film in a different role . Joseph Gordon @-@ Levitt said that he " would have loved , loved to have " been in the film but would be unable to appear because of a prior commitment to direct his first film , Don Jon . DiCaprio played his first role as a villain as the cruel plantation owner Calvin Candie . 
 = = = Costume design = = = 
 In a January 2013 interview with Vanity Fair , costume designer <unk> Davis said much of the film 's wardrobe was inspired by spaghetti westerns and other works of art . For Django 's wardrobe , Davis and Tarantino watched the television series Bonanza and referred to it frequently . The pair even hired the <unk> who designed the hat worn by the Bonanza character Little Joe , played by Michael Landon . Davis described Django 's look as a " rock @-@ n @-@ roll take on the character " . Django 's sunglasses were inspired by Charles Bronson 's character in The White Buffalo ( 1977 ) . Davis used Thomas Gainsborough 's 1770 oil painting The Blue Boy as a reference for Django 's valet outfit . 
 In the final scene , Broomhilda wears a dress similar to that of Ida Galli 's character in Blood for a Silver Dollar ( 1965 ) . Davis said the idea of Calvin Candie 's costume came partly from Rhett Butler , and that Don Johnson 's signature Miami Vice look inspired Big Daddy 's cream @-@ colored linen suit in the film . King Schultz 's faux chinchilla coat was inspired by Telly Savalas in Kojak . Davis also revealed that many of her costume ideas did not make the final cut of the film , leaving some unexplained characters such as Zoë Bell 's tracker , who was intended to drop her bandana to reveal an absent jaw . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography for Django Unchained started in California in November 2011 continuing in Wyoming in February 2012 and at the National Historic Landmark Evergreen Plantation in Wallace , Louisiana , outside of New Orleans , in March 2012 . The film was shot in the anamorphic format on 35 mm film . Although originally scripted , a sub @-@ plot centering on Zoë Bell 's masked tracker was cut , and remained unfilmed , due to time constraints . After 130 shooting days , the film wrapped up principal photography in July 2012 . 
 Django Unchained was the first Tarantino film not edited by Sally Menke , who died in 2010 . Editing duties were instead handled by Fred Raskin , who had worked as an assistant editor on Tarantino 's Kill Bill . Raskin was nominated for a BAFTA Award for Best Editing but lost to William Goldenberg for his work on Argo . 
 = = Music = = 
 The film features both original and existing music tracks . Tracks composed specifically for the film include " 100 Black Coffins " by Rick Ross and produced by and featuring Jamie Foxx , " Who Did That To You ? " by John Legend , " Ancora Qui " by Ennio Morricone and Elisa , and " Freedom " by Anthony Hamilton and <unk> Boynton . The theme , " Django " , was also the theme song of the 1966 film . Musician Frank Ocean wrote an original song for the film 's soundtrack , but it was rejected by Tarantino , who explained that " Ocean wrote a fantastic ballad that was truly lovely and poetic in every way , there just wasn 't a scene for it . " Frank Ocean later published the song , entitled " Wiseman " , on his Tumblr blog . The film also features a few famous pieces of western classical music , including Beethoven 's " Für Elise " and " Dies Irae " from Verdi 's Requiem . Tarantino has stated that he avoids using full scores of original music : " I just don 't like the idea of giving that much power to anybody on one of my movies . " The film 's soundtrack album was released on December 18 , 2012 . Ennio Morricone made statements criticizing Tarantino 's use of his music in Django Unchained and stated that he would " never work " with the director after this film , but later agreed to compose an original film score for Tarantino 's The Hateful Eight in 2015 . In a scholarly essay on the film 's music , Hollis Robbins notes that the vast majority of film music borrowings come from films made between 1966 and 1974 and argues that the political and musical resonances of these allusions situate Django Unchained squarely in the Vietnam and Watergate era , during the rise and decline of Black Power cinema . Jim Croce 's hit I Got A Name was featured in the soundtrack . 
 = = Release = = 
 The first teaser poster was inspired by a fan @-@ art poster by Italian artist Federico <unk> . His artwork was published in May 2011 , a few days after the synopsis and the official title were released to the public . In August 2011 , at Tarantino 's request , the production companies bought the concept artwork from <unk> to use for promotional purposes as well as on the crew passes and clothing for staff during filming . 
 Django Unchained was released on December 25 , 2012 , in the United States by The Weinstein Company and released on January 18 , 2013 , by Sony Pictures Releasing in the United Kingdom . The film was screened for the first time at the Directors Guild of America on December 1 , 2012 , with additional screening events having been held for critics leading up to the film 's wide release . The premiere of Django Unchained was delayed by one week following the shooting at an elementary school in Newtown , Connecticut , on December 14 , 2012 . 
 The film was released on March 22 , 2013 , by Sony Pictures in India . In March 2013 , Django Unchained was announced to be the first Tarantino film approved for official distribution in China 's strictly controlled film market . Lily Kuo , writing for Quartz , wrote that " the film depicts one of America 's darker periods , when slavery was legal , which Chinese officials like to use to push back against criticism from the United States . " The film was released in China on May 12 , 2013 . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 After a total of 143 days , the film ended its American theatrical run on May 16 , 2013 with a gross of $ 162 @,@ 805 @,@ 434 in North America . It grossed $ 262 @,@ 562 @,@ 804 in foreign countries including $ 51 @,@ 597 @,@ 323 of Germany , $ 37 @,@ 297 @,@ 979 of France , and $ 24 @,@ 893 @,@ 462 of the United Kingdom , making a worldwide total gross of $ 425 @,@ 368 @,@ 238 . As of 2013 , Django Unchained became Tarantino 's highest @-@ grossing film , surpassing his 2009 film Inglourious Basterds , which grossed $ 321 @.@ 4 million worldwide . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The film was released on DVD , Blu @-@ ray , and Digital Download on April 16 , 2013 . In the United States , the film has grossed $ 31 @,@ 939 @,@ 733 from DVD sales and $ 30 @,@ 286 @,@ 838 from Blu @-@ ray sales , making a total of $ 62 @,@ 226 @,@ 571 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical and scholarly response = = = 
 On Rotten Tomatoes the film has an approval rating of 88 % based on 247 reviews and an average rating is 8 / 10 . The site 's critical consensus reads , " Bold , bloody , and stylistically daring , Django Unchained is another incendiary masterpiece from Quentin Tarantino . " Metacritic , which assigns a weighted average score to reviews from mainstream critics , gives the film a score of 81 out of 100 based on 42 reviews , indicating " universal acclaim " . 
 Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times gave the film four stars out of four and said : " The film offers one sensational sequence after another , all set around these two intriguing characters who seem opposites but share pragmatic , financial and personal issues . " Ebert also added , " had I not been prevented from seeing it sooner because of an injury , this would have been on my year 's best films list . " Peter Bradshaw , film critic for The Guardian , awarded the film five stars , writing : " I can only say Django delivers , wholesale , that particular narcotic and delirious pleasure that Tarantino still knows how to <unk> in the cinema , something to do with the manipulation of surfaces . It 's as unwholesome , deplorable and delicious as a forbidden cigarette . " Writing in The New York Times , critic A. O. Scott compared Django to Tarantino 's earlier Inglourious Basterds : " Like Inglourious Basterds , Django Unchained is crazily entertaining , brazenly irresponsible and also ethically serious in a way that is entirely consistent with its playfulness . " Designating the film a Times ' critics ' pick , Scott said Django is " a troubling and important movie about slavery and racism . " Filmmaker Michael Moore praised Django , tweeting that the movie " is one of the best film satires ever . A rare American movie on slavery and the origins of our sick racist history . " 
 To the contrary , Owen Gleiberman , film critic for the Entertainment Weekly , wrote that " Django isn 't nearly the film that Inglourious was . It 's less clever , and it doesn 't have enough major characters – or enough of Tarantino 's trademark structural ingenuity – to earn its two @-@ hour @-@ and @-@ 45 @-@ minute running time . " In his review for the Indy Week , David <unk> wrote : " Django Unchained shows signs that Tarantino did little research beyond repeated viewings of Sergio Corbucci 's 1966 spaghetti Western Django and a blaxploitation from 1975 called Boss Nigger , written by and starring Fred Williamson . " New Yorker 's Anthony Lane was " disturbed by their [ Tarantino 's fans ' ] yelps of triumphant laughter , at the screening I attended , as a white woman was blown away by Django 's guns . " 
 According to Bob Hoose , critic with Plugged in : " This flick is far more concerned with foul @-@ mouthed Grindhouse chatter , revenge @-@ filled rage , skin @-@ tearing <unk> and bullets , and slow @-@ motion geysers of meat and blood than in communicating anything truthful and enlightening . " 
 An entire issue of the academic journal <unk> was devoted to Django Unchained : " Django Unchained and the Global Western , " featuring scholars who contextualize Tarantino 's film as a classic " western . " Dana Phillips writes : " Tarantino ’ s film is immensely entertaining , not despite but because it is so very audacious — even , at times , downright lurid , thanks to its treatment of slavery , race relations , and that staple of the Western , violence . No doubt these are matters that another director would have handled more delicately , and with less stylistic excess , than Tarantino , who has never been bashful . Another director also would have been less willing to proclaim his film the first in a new genre , the “ Southern . ” 
 = = = Top ten lists = = = 
 Django Unchained was listed on many critics ' top ten lists . 
 = = = Objections to specific elements of the film = = = 
 = = = = Portrayal and descriptions of African @-@ Americans and slavery = = = = 
 Some commentators have felt that the film 's heavy usage of the word " nigger " is inappropriate , affecting them to an even greater extent than the depicted violence against the slaves . Other reviewers have defended the usage of the language in the historic context of race and slavery in the United States . 
 Filmmaker Spike Lee , in an interview with Vibe , said he would not see the film , explaining " All I 'm going to say is that it 's disrespectful to my ancestors . That 's just me .... I 'm not speaking on behalf of anybody else . " Lee later wrote , " American slavery was not a Sergio Leone Spaghetti Western . It was a Holocaust . My ancestors are slaves stolen from Africa . I will honor them . " Louis Farrakhan , the leader of the Nation of Islam , interpreted the movie as " preparation for race war . " 
 Wesley Morris of The Boston Globe compared Samuel L. Jackson 's Stephen character to black Republicans like Clarence Thomas or Herman Cain . Samuel L. Jackson said that he believed his character to have " the same moral compass as Clarence Thomas does . " Jackson defended heavy use of the word " nigger " : " Saying Tarantino said ' nigger ' too many times is like complaining they said ' <unk> ' [ sic ] too many times in a movie about Nazis . " 
 Marc Lamont Hill , a professor at Columbia University , compared the fugitive ex – Los Angeles police officer Christopher <unk> to a real @-@ life Django , saying " It 's almost like watching ' Django Unchained ' in real life . It 's kind of exciting . " Writing in the Los Angeles Times , journalist Erin Aubry Kaplan noted the difference between Tarantino 's Jackie Brown and Django Unchained : " It is an institution whose horrors need no exaggerating , yet Django does exactly that , either to enlighten or entertain . A white director slinging around the n @-@ word in a homage to ' 70s blaxploitation à la Jackie Brown is one thing , but the same director turning the savageness of slavery into pulp fiction is quite another . " 
 While hosting NBC 's Saturday Night Live , Jamie Foxx joked about being excited " to kill all the white people in the movie " . Columnist Jeff <unk> wrote a reaction to the SNL skit for The Washington Times , saying : " Anti @-@ white bigotry has become embedded in our postmodern culture . Take Django Unchained . The movie boils down to one central theme : the white man as devil — a moral scourge who must be eradicated like a lethal virus . " 
 = = = = Use of violence = = = = 
 Some reviews criticized the film for being too violent . The originally planned premiere of Django was postponed following the Sandy Hook school shooting on December 14 , 2012 . Thomas Frank criticized the film 's use of violence as follows : 
 Not surprisingly , Quentin Tarantino has lately become the focus for this sort of criticism ( about the relationship between the movies and acts of violence ) . The fact that Django Unchained arrived in theaters right around the time of the Sandy Hook massacre didn 't help . Yet he has refused to give an inch in discussing the link between movie violence and real life . Obviously I don 't think one has to do with the other . Movies are about make @-@ believe . It 's about imagination . Part of the thing is trying to create a realistic experience , but we are faking it . Is it possible that anyone in our cynical world credits a self @-@ serving sophistry like this ? Of course an industry under fire will claim that its hands are clean , just as the NRA has done – and of course a favorite son , be it Tarantino or LaPierre , can be counted on to make the claim louder than anyone else . But do they really believe that imaginative expression is without consequence ? 
 The Independent said the movie was part of " the new sadism in cinema " and added , " There is something disconcerting about sitting in a crowded cinema as an audience guffaws at the latest <unk> or falls about in hysterics as someone is beheaded or has a limb lopped off " . 
 Adam <unk> from Mother Jones provided a more nuanced view , saying that " Django , like many Tarantino films , also has been criticized as cartoonishly violent , but it is only so when Django is killing slave owners and overseers . The violence against slaves is always appropriately terrifying . This , if nothing else , puts Django in the running for Tarantino 's best film , the first one in which he discovers violence as horror rather than just spectacle . When Schultz turns his head away from a slave being torn apart by dogs , Django explains to Calvin Candie — the plantation owner played by Leo DiCaprio — that Schultz just isn 't used to Americans . " 
 = = = = Historical inaccuracies = = = = 
 Tarantino has said about Mandingo fighting , " I was always aware those things existed " , there is no definitive historical evidence that slave owners ever staged gladiator @-@ like fights to the death between male slaves like the fight depicted in the movie . Historian Edna Greene Medford notes that there are only undocumented rumors that such fights took place . David Blight , the director of Yale 's center for the study of slavery , said it was not a matter of moral or ethical reservations that prevented slave owners from pitting slaves against each other in combat , but rather economic self @-@ interest : slave owners would not have wanted to put their substantial financial investments at risk in gladiatorial battles . 
 The non @-@ historical term " Mandingo " for a fine fighting or breeding slave comes not from Tarantino , but the earlier film Mandingo . 
 Writing in The New Yorker , William Jelani Cobb observed that Tarantino 's occasional historical elasticity sometimes worked to the film 's advantage . " There are moments , " Cobb wrote , " where this convex history works brilliantly , like when Tarantino depicts the Ku Klux Klan a decade prior to its actual formation in order to thoroughly ridicule its members ' veiled racism . " The marauding masked group depicted in the film were known as " The Regulators " and were depicted as spiritual forebears of the later post @-@ civil war KKK and not as the actual KKK . 
 On the matter of historical accuracy , Christopher Caldwell wrote in the Financial Times : " Of course , we must not mistake a feature film for a public television documentary " , pointing out that the film should be treated as entertainment , not as a historical account of the time period it is set in . " Django uses slavery the way a pornographic film might use a nurses ' convention : as a pretext for what is really meant to entertain us . What is really meant to entertain us in Django is violence . " Richard Brody , however , wrote in The New Yorker that Tarantino 's " vision of slavery 's monstrosity is historically accurate .... Tarantino rightly depicts slavery as no mere administrative ownership but a grievous and monstrous infliction of cruelty . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Django Unchained garnered several awards and nominations . The American Film Institute named it one of their Top Ten Movies of the Year in December 2012 . The film received five Golden Globe Award nominations , including Best Picture , and Best Director and Best Screenplay for Tarantino . Tarantino won an Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay . Christoph Waltz received the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor , the Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor , and the BAFTA Award for Best Supporting Actor , his second time receiving all three awards , having previously won for his role in Tarantino 's Inglourious Basterds . The NAACP Image Awards gave the film four nominations , while the National Board of Review named DiCaprio their Best Supporting Actor . Django Unchained earned a nomination for Best Theatrical Motion Picture from the Producers Guild of America . 
 = = Potential future projects = = 
 = = = Miniseries = = = 
 Tarantino has said in an interview that he has 90 minutes of material of the film on the cutting room floor and considered re @-@ editing Django Unchained into a four @-@ hour , four @-@ night cable miniseries . Tarantino said that breaking the story into four parts would be more satisfying to audiences than a four @-@ hour movie : " ... it wouldn 't be an endurance test . It would be a mini @-@ series . And people love those . " 
 = = = Novels = = = 
 The story which became the director 's follow @-@ up film The Hateful Eight was first attempted as a paperback novel sequel to Django Unchained titled Django in White Hell . Tarantino decided , however , that the character 's established morals did not fit the tone of the developing story so he began re @-@ writing it as an original screenplay with no connection to the earlier film . He has expressed a desire to write a series of Django sequel novels . 
 = = = Crossover = = = 
 Sony is planning on a Django / Zorro crossover movie , which currently exists in the form of a comic book by Dynamite Entertainment . 
 In the 2014 film A Million Ways to Die in the West , Django is seen shooting the proprietor of a racially charged shooting game , saying ' people die at the fair ' . 
 = = Alleged copyright infringement = = 
 In December 2015 , a $ 100 million lawsuit was filed against Tarantino by filmmakers Oscar Colvin Jr. and Torrance J. Colvin , who claimed that the script for Django Unchained bears extensive similarities to their film , titled Freedom . The lawsuit was filed in a federal court in Washington , DC . 
 = Battle of Cape St. Vincent ( 1780 ) = 
 The Battle of Cape St. Vincent was a naval battle took place off the southern coast of Portugal on 16 January 1780 during the Anglo @-@ Spanish War . A British fleet under Admiral Sir George Rodney defeated a Spanish squadron under Don Juan de Lángara . The battle is sometimes referred to as the Moonlight Battle because it was unusual for naval battles in the Age of Sail to take place at night . It was also the first major naval victory for the British over their European enemies in the war and proved the value of copper @-@ sheathing the hulls of warships . 
 Admiral Rodney was escorting a fleet of supply ships to relieve the Spanish siege of Gibraltar with a fleet of about twenty ships of the line when he encountered Lángara 's squadron south of Cape St. Vincent . When Lángara saw the size of the British fleet , he attempted to make for the safety of Cádiz , but the copper @-@ sheathed British ships chased his fleet down . In a running battle that lasted from mid @-@ afternoon until after midnight , the British captured four Spanish ships , including Lángara 's flagship . Two other ships were also captured , but their final disposition is unclear ; some Spanish sources indicate they were retaken by their Spanish crews , while Rodney 's report indicates the ships were grounded and destroyed . 
 After the battle Rodney successfully resupplied Gibraltar and Minorca before continuing on to the West Indies station . Lángara was released on parole , and was promoted to lieutenant general by King Carlos III . 
 = = Background = = 
 One of Spain 's principal goals upon its entry into the American War of Independence in 1779 was the recovery of Gibraltar , which had been lost to England in 1704 . The Spanish planned to retake Gibraltar by blockading and starving out its garrison , which included troops from Britain and the Electorate of Hanover . The siege formally began in June 1779 , with the Spanish establishing a land blockade around the Rock of Gibraltar . The matching naval blockade was comparatively weak , however , and the British discovered that small fast ships could evade the blockaders , while slower and larger supply ships generally could not . By late 1779 , however , supplies in Gibraltar had become seriously depleted , and its commander , General George Eliott , appealed to London for relief . 
 A supply convoy was organized , and in late December 1779 a large fleet sailed from England under the command of Admiral Sir George Brydges Rodney . Although Rodney 's ultimate orders were to command the West Indies fleet , he had secret instructions to first resupply Gibraltar and Minorca . On 4 January 1780 the fleet divided , with ships headed for the West Indies sailing westward . This left Rodney in command of 19 ships of the line , which were to accompany the supply ships to Gibraltar . 
 On 8 January 1780 ships from Rodney 's fleet spotted a group of sails . Giving chase with their faster copper @-@ clad ships , the British determined these to be a Spanish supply convoy that was protected by a single ship of the line and several frigates . The entire convoy was captured , with the lone ship of the line , Guipuzcoana , striking her colours after a perfunctory exchange of fire . Guipuzcoana was staffed with a small prize crew and renamed HMS Prince William , in honour of Prince William , the third son of the King , who was serving as midshipman in the fleet . Rodney then detached HMS America and the frigate HMS Pearl to escort most of the captured ships back to England ; the Prince William was added to his fleet , as were some of the supply ships that carried items likely to be of use to the Gibraltar garrison . On 12 January HMS Dublin , which had lost part of her topmast on 3 January , suffered additional damage and raised a distress flag . Assisted by HMS Shrewsbury , she limped into Lisbon on 16 January . 
 The Spanish had learnt of the British relief effort . From the blockading squadron a fleet comprising 11 ships of the line under Admiral Juan de Lángara was dispatched to intercept Rodney 's convoy , and the Atlantic fleet of Admiral Luis de Córdova at Cadiz was also alerted to try to catch him . Córdova learnt of the strength of Rodney 's fleet , and returned to Cadiz rather than giving chase . On 16 January the fleets of Lángara and Rodney spotted each other around 1 : 00 pm south of Cape St. Vincent , the southwestern point of Portugal and the Iberian Peninsula . The weather was hazy , with heavy swells and occasional squalls . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Rodney was ill , and spent the entire action in his bunk . His flag captain , Walter Young , urged Rodney to give orders to engage when the Spanish fleet was first spotted , but Rodney only gave orders to form a line abreast . Lángara started to establish a line of battle , but when he realised the size of Rodney 's fleet , he gave orders to make all sail for Cadiz . Around 2 : 00 pm , when Rodney felt certain that the ships seen were not the vanguard of a larger fleet , he issued commands for a general chase . Rodney 's instructions to his fleet were to chase at their best speed , and engage the Spanish ships from the rear as they came upon them . They were also instructed to sail to the lee side to interfere with Spanish attempts to gain the safety of a harbour , a tactic that also prevented the Spanish ships from opening their lowest gun ports . Because of their copper @-@ sheathed hulls ( which reduced marine growths and drag ) , the ships of the Royal Navy were faster and soon gained on the Spanish . 
 The chase lasted for about two hours , and the battle finally began around 4 : 00 pm . The Santo Domingo , trailing in the Spanish fleet , received broadsides from HMS Edgar , HMS Marlborough , and HMS Ajax before blowing up around 4 : 40 , with the loss of all but one of her crew . Marlborough and Ajax then passed Princessa to engage other Spanish ships . Princessa was eventually engaged in an hour @-@ long battle with HMS Bedford before striking her colours at about 5 : 30 . By 6 : 00 pm it was getting dark , and there was a discussion aboard HMS Sandwich , Rodney 's flagship , about whether to continue the pursuit . Although Captain Young is credited in some accounts with pushing Rodney to do so , Dr. Gilbert Blane , the fleet physician , reported it as a decision of the council . 
 The chase continued into the dark and squally night , leading it to later become known as the " Moonlight Battle " , since it was uncommon at the time for naval battles to continue after sunset . At 7 : 30 pm , HMS Defence came upon Lángara 's flagship Fenix , engaging her in a battle lasting over an hour . She was broadsided in passing by HMS Montagu and HMS Prince George , and Lángara was wounded in the battle . Fenix finally surrendered to HMS Bienfaisant , which arrived late in the battle and shot away her mainmast . Fenix 's takeover was complicated by an outbreak of smallpox aboard Bienfaisant . Captain John MacBride , rather than sending over a possibly infected prize crew , apprised Lángara of the situation and put him and his crew on parole . 
 At 9 : 15 the Montagu engaged the Diligente , which struck after her <unk> was shot away . Around 11 : 00 pm San Eugenio surrendered after having all of her masts shot away by HMS Cumberland , but the difficult seas made it impossible to board a prize crew until morning . That duel was passed by HMS Culloden and Prince George , which engaged San Julián and compelled her to surrender around 1 : 00 am . The last ship to surrender was Monarca . She nearly escaped , shooting away HMS Alcide 's topmast , but was engaged in a running battle with the frigate HMS Apollo . Apollo managed to keep up the unequal engagement until about the time that Rodney 's flagship Sandwich came upon the scene around 2 : 00 am . Sandwich fired a broadside , unaware that Monarca had already hauled down her flag . 
 The British took six ships . Four Spanish ships of the line and the fleet 's two frigates escaped , although sources are unclear if two of the Spanish ships were even present with the fleet at the time of the battle . Lángara 's report states that San Justo and San Genaro were not in his line of battle ( although they are listed in Spanish records as part of his fleet ) . Rodney 's report states that San Justo escaped but was damaged in battle , and that San Genaro escaped without damage . According to one account two of Lángara 's ships ( unspecified which two ) were despatched to investigate other unidentified sails sometime before the action . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 With the arrival of daylight , it was clear that the British fleet and their prize ships were dangerously close to a lee shore with an onshore breeze . One of the prizes , San Julián , was recorded by Rodney as too badly damaged to save , and was driven ashore . The fate of another prize , San Eugenio , is unclear . Some sources report that she too was grounded , but others report that she was retaken by her crew and managed to reach Cadiz . A Spanish history claims that the prize crews of both ships appealed to their Spanish captives for help escaping the lee shore . The Spanish captains retook control of their ships , imprisoned the British crews , and sailed to Cadiz . 
 The British reported their casualties in the battle as 32 killed and 102 wounded . The supply convoy sailed into Gibraltar on 19 January , driving the smaller blockading fleet to retreat to the safety of Algeciras . Rodney arrived several days later , after first stopping in Tangier . The wounded Spanish prisoners , who included Admiral Lángara , were offloaded there , and the British garrison was heartened by the arrival of the supplies and the presence of Prince William Henry . After also resupplying Minorca , Rodney sailed for the West Indies in February , detaching part of the fleet for service in the Channel . This homebound fleet intercepted a French fleet destined for the East Indies , capturing one warship and three supply ships . Gibraltar was resupplied twice more before the siege was lifted at the end of the war in 1783 . 
 Admiral Lángara and other Spanish officers were eventually released on parole , the admiral receiving a promotion to lieutenant general . He continued his distinguished career , becoming Spanish marine minister in the French Revolutionary Wars . 
 Admiral Rodney was lauded for his victory , the first major victory of the war by the Royal Navy over its European opponents . He distinguished himself for the remainder of the war , notably winning the 1782 Battle of the Saintes in which he captured the French Admiral Comte de Grasse . He was , however , criticised by Captain Young , who portrayed him as weak and indecisive in the battle with Lángara . ( He was also rebuked by the admiralty for leaving a ship of the line at Gibraltar , against his express orders . ) Rodney 's observations on the benefits of copper sheathing in the victory were influential in British Admiralty decisions to deploy the technology more widely . 
 = = Order of battle = = 
 None of the listed sources give an accurate accounting of the ships in Rodney 's fleet at the time of the action . Robert Beatson lists the composition of the fleet at its departure from England , and notes which ships separated to go to the West Indies , as well as those detached to return the prizes captured on 8 January to England . He does not list two ships ( Dublin and Shrewsbury , identified in despatches reprinted by Syrett ) that were separated from the fleet on 13 January . Furthermore , HMS Prince William is sometimes misunderstood to have been part of the prize escort back to England , but she was present at Gibraltar after the action . Beatson also fails to list a number of frigates , including HMS Apollo , which played a key role in the capture of the Monarca . 
 There are some discrepancies between the English and Spanish sources listing the Spanish fleet , principally in the number of guns most of the vessels are claimed to mount . The table below lists the Spanish records describing Lángara 's fleet . Beatson lists all of the Spanish ships of the line at 70 guns , except Fenix , which he lists at 80 guns . One frigate , the Santa Rosalia , is listed by Beatson at 28 guns . The identify of the second Spanish frigate is different in the two listings . Beatson records her as the Santa <unk> , 26 guns , with captain Don Annibal <unk> , while Duro 's listing describes her as Santa Cecilia , 34 , captain Don Domingo <unk> . Both frigates , whatever their identity , escaped the battle . 
 = There Goes My Baby ( Usher song ) = 
 " There Goes My Baby " is a song by American recording artist Usher . It was written by James Scheffer , Frank Romano , Danny Morris and Rico Love , with the latter producing the song with Jim Jonsin . The song was first released as the second promo single for his sixth studio album , Raymond v. Raymond ( 2010 ) on February 9 , 2010 , and later released to rhythmic and urban airplay as the album 's fourth U.S. single from the album on June 15 , 2010 . It was later included the album 's follow @-@ up set , Versus . " There Goes My Baby " is a down @-@ tempo R & B piece , which makes use of Usher 's falsetto range . 
 Critics received the song positively , complimenting Usher 's falsetto . While reaching a peak of twenty @-@ five on the Billboard Hot 100 , it topped the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . The charting gave Usher his eleventh number @-@ one on the chart , tying Ray Charles and R. Kelly for the fifth @-@ most number @-@ one 's since the chart 's inception . The song 's accompanying music video features Usher pursuing his love interest in risque scenes . Critics generally favored the video , calling it classic Usher , while some noted its theme was played @-@ out . Usher performed the song a number of times , including at the 2010 BET Awards . The song earned Usher a Grammy Award for Best Male R & B Vocal Performance , at the 53rd Grammy Awards in 2011 . 
 = = Composition and critical reception = = 
 " There Goes My Baby " is a , " slinky " down @-@ tempo R & B ballad , with infused hints of neo soul . It is composed in a " moderate groove " of eighty beats per minute , and is set in common time . It is written the key of A minor and Usher 's vocals span from the low note of E4 to high note of C6 . It follows the chord progression A – Fmaj7 – G. The song makes use of Usher 's falsetto range , which was warmly received by critics . Edna Gunderson of USA Today called Usher 's falsetto " charming . " Jaime Gill of Yahoo ! Music UK said that the song was a delight and that its falsetto tenderness was absent in the rest of the work . Tyler Lewis of PopMatters said the song featured " nice falsetto work " from the singer , while Leah Greenblatt of Entertainment Weekly coined the song a " falsetto @-@ laced plea . " 
 Andy Kellman of Allmusic noted the track as a standout from Raymond v. Raymond . Greg Kot of the Chicago Tribune said that the sweetness of Usher 's falsetto balanced out the album 's " boilerplate swagger . " Fraser McAlpine of BBC Music thought that the song recalled Usher 's past slow jams , coining it , " a sumptuous deep @-@ pile carpet of seductive song . " Ashante Infantry of the Toronto Star said the song was one of the best on the album , and said that it was a " steamy slow jam . " Calling the song " decent , " James Reed of the Boston Globe thought the lyrical content was hollow . Calling it a low @-@ point of the album , Matthew Cole of Slant Magazine said that the song was " sappy . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 As a promo single , the song debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 chart at number seventy @-@ one solely from digital downloads . It fell off the next week , but upon its release as a single it re @-@ entered at number 100 , and eventually reached number twenty @-@ five . It topped the US R & B / Hip @-@ Hop chart for four consecutive weeks , giving Usher his eleventh number @-@ one hit on that chart , and to date spent there the huge amount of 71 weeks . With eleven top singles on the chart , Usher tied with R. Kelly and Ray Charles on the Stevie Wonder @-@ led list of most number ones since the inception of the chart . As the fourth single from Raymond v. Raymond , the single was also Usher 's fourth consecutive top ten song on the R & B chart , a feat not matched by him since his Confessions era . " There Goes My Baby " was also Usher 's fourth consecutive top forty song on the Hot 100 , another feat not matched since Confessions . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background and synopsis = = = 
 The accompanying music video for the song was filmed on June 16 , 2010 in Malibu , California , and directed by Anthony Mandler . It took fifteen hours for the shoot . Preparing his physique for the filming , the singer told People , " At 31 , when you take your shirt off , you must have it together ! " A preview of the video was released on July 12 , 2010 , and the full video premiered on 106 & Park and Vevo on July 13 , 2010 . 
 Containing a vague plot , the opening scene of the clip features Usher donning a black tank top and dark jeans , while he stands in a field with the sun rising in the background . While performing t 'ai chi @-@ inspired dance moves , he begins to pursue his love interest , and appears shirtless in front of a black backdrop . 
 Appearing alongside his interest in the backdrop scenes , Usher then sings propped on a concrete wall in a dark alley , while he and the woman tease each other , before moving outside on the balcony of a house on top of mountains . The singer performs acrobatic moves , including one in particular in which he does a pull @-@ up onto the roof to kiss his partner . All previous scenes are intercut before culminating with Usher seducing his partner in bed , in racy moments with Usher in nothing but briefs as he pulls off her stockings . The final scene sees the singer driving off in a convertible . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Jayson Rodriguez of MTV News positively reviewed the clip , stating , " with a new video for his single " There Goes My Baby , " the singer continues to push back at detractors who dare to suggest he 's slipped . " Megan Vick of Billboard said the clip was classic Usher , " from the stunning women to the architectural scenery and most importantly , the rippling abs . " Lining up points on why the video should be watched , AOL Boombox said that the singer " sexes it up " in the video as he " proudly proclaims " the song 's title . Brad Wete of Entertainment Weekly gave the video a mixed review , complimenting Usher 's trademark sexual videos , but at the same time said it was not " new territory " for the singer , preferring he would take a video route as he did in 2008 's " Trading Places . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 While promoting Raymond v. Raymond , Usher performed the song along with others from the then @-@ upcoming set on Good Morning America . In promotion of the single , he sang the song on Lopez Tonight on June 2 , 2010 , and on The View on June 9 , 2010 . Furthermore , Usher performed the song on the 2010 BET Awards in June 2010 . In August 2010 he sang the song at his 2010 World Leadership Awards for his New Look Foundation , alongside other performers , friend Ciara and protege Justin Bieber . The same month , the singer later appeared on The Early Show as a part of their summer concert series . On September 17 , 2010 , he performed the song alongside " DJ Got Us Fallin ' in Love " on Jimmy Kimmel Live ! . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital download 
 " There Goes My Baby " - 4 : 44 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Songwriting - Rico Love , James Scheffer , Frank Romano , Danny Morris 
 Production - Jim Jonsin , Rico Love 
 Keyboards and programming – Jim Jonsin , Danny Morris 
 Guitars - Frank Romano 
 Additional vocals – Rico Love 
 Recording - Ian Cross and assisted by Thomas McCrea and Jason Wilkie 
 Mixing - Mark “ Spike " Stent , assisted by Matty Green 
 Source 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Year @-@ end charts = = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = John Wark = 
 John Wark ( born 4 August 1957 ) is a Scottish former footballer who spent most of his playing time with Ipswich Town . He won a record four Player of the Year awards before becoming one of the four inaugural members of the club 's Hall of Fame . Wark had long spells at the club , which bookended his career , and a third , brief interlude dividing his briefer periods at Liverpool and Middlesbrough . A versatile player , Wark played most of his professional games as a midfielder , although he sometimes played as a central defender and on occasion as a striker . 
 Born in Glasgow , Wark represented Scotland in international football , winning 29 caps and scoring seven goals . This included selection for Scotland in the 1982 FIFA World Cup in which he made three appearances and scored twice . 
 During his playing career , Wark appeared in the film Escape to Victory . Since retiring as a professional player in 1996 , he has continued to work for Ipswich Town — since April 2009 in the corporate hospitality department . His autobiography , Wark On , was published in 2009 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Wark was born on 4 August 1957 , in Glasgow Royal Maternity Hospital to parents Alex and Helen . The third of four children , he has an older sister Wilma , older brother Alex and younger brother Andrew . The family lived in a four @-@ storey tenement block in Partick . The family was impoverished : Wark 's parents could not afford a cot and as a small child , he slept in a drawer from a sideboard . Although christened John , Wark was soon referred to by his family as Johnny , a diminutive that stuck throughout his footballing career . 
 In the early 1960s , the family moved to another tenement block , this time in Scotstoun , and Wark 's father secured employment at nearby Albion Motors . The new home accommodated a back yard in which Wark played football from the age of six . He said " [ f ] <unk> seemed to occupy 99 per cent of my time as a youngster " as he tried to emulate his brother Alex , who had become a professional at St Mirren . Wark attended Scotstoun Primary School , where he became captain of the football team . On moving to secondary school , he was selected for the Glasgow Schools representative team . He also played for Drumchapel Amateurs at the under @-@ 14 level , where he was , for a period , managed by David Moyes ' father , also named David . 
 During Wark 's time at Drumchapel , he attracted the attention of Celtic . He trained with the club at their Parkhead ground , before receiving an invitation to sign schoolboy forms for the club . As a lifelong Rangers fan ( with whom Celtic have a notable rivalry ) and with interest from " several English clubs " , including Bristol City , Manchester City and Ipswich Town , Wark stalled on the offer . He trialled with both Ipswich Town and Manchester City , and selected Ipswich when the latter remained non @-@ committal . On arrival at Portman Road , Town manager Bobby Robson , later described by Wark as the person in football " who had the single biggest influence on [ him ] " , personally welcomed him and Wark signed with the club as an apprentice . 
 = = Domestic playing career = = 
 = = = First spell at Ipswich = = = 
 Wark started his career at Ipswich in the youth team , initially playing at left back before moving to the centre of defence and occasionally occupying the right back position . He signed up as a professional for the club on his 17th birthday . Selected for the senior squad as a replacement for the injured Kevin Beattie , Wark made his first @-@ team debut on 27 March 1975 in the 3 – 2 FA Cup 6th round ( 3rd replay ) victory over Leeds United ; the game was played at Leicester City 's Filbert Street . A nervous and homesick Wark was reassured by manager Robson : 
 " My debut was in the quarter @-@ final of the FA Cup against the Leeds team of Giles and Bremner . He [ Robson ] said , ' I wouldn 't put you in the team if I didn 't think you were good enough ' . He was a father figure as well because I was homesick . If it hadn 't been for the boss I would have been straight back to Glasgow . " 
 Making four more first @-@ team appearances in place of injured regulars , Wark ended the season still on the youth team , and experienced success in the final of the FA Youth Cup , defeating West Ham United 5 – 1 . He spent much of the 1975 – 76 season playing for the reserves , and was presented with the club 's Young Player of the Year award , despite making just four appearances for the senior team . Moving into midfield , Wark made over 30 appearances in the 1976 – 77 season , scoring his first goals for the club , ( 10 , in all ) taking over penalty kicking duty ; he also received his first red card . 
 In the June 1977 , Wark was selected for the Scotland squad for the first time , for a friendly match against East Germany ; however , a torn hamstring sustained in pre @-@ season training ended any chance of an international debut . The injury also kept him out of first @-@ team football until January 1978 , when he returned for a match against Cardiff City in the third round of the 1977 – 78 FA Cup . 
 Indifferent league performances that season meant that Ipswich finished just three points above the relegation zone , but the season ended in success in the FA Cup . Wark scored in a 3 – 1 victory over West Bromwich Albion in the semi @-@ final , and appeared in the final at Wembley as part of a side that surprised favourites Arsenal , winning the game 1 – 0 . Wark remarked , " We were underdogs but on the day we hammered them . " Wark did not touch the ball for the first 18 minutes of the match , and as the players left the pitch at half @-@ time , David <unk> said to Wark , " Make sure you hit it between the posts in the second @-@ half . Avoid the white bits . " In the second half of the game , Wark " ignored <unk> ' advice and hit Pat Jennings ' right post twice with almost identical swerving right @-@ foot shots from outside the penalty area " . 
 Twice in the three seasons that followed , Ipswich came within one game of winning the League championship , but finished as runners @-@ up to Liverpool and Aston Villa , respectively . However , Ipswich did win the club 's only European trophy when they lifted the 1980 – 81 UEFA Cup . Wark set a competition record by scoring 14 goals — including two , one in each leg — in the final as Ipswich overcame Dutch side AZ 67 Alkmaar 5 – 4 on aggregate . Wark 's record equalled the long @-@ standing scoring record in a European competition , set by José Altafini of A.C. Milan in the 1962 – 63 European Cup . Wark 's personal triumph that year was to win a European accolade , Young Player of the Year , and gain the acclaim of his fellow professionals in England to earn the PFA Player of the Year award . He ended the 1980 – 81 season with 36 goals . 
 Wark continued to play for Ipswich , but after Robson left to become England manager in 1982 , the side was gradually broken up by new manager Bobby Ferguson . Following a rejected demand for a wage increase , Wark submitted a transfer request , which was accepted . He signed for Liverpool for £ 450 @,@ 000 on 10 March 1984 . At the time , Liverpool had won the league title six times , the European Cup three times and the League Cup three times in the preceding eight seasons . 
 Wark 's final full season at Portman Road , 1982 – 83 , had seen him record the highest league goals tally of his career . He scored 20 goals in 42 league games , though it was not enough to prevent Ipswich from slipping to ninth place in the final table – their lowest position since finishing 18th in 1978 . 
 = = = Liverpool = = = 
 The medical examination for Wark 's transfer somewhat surprised him : 
 " I was rather taken aback when the doctor entered the Anfield boot room " , Wark said . " He was small in stature and I could not help but detect the smell of alcohol on his breath as he introduced himself to me . I was even more surprised when he announced we would stay put to conduct the medical examination . " He took my blood pressure , looked at the reading and muttered ' that 's fine ' . Then something happened that to this day I still cannot get over . He asked me to bend down and touch my toes . " Trying not to show my surprise , I did exactly as he asked and as I lifted my head he spoke again , this time to announce ' you 've passed ' . That was it , my Liverpool medical . " 
 Wark made his debut for the club on 31 March 1984 in a 2 – 0 league win against Watford at Vicarage Road , and scored Liverpool 's opening goal in the 58th minute . Liverpool won the English league title that season , and Wark made sufficient appearances to earn himself a medal . His unusual ability as a goalscoring midfielder was on display when he finished the 1984 – 85 season as the club 's top goalscorer , ahead of prolific striker Ian Rush , with a tally of 27 goals in 62 appearances — a goal every 2 @.@ 3 games . Wark 's season included three hat @-@ tricks , one each in the League , the FA Cup and the European Cup . Liverpool qualified for the 1985 European Cup Final but the match was overshadowed by the Heysel Stadium Disaster , a tragedy Wark remembers as " a nightmare memory " . 
 In the 1985 – 86 season , Wark made 18 appearances , scoring six times , but missed out on the club 's run @-@ in to their League and FA Cup " double " , due to a broken ankle suffered just after the turn of 1986 , followed by an Achilles tendon injury . He eventually regained his fitness but struggled to regain his place in the Liverpool team until injury to Steve McMahon allowed him back in . Wark came on as a late substitute ( but according to him , never touched the ball ) when Liverpool lost the 1987 League Cup Final to Arsenal . No longer a part of manager Kenny Dalglish 's plans following the arrival of new midfielders including John Barnes , Wark was sold back to Ipswich on 4 January 1988 for £ 100 @,@ 000 . In spite of more financially lucrative offers from both Watford and Coventry City , he followed Bobby Robson 's advice : " Money isn 't everything — go where you will be happiest . " Wark left the Merseyside club with a record of 42 goals in 108 appearances , a goal every 2 @.@ 6 games . 
 = = = Second spell at Ipswich = = = 
 Ipswich had been relegated 18 months before Wark 's return to the club and were still playing in the second tier of English football . During this second spell at Ipswich , Wark was close to being an ever @-@ present in the side : he missed just two games in two seasons . He was the club 's equal top @-@ scorer in the 1988 – 89 season , sharing the achievement with forwards Dalian Atkinson and Jason Dozzell . 
 Following three seasons of mid @-@ table finishes , manager John Duncan was sacked and replaced by John Lyall . With his contract expiring , Wark received what he considered to be a " derisory " offer from Lyall , which he declined . Once he became a free agent , Wark signed on a free transfer for Second Division rivals Middlesbrough in August 1990 . In his two additional seasons with Ipswich , Wark had scored 20 goals , and won the club 's Player of the Year award in both seasons . 
 = = = Middlesbrough = = = 
 Wark signed for Middlesbrough , the first club to show " a definite interest " in him , on a two @-@ year contract , moving back to play in the centre of defence . He made regular appearances and helped the team to seventh place by the end of the season and qualification for the Second Division play @-@ offs . Following a 1 – 1 draw with Notts County at Ayresome Park , Wark was informed by manager Colin Todd that he would not be selected for the second leg . Wark was outraged ; Middlesbrough lost the second leg 1 – 0 . Todd departed from the club and was replaced by Lennie Lawrence , who insisted that all players live " within an hour of Ayresome Park " . Wark was still living in Ipswich at the time and following a " sensible agreement " with Lawrence , Wark 's contract was terminated and he became a free agent again . 
 = = = Third spell at Ipswich = = = 
 Remaining without a club before the start of the 1991 – 92 season , Wark trained with Ipswich to keep fit , and rejected interest in his services from Leyton Orient , Colchester United and Falkirk . When Ipswich suffered a succession of injuries among their defenders , they offered him a contract , initially on a week @-@ by @-@ week basis , before securing a year @-@ long deal . Wark made 43 appearances in the first season of his third spell with the club . Early results in the season were excellent ; the club won seven of their first 11 matches in the league . In the FA Cup , Ipswich progressed to a fifth round encounter against Liverpool ; when the tie went to a replay at Anfield , Wark received a standing ovation from both sets of fans . Ipswich lost the match 3 – 2 after extra time , having led 2 – 1 in the first period . Ipswich went on to finish strongly in their league campaign and were crowned Second Division champions and promoted into the newly formed Premier League . Wark ended the season as the club 's Player of the Year for the third time . 
 Wark agreed to a new one @-@ year contract for the 1992 – 93 season and was asked to feature in a Sky Sports advertisement to promote the inaugural Premier League competition . Ipswich were the only Premier League club to remain unbeaten after eight games ( a sequence that included Wark 's first Premier League goal in a 1 – 1 draw with Tottenham Hotspur ) . Ipswich went fourth in February and there was talk of finally winning that title that had eluded them more than once during Wark 's first spell there , but 13 consecutive games without a win resulted a 16th @-@ place finish in the table , just three points above the relegation zone , and only a win on the final day of the season made sure of their survival . Wark , now aged 37 , secured yet another one @-@ year contract shortly before the end of the 1993 – 94 season . Ipswich were saved from relegation in the last round of matches ( for the second season running , another good start had given way to a late season slump ) , courtesy of an injury time winning goal scored by Mark Stein of Chelsea at Stamford Bridge , which ensured that Ipswich 's fellow strugglers Sheffield United went down . Wark went on to be voted the club 's Player of the Year for a record fourth time . 
 Ipswich and Wark fared worse in the 1994 – 95 season . The club lost 9 – 0 to Manchester United during a season in which Ipswich " recorded fewer victories and suffered more defeats than in any campaign in the club 's history " . He was sent off in the away game at Norwich , where the team lost 3 – 0 . Wark made fewer than 20 appearances in the following season , primarily because of a persistent foot injury . Despite his appearance in three more matches in the 1996 – 97 season , and a testimonial against Arsenal at Portman Road , Wark played his last professional match against Tranmere Rovers on 30 November 1996 at the age of 39 . By this stage , he was the club 's oldest player . Of a total 826 league matches played by Wark as a professional , he made 679 appearances for Ipswich . As of 5 June 2009 , he is Ipswich Town 's third @-@ highest all @-@ time scorer , with 179 goals scored for the club , despite rarely appearing as a striker . 
 = = International playing career = = 
 From 1979 , Wark was selected to play for his country , usually as a defender , eventually winning 29 caps for Scotland and scoring seven goals . Jock Stein was the Scotland manager who gave him his debut , in a game held on 19 May 1979 , a British Home Championship match against Wales at Ninian Park ; Scotland lost 3 – 0 . Wark scored his first international goal a week later on 26 May , again in a British Home Championship game , this time against England at Wembley . Wark 's opening effort was not enough , as Scotland were defeated 3 – 1 . A week later Wark played for Scotland in a friendly against Argentina at Hampden Park . However , the game is best remembered for the performance of Diego Maradona who scored his first international goal and whose performance led Argentina to a comfortable 3 – 1 win over the Scots . 
 After a 3 – 1 home defeat by Belgium in December 1979 , Wark was not selected again for his country until February 1981 for the 1982 World Cup qualifying match away against Israel . Following a successful qualification campaign , Wark was included in the Scotland squad that went to the World Cup in Spain under Stein 's leadership . Wark played three games and scored two goals , both of which were Scotland 's opening match against New Zealand , a game Scotland won 5 – 2 . Scotland were knocked out in the group stage . 
 Wark 's final appearance for Scotland came in September 1984 , under Stein ; he was replaced in favour of Paul McStay at half @-@ time in a 6 – 1 victory over Yugoslavia . 
 = = Life outside football = = 
 = = = Personal life = = = 
 Wark has married twice — first to <unk> , on 1 July 1981 , with whom he has a son , Andrew , born in June 1983 . He married Karen at Gretna Green in April 2009 . They live in <unk> near <unk> in Suffolk . 
 = = = Film appearance = = = 
 In 1981 , Wark was one of several Ipswich players who appeared alongside stars including Bobby Moore and Pelé in the Second World War football film Escape to Victory , which starred Sylvester Stallone , Michael Caine and Max von Sydow . Wark played a character called Arthur Hayes , but his only line was dubbed due to his broad Glaswegian accent . 
 = = = Since retirement as a player = = = 
 Following his retirement from playing football professionally , Wark continued to live in Suffolk , like many other ex @-@ Ipswich players , including Allan Hunter , Mick Mills , Roger Osborne and Mick Lambert . Despite his retirement from the professional ranks , Wark continued playing football as an amateur , and signed for Woodbridge Town in 1999 alongside former Ipswich team @-@ mate Paul Mason . He also played veterans football for Windsor and Eton , played with Soccer AM 's Badgers team at the Millennium Stadium , and has represented the Liverpool veterans in the Sky Sports Masters series . 
 In 2005 , Wark was voted as the BBC television programme Football Focus " all @-@ time cult hero " by Ipswich Town fans . In 2008 Radio Suffolk announced that he would join their commentary team as a summariser , alongside former team @-@ mates Kevin Beattie and Bryan Hamilton . As of April 2009 , he works in the corporate hospitality department at Ipswich Town . 
 = = = Autobiography = = = 
 Wark 's autobiography Wark On was published on 9 April 2009 . The book contained material that gained media interest . Wark stated that he made " a small fortune by flogging tickets for the FA Cup Final to a shady underworld ticket tout " . " Wark used his share of the cash to help pay for his wedding while a team @-@ mate bankrolled a house extension . He added : " Other teams had done it , so why shouldn ’ t we ? Nowadays it 's illegal but in those days it was regarded as a perk . " The report also highlighted Wark 's " dig " at the current " crop of stars " at Anfield . He said : " None of that lot would have been good enough in my time at Anfield . " 
 = = Playing style and personality = = 
 Wark played as a central defender , midfielder and , occasionally , as a striker . Wark was an unusual player ; he was able to play as a defensive midfielder yet break forward to score . According to former team @-@ mate Terry Butcher , this was because his colleagues would drop back to cover for him : " I played with John Wark , who was a sitting midfielder but was one of the top scorers in England and Europe . If you see it , then do it , as long as the others spot it and cover for you . " 
 Wark was not a " supremely talented " player , but , according to football journalist Jim White , one who espoused team @-@ work and team spirit : " There is no question that the ' one @-@ for @-@ all , all @-@ for @-@ one ' mentality generated in the Anfield dressing room was the engine that drove the great team . With players such as Alan Kennedy , John Wark , Sammy Lee and Craig Johnston , nobody could claim this was a collection of top @-@ notch operators in the manner , say , of the current Real Madrid . Every week , they played as an entity greater than the sum of its parts . " He has been described as " a defensive midfielder with an astonishing goalscoring record " . 
 Over the years , Wark has become closely associated with his moustache . Owen Slot described the player as " Ipswich 's immortal moustache " , while Wark himself notes " ... it is something of a trademark , even if people are always calling me Bruce ... " 
 = = Honours = = 
 In 2006 Wark gained the final place in the poll 100 Players Who Shook the Kop , conducted by the <unk> website . The list was compiled as a result of a fan survey : " Over 110 @,@ 000 supporters all nominated their own personal Top 10 players in order of impact made " . In 2007 , the Professional Footballers ' Association polled fans of all Football League clubs , as to " their No 1 player " as part of the " centenary celebrations of the players ' union " ; Wark was the choice of Ipswich fans . In the same year , Wark was one of four Ipswich Town players to be inducted into the club 's Hall of Fame . 
 = = = Ipswich Town = = = 
 Winner 
 1977 – 78 FA Cup 
 1980 – 81 UEFA Cup 
 1981 PFA Players ' Player of the Year 
 1981 Young European Player of the Year 
 1991 – 92 Football League Second Division ( Level 2 ) 
 Runner up 
 1978 – 79 Charity Shield 
 1980 – 81 Football League First Division ( Level 1 ) 
 1981 – 82 Football League First Division ( Level 1 ) 
 = = = Liverpool = = = 
 Winner 
 1983 – 84 Football League First Division ( Level 1 ) 
 1985 – 86 Football League First Division ( Level 1 ) 
 Runner up 
 1984 – 85 Charity Shield 
 1984 – 85 Intercontinental Cup 
 1984 – 85 European Super Cup 
 1984 – 85 Football League First Division ( Level 1 ) 
 1984 – 85 European Cup 
 1986 – 87 Football League Cup 
 1986 – 87 Football League First Division ( Level 1 ) 
 = = = Scotland national team = = = 
 1979 – 84 29 caps , 7 goals 
 All honours referenced by : 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = Bomis = 
 Bomis ( / <unk> / to rhyme with " promise " ) was a dot @-@ com company best known for supporting the creations of free @-@ content online @-@ encyclopedia projects Nupedia and Wikipedia . It was founded in 1996 by Jimmy Wales , Tim Shell and Michael Davis . Davis became acquainted with Wales after hiring him at Chicago Options Associates in 1994 , and Wales became friends with Shell through mailing lists discussing philosophy . The primary business of Bomis was the sale of advertising on the Bomis.com search portal . 
 The company initially tried a number of ideas for content , including being a directory of information about Chicago . The site subsequently focused on content geared to a male audience , including information on sporting activities , automobiles and women . Bomis became successful after focusing on X @-@ rated media . " Bomis Babes " was devoted to erotic images ; the " Bomis Babe Report " featured adult pictures . Bomis Premium , available for an additional fee , provided explicit material . " The Babe Engine " helped users find erotic content through a web search engine . The advertising director for Bomis noted that 99 percent of queries on the site were for nude women . 
 Bomis created Nupedia as a free online encyclopedia ( with content submitted by experts ) but it had a tedious , slow review process . Wikipedia was initially launched by Bomis to provide content for Nupedia , and was a for @-@ profit venture ( a Bomis subsidiary ) through the end of 2002 . As the costs of Wikipedia rose with its popularity , Bomis ' revenues declined as result of the dot @-@ com crash . Since Wikipedia was a drain on Bomis ' resources , Wales and philosophy graduate student Larry Sanger decided to fund the project as a charity ; Sanger was laid off from Bomis in 2002 . Nupedia content was merged into Wikipedia , and it ceased in 2003 . 
 The non @-@ profit Wikimedia Foundation began in 2003 with a Board of Trustees composed of Bomis ' three founders ( Wales , Davis and Shell ) and was first headquartered in St. Petersburg , Florida , Bomis ' location . Wales used about US $ 100 @,@ 000 of revenue from Bomis to fund Wikipedia before the decision to shift the encyclopedia to non @-@ profit status . Wales stepped down from his role as CEO of Bomis in 2004 . Shell served as CEO of the company in 2005 , while on the Wikimedia Foundation board of trustees . Wales edited Wikipedia in 2005 to remove the characterizations of Bomis as providing softcore pornography , which attracted media attention ; Wales expressed regret for his actions . The Atlantic gave Bomis the nickname " Playboy of the Internet " , and the term caught on in other media outlets . Scholars have described Bomis as a provider of softcore pornography . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Jimmy Wales left a study track at Indiana University as a PhD candidate to work in finance before completing his doctoral dissertation . In 1994 Wales was hired by Michael Davis , CEO of finance company Chicago Options Associates , as a trader focusing on futures contracts and options . Wales was adept at determining future movements of foreign currencies and interest rates ; he was successful in Chicago , became independently wealthy , and was director of research at Chicago Options Associates from 1994 to 2000 . He became acquainted with Tim Shell from email lists discussing philosophy . 
 Wales wanted to participate in the online @-@ based entrepreneurial ventures which were increasingly popular and successful during the mid @-@ 1990s . His experience ( from gaming in his youth ) impressed on him the importance of networking . Wales was interested in computer science , experimenting with source code on the Internet and improving his skill at computer programming . In his spare time after work at Chicago Options Associates , Wales constructed his own web browser . While at the firm , he noted the successful 1995 initial public offering of Netscape Communications . 
 = = = Foundation = = = 
 Wales co @-@ founded Bomis in 1996 , with business associates Tim Shell , and his then @-@ manager Michael Davis , as a for @-@ profit corporation with joint ownership . Wales was its chief manager . In 1998 he moved from Chicago to San Diego to work for Bomis , and then to St. Petersburg , Florida ( where the company subsequently relocated ) . 
 The staff at Bomis was originally about five employees . Its 2000 staff included programmer Toan Vo and system administrator Jason Richey ; Wales employed his high @-@ school friend and best man in his second wedding , Terry Foote , as advertising director . In June 2000 , Bomis was one of five network partners of Ask Jeeves . The majority of the revenue that came in to Bomis was generated through advertising . The most successful time for Bomis was during its venture as a member of the NBC web portal <unk> ; this collapsed at the end of the dot @-@ com bubble . 
 Although Bomis is not an acronym , the name stemmed from " Bitter Old Men in Suits " ( as Wales and Shell called themselves in Chicago ) . The site began as a web portal , trying a number of ideas ( including serving as an access point for information about Chicago ) . It later focused on male @-@ oriented content , including information on sporting activities , automobiles and women . 
 = = = Hosted content = = = 
 Working from the Open Directory Project , Bomis created and maintained hundreds of <unk> on topics related to lad culture . In 1999 the company introduced the Bomis Browser , which helped users block online pop @-@ up ads . Its <unk> on Star Wars was considered a useful resource for information on Star Wars : Episode I – The Phantom Menace . Additional <unk> included sections helping users find information on Casablanca , Hunter S. Thompson , Farah Fawcett , Geri <unk> of the Spice Girls and Snake Eyes . " Bomis : The Buffy the Vampire Slayer Ring " , devoted to Buffy the Vampire Slayer , organized over 50 sites related to the program . Sheila Jeffreys noted in her Beauty and <unk> that in 2004 Bomis maintained " The Lipstick Fetish Ring " , which helped users with a particular attraction to women in makeup . 
 Bomis became successful after it focused on X @-@ rated and erotic media . Advertising generated revenue which enabled the company to fund other websites , and the site published suggestive pictures of professional models . In addition to Bomis the company maintained <unk> and <unk> , which featured pictures of nude women . About ten percent of Bomis ' revenue was derived from pornographic films and blogs . 
 The website included a segment devoted to erotic images , " Bomis Babes " , and a feature enabled users to submit recommended links to other sites appealing to a male audience . Peer @-@ to @-@ peer services provided by the site helped users find other websites about female celebrities , including Anna Kournikova and Pamela Anderson . In the Bomis Babes section was the Bomis Babe Report , begun in 2000 , with pictures of porn stars in a blog format . The Bomis Babe Report produced original erotic material , including reports on pornographic film actors and celebrities who had posed nude . It was referred to as The Babe Report for short . 
 Wales referred to the site 's softcore pornography as " glamour photography " , and Bomis became familiar to Internet users for its erotic images . During this period Wales was photographed steering a yacht with a peaked cap , posing as a sea captain with a female professional model on either side of him . In the photograph , the women were wearing panties and T @-@ shirts advertising Bomis . 
 A subscription section , Bomis Premium , provided access to adult content and erotic material ; A three @-@ day trial was US $ 2 @.@ 95 . While Bomis Babes provided nude images of females to subscribers , Bomis Premium featured lesbian sexual practices and female anatomy . Bomis created the Babe Engine , which helped users find erotic material online through a web search engine . According to Bomis advertising director Terry Foote , 99 percent of searches on the site related to nude women . 
 = = = Nupedia and Wikipedia = = = 
 Bomis is best known for supporting the creation of free @-@ content online @-@ encyclopedia projects Nupedia and Wikipedia . Tim Shell and Michael David continued their partnership with Wales during the 2000 Nupedia venture . Larry Sanger met Jimmy Wales through an e @-@ mail communication group about philosophy and objectivism , and joined Bomis in May 1999 . Sanger was a graduate student working towards a PhD degree in philosophy , with research focused on epistemology ; he received his degree from Ohio State University , moving to San Diego to help Bomis with its encyclopedia venture . At the time Sanger joined Bomis the company had a total workforce of two employees with help from programmers . 
 Sanger and Wales began Nupedia with resources from Bomis ; at the beginning of 2000 , the company agreed to provide early financing for Nupedia from its profits . Nupedia went live in March , when Wales was CEO of Bomis ; Sanger was Nupedia 's editor @-@ in @-@ chief . Nupedia 's reading comprehension was intended for high @-@ school graduates , and Bomis set its goal : " To set a new standard for breadth , depth , timeliness and lack of bias , and in the fullness of time to become the most comprehensive encyclopedia in the history of humankind . " 
 Although Bomis began a search for experts to vet Nupedia articles , this proved tedious . In August 2000 Nupedia had more than 60 academics contributing to the peer @-@ review process on the site , most with doctor of philosophy or doctor of medicine degrees . Scholars wishing to contribute to Nupedia were required to submit their credentials via fax for verification . At that time , Bomis was attempting to obtain advertising revenue for Nupedia and the company was optimistic that it could fund the project with ad space on <unk> 
 Wikipedia began as a feature of <unk> on January 15 , 2001 , later known as Wikipedia Day . It was originally intended only to generate draft articles for Nupedia , with finished articles moved to the latter . Wikipedia became a separate site days after the Nupedia advisory board opposed combining the two . In September 2001 , Wales was simultaneously CEO of Bomis and co @-@ founder of Wikipedia ; Sanger was chief organizer of Wikipedia and editor @-@ in @-@ chief of Nupedia . 
 Nupedia was encumbered by its peer @-@ review system , a seven @-@ step process of review and copyediting , and Wikipedia grew at a faster rate . In November 2000 , Nupedia had 115 potential articles awaiting its peer @-@ review process . By September 2001 , after a total investment of US $ 250 @,@ 000 from Bomis , Nupedia produced 12 articles ; from 2000 through 2003 , Nupedia contributors produced a total of 24 finalized articles . Wikipedia had about 20 @,@ 000 articles and 18 language versions by the end of 2001 . 
 Bomis originally planned to make Wikipedia profitable , providing staffing and hardware for its initial structure ; Wikipedia would not have survived without this early support . Bomis provided web servers and bandwidth for the projects , owning key items such as domain names . Wales used checks from Bomis to maintain the Wikipedia servers in Tampa , Florida . 
 As the cost of Wikipedia rose with its popularity , Bomis ' revenues declined as a result of the dot @-@ com crash . In late 2000 Bomis had a staff of about 11 employees , but by early 2002 layoffs reduced the staff to its original size of about five . Sanger was laid off in February 2002 ; from January 15 , 2001 through March 1 , 2002 , he was the sole paid editor of Wikipedia . Sanger stepped down from his dual roles as chief organizer of Wikipedia and editor @-@ in @-@ chief of Nupedia on March 1 , 2002 , feeling unable to commit to these areas on a volunteer basis and a dearth of " the habit or tradition of respect for expertise " from high @-@ ranking Wikipedia members . He continued contributing to community discussions , optimistic about Wikipedia 's future success . 
 After Sanger 's departure , Wikipedia was managed by Wales and a burgeoning online community ; although he thought advertising a possibility , the Wikipedia community was opposed to business development and Internet marketing was difficult at the end of 2002 . Wikipedia remained a for @-@ profit venture ( under the auspices of Bomis ) through the end of 2002 . By then it had moved from a .com domain name to <unk> , and Wales said that the site would not accept advertising . Material from Nupedia was folded into Wikipedia , and by 2003 the former was discontinued . 
