 = = = Wikimedia Foundation Board of Trustees = = = 
 By 2003 Wikipedia had grown to 100 @,@ 000 articles in its English @-@ language version , and it became difficult for Bomis to continue financially supporting the project . With Wikipedia a drain on the company 's resources , Wales and Sanger decided to fund the project on a non @-@ profit basis . Bomis laid off most of its employees to continue operating , since Wikipedia was not generating revenue . The company owned Wikipedia from its creation through 2003 , and Wales used about $ 100 @,@ 000 of Bomis ' revenue to fund Wikipedia before the decision to shift the encyclopedia to non @-@ profit status . 
 In June 2003 Wikipedia was transferred to a nascent non @-@ profit organization , the Wikimedia Foundation , which was formed as a charitable institution to supervise Wikipedia and its associated wiki @-@ based sites . When the foundation was established , its staff began to solicit public funding and Bomis turned Wikipedia over to the non @-@ profit . All Bomis @-@ owned hardware used to run Wikipedia @-@ associated websites was donated to the Wikimedia Foundation , and Wales transferred Wikipedia @-@ related copyrights from Bomis to the foundation . It was first headquartered in St. Petersburg , Florida , where Bomis was located . The foundation shifted Wikipedia 's dependence away from Bomis , allowing it to purchase hardware for expansion . 
 The Wikimedia Foundation Board of Trustees was initially composed of Bomis ' three founders : Jimmy Wales and his two business partners , Michael Davis and Tim Shell . Shell and Davis were appointed to the board by Wales , but after Wikipedia community members complained that the board was composed of appointed individuals , the first elections were held in 2004 . Two community members , Florence <unk> and Angela Beesley , were elected to the Board of Trustees . 
 In August 2004 Wales was chief executive officer of Bomis , and on September 20 Wikipedia reached the million @-@ article mark on an expenditure of $ 500 @,@ 000 ( most directly from Wales ) . In November 2004 he told the St. Petersburg Times he no longer controlled Bomis ' day @-@ to @-@ day operations , but retained ownership as a shareholder . In 2005 , Tim Shell was CEO of Bomis and one of the board members overseeing Wikipedia . Shell remained CEO of Bomis in 2006 , becoming vice @-@ president of the Wikimedia Foundation and continuing to serve on its board . Bomis co @-@ founder Michael Davis became treasurer of the Wikimedia Foundation that year . Wales told The Sydney Morning Herald in 2007 that although he retained partial ownership of Bomis , " It 's pretty much dead . " According to the Internet Archive , the Bomis website was last accessible with content in 2010 ; when accessed in 2013 by the archive , it had a welcome message for <unk> . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In 2005 , Wales made 18 changes to his Wikipedia biography . He removed references to Bomis Babes as softcore pornography and erotica , and Larry Sanger as co @-@ founder of Wikipedia . Wales ' actions were publicized by author Rogers Cadenhead , attracting attention from US and UK media . In 2011 , Time listed Wales ' 2005 edits in its " Top 10 Wikipedia Moments " . 
 Wikipedia policy warned users not to edit their own biography pages , with its rules on autobiographical editing quoting Wales : " It is a social faux pas to write about yourself . " Larry Sanger said , " It does seem that Jimmy is attempting to rewrite history " , and began a discussion on the talk page of Wales ' biography about historical revisionism . 
 Wales called his actions fixing mistakes , but after Cadenhead publicized the edits to his biography he expressed regret for his actions . In The Times Wales said that individuals should not edit their own Wikipedia biographies , telling The New Yorker that the standard applied to himself as well . Wales warned that the activity should be discouraged because of the potential for bias : " I wish I hadn 't done it . It 's in poor taste . " 
 Bomis was called the " ' Playboy ' of the Internet " by The Atlantic , and the sobriquet was adopted by other media outlets . Wales considered the " ' Playboy ' of the Internet " nickname inappropriate , although he was asked in interviews if his time at Bomis made him a " porn king " . The 2010 documentary film about Wikipedia , Truth in Numbers ? , discussed this characterization of Wales by journalists . Wales , interviewed in the film , called the characterization inaccurate and explained that his company responded to content demand from customers . In later interviews , he responded to " porn king " questions by telling journalists to look at a page on Yahoo ! about pornography related to dwarfism . According to a 2007 article in Reason , " If he was a porn king , he suggests , so is the head of the biggest Web portal in the world . " 
 On December 14 , 2012 , academic and writer Judith Reisman stated in a piece for WorldNetDaily that in her view Wales had received revenue from a website which dealt in pornography . Relatively soon after the article was published , Wales wrote to WorldNetDaily to object to this characterization : " This is absolutely and <unk> [ sic ] false . I have never made any ' fortune ' , as a pornography trafficker or otherwise , and I have never been a ' pornography trafficker ' at all . ... I demand an immediate edit to that story to remove the lie about me . " WorldNetDaily editor Joseph Farah personally replied to Wales to explain that Wikipedia 's coverage of the history of Bomis acknowledged at the time that : " Bomis ran a website called Bomis Premium at <unk> until 2005 , offering customers access to premium , X @-@ rated pornographic content . " Wales sent an email to Farah stating Wikipedia : " doesn 't say anything remotely like me making a ' fortune ' from ' pornography . " Wales inquired to Farah what he was going to do next about what Wales characterized as " libel " . Farah responded to Wales ' reply with a subsequent email asking : " Let me get this straight : You admit making money from pornography , but you feel defamed because you didn ’ t make enough for it to be considered a ' fortune ' ? " Wales then repeated his original request to Farah and again asserted the original article was " defamatory " , writing in an email : " This is a defamatory falsehood . I have never made any ' fortune ' as a ' <unk> [ sic ] trafficker . ' Fix it . " 
 WorldNetDaily published a correction on December 17 , 2012 , in the form of a new full article by journalist Chelsea Schilling which presented an analysis of the history of Bomis . Schilling reported that WorldNetDaily had performed a search of archives of Bomis and found that the Bomis Premium feature had indeed advertised on its site that membership included access to naked pictures of models . Schilling 's article included historical screenshots of the appearance of the site when Bomis Premium was an active feature . She cited a Wired article , and noted the prior history from 2005 of Wales 's repeated attempts to remove references on Wikipedia to the term " pornography " in reference to Bomis . In its final determination , Schilling reported that WorldNetDaily had modified the original article from stating Wales " made his original fortune as a pornography trafficker " to : " originally made his living off a website that earned revenue from pornography traffickers " . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 The Chronicle of Philanthropy characterized Bomis as " an Internet marketing firm ... which also traded in erotic photographs for a while . " Jeff Howe wrote in his book , <unk> , about " one of Wales 's less altruistic ventures , a Web portal called Bomis.com that featured , among other items , soft @-@ core pornography . " In his book , The Future of the Internet — And How to Stop It , legal scholar Jonathan Zittrain wrote that " Bomis helped people find ' erotic photography ' , and earned money through advertising as well as subscription fees for premium content . " The Guardian described the site as on " the fringes of the adult entertainment industry " , and The Edge called Bomis.com an " explicit @-@ content search engine " . Business 2 @.@ 0 Magazine described it as " a search portal ... which created and hosted Web rings around popular search terms – including , not surprisingly , a lot of adult themes . " 
 = Harrie Massey = 
 Sir Harrie Stewart Wilson Massey FRS ( 16 May 1908 – 27 November 1983 ) was an Australian mathematical physicist who worked primarily in the fields of atomic and atmospheric physics . 
 A graduate of the University of Melbourne and Cambridge University , where he earned his doctorate at the Cavendish Laboratory , Massey became an independent lecturer in Mathematical Physics at the Queen 's University of Belfast in 1933 . He was appointed Goldsmid Professor of Applied Mathematics at University College London , in 1938 . During the Second World War , Massey worked at the Admiralty Research Laboratory , where he helped devise countermeasures for German magnetic naval mines , and at the Admiralty Mining Establishment in Havant , where he helped develop British naval mines . In 1943 , Mark Oliphant persuaded the Admiralty to release Massey to work on the Manhattan Project . He joined Oliphant 's British Mission at the Radiation Laboratory at the University of California , where they worked on the electromagnetic isotope separation process . When Oliphant returned to Britain in 1945 , Massey took over the Berkeley Mission . 
 Massey returned to University College , London , in October 1945 to find it badly damaged by bombing , and the Mathematics Department in dingy temporary accommodation . In 1950 he was appointed Quain Professor of Physics and head of the University College , London , Physics Department . The department was merged with Astronomy in 1973 , but he remained its head until he retired in 1975 . Under his direction , the Physics Department was reoriented towards particle physics and upper atmosphere physics . He worked with the Woomera Rocket Range to develop British Skylark rocket , and was on the governing board of the Anglo @-@ Australian Telescope . He was the chairman of the Committee on Space Research ( COSPAR ) from 1959 to 1978 , and of its British national chapter . He was also the first Chairman of the European Space Sciences Committee , and helped found the European Space Research Organization and the Mullard Space Science Laboratory at University College , London . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Harrie Stewart Wilson Massey was born in Invermay , Victoria , Australia , on 16 May 1908 , the only child of Harrie Stewart Massey , a miner , and his wife Eleanor Elizabeth née Wilson . He grew up in the rural community of <unk> Creek , and enrolled in the local state school in 1913 . He received his Merit Certificate , normally awarded after completing the eighth grade , when he was nine , but due to his age he still had to stay there for another three years . He won a scholarship to University High School , and moved to <unk> with his mother in 1920 . At University High School he was president of the Science Club and vice captain of the cricket team . 
 = = Carrier = = 
 At the age of 16 , Massey won a scholarship to the University of Melbourne , which he entered in 1925 . He had thoughts of studying chemistry , but was impressed by the physics lectures given by Eric <unk> . This was a stroke of luck ; first year physics lectures were normally given by Thomas Laby . Massey recalled in 1980 that " in a fairly wide experience I would rate [ Laby ] the worst lecturer I have heard " . At the University he played cricket , billiards , tennis and baseball , which he played for the University . He was awarded his Bachelor of Arts ( BSc ) in physics with first class honours in 1928 , and a Bachelor of Arts ( BA ) in mathematics in 1929 . At a meeting of the Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science in Perth in August 1925 , he met a schoolteacher , Jessica Elizabeth Bruce . They were married on 11 January 1928 at the district registrar ’ s office in Perth . They had a daughter , Pamela Lois . 
 At that time , the university did not offer a Doctor of Philosophy ( PhD ) program so Massey undertook a Master of Science ( MSc ) course , with both experimental and theoretical components . The former , in cooperation with Courtney Mohr , dealt with soft X @-@ ray deflection from metal surfaces ; the latter with wave mechanics . This involved translating numerous articles from German journals such as Zeitschrift für Physik , Annalen der Physik and Physikalische Zeitschrift . His external examiner was Ralph Fowler from the University of Cambridge , who was Paul Dirac 's PhD supervisor . 
 In 1929 , with the benefit of an Aitchison travelling scholarship from the University of Melbourne , Massey went to Trinity College , Cambridge to perform research at the Cavendish Laboratory led by Ernest Rutherford . The scholarship expired after two years , but he was awarded an 1851 Exhibition Scholarship in 1931 . At this time the Cavendish Laboratory was one of the leading centres of physics in the world . In 1932 Cavendish laboratory scientists John Cockcroft and Ernest Walton split the atomic nucleus , James Chadwick discovered the neutron , and Patrick Blackett and Giuseppe Occhialini confirmed the existence of the positron . 
 Fowler was appointed as Massey 's supervisor although it was clear that he did not need any supervision per se . Massey obtained his PhD on the The Collisions of Material Particles in 1932 . Shortly afterwards , he co @-@ authored a book on atomic collision processes with Nevill Mott , Theory of Atomic Collisions ( 1933 ) . He also applied the theory of collisions to models of neutron structure . At the Cavendish laboratory , he also played hockey with Cockcroft , and cricket for the Cavendish Cricket Club , becoming team captain in his final year there . 
 In June 1933 Massey became an independent lecturer in Mathematical Physics at the Queen 's University of Belfast . He was the only member of the department until R. A. Buckingham arrived in 1934 . Despite having to give nine lectures a week , he found time to write his second book , Negative Ions ( 1938 ) , and began working on upper atmospheric physics . Frustrated with the tiresome and time @-@ consuming process of calculation , he had his physics workshop superintendent , John Wylie , build him a small @-@ scale differential analyzer , an analog computer that could solve differential equations , for just £ 50 . This was used to solve problems related to low temperature helium , and the photo @-@ ionisation of oxygen in the upper atmosphere . 
 Massey was appointed Goldsmid Professor of Applied Mathematics at University College London , in 1938 , following the death of L. N. G. <unk> the previous year . He brought with him Buckingham , now an 1851 Exhibition Scholar himself , and David Bates , a promising graduate student . They brought the differential analyser with them to London , where it was destroyed by an air raid during the Second World War . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 Soon after the outbreak of war in September 1939 , the Germans began a naval mine campaign against Britain . The results were devastating . Nineteen ships totaling 59 @,@ 027 tons were sunk by mines in October , and 27 totaling 120 @,@ 958 tons in November , along with the destroyer HMS Blanche . Many more ships were damaged , including the cruiser HMS Belfast . The nature of the mines was initially unknown , but on 23 November 1939 , a bomb disposal team under Lieutenant Commander J. G. D. <unk> recovered an intact aerial mine from a mudflat at Shoeburyness , and the threat was revealed to be a magnetic mine . 
 In December 1939 , Massey joined a group at the Admiralty Research Laboratory in Teddington led by Stephen Butterworth . They were soon joined by a number of other physicists , including Bates , Buckingham , Francis Crick and John Gunn . Together , they came up with a series of countermeasures that enable the Navy to successfully sweep the mines . With this in hand , Massey became Deputy Chief Scientist to the Scientific Section of Mine Design Department at the Admiralty Mining Establishment in Havant in early 1941 . This time , the job was to create mines as good as the German ones . Massey brought his team with him . While Bates worked on packaging to protect the mine when it was dropped from an aircraft , Buckingham and Gunn calculated its theoretical effectiveness , and Crick designed the circuitry . Their mine codenamed MX , was soon in service , and the group turned its attention to developing acoustic or pressure mines . On the retirement of A. B. Wood in 1943 , Massey became Chief Scientist at Havant . 
 After the August 1943 Quebec Agreement merged the British and American atomic bomb projects , Mark Oliphant persuaded the Admiralty to release Massey to work on the Manhattan Project . In November 1943 , Massey set out with Oliphant for the Radiation Laboratory at the University of California in Berkeley in a B @-@ 24 Liberator bomber . The Radiation Laboratory 's part was to develop an electromagnetic isotope separation process . Massey was in charge of its Theoretical Group , which included American David Bohm and Australian Eric Burhop . They studied the characteristics of electric discharges in magnetic fields , today known as Bohm diffusion , and studied the ionization of uranium compounds used as feed in the electromagnetic uranium enrichment process such as uranium tetrachloride ( <unk> ) and uranium hexafluoride ( UF6 ) . Oliphant returned to Britain in March 1945 , and was replaced as head of the British mission in Berkeley by Massey . Wartime papers produced by the group were collected and published in The Characteristics of Electrical Discharges in Magnetic Fields ( 1949 ) . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Massey returned to University College , London , in October 1945 to find it badly damaged by bombing , and the Mathematics Department in dingy temporary accommodation . He was allowed to pick his own lecturers , so he chose Bats , Burhop , Buckingham and Gunn . While they had to teach mathematics , they were free to choose their own research topics , so they chose to research physics , carrying out physical experiments . This situation lasted until 1950 , when Edward Andrade retired , and Massey was appointed Quain Professor of Physics and head of the University College , London , Physics Department . The department was merged with Astronomy in 1973 , but he remained its head until he retired in 1975 . He also served as University College , London 's Vice @-@ Provost from 1969 to 1973 . 
 When Massey took over the Physics Department , most of his physicists , including Bates , Buckingham , Burhop and Robert Boyd , moved with him . Like the Mathematics Department , it was still in temporary accommodation owing to bomb damage during the war . A new building was under construction , but to develop the technical infrastructure , Massey hired Harry Tomlinson , who had worked for him in the British Mission in Berkeley . The Department acquired several accelerators , including a 20 MeV synchrotron from the Atomic Energy Authority . Dick Jennings and Franz Heymann built two <unk> . Under Massey , the Physics Department moved away from researching the physics of metals and liquids , and focused on particle physics and upper atmosphere physics . Massey saw the potential of computers . He arranged with Andrew Booth for a copy of his All Purpose Electronic Computer , and recruited two programmers , Joan Lawson and Jane Wallace . When the University of London established a computing unit , Buckingham left to head it . 
 Elected a Fellow of the Royal Society of London in 1940 , Massey was awarded its Hughes Medal in 1955 , and its Royal Medal in 1958 . He was a member of the its council from 1949 to 1951 and again from 1959 to 1960 , before serving as its Physical Secretary and Vice @-@ President from 1969 to 1978 . He became a member of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research 's Nuclear Physics Sub @-@ Committee in 1956 . When the National Institute for Research in Nuclear Science was founded in 1957 , he became one of the initial members of its governing board . He became a member of the Research Grants Committee in 1959 , and was chairman of the Council for Scientific Policy from 1965 to 1970 . He was knighted for his services in 1960 . 
 Rockets had seen enormous development for military purposes during the Second World War , and Massey saw their potential for studying the upper atmosphere . He became a major supporter of space science , and wrote a book on the subject , History of British Space Science ( 1984 ) . He was the chairman of the Committee on Space Research ( COSPAR ) , which was established by the International Council of Scientific Unions , from its founding in 1959 until 1978 , and also of the British National Committee for Space Research , its British national chapter . He was also the first Chairman of the European Space Sciences Committee , and helped found the European Space Research Organization and the Mullard Space Science Laboratory at University College , London . 
 Space science also gave Massey an excuse to visit Australia ; he made some twenty trips . He was involved in the testing of balloons for upper atmosphere research at the University of Melbourne 's site in Mildura , Victoria . As chairman of the Rocket Subcommittee of the Royal Society 's <unk> Committee , he visited the Weapons Research Establishment near Adelaide and the Woomera Rocket Range to discuss collaboration on the British Skylark rocket , which was test fired from Woomera in 1957 . He sought to develop a UK space program in cooperation in space with Australia , the United States and European countries . He was successful in building international cooperation , although his Black Knight project was cancelled in favour of Black Arrow , which launched Prospero , only satellite launched with a British launch vehicle , from Woomera in 1971 . He was involved in the negotiations leading to the establishment of the Anglo @-@ Australian Telescope at Siding Spring Mountain in New South Wales . 
 Massey received an Honorary Doctorate from Heriot @-@ Watt University in 1975 . 
 He was a United Kingdom member and deputy chairman its governing board from 1975 to 1980 , and chairman from 1980 to 1983 . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 After a long illness , Massey died at his home in Esher , Surrey , which Jessica had named " Kalamunda " , from the Australian Aboriginal word for the area in Western Australia where she had once lived , on 27 November 1983 . He was survived by his wife and daughter . The Royal Society / COSPAR Massey Award is named after him , as is the Harrie Massey Lecture Theatre and Harrie Massey Prize at University College , London , and the Harrie Massey Medal and Prize , jointly awarded by the Australian Institute of Physics and British Institute of Physics . His papers are in the University College , London , archives . 
 = Gorgosaurus = 
 Gorgosaurus ( / <unk> / <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ SOR @-@ əs ; meaning " dreadful lizard " ) is a genus of tyrannosaurid theropod dinosaur that lived in western North America during the Late Cretaceous Period , between about 76 @.@ 6 and 75 @.@ 1 million years ago . Fossil remains have been found in the Canadian province of Alberta and possibly the U.S. state of Montana . Paleontologists recognize only the type species , G. libratus , although other species have been erroneously referred to the genus . 
 Like most known tyrannosaurids , Gorgosaurus was a bipedal predator weighing more than two metric tons as an adult ; dozens of large , sharp teeth lined its jaws , while its two @-@ fingered forelimbs were comparatively small . Gorgosaurus was most closely related to Albertosaurus , and more distantly related to the larger Tyrannosaurus . Gorgosaurus and Albertosaurus are extremely similar , distinguished mainly by subtle differences in the teeth and skull bones . Some experts consider G. libratus to be a species of Albertosaurus ; this would make Gorgosaurus a junior synonym of that genus . 
 Gorgosaurus lived in a lush floodplain environment along the edge of an inland sea . It was an apex predator , preying upon abundant ceratopsids and hadrosaurs . In some areas , Gorgosaurus coexisted with another tyrannosaurid , Daspletosaurus . Although these animals were roughly the same size , there is some evidence of niche differentiation between the two . Gorgosaurus is the best @-@ represented tyrannosaurid in the fossil record , known from dozens of specimens . These plentiful remains have allowed scientists to investigate its ontogeny , life history and other aspects of its biology . 
 = = Description = = 
 Gorgosaurus was smaller than Tyrannosaurus or Tarbosaurus , closer in size to Albertosaurus and Daspletosaurus . Adults reached 8 to 9 m ( 26 to 30 ft ) from snout to tail . Paleontologists have estimated full @-@ grown adults to weigh about 2 @.@ 5 tonnes ( 2 @.@ 8 short tons ) , perhaps approaching 2 @.@ 8 tonnes ( 3 @.@ 1 short tons ) . The largest known skull measures 99 cm ( 39 in ) long , just slightly smaller than that of Daspletosaurus . As in other tyrannosaurids , the skull was large compared to its body size , although chambers within the skull bones and large openings ( fenestrae ) between bones reduced its weight . Albertosaurus and Gorgosaurus share proportionally longer and lower skulls than Daspletosaurus and other tyrannosaurids . The end of the snout was blunt , and the nasal and parietal bones were fused along the midline of the skull , as in all other members of the family . The eye socket was circular rather than oval or keyhole @-@ shaped as in other tyrannosaurid genera . A tall crest rose from the lacrimal bone in front of each eye , similar to Albertosaurus and Daspletosaurus . Differences in the shape of bones surrounding the brain set Gorgosaurus apart from Albertosaurus . 
 Gorgosaurus teeth were typical of all known tyrannosaurids . The eight premaxillary teeth at the front of the snout were smaller than the rest , closely packed and D @-@ shaped in cross section . In Gorgosaurus , the first tooth in the maxilla was also shaped like the premaxillary teeth . The rest of the teeth were oval in cross section , rather than blade @-@ like as in most other theropods . Along with the eight premaxillary teeth , Gorgosaurus had 26 to 30 maxillary teeth and 30 to 34 teeth in the dentary bones of the lower jaw . This number of teeth is similar to Albertosaurus and Daspletosaurus but is fewer than those of Tarbosaurus or Tyrannosaurus . 
 Gorgosaurus shared its general body plan with all other tyrannosaurids . Its massive head was perched on the end of an S @-@ shaped neck . In contrast to its large head , its forelimbs were very small . The forelimbs had only two digits , although a third metacarpal is known in some specimens , the vestigial remains of the third digit seen in other theropods . Gorgosaurus had four digits on each hindlimb , including a small first toe ( hallux ) which did not contact the ground . Tyrannosaurid hindlimbs were long relative to overall body size compared with other theropods . The largest known Gorgosaurus femur measured 105 cm ( 41 in ) long . In several smaller specimens of Gorgosaurus , the tibia was longer than the femur , a proportion typical of fast @-@ running animals . The two bones were of equal length in the largest specimens . The long , heavy tail served as a counterweight to the head and torso and placed the center of gravity over the hips . 
 In 2001 , paleontologist Phil Currie reported skin impressions from the holotype specimen of G. libratus . He originally reported the skin as being essentially smooth and lacking the scales found in other dinosaurs , similar to the secondarily featherless skin found in large modern birds . Scales of some sort were present in this specimen , but they are reportedly widely dispersed from each other and very small . Other patches of isolated Gorgosaurus skin shows denser , and larger though still relatively fine scales ( smaller than hadrosaurid scales and approximately as fine as a Gila monster 's ) . Neither of these specimens was associated with any particular bone or specific body area . In the Encyclopedia of Dinosaurs Kenneth Carpenter pointed out that traces of skin impressions from the tail of Gorgosaurus showed similar small rounded or hexagonal scales . 
 = = Classification and systematics = = 
 Gorgosaurus is classified in the theropod subfamily Albertosaurinae within the family Tyrannosauridae . It is most closely related to the slightly younger Albertosaurus . These are the only two definite albertosaurine genera that have been described , although other undescribed species may exist . Appalachiosaurus was described as a basal tyrannosauroid just outside Tyrannosauridae , although American paleontologist Thomas Holtz published a phylogenetic analysis in 2004 which indicated it was an albertosaurine . More recent , unpublished work by Holtz agrees with the original assessment . All other tyrannosaurid genera , including Daspletosaurus , Tarbosaurus and Tyrannosaurus , are classified in the subfamily Tyrannosaurinae . Compared to the tyrannosaurines , albertosaurines had slender builds , with proportionately smaller , lower skulls and longer bones of the lower leg ( tibia ) and feet ( metatarsals and phalanges ) . 
 The close similarities between Gorgosaurus libratus and Albertosaurus sarcophagus have led many experts to combine them into one genus over the years . Albertosaurus was named first , so by convention it is given priority over the name Gorgosaurus , which is sometimes considered its junior synonym . William Diller Matthew and Barnum Brown doubted the distinction of the two genera as early as 1922 . Gorgosaurus libratus was formally reassigned to Albertosaurus ( as Albertosaurus libratus ) by Dale Russell in 1970 , and many subsequent authors followed his lead . Combining the two greatly expands the geographical and chronological range of the genus Albertosaurus . Other experts maintain the two genera as separate . Canadian paleontologist Phil Currie claims there are as many anatomical differences between Albertosaurus and Gorgosaurus as there are between Daspletosaurus and Tyrannosaurus , which are almost always kept separate . He also notes that undescribed tyrannosaurids discovered in Alaska , New Mexico and elsewhere in North America may help clarify the situation . Gregory S. Paul has suggested that Gorgosaurus libratus is ancestral to Albertosaurus sarcophagus . 
 Below is the cladogram of Tyrannosauridae based on the phylogenetic analysis conducted by Loewen et al. in 2013 . 
 = = Discovery and naming = = 
 Gorgosaurus libratus was first described by Lawrence Lambe in 1914 . Its name is derived from the Greek <unk> / <unk> ( " fierce " or " terrible " ) and σαυρος / saurus ( " lizard " ) . The type species is G. libratus ; the specific epithet " balanced " is the past participle of the Latin verb <unk> , meaning " to balance " . 
 The holotype of Gorgosaurus libratus ( NMC 2120 ) is a nearly complete skeleton associated with a skull , discovered in 1913 by Charles M. Sternberg . This specimen was the first tyrannosaurid found with a complete hand . It was found in the Dinosaur Park Formation of Alberta and is housed in the Canadian Museum of Nature in Ottawa . Prospectors from the American Museum of Natural History in New York City were active along the Red Deer River in Alberta at the same time , collecting hundreds of spectacular dinosaur specimens , including four complete G. libratus skulls , three of which were associated with skeletons . Matthew and Brown described four of these specimens in 1923 . 
 Matthew and Brown also described a fifth skeleton ( AMNH <unk> ) , which Charles H. Sternberg had collected in 1917 and sold to their museum . It was smaller than other Gorgosaurus specimens , with a lower , lighter skull and more elongate limb proportions . Many sutures between bones were unfused in this specimen as well . Matthew and Brown noted that these features were characteristic of juvenile tyrannosaurids , but still described it as the holotype of a new species , G. sternbergi . Today 's paleontologists regard this specimen as a juvenile G. libratus . Dozens of other specimens have been excavated from the Dinosaur Park Formation and are housed in museums across the United States and Canada . G. libratus is the best @-@ represented tyrannosaurid in the fossil record , known from a virtually complete growth series . 
 In 1856 , Joseph Leidy described two tyrannosaurid premaxillary teeth from Montana . Although there was no indication of what the animal looked like , the teeth were large and robust , and Leidy gave them the name Deinodon . Matthew and Brown commented in 1922 that these teeth were indistinguishable from those of Gorgosaurus , but in the absence of skeletal remains of Deinodon , opted not to unequivocally <unk> the two genera , provisionally naming a ? Deinodon libratus . Although Deinodon teeth are very similar to those of Gorgosaurus , tyrannosaurid teeth are extremely uniform , so it cannot be said for certain which animal they belonged to . Deinodon is usually regarded as a nomen dubium today . Additional likely synonyms of G. libratus and / or D. horridus include Laelaps <unk> , Laelaps <unk> , Laelaps incrassatus , and Dryptosaurus <unk> . 
 Several tyrannosaurid skeletons from the Two Medicine Formation and Judith River Formation of Montana probably belong to Gorgosaurus , although it remains uncertain whether they belong to G. libratus or a new species . One specimen from Montana ( <unk> 2001 @.@ 89 @.@ 1 ) , housed in the Children 's Museum of Indianapolis , shows evidence of severe pathologies , including healed leg , rib , and vertebral fractures , osteomyelitis ( infection ) at the tip of the lower jaw resulting in permanent tooth loss , and possibly a brain tumor . 
 = = = <unk> species = = = 
 Several species were incorrectly assigned to Gorgosaurus in the twentieth century . A complete skull of a small tyrannosaurid ( <unk> <unk> ) , found in the younger , late Maastrichtian @-@ age Hell Creek Formation of Montana , was named Gorgosaurus lancensis by Charles Whitney Gilmore in 1946 . This specimen was renamed Nanotyrannus by Bob Bakker and colleagues in 1988 . Currently , many paleontologists regard Nanotyrannus as a juvenile Tyrannosaurus rex . Similarly , Evgeny Maleev created the names Gorgosaurus lancinator and Gorgosaurus novojilovi for two small tyrannosaurid specimens ( PIN 553 @-@ 1 and PIN 552 @-@ 2 ) from the Nemegt Formation of Mongolia in 1955 . Kenneth Carpenter renamed the smaller specimen Maleevosaurus novojilovi in 1992 , but both are now considered juveniles of Tarbosaurus bataar . 
 = = Paleobiology = = 
 = = = Coexistence with Daspletosaurus = = = 
 In the middle stages of the Dinosaur Park Formation , Gorgosaurus lived alongside a rarer species of the tyrannosaurine , Daspletosaurus . This is one of the few examples of two tyrannosaur genera coexisting . Similar @-@ sized predators in modern predator guilds are separated into different ecological niches by anatomical , behavioral or geographical differences that limit competition . Niche differentiation between the Dinosaur Park tyrannosaurids is not well understood . In 1970 , Dale Russell hypothesized that the more common Gorgosaurus actively hunted fleet @-@ footed hadrosaurs , while the rarer and more troublesome ceratopsians and ankylosaurians ( horned and heavily armoured dinosaurs ) were left to the more heavy built Daspletosaurus . However , a specimen of Daspletosaurus ( OTM 200 ) from the contemporaneous Two Medicine Formation of Montana preserves the digested remains of a juvenile hadrosaur in its gut region , and another bonebed contains the remains of three Daspletosaurus along with the remains of at least five hadrosaurs . 
 Unlike some other groups of dinosaurs , neither genus was more common at higher or lower elevations than the other . However , Gorgosaurus appears more common in northern formations like Dinosaur Park , with species of Daspletosaurus being more abundant to the south . The same pattern is seen in other groups of dinosaurs . Chasmosaurine ceratopsians and hadrosaurine hadrosaurs are also more common in the Two Medicine Formation of Montana and in southwestern North America during the Campanian , while centrosaurine and lambeosaurines dominate in northern latitudes . Holtz has suggested this pattern indicates shared ecological preferences between tyrannosaurines , chasmosaurines and hadrosaurines . At the end of the later Maastrichtian stage , tyrannosaurines like Tyrannosaurus rex , hadrosaurines like Edmontosaurus and Kritosaurus and chasmosaurines like Triceratops and Torosaurus were widespread throughout western North America , while lambeosaurines were rare , consisting of a few species like Hypacrosaurus , and albertosaurines and centrosaurines had gone extinct ; however , they had thrived in Asia with species like Sinoceratops and Alioramus . 
 = = = Life history = = = 
 Gregory Erickson and colleagues have studied the growth and life history of tyrannosaurids using bone histology , which can determine the age of a specimen when it died . A growth curve can be developed when the ages of various individuals are plotted against their sizes on a graph . Tyrannosaurids grew throughout their lives , but underwent tremendous growth spurts for about four years , after an extended juvenile phase . Sexual maturity may have ended this rapid growth phase , after which growth slowed down considerably in adult animals . Examining five Gorgosaurus specimens of various sizes , Erickson calculated a maximum growth rate of about 50 kg ( 110 lb ) per year during the rapid growth phase , slower than in tyrannosaurines like Daspletosaurus and Tyrannosaurus , but comparable to Albertosaurus . 
 Gorgosaurus spent as much as half its life in the juvenile phase before ballooning up to near @-@ maximum size in only a few years . This , along with the complete lack of predators intermediate in size between huge adult tyrannosaurids and other small theropods , suggests that these niches may have been filled by juvenile tyrannosaurids . This pattern is seen in modern Komodo dragons , whose hatchlings start off as tree @-@ dwelling insectivores and slowly mature into massive apex predators capable of taking down large vertebrates . Other tyrannosaurids , including Albertosaurus , have been found in aggregations that some have suggested to represent mixed @-@ age packs , but there is no evidence of gregarious behavior in Gorgosaurus . 
 = = = Paleopathology = = = 
 Several pathologies have been documented in the Gorgosaurus libratus holotype , NMC 2120 . These include the third right dorsal rib , as well as healed fractures on the 13th and 14th gastralia and left fibula . Its fourth left metatarsal bore roughened <unk> both in the middle and at the far end . The third phalanx of the third right toe is deformed , as the claw on that digit has been described as " quite small and amorphous " . The three pathologies may have been received in a single encounter with another dinosaur . 
 Another specimen cataloged as <unk> bears multiple pathologies . A 10 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) longitudinal fracture is present in the middle of the right fibula 's shaft . Multiple ribs bear healed fractures and the specimen had a <unk> <unk> . Lesions from a bite received to the face were present and showed evidence that the wounds were healing before the animal died . 
 <unk> is another Gorgosaurus with preserved face bite injuries but also has a thoroughly healed fracture in the right fibula . Also present was a healed fracture in the dentary and what the authors describing the specimen referred to as " a mushroom @-@ like hyperostosis of a right pedal phalanx . " Ralph Molnar has speculated that this may be the same kind of pathology afflicting an unidentified ornithomimid discovered with a similar mushroom shaped growth on a toe bone . <unk> is also preserved in a characteristic death pose . 
 Another specimen has a poorly healed fracture of the right fibula , which left a large callus on the bone . In a 2001 study conducted by Bruce Rothschild and other paleontologists , 54 foot bones referred to Gorgosaurus were examined for signs of stress fracture , but none were found . 
 = = Paleoecology = = 
 Most specimens of Gorgosaurus libratus have been recovered from the Dinosaur Park Formation in Alberta . This formation dates to the middle of the Campanian , between 76 @.@ 5 and 74 @.@ 8 million years ago , and Gorgosaurus libratus fossils are known specifically from the lower to middle section of the formation , between 76 @.@ 6 and 75 @.@ 1 million years ago . The Two Medicine Formation and Judith River Formation of Montana have also yielded possible Gorgosaurus remains . At this time , the area was a coastal plain along the western edge of the Western Interior Seaway , which divided North America in half . The Laramide Orogeny had begun uplifting the Rocky Mountains to the west , from which flowed great rivers that deposited eroded sediment in vast floodplains along the coast . The climate was subtropical with marked seasonality , and periodic droughts sometimes resulted in massive mortality among the great herds of dinosaurs , as represented in the numerous bonebed deposits preserved in the Dinosaur Park Formation . Conifers formed the forest canopy , while the understory plants consisted of ferns , tree ferns and angiosperms . Around 73 million years ago , the seaway began to expand , transgressing into areas formerly above sea level and drowning the Dinosaur Park ecosystem . This transgression , called the Bearpaw Sea , is recorded by the marine sediments of the massive Bearpaw Shale . 
 The Dinosaur Park Formation preserves a great wealth of vertebrate fossils . A wide variety of fish swam the rivers and estuaries , including gars , sturgeons , sharks and rays , among others . Frogs , salamanders , turtles , crocodilians and <unk> also dwelled in the aquatic habitats . Azhdarchid pterosaurs and neornithine birds like Apatornis flew overhead , while the enantiornithine bird Avisaurus lived on the ground alongside multituberculate , marsupial and placental mammals . A number of species of terrestrial lizards were also present , including whiptails , skinks , monitors and alligator lizards . Dinosaur fossils in particular are found with unrivaled abundance and diversity . Huge herds of ceratopsids roamed the floodplains alongside equally large groups of hadrosaurine and lambeosaurine hadrosaurs . Other herbivorous groups like ornithomimids , therizinosaurs , pachycephalosaurs , small ornithopods , nodosaurids and ankylosaurids were also represented . Small predatory dinosaurs like oviraptorosaurs , troodonts and dromaeosaurs hunted smaller prey than the huge tyrannosaurids ; Daspletosaurus and Gorgosaurus , which were two orders of magnitude larger in mass . Intervening predatory niches may have been filled by young tyrannosaurids . A Saurornitholestes dentary has been discovered in the Dinosaur Park Formation that bore tooth marks left by the bite of a young tyrannosaur , possibly Gorgosaurus . 
 = James Constable = 
 James Ashley Constable ( born 4 October 1984 ) is an English professional footballer who plays as a striker for National League club Eastleigh . 
 Constable started his career with the Cirencester Town youth system , before breaking into the first team during the 2002 – 03 season . He moved to Chippenham Town in 2003 , before signing for Walsall in the Football League in 2005 . He moved out on loan to Kidderminster Harriers of the Conference National in 2006 , before signing permanently in 2007 . After a year at the club , during which he scored the first club goal at the new Wembley Stadium in the FA Trophy final , he returned to the League with Shrewsbury Town . After spending the 2008 – 09 season on loan at Oxford United , he signed for the club permanently in 2009 . Constable scored the second goal in Oxford 's 3 – 1 2010 Conference Premier play @-@ off Final victory over York City in 2010 , which secured Oxford 's promotion into League Two . He was leading goalscorer in each of his six seasons at the club , and when he left after the 2013 – 14 season he had scored 106 goals , one short of the club record . 
 He has played for the England C team , who represent England at non @-@ League level , making his debut in 2007 in a 2 – 0 victory over Finland in the International Challenge Trophy . He scored the goal in a 2 – 2 draw with Italy in 2008 that took England to the International Challenge Trophy Final , which Constable played in as England were defeated 1 – 0 by the Belgium under @-@ 21 team in 2009 . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Born in Malmesbury , Wiltshire , Constable grew up in the town as a Tottenham Hotspur supporter . He played for Malmesbury Youth before starting his career with Cirencester Town after progressing through their youth system , playing for the Academy and making several first team appearances as a substitute in the 2002 – 03 season . He progressed to being a regular in the team and signed for Southern League Premier Division team Chippenham Town in December 2003 . He made his debut in a 3 – 1 defeat to Tiverton Town on 1 January 2004 , scoring in the following game against Nuneaton Borough with the opening goal in a 1 – 1 draw . He finished the 2003 – 04 season with 19 appearances and nine goals for Chippenham . He made 37 appearances and scored 13 goals during the 2004 – 05 season . He scored for Chippenham with the opening goal in a 1 – 1 draw against Worcester City in the FA Cup first round in November 2005 . While playing as a semi @-@ professional at Chippenham , he worked in an undergarment lining factory . 
 = = = Walsall = = = 
 Football League sides Bristol City , Swansea City , Swindon Town and Walsall all made enquiries for Constable in November 2005 . He eventually signed for League One team Walsall on 21 November 2005 on loan until 1 January 2006 , when he would sign permanently for a fee of £ 4 @,@ 000 on a contract until June 2007 , having made 14 appearances and scored eight goals for Chippenham up to that point during the 2005 – 06 season . He made his debut as an 82nd @-@ minute substitute in a 1 – 0 victory over Bournemouth in the Football League Trophy on 22 November . This was followed by his Football League debut four days later after being introduced as an 89th @-@ minute substitute in a 3 – 1 victory over Rotherham United . 
 He scored his first goal for Walsall in a 3 – 2 victory over Wycombe Wanderers in the Trophy on 20 December with a " fine drive " , which drew the teams at 1 – 1 . Constable scored two goals in seven minutes to help Walsall to a 2 – 0 victory over Blackpool . His first appearance after signing permanently came in a 3 – 0 defeat to Bristol City on 2 January 2006 . He scored Walsall 's second equaliser in a 2 – 2 draw against Swansea City in the Trophy , which was lost 6 – 5 on a penalty shoot @-@ out . Chippenham failed in an attempt to re @-@ sign Constable on loan for the remainder of the 2005 – 06 season in February . He scored his last goal of the 2005 – 06 season with a shot from Dean Keates ' cross , which was the opening goal in a 1 – 1 draw with Port Vale in April . He finished the season with five goals in 20 appearances for Walsall . 
 = = = Kidderminster Harriers = = = 
 He joined Conference National team Kidderminster Harriers on a two @-@ month loan on 24 November , after having made nine appearances for Walsall up to that point during the 2006 – 07 season . After arriving at Kidderminster , he made " a mammoth impact " . He made his debut in a 2 – 1 defeat to Stevenage Borough , and manager Mark Yates praised him , saying " I thought James was excellent , bar taking the couple of chances that fell his way he can be well pleased with himself . " He scored his first goal in the following game , a 3 – 1 victory over Gravesend & Northfleet , with a " clinical finish " from a Michael Blackwood cross . He scored two goals against Stafford Rangers after he " coolly slotted home " and scored with " ease into the bottom @-@ right corner " , which gave Kidderminster a 2 – 1 victory on 26 December . His hat @-@ trick in a 4 – 0 victory against Vauxhall Motors in the first round of the FA Trophy in January 2007 was the first for a Kidderminster player since Bo Henriksen in 2003 . After impressing during the loan , he moved to the club permanently on a two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ year contract for an undisclosed fee on 31 January . He scored Kidderminster 's equaliser in a 1 – 1 draw against St Albans City on 24 March , before being sent off for a " wild " challenge on Ahmed Deen . In the 2007 FA Trophy Final Constable scored the first and second goals for an English club at the new Wembley Stadium , although his efforts were in vain as Kidderminster lost 3 – 2 to Stevenage Borough . He finished the season as Kidderminster 's top scorer with 16 goals in 32 appearances . 
 He scored his first goals of the 2007 – 08 season with a hat @-@ trick in a 4 – 0 victory over Exeter City on 1 September . After two games without scoring , he scored a second hat @-@ trick for Kidderminster in a 5 – 4 defeat to Ebbsfleet United . He was substituted at half time in Kidderminster 's 2 – 1 defeat to Histon in October , after picking up a hamstring injury . He made his return in a 2 – 0 victory over Ware in the FA Cup in November , scoring the first goal from 18 yards . He was sent off in a 2 – 0 defeat against Oxford United for elbowing James Clarke , and after having an appeal rejected , he was given a three @-@ match suspension . He made his return in a 2 – 1 away win over Hinckley United in the Conference League Cup on 22 December . 
 = = = Shrewsbury Town = = = 
 Constable transferred to League Two club Shrewsbury Town on 31 January 2008 , transfer deadline day , along with Harriers teammate Scott Bevan , being billed as " the striker to help Shrewsbury Town push for the play @-@ offs . " He made his debut two days later , coming on as a 50th @-@ minute substitute in a 2 – 1 defeat to Lincoln City . A week later , Constable scored his first goal for Shrewsbury with an equaliser against Brentford on 79 minutes . He made his full debut in the next game on 12 February , scoring twice as his team came back from 3 – 0 down to draw 3 – 3 at home to Milton Keynes Dons . He scored one more goal before the end of the season , in a 3 – 0 victory over Wrexham , which he finished with 14 appearances and four goals . The signings of Grant Holt and Richard Walker during the summer resulted in Constable being moved further down the pecking order at Shrewsbury . 
 = = = Oxford United = = = 
 Constable returned to the Conference Premier after signing for Oxford United on a season @-@ long loan for the 2008 – 09 season on 8 July 2008 . He made his debut in a 3 – 0 defeat by Barrow on 8 August 2008 , scoring his first goals in a 6 – 3 victory over Eastbourne Borough a week later , netting twice and providing an assist . He scored both goals in a 2 – 1 victory over Northwich Victoria in September , which was Oxford 's first away victory of the season . He picked up a groin strain during a 1 – 1 draw with Kettering Town , and he was expected to be out of action for two to three weeks . He did not miss any matches through this injury , featuring in a 1 – 0 defeat to former club Kidderminster . He scored the winning goal in a 2 – 1 victory over Burton Albion on 18 October 2008 , which he said " was an absolutely massive result " . Manager Chris Wilder said in January 2009 he wanted to extend Constable 's stay the club , claiming he " epitomises what I am trying to build here at the club " . With regard to extending his stay at Oxford , Constable said he was " open to offers " . He gathered further praise from Wilder later in the month and there were calls from Oxford fans for Constable to be signed permanently . 
 Constable had a run of scoring five goals in as many games from 28 December 2008 to 20 January 2009 , which constituted four home victories for Oxford . Following this , he went seven games without a goal , before scoring two in a 3 – 3 draw with Forest Green Rovers on 7 March 2009 . Oxford announced he had agreed a permanent deal with the club in April 2009 , although this was denied by Shrewsbury , who stated the transfer was not yet complete . He scored the winning goal for Oxford in a 1 – 0 victory over Wrexham on 11 April 2009 with a header in the fourth minute of stoppage time , which was described as " one of the most dramatic late goals in Oxford United 's history " . He finished the season with 49 appearances and 26 goals , after which he claimed Oxford 's Supporters ' Player of the Year and the Players ' Player of the Year awards . Constable 's permanent transfer to Oxford eventually took place on 28 April 2009 , signing a three @-@ year contract for an undisclosed fee . After the end of the season , he won the Conference Premier 's Player of the Year and Fans ' Player of the Year awards . 
 He started the 2009 – 10 season with a " flood of goals " , scoring six times in his first 11 appearances , with his first goals of the season coming in a 4 – 3 victory over Histon on 15 August 2009 . In the following game , he scored his first hat @-@ trick for Oxford in a 4 – 0 victory over Chester City . However , following Chester 's expulsion from the Football Conference in March 2010 , these goals were discounted from the records as their results were expunged . He said in February 2010 that he was considering stepping aside as Oxford 's penalty kick taker after having missed three during the season . Constable suffered an ankle injury in March 2010 , meaning he missed three games , with manager Wilder saying " I wouldn ’ t put the long @-@ term health of James in jeopardy " . He made his return in a 0 – 0 draw with Tamworth on 21 March 2010 . Constable scored for Oxford in a 1 – 1 draw at Rushden & Diamonds in their play @-@ off semi @-@ final first leg on 29 April 2010 , giving them the lead on 29 minutes with a 12 yard volley before Mark Byrne equalised for Rushden . He scored the second goal in the 2 – 0 victory over Rushden in the second leg , meaning the tie was won 3 – 1 on aggregate . He scored Oxford 's second goal as they defeated York City 3 – 1 in the 2010 Conference Premier play @-@ off Final at Wembley to end their four @-@ year exile from the Football League . At the Football Conference 's Annual Presentation Dinner , he was named in the Conference Premier Team of the Year , having finished the season with 26 goals in 44 games . 
 Having acted as captain during the previous season following an injury to Adam Murray , he was appointed captain permanently ahead of the 2010 – 11 season . He played in Oxford 's first Football League game since promotion , a 0 – 0 draw with Burton on 7 August . His first goals of the season came after he scored two in a 6 – 1 victory over League One team Bristol Rovers on 10 August . Constable finished the season with 17 goals in 46 appearances . 
 Oxford accepted an improved offer for Constable from local rivals Swindon Town on 19 January 2012 . Oxford allowed Constable to talk to the club , although he refused the opportunity to discuss the move with Swindon manager Paolo Di Canio . 
 On 16 November 2013 Constable scored his 100th goal for Oxford in a 3 – 1 away victory at Mansfield Town . 
 = = = Eastleigh = = = 
 Having been one goal short of equalling Oxford 's club record for goals scored of 107 , Constable turned down a new contract with the club to sign for newly promoted Conference Premier team Eastleigh on a two @-@ year deal on 21 May 2014 . He made his debut in a 3 – 0 away victory over Nuneaton Town on the opening day of the 2014 – 15 season on 9 August 2014 . 
 = = International career = = 
 Constable was named in the England C team , who represent England at non @-@ League level , in November 2007 , for a 2007 – 09 International Challenge Trophy game against Finland . He made his debut after starting the game and England won 2 – 0 . He was called up again in October 2008 for a game against Italy , scoring the goal that sent England to the International Challenge Trophy Final in a 2 – 2 draw at the Stadio Santa Colomba . Constable was called up to the team for this game against the Belgium under @-@ 21 team , saying " It 's an incredibly proud feeling to be representing my country at this level . " He started the game , which was played at Oxford 's Kassam Stadium , and England lost 1 – 0 , during which he had a frustrating performance . He earned three caps and scored one goal for England C from 2007 to 2009 . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 Constable plays as a striker and is " a big , powerful frontman with bags of pace " . He has been described as being a prolific goalscorer , leading to remarks of him being a " hot @-@ shot " and a " goal machine " . He was described as a " young , hungry player with bags of potential " by Kidderminster manager Mark Yates in 2007 . His strike partnership at Oxford United with Matt Green and Jamie Cook was described as " devastating " in 2009 . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 As of match played 12 April 2016 . 
 = = Honours = = 
 Oxford United 
 Conference Premier play @-@ offs : 2009 – 10 
 Individual 
 Oxford United Player of the Year : 2008 – 09 
 Conference Premier Player of the Year : 2008 – 09 
 Conference Premier Team of the Year : 2009 – 10 
 = Ruislip = 
 Ruislip ( / <unk> / RY @-@ slip ) is a town in west London , England , which is part of the London Borough of Hillingdon . 
 It was formerly a parish in the county of Middlesex covering the neighbouring areas of Eastcote , Northwood , Ruislip Manor and South Ruislip . The parish appears in the Domesday Book , and some of the earliest settlements still exist today , designated as local heritage sites . The parish church , St Martin 's , dates back to the 13th century and remains in use . The buildings at the northern end of Ruislip High Street form the core of the original village square and are now Grade II listed . It originally featured a central water pump which was moved out of the road in the 1970s as a result of increased traffic . 
 The expansion of the Metropolitan Railway in the early 20th century acted as a catalyst for development in the area . A station was opened in Ruislip in 1904 and the parish council created a new urban district to address the forthcoming population growth . The Ruislip @-@ Northwood Urban District continued until 1965 when Ruislip became part of the newly established London Borough of Hillingdon . Between 1911 and 1961 , Ruislip @-@ Northwood experienced a significant rise in population , from 6 @,@ 217 to 72 @,@ 791 , largely attributed to the extension of the railway . 
 Major landmarks in the area include Ruislip Lido , a former reservoir , now an area of public parkland with its own miniature railway and Manor Farm , a settlement dating from the 9th century which is now designated as a local heritage site . Ruislip is included within the Ruislip , Northwood and Pinner Parliament constituency and is covered by three electoral wards within the local council . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Toponymy = = = 
 At the time of Edward the Confessor , the parishes of Ruislip and Ickenham belonged to a Saxon named <unk> Wit , a thane of the king who owned land in 11 counties . Ruislip parish included what is now the modern Ruislip , Northwood , Eastcote , Ruislip Manor and South Ruislip . Wit lost much of his land during the Norman conquest of England ; Arnulf de Hesdin took control of Ruislip – his ownership is recorded within the 1086 Domesday Book . 
 Ruislip appears in the Domesday Book as <unk> , thought to mean ' leaping place on the river where rushes grow ' , in reference to the River Pinn . It is formed from the Old English ' <unk> ' and ' <unk> ' . Translated from Latin , an entry reads : 
 M. Arnulf [ Ernulf ] of Hesdin holds <unk> [ Ruislip ] . It is assessed for 30 hides . Land for 20 ploughs . In lordship 11 hides ; 3 ploughs there . There are 12 ploughs between the Frenchmen and the villagers ; a further 5 possible . 
 A priest , ½ hide ; 2 villagers with 1 hide ; 17 villagers , 1 virgate each ; 10 villagers , ½ virgate each ; 7 smallholders , 4 acres each ; 8 cottagers ; 4 slaves ; 4 Frenchmen with 3 hides and 1 virgate . 
 Pasture for the village livestock ; a park for woodland beasts ; woodland , 1500 pigs , and <unk> too . 
 Total value £ 20 ; when acquired £ 12 ; before 1066 £ 30 . 
 <unk> Wight , a thane of King Edward 's , held this manor ; he could sell it to whom he would . 
 Under Edward the Confessor , Ruislip had been valued at £ 30 , though the reduction to £ 12 by the time Ernulf de Hesdin took possession is believed to have been caused by a passing unit of the Norman Army taking crops . This led to the construction of buildings at Manor Farm to protect produce . 
 Before leaving England to fight in the Holy Lands , Ernulf de Hesdin gave ownership of Ruislip to the Benedictine Bec Abbey in 1087 . He died fighting and is commemorated in annual masses held in June at Sacred Heart Church and on the remains of the Motte @-@ and @-@ bailey at Manor Farm . 
 = = = Early developments = = = 
 The parish church , St Martin 's , has been dated to the mid @-@ 13th century . An earlier church is believed to have been built during the Norman period , as a stone was found within the grounds with markings from that time . The name St. Martin is believed to have been given to the church by the monks of the Bec Abbey , after Martin of Tours , a saint in Normandy . Before 1245 , references to the church only name it as " Ruislip church " . 
 The present church was believed to have been built upon the insistence of the Proctor @-@ General , William de <unk> , under the ownership of Bec Abbey , to serve the growing population . He used the priory at Manor Farm as his main residence The first recorded vicar was William de <unk> in 1327 . The building itself has been remodelled in parts over the centuries and was substantially restored by George Gilbert Scott in 1870 . It received Grade B listed status as an Anglican church in 1950 , corresponding as Grade II . 
 Under the ownership of the Bec Abbey , timber from the woods around Ruislip – Park Wood , Mad Bess Wood and Copse Wood – was used in the construction of the Tower of London in 1339 , Windsor Castle in 1344 , the Palace of Westminster in 1346 and the manor of the Black Prince in Kennington . The woods were coppiced on rotation throughout the years with the timber sold to local tanneries . By the time King 's College took ownership of the manor , the woods were let for sport , with pheasants kept for shooting . 
 = = = Urban development = = = 
 In 1812 , Bishop Winnington Ingram School was established by the vestry of St Martin 's church in Eastcote Road . The school had 111 pupils by 1845 but fell into a state of disrepair until it was rebuilt in 1931 . 
 Ruislip came under the jurisdiction of the Metropolitan Police in 1845 . By 1869 , the police were renting a house in the High Street to serve as the local police station , the copyhold of which was purchased in 1873 . A new station was built in The Oaks in 1961 . 
 In 1863 , the White Bear public house came under the ownership of the Harman 's Brewery in Uxbridge . It had been built close to Primrose Hill Farm near the junction of the Ickenham Road and Kings End . Kings End was a hamlet , with one building dating back to the 16th century . It was named after a family who had lived there at that time . 
 A well was sunk in 1864 in the High Street at the junction with Bury Street , constructed by Mr Charles Page from Uxbridge . The first 15 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) were dug , before 90 @.@ 75 @-@ foot ( 27 @.@ 66 m ) was bored through the London clay and the final 30 @-@ foot ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) was cut through chalk . A drought in 1898 led to the parish council requesting a well be created on what are now the Pinn Meadows , to make use of the natural spring there . The Colne River Water Company agreed , upon the guarantee of £ 45 per year , and the service was established . 
 A report had been prepared for the parish council in 1903 which noted the population in Northwood – 2 @,@ 700 by that time , with 530 houses – compared with the largely rural character of the rest of Ruislip parish . At a meeting of the Ruislip parish council on 28 October 1903 , the forthcoming extension of the Metropolitan Railway from Harrow on the Hill to Uxbridge was also discussed as it was known that a station would be opened in Ruislip on the new line . Councillors were also aware that King 's College , Cambridge , owners of much of the land in the parish and lords of the manor , were planning to sell some for development . With this in mind , a vote was cast which went in favour of becoming an urban district . The new district was designed to better reflect to increase in development , as councillors felt a parish council would work slower than an urban district . 
 The first train on the new railway line ran on 30 June 1904 , and the new station at Ruislip opened on 4 July . The area became popular with ramblers , who would head to the Ruislip Lido , and general day @-@ trippers who sought out the countryside . Local residents in Ruislip established their own tea gardens , which they advertised for the visitors . In particular , the <unk> , a Georgian house built in 1774 on the corner of the High Street and Ickenham Road , opened a tea garden in the grounds . It was eventually demolished in 1929 to make way for shops . A similar establishment was opened in light of the new railway on the corner of Sharps Lane , known as The Orchard Bungalow . It was eventually expanded and became The Orchard Hotel . 
 The new urban district was formed on 30 September 1904 , covering the parish , which had previously been part of the Uxbridge Rural District . At the time the parish incorporated Ruislip Manor , South Ruislip , Eastcote and Northwood . The new urban district council held its first meeting at Northwood School on 1 October , the day after forming . 
 Kings End was developed as a residential road in the early 1900s . By 1907 , the first of the new homes were completed and residents began to move into them . The road was named Kings End Avenue , though reverted to the original name of Kings End later in the century . 
 The district experienced a sharp rise in population , from 6 @,@ 217 in 1911 to 72 @,@ 791 in 1961 , caused by the extension of the Metropolitan Railway , termed Metro @-@ land , which brought with it an increase in suburban house building . As a consequence , the district was one of the first in England to devise a statutory planning scheme in 1914 , following the Housing and Town Planning Act 1909 . The council had been prompted to follow this new act by the Chairman of the Council , a Mr. Elgood , an architect , and the Clerk to the Council , Mr. Abbot . Members of the council had already raised concerns over some of the new building work around Eastcote and South Ruislip , and the new development near Northwood station which they described as " badly arranged and closely @-@ packed " . 
 Together with King 's College , the urban district council worked to establish plots of land for development around Ruislip and Ruislip Manor . A town planning competition was held , won by A & J Soutar from Wandsworth , who sought to create a symmetrical design spreading across Ruislip parish . Many of the woods and historic sites including Manor Farm were to be demolished and cleared as part of the plan , making way for a projected total of 7 @,@ 642 homes , enough for 35 @,@ 000 residents . Only St. Martin 's church would have been spared . An outline map was made public on 30 November 1910 with few objections recorded . A Local Board inquiry followed on 17 February 1911 which required negotiations with landowners to allow for a full planning scheme to be compiled . This was presented in February 1913 with an adaptation of the original Soutars plan , receiving approval from the Local Government Board in September 1914 . Three roads with residential housing , Manor Way , Windmill Way and Park Way were completed before the outbreak of the First World War when all construction work was halted . It did not resume until 1919 . 
 Manor Farm and the local woods eventually avoided demolition in January 1930 , after the visit by a member of the Royal Society of Arts to choose the buildings that should be conserved . The Great Barn and Little Barn were singled out from the site , together with the old Post Office , the Old Bell public house and the Priest 's House of the local church . The woods were included in a sale by King 's College to the district in February 1931 . Park Wood was sold for £ 28 @,@ 100 with Manor Farm and the old Post Office included as a gift to the people of Ruislip . King 's had wished to also present the wood as a gift but was required by the University and Colleges Act to receive payment as it was the trustee of the land . Middlesex County Council contributed 75 % of the cost as the urban district council argued that many of those who would make use of the land would be recreational day @-@ trippers from outside the district . Under a 999 @-@ year lease , the council agreed to maintain the wood and ensure no new building was constructed without the permission of the county council . An area of the wood to the south was not included in the lease agreement and three residential roads were later constructed on it . 
 Copse Wood was later purchased by Middlesex County Council and London County Council in 1936 for £ 23 @,@ 250 , later joined by Mad Bess Wood in the same year . The urban district council purchased the 186 acres ( 75 ha ) wood together with Middlesex and London County Councils for £ 28 @,@ 000 in a compulsory purchase from Sir Howard Stransom Button . Sir Howard became High Sheriff of Middlesex in 1937 . 
 On the 19th of December 1946 a Railway Air Services Dakota 3 airliner taking @-@ off from Northolt crashed into a house in Angus Drive , Ruislip , fortunately with no serous injuries to anyone , either in the aircraft or on the ground . 
 On 6 January 1948 a British European Airways Vickers <unk> Viking flying from Renfrew Airport to RAF Northolt crashed in a ploughed field in Ruislip , five miles from the runway . The crew had tried to land the aircraft twice unsuccessfully when the aircraft struck a tree on the third approach attempt . Of the 18 passengers and crew on board , one crew member was killed in the crash . 
 In 1961 , the Portland Spy Ring was uncovered . Peter and Helen Kroger were found to have been involved , while living in Ruislip . They were visited each Saturday evening by Gordon Lonsdale and were eventually placed under police surveillance . The Krogers were eventually arrested and found to have codes , a <unk> reader and film of the Admiralty Underwater Weapons Establishment in Portland Harbour concealed within ordinary household items . A radio transmitter hidden in the garden was not retrieved until 1977 . 
 Primrose Hill Farm was demolished to make way for housing in 1965 . Field End Farm , covering 50 acres ( 20 ha ) at the junction of Wood Lane and West End Road , was demolished in 1966 . The farm house had been owned by the manor of Northolt under the name of <unk> . Bishop Winnington Ingram School moved to Southcote Rise in 1968 and the original school building was demolished . In 1976 , the war memorial dedicated to those killed during the First World War was moved from the graveyard of St Martin 's to the entrance of Manor Farm . Bury Street Farm near the Plough was demolished in 1980 . 
 In 1984 , the Battle of Britain House , built within Copse Wood in 1905 , was destroyed by fire and the ruins demolished . The house became a college in 1948 and included plaques with the crests of all Royal Air Force squadrons involved in the Battle of Britain as a memorial . 
 In April 2007 , restoration work began on the Manor Farm site using funding from the Heritage Lottery Fund . The work was completed in June the following year , and included the renovation of the Grade II listed library . The Duck Pond Market began in the Great Barn in December 2008 , following the refurbishment , and runs once a month . Winston Churchill Hall on the site received a £ 370 @,@ 000 grant from Hillingdon Council in March 2011 to enable its refurbishment . 
 = = Local government = = 
 Ruislip formed an ancient parish of 6 @,@ 585 acres ( 26 @.@ 65 km2 ) in the Elthorne hundred of Middlesex . Following the Poor Law Amendment Act 1834 , the parish lost control of poor relief to Uxbridge Poor Law Union and it was grouped into the Uxbridge rural sanitary district in 1875 . In 1894 the sanitary district was replaced by Uxbridge Rural District and the parish vestry was replaced with a parish council . Due to increasing population , the parish split off from the rural district and formed the Ruislip @-@ Northwood Urban District , with the parish council replaced by an urban district council . The urban district was abolished in 1965 and was transferred to Greater London to form part of the newly established London Borough of Hillingdon . 
 Within the London Borough of Hillingdon , Ruislip is covered by three electoral wards : Eastcote and East Ruislip , South Ruislip and West Ruislip . Ruislip is part of the Ruislip , Northwood and Pinner constituency within the UK Parliament , represented by Nick Hurd MP . 
 = = Education = = 
 Primary schools in Ruislip include <unk> Infants and Juniors Schools , Bishop Winnington Ingram Church of England Primary School , Sacred Heart Catholic Primary School , Bourne Primary School , Field End Infant School , Field End Junior School , Lady Bankes Infant School , Lady Bankes Junior School , Newnham Infant School , Newnham Junior School , Ruislip Gardens Primary School , St Swithun Wells Roman Catholic Primary School , Warrender Primary School , <unk> Infant School , and <unk> Junior School . 
 Secondary schools include Bishop Ramsey School , <unk> School , and Ruislip High School . 
 = = Sports clubs = = 
 Ruislip has two Non @-@ League football clubs – Hillingdon Borough F.C. , which plays at the Middlesex Stadium and Wealdstone FC based at the St. Georges Stadium . 
 The Middlesex town also played host to Ruislip Manor F.C. between 1938 and 2008 , before the non @-@ league club folded following a period of financial uncertainty during its latter two trading years . 
 Ruislip Rugby Club is based in West End Road and was formed in 1954 , succeeding an earlier club from around 1950 . The club 's ground is at West End Road in Ruislip . 
 Ruislip Golf Course , on Ickenham Road , was opened in 1922 , and is operated by a private company on behalf of the London Borough of Hillingdon . Ruislip is also the home of Eastcote Hockey Club , based at Kings College playing fields . The club was originally based in Eastcote , from where it took its name , but moved to the present location in 1964 . 
 Ruislip Eagles West London Handball Club runs competitive men ’ s and women 's handball teams . Affiliated to the <unk> , the club was founded in 1970 ad is based in <unk> Sports Centre in South Ruislip . 
 = = Transport = = 
 = = = London Underground = = = 
 Stations in the area : 
 South Ruislip station ( Central line and Chiltern Railways ) 
 Ruislip Station ( Metropolitan line & Piccadilly line ) 
 Ruislip Manor station ( Metropolitan line & Piccadilly line ) 
 Ruislip Gardens Station ( Central line ) 
 West Ruislip station ( Central line & Chiltern Railways ) 
 = = = Buses = = = 
 London Buses serving Ruislip are : 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 = = = Village square = = = 
 The buildings at the north end of Ruislip High Street , Nos 1 to 15 , the Duck House restaurant and the Swan public house , which has since been re @-@ branded as Cafe Rouge , form the core of the original village and are Grade II listed . This area formed the village square , at the junction of the High Street , Bury Street and Eastcote Road . The village water pump was sunk in the centre of the square in 1864 , to a depth of 105 feet ( 32 m ) 9 inches ( 230 mm ) , though was moved to be beside the Manor Farm Lodge in the 1970s . It was moved again in 1982 to sit outside 7 – 15 High Street . 
 = = = Manor Farm = = = 
 To the north of Ruislip High Street , the 22 acres ( 8 @.@ 9 ha ) Manor Farm site incorporates the remains of settlements dating back to the 9th century , as well as buildings including the Great Barn , dated by English Heritage as having been built around 1280 . A working farm until the 1930s , the farm was let by King 's College , Cambridge , the owners of the land from 1500 to the mid 20th century . It has been designated as a local heritage site and was refurbished between 2007 and 2008 with funding from the Heritage Lottery Fund . 
 = = = Ruislip Lido = = = 
 Ruislip Lido is a nineteenth century reservoir with an artificial sand beach , surrounded by woodlands through which runs the Ruislip Lido Railway , a miniature 12 " gauge railway with diesel and steam locomotives . The Lido was established as a reservoir to feed the Grand Union Canal by damming and flooding the lower part of the valley between Park Wood and Copse Wood , including the hamlet of Park Hearn . Work began in 1811 ; the consulting engineer John Rennie announced completion of the project to the Grand Junction Waterworks Company on 5 December that year . Unsuccessful as a canal feeder lake , it was reconstructed as a pleasure resort in 1933 . 
 = = = The Orchard Hotel = = = 
 Following the extension of the Metropolitan Railway to Ruislip , and the resulting influx of visitors to the area , Albert Cross built a bungalow from where teas were served to day @-@ trippers . This became a success and Cross had the building expanded , which soon became The Orchard Hotel . Between 1933 and 1971 it became an <unk> licensed bar and well @-@ known high @-@ class restaurant . It then became a Beefeater steak house , which it remains , and was recently extended with a Premier Inn hotel . During the Battle of Britain , The Orchard was very popular with the pilots of No. 303 Polish Fighter Squadron stationed at RAF Northolt , who celebrated many of their successes in battle there . The owner was known to open a bottle of Champagne for each German aircraft shot down by the squadron . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 Optical mineralogist Stuart Olof <unk> ( 1913 – 1996 ) was born in Ruislip . 
 Lady Mary Bankes ( c . 1598 – 1661 ) , Royalist figure of the Royal Pharmaceutical Society , lived in Ruislip . 
 Experimental musician Paul Burwell ( 1949 – 2007 ) was born in Ruislip . 
 Poet Peter Levi ( 1931 – 2000 ) was born in Ruislip . 
 Actress Lana Morris ( 1930 – 1998 ) was born in Ruislip . 
 Actor Simon Fisher @-@ Becker was born in Ruislip in 1961 
 Actor and recorder Andy Serkis was born in Ruislip in 1964 
 = History of Cornell University = 
 The history of Cornell University begins when its two founders , Andrew Dickson White of Syracuse and Ezra Cornell of Ithaca , met in the New York State Senate in January 1864 . Together , they established Cornell University in Ithaca , New York , in 1865 . The university was initially funded by Ezra Cornell 's $ 400 @,@ 000 endowment and by New York 's 989 @,@ 920 @-@ acre ( 4 @,@ 006 @.@ 1 km2 ) allotment of the Morrill Land Grant Act of 1862 . 
 However , even before Ezra Cornell and Andrew White met in the New York Senate , each had separate plans and dreams that would draw them toward their collaboration in founding Cornell . White believed in the need for a great university for the nation that would take a radical new approach to education ; and Cornell , who had great respect for education and philanthropy , desired to use his money " to do the greatest good . " Abraham Lincoln 's signing of Vermont Senator Justin Morrill 's Land Grant Act into law was also critical to the formation of many universities , including Cornell , in the post @-@ Civil War era . 
 = = Founders = = 
 As newly elected members of the state senate , Cornell chaired the Committee of Agriculture , and White was the chair of the Committee of Literature , which dealt with educational matters . Hence , both chaired committees with jurisdiction over bills allocating the land grant , which was to be used for instruction in " without excluding other scientific and classical studies and including military tactic , to teach such branches of learning as are related to agriculture and the mechanic arts " . Yet their eventual partnership seemed unlikely . Although both valued egalitarianism , science , and education , they had come from two very different backgrounds . Ezra Cornell , a self @-@ made businessman and austere , pragmatic telegraph mogul , made his fortune on the Western Union Telegraph Company stock he received during the consolidation that led to its formation . Cornell , who had been poor for most of his life , suddenly found himself looking for ways that he could do the greatest good for with his money . He wrote , " My greatest care now is how to spend this large income to do the greatest good to those who are properly dependent on me , to the poor and to posterity . " Cornell 's self @-@ education and hard work would lead him to the conclusion that the greatest end for his philanthropy was in the need of colleges for the teaching of practical pursuits such as agriculture , the applied sciences , veterinary medicine and engineering , and in finding opportunities for the poor to attain such an education . 
 Andrew Dickson White entered college at the age of 16 in 1849 . White dreamed of going to one of the elite eastern colleges , but his father sent him to Geneva Academy ( later known as the Hobart and William Smith Colleges ) , a small Episcopal <unk> Geneva , White would read about the great colleges at Oxford University and at the University of Cambridge ; this appears to be his first inspiration for " dreaming of a university worthy of the commonwealth [ New York ] and of the nation . " This dream would become a lifelong goal of White 's . After a year at Geneva , White convinced his father to send him to Yale University . For White , Yale was a great improvement over Geneva , but he found that even at one of the country 's great universities there was " too much reciting by rote and too little real intercourse . " 
 In the late 1850s , while White served as a professor of history at the University of Michigan , he continued to develop his thoughts on a great American university . He was influenced by both the curriculum , which was more liberal than at the Eastern universities , and by the administration of the university as a secular institution . 
 = = Conception = = 
 White had been duly impressed by a bill introduced by Cornell in one of his first actions as a state senator : the incorporation of a large public library for Ithaca for which Cornell had donated $ 100 @,@ 000 . White was struck by not only his generosity , but also " his breadth of mind " . He wrote : 
 The most striking sign of this was his mode of forming a board of trustees ; for , instead of the usual effort to tie up the organization forever in some sect , party or clique , he had named the best men of his town — his political opponents as well as his friends ; and had added to them the pastors of all the principal churches , Catholic and Protestant . 
 Yet , Cornell and White soon found themselves on opposite sides of a battle that would in the end lead to the creation of Cornell University . In 1863 , the legislature had granted the proceeds of the land grant to the People 's College in Havana ( now Montour Falls ) , with conditions that would need to be met within a certain time frame . Because the Morrill Act set a five @-@ year limit on each state identifying a land grant college , and it seemed unlikely that the People 's College would meet its conditions , the legislature was ready to select a different school . Initially , Cornell , as a member of the Board of Trustees of the New York State Agricultural College at Ovid , wanted half the grant to go to that school . However , White " vigorously opposed this bill , on the ground that the educational resources of the state were already too much dispersed " . He felt that the grant would be most effective if it were used to establish or strengthen a comprehensive university . 
 Still working to send part of the grant to the Agricultural College , on September 25 , 1864 , in Rochester , New York , Cornell announced his offer to donate $ 300 @,@ 000 ( soon thereafter increased to $ 500 @,@ 000 ) if part of the land grant could be secured and the trustees moved the college to Ithaca . White did not relent ; however , he said he would support a similar measure that did not split up the grant . Thus began the collaboration between Ezra Cornell and Andrew D. White that became Cornell University . 
 = = Establishment = = 
 On February 7 , 1865 , Andrew D. White introduced an act to the State Senate " to establish the Cornell University " , which appropriated the full income of the sale of lands given to New York under the Morrill Act to the university . But , while Cornell and White had come to an agreement , they faced fierce opposition , including from the People 's College in Havana , the Agricultural College at Ovid , and dozens of other institutions across the state vying for a share of the land grant funds ; from religious groups , who opposed the proposed composition of the university 's board of trustees ; and even from the secular press , some of whom thought Cornell was swindling the state out of its federal land grant . To placate legislators representing Ovid , White arranged for the Willard State Asylum for the Insane to be located on the land held for the Agricultural College . The bill limited the total amount of property or endowment that Cornell University could hold to $ 3 million . 
 The bill was modified at least twice in attempts to attain the votes necessary for passage . In the first change , the People 's College was given three months to meet certain conditions for which it would receive the land grant under the 1863 law . The second came from a Methodist faction , which wanted a share of the grant for Genesee College . They agreed to a quid @-@ pro quo donation of $ 25 @,@ 000 from Ezra Cornell in exchange for their support . Cornell insisted the bargain be written into the bill . The bill was signed into law by Governor Reuben E. Fenton on April 27 , 1865 . On July 27 , the People 's College lost its claim to the land grant funds , and the building of Cornell University began . 
 From 1865 to 1868 , the year the university opened , Ezra Cornell and Andrew D. White worked in tireless collaboration to build their university . Cornell oversaw the construction of the university 's first buildings , starting with Morrill Hall , and spent time investing the federal land scrip in western lands for the university that would eventually net millions of dollars , while White , who was unanimously elected the first President of Cornell University by the Board of Trustees on November 21 , 1866 , began making plans for the administrative and educational policies of the university . To this end , he traveled to France , Germany and England " to visit model institutions , to buy books and equipment , to collect professors " . White returned from Europe to be inaugurated as Cornell 's president in 1868 , and he remained leader of Cornell until his retirement from the presidency in 1885 . 
 = = Opening = = 
 The university 's Inauguration Day took place on October 7 , 1868 . The previous day , each of the candidates who showed up in Ithaca was given an entrance examination . There were 412 successful applicants ; with this initial enrollment , Cornell 's first class was , at the time , the largest entering class at an American university . 
 On the occasion , Ezra Cornell delivered a brief speech . He said , " I hope we have laid the foundation of an institution which shall combine practical with liberal education . ... I believe we have made the beginning of an institution which will prove highly beneficial to the poor young men and the poor young women of our country . " His speech included another statement which later became the school 's motto , " I would found an institution where any person can find instruction in any study . " 
 Two other Ezra Cornell @-@ founded , Ithaca institutions played a role in the rapid opening of the university . The Cornell Library , a public library in downtown Ithaca which opened in 1866 , served as a classroom and library for the first students . Also Cascadilla Hall , which was constructed in 1866 as a water cure sanitarium , served at the university 's first dormitory . 
 Cornell was among the first universities in the United States to admit women alongside men . The first woman was admitted to Cornell in 1870 , although the university did not yet have a women 's dormitory . On February 13 , 1872 , Cornell 's Board of Trustees accepted an offer of $ 250 @,@ 000 from Henry W. Sage to build such a dormitory . During the construction of Sage College ( now home to the Samuel Curtis Johnson Graduate School of Management as Sage Hall ) and after its opening in 1875 , the admittance of women to Cornell continued to increase . 
 Significant departures from the standard curriculum were made at Cornell under the leadership of Andrew D. White . In 1868 , Cornell introduced the elective system , under which students were free to choose their own course of study . Harvard University would make a similar change in 1872 , soon after the inauguration of Charles W. Eliot in 1869 . 
 It was the success of the egalitarian ideals of the newly established Cornell , a uniquely American institution , that would help drive some of the changes seen at other universities throughout the next few decades , and would lead educational historian Frederick Rudolph to write : 
 Andrew D. White , its first president , and Ezra Cornell , who gave it his name , turned out to be the developers of the first American university and therefore the agents of revolutionary curricular reform . 
 In 1892 , the university library was opened . Known today as Uris Library , it was the result of a gift from Henry W. Sage in memory of Jennie McGraw . In her will , she left $ 300 @,@ 000 to her husband Willard Fiske , $ 550 @,@ 000 to her brother Joseph and his children , $ 200 @,@ 000 to Cornell for a library , $ 50 @,@ 000 for construction of McGraw Hall , $ 40 @,@ 000 for a student hospital , and the remainder to the University for whatever use it saw fit . However , the University 's charter limited its property holdings to $ 3 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 , and Cornell could not accept the full amount of McGraw 's gift . When Fiske realized that the university had failed to inform him of this restriction , he launched a legal assault to re @-@ acquire the money , known as The Great Will Case . The United States Supreme Court eventually affirmed the judgment of the New York Court of Appeals that Cornell could not receive the estate on May 19 , 1890 , with Justice Samuel Blatchford giving the majority opinion . However , Sage then donated $ 500 @,@ 000 to build the library instead . 
 = = Coeducation = = 
 In 1870 , Cornell admitted its first female students , making it the first coeducational school among what came to be known as the Ivy League . However , the admission of female students was limited until the construction of Sage Hall to serve as a women 's dormitory in 1872 . 
 The requirement that women ( at least freshman women ) must live in dormitories , which started in 1884 , served to constrain female student admissions until 1972 , when Cornell dropped its freshman dorm residency requirement . As a result , the academic admission standards for women in each college were typically higher than the corresponding standards for men . In general , women have been over @-@ represented in certain schools and under @-@ represented in others . For example , the NYS College of Home Economics and the Cornell School of Nursing historically drew a disproportionate number of women students , while the College of Engineering attracted fewer women . 
 Early in the history of the university , female students were separated from male students in many ways . For example , they had a separate entrance and lounges in Willard Straight Hall , a separate student government , and a separate page ( edited by women ) in the Cornell Daily Sun . The male students were required to take " drill " ( a precursor to ROTC ) , but the women were exempt . One account of the history of coeducation at Cornell claims that in the very beginning , " [ m ] ale students were almost unanimously opposed to co @-@ education , and vigorously protested the arrival of a group of 16 women , who promptly formed a women 's club with a broom for their standard , and ' In hoc signo <unk> ' as their motto . " In the 1870s and 1880s , female Cornell students on campus were generally ignored by male students . Women did not have a formal role in the annual commencement ceremony until 1935 , when the student government selected a woman to be Class Poet . In 1936 , the Willard Straight Hall Board of Managers voted to allow women to eat in its cafeteria . Until the 1970s , male students resided in west campus dormitories while women were housed in the north campus . As of 2010 , the only remaining women 's dormitory is Balch Hall , due to a restriction in the gift that funded it . Lyon Hall ( which for most of its history was a men @-@ only <unk> ) , also currently disallows male residents on its lower floors . All other dormitories were converted to co @-@ educational housing in the late 1970s . 
 The NYS College of Veterinary Medicine was an early pioneer in educating women , bestowing the first <unk> degree on a woman in the United States , Florence Kimball , in 1910 . However , until the early 1980s , the Vet College limited the number of women in each entering class to four or less , regardless of female applicants ' qualifications . 
 With the implementation of Title IX in the mid @-@ 1970s , Cornell significantly expanded its athletic offerings for women . The Department of Physical Education and Athletics moved from having all women 's activities housed in Helen Newman Hall to having men 's and women 's programs in all facilities . 
 = = <unk> and religion on campus = = 
 Up until the time of Cornell 's founding , most prominent American colleges had ties to religious denominations . Cornell was founded as a non @-@ sectarian school , but had to compete with church @-@ sponsored institutions for gaining New York 's land grant status . A.D. White noted in his inaugural address , " We will labor to make this a Christian institution , a sectarian institution may it never be . " However , the university has made provision for voluntary religious observance on campus . Currently , the University Charter provides , " Persons of every religious denomination , or of no religious denomination , shall be equally eligible to all offices and appointments " . Through the 20th century , the University Charter also required that a majority of trustees could not be of any single denomination . Sage Chapel , a non @-@ denominational house of worship opened in 1875 . Since 1929 , the Cornell United Religious Works ( CURW ) has been an umbrella organization for the campus chaplains sponsored by different denominations and faiths . Perhaps the most newsworthy of the chaplains was Daniel Berrigan who , while Assistant Director of CURW , became a national leader in protesting the Vietnam War . In 1971 , the social activism aspects of CURW were spun off into a separate Center for Religion , Ethics and Social Policy ( <unk> ) . In 2006 , <unk> was reorganized as Cornell 's Center for Transformative Action . 
 In the late 1950s , the National Council of Young Israel ( <unk> ) leased a house across the street from the university and established a Jewish living center and kosher dining hall . The Cornell Young Israel chapter became the Center for Jewish Living , and a new Foundation for Kosher Observance at Cornell , Inc. was established so that the university 's dining department would operate both a kosher kitchen at the center as well as serving kosher food on the North Campus . 
 Since the 1870s , Cornell 's system of fraternities and sororities grew to play a large role in student life , with many chapters becoming a part of national organizations . As of 1952 , 19 fraternities had national restrictions based on race , religion or national origin , and of the 32 fraternities without such national requirements , 19 did not have " mixed " memberships . In response , the undergraduate Interfraternity Council passed a resolution condemning discrimination . In the 1960s , the Trustees established a Commission to examine the membership restrictions of those national organizations . Cornell adopted a policy that required fraternities and sororities affiliated with nationals that discriminated based on religion or race to either amend their national charters or quit the national organizations . As a result , a number of national Greek organizations dropped racial or religious barriers to their membership . 
 In 1873 , the cornerstone of Sage Hall was laid . This new hall was to house the Sage College for Women and thus to concretely establish Cornell University 's coeducational status . Ezra Cornell wrote a letter for posterity — dated May 15 , 1873 — and sealed it into the cornerstone . No copies of the letter were made , and Cornell kept its contents a secret . However , he hinted at the theme of the letter during his speech at the dedication of Sage Hall , stating that " the letter deposited in the cornerstone addressed to the future man and woman , of which I have kept no copy , will relate to future generations the cause of the failure of this experiment , if it ever does fail , as I trust in God it never will . " 
 Cornell historians largely assumed that the " experiment " to which Cornell referred was that of coeducation , given that Sage Hall was to be a women 's dormitory and that coeducation was still a controversial issue at the time . However , when the letter was finally unearthed in 1997 , its focus was revealed to be the university 's nonsectarian status — a principle which had invited equal controversy in the 19th century , given that most universities of the time had specific religious affiliations . Cornell wrote : 
 = = Infrastructure innovations = = 
 In 1883 , Cornell was one of the first university campuses to use electricity to light the grounds from a water @-@ powered dynamo . In 1904 , a hydroelectric plant was built in the Fall Creek gorge . The plant takes water from Beebe Lake through a tunnel in the side of the gorge to power up to 1 @.@ 9 megawatts of electricity . The plant continued to serve the campus 's electric needs until 1970 , when local utility rates placed a heavy economic penalty on independently generating electricity . The abandoned plant was vandalized in 1972 , but renovated and placed back into service in 1981 . 
 In 1986 – 87 , a cogeneration facility was added to the central heating plant to generate electricity from the plant 's waste heat . A Cornell Combined Heat & Power Project , which was completed in December 2009 , shifted the central heating plant from using coal to natural gas and enable the plant to generate all of the campus 's non @-@ peak electric requirements . 
 In the 1880s , a suspension bridge was built across Fall Creek to provide pedestrian access to the campus from the North . In 1913 , Professors S.C. Hollister and William McGuire designed a new suspension bridge that is 138 ft ( 42 m ) , 3 @.@ 5 in. above the water and 500 ft ( 150 m ) downstream from the original . However , the second bridge was declared unsafe and closed August 1960 to be rebuilt with a replacement of the same design . 
 The Arecibo Observatory , radio and radar telescope , from its construction in the 1960s until 2011 , was managed by Cornell University . 
 Cornell began operating a closed loop , central chilled water system for air conditioning and laboratory cooling in the 1963 using centralized mechanical <unk> , rather than inefficient , building @-@ specific air conditioners . In 2000 , Cornell began operation of its Lake Source Cooling System which uses the cold water temperature at the bottom of Cayuga Lake ( approx 39 ° F ) to air condition the campus . The system was the first wide @-@ scale use of lake source cooling in North America . 
 = = Giving and alumni involvement = = 
 The first endowed chair at Cornell was the Professorship of Hebrew and Oriental Literature and History donated by New York City financier Joseph Seligman in 1874 , with the proviso that he ( Seligman ) would nominate the <unk> ; and following his wishes , Dr. Felix Adler ( Society for Ethical Culture ) , was appointed . After two years , Professor Adler was quietly let go . Seligman demanded an inquiry . On rebuffing Joseph Seligman in 1877 , the Trustees established one of their guiding principles governing the receipt of gifts , " That in the future no Endowment of Professorships will be accepted by the ( Cornell ) University which deprives the Board of Trustees of the power to Select The persons who shall fill such professorships " . 
 In September 1896 , Cornell ’ s president Jacob Gould Schurman prevailed upon the Board of Trustees to extend an offer to Nathaniel Schmidt . The situation at Colgate ’ s Divinity School had deteriorated . Schmidt ’ s unorthodox theology generated discomfort within that college . From 1886 to the arrival of Professor Nathaniel Schmidt in 1896 , Cornell ’ s Library maintained its support for the acquisition of Near Eastern materials . Taking over as Cornell President , Jacob Gould Schurman decided Cornell needed a chair of Hebrew language . In 1896 , Schurman persuaded Henry W. Sage to finance a professor of Semitic Languages and Literatures for <unk> @-@ 97 and AY 1897 @-@ 98 . He knew the University could secure Schmidt at a bargain . Schmidt ’ s unorthodox theological views made his stay at Colgate Divinity School untenable . Schmidt gained the respect of the Cornell community . Noted for his personal and scholarly integrity , he was soon shielded by sympathetic administrators . Schmidt served Cornell for thirty @-@ six years , carrying a high teaching load in addition to this extensive research . He taught an elementary course in Hebrew each year . Advanced Hebrew covered the leading writers of the Old Testament and some parts of the Mishnaic and other Talmudic literature in three years . General linguistics students were advised to begin their study of Semitic languages with Arabic , also offered each year . Aramaic and Egyptian alternated with Assyrian and <unk> . The Semitic Seminary , given one term each year , was dedicated to epigraphical studies . 
 The second was the Susan E. Linn Sage Professor of Ethics and Philosophy given in 1890 by Henry W. Sage . Since then , 327 named professorships have been established , of which 43 are honorary and do not have endowments . The university 's first endowed scholarship was established in 1892 . 
 The original University charter adopted by the New York State legislature required that Cornell give scholarships from students in each legislative district to attend the University tuition @-@ free . Although both Cornell and White believed this meant one scholarship , the legislature later argued that it meant one new freshman student per district each year , or four per district . This allowed students of diverse financial resources to attend the university from the start . 
 When Atlantic Gulf & Pacific Dredging Company John McMullen left his estate to Cornell to establish scholarships for engineering students , Cornell 's Trustees decided to invest those funds , and eventually sold the dredging company . The resulting fund is Cornell 's largest single scholarship endowment . Since 1925 , the fund has provided substantial assistance to more than 3 @,@ 700 engineering students . ( Cornell has received a number of unusual non @-@ cash ( in @-@ kind ) gifts over the years , including : Ezra Cornell 's farm , the Cornell Aeronautical <unk> ( see below ) , a copy of Lincoln 's Gettysburg Address , a Peruvian mummy , and the Ostrander elm trees . ) 
 Before the university opened , the State Legislature amended Cornell 's charter on April 24 , 1867 to specify alumni elected trustees . However that provision did not become operative until there were at least 100 alumni in 1872 . Cornell was one of the first Universities to elect trustees by direct election . ( Harvard was probably the first to shift to direct election of its Board of Overseers by alumni in 1865 . ) Cornell 's first female trustee was Martha Carey Thomas ( class of 1877 ) , who the alumni elected while she was serving as President of Bryn Mawr College . 
 In October 1890 , Andrew Carnegie became a Cornell Trustee and quickly became aware of the lack of an adequate pension plans for Cornell faculty . His concern led to the formation in 1905 of what is now called Teachers Insurance and <unk> Association of America ( <unk> ) . In October 2010 , David A. Atkinson and his wife Patricia donated $ 80 million to fund a sustainability center , and the gift is currently the largest single gift to Cornell ( ignoring inflation ) and is the largest ever given to a university for sustainability research and faculty support . 
 Many alumni classes elected secretaries to maintain correspondence with classmates . In 1905 , the Class Secretaries organized to form what is now called the Cornell Association of Class Officers , which meets annually to develop alumni class programs and assist in organizing reunions . The Cornell Alumni News is an independent , alumni @-@ owned publication founded in 1899 It is owned and controlled by the Cornell Alumni Association , a separate nonprofit corporation and is now known as Cornell Alumni Magazine . 
 = = Support from New York State = = 
 Under the Morrill Act , states were obligated to fund the maintenance of land grant college facilities , but were not obligated to fund operations . Subsequent laws required states to match federal funds for agricultural research stations and cooperative extension . In his inaugural address as Cornell 's third president on November 11 , 1892 , Jacob Gould Schurman announced his intention to enlist the financial support of the state . Until that point , Cornell 's relationship with the state was a net economic loss . Cornell was offering full scholarships to four students in each New York assembly district every year and was spending funds to serve as the state 's land @-@ grant university . It determined to convince the state to become a benefactor of the university , instead . In 1894 , the state legislature voted to give financial support for the establishment of the New York State College of Veterinary Medicine and to make annual appropriations for the college . This set the precedents of privately controlled , state @-@ supported statutory colleges and cooperation between Cornell and the state . The annual state appropriations were later extended to agriculture , home economics , and following World War II , industrial and labor relations . 
 In 1882 , Cornell opened the New York State Agricultural Experiment Station in Geneva , New York , the sixth oldest institution of its kind in the United States . It made significant advances in scientific agriculture and for many years played an active role in agriculture law enforcement . 
 In 1900 , a home economics curriculum was added to Cornell 's Agriculture college . This was expanded to a separate state @-@ supported school in 1919 . The Home Economics School , in turn , began to develop classes in hotel administration in 1922 , which spun off into a separate , endowed college in 1950 . 
 In 1898 , the New York State College of Forestry opened at Cornell , which was the first forestry college in North America . The College undertook to establish a 30 @,@ 000 @-@ acre ( 120 km2 ) demonstration forest in the Adirondacks , funded by New York State . However , the plans of the school 's director Bernhard Fernow for the land drew criticism from neighbors living on Saranac Lake , Knollwood Club , and Governor Benjamin B. Odell vetoed the 1903 appropriation for the school . In response , Cornell closed the school . By some reports , Cornell gained annual state funding of the College of Agriculture in exchange for closing the forestry college . Subsequently , in 1911 , the State Legislature established a New York State College of Forestry at Syracuse University , and the remains of Cornell 's program became the Department of Natural Resources in its Agriculture College in 1910 . However , Cornell had contracted with the Brooklyn Cooperage Company to take the logs from the forest , and the People of the State of New York , Knollwood Club members ( " People v. the Brooklyn Cooperage Company and Cornell " ) sued to stop the destructive practices of Fernow even before the closing of the school . Cornell University lost the case in 1910 and on appeal in 1912 . Cornell eventually established a research forest south of Ithaca , the Arnot Woods . When New York State later funded the construction of a Forestry building for the Agriculture school , New York State College of Agriculture and Life Sciences , Cornell named it Fernow Hall . 
 In 1914 , the US Department of Agriculture began to fund cooperative extension services through the land grant college of each state , and Cornell expanded its impact by sending agents to spread knowledge in each county of New York State . Although Syracuse had started awarding forestry degrees at this point , Cornell 's extension agents covered all of home economics and agriculture , including forestry . 
 In 1945 , the New York State Legislature founded the New York State School of Industrial and Labor Relations at Cornell , in response to requests from organized labor and Democratic leaders . The school quickly gained national stature when U.S. Secretary of Labor Frances Perkins , who was the first female US Cabinet member and served longer than anyone else as Secretary of Labor ( 12 years ) , joined the <unk> faculty . Since agricultural interests were mostly affiliated with the Republicans , Cornell enjoyed bi @-@ partisan support following World War II . 
 In 1948 , the Legislature placed all state @-@ funded higher education into the new State University of New York ( SUNY ) . Cornell 's four statutory colleges ( agriculture , human ecology , labor relations and veterinary medicine ) have been affiliated with SUNY since its inception , but did not have any such state affiliation prior to that time . Statutory college employees legally are employees of Cornell , not employees of SUNY . The State Education Law gives the SUNY Board of Trustees the authority to approve Cornell 's appointment of the deans / unit heads of the statutory colleges , and control of the level of state funding for the statutory colleges . 
 Today , state support is significant . In 2007 – 08 , Cornell received a total of $ 174 million of state appropriations for operations . Of the $ 2 @.@ 5 billion in capital spending budgeted for 2007 – 2017 , $ 721 million was to come from the state of New York . 
 = = Medical education = = 
 Starting in 1878 , Cornell 's Ithaca campus offered a pre @-@ medical school curriculum , although most medical students enrolled in medical school directly after high school . In 1896 , three New York City institutions , the University Medical College , the Loomis Laboratory and the Bellevue Hospital Medical College united with the goal of affiliating with New York University ( NYU ) . Unfortunately , NYU imposed a number of surprising new policies including limiting faculty to what they would have otherwise earned in private practice . The faculty revolted in 1897 and sought return of the property of the three former institutions , with a resulting lawsuit . On March 22 , 1904 and April 5 , 1904 , the New York State Court of Appeals ordered NYU to return property to Loomis Laboratory because the NYU Dean had breached oral promises made to form the merger . Having won their separation from NYU , the medical faculties sought a new university affiliation , and on April 14 , 1898 , Cornell 's Board of Trustees voted to create a medical school and elected former NYU professors as its Dean and faculty . The school opened on October 4 , 1898 in the Loomis Laboratory facilities . In 1900 , a new campus on First Avenue on the upper East Side of Manhattan opened which was donated by Oliver Hazard Payne . Cornell also began a program in the fall of 1898 to allow students to take their first two years of medical school in Ithaca , with Stimson Hall being constructed to house that program . The building opened in 1903 . The M.D. degree program was open to both men and women , but women were required to study in Ithaca for their first two years . In 1908 , Cornell was one of the early medical schools to require an undergraduate degree as a prerequisite to admission to the M.D. program . In 1913 , Cornell 's medical school affiliated with New York Hospital as its teaching hospital . Unlike the New York branch of the medical school which was well endowed , the Ithaca branch was subsidized by the University , and the Trustees reduced its scope to just first year students in 1910 , and eventually phased it out . 
 In 1927 , William Payne Whitney 's $ 27 million donation led to the building of the Payne Whitney Psychiatric Clinic , which became the name for Weill Cornell 's large psychiatric effort . That same year , the college became affiliated with New York Hospital and the two institutions moved to their current joint campus in 1932 . The hospital 's Training School for Nurses became affiliated with the university in 1942 , operating as the Cornell Nursing School until it closed in 1979 . 
 In 1998 , Cornell University Medical College 's affiliate hospital , New York Hospital , merged with Presbyterian Hospital ( the affiliate hospital for Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons ) . The combined institution operates today as NewYork @-@ Presbyterian Hospital . Despite the clinical alliance , the faculty and instructional functions of the Cornell and Columbia units remain distinct and independent . Multiple fellowships and clinical programs have merged , however , and the institutions are continuing in their efforts to bring together departments , which could enhance academic efforts , reduce costs , and increase public recognition . All hospitals in the NewYork @-@ Presbyterian Healthcare System are affiliated with one of the two colleges . 
 Also in 1998 , the medical college was renamed as Weill Medical College of Cornell University after receiving a substantial endowment from Sanford I. Weill , then Chairman of Citigroup . 
 = = Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory = = 
 Curtiss @-@ Wright built this lab facility located in the suburbs of Buffalo , New York as a part of the World War II effort . As a part of its tax planning in the wake of the war effort , Curtiss @-@ Wright donated the facility to Cornell University to operate " as a public trust " and received a charitable tax deduction . Seven other east coast aircraft companies also donated $ 675 @,@ 000 to provide working capital for the lab . The lab operated under the name Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory from 1946 until 1972 . During this same time , Cornell formed a new Graduate School of Aerospace Engineering on its Ithaca , New York campus . 
 CAL invented the first crash test dummy in 1948 , the automotive seat belt in 1951 , the first mobile field unit with Doppler weather radar for weather @-@ tracking in 1956 , the first accurate airborne simulation of another aircraft ( the North American X @-@ 15 ) in 1960 , the first successful demonstration of an automatic terrain @-@ following radar system in 1964 , the first use of a laser beam to successfully measure gas density in 1966 , the first independent <unk> sled test facility to evaluate automotive restraint systems in 1967 , the <unk> , an instrument for research on neuromuscular behavior and disorders in 1969 , and the prototype for the Federal Bureau of Investigation 's fingerprint reading system in 1972 . CAL served as an " honest broker " making objective comparisons of competing plans to build military hardware . It also conducted classified counter @-@ insurgency research in Thailand for the Defense Department . By the time of its divestiture , CAL had 1 @,@ 600 employees . CAL conducted wind tunnel test on models of a number of skyscraper buildings , including most notably the John Hancock Tower in Boston , Massachusetts and the 40 @-@ story Commerce House in Seattle , Washington . 
 During the late 1960s and early 1970s , universities came under criticism for conducting war @-@ related research particularly as the Vietnam War became unpopular , and Cornell University tried to sever its ties . Cornell accepted a $ 25 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 offer from EDP Technology , Inc. to purchase the lab in 1968 . However , a group of lab employees who had made a competing $ 15 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 offer organized a lawsuit to block the sale . In May 1971 , New York 's highest court ruled that Cornell had the right to sell the lab . At the conclusion of the suit , EDP Technology could not raise the money , and in 1972 , Cornell reorganized the lab as the for @-@ profit Calspan Corporation and then sold its stock in Calspan to the public . 
 = = Race relations = = 
 Cornell had enrolled African @-@ American students by the mid @-@ 1880s . On December 4 , 1906 , Alpha Phi Alpha , the first Greek letter fraternity for African @-@ Americans was founded at Cornell . Cornell had a very low black enrollment until the 1960s , when it formed the Committee on Special Educational Projects ( <unk> ) to recruit and mentor minority students . In 1969 , Cornell established its Africana Studies and Research Center , one of the first such black studies programs in the Ivy League . On April 1 , 1970 , during a period of heightened racial tension , the building that housed the Africana Studies center burned down . Since 1972 , <unk> , a special interest program dormitory located in North Campus Low Rise No. 10 , provides housing for many minority students . However , in 1974 , the New York State Board of Regents ordered it desegregated , and its status remained controversial for years . 
 = = = Willard Straight Hall Takeover = = = 
 On April 19 , 1969 , during a parents ' weekend , over 80 members of Cornell 's Afro @-@ American Society took over the student union building , Willard Straight Hall . The takeover was precipitated by increasing racial tension at the university and the students ' frustration with the administration 's lack of support for a black studies program . The specific catalysts for the takeover were a reprimand of three black students for an incident the previous December and a cross burning in front of the black women 's cooperative and other cases of racism . 
 By the following day a deal was brokered between the students and university officials , and on April 20 , the takeover ended , with the administration ceding to some of the Afro @-@ American Society 's demands . The students emerged making a black @-@ power salute and with guns in hand ( the guns had been brought into Willard Straight Hall after the initial takeover ) . James A. Perkins , president of Cornell during the events , would resign soon after the crisis . 
 Some of the elements of the deal required faculty approval , and the faculty voted to uphold the reprimands of the three students on April 21 . The faculty was asked to reconsider , and a group of 2 @,@ 000 to 10 @,@ 000 gathered in Barton Hall to debate the matter as the faculty deliberated . This " Barton Hall Community " formed a representative Constituent Assembly which undertook a comprehensive review of the University . Among the changes stemming from the crisis were the founding of an Africana Studies and Research Center , an overhaul of the campus judicial system , and the addition of students to Cornell 's Board of Trustees . The crisis also prompted New York to enact the Henderson Law requiring every college in the State to adopt rules for the maintenance of public order . 
 Yale Professor Donald Kagan , at Cornell through 1969 ( 1958 – 69 ) was once a liberal democrat , but he changed his views in 1969 and became one of the original signers to the 1997 Statement of Principles by the neoconservative think tank Project for the New American Century . According to Jim Lobe , cited in The Fall of the House of Bush by Craig Unger ( p . 39 , n . ) , Kagan 's turn away from liberalism occurred in 1969 when Cornell University was pressured into starting a " Black Studies " program by gun @-@ wielding students seizing Willard Straight Hall on campus : " Watching administrators demonstrate all the courage of Neville Chamberlain had a great impact on me , and I became much more conservative . " On the eve of the 2000 presidential elections , Kagan and his son , Frederick Kagan , published While America Sleeps , a call to increase defense spending . 
 = = Interdisciplinary studies = = 
 Historically , Cornell 's colleges have operated with great autonomy , each with a separate admissions policy , separate faculty , separate fundraising staff and in many cases , separate tuition structure . However , the University has taken steps to encourage collaboration between related academic fields within the University and with outside organizations . In the 1960s , the University created a Division of Biological Sciences to unify related programs in the Art and Agriculture colleges . Although a success , the structure was ultimately dropped in 1999 due to difficulty with funding . 
 A " Faculty of Computing and Information Science " was established in 1999 to unify computer science efforts throughout the University . This structure <unk> the need for a separate school or college of computer science . For its first ten years , Robert Constable served as its Dean . 
 = = <unk> and use of the endowment = = 
 Since the 1970s , tuition at Cornell and other Ivy League schools has grown much faster than inflation . This trend coincided with the creation of Federally guaranteed student loan programs . At the same time , the endowments of these schools continue to grow due to gifts and successful investments . Critics called for universities to keep their tuition at affordable levels and to not hoard endowment earnings . As a result , in 2008 , Cornell and other Ivy Schools decided to increase the spending of endowment earnings in order to subsidize tuition for low and middle income families , reducing the amount of debt that Cornell students will incur . Cornell also placed a priority to soliciting endowed scholarships for undergraduates . In fall 2007 , Cornell had 1 @,@ 863 undergraduates ( 14 % of all undergraduates ) receiving federal Pell Grants . Cornell 's Pell Grant students roughly totals the combined Pell Grant recipients studying at Harvard , Princeton and Yale . 
 = = Portrayal in fiction = = 
 Students and faculty have chronicled Cornell in works of fiction . The most notable was The Widening Stain which first appeared anonymously . It was since revealed to have been written by Morris Bishop . Alison Lurie wrote a fictional account of the campus during the Vietnam War protests called The War Between the <unk> . Matt Ruff captured Cornell around 1985 in The Fool on the Hill . Richard Fariña wrote a novel based on a real 1958 protest led by Kirkpatrick Sale against in loco parentis policies in Been Down So Long It Looks Like Up to Me . 
 = Grift of the Magi = 
 " Grift of the Magi " is the ninth episode of the eleventh season of the American animated television sitcom The Simpsons . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on December 19 , 1999 . In the episode , mafia boss Fat Tony successfully extorts a large sum of money from Springfield Elementary School , forcing Principal Skinner to close it down . However , a toy company called Kid First Industries , led by Jim Hope , later buys the school and <unk> it . Classes now start focusing on toys and marketing only , and soon a new toy called Funzo that resembles the children 's ideas is released by Kid First Industries in time for the Christmas shopping season . Bart and Lisa decide to destroy all <unk> in Springfield but Gary Coleman , Kid First Industries ' security guard , tries to intercept them . 
 " Grift of the Magi " , which satirizes the commercialization of Christmas , was written by Tom Martin and directed by Matthew Nastuk . The episode features several guest appearances ; Tim Robbins as Jim Hope , Gary Coleman as himself , Joe Mantegna as Fat Tony , and Clarence Clemons as a narrator that tells the viewers at the end of the episode how the story ends . 
 Around 7 @.@ 76 million American homes tuned in to watch the episode during its original airing . It was first released on DVD in 2003 in a collection of five Christmas @-@ related Simpsons episodes , titled Christmas With the Simpsons . Critics have given " Grift of the Magi " generally mixed to negative reviews , particularly because of its plot . The episode has , however , been praised for some of its gags and Coleman 's appearance . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Bart and Milhouse have to remain inside the Simpsons ' house when an ozone hole moves over Springfield . The two dress up as ladies and jump on the bed , singing " Sisters Are Doin ' It for Themselves " . When Homer comes in abruptly , Bart falls off of the bed and lands on one of Homer 's bowling balls and breaks his coccyx . Dr. Hibbert informs Homer and Marge that Bart will have to use a wheelchair until the bone has healed . When Bart arrives at Springfield Elementary School the following day , he finds that he cannot enter because the school lacks ramps for the disabled . As Principal Skinner considers a ramp for the school , mafia boss Fat Tony emerges and suggests that his construction company would be a good choice of company to build it . Although the new ramp system almost immediately collapses , Fat Tony informs Skinner that the construction supposedly cost US $ 200 @,@ 000 and that the school will still have to pay . In response , Principal Skinner decides to close Springfield Elementary due to lack of funds ( having used them to pay off Fat Tony and thus avoid brutal mob reprisals ) . 
 All pleas for financial help are in vain , including a private school play performed in front of Mr. Burns at his mansion , until Jim Hope , the president of a company named Kid First Industries , buys the school and <unk> it . The school 's staff is replaced , and classes now focus on toys and marketing . Lisa soon discovers that the company that bought Springfield Elementary is a toy company , using students for research to make a new popular toy in time for the Christmas shopping season . She is then frightened by the appearance of a robotic figure . When Bart and Lisa are back at home , watching television , they see an advertisement for a toy named Funzo . It has many features suggested by Springfield Elementary students during a brainstorming session at the school . They visit Jim Hope 's office to complain , and he apologetically gives them a free Funzo toy . Bart and Lisa later discover that Funzo is programmed to destroy other toys . 
 On Christmas Eve , with Homer 's help , the two steal all the Funzo toys from underneath every Christmas tree in Springfield with the intention of burning them in the town 's long @-@ running tire fire . However , Gary Coleman , who is a security guard at Kid First Industries , comes to stop them . The two parties argue all night until the next morning when they settle down into civilized discussion about the commercialization of Christmas . Coleman changes his opinion about the toy company and helps the Simpsons destroy the remaining functioning Funzo toys that were not destroyed in the tire fire . Afterwards , Homer invites Coleman to Christmas dinner at the Simpson family 's house , where Mr. Burns shows up after deciding to donate money to Springfield Elementary following an epiphany he had that night . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Grift of the Magi " was written by Tom Martin and directed by Matthew Nastuk as part of the eleventh season of The Simpsons ( 1999 – 2000 ) . It was the first episode that Martin wrote on his own , having previously co @-@ written the season ten episode " Sunday , Cruddy Sunday " with George Meyer , Brian Scully , and The Simpsons showrunner Mike Scully . Martin got the inspiration for " Grift of the Magi " after reading a magazine article about how major companies were receiving permission to advertise their products in school students ' textbooks . He thought it " seemed like a gigantic conflict that could lead to big problems " , and therefore believed an episode based on it would be a good idea . According to DVD Talk reviewer Adam Tyner , the episode is a satire of the commercialization of Christmas . A writer for Newsday has commented that episode skewers " the annual craze for that one ' hot ' toy . " This has also been pointed out by Mike Scully , who said in 2008 that " Grift of the Magi " was produced around the time when " every year there seemed to be a hot toy . Like the <unk> , or whatever – some toy that kids just had to have that year . " In response to Scully 's comment , Martin added that every year " the media would create this gigantic rush at the toy store for various things . This [ episode ] was coming on the heels of , yeah , the <unk> . " 
 Guest stars in the episode include Tim Robbins as Jim Hope , Gary Coleman as himself , Joe Mantegna as Fat Tony , and Clarence Clemons as a narrator . Scully thought Robbins " did a great job " because the Simpsons staff wanted the character of Jim Hope to be " fun and upbeat and somebody the kids would love . " Clemons narrates a few scenes at the end of the episode , telling the viewers how the story ends . When Coleman agrees to spend Christmas with the Simpsons , Clemons says , for example : " And Gary Coleman was as good as his word , and as for old Mr. Burns , he was visited by three ghosts during the night and agreed to fund the school with some money he found in his tuxedo pants . " Shortly after Coleman 's death in 2010 , an article appeared in the newspaper El Comercio that noted that " the nod to the harsh reality of Gary Coleman in [ the episode ] is given : in real life a few years ago Gary had to make a living as a shop security guard . " 
 = = Release = = 
 " Grift of the Magi " originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on December 19 , 1999 . It was viewed in approximately 7 @.@ 76 million households that night . With a Nielsen rating of 7 @.@ 7 , the episode finished 39th in the ratings for the week of December 13 – 19 , 1999 ( tied with an episode of the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) ' s 20 / 20 ) . It was the second highest @-@ rated broadcast on Fox that week , following an episode of Ally McBeal ( which received a 9 @.@ 9 rating ) . On October 14 , 2003 , " Grift of the Magi " was released in the United States on a DVD collection titled Christmas With the Simpsons , along with the season one episode " Simpsons Roasting on an Open Fire " , the season four episode " Mr. Plow " , the season nine episode " Miracle on Evergreen Terrace " , and the season thirteen episode " She of Little Faith " . On October 7 , 2008 , the episode was released on DVD again as part of the box set The Simpsons – The Complete Eleventh Season . Staff members Martin , Scully , Meyer , Matt Groening , Ian Maxtone @-@ Graham , Matt Selman , Tim Long , and Lance Kramer participated in the DVD audio commentary for " Grift of the Magi " . Deleted scenes from the episode were also included on the box set . 
 Since airing , " Grift of the Magi " has received generally mixed to negative reception from critics . While reviewing the eleventh season of The Simpsons , DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson commented that the episode " feels like an amalgamation of elements from prior holiday programs and never really elicits much humor . Christmas is commercialized and corporations use and abuse their customers ? Those aren ’ t exactly rich insights , so [ ' Grift of the Magi ' ] comes across as a below average episode . " In his review of the DVD Christmas With the Simpsons , Digitally Obsessed critic Joel Cunningham wrote that the episode " comes from Season 11 , well past the point when the series had sacrificed character for absurdist humor . Unless you don 't think evil toy marketers , sentient <unk> , and Gary Coleman qualify . Anyway , after the school nearly goes bankrupt , Principal Skinner signs a contract with corporate backers who use the kids to conduct market research . There are some good gags , but the story doesn 't hang together very well . " Adam Tyner of DVD Talk argued that the episode " has a couple of good gags ( Gary Coleman chatting on the phone being my favorite ) but is quickly forgettable " . Brian James of PopMatters described Coleman 's cameo as " hysterical " in 2004 , and Meghan <unk> of the same website listed " Grift of the Magi " at number eight on her 2009 list of the " 10 best holiday themed TV episodes . " 
 = Falklands ' 82 = 
 Falklands ' 82 ( released as Malvinas ' 82 in Spanish markets ) is a 1986 turn @-@ based strategy video game developed and published by Personal Software Services for the ZX Spectrum and Commodore 64 . It is the fifth instalment of the Strategic Wargames series . The game is set during the 1982 Falklands War and revolves around the Argentine occupation and subsequent British re @-@ capture of the Falkland Islands . The player controls the British Task Force as they must either defeat all Argentine forces on the archipelago or re @-@ capture every settlement . 
 A port for the Amstrad CPC was advertised but never released . During development , the developers obtained information and statistics of the war from NATO . The game met with mixed reviews and controversy : critics praised the detailed graphics , but some were divided over the gameplay and authenticity ; others criticised the in @-@ game potential of an Argentine " victory " . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Falklands ' 82 is a turn @-@ based strategy game focusing on land battles during the Falklands War . The player commands the British Task Force against the Argentine ground forces , who are occupying the islands . The game begins by allocating fifteen Royal Navy ships for the task force ; a proportionate amount must be devoted for attack and defence purposes . The player must then choose four landing spots in northern East Falkland to begin the invasion : Port Stanley , Berkeley Sound , Cow Bay and San Carlos Bay . The SAS or SBS are available throughout the game to provide intelligence on Argentine movements ; however , intelligence is limited and may only be collected a certain number of times . At any time , the player may request reinforcements from either one of the two aircraft carriers , HMS Hermes or HMS Invincible . 
 The main objective of the game is to either defeat all occupying Argentine forces in the archipelago , or to capture and hold all ten settlements of the Falklands simultaneously . Depending on the difficulty setting , the game lasts 25 or 30 turns ; if every settlement has not been occupied or any Argentine forces remain by the end of the last turn , the game will end . The capital of the Falklands , Stanley , has the highest concentration of Argentine forces and is usually the last settlement to be captured . There are a total of four choices for combat : attack , move , pass , and " recce " . The game includes a weather system that changes from every turn and provides obstructions for various forces . For example , stormy seas will temporarily render naval vessels and troop reinforcements unavailable , while fog will render both naval and air forces unavailable . 
 During the course of the game , Argentine airstrikes will frequently sink Royal Navy ships , depending on how many of them were initially allocated to defensive positions . In addition , Argentine air forces will occasionally bomb and destroy British forces on the ground , which are represented as animated sprites on the map . The map also displays terrain details , including rivers and mountains . If troops are situated on top of a mountain , they will receive a defensive bonus once attacked ; however , due to the steep terrain , they will move more slowly . If the player chooses to enter an enemy @-@ controlled zone , the move will instantly end , leaving the unit vulnerable to an Argentine attack . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 Personal Software Services was founded in Coventry , England , by Gary Mays and Richard Cockayne in November 1981 . The company was known for creating games that revolved around historic war battles and conflicts , such as Theatre Europe , Bismarck and Battle of Britain . The company had a partnership with French video game developer ERE Informatique and published localised versions of their products to the United Kingdom . The Strategic Wargames series was conceptualised in 1984 by software designer Alan Steel ; during development of these titles , Steel would often research the upcoming game 's topic and pass on his findings to associates in Coventry and London . In 1983 , the company was recognised as " one of the top software houses " in the United Kingdom , and was a finalist for BBC Radio 4 's New Business Enterprise Award . 
 During development of both games , Cockayne and Mays obtained statistics for both the Cold War and Falklands War from NATO and the Soviet embassy in London . In an interview with Your Computer magazine , Richard Cockayne stated that both Theatre Europe and Falklands ' 82 received heavy criticism from the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament and The Sun newspaper , respectively . An editor from The Sunday Press suggested that Falklands ' 82 was " distasteful " because of the game 's possibility of an Argentine victory . The game was planned for an Amstrad CPC port , but was never released for that computer . In Spanish markets , the game was released as Malvinas ' 82 ( the Spanish name for the Falkland Islands ) and included a manual which was never translated into English . 
 In 1986 , Cockayne decided to alter products for release on 16 @-@ bit consoles , since smaller 8 @-@ bit consoles , such as the ZX Spectrum , lacked the processing power for larger strategy games . The decision was falsely interpreted by video game journalist Phillipa Irving as " pulling out " from the Spectrum market . Following years of successful sales throughout the mid @-@ 1980s , Personal Software Services experienced financial difficulties , and Cockayne admitted in a retrospective interview that " he took his eye off the ball " . The company was acquired by Mirrorsoft in February 1987 , and was later dispossessed due to debt . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game received mostly positive reviews from critics upon release . Rachael Smith of Your Sinclair praised the overall experience of the gameplay , stating that it was " ideal " for newcomers and plays " smooth " ; however , she criticised it for being " annoyingly slow " at times . Sean Masterson of Crash criticised the gameplay , stating that it fails to " offer a serious challenge " and prohibits the player from experimenting with choices the real commanders never had , such as planning tactical air strikes . A reviewer from Sinclair User praised the gameplay , stating that it was " swift " and had " nice touches " for beginners to the wargame genre . He sarcastically remarked that the inability to play on the Argentine side would help improve Anglo @-@ Argentinian relations . A reviewer from Zzap ! 64 criticised the game 's lack of authenticity and strategy , stating that the developer 's previous games had more credence if the player " played them with their eyes shut " . 
 A reviewer from ZX Computing heralded the graphics and details of the map but suggested that " hardened wargamers " would not be interested in graphical advancements . A reviewer from Computer Gamer praised its simplicity , stating that it was a " simple game " and would prove to be an " excellent " introduction to the wargame strategy genre . In a retrospective review , Tim Stone of Rock , Paper , Shotgun praised the game 's ability to display the war in a neutral manner ; however , he questioned the inability to play on the Argentine side . Stone concluded that the game had " greater significance " over other war strategy games at the time and had an " undeniable quality " . Upon release , The Sun newspaper criticised Falklands ' 82 for including a scenario where " Argentina could win , " but Cockayne maintained that his company 's video games did not <unk> the war . 
 = Dive ( Usher song ) = 
 " Dive " is a song recorded by American recording artist Usher for his seventh studio album Looking 4 Myself ( 2012 ) . It was written and produced by Rico Love , Jim Jonsin , Danny Morris and Frank Romano . " Dive " is a slow @-@ paced R & B ballad with elements of pop music , with Usher making use of his falsetto range . Its lyrics use the metaphor of diving , which was interpreted by critics to discuss a commitment to a relationship . The song was announced by Usher via Twitter as the fifth single from Looking 4 Myself on August 21 , 2012 . It was released to urban radio on August 28 , 2012 . 
 " Dive " was received well by critics , who praised its production and Usher 's vocals , particularly his falsetto . An accompanying music video directed by Chris Applebaum , portrays Victoria 's Secret Angel model Chanel Iman as Usher 's love interest , showing them being intimate and making love in several scenes . Upon the release of Looking 4 Myself , the song debuted at number 50 on the South Korea Gaon International Chart , with sales of 6 @,@ 546 digital copies . " Dive " peaked at number 34 on the US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs , remaining on the chart for twelve weeks before dropping out . 
 = = Composition and lyrics = = 
 The track is a slow @-@ paced R & B ballad with elements of pop music , that runs for a length of three minutes and 47 seconds . Throughout the song , Usher makes use of his falsetto range , to which Billboard 's Erika Ramirez described as " soulful " . Chuck Arnold of People complimented Usher 's falsetto on both " Dive " and lead single " Climax " , adding that the songs show " that he 's a " better singer than ever " . Matt Cibula of PopMatters wrote that " Dive " contains a triple entendre in its lyrics : seemingly singing about diving or oral sex , " only to realize that what he 's really discussing " is commitment to a relationship . Trent Fitzgerald of PopCrush perceived that the song 's lyrics " metaphorically compares love to the crashing waters of the ocean " . Carrie Battan of Pitchfork interpreted the lyrics as " explicit " which might " make you cringe if they 'd come from of anyone else " in the line : " It 's raining inside your bed / No parts are dry / Lovin ' made you so wet / Your Legs / Your thighs " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Dive " received universally positive acclaim from music critics . DJ Booth described its production as " sultry " and noted the song as a potential hit for Usher . Erika Ramirez of Billboard also saw the song as a success , writing that it is " slower and more sensual " than Jim Jonsin and Rico Love 's " Motivation " ( 2011 ) performed by Kelly Rowland . Ramirez also praised Usher 's vocals , more specifically his falsetto , the reasoning to why " we fell in love with the singer to begin with " . Complex 's Brad Wete perceived the song as a " sexy slow @-@ winding cut " , that is " powered by Usher ’ s falsetto " . Ryan Hadfield of Consequence of Sound also praised Usher 's vocals , with " Dive " and lead single " Climax " showing his " superior R & B vocal range " . Pitchfork 's Carry Battan wrote that Usher 's " vocal mastery " allows him to turn the chorus of " Dive " — which she viewed as " cornball " — into something " more specific , as if he were addressing just one woman [ ... ] " . PopMatters ' Matt Cibula saw the lyric 's as " clever " for incorporating a triple @-@ entendre . Cibula further lauded Usher 's falsetto , which he wrote Usher sings in an " urgent " whisper . 
 = = Music video and live performances = = 
 The music video for " Dive " was filmed in July 2012 , directed by Chris Applebaum , and released to VEVO on August 25 , 2012 . In the video , Victoria 's Secret Angel model Chanel Iman plays as Usher 's love interest . Set on a luxury Yacht in the open sea , the video begins with Usher talking , before showing him singing the first verse . The video intercuts to Iman , and Usher inside a cabin with water gushing in . For the chorus , Usher and Iman are being intimate , with water further entering the singer 's cabin . Usher and Iman are once again being intimate for the second verse , sat outside of the Yacht , with water now level with Usher 's waist inside the cabin , entering the second chorus , where Usher and Iman make love . During the bridge , both are romancing within the cabin 's bathroom , with the video intercutting to different romantic scenarios . Further scenarios are shown in the final chorus , with the water now fully submerging the cabin and Usher . The video closes with Usher swimming to safety , but before reaching the surface , he and Iman approach each other , embracing in the water . Opening the 2012 iTunes Festival , Usher performed " Dive " for the first time along with " Can 't Stop Won 't Stop " , " Twisted " and " Numb " and other songs . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Vocal recording – Parkland Playhouse , Parkland , FL ; <unk> Studios , Miami , FL 
 Mixing – Parkland Playhouse , Parkland , FL 
 Personnel 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Looking 4 Myself , RCA Records . 
 = = Charts = = 
 Upon the release of Looking 4 Myself , due to digital downloads , " Dive " entered the singles chart in South Korea . It debuted on the South Korea Gaon International Chart at number 50 on June 10 , 2012 , with sales of 6 @,@ 546 digital copies . It debuted at number eight on the US Bubbling Under Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Singles chart for the chart issue dated September 8 , 2012 . On the US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart , " Dive " peaked at number 34 , remaining on the chart for twelve weeks before dropping out . 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Justinian I = 
 Justinian I ( / <unk> / ; Latin : Flavius Petrus <unk> Iustinianus Augustus , Greek : Φλάβιος <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ) ( c . 482 – 14 November 565 ) , traditionally known as Justinian the Great and also Saint Justinian the Great in the Eastern Orthodox Church , was a Byzantine ( East Roman ) emperor from 527 to 565 . During his reign , Justinian sought to revive the empire 's greatness and reconquer the lost western half of the historical Roman Empire . Justinian 's rule constitutes a distinct epoch in the history of the Later Roman empire , and his reign is marked by the ambitious but only partly realized <unk> imperii , or " restoration of the Empire " . 
 Because of his restoration activities , Justinian has sometimes been called the " last Roman " in modern historiography . This ambition was expressed by the partial recovery of the territories of the defunct western Roman empire . His general , Belisarius , swiftly conquered the Vandal kingdom in North Africa . Subsequently Belisarius , Narses , and other generals conquered the Ostrogothic kingdom , restoring Dalmatia , Sicily , Italy , and Rome to the empire after more than half a century of rule by the Ostrogoths . The prefect Liberius reclaimed the south of the Iberian peninsula , establishing the province of Spania . These campaigns re @-@ established Roman control over the western Mediterranean , increasing the Empire 's annual revenue by over a million solidi . During his reign Justinian also subdued the <unk> , a people on the east coast of the Black Sea that had never been under Roman rule before . 
 A still more resonant aspect of his legacy was the uniform rewriting of Roman law , the Corpus Juris Civilis , which is still the basis of civil law in many modern states . His reign also marked a blossoming of Byzantine culture , and his building program yielded such masterpieces as the church of Hagia Sophia . A devastating outbreak of bubonic plague in the early 540s marked the end of an age of splendour . 
 = = Life = = 
 Justinian was born in <unk> around 482 . A native speaker of Latin ( possibly the last Roman emperor to be one ) , he came from a peasant family believed to have been of <unk> @-@ Roman or Thraco @-@ Roman origins . The cognomen Iustinianus , which he took later , is indicative of adoption by his uncle Justin . During his reign , he founded Justiniana Prima not far from his birthplace , which today is in South East Serbia . His mother was <unk> , the sister of Justin . Justin , who was in the imperial guard ( the Excubitors ) before he became emperor , adopted Justinian , brought him to Constantinople , and ensured the boy 's education . As a result , Justinian was well educated in jurisprudence , theology and Roman history . Justinian served for some time with the Excubitors but the details of his early career are unknown . Chronicler John Malalas , who lived during the reign of Justinian , tells of his appearance that he was short , fair skinned , curly haired , round faced and handsome . Another contemporary chronicler , Procopius , compares Justinian 's appearance to that of tyrannical Emperor Domitian , although this is probably slander . 
 When Emperor Anastasius died in 518 , Justin was proclaimed the new emperor , with significant help from Justinian . During Justin 's reign ( 518 – 527 ) , Justinian was the emperor 's close confidant . Justinian showed much ambition , and it has been thought that he was functioning as virtual regent long before Justin made him associate emperor on 1 April 527 , although there is no conclusive evidence for this . As Justin became senile near the end of his reign , Justinian became the de facto ruler . Justinian was appointed consul in 521 and later commander of the army of the east . Upon Justin 's death on 1 August 527 , Justinian became the sole sovereign . 
 As a ruler , Justinian showed great energy . He was known as " the emperor who never sleeps " on account of his work habits . Nevertheless , he seems to have been amiable and easy to approach . Around 525 , he married his mistress , Theodora , in Constantinople . She was by profession a courtesan and some twenty years his junior . In earlier times , Justinian could not have married her because of her class , but his uncle , Emperor Justin I , had passed a law allowing intermarriage between social classes . Theodora would become very influential in the politics of the Empire , and later emperors would follow Justinian 's precedent in marrying outside the aristocratic class . The marriage caused a scandal , but Theodora would prove to be shrewd judge of character and Justinian 's greatest supporter . Other talented individuals included Tribonian , his legal adviser ; Peter the Patrician , the diplomat and longtime head of the palace bureaucracy ; Justinian 's finance ministers John the Cappadocian and Peter <unk> , who managed to collect taxes more efficiently than any before , thereby funding Justinian 's wars ; and finally , his prodigiously talented generals , Belisarius and Narses . 
 Justinian 's rule was not universally popular ; early in his reign he nearly lost his throne during the Nika riots , and a conspiracy against the emperor 's life by dissatisfied businessmen was discovered as late as 562 . Justinian was struck by the plague in the early 540s but recovered . Theodora died in 548 at a relatively young age , possibly of cancer ; Justinian outlived her by nearly twenty years . Justinian , who had always had a keen interest in theological matters and actively participated in debates on Christian doctrine , became even more devoted to religion during the later years of his life . When he died on 14 November 565 , he left no children , though his wife Theodora had given birth to a stillborn son several years into his reign . He was succeeded by Justin II , who was the son of his sister <unk> and married to Sophia , the niece of Empress Theodora . Justinian 's body was entombed in a specially built mausoleum in the Church of the Holy Apostles until it was desecrated and robbed during the pillage of the city in 1204 by the Latin States of the Fourth Crusade . 
 = = Reign = = 
 = = = Legislative activities = = = 
 Justinian achieved lasting fame through his judicial reforms , particularly through the complete revision of all Roman law , something that had not previously been attempted . The total of Justinian 's legislature is known today as the Corpus juris <unk> . It consists of the Codex Iustinianus , the Digesta or <unk> , the Institutiones , and the Novellae . 
 Early in his reign , Justinian appointed the quaestor Tribonian to oversee this task . The first draft of the Codex Iustinianus , a codification of imperial constitutions from the 2nd century onward , was issued on 7 April 529 . ( The final version appeared in 534 . ) It was followed by the Digesta ( or <unk> ) , a compilation of older legal texts , in 533 , and by the Institutiones , a textbook explaining the principles of law . The Novellae , a collection of new laws issued during Justinian 's reign , supplements the Corpus . As opposed to the rest of the corpus , the Novellae appeared in Greek , the common language of the Eastern Empire . 
 The Corpus forms the basis of Latin jurisprudence ( including ecclesiastical Canon Law ) and , for historians , provides a valuable insight into the concerns and activities of the later Roman Empire . As a collection it gathers together the many sources in which the leges ( laws ) and the other rules were expressed or published : proper laws , senatorial consults ( <unk> ) , imperial decrees , case law , and jurists ' opinions and interpretations ( responsa <unk> ) . Tribonian 's code ensured the survival of Roman law . It formed the basis of later Byzantine law , as expressed in the Basilika of Basil I and Leo VI the Wise . The only western province where the <unk> code was introduced was Italy ( after the conquest by the so @-@ called Pragmatic Sanction of 554 ) , from where it was to pass to Western Europe in the 12th century and become the basis of much European law code . It eventually passed to Eastern Europe where it appeared in Slavic editions , and it also passed on to Russia . It remains influential to this day . 
 He passed laws to protect prostitutes from exploitation and women from being forced into prostitution . Rapists were treated severely . Further , by his policies : women charged with major crimes should be guarded by other women to prevent sexual abuse ; if a woman was widowed , her dowry should be returned ; and a husband could not take on a major debt without his wife giving her consent twice . 
 = = = Nika riots = = = 
 Justinian 's habit of choosing efficient , but unpopular advisers nearly cost him his throne early in his reign . In January 532 , partisans of the chariot racing factions in Constantinople , normally divided among themselves , united against Justinian in a revolt that has become known as the Nika riots . They forced him to dismiss Tribonian and two of his other ministers , and then attempted to overthrow Justinian himself and replace him with the senator Hypatius , who was a nephew of the late emperor Anastasius . While the crowd was rioting in the streets , Justinian considered fleeing the capital , but eventually decided to stay , apparently on the prompting of Theodora , who refused to leave . In the next two days , he ordered the brutal suppression of the riots by his generals Belisarius and Mundus . Procopius relates that 30 @,@ 000 unarmed civilians were killed in the Hippodrome . On Theodora 's insistence , and apparently against his own judgment , Justinian had Anastasius ' nephews executed . 
 The destruction that had taken place during the revolt provided Justinian with an opportunity to tie his name to a series of splendid new buildings , most notably the architectural innovation of the domed Hagia Sophia . 
 = = = Military activities = = = 
 One of the most spectacular features of Justinian 's reign was the recovery of large stretches of land around the Western Mediterranean basin that had slipped out of Imperial control in the 5th century . As a Christian Roman emperor , Justinian considered it his divine duty to restore the Roman Empire to its ancient boundaries . Although he never personally took part in military campaigns , he boasted of his successes in the prefaces to his laws and had them commemorated in art . The re @-@ conquests were in large part carried out by his general Belisarius . 
 = = = = War with the Sassanid Empire , 527 – 532 = = = = 
 From his uncle , Justinian inherited ongoing hostilities with the Sassanid Empire . In 530 a Persian army was defeated at Dara , but the next year saw the defeat of Roman forces under Belisarius near Callinicum . When king Kavadh I of Persia died ( September 531 ) , Justinian concluded an " Eternal Peace " ( which cost him 11 @,@ 000 pounds of gold ) with his successor Khosrau I ( 532 ) . Having thus secured his eastern frontier , Justinian turned his attention to the West , where Germanic kingdoms had been established in the territories of the former Western Roman Empire . 
 = = = = Conquest of North Africa , 533 – 534 = = = = 
 The first of the western kingdoms Justinian attacked was that of the Vandals in North Africa . King Hilderic , who had maintained good relations with Justinian and the North African Catholic clergy , had been overthrown by his cousin Gelimer in 530 . Imprisoned , the deposed king appealed to Justinian . 
 In 533 , Belisarius with a fleet of 92 dromons escorting 500 transports , landed at Caput Vada ( modern Ras <unk> ) in modern Tunisia with an army of about 15 @,@ 000 men , as well as a number of barbarian troops . They defeated the Vandals , who were caught completely off guard , at Ad Decimum on 14 September 533 and Tricamarum in December ; Belisarius took Carthage . King Gelimer fled to Mount <unk> in Numidia , but surrendered the next spring . He was taken to Constantinople , where he was paraded in a triumph . Sardinia and Corsica , the Balearic Islands , and the stronghold Septem <unk> near Gibraltar were recovered in the same campaign . 
 An African prefecture , centered in Carthage , was established in April 534 , but it would teeter on the brink of collapse during the next 15 years , amidst warfare with the Moors and military mutinies . The area was not completely pacified until 548 , but remained peaceful thereafter and enjoyed a measure of prosperity . The recovery of Africa cost the empire about 100 @,@ 000 pounds of gold . 
 = = = = War in Italy , first phase , 535 – 540 = = = = 
 As in Africa , dynastic struggles in Ostrogothic Italy provided an opportunity for intervention . The young king Athalaric had died on 2 October 534 , and a usurper , Theodahad , had imprisoned queen Amalasuntha , Theodoric 's daughter and mother of Athalaric , on the island of <unk> in Lake <unk> , where he had her assassinated in 535 . Thereupon Belisarius with 7 @,@ 500 men invaded Sicily ( 535 ) and advanced into Italy , sacking Naples and capturing Rome on 9 December 536 . By that time Theodahad had been deposed by the Ostrogothic army , who had elected <unk> as their new king . He gathered a large army and besieged Rome from February 537 to March 538 without being able to retake the city . 
 Justinian sent another general , Narses , to Italy , but tensions between Narses and Belisarius hampered the progress of the campaign . Milan was taken , but was soon recaptured and razed by the Ostrogoths . Justinian recalled Narses in 539 . By then the military situation had turned in favour of the Romans , and in 540 Belisarius reached the Ostrogothic capital Ravenna . There he was offered the title of Western Roman Emperor by the Ostrogoths at the same time that envoys of Justinian were arriving to negotiate a peace that would leave the region north of the Po River in Gothic hands . Belisarius feigned to accept the offer , entered the city in May 540 , and reclaimed it for the Empire . Then , having been recalled by Justinian , Belisarius returned to Constantinople , taking the captured <unk> and his wife Matasuntha with him . 
 = = = = War with the Sassanid Empire , 540 – 562 = = = = 
 Belisarius had been recalled in the face of renewed hostilities by the Persians . Following a revolt against the Empire in Armenia in the late 530s and possibly motivated by the pleas of Ostrogothic ambassadors , King Khosrau I broke the " Eternal Peace " and invaded Roman territory in the spring of 540 . He first sacked Beroea and then Antioch ( allowing the garrison of 6 @,@ 000 men to leave the city ) , besieged Daras , and then went on to attack the small but strategically significant satellite kingdom of Lazica near the Black Sea , exacting tribute from the towns he passed along his way . He forced Justinian I to pay him 5 @,@ 000 pounds of gold , plus 500 pounds of gold more each year . 
 Belisarius arrived in the East in 541 , but , after some success , was again recalled to Constantinople in 542 . The reasons for his withdrawal are not known , but it may have been instigated by rumours of disloyalty on behalf of the general reaching the court . The outbreak of the plague caused a lull in the fighting during the year 543 . The following year Khosrau defeated a Byzantine army of 30 @,@ 000 men , but unsuccessfully besieged the major city of Edessa . Both parties made little headway , and in 545 a truce was agreed upon for the southern part of the Roman @-@ Persian frontier . After that the Lazic War in the North continued for several years , until a second truce in 557 , followed by a Fifty Years ' Peace in 562 . Under its terms , the Persians agreed to abandon Lazica in exchange for an annual tribute of 400 or 500 pounds of gold ( 30 @,@ 000 solidi ) to be paid by the Romans . 
 = = = = War in Italy , second phase , 541 – 554 = = = = 
 While military efforts were directed to the East , the situation in Italy took a turn for the worse . Under their respective kings Ildibad and <unk> ( both murdered in 541 ) and especially Totila , the Ostrogoths made quick gains . After a victory at Faenza in 542 , they reconquered the major cities of Southern Italy and soon held almost the entire peninsula . Belisarius was sent back to Italy late in 544 , but lacked sufficient troops . Making no headway , he was relieved of his command in 548 . Belisarius succeeded in defeating a Gothic fleet with 200 ships . During this period the city of Rome changed hands three more times , first taken and depopulated by the Ostrogoths in December 546 , then reconquered by the Byzantines in 547 , and then again by the Goths in January 550 . Totila also plundered Sicily and attacked the Greek coastlines . 
 Finally , Justinian dispatched a force of approximately 35 @,@ 000 men ( 2 @,@ 000 men were detached and sent to invade southern Visigothic Hispania ) under the command of Narses . The army reached Ravenna in June 552 , and defeated the Ostrogoths decisively within a month at the battle of Busta Gallorum in the Apennines , where Totila was slain . After a second battle at Mons Lactarius in October that year , the resistance of the Ostrogoths was finally broken . In 554 , a large @-@ scale Frankish invasion was defeated at Casilinum , and Italy was secured for the Empire , though it would take Narses several years to reduce the remaining Gothic strongholds . At the end of the war , Italy was garrisoned with an army of 16 @,@ 000 men . The recovery of Italy cost the empire about 300 @,@ 000 pounds of gold . 
 = = = = Other campaigns = = = = 
 In addition to the other conquests , the Empire established a presence in Visigothic Hispania , when the usurper Athanagild requested assistance in his rebellion against King <unk> I. In 552 , Justinian dispatched a force of 2 @,@ 000 men ; according to the historian Jordanes , this army was led by the octogenarian Liberius . The Byzantines took Cartagena and other cities on the southeastern coast and founded the new province of Spania before being checked by their former ally Athanagild , who had by now become king . This campaign marked the apogee of Byzantine expansion . 
 During Justinian 's reign , the Balkans suffered from several incursions by the Turkic and Slavic peoples who lived north of the Danube . Here , Justinian resorted mainly to a combination of diplomacy and a system of defensive works . In 559 a particularly dangerous invasion of <unk> and Kutrigurs under their khan <unk> threatened Constantinople , but they were repulsed by the aged general Belisarius . 
 = = = Results = = = 
 Justinian 's ambition to restore the Roman Empire to its former glory was only partly realized . In the West , the brilliant early military successes of the 530s were followed by years of stagnation . The dragging war with the Goths was a disaster for Italy , even though its long @-@ lasting effects may have been less severe than is sometimes thought . The heavy taxes that the administration imposed upon its population were deeply resented . While the final victory in Italy and the conquest of the coast of southern Hispania significantly enlarged the area over which the Empire could project its power and influence , and while they must have contributed to the Empire 's prestige , most of the conquests proved ephemeral . The greater part of Italy would be lost to the invading Lombards three years after Justinian 's death ( 568 ) , the newly founded province of Spania was completely recovered by the <unk> Visigoths in 624 under the leadership of <unk> , and within a century and a half Africa would be forever lost for the empire to the Rashidun and Umayyad <unk> during the Muslim conquests . 
 Events of the later years of the reign showed that Constantinople itself was not safe from barbarian incursions from the north , and even the relatively benevolent historian Menander Protector felt the need to attribute the Emperor 's failure to protect the capital to the weakness of his body in his old age . In his efforts to renew the Roman Empire , Justinian dangerously stretched its resources while failing to take into account the changed realities of 6th @-@ century Europe . Paradoxically , the grand scale of Justinian 's military successes probably contributed in part to the Empire 's subsequent decline . 
 = = = Religious activities = = = 
 Justinian saw the orthodoxy of his empire threatened by diverging religious currents , especially Monophysitism , which had many adherents in the eastern provinces of Syria and Egypt . Monophysite doctrine , which maintains that Jesus Christ had one divine nature or a synthesis of a divine and human nature , had been condemned as a heresy by the Council of Chalcedon in 451 , and the tolerant policies towards Monophysitism of Zeno and Anastasius I had been a source of tension in the relationship with the bishops of Rome . Justin reversed this trend and confirmed the Chalcedonian doctrine , openly condemning the Monophysites . Justinian , who continued this policy , tried to impose religious unity on his subjects by forcing them to accept doctrinal compromises that might appeal to all parties , a policy that proved unsuccessful as he satisfied none of them . 
 Near the end of his life , Justinian became ever more inclined towards the Monophysite doctrine , especially in the form of <unk> , but he died before being able to issue any legislation . The empress Theodora sympathized with the Monophysites and is said to have been a constant source of pro @-@ Monophysite intrigues at the court in Constantinople in the earlier years . In the course of his reign , Justinian , who had a genuine interest in matters of theology , authored a small number of theological treatises . 
 = = = = Religious policy = = = = 
 As in his secular administration , despotism appeared also in the Emperor 's ecclesiastical policy . He regulated everything , both in religion and in law . 
 At the very beginning of his reign , he deemed it proper to promulgate by law the Church 's belief in the Trinity and the Incarnation ; and to threaten all heretics with the appropriate penalties ; whereas he subsequently declared that he intended to deprive all <unk> of orthodoxy of the opportunity for such offense by due process of law . He made the <unk> @-@ Constantinopolitan creed the sole symbol of the Church , and accorded legal force to the canons of the four ecumenical councils . The bishops in attendance at the Second Council of Constantinople in 553 recognized that nothing could be done in the Church contrary to the emperor 's will and command ; while , on his side , the emperor , in the case of the Patriarch Anthimus , reinforced the ban of the Church with temporal proscription . Justinian protected the purity of the church by suppressing heretics . He neglected no opportunity for securing the rights of the Church and clergy , for protecting and extending monasticism . He granted the monks the right to inherit property from private citizens and the right to receive <unk> or annual gifts from the Imperial treasury or from the taxes of certain provinces and he prohibited lay confiscation of monastic estates . 
 Although the despotic character of his measures is contrary to modern sensibilities , he was indeed a " nursing father " of the Church . Both the Codex and the Novellae contain many enactments regarding donations , foundations , and the administration of ecclesiastical property ; election and rights of bishops , priests and abbots ; monastic life , residential obligations of the clergy , conduct of divine service , episcopal jurisdiction , et cetera . Justinian also rebuilt the Church of Hagia Sophia ( which cost 20 @,@ 000 pounds of gold ) , the original site having been destroyed during the Nika riots . The new Hagia Sophia , with its numerous chapels and shrines , gilded octagonal dome , and mosaics , became the centre and most visible monument of Eastern Orthodoxy in Constantinople . 
 = = = = Religious relations with Rome = = = = 
 From the middle of the 5th century onward , increasingly arduous tasks confronted the emperors of the East in ecclesiastical matters . Justinian entered the arena of ecclesiastical statecraft shortly after his uncle 's accession in 518 , and put an end to the Acacian schism . Previous Emperors had tried to alleviate theological conflicts by declarations that deemphasized the Council of Chalcedon , which had condemned Monophysitism , which had strongholds in Egypt and Syria , and by tolerating the appointment of Monophysites to church offices . The Popes reacted by severing ties with the Patriarch of Constantinople who supported these policies . Emperors Justin I ( and later Justinian himself ) rescinded these policies and reestablished the union between Constantinople and Rome . After this , Justinian also felt entitled to settle disputes in papal elections , as he did when he favoured Vigilius and had his rival <unk> deported . 
 This new @-@ found unity between East and West did not , however , not solve the ongoing disputes in the east . Justinian 's policies switched between attempts to force Monophysites to accept the Chalcedonian creed by persecuting their bishops and monks - thereby <unk> their sympathizers in Egypt and other provinces - and attempts at a compromise that would win over the Monophysites without surrendering the Chalcedonian faith . Such an approach was supported by the Empress Theodora , who favoured the Monophysites unreservedly . In the condemnation of the Three Chapters , three theologians that had opposed Monophysitism before and after the Council of Chalcedon , Justinian tried to win over the opposition . At the Fifth Ecumenical Council , most of the Eastern church yielded to the Emperor 's demands and Pope Vigilius , who was forcibly brought to Constantinople and besieged at a <unk> , finally also gave his assent . However , the condemnation was received unfavourably in the west , where it led to new ( albeit temporal ) schism , and failed to reach its goal in the east , as the Monophysites , remained unsatisfied ; all the more bitter for him because during his last years he took an even greater interest in theological matters . 
 = = = = Suppression of other religions and philosophies = = = = 
 Justinian 's religious policy reflected the Imperial conviction that the unity of the Empire presupposed unity of faith , and it appeared to him obvious that this faith could only be the orthodox ( Nicaean ) . Those of a different belief were subjected to persecution , which imperial legislation had effected from the time of Constantius II and which would now vigorously continue . The Codex contained two statutes that decreed the total destruction of paganism , even in private life ; these provisions were zealously enforced . Contemporary sources ( John Malalas , Theophanes , John of Ephesus ) tell of severe persecutions , even of men in high position . In 529 , the Neoplatonic Academy of Athens was placed under state control as paganism , strangling this training school for this branch of Hellenistic philosophy .. 
 In Asia Minor alone , John of Ephesus reported to have converted 70 @,@ 000 pagans . Other peoples also accepted Christianity : the Heruli , the Huns dwelling near the Don , the <unk> , and the <unk> in Caucasia . 
 The worship of Amun at <unk> in the Libyan desert was abolished ; and so were the remnants of the worship of Isis on the island of Philae , at the first cataract of the Nile . The Presbyter Julian and the Bishop Longinus conducted a mission among the Nabataeans , and Justinian attempted to strengthen Christianity in Yemen by despatching a bishop from Egypt . 
 The civil rights of Jews were restricted and their religious privileges threatened . Justinian also interfered in the internal affairs of the synagogue , and encouraged the Jews to use the Greek Septuagint in their synagogues in Constantinople . 
 The Emperor faced significant opposition from the Samaritans , who resisted conversion to Christianity and were repeatedly in insurrection . He persecuted them with rigorous edicts , but yet could not prevent reprisals towards Christians from taking place in Samaria toward the close of his reign . The consistency of Justinian 's policy meant that the Manicheans too suffered persecution , experiencing both exile and threat of capital punishment . At Constantinople , on one occasion , not a few Manicheans , after strict inquisition , were executed in the emperor 's very presence : some by burning , others by drowning . 
 = = = Architecture , learning , art and literature = = = 
 Justinian was a prolific builder ; the historian Procopius bears witness to his activities in this area . Under Justinian 's patronage the San Vitale in Ravenna , which features two famous mosaics representing Justinian and Theodora , was completed . Most notably , he had the Hagia Sophia , originally a basilica @-@ style church that had been burnt down during the Nika riots , splendidly rebuilt according to a completely different ground plan , under the architectural supervision of Isidore of Miletus and Anthemius of Tralles . According to Procopius , Justinian stated at the completion of this edifice , " Solomon I have outdone thee " ( in reference to the 1st Jewish temple ) . This new cathedral , with its magnificent dome filled with mosaics , remained the centre of eastern Christianity for centuries . 
 Another prominent church in the capital , the Church of the Holy Apostles , which had been in a very poor state near the end of the 5th century , was likewise rebuilt . Works of embellishment were not confined to churches alone : excavations at the site of the Great Palace of Constantinople have yielded several high @-@ quality mosaics dating from Justinian 's reign , and a column topped by a bronze statue of Justinian on horseback and dressed in a military costume was erected in the <unk> in Constantinople in 543 . Rivalry with other , more established patrons from the Constantinopolitan and exiled Roman aristocracy ( like Anicia Juliana ) might have enforced Justinian 's building activities in the capital as a means of strengthening his dynasty 's prestige . 
 Justinian also strengthened the borders of the Empire from Africa to the East through the construction of fortifications , and ensured Constantinople of its water supply through construction of underground cisterns ( see Basilica Cistern ) . To prevent floods from damaging the strategically important border town Dara , an advanced arch dam was built . During his reign the large Sangarius Bridge was built in Bithynia , securing a major military supply route to the east . Furthermore , Justinian restored cities damaged by earthquake or war and built a new city near his place of birth called Justiniana Prima , which was intended to replace Thessalonica as the political and religious centre of Illyricum . 
 In Justinian 's reign , and partly under his patronage , Byzantine culture produced noteworthy historians , including Procopius and Agathias , and poets such as Paul the <unk> and Romanus the Melodist flourished . On the other hand , centres of learning as the Platonic Academy in Athens and the famous Law School of Beirut lost their importance during his reign . Despite Justinian 's passion for the glorious Roman past , the practice of choosing Roman consul was allowed to lapse after 541 . 
 = = = Economy and administration = = = 
 As was the case under Justinian 's predecessors , the Empire 's economic health rested primarily on agriculture . In addition , long @-@ distance trade flourished , reaching as far north as Cornwall where tin was exchanged for Roman wheat . Within the Empire , convoys sailing from Alexandria provided Constantinople with wheat and grains . Justinian made the traffic more efficient by building a large granary on the island of Tenedos for storage and further transport to Constantinople . Justinian also tried to find new routes for the eastern trade , which was suffering badly from the wars with the Persians . 
 One important luxury product was silk , which was imported and then processed in the Empire . In order to protect the manufacture of silk products , Justinian granted a monopoly to the imperial factories in 541 . In order to bypass the Persian <unk> , Justinian established friendly relations with the Abyssinians , whom he wanted to act as trade mediators by transporting Indian silk to the Empire ; the Abyssinians , however , were unable to compete with the Persian merchants in India . Then , in the early 550s , two monks succeeded in smuggling eggs of silk worms from Central Asia back to Constantinople , and silk became an indigenous product . 
 Gold and silver were mined in the Balkans , Anatolia , Armenia , Cyprus , Egypt and Nubia . 
 At the start of Justinian I 's reign he had inherited a surplus 28 @,@ 800 @,@ 000 solidi ( 400 @,@ 000 pounds of gold ) in the imperial treasury from Anastasius I and Justin I. Under Justinian 's rule , measures were taken to counter corruption in the provinces and to make tax collection more efficient . Greater administrative power was given to both the leaders of the prefectures and of the provinces , while power was taken away from the vicariates of the dioceses , of which a number were abolished . The overall trend was towards a simplification of administrative infrastructure . According to Brown ( 1971 ) , the increased professionalization of tax collection did much to destroy the traditional structures of provincial life , as it weakened the autonomy of the town councils in the Greek towns . It has been estimated that before Justinian I 's reconquests the state had an annual revenue of 5 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 solidi in AD 530 , but after his reconquests , the annual revenue was increased to 6 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 solidi in AD 550 . 
 Throughout Justinian 's reign , the cities and villages of the East prospered , although Antioch was struck by two earthquakes ( 526 , 528 ) and sacked and evacuated by the Persians ( 540 ) . Justinian had the city rebuilt , but on a slightly smaller scale . 
 Despite all these measures , the Empire suffered several major setbacks in the course of the 6th century . The first one was the plague , which lasted from 541 to 543 and , by decimating the Empire 's population , probably created a scarcity of labor and a rising of wages . The lack of manpower also led to a significant increase in the number of " barbarians " in the Byzantine armies after the early 540s . The protracted war in Italy and the wars with the Persians themselves laid a heavy burden on the Empire 's resources , and Justinian was criticized for curtailing the government @-@ run post service , which he limited to only one eastern route of military importance . 
 = = Natural disasters = = 
 During the decade of the 530s , it seemed to many that God had abandoned the Christian Roman Empire . There were noxious fumes in the air ; and the Sun , while still providing day , refused to give much heat . This caused famine unlike anything those of the time had seen before , weakening the people of Europe and the Middle East . 
 The cause of these disasters aren 't precisely known , but the Rabaul caldera , Lake <unk> and Krakatoa volcanoes or a collision with a swarm of meteors are all suspected . Scientists have spent decades on the mystery . 
 Seven years later , in 542 , a devastating outbreak of Bubonic Plague , second only to that of the 14th century , laid siege to the world , killing tens of millions . As ruler of the Empire , Justinian , and members of his court , were physically unaffected by famine . However , the Imperial Court did prove susceptible to plague , with Justinian himself contracting , but surviving , the pestilence . 
 In July 551 , the eastern Mediterranean was rocked by the 551 Beirut earthquake , which triggered a tsunami . The combined fatalities of both events probably exceeded 30 @,@ 000 , with tremors being felt from Antioch to Alexandria . 
 = = Cultural depictions = = 
 In the Paradiso section of the Divine Comedy by Dante Alighieri , Justinian I is prominently featured as a spirit residing on the sphere of Mercury , which holds the ambitious souls of Heaven . His legacy is elaborated on , and he is portrayed as a defender of the Christian faith and the restorer of Rome to the Empire . However , Justinian confesses that he was partially motivated by fame rather than duty to God , which tainted the justice of his rule in spite of his proud accomplishments . In his introduction , " Cesare <unk> e son <unk> " ( " Caesar I was , and am Justinian " ) , his mortal title is contrasted with his immortal soul , to emphasize that glory in life is ephemeral , while contributing to God 's glory is eternal , according to Dorothy L. Sayers . Dante also uses Justinian to criticize the factious politics of his 14th Century Italy , in contrast to the unified Italy of the Roman Empire . 
 = = Historical sources = = 
 Procopius provides the primary source for the history of Justinian 's reign . The Syriac chronicle of John of Ephesus , which does not survive , was used as a source for later chronicles , contributing many additional details of value . Both historians became very bitter towards Justinian and his empress , Theodora . Other sources include the histories of Agathias , Menander Protector , John Malalas , the Paschal Chronicle , the chronicles of Marcellinus Comes and Victor of <unk> . Justinian is considered a saint among Eastern Orthodox Christians , and is also remembered by some in the Lutheran Church on 14 November . 
 = Tricholoma pardinum = 
 Tricholoma pardinum , commonly known as spotted tricholoma , tiger tricholoma , <unk> , leopard knight , or dirty trich , is a gilled mushroom widely distributed across North America and Europe , as well as parts of Asia . It is generally found in beech woodland in summer and autumn . Two subspecies have been described from southern Europe . First officially described by Christiaan Hendrik Persoon in 1801 , Tricholoma pardinum has had a confusing taxonomic history that extends over two centuries . In 1762 , German naturalist Jacob Christian Schäffer described the species Agaricus tigrinus with an illustration corresponding to what is thought to be T. pardinum , and consequently , the name Tricholoma tigrinum has been used erroneously in some European field guides . 
 The fruit body of Tricholoma pardinum is an imposing mushroom with a pale grey cap up to 15 cm ( 6 in ) in diameter that is covered with dark brownish to greyish scales . The gills are whitish , and are not attached to the stout white to pale grey @-@ brown stalk . The spore print is white . One of the more toxic members of the genus Tricholoma , the species has been implicated in a number of episodes of mushroom poisoning , probably because it is a large , attractive mushroom with a pleasant smell and taste , and it bears a superficial resemblance to several edible species , like Tricholoma terreum . Ingesting T. pardinum — even in small quantities — results in a severe , persistent gastroenteritis caused by an unknown mycotoxin . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Christiaan Hendrik Persoon described this species as Agaricus <unk> var. <unk> in 1801 , although he queried whether it was a distinct species . However , the German naturalist Jacob Christian Schäffer had in 1762 published Fungorum qui in Bavaria et Palatinatu circa Ratisbonam nascuntur Icones , in which he described a mushroom he called Agaricus tigrinus . The illustration accompanying the name fits what we now know as Tricholoma pardinum , although the description is less clear . To confuse matters further , Elias Magnus Fries used the name Agaricus tigrinus in his 1821 work Systema Mycologicum , in accordance with Bulliard 's 1782 description , which now corresponds with Lentinus tigrinus . In his 1838 work Epicrisis <unk> <unk> : seu synopsis <unk> , Fries assigned a different fungus again to the binomial name and linked it to Schäffer 's 1762 description . French mycologist Lucien Quélet reclassified it as a species in 1873 , giving it its current binomial name . Italian mycologist Alfredo Riva has noted that Swiss mycologist Louis Secretan provided a description forty years before Quélet , in his 1833 work Mycographie Suisse , and queried why it was ignored . He has proposed the fungus be written as Tricholoma pardinum ( <unk> . ) Quél . However , Secretan 's works are generally not recognised for nomenclatural purposes because he did not use binomial nomenclature consistently . 
 There has been confusion over which scientific name to use for over two hundred years . Tricholoma tigrinum has been used in some European field guides , but has been applied in error to this species . The uncertainty was such that Czech mycologists Josef <unk> and František <unk> suggested in 1967 that both designations were incorrect , and proposed the new name T. <unk> . 
 Tricholoma pardinum lies within the subgenus <unk> of Tricholoma , a grouping of similar species characterised by greyish , brownish , or pallid caps that are woolly or covered in small scales , spores with a length between 8 and 11 micrometres , and abundant clamp connections in the hyphae . Molecular analyses suggest that T. pardinum is closely related to T. <unk> , T. mutabile , and T. venenatum . Tricholoma pardinum var. <unk> is an uncommon variety , described in 1983 by Carlo Luciano Alessio , which produces mushrooms with more fibrillose caps and stalks than the typical variety . It is found in southern Europe , where it associates with chestnut and spruce trees . Another variety has been described as T. pardinum var. <unk> , characterised by <unk> mushrooms that have a greasy coating on their caps . 
 The specific epithet pardinum is derived from the Latin pardus " leopard " , referring to its mottled or spotted cap . The generic name derives from the Greek <unk> / <unk> " hair " and <unk> / <unk> " hem " , " fringe " , or " border " . Common names include striped tricholoma , spotted tricholoma , tiger tricholoma , poison trich , leopard knight , and <unk> . Dirty trich was a name coined by author Gary H. <unk> in response to a publisher 's request for a more accessible name than its binomial one for North American guidebooks . 
 = = Description = = 
 The fruit body is a medium @-@ sized mushroom , with a cap 6 – 10 cm ( 2 @.@ 5 – 4 in ) in diameter , though larger specimens occasionally reach 15 cm ( 6 in ) . The cap is initially hemispherical before flattening with maturity , and has a broad , shallow umbo . The cap margin is initially curled inwards but <unk> as it matures . The cap surface is silvery @-@ grey and covered with concentrically patterned darker scales of a grey , brown or blackish colour that grow paler toward the cap margin , Secretan noting its resemblance to the cap of Sarcodon <unk> . The gills are free ( unattached to the stalk ) , white and thick , may have a yellow or greenish tint , and may drip water , as may the top of the stalk when broken . With age , the gill edges can become jagged and rough . The gill spacing is rather variable , ranging from distant to crowded ; typically , between 100 – 120 gills extend fully from the stalk to the edge of the cap , with a variable number of lamellulae ( shorter gills not extending fully from stalk to cap margin ) . 
 The stout stalk may be white , pale grey or pale brown , and is thicker at the base . The texture of the stalk surface ranges from fibrillose ( appearing to be made of coarse fibers arranged longitudinally ) to more or less smooth , and the stalk base will stain a dirty brown to yellow colour when bruised . It is 3 @.@ 0 – 8 @.@ 0 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 – 3 @.@ 1 in ) high and 1 @.@ 5 – 2 @.@ 0 cm ( 0 @.@ 6 – 0 @.@ 8 in ) wide , with the base 2 @.@ 5 – 4 @.@ 0 cm ( 1 @.@ 0 – 1 @.@ 6 in ) in diameter , and bruises a dirty yellowish colour . There is no ring or volva . The flesh is whitish and has a pleasant mealy smell and taste . Variety <unk> has a mealy odour and taste reminiscent of cucumber . 
 The spore print is white , and the oval to oblong spores are 7 @.@ 5 – 9 @.@ 5 μm long by 5 @.@ 0 – 7 @.@ 0 μm wide . Spores are smooth , hyaline ( translucent ) , nonamyloid , and have a prominent hilum . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are cylindrical to club shaped , four spored , and measure 39 – 50 by 8 @.@ 0 – 9 @.@ 6 μm . The cystidia present on the gill edge ( cheilocystidia ) are thin walled , hyaline , have a short stalk and a spherical apical portion , and measure 29 – 41 by 12 – 21 μm ; cystidia are absent from the gill face . The cap cuticle ranges in cellular form from a cutis ( in which the hyphae are bent over , running parallel to the cap surface ) to a trichoderm ( with hyphae emerging roughly parallel , like hairs , perpendicular to the cap surface ) ; the hyphae comprising the cuticle are cylindrical , and measure 2 @.@ 0 – 9 @.@ 0 μm wide with a club @-@ shaped tip up to 11 μm wide . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Tricholoma pardinum mushrooms may be confused with several edible grey @-@ capped members of the genus Tricholoma , and some authorities recommend leaving all grey @-@ capped Tricholoma mushrooms for experienced hunters . There are several superficially similar European species that could be mistaken for T. pardinum . The smaller T. terreum lacks a mealy smell and cap scales , is darker coloured and less robust , and has smaller spores measuring 5 – 7 @.@ 5 by 4 – 5 μm . The edible T. <unk> somewhat resembles T. pardinum — but with finer scales , and gills and bruised parts that yellow with age . Unlike the preferentially montane T. pardinum , these lookalikes tend to fruit at lower elevations . T. <unk> is smaller and darker than T. pardinum , and has a peppery aroma . T. <unk> has fine dark scales and pinkish gills , brittle flesh , and is generally smaller . T. <unk> is smaller than T. pardinum , has a thin , fibrous partial veil on young specimens , and elliptical spores measuring 5 – 6 by 3 @.@ 5 – 4 μm . The edible and highly regarded T. <unk> is of a similar size , though has a uniform grey cap that is never scaled . 
 In North America , Tricholoma pardinum can be confused with T. nigrum and forms of T. <unk> that have more streaked rather than spotted caps . A form of T. pardinum in North America can be nearly white with pale scales , and may be confused with the whitish edible species T. <unk> . Microscopically , the presence of clamp connections sets T. pardinum apart from most other members of the genus , although the similar @-@ looking ( though more tan @-@ coloured ) T. venenatum also has them . According to Alexander H. Smith , T. <unk> is closely related , but can be distinguished from T. pardinum by its narrower gills , its tendency to form drops of reddish liquid on the gills and stalk , and an ash @-@ grey and scaly stalk surface . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Tricholoma pardinum is found across Europe , where it is more common in the south . It is abundant in the Jura Mountains in eastern France . The species is found in Belgium and Germany , but has not been recorded from the Netherlands or the British Isles . A historical record from Estonia has been discarded because no herbarium specimens could be found . In Asia , it has been recorded from İzmir Province in southwestern Turkey , China , and Sado Island in Japan . It is found widely across temperate North America , where Santa Cruz County and Sierra Nevada in central California in the west of the continent , and the central Appalachians in the east form the southern limits of its distribution . T. pardinum is commonly associated with conifers in the Rocky Mountains and Pacific Northwest , and with tanoak ( Lithocarpus densiflorus ) and madrone ( Arbutus spp . ) in California . The mushroom can be abundant in some years , especially warmer years with higher rainfall , yet missing or rare for several years in between . In Europe , it is found on chalky soil in woodland with beech and fir in summer and autumn , where it prefers areas of some elevation . Although it may be found in groups or fairy rings , it most commonly occurs singly . 
 = = Toxicity = = 
 Tricholoma pardinum is one of several poisonous members of the genus Tricholoma ; its large size , fleshy appearance , and pleasant smell and taste add to the risk of it being accidentally consumed . It was responsible for over 20 percent of cases of mushroom poisoning in Switzerland in the first half of the 20th century . Many cases of poisoning arise in the Jura Mountains . Eating it causes highly unpleasant gastrointestinal symptoms of nausea , dizziness , vomiting , and diarrhea . These arise 15 minutes to 2 hours after consumption and often persist for several hours ; complete recovery usually takes 4 to 6 days . Sweating and anxiety may be evident , and disturbance in liver function has been recorded . <unk> may occur in the calves . In one case , seven people and a cat suffered severe symptoms after sharing a meal that contained only two mushroom caps . The toxin , the identity of which is unknown , appears to cause a sudden inflammation of the mucous membranes lining the stomach and intestines . 
 These symptoms may be severe enough to warrant hospitalisation . Treatment is supportive ; antispasmodic medicines may lessen colicky abdominal cramps , and activated charcoal may be administered early on to bind residual toxin . Intravenous fluids may be required if dehydration has been extensive , especially with children and the elderly . Once gastric contents are emptied , metoclopramide may be used in cases of recurrent vomiting . 
 = HMS Swordfish ( 1916 ) = 
 HMS Swordfish was an experimental submarine built for the Royal Navy before the First World War to meet the Navy 's goal of an " overseas " submarine capable of 20 knots ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) on the surface . Diesel engines of the period were unreliable and not very powerful so steam turbines were proposed instead to meet the RN 's requirement . Swordfish proved to be slower than designed and unstable while surfacing , and consequently she was modified as an anti @-@ submarine patrol vessel in 1917 . She was paid off before the end of the war and sold for scrapping in 1922 . 
 = = Design = = 
 HMS Swordfish was developed to meet a requirement of Royal Navy 's Submarine Committee for a large submarine capable of operating with the fleet at a surfaced speed of 20 knots . Most of the earlier British submarines had been single @-@ hulled vessels built by Vickers , and the Navy was interested in evaluating other designs . Captain Roger Keyes , Inspecting Captain of Submarines , had previously served as naval attaché in Italy and had kept abreast of Italian submarine developments , which notably included double @-@ hulled submarines designed by Cesare Laurenti of Fiat @-@ San Giorgio . Three boats of the S class were ordered first and Laurenti was invited to submit a design to meet the RN requirement . 
 Fiat @-@ San Giorgio " was wary about using heavy oil Diesel engines and hesitated to guarantee the success of such engines of the power required . At the same time Laurenti prepared a design with geared steam turbines having a speed of 18 knots on a surface displacement of 856 tons . " His design was modified by Scotts Shipbuilding and Engineering Company , Greenock , to include guns . Swordfish kept the same main dimensions as Laurenti 's original design , but had a greater displacement and less endurance . 
 = = Description = = 
 Swordfish had an overall length of 231 ft 3 @.@ 5 in ( 70 @.@ 498 m ) , a beam of 22 ft 11 in ( 6 @.@ 99 m ) , and a draught of 14 feet 11 inches ( 4 @.@ 55 m ) . She displaced 932 long tons ( 947 t ) on the surface and 1 @,@ 105 long tons ( 1 @,@ 123 t ) submerged . She had a partial double hull , which extended over 75 % of her length . The upper portion of the double hull was controlled free @-@ flooding while the rest was devoted to watertight ' baling flats ' , ballast and fuel tanks . Her hull was divided into eight compartments by seven watertight bulkheads . 
 Swordfish 's diving depth and time are not known because the records from her sea trials have not survived . Shutting down her boiler , retracting the funnel and sealing the boiler uptake required about a minute and a quarter , which included switching over to the electric motors . In marked contrast to contemporary Vickers designs much attention was paid to safety arrangements , including her extensive subdivision . Indicator and telephone buoys , which could be released from inside the submarine were provided together with external air connections and a charged high @-@ pressure line which could provide air to any manned compartment or the living spaces . Furthermore , the main ballast tanks could be blown from either end of the ship . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 Swordfish had two Parsons geared impulse @-@ reaction steam turbine sets , each driving one of the two propeller shafts . The turbines were powered by a single Yarrow @-@ type boiler . They were designed to produce a total of 4 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 3 @,@ 000 kW ) at a working pressure of 250 psi ( 1 @,@ 700 kPa ; 18 kgf / cm2 ) which used a superheater to increase the working temperature by 100 ° F ( 38 ° C ) . She was fitted with two electric motors which had a combined output of 1 @,@ 400 bhp ( 1 @,@ 000 kW ) . Two battery rooms each had 64 battery cells . It is uncertain if the ship reached her designed speed of 18 knots on the surface , although it seems unlikely given her increased displacement over Laurenti 's original design . Maximum speed was 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) underwater . 
 Swordfish could carry 102 long tons ( 104 t ) of fuel oil , which her builders estimated gave her an endurance of 3 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 5 @,@ 600 km ; 3 @,@ 500 mi ) at a speed of 8 @.@ 5 knots ( 15 @.@ 7 km / h ; 9 @.@ 8 mph ) on the surface . On her batteries her submerged endurance was 60 nautical miles ( 110 km ; 69 mi ) at a speed of 6 knots ( 11 km / h ; 6 @.@ 9 mph ) . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Swordfish had two tubes for 21 @-@ inch ( 530 mm ) torpedoes in her bow . They were stepped vertically and positioned well back from the stem in a notch from the keel to preserve the fine lines of the bow . Two 18 @-@ inch ( 460 mm ) torpedo tubes were positioned on each beam amidships . Each torpedo tube was provided with one reload . Two 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) guns were fitted on the deck in disappearing mounts , one each fore and aft of the conning tower . They were covered by watertight hoods to preserve the streamlining of the submarine . 
 = = Construction and service = = 
 Swordfish was ordered from Scotts Shipbuilding and Engineering Company on 18 August 1913 although she was not laid down until 28 February 1914 . The start of the First World War six months later greatly hindered her completion , and she was not launched until 18 March 1916 . HMS Swordfish was commissioned on 28 April 1916 , before completion , and renamed HMS S1 that same day . She was not completed until 21 July . 
 Captained by Commander Geoffrey Layton , her post @-@ completion trials lasted for five months as she was used to evaluate steam power for submarine use . Much was learned about the operation of steam submarines , which helped the subsequent design of the steam @-@ powered K @-@ class fleet submarines . She proved to be very unstable while surfacing , presumably because she could not pump the water out of her controlled free @-@ flooding spaces quickly enough in the upper part of her double hull . These problems , coupled with the fact that she was too slow to work with the fleet as originally envisioned , meant that she was impossible to make into an effective warship , and she was laid up after her trials . 
 In July 1917 S1 reverted to her original name and was converted to a surface patrol vessel between 27 June 1917 and 24 January 1918 . Her torpedo tubes and disappearing guns were removed . She was given a forecastle , a bridge and her funnel was fixed in place and extended . She was rearmed with a pair of 12 @-@ pounder ( 3 inch , 76 mm ) guns and depth charges , weapons more suitable for her new role as an anti @-@ submarine patrol boat . Swordfish joined the 1st Destroyer Flotilla at Portsmouth upon completion of her sea trials , but nothing is known of her subsequent service . 
 Swordfish was paid off on 30 October 1918 and stricken from the Navy List by January 1919 . She was sold for scrapping to Pounds , of Portsmouth in July 1922 , but was reported to have been resold to Hayes , of Porthcawl in 1923 . 
 = Winchester Model 1897 = 
 The Winchester Model 1897 , also known as the Model 97 , <unk> , or Trench Gun , was a pump @-@ action shotgun with an external hammer and tube magazine manufactured by the Winchester Repeating Arms Company . The Model 1897 was an evolution of the Winchester Model 1893 designed by John Browning . From 1897 until 1957 , over one million of these shotguns were produced . The Model 1897 was offered in numerous barrel lengths and grades , chambered in 12 and 16 gauge , and as a solid frame or takedown . The 16 @-@ gauge guns had a standard barrel length of 28 inches , while 12 @-@ gauge guns were furnished with 30 @-@ inch length barrels . Special length barrels could be ordered in lengths as short as 20 inches , and as long as 36 inches . Since the time the Model 1897 was first manufactured it has been used by American soldiers , police departments , and hunters . 
 = = History = = 
 The Winchester Model 1897 was designed by the famous American firearms inventor John Moses Browning . The Model 1897 was first listed for sale in the November 1897 Winchester catalog as a 12 gauge solid frame . However , the 12 gauge takedown was added in October 1898 , and the 16 gauge takedown in February 1900 . Originally produced as a tougher , stronger and more improved version of the Winchester 1893 , itself a takeoff on the early Spencer pump gun , the 1897 was identical to its forerunner , except that the receiver was thicker and allowed for use of smokeless powder shells , which were not common at the time . The 1897 introduced a " take down " design , where the barrel could be taken off ; a standard in pump shotguns made today , like the Remington 870 and Mossberg 500 series . Over time , “ the model 97 became the most popular shotgun on the American market and established a standard of performance by which other kinds and makes of shotguns were judged , including the most expensive imported articles ” . The Winchester Model 1897 was in production from 1897 until 1957 . It was in this time frame that the " modern " hammerless designs became common , like the Winchester Model 1912 and the Remington 870 and the Model 1897 was superseded by the Winchester Model 1912 . However , the gun can still be found today in regular use . 
 = = = Improvements From the 1893 = = = 
 In the new Model 1897 , many of the weaknesses that were present in the Model 93 were taken into account and remedied . These improvements included : 
 The frame was strengthened and made longer to handle a 12 gauge 2 ¾ -inch shell , as well as the 2 ⅝ -inch shell . 
 The frame at the top was covered so that the ejection of the fired shell was entirely from the side . This added a great amount of strength to the frame of the gun and it allowed the use of a 2 ¾ inch shell without the danger of the gun constantly jamming . 
 The gun could not be opened until a slight forward movement of the slide handle released the action slide lock . In firing , the recoil of the gun gave a slight forward motion to the slide handle and released the action slide lock which enabled immediate opening of the gun . In the absence of any recoil , the slide handle had to be pushed forward manually in order to release the action slide lock . 
 A movable cartridge guide was placed on the right side of the carrier block to prevent the escape of the shell when the gun was turned sideways in the act of loading . 
 The stock was made longer and with less drop . 
 Of the improvements , the slide lock is the one that really made the gun safer . This improved slide lock kept the gun locked until actual firing occurred which prevented the gun from jamming in the case of a misfire . The slide lock " stands in such a relation to the body of the firing pin as will prevent the firing pin reaching the primer until the pin has moved forward a sufficient distance to insure locking of the breech bolt . " This prevents the action sleeve " from being retracted by the hand of the gunner until after firing , and hence rendering the fire arm more safe " 
 = = Description = = 
 The Winchester Model 1897 evolved from the Winchester Model 1893 . The Model 1897 and 1893 were both designed by John Browning . The Model 1897 is an external hammer shotgun lacking a trigger <unk> . This means that the user can hold the trigger down while cycling the shotgun and once the action is returned to battery the gun fires . The gun itself is classified as a slide action pump shotgun . It was the first truly successful pump @-@ action shotgun produced . Throughout the time period the Model 1897 was in production , over a million of the type were produced in various grades and barrel lengths . 16 @-@ gauge guns had a standard barrel length of 28 inches , while 12 @-@ gauge guns were furnished with 30 @-@ inch length barrels . Special length barrels could be ordered in lengths as short as 20 inches , and as long as 36 inches . Along with various grades and barrel lengths , the Model 1897 came in two different <unk> . One was the 12 gauge and the other was the 16 gauge . The shells should be of the 2- ¾ inch or 2- ⅝ inch model . Any shells larger are not recommended . An average Model 1897 held 5 shotgun shells in the magazine tube . After including the one shell that could be held in the chamber , the average Model 1897 held a total of 6 shotgun shells . However , this would vary from grade to grade . When working the action of the Model 1897 the forend ( fore grip ) is pulled back , forcing the breech bolt to the rear which extracts and then ejects the spent shell while simultaneously cocking the external hammer by pushing it to the rear . When the forend is slid forward again , the breech bolt pushes a fresh shell into the gun 's chamber and locks into place . This action of sliding the forend back and forth ( pumping ) is why the gun is classified as a slide action ( or pump ) gun . 
 The Chinese company Norinco has made an effort to reproduce this firearm . The Norinco 97 is an almost exact copy of the Winchester 1897 , produced in both Trench and Riot grades , yet lacking in the fit and finish of the originals . 
 = = = Grades of the Model 97 = = = 
 = = = Original Prices = = = 
 When the Model 1897 was first introduced , the price depended upon what grade was being purchased and what features were being added to that specific gun . To purchase a plain finished shotgun would cost the buyer $ 25 . Whereas to have an engraved receiver with checkered and finer wood included , it would cost $ 100 . The more expensive grades of the Model 1897 were the standard , trap , pigeon , and tournament grades . These were the grades that were normally equipped with an engraved receiver and with checkered , finer wood . The less expensive and plainer grades were the Brush , Brush Takedown , Riot , and Trench . These grades were not given the higher valued wood or special designs . This is because these guns were designed and built for hard abuse . These grades stood a higher chance of being badly damaged so there was no need to put extra money into them for appearance purposes . As the functions that were performed with these grades required them to be lightweight it was not beneficial to use heavy and expensive wood when designing them . Most often , when these grades were purchased , they were purchased in high numbers . By designing these grades with standard wood and finish , it kept the prices at a lower level . 
 = = Military use = = 
 The Model 1897 was popular before World War I , but it was after the war broke out that sales of the Model 1897 picked up . This was because many were produced to meet the demands of the Military . When the United States entered World War I , there was a need for more service weapons to be issued to the troops . It became clear to the United States just how brutal trench warfare was , and how great the need was for a large amount of close @-@ range firepower while fighting in a trench , after they had observed the war for the first three years . The Model 1897 Trench grade was an evolution of this idea . The pre @-@ existing Winchester Model 1897 was modified by adding a perforated steel heat shield over the barrel which protected the hand of the user from the barrel when it became over @-@ heated , and an adapter with bayonet lug for affixing an M1917 bayonet . 
 This model was ideal for close combat and was efficient in trench warfare due to its 20 inch cylinder bore barrel . Buckshot ammunition was issued with the trench grade during the war . Each round of this ammunition contained nine 00 ( .33 @-@ caliber ) buckshot pellets . This gave considerable firepower to the individual soldier by each round that was fired . This shorter barrel and large amount of firepower is what made this grade ideal for trench warfare . The Model 1897 was used by American troops for other purposes in World War I other than a force multiplier . American soldiers who were skilled at trap shooting were armed with these guns and stationed where they could fire at enemy hand grenades in midair . This would deflect the grenades from falling into the American trenches and therefore protect American soldiers . 
 Unlike most modern pump @-@ action shotguns , the Winchester Model 1897 ( versions of which were type classified as the Model 97 or <unk> for short ) fired each time the action closed with the trigger depressed ( that is , it lacks a trigger <unk> ) . Coupled with its six @-@ shot capacity made it effective for close combat , such that troops referred to it as a " trench sweeper " . This characteristic allowed troops to fire the whole magazine with great speed . The Model 1897 was so effective , and feared , that the German government protested ( in vain ) to have it outlawed in combat . The Model 1897 was used in limited numbers during World War II by the United States Army and Marine Corps , although it was largely superseded by the similarly militarized version of the hammerless Model 1912 . 
 Other military uses of the shotgun included " the execution of security / interior guard operations , rear area security operations , guarding prisoners of war , raids , ambushes , military operations in urban terrain , and selected special operations . " 
 = = World War I protests = = 
 Although the Model 1897 was popular with American troops in World War I , the Germans soon began to protest its use in combat . " On 19 September 1918 , the German government issued a diplomatic protest against the American use of shotguns , alleging that the shotgun was prohibited by the law of war . " A part of the German protest read that " [ i ] t is especially forbidden to employ arms , projections , or materials calculated to cause unnecessary suffering " as defined in the 1907 Hague Convention on Land Warfare . This is the only known occasion in which the legality of actual combat use of the shotgun has been raised . However , the United States interpreted their use of the shotgun differently than Germany . The Judge Advocate General of the Army , Secretary of State Robert Lansing carefully considered and reviewed the applicable law and promptly rejected the German protest . France and Britain considered using shotguns as trench warfare weapons during World War I. The shotgun in question was a double @-@ barreled shotgun , which was not used because they were unable to obtain high powered ammunition and that type of gun is slow to reload in close combat . 
 = = = German Response = = = 
 The rejection of their protest greatly upset the German forces , because they believed they were treated unjustly in the war . Shortly after the protest was rejected , Germany issued threats that they would punish all captured American soldiers that were found to be armed with a shotgun . This led to the United States issuing a retaliation threat , stating that any measures unjustly taken against captured American soldiers would lead to an equal act by the United States on captured German soldiers . 
 = = Other uses = = 
 After the war , a shorter @-@ barrelled version of the Model 1897 was marketed by Winchester as a riot gun . Messengers of The American Express Company were armed with this weapon as were various police departments throughout the US . The differences between this riot version and the trench version were the riot version lacked the heat shield and bayonet lug , and all trench guns were equipped with sling swivels , whereas most riot guns were not . 
 = We Remain = 
 " We Remain " is a song by American singer Christina Aguilera , taken from The Hunger Games : Catching Fire – Original Motion Picture Soundtrack , the soundtrack to the 2013 American science @-@ fiction adventure film The Hunger Games : Catching Fire . It was released as the third single from the soundtrack on October 1 , 2013 , following Coldplay 's " Atlas " and Sia 's " Elastic Heart " . Composed by Ryan Tedder , Brent Kutzle and <unk> <unk> , " We Remain " is an arena pop power ballad talking about " perseverance " . Contemporary music critics lauded the song for its sound and picked it as one of the highlights from the soundtrack . The single appeared on a few national record charts including Belgium and South Korea . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 Following the release of her seventh studio album , Lotus ( 2012 ) , which spawned two singles " Your Body " and " Just a Fool " , Aguilera was reported to be featured on the soundtrack for The Hunger Games : Catching Fire Original Motion Picture Soundtrack with a song called " We Remain " in September 2013 . On September 25 , 2013 , Aguilera unveiled a 90 @-@ second preview of the track . 
 The song was released as the third single from the soundtrack , following " Atlas " by Coldplay and " Elastic Heart " by Sia Furler . It was released as a digital download single at Amazon.com on October 1 , 2013 . It was also released on the iTunes Stores on the same day . On October 8 , " We Remain " impacted US contemporary hit radio . Aguilera performed " We Remain " live with her contestant Jacquie Lee during the season finale of the fifth season of The Voice on December 17 , 2013 . A studio version of the duet was released on the US iTunes Store on December 16 , 2013 . 
 " We Remain " was written by Ryan Tedder and Brent Kutzle of OneRepublic , and <unk> <unk> . The song is a midtempo arena pop power ballad . It lasts for a duration of 4 : 00 ( four minutes ) . Aguilera sings with " enormous " and " soaring " vocals on a " propulsive Ryan Tedder @-@ ish beat " background . " We Remain " incorporates a smooth piano and drum machine in its instrumentation . According to Billboard magazine , the ballad " finds [ Aguilera ] tamping down [ ... ] for a natural and forceful message of perseverance " . At the chorus , Aguilera sings " So burn me with fire / Drown me with rain / I 'm gonna wake up screaming your name / Yes I 'm a sinner , yes I 'm a saint / whatever happens here , whatever happens here , we remain " . Several critics compared " We Remain " to Aguilera 's previous hit " Beautiful " ( 2002 ) and Alicia Keys ' " Girl on Fire " ( 2012 ) for musical similarities . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " We Remain " received critical acclaim from music critics . Ryan Reed from Rolling Stone magazine praised the " triumphant sounding " track " sure to be a hit at District 12 radio " . An editor from The Huffington Post picked " We Remain " as one of the standout tracks from the soundtrack that " encapsulates the spirit and power of Games ' heroine , Katniss " . Sam Lansky for Idolator praised the single 's musical departure from Aguilera 's ballads for her 2012 album Lotus . Brett Malec of E ! simply called it " a beautiful track " , while a staff writer from Billboard named it a " triumphant " song . While reviewing the soundtrack for The Hunger Games : Catching Fire , Alex Young from Consequence of Sound selected " We Remain " as one of the highlights from the album , which made Aguilera " the biggest star on display " . Entertainment Weekly writer Nick Catucci picked it as one of the best tracks , calling it " an awesome reminder of Christina 's power " and " one of the most righteous doses of uplift this year , on any platform " . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from The Hunger Games : Catching Fire soundtrack digital inlay cover 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital download 
 " We Remain " – 4 : 00 
 = = Charts = = 
 " We Remain " peaked at number 58 on the South Korean Gaon International Download Chart with 2 @,@ 689 copies sold on October 6 , 2013 . The single also peaked at number 31 on the Belgian Flanders Singles Chart and number 14 on the Belgian Wallonian Singles Chart . 
 = = Release history = = 
 Notes 
 = FreeBSD = 
 FreeBSD is a free Unix @-@ like operating system descended from Research Unix via the Berkeley Software Distribution ( BSD ) . Although for legal reasons FreeBSD cannot use the Unix trademark , it is a direct descendant of BSD , which was historically also called " BSD Unix " or " Berkeley Unix " . The first version of FreeBSD was released in 1993 , and today FreeBSD is the most widely used open @-@ source BSD distribution , accounting for more than three @-@ quarters of all installed systems running open @-@ source BSD derivatives . 
 FreeBSD has similarities with Linux , with two major differences in scope and licensing : FreeBSD maintains a complete operating system , i.e. the project delivers kernel , device drivers , userland utilities and documentation , as opposed to Linux delivering a kernel and drivers only and relying on third @-@ parties for system software ; and FreeBSD source code is generally released under a permissive BSD license as opposed to the copyleft GPL used by Linux . 
 The FreeBSD project includes a security team overseeing all software shipped in the base distribution . A wide range of additional third @-@ party applications may be installed using the <unk> package management system or the FreeBSD Ports , or by directly compiling source code . Due to its permissive licensing terms , much of FreeBSD 's code base has become an integral part of other operating systems such as Juniper <unk> and Apple 's OS X. 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 FreeBSD 's roots go back to the University of California , Berkeley . The university acquired a UNIX source license from AT & T. Students of the university started to modify and improve the AT & T Unix and called this modified version Berkeley Unix or BSD , implementing features such as TCP / IP , virtual memory and the Unix File System . The BSD project was founded in 1976 by Bill Joy . But since BSD contained code from AT & T Unix , all recipients had to get a license from AT & T first in order to use BSD . 
 In June 1989 , " Networking Release 1 " or simply Net @-@ 1 – the first public version of BSD – was released . After releasing Net @-@ 1 , Keith Bostic , a developer of BSD , suggested replacing all AT & T code with freely @-@ <unk> code under the original BSD license . Work on replacing AT & T code began and , after 18 months , much of the AT & T code was replaced . However , six files containing AT & T code remained in the kernel . The BSD developers decided to release the " Networking Release 2 " without those six files . Net @-@ 2 was released in 1991 . 
 = = = Birth of FreeBSD = = = 
 In 1992 , several months after the release of Net @-@ 2 , William <unk> and Lynne <unk> wrote replacements for those six missing files and ported BSD to the Intel <unk> @-@ based microprocessors and called their new operating system 386BSD . They released 386BSD via an anonymous FTP server . The development flow of 386BSD was slow and after a period of neglect , a group of 386BSD users decided to branch out on their own and create FreeBSD so that they could keep the operating system up to date . The first version of FreeBSD was released on November 1993 . 
 In the early days of the project 's inception , a company named Walnut Creek <unk> , upon the suggestion of the two FreeBSD developers , agreed to release the operating system on CD @-@ ROM . In addition to that , the company employed Jordan Hubbard and David Greenman , ran FreeBSD on its servers , sponsored FreeBSD conferences and published FreeBSD @-@ related books , including The Complete FreeBSD by Greg <unk> . By 1997 , FreeBSD was Walnut Creek 's " most successful product " . The company itself later renamed to The FreeBSD Mall and later <unk> . 
 Today , FreeBSD is used by many IT companies such as IBM , Nokia , Juniper Networks , and NetApp to build their product . Certain parts of Apple 's Mac OS X operating system are based on FreeBSD . The PlayStation 3 operating system also borrows certain components from FreeBSD , while the PlayStation 4 operating system is derived from FreeBSD 9 . Netflix , WhatsApp , and <unk> are also examples of big , successful and heavily network @-@ oriented companies which are running FreeBSD . 
 = = = Lawsuit = = = 
 386BSD and FreeBSD were both derived from 1992 's BSD release . In January 1992 , BSDi started to release BSD / 386 , later called BSD / OS , an operating system similar to FreeBSD and based on 1992 's BSD release . AT & T filed a lawsuit against BSDi and alleged distribution of AT & T source code in violation of license agreements . The lawsuit was settled out of court and the exact terms were not all disclosed . The only one that became public was that BSDi would migrate their source base to the newer 4.4BSD @-@ Lite sources . Although not involved in the litigation , it was suggested to FreeBSD that they should also move to 4.4BSD @-@ Lite . FreeBSD 2 @.@ 0 , which was released on November 1994 , was the first version of FreeBSD without any code from AT & T. 
 = = Features = = 
 = = = Uses = = = 
 As a general purpose operating system , FreeBSD could be used in various scenarios : 
 Servers 
 FreeBSD contains a significant collection of server @-@ related software in the base system and the ports collection , it is possible to configure and use FreeBSD as a mail server , web server , Firewall , FTP server , DNS server and a router , among other applications . 
 Desktop 
 Although FreeBSD does not install the X Window System by default , it is available in the FreeBSD ports collection . A number of Desktop environments such as GNOME , KDE and Xfce , and lightweight window managers such as <unk> , <unk> and <unk> are also available to FreeBSD . 
 Embedded systems 
 Although it explicitly focuses on the x86 and x86 @-@ 64 platforms , FreeBSD also supports others such as ARM , PowerPC and MIPS to a lesser degree . 
 = = = Networking = = = 
 FreeBSD 's TCP / IP stack is based on the <unk> implementation of TCP / IP which greatly contributed to the widespread adoption of these protocols . FreeBSD also supports IPv6 , <unk> , <unk> , and wireless networking ( Wi @-@ Fi ) . The IPv6 and <unk> stacks were taken from the <unk> project . Also , FreeBSD supports IPX and AppleTalk protocols , but they are considered old and it is planned to drop support of them in the upcoming FreeBSD 11 @.@ 0 . 
 As of FreeBSD 5 @.@ 4 , support for the Common Address Redundancy Protocol ( CARP ) was imported from the OpenBSD project . CARP allows multiple nodes to share a set of IP addresses . So if one of the nodes goes down , other nodes still can serve the requests . 
 = = = Storage = = = 
 FreeBSD has several unique features related to storage . Soft updates can protect the consistency of the UFS filesystem ( widely used on the BSDs ) in the event of a system crash . <unk> snapshots allow an image of a UFS filesystem at an instant in time to be efficiently created . Snapshots allow reliable backup of a live filesystem . GEOM is a modular framework that provides RAID ( levels 0 , 1 , 3 currently ) , full disk encryption , journaling , concatenation , caching , and access to network @-@ backed storage . GEOM allows building of complex storage solutions combining ( " chaining " ) these mechanisms . FreeBSD provides two frameworks for data encryption : GBDE and Geli . Both GBDE and Geli operate at the disk level . GBDE was written by Poul @-@ Henning Kamp and is distributed under the two @-@ clause BSD license . Geli is an alternative to GBDE that was written by Pawel Jakub <unk> and first appeared in FreeBSD 6 @.@ 0 . 
 From 7 @.@ 0 onward , FreeBSD supports the ZFS filesystem . ZFS was previously an open source filesystem that was first developed by Sun Microsystems , but when Oracle acquired Sun , ZFS became a proprietary product . However , the FreeBSD project is still developing and improving its ZFS <unk> via the <unk> project . 
 = = = Security = = = 
 FreeBSD provides several security @-@ related features including access control lists ( <unk> ) , security event auditing , extended file system attributes , mandatory access controls ( MAC ) and fine @-@ grained capabilities . These security enhancements were developed by the TrustedBSD project . The project was founded by Robert Watson with the goal of implementing concepts from the Common Criteria for Information Technology Security Evaluation and the Orange Book . This project is ongoing and many of its extensions have been integrated into FreeBSD . The project is supported by a variety of organizations , including the DARPA , NSA , Network Associates Laboratories , <unk> Network Services , the University of Pennsylvania , Yahoo ! , McAfee Research , <unk> , Apple Computer , <unk> Network Security , Google , the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory , and others . 
 The project has also ported the NSA 's <unk> / TE implementation from <unk> to FreeBSD . Other work includes the development of <unk> , an open source implementation of Sun 's Basic Security Module ( <unk> ) API and audit log file format , which supports an extensive security audit system . This was shipped as part of FreeBSD 6 @.@ 2 . Other infrastructure work in FreeBSD performed as part of the TrustedBSD Project has included GEOM and <unk> . 
 Most components of the TrustedBSD project are eventually folded into the main sources for FreeBSD . In addition , many features , once fully matured , find their way into other operating systems . For example , <unk> has been adopted by NetBSD . Moreover , the TrustedBSD MAC Framework has been adopted by Apple for OS X. 
 FreeBSD ships with three different firewall packages : IPFW , pf and IPFilter . IPFW is FreeBSD 's native <unk> pf was taken from OpenBSD and IPFilter was ported to FreeBSD by Darren Reed . 
 Taken from OpenBSD , the OpenSSH program was included in default install . OpenSSH is a Free implementation of the SSH protocol and is a replacement for <unk> . Unlike <unk> , OpenSSH <unk> all information ( including username and password ) . 
 In November 2012 , The FreeBSD Security Team announced that hackers gained unauthorized access on two of the project 's servers . These servers were turned off immediately . More research demonstrated that the first unauthorized access by hackers occurred on 19 September . Apparently hackers gained access to these servers by stealing SSH keys from one of the developers , not by exploiting a bug in the operating system itself . These two hacked servers were part of the infrastructure used to build third @-@ party software packages . The FreeBSD Security Team checked the integrity of the binary packages and announced that no unauthorized change was made to the binary packages , but they stated that they can 't guarantee the integrity of packages that were downloaded between 19 September and 11 November . 
 = = = Portability = = = 
 FreeBSD has been ported to a variety of processor architectures . The FreeBSD project organizes architectures into tiers that characterize the level of support provided . Tier 1 architectures are mature and fully supported . Tier 2 architectures are undergoing major development . Tier 3 architectures are experimental or are no longer under active development and Tier 4 architectures have no support at all . 
 As of March 2016 , FreeBSD has been ported to the following architectures : 
 The ARM and MIPS support is mostly aimed at embedded systems , however FreeBSD / ARM runs on a number of single @-@ board computers , including the <unk> Black , Raspberry Pi and <unk> . 
 = = = Third @-@ party software = = = 
 FreeBSD has a repository of over 24 @,@ 000 applications that are developed by third parties . Examples include : windowing systems , web browsers , email clients , office suites and so forth . In general , the project itself does not develop this software , only the framework to allow these programs to be installed , which is known as the Ports collection . Applications may either be compiled from source ( " ports " ) , provided their licensing terms allow this , or downloaded as pre @-@ compiled binaries ( " packages " ) . The Ports collection supports the current and stable branches of FreeBSD . Older releases are not supported and may or may not work correctly with an up @-@ to @-@ date Ports collection . 
 Ports use <unk> to automatically fetch the desired application 's source code , either from a local or remote repository , unpack it on the system , apply patches to it and compile it . Depending on the size of the source code , compiling can take a long time , but it gives the user more control over the process and its result . Most ports also have package counterparts ( i.e. pre @-@ compiled binaries ) , giving the user a choice . Although this method is faster , the user has fewer customisation options . 
 FreeBSD version 10 @.@ 0 introduced the package manager pkg as a replacement for the previously used package tools . It is functionally similar to apt and yum in Linux distributions . It allows for installation , upgrading and removal of both ports and packages . In addition to pkg , <unk> can also be used to access the Ports collection . 
 = = = Jails = = = 
 First introduced in FreeBSD version 4 , jails is a security mechanism and an implementation of operating @-@ system @-@ level virtualization that enables the user to run multiple instances of a guest operating system on top of a FreeBSD host . It is an enhanced version of the traditional <unk> mechanism . A process that runs within such a jail is unable to access the resources outside of it . Every jail has its own <unk> and IP address . It is possible to run multiple jails at the same time , but the kernel is shared among all of them . Hence only software supported by the FreeBSD kernel can be run within a jail . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 bhyve , a new virtualization solution was introduced in FreeBSD 10 @.@ 0 @.@ bhyve allows a user to run a number of guest operating systems ( FreeBSD , OpenBSD , Linux , and Microsoft Windows ) simultaneously . Other operating systems such as <unk> are <unk> bhyve was written by Neel Nato and Peter <unk> and was announced in the 2011 <unk> conference for the first time . The main difference between bhyve and FreeBSD jails is that jails are an operating system @-@ level virtualization and therefore limited to only FreeBSD guests ; but bhyve is a type 2 hypervisor and is not limited to only FreeBSD guests . For comparison , bhyve is a similar technology to KVM whereas jails are closer to <unk> containers or Solaris Zones . 
 = = = OS compatibility layers = = = 
 Most software that runs on Linux can run on FreeBSD using an optional built @-@ in compatibility layer . Hence , most Linux binaries can be run on FreeBSD , including some proprietary applications distributed only in binary form . This compatibility layer is not an emulation ; Linux 's system call interface is implemented in the FreeBSD 's kernel and hence , Linux executable images and shared libraries are treated the same as FreeBSD 's native executable images and shared libraries . Additionally , FreeBSD provides compatibility layers for several other Unix @-@ like operating systems , in addition to Linux , such as BSD / OS and <unk> , however , it is more common for users to compile those programs directly on FreeBSD . 
 No noticeable performance penalty over native FreeBSD programs has been noted when running Linux binaries , and , in some cases , these may even perform more smoothly than on Linux . However , the layer is not altogether seamless , and some Linux binaries are unusable or only partially usable on FreeBSD . There is support for system calls up to version 2 @.@ 6 @.@ 18 , available since FreeBSD 7 @.@ 0 . As of release 10 @.@ 3 , FreeBSD can run 64 @-@ bit Linux binaries . 
 FreeBSD has implemented a number of Microsoft Windows native <unk> kernel interfaces to allow FreeBSD to run Windows @-@ only network drivers . 
 = = = Kernel = = = 
 FreeBSD 's kernel provides support for some essential tasks such as managing processes , communication , booting and filesystems . FreeBSD has a monolithic kernel , with modular design . Different parts of the kernel such as drivers , are designed as modules . The user can load and unload these modules at any time . <unk> is the default scheduler in FreeBSD since version 7 @.@ 1 , it supports SMP and SMT . The FreeBSD kernel has also a scalable event notification interface , named <unk> . It has been ported to other BSD @-@ derivatives such as OpenBSD , NetBSD . Kernel threading was introduced in FreeBSD 5 @.@ 0 , using an M : N threading model . This model works well in theory , but it is hard to implement and few operating systems support it . Although FreeBSD 's implementation of this model worked , it did not perform well , so from version 7 @.@ 0 onward , FreeBSD started using a 1 : 1 threading model , called <unk> . 
 = = = Documentation and support = = = 
 FreeBSD 's documentation consists of its handbooks , manual pages , mailing list archives , <unk> and a variety of articles , mainly maintained by The FreeBSD Documentation Project . FreeBSD 's documentation is translated into several languages . All official documentation is released under the FreeBSD Documentation License , " a permissive non @-@ copyleft free documentation license that is compatible with the GNU FDL " . FreeBSD 's documentation is described as " high @-@ quality " . 
 The FreeBSD project maintains a variety of mailing lists . Among the most popular mailing lists are FreeBSD @-@ questions ( general questions ) and FreeBSD @-@ hackers ( a place for asking more technical questions ) . 
 Since 2004 , the New York City BSD Users Group database provides <unk> information from a collection of computers ( laptops , workstations , single @-@ board computers , embedded systems , virtual machines , etc . ) running FreeBSD . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 From version 2 @.@ 0 to 9 @.@ 0 , FreeBSD used the sysinstall program as its main installer . It was written in C by Jordan Hubbard . It uses a text user interface , and is divided into a number of menus and screens that can be used to configure and control the installation process . It can also be used to install Ports and Packages as an alternative to the command @-@ line interface . 
 The sysinstall utility is now considered deprecated in favor of <unk> , a new installer which was introduced in FreeBSD 9 @.@ 0 @.@ <unk> is " a lightweight replacement for sysinstall " that was written in sh . According to <unk> , " It has lost some features while gaining others , but it is a much more flexible design , and will ultimately be significant improvement " . 
 = = Development = = 
 FreeBSD is developed by a volunteer team located around the world . The developers use the Internet for all communication and many have not met each other in person . In addition to local user groups sponsored and attended by users , an annual conference , called BSDcon , is held by USENIX . BSDcon is not FreeBSD @-@ specific so it deals with the technical aspects of all BSD operating systems , including OpenBSD and NetBSD . In addition to BSDcon , three other annual conferences , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> take place in Europe , Japan and Canada respectively . 
 = = = Governance structure = = = 
 The FreeBSD Project is run by around 500 committers , or developers who have commit access to the master source code repositories and can develop , debug or enhance any part of the system . Most of the developers are volunteers and few developers are paid by some companies . There are several kinds of committers , including source committers ( base operating system ) , doc committers ( documentation and web site authors ) and ports ( third party application porting and infrastructure ) . Every two years the FreeBSD committers select a 9 @-@ member FreeBSD Core Team who are responsible for overall project direction , setting and enforcing project rules and approving new <unk> , or the granting of <unk> commit access . A number of responsibilities are officially assigned to other development teams by the FreeBSD Core Team , for example , responsibility for managing the ports collection is delegated to the Ports Management Team . 
 In addition to developers , FreeBSD has thousands of " contributors " . Contributors are also volunteers outside of the FreeBSD project who submit patches for consideration by committers , as they don 't have direct access to FreeBSD 's source code repository . <unk> then evaluate contributors submissions and decide what to accept and what to reject . A contributor who submits high @-@ quality patches is often asked to become a <unk> . 
 = = = Branches = = = 
 FreeBSD developers maintain at least two branches of simultaneous development . The <unk> branch always represents the " bleeding edge " of FreeBSD development . A <unk> branch of FreeBSD is created for each major version number , from which <unk> are cut about once every 4 – 6 months . If a feature is sufficiently stable and mature it will likely be <unk> ( MFC or Merge from <unk> in FreeBSD developer slang ) to the <unk> branch . 
 = = = Foundation = = = 
 FreeBSD development is supported in part by the FreeBSD Foundation . The foundation is a non @-@ profit organization that accepts donations to fund FreeBSD development . Such funding has been used to sponsor developers for specific activities , purchase hardware and network infrastructure , provide travel grants to developer summits , and provide legal support to the FreeBSD project . 
 In November 2014 , the FreeBSD Foundation received 1 million USD donation from Jan <unk> , Co @-@ Founder and CEO of WhatsApp , - the largest single donation to the Foundation since its inception . Jan <unk> himself is a FreeBSD user since the late 1990s and WhatsApp uses FreeBSD on its servers . 
 = = License = = 
 FreeBSD is released under a variety of open source licenses . The kernel code and most newly created code is released under the two @-@ clause BSD license which allows everyone to use and redistribute FreeBSD as they wish . This license was approved by Free Software Foundation and Open Source Initiative as a Free Software and Open Source license respectively . Free Software Foundation described this license as " a lax , permissive non @-@ copyleft free software license , compatible with the GNU GPL " . There are parts released under three- and four @-@ clause BSD licenses , as well as <unk> license . Some device drivers include a binary blob , such as the <unk> HAL of FreeBSD versions before 7 @.@ 2 . Some of the code contributed by other projects is licensed under GPL , <unk> , <unk> and ISC . All the code licensed under GPL and <unk> is clearly separated from the code under liberal licenses , to make it easy for users such as embedded device manufacturers to use only permissive free software licenses . <unk> aims to replace some GPL dependencies in the FreeBSD base system by replacing the GNU compiler collection with the BSD @-@ licensed <unk> / <unk> compiler . <unk> became self @-@ hosting on 16 April 2010 . 
 = = Logo = = 
 For many years FreeBSD 's logo was the generic BSD daemon , also called Beastie , a distorted pronunciation of BSD . First appearing in 1976 on Unix T @-@ shirts purchased by Bell Labs , the more popular versions of the BSD daemon were drawn by animation director John Lasseter beginning in 1984 . Several FreeBSD @-@ specific versions were later drawn by Tatsumi Hosokawa . 
 However , Beastie was not unique to FreeBSD . In lithographic terms , the Lasseter graphic is not line art and often requires a screened , four color photo offset printing process for faithful reproduction on physical surfaces such as paper . Also , the BSD daemon was thought to be too graphically detailed for smooth size scaling and aesthetically over @-@ dependent on multiple color gradations , making it hard to reliably reproduce as a simple , standardized logo in only two or three colors , much less in monochrome . Because of these worries , a competition was held and a new logo designed by Anton K. <unk> , still echoing the BSD daemon , was released on 8 October 2005 . However , it was announced by Robert Watson that , the FreeBSD project is " seeking a new logo , but not a new mascot " and that the FreeBSD project will continue to use Beastie as its mascot . 
 The name " FreeBSD " was coined by David Greenman on 19 June 1993 , other suggested names were " <unk> " and " <unk> " . FreeBSD 's slogan , " The Power to serve " , is a trademark of The FreeBSD Foundation . 
 = = Derivatives = = 
 There are a number of software distributions based on FreeBSD including : 
 <unk> 10 ( server ) 
 PC @-@ BSD ( aimed at home users and workstations ) 
 <unk> ( desktop @-@ oriented operating system , originally based on KDE ) 
 <unk> ( <unk> @-@ based distribution , which also offers other desktop environments ) 
 <unk> ( live CD ) 
 Frenzy ( live CD ) 
 <unk> ( exploit mitigation and hardening development ) 
 <unk> ( firewall ) 
 <unk> ( firewall ) 
 <unk> ( for Network @-@ attached storage devices ) 
 <unk> ( for Network @-@ attached storage devices ) 
 <unk> / <unk> - ( for network servers & storage ) 
 All these distributions have no or only minor changes when compared with the original FreeBSD base system . The main difference to the original FreeBSD is that they come with pre @-@ installed and pre @-@ configured software for specific use cases . This can be compared with Linux distributions , which are all binary compatible because they use the same kernel and also use the same basic tools , compilers and libraries , while coming with different applications , configurations and branding . 
 Besides these distributions , there are some independent operating systems based on FreeBSD . DragonFly BSD is a fork from FreeBSD 4 @.@ 8 aiming for a different multiprocessor synchronization strategy than the one chosen for FreeBSD 5 and development of some <unk> features . It does not aim to stay compatible with FreeBSD and has huge differences in the kernel and basic userland . <unk> is a fork of FreeBSD 6 @.@ 1 borrowing heavily from NeXTSTEP , particularly in the user interface department . 
 Darwin , the core of Apple OS X , includes a virtual file system and network stack derived from the FreeBSD virtual file system and network stack , and components of its userspace are also FreeBSD @-@ derived . 
 Some subscription services that are directly based on FreeBSD are : 
 WhatsApp - processes 2 million concurrent TCP connections per server . 
 Embedded devices and embedded device operating systems based on FreeBSD include : 
 NetApp 's Data <unk> 8.x and the now superseded <unk> GX ( only as a loader for proprietary kernel @-@ space module ) 
 Netflix 's Open Connect Appliance to handle content delivery . 
 The PlayStation 4 ( " Orbis OS " ) 
 Parts of FreeBSD were also used in PlayStation 3 . 
 = = Version history = = 
 = Tracheal intubation = 
 Tracheal intubation , usually simply referred to as intubation , is the placement of a flexible plastic tube into the trachea ( windpipe ) to maintain an open airway or to serve as a conduit through which to administer certain drugs . It is frequently performed in critically injured , ill , or anesthetized patients to facilitate ventilation of the lungs , including mechanical ventilation , and to prevent the possibility of asphyxiation or airway obstruction . 
 The most widely used route is orotracheal , in which an endotracheal tube is passed through the mouth and vocal apparatus into the trachea . In a nasotracheal procedure , an endotracheal tube is passed through the nose and vocal apparatus into the trachea . Other methods of intubation involve surgery and include the cricothyrotomy ( used almost exclusively in emergency circumstances ) and the tracheotomy , used primarily in situations where a prolonged need for airway support is anticipated . 
 Because it is an invasive and uncomfortable medical procedure , intubation is usually performed after administration of general anesthesia and a neuromuscular @-@ blocking drug . It can however be performed in the awake patient with local or topical anesthesia or in an emergency without any anesthesia at all . Intubation is normally facilitated by using a conventional laryngoscope , flexible fiberoptic bronchoscope , or video laryngoscope to identify the vocal cords and pass the tube between them into the trachea instead of into the esophagus . Other devices and techniques may be used alternatively . 
 After the trachea has been intubated , a balloon cuff is typically inflated just above the far end of the tube to help secure it in place , to prevent leakage of respiratory gases , and to protect the tracheobronchial tree from receiving undesirable material such as stomach acid . The tube is then secured to the face or neck and connected to a T @-@ piece , anesthesia breathing circuit , bag valve mask device , or a mechanical ventilator . Once there is no longer a need for ventilatory assistance and / or protection of the airway , the tracheal tube is removed ; this is referred to as <unk> of the trachea ( or <unk> , in the case of a surgical airway such as a cricothyrotomy or a tracheotomy ) . 
 For centuries , tracheotomy was considered the only reliable method for intubation of the trachea . However , because only a minority of patients survived the operation , physicians undertook tracheotomy only as a last resort , on patients who were nearly dead . It was not until the late 19th century however that advances in understanding of anatomy and physiology , as well an appreciation of the germ theory of disease , had improved the outcome of this operation to the point that it could be considered an acceptable treatment option . Also at that time , advances in endoscopic instrumentation had improved to such a degree that direct laryngoscopy had become a viable means to secure the airway by the non @-@ surgical orotracheal route . By the mid @-@ 20th century , the tracheotomy as well as endoscopy and non @-@ surgical tracheal intubation had evolved from rarely employed procedures to becoming essential components of the practices of anesthesiology , critical care medicine , emergency medicine , and laryngology . 
 Tracheal intubation can be associated with minor complications such as broken teeth or lacerations of the tissues of the upper airway . It can also be associated with potentially fatal complications such as pulmonary aspiration of stomach contents which can result in a severe and sometimes fatal chemical aspiration pneumonitis , or unrecognized intubation of the esophagus which can lead to potentially fatal anoxia . Because of this , the potential for difficulty or complications due to the presence of unusual airway anatomy or other uncontrolled variables is carefully evaluated before undertaking tracheal intubation . Alternative strategies for securing the airway must always be readily available . 
 = = Indications = = 
 Tracheal intubation is indicated in a variety of situations when illness or a medical procedure prevents a person from maintaining a clear airway , breathing , and oxygenating the blood . In these circumstances , oxygen supplementation using a simple face mask is inadequate . 
 = = = Depressed level of consciousness = = = 
 Perhaps the most common indication for tracheal intubation is for the placement of a conduit through which nitrous oxide or volatile anesthetics may be administered . General anesthetic agents , opioids , and neuromuscular @-@ blocking drugs may diminish or even abolish the respiratory drive . Although it is not the only means to maintain a patent airway during general anesthesia , intubation of the trachea provides the most reliable means of oxygenation and ventilation and the greatest degree of protection against regurgitation and pulmonary aspiration . 
 Damage to the brain ( such as from a massive stroke , non @-@ penetrating head injury , intoxication or poisoning ) may result in a depressed level of consciousness . When this becomes severe to the point of stupor or coma ( defined as a score on the Glasgow Coma Scale of less than 8 ) , dynamic collapse of the extrinsic muscles of the airway can obstruct the airway , impeding the free flow of air into the lungs . Furthermore , protective airway reflexes such as coughing and swallowing may be diminished or absent . Tracheal intubation is often required to restore <unk> ( the relative absence of blockage ) of the airway and protect the tracheobronchial tree from pulmonary aspiration of gastric contents . 
 = = = Hypoxemia = = = 
 Intubation may be necessary for a patient with decreased oxygen content and oxygen saturation of the blood caused when their breathing is inadequate ( hypoventilation ) , suspended ( apnea ) , or when the lungs are unable to sufficiently transfer gasses to the blood . Such patients , who may be awake and alert , are typically critically ill with a <unk> disease or multiple severe injuries . Examples of such conditions include cervical spine injury , multiple rib fractures , severe pneumonia , acute respiratory distress syndrome ( ARDS ) , or near @-@ drowning . Specifically , intubation is considered if the arterial partial pressure of oxygen ( PaO2 ) is less than 60 millimeters of mercury ( mm Hg ) while breathing an inspired O2 concentration ( <unk> ) of 50 % or greater . In patients with elevated arterial carbon dioxide , an arterial partial pressure of CO2 ( PaCO2 ) greater than 45 mm Hg in the setting of <unk> would prompt intubation , especially if a series of measurements demonstrate a worsening respiratory acidosis . Regardless of the laboratory values , these guidelines are always interpreted in the clinical context . 
 = = = Airway obstruction = = = 
 Actual or impending airway obstruction is a common indication for intubation of the trachea . Life @-@ threatening airway obstruction may occur when a foreign body becomes lodged in the airway ; this is especially common in infants and toddlers . Severe blunt or penetrating injury to the face or neck may be accompanied by swelling and an expanding hematoma , or injury to the larynx , trachea or bronchi . Airway obstruction is also common in people who have suffered smoke inhalation or burns within or near the airway or epiglottitis . Sustained generalized seizure activity and angioedema are other common causes of life @-@ threatening airway obstruction which may require tracheal intubation to secure the airway . 
 = = = Manipulation of the airway = = = 
 Diagnostic or therapeutic manipulation of the airway ( such as bronchoscopy , laser therapy or stenting of the bronchi ) may intermittently interfere with the ability to breathe ; intubation may be necessary in such situations . 
 = = Equipment = = 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The vast majority of tracheal <unk> involve the use of a viewing instrument of one type or another . The modern conventional laryngoscope consists of a handle containing batteries that power a light and a set of interchangeable blades , which are either straight or curved . This device is designed to allow the laryngoscopist to directly view the larynx . Due to the widespread availability of such devices , the technique of blind intubation of the trachea is rarely practiced today , although it may still be useful in certain emergency situations , such as natural or man @-@ made disasters . In the prehospital emergency setting , digital intubation may be necessitated if the patient is in a position that makes direct laryngoscopy impossible . For example , digital intubation may be used by a paramedic if the patient is entrapped in an inverted position in a vehicle after a motor vehicle collision with a prolonged extrication time . 
 The decision to use a straight or curved laryngoscope blade depends partly on the specific anatomical features of the airway , and partly on the personal experience and preference of the laryngoscopist . The Macintosh blade is the most widely used curved laryngoscope blade , while the Miller blade is the most popular style of straight blade . Both Miller and Macintosh laryngoscope blades are available in sizes 0 ( infant ) through 4 ( large adult ) . There are many other styles of straight and curved blades , with accessories such as mirrors for enlarging the field of view and even ports for the administration of oxygen . These specialty blades are primarily designed for use by <unk> and <unk> , most commonly in the operating room . 
 <unk> <unk> have become increasingly available since the 1990s . In contrast to the conventional laryngoscope , these devices allow the laryngoscopist to indirectly view the larynx . This provides a significant advantage in situations where the operator needs to see around an acute bend in order to visualize the glottis , and deal with otherwise difficult <unk> . Video laryngoscopes are specialized fiberoptic <unk> that use a digital video camera sensor to allow the operator to view the glottis and larynx on a video monitor . Other " noninvasive " devices which can be employed to assist in tracheal intubation are the laryngeal mask airway ( used as a conduit for endotracheal tube placement ) and the <unk> . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 An intubating stylet is a malleable metal wire designed to be inserted into the endotracheal tube to make the tube conform better to the upper airway anatomy of the specific individual . This aid is commonly used with a difficult laryngoscopy . Just as with laryngoscope blades , there are also several types of available stylets , such as the <unk> <unk> , which is specifically designed to follow the 60 ° blade angle of the <unk> video laryngoscope . 
 The Eschmann tracheal tube introducer ( often incorrectly referred to as a " gum elastic <unk> " ) is specialized type of stylet used to facilitate difficult intubation . This flexible device is 60 cm ( 24 in ) in length , 15 French ( 5 mm diameter ) with a small " hockey @-@ stick " angle at the far end . Unlike a traditional intubating stylet , the Eschmann tracheal tube introducer is typically inserted directly into the trachea and then used as a guide over which the endotracheal tube can be passed ( in a manner analogous to the Seldinger technique ) . As the Eschmann tracheal tube introducer is considerably less rigid than a conventional stylet , this technique is considered to be a relatively <unk> means of tracheal intubation . 
 The tracheal tube exchanger is a hollow catheter , 56 to 81 cm ( 22 @.@ 0 to 31 @.@ 9 in ) in length , that can be used for removal and replacement of tracheal tubes without the need for laryngoscopy . The Cook Airway Exchange Catheter ( <unk> ) is another example of this type of catheter ; this device has a central lumen ( hollow channel ) through which oxygen can be administered . 
 The lighted stylet is a device that employs the principle of <unk> to facilitate blind orotracheal intubation ( an intubation technique in which the laryngoscopist does not view the glottis ) . 
 = = = Tracheal tubes = = = 
 A tracheal tube is a catheter that is inserted into the trachea for the primary purpose of establishing and maintaining a patent ( open and unobstructed ) airway . Tracheal tubes are frequently used for airway management in the settings of general anesthesia , critical care , mechanical ventilation and emergency medicine . Many different types of tracheal tubes are available , suited for different specific applications . An endotracheal tube is a specific type of tracheal tube that is nearly always inserted through the mouth ( orotracheal ) or nose ( nasotracheal ) . It is a breathing conduit designed to be placed into the airway of critically injured , ill or anesthetized patients in order to perform mechanical positive pressure ventilation of the lungs and to prevent the possibility of aspiration or airway obstruction . The endotracheal tube has a fitting designed to be connected to a source of pressurized gas such as oxygen . At the other end is an orifice through which such gases are directed into the lungs and may also include a balloon ( referred to as a cuff ) . The tip of the endotracheal tube is positioned above the carina ( before the trachea divides to each lung ) and sealed within the trachea so that the lungs can be ventilated equally . A tracheostomy tube is another type of tracheal tube ; this 2 – 3 @-@ inch @-@ long ( 51 – 76 mm ) curved metal or plastic tube is inserted into a tracheostomy stoma or a cricothyrotomy incision . 
 Tracheal tubes can be used to ensure the adequate exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide , to deliver oxygen in higher concentrations than found in air , or to administer other gases such as helium , nitric oxide , nitrous oxide , xenon , or certain volatile anesthetic agents such as desflurane , <unk> , or sevoflurane . They may also be used as a route for administration of certain medications such as bronchodilators , inhaled corticosteroids , and drugs used in treating cardiac arrest such as atropine , epinephrine , lidocaine and vasopressin . 
 Originally made from latex rubber , most modern endotracheal tubes today are constructed of polyvinyl chloride . Tubes constructed of silicone rubber , wire @-@ reinforced silicone rubber or stainless steel are also available for special applications . For human use , tubes range in size from 2 to 10 @.@ 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 1 to 0 @.@ 4 in ) in internal diameter . The size is chosen based on the patient 's body size , with the smaller sizes being used for infants and children . Most endotracheal tubes have an inflatable cuff to seal the tracheobronchial tree against leakage of respiratory gases and pulmonary aspiration of gastric contents , blood , secretions and other fluids . <unk> tubes are also available , though their use is limited mostly to children ( in small children , the cricoid cartilage is the narrowest portion of the airway and usually provides an adequate seal for mechanical ventilation ) . 
 In addition to cuffed or <unk> , preformed endotracheal tubes are also available . The oral and nasal RAE tubes ( named after the inventors Ring , Adair and Elwyn ) are the most widely used of the preformed tubes . 
 There are a number of different types of double @-@ lumen endo @-@ bronchial tubes that have endobronchial as well as endotracheal channels ( <unk> , White and <unk> tubes ) . These tubes are typically coaxial , with two separate channels and two separate openings . They incorporate an endotracheal lumen which terminates in the trachea and an endobronchial lumen , the distal tip of which is positioned 1 – 2 cm into the right or left mainstem bronchus . There is also the <unk> tube , which has a single tracheal lumen and an integrated endobronchial blocker . These tubes enable one to ventilate both lungs , or either lung independently . Single @-@ lung ventilation ( allowing the lung on the operative side to collapse ) can be useful during thoracic surgery , as it can facilitate the surgeon 's view and access to other relevant structures within the thoracic cavity . 
 The " armored " endotracheal tubes are cuffed , wire @-@ reinforced silicone rubber tubes . They are much more flexible than polyvinyl chloride tubes , yet they are difficult to compress or kink . This can make them useful for situations in which the trachea is anticipated to remain intubated for a prolonged duration , or if the neck is to remain flexed during surgery . Most armored tubes have a Magill curve , but preformed armored RAE tubes are also available . Another type of endotracheal tube has four small openings just above the inflatable cuff , which can be used for suction of the trachea or administration of <unk> medications if necessary . Other tubes ( such as the Bivona <unk> @-@ <unk> tube ) are designed specifically for use in laser surgery in and around the airway . 
 = = = Methods to confirm tube placement = = = 
 No single method for confirming tracheal tube placement has been shown to be 100 % reliable . Accordingly , the use of multiple methods for confirmation of correct tube placement is now widely considered to be the standard of care . Such methods include direct visualization as the tip of the tube passes through the glottis , or indirect visualization of the tracheal tube within the trachea using a device such as a bronchoscope . With a properly positioned tracheal tube , equal bilateral breath sounds will be heard upon listening to the chest with a stethoscope , and no sound upon listening to the area over the stomach . Equal bilateral rise and fall of the chest wall will be evident with ventilatory excursions . A small amount of water vapor will also be evident within the lumen of the tube with each exhalation and there will be no gastric contents in the tracheal tube at any time . 
 Ideally , at least one of the methods utilized for confirming tracheal tube placement will be a measuring instrument . <unk> <unk> has emerged as the gold standard for the confirmation of tube placement within the trachea . Other methods relying on instruments include the use of a colorimetric end @-@ tidal carbon dioxide detector , a self @-@ inflating esophageal bulb , or an esophageal detection device . The distal tip of a properly positioned tracheal tube will be located in the mid @-@ trachea , roughly 2 cm ( 1 in ) above the bifurcation of the carina ; this can be confirmed by chest x @-@ ray . If it is inserted too far into the trachea ( beyond the carina ) , the tip of the tracheal tube is likely to be within the right main bronchus — a situation often referred to as a " right mainstem intubation " . In this situation , the left lung may be unable to participate in ventilation , which can lead to decreased oxygen content due to ventilation / perfusion mismatch . 
 = = Special situations = = 
 = = = Emergencies = = = 
 Tracheal intubation in the emergency setting can be difficult with the fiberoptic bronchoscope due to blood , vomit , or secretions in the airway and poor patient cooperation . Because of this , patients with massive facial injury , complete upper airway obstruction , severely diminished ventilation , or profuse upper airway bleeding are poor candidates for fiberoptic intubation . <unk> intubation under general anesthesia typically requires two skilled individuals . Success rates of only 83 – 87 % have been reported using fiberoptic techniques in the emergency department , with significant nasal bleeding occurring in up to 22 % of patients . These drawbacks limit the use of fiberoptic bronchoscopy somewhat in urgent and emergency situations . 
 Personnel experienced in direct laryngoscopy are not always immediately available in certain settings that require emergency tracheal intubation . For this reason , specialized devices have been designed to act as bridges to a definitive airway . Such devices include the laryngeal mask airway , cuffed oropharyngeal airway and the esophageal @-@ tracheal <unk> ( <unk> ) . Other devices such as rigid stylets , the <unk> ( a blind technique ) and indirect fiberoptic rigid stylets , such as the Bullard scope , Upsher scope and the <unk> can also be used as alternatives to direct laryngoscopy . Each of these devices have its own unique set of benefits and drawbacks , and none of them is effective under all circumstances . 
 = = = = Rapid @-@ sequence induction and intubation = = = = 
 Rapid sequence induction and intubation ( RSI ) is a particular method of induction of general anesthesia , commonly employed in emergency operations and other situations where patients are assumed to have a " full stomach " . The objective of RSI is to minimize the possibility of regurgitation and pulmonary aspiration of gastric contents during the induction of general anesthesia and subsequent tracheal intubation . RSI traditionally involves <unk> the lungs with a tightly fitting oxygen mask , followed by the sequential administration of an intravenous sleep @-@ inducing agent and a rapidly acting neuromuscular @-@ blocking drug , such as <unk> , <unk> , or <unk> <unk> , before intubation of the trachea . 
 One important difference between RSI and routine tracheal intubation is that the practitioner does not manually assist the ventilation of the lungs after the onset of general anesthesia and cessation of breathing , until the trachea has been intubated and the cuff has been inflated . Another key feature of RSI is the application of manual ' cricoid pressure ' to the cricoid cartilage , often referred to as the " Sellick maneuver " , prior to instrumentation of the airway and intubation of the trachea . 
 Since the introduction of RSI , there has been controversy regarding virtually every aspect of this technique , including : 
 choice of induction drug , dose and method of administration . 
 avoidance of manual ventilation before tracheal intubation . 
 optimal position and whether the head @-@ up , head @-@ down , or horizontal supine position is the safest for induction of anesthesia in full @-@ stomach patients . 
 application of cricoid pressure ( the Sellick maneuver ) . 
 Named for British anesthetist Brian Arthur Sellick ( 1918 – 1996 ) who first described the procedure in 1961 , the goal of cricoid pressure is to minimize the possibility of regurgitation and pulmonary aspiration of gastric contents . Cricoid pressure has been widely used during RSI for nearly fifty years , despite a lack of compelling evidence to support this practice . The initial article by Sellick was based on a small sample size at a time when high tidal volumes , head @-@ down positioning and barbiturate anesthesia were the rule . Beginning around 2000 , a significant body of evidence has accumulated which questions the effectiveness of cricoid pressure . The application of cricoid pressure may in fact displace the esophagus laterally instead of compressing it as described by Sellick . Cricoid pressure may also compress the glottis , which can obstruct the view of the laryngoscopist and actually cause a delay in securing the airway . 
 Cricoid pressure is often confused with the " <unk> " ( Backwards Upwards <unk> Pressure ) maneuver . While both of these involve digital pressure to the anterior aspect ( front ) of the laryngeal apparatus , the purpose of the latter is to improve the view of the glottis during laryngoscopy and tracheal intubation , rather than to prevent regurgitation . Both cricoid pressure and the <unk> maneuver have the potential to worsen laryngoscopy . 
 RSI may also be used in prehospital emergency situations when a patient is conscious but respiratory failure is imminent ( such as in extreme trauma ) . This procedure is commonly performed by flight paramedics . Flight paramedics often use RSI to intubate before transport because intubation in a moving fixed @-@ wing or rotary @-@ wing aircraft is extremely difficult to perform due to environmental factors . The patient will be paralyzed and intubated on the ground before transport by aircraft . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 A cricothyrotomy is an incision made through the skin and cricothyroid membrane to establish a patent airway during certain life @-@ threatening situations , such as airway obstruction by a foreign body , angioedema , or massive facial trauma . A cricothyrotomy is nearly always performed as a last resort in cases where orotracheal and nasotracheal intubation are impossible or contraindicated . <unk> is easier and quicker to perform than tracheotomy , does not require manipulation of the cervical spine and is associated with fewer complications . 
