 Scholars have found it extremely difficult to assign one specific , overarching theme to the play . Proposals for a main theme include a discovery by the characters that human beings are neither wholly good nor wholly evil , but instead are more or less alike , awaking out of a dream and into reality , the danger of hasty action , or the power of tragic fate . None of these have widespread support . However , even if an overall theme cannot be found it is clear that the play is full of several small , thematic elements that intertwine in complex ways . Several of those most often debated by scholars are discussed below . 
 = = = Love = = = 
 Romeo and Juliet is sometimes considered to have no unifying theme , save that of young love . Romeo and Juliet have become emblematic of young lovers and doomed love . Since it is such an obvious subject of the play , several scholars have explored the language and historical context behind the romance of the play . 
 On their first meeting , Romeo and Juliet use a form of communication recommended by many etiquette authors in Shakespeare 's day : metaphor . By using metaphors of saints and sins , Romeo was able to test Juliet 's feelings for him in a non @-@ threatening way . This method was recommended by Baldassare Castiglione ( whose works had been translated into English by this time ) . He pointed out that if a man used a metaphor as an invitation , the woman could pretend she did not understand him , and he could retreat without losing honour . Juliet , however , participates in the metaphor and expands on it . The religious metaphors of " shrine " , " pilgrim " and " saint " were fashionable in the poetry of the time and more likely to be understood as romantic rather than blasphemous , as the concept of sainthood was associated with the Catholicism of an earlier age . Later in the play , Shakespeare removes the more daring allusions to Christ 's resurrection in the tomb he found in his source work : Brooke 's Romeus and Juliet . 
 In the later balcony scene , Shakespeare has Romeo overhear Juliet 's soliloquy , but in Brooke 's version of the story her declaration is done alone . By bringing Romeo into the scene to eavesdrop , Shakespeare breaks from the normal sequence of courtship . Usually a woman was required to be modest and shy to make sure that her suitor was sincere , but breaking this rule serves to speed along the plot . The lovers are able to skip courting , and move on to plain talk about their relationship — agreeing to be married after knowing each other for only one night . In the final suicide scene , there is a contradiction in the message — in the Catholic religion , suicides were often thought to be condemned to hell , whereas people who die to be with their loves under the " Religion of Love " are joined with their loves in paradise . Romeo and Juliet 's love seems to be expressing the " Religion of Love " view rather than the Catholic view . Another point is that although their love is passionate , it is only consummated in marriage , which keeps them from losing the audience 's sympathy . 
 The play arguably equates love and sex with death . Throughout the story , both Romeo and Juliet , along with the other characters , <unk> about it as a dark being , often equating it with a lover . Capulet , for example , when he first discovers Juliet 's ( faked ) death , describes it as having deflowered his daughter . Juliet later erotically compares Romeo and death . Right before her suicide she grabs Romeo 's dagger , saying " O happy dagger ! This is thy sheath . There rust , and let me die . " 
 = = = Fate and chance = = = 
 Scholars are divided on the role of fate in the play . No consensus exists on whether the characters are truly fated to die together or whether the events take place by a series of unlucky chances . Arguments in favour of fate often refer to the description of the lovers as " star @-@ cross 'd " . This phrase seems to hint that the stars have predetermined the lovers ' future . John W. Draper points out the parallels between the Elizabethan belief in the four humours and the main characters of the play ( for example , Tybalt as a choleric ) . Interpreting the text in the light of humours reduces the amount of plot attributed to chance by modern audiences . Still , other scholars see the play as a series of unlucky chances — many to such a degree that they do not see it as a tragedy at all , but an emotional melodrama . Ruth Nevo believes the high degree to which chance is stressed in the narrative makes Romeo and Juliet a " lesser tragedy " of happenstance , not of character . For example , Romeo 's challenging Tybalt is not impulsive ; it is , after Mercutio 's death , the expected action to take . In this scene , Nevo reads Romeo as being aware of the dangers of flouting social norms , identity and commitments . He makes the choice to kill , not because of a tragic flaw , but because of circumstance . 
 = = = Duality ( light and dark ) = = = 
 Scholars have long noted Shakespeare 's widespread use of light and dark imagery throughout the play . Caroline Spurgeon considers the theme of light as " symbolic of the natural beauty of young love " and later critics have expanded on this interpretation . For example , both Romeo and Juliet see the other as light in a surrounding darkness . Romeo describes Juliet as being like the sun , brighter than a torch , a jewel sparkling in the night , and a bright angel among dark clouds . Even when she lies apparently dead in the tomb , he says her " beauty makes This vault a feasting presence full of light . " Juliet describes Romeo as " day in night " and " Whiter than snow upon a raven 's back . " This contrast of light and dark can be expanded as symbols — contrasting love and hate , youth and age in a metaphoric way . Sometimes these intertwining metaphors create dramatic irony . For example , Romeo and Juliet 's love is a light in the midst of the darkness of the hate around them , but all of their activity together is done in night and darkness , while all of the feuding is done in broad daylight . This paradox of imagery adds atmosphere to the moral dilemma facing the two lovers : loyalty to family or loyalty to love . At the end of the story , when the morning is gloomy and the sun hiding its face for sorrow , light and dark have returned to their proper places , the outward darkness reflecting the true , inner darkness of the family feud out of sorrow for the lovers . All characters now recognise their folly in light of recent events , and things return to the natural order , thanks to the love and death of Romeo and Juliet . The " light " theme in the play is also heavily connected to the theme of time , since light was a convenient way for Shakespeare to express the passage of time through descriptions of the sun , moon , and stars . 
 = = = Time = = = 
 Time plays an important role in the language and plot of the play . Both Romeo and Juliet struggle to maintain an imaginary world void of time in the face of the harsh realities that surround them . For instance , when Romeo swears his love to Juliet by the moon , she protests " O swear not by the moon , th <unk> moon , / That monthly changes in her circled orb , / Lest that thy love prove likewise variable . " From the very beginning , the lovers are designated as " star @-@ cross 'd " referring to an <unk> belief associated with time . Stars were thought to control the fates of humanity , and as time passed , stars would move along their course in the sky , also charting the course of human lives below . Romeo speaks of a foreboding he feels in the stars ' movements early in the play , and when he learns of Juliet 's death , he defies the stars ' course for him . 
 Another central theme is haste : Shakespeare 's Romeo and Juliet spans a period of four to six days , in contrast to Brooke 's poem 's spanning nine months . Scholars such as G. Thomas <unk> believe that time was " especially important to Shakespeare " in this play , as he used references to " short @-@ time " for the young lovers as opposed to references to " long @-@ time " for the " older generation " to highlight " a headlong rush towards doom " . Romeo and Juliet fight time to make their love last forever . In the end , the only way they seem to defeat time is through a death that makes them immortal through art . 
 Time is also connected to the theme of light and dark . In Shakespeare 's day , plays were most often performed at noon or in the afternoon in broad daylight . This forced the playwright to use words to create the illusion of day and night in his plays . Shakespeare uses references to the night and day , the stars , the moon , and the sun to create this illusion . He also has characters frequently refer to days of the week and specific hours to help the audience understand that time has passed in the story . All in all , no fewer than 103 references to time are found in the play , adding to the illusion of its passage . 
 = = Criticism and interpretation = = 
 = = = Critical history = = = 
 The earliest known critic of the play was diarist Samuel Pepys , who wrote in 1662 : " it is a play of itself the worst that I ever heard in my life . " Poet John Dryden wrote 10 years later in praise of the play and its comic character Mercutio : " Shakespear show 'd the best of his skill in his Mercutio , and he said himself , that he was <unk> 'd to kill him in the third Act , to prevent being killed by him . " Criticism of the play in the 18th century was less sparse , but no less divided . Publisher Nicholas Rowe was the first critic to ponder the theme of the play , which he saw as the just punishment of the two feuding families . In mid @-@ century , writer Charles <unk> and philosopher Lord Kames argued that the play was a failure in that it did not follow the classical rules of drama : the tragedy must occur because of some character flaw , not an accident of fate . Writer and critic Samuel Johnson , however , considered it one of Shakespeare 's " most pleasing " plays . 
 In the later part of the 18th and through the 19th century , criticism centred on debates over the moral message of the play . Actor and playwright David Garrick 's 1748 adaptation excluded Rosaline : Romeo abandoning her for Juliet was seen as fickle and reckless . Critics such as Charles Dibdin argued that Rosaline had been purposely included in the play to show how reckless the hero was , and that this was the reason for his tragic end . Others argued that Friar Laurence might be Shakespeare 's spokesman in his warnings against undue haste . With the advent of the 20th century , these moral arguments were disputed by critics such as Richard Green Moulton : he argued that accident , and not some character flaw , led to the lovers ' deaths . 
 = = = Dramatic structure = = = 
 In Romeo and Juliet , Shakespeare employs several dramatic techniques that have garnered praise from critics ; most notably the abrupt shifts from comedy to tragedy ( an example is the punning exchange between Benvolio and Mercutio just before Tybalt arrives ) . Before Mercutio 's death in Act three , the play is largely a comedy . After his accidental demise , the play suddenly becomes serious and takes on a tragic tone . When Romeo is banished , rather than executed , and Friar Laurence offers Juliet a plan to reunite her with Romeo , the audience can still hope that all will end well . They are in a " breathless state of suspense " by the opening of the last scene in the tomb : If Romeo is delayed long enough for the Friar to arrive , he and Juliet may yet be saved . These shifts from hope to despair , reprieve , and new hope , serve to emphasise the tragedy when the final hope fails and both the lovers die at the end . 
 Shakespeare also uses sub @-@ plots to offer a clearer view of the actions of the main characters . For example , when the play begins , Romeo is in love with Rosaline , who has refused all of his advances . Romeo 's infatuation with her stands in obvious contrast to his later love for Juliet . This provides a comparison through which the audience can see the seriousness of Romeo and Juliet 's love and marriage . Paris ' love for Juliet also sets up a contrast between Juliet 's feelings for him and her feelings for Romeo . The formal language she uses around Paris , as well as the way she talks about him to her Nurse , show that her feelings clearly lie with Romeo . Beyond this , the sub @-@ plot of the Montague – Capulet feud <unk> the whole play , providing an atmosphere of hate that is the main contributor to the play 's tragic end . 
 = = = Language = = = 
 Shakespeare uses a variety of poetic forms throughout the play . He begins with a 14 @-@ line prologue in the form of a Shakespearean sonnet , spoken by a Chorus . Most of Romeo and Juliet is , however , written in blank verse , and much of it in strict iambic pentameter , with less rhythmic variation than in most of Shakespeare 's later plays . In choosing forms , Shakespeare matches the poetry to the character who uses it . Friar Laurence , for example , uses sermon and sententiae forms , and the Nurse uses a unique blank verse form that closely matches colloquial speech . Each of these forms is also moulded and matched to the emotion of the scene the character occupies . For example , when Romeo talks about Rosaline earlier in the play , he attempts to use the Petrarchan sonnet form . Petrarchan sonnets were often used by men to exaggerate the beauty of women who were impossible for them to attain , as in Romeo 's situation with Rosaline . This sonnet form is used by Lady Capulet to describe Count Paris to Juliet as a handsome man . When Romeo and Juliet meet , the poetic form changes from the Petrarchan ( which was becoming archaic in Shakespeare 's day ) to a then more contemporary sonnet form , using " pilgrims " and " saints " as metaphors . Finally , when the two meet on the balcony , Romeo attempts to use the sonnet form to pledge his love , but Juliet breaks it by saying " Dost thou love me ? " By doing this , she searches for true expression , rather than a poetic exaggeration of their love . Juliet uses monosyllabic words with Romeo , but uses formal language with Paris . Other forms in the play include an epithalamium by Juliet , a rhapsody in Mercutio 's Queen Mab speech , and an elegy by Paris . Shakespeare saves his prose style most often for the common people in the play , though at times he uses it for other characters , such as Mercutio . Humour , also , is important : scholar Molly <unk> identifies at least 175 puns and wordplays in the text . Many of these jokes are sexual in nature , especially those involving Mercutio and the Nurse . 
 = = = Psychoanalytic criticism = = = 
 Early psychoanalytic critics saw the problem of Romeo and Juliet in terms of Romeo 's impulsiveness , deriving from " ill @-@ controlled , partially disguised aggression " , which leads both to Mercutio 's death and to the double suicide . Romeo and Juliet is not considered to be exceedingly psychologically complex , and sympathetic psychoanalytic readings of the play make the tragic male experience equivalent with sicknesses . Norman Holland , writing in 1966 , considers Romeo 's dream as a realistic " wish fulfilling fantasy both in terms of Romeo 's adult world and his hypothetical childhood at stages oral , phallic and oedipal " – while acknowledging that a dramatic character is not a human being with mental processes separate from those of the author . Critics such as Julia <unk> focus on the hatred between the families , arguing that this hatred is the cause of Romeo and Juliet 's passion for each other . That hatred manifests itself directly in the lovers ' language : Juliet , for example , speaks of " my only love sprung from my only hate " and often expresses her passion through an anticipation of Romeo 's death . This leads on to speculation as to the playwright 's psychology , in particular to a consideration of Shakespeare 's grief for the death of his son , Hamnet . 
 = = = Feminist criticism = = = 
 Feminist literary critics argue that the blame for the family feud lies in Verona 's patriarchal society . For Coppélia Kahn , for example , the strict , masculine code of violence imposed on Romeo is the main force driving the tragedy to its end . When Tybalt kills Mercutio , Romeo shifts into this violent mode , regretting that Juliet has made him so " effeminate " . In this view , the younger males " become men " by engaging in violence on behalf of their fathers , or in the case of the servants , their masters . The feud is also linked to male virility , as the numerous jokes about <unk> aptly demonstrate . Juliet also submits to a female code of docility by allowing others , such as the Friar , to solve her problems for her . Other critics , such as <unk> Callaghan , look at the play 's feminism from a historicist angle , stressing that when the play was written the feudal order was being challenged by increasingly centralised government and the advent of capitalism . At the same time , emerging Puritan ideas about marriage were less concerned with the " evils of female sexuality " than those of earlier eras , and more sympathetic towards love @-@ matches : when Juliet dodges her father 's attempt to force her to marry a man she has no feeling for , she is challenging the patriarchal order in a way that would not have been possible at an earlier time . 
 = = = Queer theory = = = 
 A number of critics have found the character of Mercutio to have unacknowledged homoerotic desire for Romeo . Jonathan Goldberg examined the sexuality of Mercutio and Romeo utilising " queer theory " in <unk> the Renaissance , comparing their friendship with sexual love . Mercutio , in friendly conversation , mentions Romeo 's phallus , suggesting traces of homoeroticism . An example is his joking wish " To raise a spirit in his mistress ' circle ... letting it there stand / Till she had laid it and conjured it down . " Romeo 's homoeroticism can also be found in his attitude to Rosaline , a woman who is distant and unavailable and brings no hope of offspring . As Benvolio argues , she is best replaced by someone who will reciprocate . Shakespeare 's procreation sonnets describe another young man who , like Romeo , is having trouble creating offspring and who may be seen as being a homosexual . Goldberg believes that Shakespeare may have used Rosaline as a way to express homosexual problems of procreation in an acceptable way . In this view , when Juliet says " ... that which we call a rose , by any other name would smell as sweet " , she may be raising the question of whether there is any difference between the beauty of a man and the beauty of a woman . 
 = = = The Balcony Scene = = = 
 The balcony scene was introduced by Da Porto in 1524 . He had Romeo walk frequently by her house , " sometimes climbing to her chamber window " and wrote " It happened one night , as love ordained , when the moon shone unusually bright , that whilst Romeo was climbing the balcony , the young lady ... opened the window , and looking out saw him " . After this they have a conversation in which they declare eternal love to each other . A few decades later , Bandello greatly expanded this scene , diverging from the familiar one : Julia has her nurse deliver a letter asking Romeo to come to her window with a rope ladder , and he climbs the balcony with the help of his servant , Julia and the nurse ( the servants discreetly withdraw after this ) . 
 Nevertheless , in October 2014 , Lois Leveen speculated in The Atlantic that the original Shakespeare play did not contain a balcony . The word , <unk> , did not exist in the English language until two years after Shakespeare 's death . The balcony was certainly used in Thomas Otway 's 1679 play , The History and Fall of Caius Marius , which had borrowed much of its story from Romeo and Juliet and placed the two lovers in a balcony reciting a speech similar to that between Romeo and Juliet . Leveen suggested that during the 18th century , David Garrick chose to use a balcony in his adaptation and revival of Romeo and Juliet and modern adaptations have continued this tradition . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Shakespeare 's day = = = 
 Romeo and Juliet ranks with Hamlet as one of Shakespeare 's most performed plays . Its many adaptations have made it one of his most enduring and famous stories . Even in Shakespeare 's lifetime it was extremely popular . Scholar Gary Taylor measures it as the sixth most popular of Shakespeare 's plays , in the period after the death of Christopher Marlowe and Thomas Kyd but before the ascendancy of Ben Jonson during which Shakespeare was London 's dominant playwright . The date of the first performance is unknown . The First Quarto , printed in 1597 , says that " it hath been often ( and with great applause ) plaid <unk> " , setting the first performance before that date . The Lord Chamberlain 's Men were certainly the first to perform it . Besides their strong connections with Shakespeare , the Second Quarto actually names one of its actors , Will Kemp , instead of Peter in a line in Act five . Richard Burbage was probably the first Romeo , being the company 's actor , and Master Robert Goffe ( a boy ) the first Juliet . The premiere is likely to have been at " The Theatre " , with other early productions at " The Curtain " . Romeo and Juliet is one of the first Shakespearean plays to have been performed outside England : a shortened and simplified version was performed in Nördlingen in 1604 . 
 = = = Restoration and 18th @-@ century theatre = = = 
 All theatres were closed down by the puritan government on September 6 , 1642 . Upon the restoration of the monarchy in 1660 , two patent companies ( the King 's Company and the Duke 's Company ) were established , and the existing theatrical repertoire divided between them . 
 Sir William Davenant of the Duke 's Company staged a 1662 adaptation in which Henry Harris played Romeo , Thomas Betterton Mercutio , and Betterton 's wife Mary <unk> Juliet : she was probably the first woman to play the role professionally . Another version closely followed Davenant 's adaptation and was also regularly performed by the Duke 's Company . This was a tragicomedy by James Howard , in which the two lovers survive . 
 Thomas Otway 's The History and Fall of Caius Marius , one of the more extreme of the Restoration adaptations of Shakespeare , debuted in 1680 . The scene is shifted from Renaissance Verona to ancient Rome ; Romeo is Marius , Juliet is Lavinia , the feud is between patricians and plebeians ; Juliet / Lavinia wakes from her potion before Romeo / Marius dies . Otway 's version was a hit , and was acted for the next seventy years . His innovation in the closing scene was even more enduring , and was used in adaptations throughout the next 200 years : Theophilus Cibber 's adaptation of 1744 , and David Garrick 's of 1748 both used variations on it . These versions also eliminated elements deemed inappropriate at the time . For example , Garrick 's version transferred all language describing Rosaline to Juliet , to heighten the idea of faithfulness and downplay the love @-@ at @-@ first @-@ sight theme . In 1750 a " Battle of the Romeos " began , with Spranger Barry and Susannah Maria Arne ( Mrs. Theophilus Cibber ) at Covent Garden versus David Garrick and George Anne Bellamy at Drury Lane . 
 The earliest known production in North America was an amateur one : on 23 March 1730 , a physician named <unk> Bertrand placed an advertisement in the Gazette newspaper in New York , promoting a production in which he would play the apothecary . The first professional performances of the play in North America were those of the Hallam Company . 
 = = = 19th @-@ century theatre = = = 
 Garrick 's altered version of the play was very popular , and ran for nearly a century . Not until 1845 did Shakespeare 's original return to the stage in the United States with the sisters Susan and Charlotte Cushman as Juliet and Romeo , respectively , and then in 1847 in Britain with Samuel Phelps at Sadler 's Wells Theatre . Cushman adhered to Shakespeare 's version , beginning a string of eighty @-@ four performances . Her portrayal of Romeo was considered genius by many . The Times wrote : " For a long time Romeo has been a convention . Miss Cushman 's Romeo is a creative , a living , breathing , animated , ardent human being . " Queen Victoria wrote in her journal that " no @-@ one would ever have imagined she was a woman " . Cushman 's success broke the Garrick tradition and paved the way for later performances to return to the original storyline . 
 Professional performances of Shakespeare in the mid @-@ 19th century had two particular features : firstly , they were generally star vehicles , with supporting roles cut or marginalised to give greater prominence to the central characters . Secondly , they were " pictorial " , placing the action on spectacular and elaborate sets ( requiring lengthy pauses for scene changes ) and with the frequent use of tableaux . Henry Irving 's 1882 production at the Lyceum Theatre ( with himself as Romeo and Ellen Terry as Juliet ) is considered an archetype of the pictorial style . In 1895 , Sir Johnston Forbes @-@ Robertson took over from Irving , and laid the groundwork for a more natural portrayal of Shakespeare that remains popular today . Forbes @-@ Robertson avoided the <unk> of Irving and instead portrayed a down @-@ to @-@ earth Romeo , expressing the poetic dialogue as realistic prose and avoiding melodramatic flourish . 
 American actors began to rival their British counterparts . Edwin Booth ( brother to John Wilkes Booth ) and Mary McVicker ( soon to be Edwin 's wife ) opened as Romeo and Juliet at the sumptuous Booth 's Theatre ( with its European @-@ style stage machinery , and an air conditioning system unique in New York ) on 3 February 1869 . Some reports said it was one of the most elaborate productions of Romeo and Juliet ever seen in America ; it was certainly the most popular , running for over six weeks and earning over $ 60 @,@ 000 ( equal to about $ 1 @,@ 067 @,@ 000 today ) . The programme noted that : " The tragedy will be produced in strict accordance with historical propriety , in every respect , following closely the text of Shakespeare . " 
 The first professional performance of the play in Japan may have been George Crichton <unk> 's company 's production , which toured to Yokohama in 1890 . Throughout the 19th century , Romeo and Juliet had been Shakespeare 's most popular play , measured by the number of professional performances . In the 20th century it would become the second most popular , behind Hamlet . 
 = = = 20th @-@ century theatre = = = 
 In 1933 , the play was revived by actress Katharine Cornell and her director husband Guthrie McClintic and was taken on a seven @-@ month nationwide tour throughout the United States . It starred Orson Welles , Brian Aherne and Basil Rathbone . The production was a modest success , and so upon the return to New York , Cornell and McClintic revised it and for the first time , the play was presented with almost all the scenes intact , including the Prologue . The new production opened in December 1934 with Ralph Richardson as Mercutio and Maurice Evans as Romeo . Critics wrote that Cornell was " the finest Juliet of her time " , " endlessly haunting " , and " the most lovely and enchanting Juliet our present @-@ day theatre has seen " . 
 John Gielgud 's New Theatre production in 1935 featured Gielgud and Laurence Olivier as Romeo and Mercutio , exchanging roles six weeks into the run , with Peggy Ashcroft as Juliet . Gielgud used a scholarly combination of Q1 and Q2 texts , and organised the set and costumes to match as closely as possible to the Elizabethan period . His efforts were a huge success at the box office , and set the stage for increased historical realism in later productions . Olivier later compared his performance and Gielgud 's : " John , all spiritual , all spirituality , all beauty , all abstract things ; and myself as all earth , blood , humanity ... I 've always felt that John missed the lower half and that made me go for the other ... But whatever it was , when I was playing Romeo I was carrying a torch , I was trying to sell realism in Shakespeare . " 
 Peter Brook 's 1947 version was the beginning of a different style of Romeo and Juliet performances . Brook was less concerned with realism , and more concerned with translating the play into a form that could communicate with the modern world . He argued , " A production is only correct at the moment of its correctness , and only good at the moment of its success . " Brook excluded the final reconciliation of the families from his performance text . 
 Throughout the century , audiences , influenced by the cinema , became less willing to accept actors distinctly older than the teenage characters they were playing . A significant example of more youthful casting was in Franco Zeffirelli 's Old Vic production in 1960 , with John Stride and Judi Dench , which would serve as the basis for his 1968 film . Zeffirelli borrowed from Brook 's ideas , altogether removing around a third of the play 's text to make it more accessible . In an interview with The Times , he stated that the play 's " twin themes of love and the total breakdown of understanding between two generations " had contemporary relevance . 
 Recent performances often set the play in the contemporary world . For example , in 1986 the Royal Shakespeare Company set the play in modern Verona . <unk> replaced swords , feasts and balls became drug @-@ laden rock parties , and Romeo committed suicide by hypodermic needle . In 1997 , the Folger Shakespeare Theatre produced a version set in a typical suburban world . Romeo sneaks into the Capulet barbecue to meet Juliet , and Juliet discovers Tybalt 's death while in class at school . 
 The play is sometimes given a historical setting , enabling audiences to reflect on the underlying conflicts . For example , adaptations have been set in the midst of the Israeli @-@ Palestinian conflict , in the apartheid era in South Africa , and in the aftermath of the Pueblo Revolt . Similarly , Peter Ustinov 's 1956 comic adaptation , Romanoff and Juliet , is set in a fictional mid @-@ European country in the depths of the Cold War . A mock @-@ Victorian revisionist version of Romeo and Juliet 's final scene ( with a happy ending , Romeo , Juliet , Mercutio and Paris restored to life , and Benvolio revealing that he is Paris 's love , <unk> , in disguise ) forms part of the 1980 stage @-@ play The Life and Adventures of Nicholas Nickleby . Shakespeare ’ s R & J , by Joe <unk> , spins the classic in a modern tale of gay teenage awakening . A recent comedic musical adaptation was The Second City 's The Second City 's Romeo and Juliet Musical : The People vs. Friar Laurence , the Man Who Killed Romeo and Juliet , set in modern times . 
 In the 19th and 20th century , Romeo and Juliet has often been the choice of Shakespeare plays to open a classical theatre company , beginning with Edwin Booth 's inaugural production of that play in his theatre in 1869 , the newly reformed company of the Old Vic in 1929 with John Gielgud , <unk> Hunt and Margaret Webster , as well as the Riverside Shakespeare Company in its founding production in New York City in 1977 , which used the 1968 film of Franco Zeffirelli 's production as its inspiration . 
 In 2013 , Romeo and Juliet ran on Broadway at Richard Rodgers Theatre from September 19 to December 8 for 93 regular performances after 27 previews starting on August 24 with Orlando Bloom and <unk> Rashad in the starring roles . 
 = = = = Ballet = = = = 
 The best @-@ known ballet version is Prokofiev 's Romeo and Juliet . Originally commissioned by the Kirov Ballet , it was rejected by them when Prokofiev attempted a happy ending , and was rejected again for the experimental nature of its music . It has subsequently attained an " immense " reputation , and has been choreographed by John Cranko ( 1962 ) and Kenneth MacMillan ( 1965 ) among others . 
 In 1977 , Michael <unk> 's production of one of the play 's most dramatic and impassioned dance interpretations was debuted in its entirety by San Francisco Ballet . This production was the first full @-@ length ballet to be broadcast by the PBS series " Great Performances : Dance in America " ; it aired in 1978 . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 At least 27 operas have been based on Romeo and Juliet . The earliest , Romeo und Julie in 1776 , a Singspiel by Georg Benda , omits much of the action of the play and most of its characters , and has a happy ending . It is occasionally revived . The best @-@ known is Gounod 's 1867 Roméo et Juliette ( libretto by Jules Barbier and Michel Carré ) , a critical triumph when first performed and frequently revived today . Bellini 's I <unk> e i <unk> is also revived from time to time , but has sometimes been judged unfavourably because of its perceived liberties with Shakespeare ; however , Bellini and his librettist , Felice Romani , worked from Italian sources — principally Romani 's libretto for Giulietta e Romeo by Nicola <unk> — rather than directly adapting Shakespeare 's play . Among later operas there is Heinrich <unk> 's 1940 work Romeo und Julia . 
 Roméo et Juliette by Berlioz is a " symphonie <unk> " , a large @-@ scale work in three parts for mixed voices , chorus and orchestra , which premiered in 1839 . Tchaikovsky 's Romeo and Juliet Fantasy @-@ Overture ( 1869 , revised 1870 and 1880 ) is a 15 @-@ minute symphonic poem , containing the famous melody known as the " love theme " . Tchaikovsky 's device of repeating the same musical theme at the ball , in the balcony scene , in Juliet 's bedroom and in the tomb has been used by subsequent directors : for example Nino Rota 's love theme is used in a similar way in the 1968 film of the play , as is Des 'ree 's Kissing You in the 1996 film . Other classical composers influenced by the play include Henry Hugh Pearson ( Romeo and Juliet , overture for orchestra , Op. 86 ) , Svendsen ( Romeo og Julie , 1876 ) , Delius ( A Village Romeo and Juliet , 1899 – 1901 ) , Stenhammar ( Romeo och Julia , 1922 ) , and <unk> ( Incidental Music to Romeo and Juliet , Op. 56 , 1956 ) . 
 The play influenced several jazz works , including Peggy Lee 's " Fever " . Duke Ellington 's Such Sweet Thunder contains a piece entitled " The Star @-@ Crossed Lovers " in which the pair are represented by tenor and alto saxophones : critics noted that Juliet 's sax dominates the piece , rather than offering an image of equality . The play has frequently influenced popular music , including works by The Supremes , Bruce Springsteen , Tom Waits , Lou Reed , and Taylor Swift . The most famous such track is Dire Straits ' " Romeo and Juliet " . 
 The most famous musical theatre adaptation is West Side Story with music by Leonard Bernstein and lyrics by Stephen Sondheim . It débuted on Broadway in 1957 and in the West End in 1958 , and became a popular film in 1961 . This version updated the setting to mid @-@ 20th @-@ century New York City , and the warring families to ethnic gangs . Other musical adaptations include Terrence Mann 's 1999 rock musical William Shakespeare 's Romeo and Juliet , co @-@ written with Jerome Korman , Gérard <unk> 's 2001 Roméo et Juliette , de la Haine à l 'Amour and Riccardo Cocciante 's 2007 Giulietta & Romeo . 
 = = = Literature and art = = = 
 Romeo and Juliet had a profound influence on subsequent literature . Before then , romance had not even been viewed as a worthy topic for tragedy . In Harold Bloom 's words , Shakespeare " invented the formula that the sexual becomes the erotic when crossed by the shadow of death " . Of Shakespeare 's works , Romeo and Juliet has generated the most — and the most varied — adaptations , including prose and verse narratives , drama , opera , orchestral and choral music , ballet , film , television and painting . The word " Romeo " has even become synonymous with " male lover " in English . 
 Romeo and Juliet was parodied in Shakespeare 's own lifetime : Henry Porter 's Two Angry Women of Abingdon ( 1598 ) and Thomas Dekker 's Blurt , Master Constable ( 1607 ) both contain balcony scenes in which a virginal heroine engages in bawdy wordplay . The play directly influenced later literary works . For example , the preparations for a performance form a major plot arc in Charles Dickens ' Nicholas Nickleby . 
 Romeo and Juliet is one of Shakespeare 's most @-@ illustrated works . The first known illustration was a woodcut of the tomb scene , thought to be by Elisha <unk> , which appeared in Nicholas Rowe 's 1709 edition of Shakespeare 's plays . Five paintings of the play were commissioned for the Boydell Shakespeare Gallery in the late 18th century , one representing each of the five acts of the play . The 19th century fashion for " pictorial " performances led to directors drawing on paintings for their inspiration , which in turn influenced painters to depict actors and scenes from the theatre . In the 20th century , the play 's most iconic visual images have derived from its popular film versions . 
 In 2014 , Simon & Schuster will publish Juliet 's Nurse , a novel by historian and former college professor Lois M. Leveen imagining the fourteen years leading up to the events in the play from the point of view of the nurse . The nurse has the third largest number of lines in the original play ; only the eponymous characters have more lines . 
 = = = Screen = = = 
 Romeo and Juliet may be the most @-@ filmed play of all time . The most notable theatrical releases were George Cukor 's multi @-@ Oscar @-@ nominated 1936 production , Franco Zeffirelli 's 1968 version , and Baz Luhrmann 's 1996 MTV @-@ inspired Romeo + Juliet . The latter two were both , in their time , the highest @-@ grossing Shakespeare film ever . Romeo and Juliet was first filmed in the silent era , by Georges Méliès , although his film is now lost . The play was first heard on film in The Hollywood Revue of 1929 , in which John Gilbert recited the balcony scene opposite Norma Shearer . 
 Shearer and Leslie Howard , with a combined age over 75 , played the teenage lovers in George Cukor 's MGM 1936 film version . Neither critics nor the public responded enthusiastically . <unk> considered the film too " arty " , staying away as they had from Warner 's A Midsummer Night Dream a year before : leading to Hollywood abandoning the Bard for over a decade . Renato Castellani won the Grand Prix at the Venice Film Festival for his 1954 film of Romeo and Juliet . His Romeo , Laurence Harvey , was already an experienced screen actor . By contrast , Susan <unk> , as Juliet , was a secretarial student who was discovered by the director in a London pub , and was cast for her " pale sweet skin and honey @-@ blonde hair " . 
 Stephen Orgel describes Franco Zeffirelli 's 1968 Romeo and Juliet as being " full of beautiful young people , and the camera , and the lush <unk> , make the most of their sexual energy and good looks " . Zeffirelli 's teenage leads , Leonard Whiting and Olivia Hussey , had virtually no previous acting experience , but performed capably and with great maturity . Zeffirelli has been particularly praised , for his presentation of the duel scene as bravado getting out @-@ of @-@ control . The film courted controversy by including a nude wedding @-@ night scene while Olivia Hussey was only fifteen . 
 Baz Luhrmann 's 1996 Romeo + Juliet and its accompanying soundtrack successfully targeted the " MTV Generation " : a young audience of similar age to the story 's characters . Far darker than Zeffirelli 's version , the film is set in the " crass , violent and superficial society " of Verona Beach and Sycamore Grove . Leonardo DiCaprio was Romeo and Claire Danes was Juliet . 
 The play has been widely adapted for TV and film . In 1960 , Peter Ustinov 's cold @-@ war stage parody , Romanoff and Juliet was filmed . The 1961 film of West Side Story — set among New York gangs – featured the Jets as white youths , equivalent to Shakespeare 's Montagues , while the Sharks , equivalent to the Capulets , are Puerto Rican . The 1994 film The Punk uses both the rough plot outline of Romeo and Juliet and names many of the characters in ways that reflect the characters in the play . In 2006 , Disney 's High School Musical made use of Romeo and Juliet 's plot , placing the two young lovers in rival high school cliques instead of feuding families . Film @-@ makers have frequently featured characters performing scenes from Romeo and Juliet . The conceit of dramatising Shakespeare writing Romeo and Juliet has been used several times , including John Madden 's 1998 Shakespeare in Love , in which Shakespeare writes the play against the backdrop of his own doomed love affair . An anime series produced by Gonzo and SKY Perfect Well Think , called Romeo x Juliet , was made in 2007 and the 2013 version is the latest English @-@ language film based on the play . In 2013 , Sanjay Leela Bhansali directed the Bollywood film Goliyon Ki Raasleela Ram @-@ Leela , a contemporary version of the play which starred Ranveer Singh and Deepika Padukone in leading roles . The film was a commercial and critical success . In February 2014 , <unk> released a filmed version of the 2013 Broadway Revival of Romeo and Juliet . The production starred Orlando Bloom and <unk> Rashad . The film was released internationally in April 2014 . 
 = = = Modern social media and virtual world productions = = = 
 In April and May 2010 the Royal Shakespeare Company and the <unk> Production Company presented a version of the play , entitled Such Tweet Sorrow , as an improvised , real @-@ time series of tweets on Twitter . The production used RSC actors who engaged with the audience as well each other , performing not from a traditional script but a " Grid " developed by the <unk> production team and writers Tim Wright and Bethan Marlow . The performers also make use of other media sites such as YouTube for pictures and video . 
 = = Scene by scene = = 
 = Reptar on Ice = 
 " Reptar on Ice " is the tenth episode of the second season of the animated television series Rugrats . It is the first segment of the twenty @-@ third episode for the entire series . The episode was written by Peter Gaffney and directed by Howard E. Baker . It was originally broadcast on November 8 , 1992 . " Reptar on Ice " followed the infant main characters , Tommy , Chuckie , Phil , and Lil going to an ice show with their parents that follows the love story of the babies ' favorite monster , Reptar . There , the babies attempt to return a lizard to the actor , assuming it is his child . 
 " Reptar on Ice " continued Rugrats ' employment of the character Reptar , a satirical parody of Godzilla . The episode included several other cultural references ; the basic theme lampoons the commercialization of children 's media products and its plethora of merchandise tie @-@ ins . The ice show the children see is referent to real @-@ life ice shows , such as " Disney on Ice , " and its plot centers around a Beauty and the Beast @-@ style love story . 
 The episode was released on the DVD and VHS compilation " Decade in Diapers , " which included the " favorite episodes " of Rugrats in their respected category as voted on by fans on Nick.com , and was celebratory of the show 's tenth anniversary . " Reptar on Ice " in particular was categorized as the " Favorite Reptar @-@ <unk> Episode . " Gord Lacey of <unk> described it as one of his favorite episodes from the compilation , tied with " Vacation Special . " It was adapted into an audio story , which was featured prominently on the CD and cassette tape " In Search of the Mighty Reptar " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The babies discover a tiny lizard in Tommy Pickles ' backyard that they are convinced is the offspring of Reptar , a fictitious green dinosaur and main character of many action movies of which the Rugrats are fond . After learning about the extinction of the dinosaurs , Tommy decides to return the lizard to Reptar just as his family has purchased tickets for a musical ice show based on the character . After Tommy 's parents and grandfather have fallen asleep , the babies sneak into the ice rink and present the lizard to Leo , the actor portraying Reptar , who coincidentally happens to possess a phobia of lizards . Stu Pickles , Tommy 's father , sees the <unk> and must retrieve them from the ice rink . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Reptar on Ice " was written by Peter Gaffney and directed by Howard E. Baker . It was the tenth episode of season two of Rugrats , which was created by Arlene Klasky and Gabor Csupo , along with Paul Germain , founders of the self @-@ titled company Klasky @-@ Csupo . " Reptar on Ice " was originally broadcast on November 8 , 1992 on Nickelodeon . John Schuck guest starred as Reptar . In the episode , Reptar is played by a man named Leo , who was used during season one 's " Reptar 's Revenge " dressed as Reptar for a state fair . " Reptar 's Revenge " was also written by Gaffney . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Reptar had been used since season one , episode three , " At the Movies , " as a satirical parody of the fictional Japanese monster , Godzilla . Despite being a green dinosaur , he still embodies the character , and though he is portrayed comically , his name is referent to the way a child would pronounce " Velociraptor , " made famous for its appearance in Jurassic Park , though that film is highly unlikely to have been the inspiration since it was released after Reptar 's début . Reptar is used to demonstrate and subsequently lampoon the ever growing domination of Japanese culture into children 's society . 
 " Reptar on Ice " continues this satirical tradition , heavily displaying the over commercialization where media is dragged on into several merchandising tie @-@ ins . Angelica is insistent on only eating Reptar brand cereal , which Stu states has " no actual food in it . " The ice show the babies attend mocks several different real life ice shows , including " Disney on Ice " and " Barney on Ice . " Another reference in the episode is the subsequent joke about Beauty and the Beast in the romantic plot of the entire " Reptar on Ice " performance . 
 = = Reception and home media releases = = 
 " Reptar on Ice " was originally broadcast on November 8 , 1992 . The 1997 VHS tape " Return of Reptar " was the first home video release with this episode . Four years later in 2001 , the episode is featured on a VHS and DVD compilation for the show 's tenth anniversary entitled Decade in Diapers . It included ten episodes that were voted by fans on Nick.com as their favorites in specific categories - " Reptar on Ice " was listed as the favorite " Reptar @-@ <unk> Episode . " The Decades in Diapers video had originally been released as a VHS in 2001 , and though Paramount Studios intended to concurrently put it as a DVD as well , they " opted to wait a year " . The episode was most recently re @-@ released to DVD in June 2009 as a part of the Rugrats Season 2 DVD set . 
 Gord Lacey of <unk> named the episode one of his favorites on the compilation , tying with the episode " Vacation Special , " which followed the families going to Las Vegas to relax . " Reptar on Ice " was adapted onto a CD entitled In Search of the Mighty Reptar . It features a story @-@ time set of two " adventures " the babies have ; the second story features another Reptar story , entitled " Journey to the Center of the Basement , " where they venture to their basement in order to " rescue " their " Reptar , Jr . " toy . The CD was as well made for cassette tapes , both being released on July 20 , 1999 . In Search of the Mighty Reptar was a part of Nickelodeon 's " Rugrats Go Reptar ! " event that published several different other merchandise types for Rugrats , including direct @-@ to @-@ video releases and magazines . 
 = Keith Moon = 
 Keith John Moon ( 23 August 1946 – 7 September 1978 ) was an English drummer who played with the English rock band the Who . He was noted for his unique style and his eccentric , often self @-@ destructive behaviour . His drumming continues to be praised by critics and musicians . He was posthumously inducted into the Modern Drummer Hall of Fame in 1982 , becoming only the second rock drummer to be chosen , and in 2011 , Moon was voted the second @-@ greatest drummer in history by a Rolling Stone readers ' poll . 
 Moon grew up in Alperton , a suburb of Wembley , northwest London , and took up the drums during the early 1960s . After playing with a local band , the Beachcombers , he joined the Who in 1964 before they recorded their first single . Moon remained with the band during their rise to fame , and was quickly recognised for his drumming style , which emphasised tom @-@ toms , cymbal crashes , and drum fills . He occasionally collaborated with other musicians and later appeared in films , but considered playing in the Who his primary occupation and remained a member of the band until his death . In addition to his talent as a drummer , however , Moon developed a reputation for smashing his kit on stage and destroying hotel rooms on tour . He was fascinated by blowing up toilets with cherry bombs or dynamite , and by destroying television sets . Moon enjoyed touring and socialising , and was bored and restless when the Who were inactive . His 21st birthday party in Flint , Michigan , has been cited as a notorious example of decadent behaviour by rock groups . 
 Moon suffered a number of setbacks during the 1970s , most notably the accidental death of chauffeur Neil Boland and the breakdown of his marriage . He became addicted to alcohol , particularly brandy and champagne , and acquired a reputation for decadence and dark humour ; his nickname was " Moon the Loon . " After moving to Los Angeles with personal assistant Peter " Dougal " Butler during the mid @-@ 1970s , Moon recorded his only solo album , the poorly received Two Sides of the Moon . While touring with the Who , on several occasions he passed out on stage and was hospitalised . By their final tour with him in 1976 , and particularly during production of The Kids Are Alright and Who Are You , the drummer 's deterioration was evident . Moon moved back to London in 1978 , dying in September of that year from an overdose of <unk> , a drug intended to treat or prevent symptoms of alcohol withdrawal . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Keith John Moon was born to Alfred Charles ( Alf ) and Kathleen Winifred ( Kit ) Moon on 23 August 1946 at Central Middlesex Hospital in northwest London , and grew up in Wembley . He was hyperactive as a boy , with a restless imagination and a particular fondness for The Goon Show and music . Moon attended Alperton Secondary Modern School after failing his eleven plus exam , which precluded his attending a grammar school . His art teacher said in a report : " Retarded artistically . <unk> in other respects " . His music teacher wrote that Moon " has great ability , but must guard against a tendency to show off . " 
 Moon joined his local Sea Cadet Corps band at the age of twelve on the bugle , but found the instrument too difficult to learn and decided to take up drums instead . He was interested in practical jokes and home science kits , with a particular fondness for explosions . On his way home from school , Moon would often go to Macari 's Music Studio on Ealing Road to practise on the drums there , learning his basic skills on the instrument . He left school at age fourteen , around Easter in 1961 . Moon then enrolled at Harrow Technical College ; this led to a job as a radio repairman , enabling him to buy his first drum kit . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Moon took lessons from one of the loudest contemporary drummers , Screaming Lord Sutch 's Carlo Little , at ten shillings per lesson . Moon 's early style was influenced by jazz , American surf music and rhythm and blues , exemplified by noted Los Angeles studio drummer Hal Blaine . His favourite musicians were jazz artists , particularly Gene Krupa ( whose flamboyant style he subsequently copied ) . Moon also admired Elvis Presley 's original drummer DJ Fontana , the Shadows ' original drummer Tony Meehan and the Pretty Things ' Viv Prince . He also enjoyed singing , with a particular interest in Motown . Moon idolised the Beach Boys ; Roger Daltrey later said that given the opportunity , Moon would have left to play for the California band even at the peak of the Who 's fame . 
 During this time Moon joined his first serious band : the Escorts , replacing his best friend Gerry Evans . In December 1962 he joined the Beachcombers , a semi @-@ professional London cover band playing hits by groups such as the Shadows . During his time in the group Moon incorporated theatrical tricks into his act , including " shooting " the group 's lead singer with a starter pistol . The Beachcombers all had day jobs ; Moon , who worked in the sales department at British Gypsum , had the keenest interest in turning professional . In April 1964 , at age seventeen , he auditioned for the Who as a replacement for Doug Sandom . The Beachcombers continued as a local cover band after his departure . 
 = = = The Who = = = 
 A commonly cited story of how Moon joined the Who is that he appeared at a show shortly after Sandom 's departure , where a session drummer was used . Dressed in ginger clothes and with his hair dyed ginger ( future bandmate Pete Townshend later described him as a " ginger vision " ) , he claimed to his would @-@ be bandmates that he could play better ; he played in the set 's second half , nearly demolishing the drum kit in the process . In the words of the drummer , " they said go ahead , and I got behind this other guy 's drums and did one <unk> ' Road Runner . ' I 'd several drinks to get me courage up and when I got onstage I went <unk> on the drums , broke the bass drum pedal and two skins , and got off . I figured that was it . I was scared to death . Afterwards I was sitting at the bar and Pete came over . He said : ' You ... come ' ere . ' I said , mild as you please : ' Yes , yes ? ' And Roger , who was the spokesman then , said : ' What are you doing next Monday ? ' I said : ' Nothing . ' I was working during the day , selling plaster . He said : ' You 'll have to give up work ... there 's this gig on Monday . If you want to come , we 'll pick you up in the van . ' I said : ' Right . ' And that was it . " Moon later claimed that he was never formally invited to join the Who permanently ; when Ringo Starr asked how he had joined the band , he said he had " just been filling in for the last fifteen years . " 
 Moon 's arrival in the Who changed the dynamics of the group . Sandom had generally been the peacemaker as Daltrey and Townshend feuded between themselves , but because of Moon 's temperament the group now had four members frequently in conflict . " We used to fight regularly , " remembered Moon in later years . " John [ Entwistle ] and I used to have fights – it wasn 't very serious , it was more of an emotional spur @-@ of @-@ the moment thing . " Moon also clashed with Daltrey and Townshend : " We really have absolutely nothing in common apart from music , " he said in a later interview . Although Townshend described him as a " completely different person to anyone I 've ever met , " the pair had a rapport in the early years and enjoyed practical jokes and improvised comedy . Moon 's drumming style affected the band 's musical structure ; although Entwistle initially found Moon 's lack of conventional timekeeping problematic , it created an original sound . 
 Moon was particularly fond of touring , since it was his only chance to regularly socialise with his bandmates , and was generally restless and bored when not playing live . This later carried over to other aspects of his life , as he acted them out ( according to journalist and Who biographer Dave Marsh ) " as if his life were one long tour . " These antics earned him the nickname " Moon the Loon . " 
 = = = = Musical contributions = = = = 
 Moon 's style of drumming was considered unique by his bandmates , although they sometimes found his unconventional playing frustrating ; Entwistle noted that he tended to play faster or slower according to his mood . " He wouldn 't play across his kit , " he later added . " He 'd play zig @-@ zag . That 's why he had two sets of tom @-@ toms . He 'd move his arms forward like a skier . " Daltrey said that Moon " just instinctively put drum rolls in places that other people would never have thought of putting them . " 
 Who biographer John Atkins wrote that the group 's early test sessions for Pye Records in 1964 show that " they seemed to have understood just how important was ... Moon 's contribution . " Contemporary critics questioned his ability to keep time , with biographer Tony Fletcher suggesting that the timing on Tommy was " all over the place . " Who producer Jon Astley said , " You didn 't think he was keeping time , but he was . " Early recordings of Moon 's drumming sound tinny and disorganised ; it was not until the recording of Who 's Next , with Glyn Johns ' no @-@ nonsense production techniques and the need to keep time to a synthesizer track , that he began developing more discipline in the studio . Fletcher considers the drumming on this album to be the best of Moon 's career . 
 Unlike contemporary rock drummers such as Ginger Baker and John Bonham , Moon hated drum solos and refused to play them in concert . At a Madison Square Garden show on 10 June 1974 , Townshend and Entwistle decided to spontaneously stop playing during " Wasp Man " to listen to Moon 's drum solo . Moon continued briefly and then stopped , shouting " Drum solos are boring ! " However , in 1977 , he made a guest appearance in a Led Zeppelin concert , joining John Bonham for his " Moby Dick " drum solo . The concert was bootlegged as For <unk> Only . 
 Although not an especially gifted vocalist , Moon was enthusiastic about singing and wanted to sing lead with the rest of the group . While the other three members handled the lion 's share of onstage vocals , Moon would attempt to sing backup ( particularly on " I Can 't Explain " ) . He provided humorous commentary during song announcements , although sound engineer Bob Pridden preferred to mute his vocal microphone on the mixing desk whenever possible . Moon 's knack for making his bandmates laugh around the microphone led them to banish him from the studio when vocals were being recorded ; this led to a game in which Moon would sneak in to join the singing . At the end of " Happy Jack , " Townshend can be heard saying " I saw ya ! " to Moon as he tries to sneak into the studio . The drummer 's interest in surf music and his desire to sing lead spawned lead vocals on several early tracks , including " Bucket T " and " Barbara Ann " ( Ready Steady Who EP , 1966 ) and high backing vocals on other songs , such as " Pictures of Lily . " Moon 's performance on " Bell Boy " ( Quadrophenia , 1973 ) saw him abandon " serious " vocal performances to sing in character , which gave him ( in Fletcher 's words ) " full licence to live up to his reputation as a lecherous drunk " ; it was " exactly the kind of performance the Who needed from him to bring them back down to earth . " 
 Moon composed " I Need You " ( which he also sang ) , the instrumental " Cobwebs and Strange " ( from the album A Quick One , 1966 ) , the single B @-@ sides " In The City " ( co @-@ written with Entwistle ) and " Girl 's Eyes " ( from The Who Sell Out sessions featured on Thirty Years of Maximum R & B and a 1995 re @-@ release of The Who Sell Out ) , " Dogs Part Two " ( 1969 ) , " Tommy 's Holiday Camp " ( 1969 ) and " <unk> " ( 1972 ) . Moon also co @-@ composed " The Ox " ( an instrumental from their debut album , My Generation ) with Townshend , Entwistle and keyboardist Nicky Hopkins . The setting for " Tommy 's Holiday Camp " ( from Tommy ) was credited to Moon ; the song was primarily written by Townshend and , although there is a misconception that Moon sings on it , the album version is Townshend 's demo . 
 The drummer produced the violin solo on " Baba O 'Riley . " Moon sat in on congas with East of Eden at the Lyceum , and afterwards suggested to violinist Dave Arbus that he play on the track . 
 = = = = Equipment = = = = 
 Moon played a four , then a five @-@ piece drum kit during his early career . His 1965 set consisted of Ludwig drums and Zildjian cymbals . By 1966 , feeling limited by this setup and inspired by Ginger Baker 's double bass drum , he switched to a larger Premier kit . This setup did not have a hi @-@ hat , since Moon used crash and ride cymbals instead . He remained a loyal customer of Premier . 
 Moon 's Classic Red Sparkle Premier setup consisted of two 22 @-@ inch ( 56 cm ) bass drums , three 14 @-@ inch ( 36 cm ) mounted toms , two 16 @-@ inch ( 41 cm ) floor toms and a 14 @-@ inch ( 36 cm ) Ludwig <unk> 400 snare . His cymbals consisted of two Paiste Giant Beat 18 @-@ inch ( 46 cm ) crashes and one 20 @-@ inch ( 51 cm ) ride . This kit was not used at the Who 's performance at the 1967 Monterey Pop Festival . From 1967 to 1969 Moon used the " Pictures of Lily " drum kit ( named for its artwork ) , which had two 22 @-@ inch ( 56 cm ) bass drums , two 16 @-@ inch ( 41 cm ) floor toms and three mounted toms . In recognition of his loyalty to the company , Premier reissued the kit in 2006 as the " Spirit of Lily . " 
 By 1970 Moon had begun to use timbales , gongs and timpani , and these were included in his setup for the rest of his career . In 1973 Premier 's marketing manager , Eddie Haynes , began consulting with Moon about specific requirements . At one point , Moon asked Premier to make a white kit with gold @-@ plated fittings . When Haynes said that it would be prohibitively expensive , Moon replied : " Dear boy , do exactly as you feel it should be , but that 's the way I want it . " The kit was eventually fitted with copper fittings and later given to a young Zak Starkey . 
 = = = = Destroying instruments and other stunts = = = = 
 At an early show at the Railway Tavern in Harrow , Townshend smashed his guitar after accidentally breaking it . When the audience demanded he do it again , Moon kicked over his drum kit . Subsequent live sets culminated in what the band later described as " auto @-@ destructive art , " in which band members ( particularly Moon and Townshend ) elaborately destroyed their equipment . Moon developed a habit of kicking over his drums , claiming that he did so in exasperation at an audience 's indifference . Townshend later said , " A set of skins is about $ 300 [ then £ 96 ] and after every show he 'd just go bang , bang , bang and then kick the whole thing over . " 
 In May 1966 , Moon discovered that the Beach Boys ' Bruce Johnston was visiting London . After the pair socialised for a few days , Moon and Entwistle brought Johnston to the set of Ready Steady Go ! , which made them late for a show with the Who that evening . During the finale of " My Generation , " an altercation broke out on stage between Moon and Townshend which was reported on the front page of the New Musical Express the following week . Moon and Entwistle left the Who for a week ( with Moon hoping to join the Animals or the Nashville Teens ) , but they changed their minds and returned . 
 On the Who 's early US package tour at the RKO Theatre in New York in March and April 1967 Moon performed five shows a day , kicking over his drum kit after every show . Later that year , during their appearance on The Smothers Brothers Comedy Hour , he bribed a stagehand to load gunpowder into one of his bass drums ; the stagehand used about ten times the standard amount . During the finale of " My Generation , " he kicked the drum off the riser and set off the charge . The intensity of the explosion singed Townshend 's hair and embedded a piece of cymbal in Moon 's arm . A clip of the incident became the opening scene for the film The Kids Are Alright . 
 Although Moon was known for kicking over his drum kit , Haynes claimed that it was done carefully and the kit rarely needed repairs . However , stands and foot pedals were frequently replaced ; the drummer " would go through them like a knife through butter . " 
 = = = Other work = = = 
 = = = = Music = = = = 
 While Moon generally said he was only interested in working with the Who , he participated in outside musical projects . In 1966 he worked with Yardbirds guitarist Jeff Beck , pianist Nicky Hopkins and future Led Zeppelin members Jimmy Page and John Paul Jones on the instrumental " Beck 's Bolero , " which was the B @-@ side to " Hi Ho Silver Lining " and appeared on the album Truth . Moon also played timpani on another track , a cover of Jerome Kern 's " Ol ' Man River . " He was credited on the album as " You Know Who . " 
 Moon may have inspired the name for Led Zeppelin . When he briefly considered leaving the Who in 1966 , he spoke with Entwistle and Page about forming a supergroup . Moon ( or Entwistle ) remarked that a particular suggestion had gone down like a " lead zeppelin " ( a play on " lead balloon " ) . Although the supergroup was never formed , Page remembered the phrase and later adapted it as the name of his new band . 
 The Beatles became friends with Moon , leading to occasional collaborations . In 1967 , he contributed backing vocals to " All You Need Is Love . " On 15 December 1969 , Moon joined John Lennon 's Plastic Ono Band for a live performance at the Lyceum Theatre in London for a UNICEF charity concert . In 1972 the performance was released as a companion disc to Lennon and Ono 's album , Some Time in New York City . 
 Moon 's friendship with Entwistle led to an appearance on Smash Your Head Against the Wall , Entwistle 's first solo album and the first by a member of the Who . Moon did not play drums on the album ; Jerry Shirley did , with Moon providing percussion . Rolling Stone 's John <unk> appreciated Entwistle 's decision not to let Moon drum , saying that it distanced his album from the familiar sound of the Who . 
 Moon became involved in solo work when he moved to Los Angeles during the mid @-@ 1970s . In 1974 , Track Records @-@ MCA released a Moon solo single covering the Beach Boys ' " Don 't Worry , Baby " and " Teenage Idol . " The next year he released his only solo album , entitled Two Sides of the Moon . Although it featured Moon on vocals , he played drums on only three tracks ; most of the drumming was left to others ( including Ringo Starr , session musicians Curly Smith and Jim Keltner and actor @-@ musician Miguel Ferrer ) . The album was received poorly by critics . NME 's Roy Carr wrote , " <unk> , if you didn 't have talent , I wouldn 't care ; but you have , which is why I 'm not about to accept Two Sides of the Moon . " Dave Marsh , reviewing the album in Rolling Stone , wrote : " There isn 't any legitimate reason for this album 's existence . " During one of his few televised solo drum performances ( for ABC 's Wide World ) , Moon played a five @-@ minute drum solo dressed as a cat on transparent acrylic drums filled with water and goldfish . When asked by an audience member what would happen to the kit , he joked that " even the best drummers get hungry . " His performance was not appreciated by animal lovers , several of whom called the station with complaints . 
 = = = = Film = = = = 
 In the 2007 documentary film , Amazing Journey : The Story of The Who , Daltrey and Townshend reminisced about Moon 's talent for dressing as ( and embodying ) a variety of characters . They remembered his dream of getting out of music and becoming a Hollywood film actor , although Daltrey did not think Moon had the patience and work ethic required by a professional actor . Who manager Bill Curbishley agreed that Moon " wasn 't disciplined enough to actually turn up or commit to doing the stuff . " 
 Nevertheless , the drummer landed several acting roles . His first was in 1971 , a cameo in Frank Zappa 's 200 Motels as a nun afraid of dying from a drug overdose . Although it only took 13 days to film , fellow cast member Howard Kaylan remembers Moon spending off @-@ camera time at the Kensington Garden Hotel bar instead of sleeping . Moon 's next film role was J.D. Clover , drummer for the fictional Stray Cats at a holiday camp during the early days of British rock ' n ' roll , in 1973 's That 'll Be the Day . He reprised the role for the film 's 1974 sequel , Stardust , and played Uncle Ernie in Ken Russell 's 1975 film adaptation of Tommy . Moon 's last film appearance was in 1978 's <unk> with Starr and Alice Cooper . This was the last film to star Mae West . 
 = = Destructive behaviour = = 
 Moon led a destructive lifestyle . During the Who 's early days he began taking amphetamines , and in a New Musical Express interview said his favourite food was " French Blues . " He spent his share of the band 's income quickly , and was a regular at London clubs such as the Speakeasy and the Bag O ' Nails ; the combination of pills and alcohol escalated into alcoholism and drug addiction later in his life . " [ We ] went through the same stages everybody goes through – the bloody drug corridor , " he later reflected . " Drinking suited the group a lot better . " 
 According to Townshend , Moon began destroying hotel rooms when the Who stayed at the Berlin Hilton on tour in late 1966 . In addition to hotel rooms , Moon destroyed friends ' homes and even his own , throwing furniture from upper @-@ storey windows and setting fire to buildings . Andrew Neill and Matthew Kent estimated that his destruction of hotel toilets and plumbing cost as much as £ 300 @,@ 000 ( $ 500 @,@ 000 ) . These acts , often fuelled by drugs and alcohol , were Moon 's way of demonstrating his eccentricity ; he enjoyed shocking the public with them . Longtime friend and personal assistant Butler observed , " He was trying to make people laugh and be Mr Funny , he wanted people to love him and enjoy him , but he would go so far . Like a train ride you couldn 't stop . " 
 In a limousine on the way to the airport Moon insisted they return to their hotel , saying " I forgot something . " At the hotel he ran back to his room , grabbed the television and threw it out the window into the swimming pool below . He then jumped back into the limo , saying " I nearly forgot . " 
 Fletcher argues that The Who 's lengthy break between the end of their 1972 European tour and the beginning of the Quadrophenia sessions devastated Moon 's health , as without the rigours of lengthy shows and regular touring that had previously kept him in shape , his hard @-@ partying lifestyle took a greater toll on his body . He did not keep a drum kit or practice at Tara , and began to deteriorate physically as a result of his lifestyle . Around the same time he became a severe alcoholic , starting the day with drinks and changing from the " lovable boozer " he presented himself as to a " boorish drunk " . David Puttnam recalled , " The drinking went from being a joke to being a problem . On That 'll Be the Day it was social drinking . By the time Stardust came round it was hard drinking . " 
 = = = Exploding toilets = = = 
 Moon 's favourite stunt was to flush powerful explosives down toilets . According to Fletcher , Moon 's toilet pyrotechnics began in 1965 when he purchased a case of 500 cherry bombs . He moved from cherry bombs to M @-@ 80 fireworks to sticks of dynamite , which became his explosive of choice . " All that porcelain flying through the air was quite unforgettable , " Moon remembered . " I never realised dynamite was so powerful . I 'd been used to penny bangers before . " He quickly developed a reputation for destroying bathrooms and blowing up toilets . The destruction mesmerised him , and enhanced his public image as rock 's premier hell @-@ raiser . Tony Fletcher wrote that " no toilet in a hotel or changing room was safe " until Moon had exhausted his supply of explosives . 
 Pete Townshend walked into the bathroom of Moon 's hotel room and noticed the toilet had disappeared , with only the S @-@ bend remaining . The drummer explained that since a cherry bomb was about to explode , he had thrown it down the loo and showed Townshend the case of cherry bombs . " And of course from that moment on , " the guitarist remembered , " we got thrown out of every hotel we ever stayed in . " 
 Entwistle recalled being close to Moon on tour : " I suppose we were two of a kind " ... We shared a room on the road and got up to no good . " Consequently , both were often involved in blowing up toilets . In a 1981 Los Angeles Times interview he admitted , " A lot of times when Keith was blowing up toilets I was standing behind him with the matches . " In Alabama , Moon and Entwistle loaded a toilet with cherry bombs after being denied room service . According to Entwistle , " That toilet was just dust all over the walls by the time we checked out . The management brought our suitcases down to the gig and said : ' Don 't come back ... ' " 
 A hotel manager called Moon in his room and asked him to lower the volume on his cassette recorder because it made " too much noise . " In response the drummer asked him up to his room , excused himself to go the bathroom , put a lit stick of dynamite in the toilet and shut the bathroom door . Upon returning , he asked the manager to stay for a moment , as he wanted to explain something . Following the explosion , Moon turned the recorder back on and said , " That , dear boy , was noise . This is the ' Oo . " 
 = = = Flint Holiday Inn incident = = = 
 On 23 August 1967 , on tour opening for Herman 's Hermits , Moon celebrated what he said was his 21st birthday ( although it was thought at the time to be his 20th ) at a Holiday Inn in Flint , Michigan . Entwistle later said , " He decided that if it was a publicised fact that it was his 21st birthday , he would be able to drink . " 
 The drummer immediately began drinking upon his arrival in Flint . The Who spent the afternoon visiting local radio stations with Nancy Lewis ( then the band 's publicist ) , and Moon posed for a photo outside the hotel in front of a " Happy Birthday Keith " sign put up by the hotel management . According to Lewis , Moon was drunk by the time the band went onstage at the Atwood High School football stadium . 
 Returning to the hotel , Moon started a food fight and soon cake began flying through the air . The drummer knocked out part of his front tooth ; at the hospital , doctors could not give him an anaesthetic ( due to his inebriation ) before removing the remainder of the tooth . Back at the hotel a mêlée erupted ; fire extinguishers were set off , guests ( and objects ) thrown into the swimming pool and a piano reportedly destroyed . The chaos ended only when police arrived with guns drawn . 
 A furious Holiday Inn management presented the groups with a bill for $ 24 @,@ 000 , which was reportedly settled by Herman 's Hermits tour manager Edd McCann . Townshend claimed that the Who were banned for life from all of the hotel 's properties , but Fletcher wrote that they stayed at a Holiday Inn in Rochester , New York a week later . He also disputed a widely held belief that Moon drove a Lincoln Continental into the hotel 's swimming pool , as claimed by the drummer in a 1972 Rolling Stone interview . 
 = = = Passing out on stage = = = 
 Moon 's lifestyle began to undermine his health and reliability . During the 1973 Quadrophenia tour , at the Who 's debut US date at the Cow Palace in Daly City , California , Moon ingested a mixture of tranquillisers and brandy . During the concert , Moon passed out on his drum kit during " Won 't Get Fooled Again . " The band stopped playing , and a group of roadies carried Moon offstage . They gave him a shower and an injection of cortisone , sending him back onstage after a thirty @-@ minute delay . Moon passed out again during " Magic Bus , " and was again removed from the stage . The band continued without him for several songs before Townshend asked , " Can anyone play the drums ? – I mean somebody good ? " A drummer in the audience , Scot Halpin , came up and played the rest of the show . 
 During the opening date of the band 's March 1976 US tour at the Boston Garden , Moon passed out over his drum kit after two numbers and the show was rescheduled . The next evening Moon systematically destroyed everything in his hotel room , cut himself doing so and passed out . He was discovered by manager Bill Curbishley , who took him to a hospital , telling him " I 'm gonna get the doctor to get you nice and fit , so you 're back within two days . Because I want to break your fucking jaw ... You have fucked this band around so many times and I 'm not having it any more . " Doctors told Curbishley that if he had not intervened , Moon would have bled to death . Marsh suggested that at this point Daltrey and Entwistle seriously considered firing Moon , but decided that doing so would make his life worse . 
 During the band 's recording sabbatical from 1975 to 1978 , Moon gained a considerable amount of weight . Entwistle has said that Moon and the Who reached their live peak in 1975 – 76 . At the end of the 1976 US tour in Miami that August , the drummer , delirious , was treated in Hollywood Memorial Hospital for eight days . The group was concerned that he would be unable to complete the last leg of the tour , which ended at Maple Leaf Gardens in Toronto on 21 October ( Moon 's last public show ) . By the time of the Who 's invitation @-@ only show at the Kilburn Gaumont in December 1977 for The Kids are Alright , Moon was visibly overweight and had difficulty sustaining a solid performance . After recording Who Are You , Townshend refused to follow the album with a tour until Moon stopped drinking , and said that if Moon 's playing did not improve he would be fired . Daltrey later denied threatening to fire him , but said that by this time the drummer was out of control . 
 = = = Financial problems = = = 
 Because the Who 's early stage act relied on smashing instruments , and owing to Moon 's enthusiasm for damaging hotels , the group were in debt for much of the 1960s ; Entwistle estimated they lost about £ 150 @,@ 000 . Even when the group became relatively financially stable after Tommy , Moon continued to rack up debts . He bought a number of cars and gadgets , and flirted with bankruptcy . Moon 's recklessness with money reduced his profit from the group 's 1975 UK tour to £ 47 @.@ 35 . 
 = = Personal life and relationships = = 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Before the 1998 release of Tony Fletcher 's Dear Boy : The Life of Keith Moon , Moon 's date of birth was presumed to be 23 August 1947 . This erroneous date appeared in several otherwise @-@ reliable sources , including the Townshend @-@ authorised biography Before I Get Old : The Story of The Who . The incorrect date had been supplied by Moon in interviews before it was corrected by Fletcher to 1946 . 
 = = = Kim Kerrigan = = = 
 Moon 's first serious relationship was with Kim Kerrigan , whom he started dating in January 1965 after she saw the Who play at the Disc A Go Go in Bournemouth . By the end of the year , she discovered she was pregnant ; her parents , who were furious , met with the Moons to discuss their options and she moved into the Moon family home in Wembley . They were married on 17 March 1966 at Brent Registry Office , and their daughter Amanda was born on 12 July . The marriage ( and child ) were kept secret from the press until May 1968 . Moon was occasionally violent towards Kim : " if we went out after I had Mandy , " she later said , " if someone talked to me , he 'd lose it . We 'd go home and he 'd start a fight with me . " He loved Amanda , but his absences due to touring and fondness for practical jokes made their relationship uneasy when she was very young . " He had no idea how to be a father , " Kim said . " He was too much of a child himself . " 
 From 1971 to 1975 Moon owned Tara , a home in Chertsey where he initially lived with his wife and daughter . The Moons entertained extravagantly at home , and owned a number of cars . Jack <unk> , then working for Track Records ( The Who 's label ) , recalls Moon ordering him to purchase a milk float to store in the garage at Tara . 
 In 1973 Kim , convinced that neither she nor anyone else could moderate Keith 's behaviour , left her husband and took Amanda ; she sued for divorce in 1975 and later married Faces keyboard player Ian McLagan . Marsh believes that Moon never truly recovered from the loss of his family . Butler agrees ; despite his relationship with Annette Walter @-@ Lax , he believes that Kim was the only woman Moon loved . McLagan commented that Moon " couldn 't handle it . " Moon would harass them with phone calls , and on one occasion before Kim sued for divorce , he invited McLagan for a drink at a Richmond pub and sent several " heavies " to break into McLagan 's home on Fife Road and look for Kim , forcing her to hide in a walk @-@ in closet . She died in a car accident in Austin , Texas on 2 August 2006 . 
 = = = Annette Walter @-@ Lax = = = 
 In 1975 Moon began a relationship with Swedish model Annette Walter @-@ Lax , who later said that Moon was " so sweet when he was sober , that I was just living with him in the hope that he would kick all this craziness . " She begged Malibu neighbour Larry Hagman to check Moon into a clinic to dry out ( as he had attempted to do before ) , but when doctors recorded Moon 's chemical intake at breakfast – a bottle of champagne , Courvoisier and amphetamines – they concluded that there was no hope for his rehabilitation . 
 = = = Friends = = = 
 Moon enjoyed being the life of the party . Bill Curbishley remembered that " he wouldn 't walk into any room and just listen . He was an attention seeker and he had to have it . " 
 Early in the Who 's career , Moon got to know the Beatles . He would join them at clubs , forming a particularly close friendship with Ringo Starr . Moon later became friends with Bonzo Dog Doo @-@ Dah Band members Vivian Stanshall and " Legs " Larry Smith , and the trio would drink and play practical jokes together . Smith remembers one occasion where he and Moon tore apart a pair of trousers , with an accomplice later looking for one @-@ legged trousers . In the early 1970s Moon helped Stanshall with his " Radio Flashes " radio show for BBC Radio 1 , filling in for the vacationing John Peel ( see Rawlinson End Radio Flashes ) . Subsequently , in 1973 , Moon himself filled in for John Peel in " A Touch of the Moon , " a series of four programmes produced by John Walters . 
 Guitarist Joe Walsh enjoyed socialising with Moon . In an interview with Guitar World magazine , he recalled that the drummer " taught me how to break things . " In 1974 , Moon struck up a friendship with actor Oliver Reed while working on the film version of Tommy . Although Reed matched Moon drink for drink , he appeared on set the next morning ready to perform ; Moon , on the other hand , would cost several hours of filming time . Reed later said that Moon " showed me the way to insanity . " 
 = = = Dougal Butler = = = 
 Peter " Dougal " Butler began working for the Who in 1967 , becoming Moon 's personal assistant the following year to help him stay out of trouble . He remembers managers Kit Lambert and Chris Stamp saying , " We trust you with Keith but if you ever want any time off , for a holiday or some sort of rest , let us know and we 'll pay for it . " Butler never took them up on the offer . 
 He followed Moon when the drummer relocated to Los Angeles , but felt that the drug culture prevalent at the time was bad for Moon : " My job was to have eyes in the back of my head . " Townshend agreed , saying that by 1975 Butler had " no influence over him whatsoever . " Although he was a loyal companion to Moon , the lifestyle eventually became too much for him ; he phoned Curbishley , saying that they needed to move back to England or one of them might die . Butler quit in 1978 , and later wrote of his experiences in a book entitled Full Moon : The Amazing Rock and Roll Life of Keith Moon ( 2012 ) . 
 = = = Neil Boland = = = 
 On 4 January 1970 Moon accidentally killed his friend , driver and bodyguard , Neil Boland , outside the Red Lion pub in Hatfield , Hertfordshire . Pub patrons had begun to attack his Bentley and Moon , drunk , began driving to escape them . During the fracas , he hit Boland . After an investigation , the coroner ruled Boland 's death an accident and Moon received an absolute discharge after being charged with a number of offences . 
 Those close to Moon said that he was haunted by Boland 's death for the rest of his life . According to Pamela Des Barres , Moon had nightmares ( which woke them both ) about the incident and said he had no right to be alive . 
 = = Death = = 
 In mid @-@ 1978 Moon moved into a flat in Curzon Place ( later Curzon Square ) , Shepherd Market , Mayfair , London , renting from Harry Nilsson . Cass Elliot had died there four years earlier , at the age of 32 ; Nilsson was concerned about letting the flat to Moon , believing it was cursed . Townshend disagreed , assuring him that " lightning wouldn 't strike the same place twice " . 
 After moving in , Moon began a prescribed course of <unk> ( clomethiazole , a sedative ) to alleviate his alcohol withdrawal symptoms . He wanted to get sober , but due to his fear of psychiatric hospitals he wanted to do it at home . <unk> is discouraged for unsupervised detoxification because of its addictive potential , its tendency to induce tolerance , and its risk of death when mixed with alcohol . The pills were prescribed by Geoffrey Dymond , a physician who was unaware of Moon 's lifestyle . Dymond prescribed a bottle of 100 pills , instructing him to take one pill when he felt a craving for alcohol but not more than three pills per day . 
 By September 1978 Moon was having difficulty playing the drums , according to roadie Dave " Cy " Langston . After seeing Moon in the studio trying to overdub drums for The Kids Are Alright , he said , " After two or three hours , he got more and more sluggish , he could barely hold a drum stick . " 
 On 6 September Moon and Walter @-@ Lax were guests of Paul and Linda McCartney at a preview of the film , The Buddy Holly Story . After dining with the McCartneys at Peppermint Park in Covent Garden , Moon and Walter @-@ Lax returned to their flat . He watched a film ( The Abominable Dr. <unk> ) , and asked Walter @-@ Lax to cook him steak and eggs . When she objected , Moon replied " If you don 't like it , you can fuck off ! " These were his last words . Moon then took 32 clomethiazole tablets . When Walter @-@ Lax checked on him the following afternoon , she discovered he was dead . 
 Curbishley phoned the flat at around 5 pm looking for Moon , and Dymond gave him the news . Curbishley told Townshend , who informed the rest of the band . Entwistle was giving an interview to French journalists when he was interrupted by a phone call with the news of Moon 's death . Trying to tactfully and quickly end the interview , he broke down and wept when the journalist asked him about the Who 's future plans . 
 Moon 's death came shortly after the release of Who Are You . On the album cover , he is straddling a chair to hide his weight gain ; the words " Not to be taken away " are on the back of the chair . 
 Police determined that there were 32 clomethiazole pills in Moon 's system . Six were digested , sufficient to cause his death ; the other 26 were undigested when he died . Max <unk> , an authority on alcoholism , wrote in The Sunday Times that Moon should never have been given the drug . Moon was cremated on 13 September 1978 at Golders Green Crematorium in London , and his ashes were scattered in its Gardens of Remembrance . 
 Townshend convinced Daltrey and Entwistle to carry on touring as The Who , although he later said that it was his means of coping with Moon 's death and " completely irrational , bordering on insane " . AllMusic 's Bruce Eder said , " When Keith Moon died , the Who carried on and were far more competent and reliable musically , but that wasn 't what sold rock records . " In November 1978 , Faces drummer Kenney Jones joined the Who . Townshend later said that Jones " was one of the few British drummers who could fill Keith 's shoes " ; Daltrey was less enthusiastic , saying that Jones " wasn 't the right style " . Keyboardist John " Rabbit " Bundrick , who had rehearsed with Moon earlier in the year , joined the live band as an unofficial member . 
 Jones left the Who in 1988 , and drummer Simon Phillips ( who praised Moon 's ability to drum over the backing track of " Baba O 'Riley " ) toured with the band the following year . Since 1994 , the Who 's drummer has been Ringo Starr 's son Zak Starkey , who had been given a drum kit by Moon ( whom he called " Uncle Keith " ) . 
 The London 2012 Summer Olympic Committee contacted Curbishley about Moon performing at the games , 34 years after his death . In an interview with The Times Curbishley quipped , " I emailed back saying Keith now resides in Golders Green crematorium , having lived up to the Who 's anthemic line ' I hope I die before I get old ' ... If they have a round table , some glasses and candles , we might contact him . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Moon 's drumming has been praised by critics . Author Nick <unk> described him as " the greatest drummer in rock , " adding that " he was to the drums what Jimi Hendrix was to the guitar . " Holly George @-@ Warren , editor and author of The Rock and Roll Hall of Fame : The First 25 Years , said : " With the death of Keith Moon in 1978 , rock arguably lost its single greatest drummer . " According to Eder , " Moon , with his manic , lunatic side , and his life of excessive drinking , partying , and other indulgences , probably represented the youthful , zany side of rock & roll , as well as its self @-@ destructive side , better than anyone else on the planet . " The New Book of Rock Lists ranked Moon No. 1 on its list of " 50 Greatest Rock ' n ' Roll Drummers , " and he was ranked No. 2 on the 2011 Rolling Stone " Best Drummers of All Time " readers ' poll . In 2016 , the same magazine ranked him No. 2 in their list of the 100 Greatest Drummers of All Time , behind John Bonham . Adam <unk> , editor of Drummer magazine , said that Moon 's performances on Who 's Next and Quadrophenia " represent a perfect balance of technique and passion " and " there 's been no drummer who 's touched his unique slant on rock and rhythm since . " 
 Several rock drummers , including Neil Peart and Dave Grohl , have cited Moon as an influence . The Jam paid homage to Moon on the second single from their third album , " Down in the Tube Station at Midnight " ; the B @-@ side of the single is a Who cover ( " So Sad About Us " ) , and the back cover of the record has a photo of Moon 's face . The Jam 's single was released about a month after Moon 's death . Animal , one of puppeteer Jim Henson 's Muppet characters , may have been based on Keith Moon due to their similar hair , eyebrows , personality and drumming style . 
 " God bless his beautiful heart ... " Ozzy Osbourne told Sounds a month after the drummer 's death . " People will be talking about Keith Moon ' til they die , man . Someone somewhere will say , ' Remember Keith Moon ? ' Who will remember Joe <unk> who got killed in a car crash ? No one . He 's dead , so what ? He didn 't do anything to talk of . " 
 Clem Burke of Blondie has said " Early on all I cared about was Keith Moon and the Who . When I was about eleven or twelve , my favourite part of drum lessons was the last ten minutes , when I 'd get to sit at the <unk> and play along to my favourite record . I 'd bring in ' My Generation ' . At the end of the song , the drums go nuts . ' My Generation ' was a turning point for me because before that it was all the Charlie Watts and Ringo type of thing . " 
 In 1998 Tony Fletcher published a biography of Moon , Dear Boy : The Life of Keith Moon , in the United Kingdom . The phrase " Dear Boy " became a catchphrase of Moon 's when , influenced by Kit Lambert , he began affecting a pompous English accent . In 2000 , the book was released in the US as Moon ( The Life and Death of a Rock Legend ) . Q Magazine called the book " horrific and terrific reading , " and Record Collector said it was " one of rock 's great biographies . " 
 In 2008 , English Heritage declined an application for Moon to be awarded a blue plaque . Speaking to The Guardian , Christopher <unk> said they " decided that bad behaviour and overdosing on various substances wasn 't a sufficient qualification . " The UK 's Heritage Foundation disagreed with the decision , presenting a plaque which was unveiled on 9 March 2009 . Daltrey , Townshend , Robin Gibb and Moon 's mother Kit were present at the ceremony . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Solo albums 
 Two Sides of the Moon ( 1975 ) 
 = CryoSat @-@ 2 = 
 CryoSat @-@ 2 is a European Space Agency environmental research satellite which was launched in April 2010 . It provides scientists with data about the polar ice caps and tracks changes in the thickness of the ice with a resolution of about 1 @.@ 3 centimetres ( 1 ⁄ 2 in ) . 
 CryoSat @-@ 2 was built as a replacement for CryoSat @-@ 1 , whose Rokot carrier rocket was unable to achieve orbit . Compared to its predecessor , CryoSat @-@ 2 features software upgrades , greater battery capacity and an updated instrument package . Its main instrument is an interferometric radar range @-@ finder with twin antennas , which measures the height difference between floating ice and open water . 
 CryoSat @-@ 2 is operated as part of the CryoSat programme to study the Earth 's polar ice caps , which is itself part of the Living Planet programme . The CryoSat @-@ 2 spacecraft was constructed by EADS Astrium , and was launched by ISC Kosmotras , using a Dnepr @-@ 1 carrier rocket , on 8 April 2010 . On 22 October 2010 , CryoSat @-@ 2 was declared operational following six months of on @-@ orbit testing . 
 = = Background = = 
 The initial proposal for the CryoSat programme was submitted as part of a call for proposals in July 1998 for Earth Explorer missions as part of the European Space Agency 's Living Planet programme . It was selected for further studies in 1999 , and following completion of a feasibility study the mission was authorised . The construction phase began in 2001 , and in 2002 EADS Astrium was awarded a contract to build the spacecraft . A contract was also signed with <unk> , to conduct the launch of the satellite using a Rokot / Briz @-@ KM carrier rocket . 
 Construction of the original spacecraft was completed in August 2004 . Following testing the spacecraft was shipped to the <unk> Cosmodrome in August 2005 , and arrived on 1 September . The launch occurred from Site 133 / 3 on 8 October , however due to a missing command in the rocket 's flight control system , the second stage engine did not shut down at the end of its planned burn , and instead the stage burned to depletion . This prevented the second stage and Briz @-@ KM from separating , and as a result the rocket failed to achieve orbit . The spacecraft was lost when it reentered over the Arctic Ocean , North of Greenland . 
 Due to the importance of the CryoSat mission for understanding global warming and reductions in polar ice caps , a replacement satellite was proposed . The development of CryoSat @-@ 2 was authorised in February 2006 , less than five months after the failure . 
 = = Development = = 
 Like its predecessor , CryoSat @-@ 2 was constructed by EADS Astrium , with its main instrument being built by Thales Alenia Space . Construction and testing of the spacecraft 's primary instrument was completed by February 2008 , when it was shipped for integration with the rest of the spacecraft . In August 2009 , the spacecraft 's ground infrastructure , which had been redesigned since the original mission , was declared ready for use . Construction and testing of the spacecraft had been completed by mid @-@ September . The Project Manager for the CryoSat @-@ 2 mission was Richard Francis , who had been the Systems Manager on the original CryoSat mission . 
 CryoSat @-@ 2 is an almost @-@ identical copy of the original spacecraft , however modifications were made including the addition of a backup radar altimeter . In total , 85 improvements were made to the spacecraft when it was rebuilt . 
 = = Supporting Measurements : CRYOVEX = = 
 It was clear from the beginning of the CryoSat programme that an extensive series of measurements would be needed , both to understand interaction of the radar waves with the surface of the ice caps and to relate the measured freeboard of floating sea ice with its thickness . This latter , in particular , would have to take account of snow loading . For sea ice , which moves as it is blown by the wind , it was also necessary to develop techniques which could give consistent results when measured from platforms travelling at different speed ( scientists on the surface , helicopter @-@ towed sounders , aircraft @-@ borne radars and CryoSat itself ) . A number of campaigns were performed under a programme called CRYOVEX which aimed to address each of the identified areas of uncertainty . These campaigns continued through the development of the original CryoSat and were planned to continue after its launch . 
 Following the announcement that CryoSat @-@ 2 would be built the CRYOVEX programme was extended . Experiments were conducted in Antarctica to determine how snow could affect its readings , and to provide data for calibrating the satellite . In January 2007 the European Space Agency issued a request for proposals for further calibration and validation experiments . Further <unk> experiments were conducted on Svalbard in 2007 , followed by a final expedition to Greenland and the Devon Ice Cap in 2008 . Additional snow measurements were provided by the Arctic Arc Expedition , and the Alfred Wegener Institute 's Airborne Synthetic Aperture and Interferometric Radar Altimeter System ( <unk> ) instrument , mounted aboard a Dornier Do 228 aircraft . 
 = = Final preparations = = 
 When it was approved in February 2006 , the launch of CryoSat @-@ 2 was planned for March 2009 . It was originally planned that like its predecessor it would be launched by a Rokot , however due to a lack of available launches a Dnepr @-@ 1 rocket was selected instead . ISC Kosmotras were contracted to perform the launch . Due to delays to earlier missions and range availability problems , the launch was delayed until February 2010 . 
 The Dnepr rocket assigned to launch CryoSat @-@ 2 arrived at the Baikonur Cosmodrome by train on 29 December 2009 . On 12 January 2010 , the first two stages of the rocket were loaded into the launch canister , and the canister was prepared for transportation to the launch site . On 14 January , it was rolled out to Site 109 / 95 , where it was installed into its silo . The next day saw the third stage transported to the silo , and installed atop the rocket . 
 Following the completion of its construction , CryoSat @-@ 2 was placed into storage to await launch . In January 2010 , the spacecraft was removed from storage , and shipped to Baikonur for launch . It departed Munich Franz Josef Strauss Airport aboard an Antonov An @-@ 124 aircraft on 12 January , and arrived at Baikonur the next day . Following arrival at the launch site , final assembly and testing were conducted . 
 During final testing , engineers detected that the spacecraft 's X band ( NATO H / I / J bands ) communications antenna was transmitting only a tiny fraction of the power that it should . Thermal imaging showed that the waveguide to the antenna , deep inside the spacecraft , was very hot . Clearly that was where the missing power was being dissipated . The waveguide could not normally be inspected or repaired without major disassembly of the satellite , which would have required a return to the facilities in Europe and resulted in a major delay to the launch . To avoid doing this , a local surgeon was brought in to inspect the component with an endoscope . The surgeon , Tatiana <unk> , discovered that two pieces of ferrite were lodged in the tube , and was able to remove both of them . Engineers were able to assist the removal of the second one with a magnet . It was determined that the ferrite had come from an absorption load installed deep inside the antenna , which was intended to improve its performance . Some ferrite ( the remaining stump of this load ) was removed from inside the base of the antenna in order to prevent any further debris falling into the waveguide . 
 On 4 February , the CryoSat @-@ 2 spacecraft was fuelled for launch . Then on 10 February it was attached to the payload adaptor , and encapsulated in the payload fairing , to form a unit known as the Space Head Module . This was transported to the launch pad by means of a vehicle known as the crocodile , and installed atop the carrier rocket . Rollout occurred on 15 February , and the next day the satellite was activated in order to test its systems following integration onto the rocket . 
 = = Launch = = 
 When the spacecraft was installed atop the Dnepr , launch was scheduled to occur on 25 February , at 13 : 57 UTC . Prior to this , a practice countdown was scheduled for 19 February . Several hours before the practice was scheduled to begin ISC Kosmotras announced that the launch had been delayed , and as a result the practice did not take place . The delay was caused by a concern that the second stage manoeuvring engines did not have a sufficient quantity of reserve fuel . 
 Following the delay , the Space Head Module was removed from the rocket , and returned to its integration building on 22 February . Whilst it was in the integration building , daily inspections were made to ensure that the spacecraft was still functioning normally . Once the fuel issue had been resolved , the launch was rescheduled for 8 April , and launch operations resumed . On 1 April , the Space Head Module was returned to the silo , and reinstalled atop the Dnepr . Following integrated tests , the practice countdown was successfully conducted on 6 April . 
 CryoSat @-@ 2 was launched at 13 : 57 : 04 UTC on 8 April 2010 . Following a successful launch , CryoSat @-@ 2 separated from the upper stage of the Dnepr into a low Earth orbit . The first signals from the satellite were detected by a ground station at the <unk> Space Centre in Malindi , Kenya , seventeen minutes after launch . 
 = = Mission = = 
 CryoSat @-@ 2 's mission is to study the Earth 's polar ice caps , measuring , and looking for variation in , the thickness of the ice . Its mission is identical to that of the original CryoSat . 
 The primary instruments aboard CryoSat @-@ 2 are SIRAL @-@ 2 , the SAR / Interferometric Radar <unk> ; which uses radar to determine and monitor the spacecraft 's altitude in order to measure the elevation of the ice . Unlike the original CryoSat , two SIRAL instruments are installed aboard CryoSat @-@ 2 , with one serving as a backup in case the other fails . 
 A second instrument , Doppler Orbit and Radio Positioning Integration by Satellite , or <unk> , is used to calculate precisely the spacecraft 's orbit . An array of <unk> are also carried aboard the spacecraft , and allow measurements to be made from the ground to verify the orbital data provided by <unk> . 
 Following launch , CryoSat @-@ 2 was placed into a low Earth orbit with a perigee of 720 kilometres ( 450 mi ) , an apogee of 732 kilometres ( 455 mi ) , 92 degrees of inclination and an orbital period of 99 @.@ 2 minutes . It had a mass at launch of 750 kilograms ( 1 @,@ 650 lb ) , and is expected to operate for at least three years . 
 Launch and Early Orbit Phase operations were completed in the morning of 11 April 2010 , and SIRAL @-@ 2 was activated later the same day . At 14 : 40 UTC , the spacecraft returned its first scientific data . Initial data on ice thickness was presented by the mission 's Lead Investigator , Duncan <unk> , at the 2010 Living Planet Symposium on 1 July . Later the same month , data was made available to scientists for the first time . The spacecraft underwent six months of on @-@ orbit testing and commissioning , which concluded with a review on 22 October 2010 that found the spacecraft was operating as expected , and that it was ready to begin operations . 
 The exploitation phase of the mission started on the 26 October 2010 under the responsibility of Tommaso <unk> who is currently the Mission Manager . 
 = = Results = = 
 Data from CryoSat @-@ 2 has shown 25 @,@ 000 seamounts , with more to come as data is interpreted . 
 = German cruiser Admiral Scheer = 
 Admiral Scheer was a Deutschland @-@ class heavy cruiser ( often termed a pocket battleship ) which served with the Kriegsmarine of Nazi Germany during World War II . The vessel was named after Admiral Reinhard Scheer , German commander in the Battle of Jutland . She was laid down at the Reichsmarinewerft shipyard in Wilhelmshaven in June 1931 and completed by November 1934 . Originally classified as an armored ship ( Panzerschiff ) by the Reichsmarine , in February 1940 the Germans reclassified the remaining two ships of this class as heavy cruisers . 
 The ship was nominally under the 10 @,@ 000 long tons ( 10 @,@ 000 t ) limitation on warship size imposed by the Treaty of Versailles , though with a full load displacement of 15 @,@ 180 long tons ( 15 @,@ 420 t ) , she significantly exceeded it . Armed with six 28 cm ( 11 in ) guns in two triple gun turrets , Admiral Scheer and her sisters were designed to outgun any cruiser fast enough to catch them . Their top speed of 28 knots ( 52 km / h ; 32 mph ) left only a handful of ships in the Anglo @-@ French navies able to catch them and powerful enough to sink them . 
 Admiral Scheer saw heavy service with the German Navy , including a deployment to Spain during the Spanish Civil War , where she bombarded the port of Almería . Her first operation during World War II was a commerce raiding operation into the southern Atlantic Ocean ; she also made a brief foray into the Indian Ocean . During the operation , she sank 113 @,@ 223 gross register tons ( GRT ) of shipping , making her the most successful capital ship surface raider of the war . Following her return to Germany , she was deployed to northern Norway to interdict shipping to the Soviet Union . She was part of the abortive attack on Convoy PQ 17 and conducted Operation Wunderland , a sortie into the Kara Sea . After returning to Germany at the end of 1942 , the ship served as a training ship until the end of 1944 , when she was used to support ground operations against the Soviet Army . She was sunk by British bombers on 9 April 1945 and partially scrapped ; the remainder of the wreck lies buried beneath a quay . 
 = = Design = = 
 Admiral Scheer was 186 meters ( 610 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 21 @.@ 34 m ( 70 @.@ 0 ft ) and a maximum draft of 7 @.@ 25 m ( 23 @.@ 8 ft ) . The ship had a design displacement of 13 @,@ 660 t ( 13 @,@ 440 long tons ; 15 @,@ 060 short tons ) and a full load displacement of 15 @,@ 180 long tons ( 15 @,@ 420 t ) , though the ship was officially stated to be within the 10 @,@ 000 long tons ( 10 @,@ 000 t ) limit of the Treaty of Versailles . Admiral Scheer was powered by four sets of MAN nine @-@ cylinder double @-@ acting two @-@ stroke diesel engines . The ship 's top speed was 28 @.@ 3 knots ( 52 @.@ 4 km / h ; 32 @.@ 6 mph ) , at 52 @,@ 050 shaft horsepower ( 38 @,@ 810 kW ) . At a cruising speed of 20 knots ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) , the ship could steam for 9 @,@ 100 nautical miles ( 16 @,@ 900 km ; 10 @,@ 500 mi ) . As designed , her standard complement consisted of 33 officers and 586 enlisted men , though after 1935 this was significantly increased to 30 officers and 921 – 1 @,@ 040 sailors . 
 Admiral Scheer 's primary armament was six 28 cm ( 11 @.@ 0 in ) SK C / 28 guns mounted in two triple gun turrets , one forward and one aft of the superstructure . The ship carried a secondary battery of eight 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) SK C / 28 guns in single turrets grouped amidships . Her anti @-@ aircraft battery originally consisted of three 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) L / 45 guns , though in 1935 these were replaced with six 8 @.@ 8 cm L / 78 guns . By 1940 the ship 's anti @-@ aircraft battery was significantly increased , consisting of six 10 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) C / 33 guns , four twin @-@ mounted 3 @.@ 7 cm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) C / 30 guns and up to twenty @-@ eight 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) Flak 30 guns . By 1945 , the anti @-@ aircraft battery had again been reorganized and comprised six 4 cm guns , eight 3 @.@ 7 cm guns , and thirty @-@ three 2 cm guns . 
 The ship also carried a pair of quadruple 53 @.@ 3 cm ( 21 @.@ 0 in ) deck @-@ mounted torpedo launchers placed on her stern . The ship was equipped with two Arado Ar 196 seaplanes and one catapult . Admiral Scheer 's armored belt was 60 to 80 mm ( 2 @.@ 4 to 3 @.@ 1 in ) thick ; her upper deck was 17 mm ( 0 @.@ 67 in ) thick while the main armored deck was 17 to 45 mm ( 0 @.@ 67 to 1 @.@ 77 in ) thick . The main battery turrets had 140 mm ( 5 @.@ 5 in ) thick faces and 80 mm thick sides . Radar initially consisted of a FMG 39 G ( gO ) set , though in 1941 this was replaced with an FMG 40 G ( gO ) set and a FuMO 26 system . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Admiral Scheer was ordered by the Reichsmarine from the Reichsmarinewerft shipyard in Wilhelmshaven . Naval rearmament was not popular with the Social Democrats and the Communists in the German Reichstag , so it was not until 1931 that a bill was passed to build a second Panzerschiff . The money for Panzerschiff B , which was ordered as Ersatz Lothringen , was secured after the Social Democrats abstained to prevent a political crisis . Her keel was laid on 25 June 1931 , under construction number 123 . The ship was launched on 1 April 1933 ; at her launching , she was christened by Marianne <unk> , the daughter of Admiral Reinhard Scheer , the ship 's namesake . She was completed slightly over a year and a half later on 12 November 1934 , the day she was commissioned into the German fleet . The old battleship Hessen was removed from service and her crew transferred to the newly commissioned <unk> . 
 At her commissioning in November 1934 , Admiral Scheer was placed under the command of Kapitän zur See ( KzS ) Wilhelm Marschall . The ship spent the remainder of 1934 conducting sea trials and training her crew . In 1935 , she had a new catapult and landing sail system to operate her Arado seaplanes on heavy seas installed . From 1 October 1935 to 26 July 1937 her first officer was Leopold <unk> , later to become head of foreign intelligence in the Third Reich . By October 1935 , the ship was ready for her first major cruise , when on 25 – 28 October she visited Madeira , returning to Kiel on 8 November . The following summer , she cruised out through the Skagerrak and the English Channel into the Irish Sea , before visiting Stockholm on the return voyage . 
 = = = Spanish Civil War = = = 
 Admiral Scheer 's first overseas deployment began in July 1936 when she was sent to Spain to evacuate German civilians caught in the midst of the Spanish Civil War . From 8 August 1936 she served together with her sister ship Deutschland on non @-@ intervention patrols off the Republican @-@ held coast of Spain . She served four tours of duty with the non @-@ intervention patrol through June 1937 . Her official objective was to control the influx of war materiel into Spain , though she also recorded Soviet ships carrying supplies to the Republicans and protected ships delivering German weapons to Nationalist forces . During the deployment to Spain , Ernst Lindemann served as the ship 's first gunnery officer . After Deutschland was attacked on 29 May 1937 by Spanish Republican Air Force aircraft off Ibiza , Admiral Scheer was ordered to bombard the Republican @-@ held port of Almería in reprisal . On 31 May 1937 , the anniversary of the Battle of Jutland , Admiral Scheer , flying the Imperial War Flag , arrived off Almería at 07 : 29 and opened fire on shore batteries , naval installations and ships in the harbor . On 26 June 1937 , she was relieved by her sister ship Admiral Graf Spee , allowing her to return to Wilhelmshaven on 1 July . She returned to the Mediterranean between August and October , however . In September 1936 KzS Otto Ciliax replaced Marschall as the ship 's commanding officer . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 At the outbreak of World War II in September 1939 , Admiral Scheer remained at anchor in the Schillig roadstead outside Wilhelmshaven , along with the heavy cruiser Admiral Hipper . On 4 September , two groups of five Bristol Blenheim bombers attacked the ships . The first group surprised the anti @-@ aircraft gunners aboard Admiral Scheer , who nevertheless managed to shoot down one of the five Blenheims . One bomb struck the ship 's deck and failed to explode , and two detonated in the water near the ship . The remaining bombs also failed to explode . The second group of five Blenheims were confronted by the alerted German defenses , which shot down four of the five bombers . Admiral Scheer emerged from the attack undamaged . In November 1939 , KzS Theodor Krancke became the ship 's commanding officer . 
 Admiral Scheer underwent a refit while her sister ships set out on commerce raiding operations in the Atlantic . Admiral Scheer was modified during the early months of 1940 , including the installation of a new , raked clipper bow . The heavy command tower was replaced with a lighter structure , and she was reclassified as a heavy cruiser . Additional anti @-@ aircraft guns were also installed , along with updated radar equipment . On 19 – 20 July RAF bombers attacked Admiral Scheer and the battleship Tirpitz , though they failed to score any hits . On 27 July , the ship was pronounced ready for service . 
 = = = = Atlantic sortie = = = = 
 Admiral Scheer sailed in October 1940 on her first combat sortie . On the night of 31 October she slipped through the Denmark Strait and broke into the open Atlantic . Her B @-@ Dienst radio intercept equipment identified the convoy HX @-@ 84 , sailing from Halifax Nova Scotia . Admiral Scheer 's Arado seaplanes located the convoy on 5 November 1940 , The armed merchant cruiser HMS Jervis Bay , the sole escort for the convoy , issued a report of the German raider and attempted to prevent her from attacking the convoy . The convoy was ordered to scatter under cover of a smoke screen . Admiral Scheer 's first salvo scored hits on Jervis Bay , disabling her wireless equipment and steering gear . Shells from her second salvo struck the bridge and killed her commander , Edward <unk> . Admiral Scheer quickly sank Jervis Bay , but the delay allowed the majority of the convoy to escape . The Germans sank only five of the convoy 's 37 ships . 
 On 18 December , Admiral Scheer encountered and sank the refrigerator ship Duquesa , of some 8 @,@ 651 long tons ( 8 @,@ 790 t ) displacement . The ship sent off a distress signal , which the German raider deliberately allowed , to draw British naval forces to the area . Krancke wanted to lure British warships to the area to draw attention away from Admiral Hipper , which had just exited the Denmark Strait . The aircraft carriers HMS Formidable and Hermes , the cruisers Dorsetshire , Neptune , and Dragon , and the armed merchant cruiser Pretoria Castle converged to hunt down the German raider , but she eluded the British . 
 Between 26 December and 7 January , Admiral Scheer rendezvoused with the supply ships Nordmark and <unk> , the auxiliary cruiser Thor , and the prizes Duquesa and Storstad . The raiders transferred some 600 prisoners to Storstad while they refueled from Nordmark and <unk> . Between 18 and 20 January Admiral Scheer captured three Allied merchant ships totalling 18 @,@ 738 gross register tons ( GRT ) , including the Norwegian oil tanker Sandefjord . She spent Christmas 1940 at sea in the mid @-@ Atlantic , several hundred miles from Tristan da Cunha , before making a foray into the Indian Ocean in February 1941 . 
 On 14 February , Admiral Scheer rendezvoused with the auxiliary cruiser Atlantis and the supply ship <unk> about 1 @,@ 000 nmi ( 1 @,@ 900 km ; 1 @,@ 200 mi ) east of Madagascar . The raiders resupplied from <unk> and exchanged information on Allied merchant traffic in the area , parting company on 17 February . Admiral Scheer then steamed to the Seychelles north of Madagascar , where she found two merchant vessels with her Arado floatplanes . She took the 6 @,@ 994 GRT oil tanker British Advocate as a prize and sank the 2 @,@ 456 GRT Greek @-@ flagged Grigorios . A third ship , the 7 @,@ 178 GRT Canadian Cruiser , managed to send a distress signal before Admiral Scheer sank her on 21 February . The raider encountered and sank a fourth ship the following day , the 2 @,@ 542 GRT Dutch steamer <unk> , though she too was able to send a distress signal before she sank . 
 The British cruiser HMS Glasgow , which was patrolling in the area , received both messages from Admiral Scheer 's victims . Glasgow launched reconnaissance aircraft that spotted Admiral Scheer on 22 February . Vice Admiral Ralph <unk> , the commander of the East Indies Station , deployed the carrier Hermes and cruisers Capetown , Emerald , Hawkins , Shropshire , and the Australian HMAS Canberra to join the hunt . Krancke turned to the south @-@ east to evade his pursuers , reaching the South Atlantic by 3 March . The British , meanwhile , had abandoned the hunt on 25 February when it became clear that Admiral Scheer had withdrawn from the area . 
 Admiral Scheer then sailed northwards , breaking through the Denmark Strait on 26 – 27 March and evading the cruisers Fiji and Nigeria . She reached Bergen , Norway on 30 March , where she spent a day in the Grimstadfjord . A destroyer escort joined the ship for the voyage to Kiel , which they reached on 1 April . In the course of her raiding operation , she had steamed over 46 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 85 @,@ 000 km ) and sank seventeen merchant ships for a total of 113 @,@ 223 GRT . She was by far the most successful German capital ship commerce raider of the entire war . After returning to Germany , Krancke left the ship and was replaced by KzS Wilhelm Meendsen @-@ Bohlken in June 1941 . The loss of the battleship Bismarck in May 1941 , and more importantly , the Royal Navy 's destruction of the German supply ship network in the aftermath of the Bismarck operation forced a planned Atlantic raiding operation for Admiral Scheer and her sister Lützow at the end of 1941 to be abandoned . On 4 – 8 September , Admiral Scheer was briefly moved to Oslo . There , on 5 and 8 September , No. 90 Squadron RAF , equipped with Boeing B @-@ 17 Flying Fortress bombers , mounted a pair of unsuccessful attacks on the ship . On 8 September , the ship left Oslo and returned to Swinemünde . 
 = = = = Deployment to Norway = = = = 
 On 21 February 1942 , Admiral Scheer , the heavy cruiser Prinz Eugen , and the destroyers Z4 Richard Beitzen , Z5 Paul Jakobi , Z25 , Z7 Hermann Schoemann , and Z14 Friedrich Ihn steamed to Norway . After stopping briefly in Grimstadfjord , the ships proceeded on to Trondheim . On 23 February , the British submarine Trident torpedoed Prinz Eugen , causing serious damage . The first operation in Norway in which Admiral Scheer took part was Operation Rösselsprung , in July 1942 . On 2 July , the ship sortied as part of the attempt to intercept Arctic convoy PQ @-@ 17 . Admiral Scheer and Lützow formed one group while Tirpitz and Admiral Hipper composed another . While en route to the rendezvous point , Lützow and three destroyers ran aground , forcing the entire group to abandon the operation . Admiral Scheer was detached to join Tirpitz and Admiral Hipper in Altafjord . The British detected the German departure and ordered the convoy to scatter . Aware that surprise had been lost , the Germans broke off the surface attack and turned the destruction of PQ @-@ 17 over to the U @-@ boats and Luftwaffe . Twenty @-@ four of the convoy 's thirty @-@ five transports were sunk . 
 In August 1942 , she conducted Operation Wunderland , a sortie into the Kara Sea to interdict Soviet shipping and attack targets of opportunity . The length of the mission and the distances involved precluded a destroyer escort for the operation ; three destroyers would escort Admiral Scheer until they reached Novaya Zemlya , at which point they would return to Norway . Two U @-@ boats — U @-@ 251 and U @-@ 456 — patrolled the Kara Gate and the <unk> Strait . The Germans originally intended to send Admiral Scheer with her sister ship Lützow , but since the latter had run aground the previous month , she was unavailable for the operation . 
 The operational plan called for strict radio silence to ensure surprise could be maintained . This required Meendsen @-@ Bohlken to have total tactical and operational control of his ship ; shore @-@ based commands would be unable to direct the mission . On 16 August , Admiral Scheer and her destroyer escort left Narvik on a course to pass to the north of Novaya Zemlya . Upon entering the Kara Sea , she encountered heavy ice ; in addition to searching for merchant shipping , the Arado floatplane was used to scout paths through the ice fields . On 25 August , she encountered the Soviet icebreaker <unk> . Admiral Scheer sank the icebreaker , but not before she sent a distress signal . The German ship then turned south , and two days later , arrived off the port of <unk> . Admiral Scheer damaged two ships in the port and shelled harbor facilities . Meendsen @-@ Bohlken considered sending a landing party ashore , but firing from Soviet shore batteries convinced him to abandon the plan . After breaking off the bombardment , Meendsen @-@ Bohlken decided to return to Narvik . She reached port on 30 August without having achieved any significant successes . 
 On 23 October Admiral Scheer , Tirpitz and the destroyers Z4 Richard Beitzen , Z16 Friedrich Eckoldt , Z23 , Z28 , and Z29 left Bogen Bay and proceeded to Trondheim . There , Tirpitz stopped for repairs , while Admiral Scheer and Z28 continued on to Germany . Fregattenkapitän Ernst Gruber served as the ship 's acting commander at the end of November . In December 1942 , Admiral Scheer returned to Wilhelmshaven for major overhaul , where she was attacked and slightly damaged by RAF bombers . Consequently , Admiral Scheer moved to the less exposed port of Swinemünde . In February 1943 , KzS Richard Rothe @-@ Roth took command of the ship . Until the end of 1944 Admiral Scheer was part of the Fleet Training Group . 
 = = = = Return to the Baltic = = = = 
 KzS Ernst @-@ Ludwig <unk> , the ship 's final commander , took command of Admiral Scheer in April 1944 . On 22 November 1944 , Admiral Scheer , the destroyers Z25 and <unk> , and the 2nd Torpedo Boat Flotilla relieved the cruiser Prinz Eugen and several destroyers supporting German forces fighting the Soviets on the island of Ösel in the Baltic . The Soviet Air Force launched several air attacks on the German forces , all of which were successfully repelled by heavy anti @-@ aircraft fire . The ship 's Arado floatplane was shot down , however . On the night of 23 – 24 November , the German naval forces completed the evacuation of the island . In all , 4 @,@ 694 troops were evacuated from the island . 
 In early February 1945 , Admiral Scheer stood off Samland with several torpedo boats in support of German forces fighting Soviet advances . On 9 February , the ships began shelling Soviet positions . Between 18 and 24 February , German forces launched a local counterattack ; Admiral Scheer and the torpedo boats provided artillery support , targeting Soviet positions near <unk> and Gross @-@ <unk> . The German attack temporarily restored the land connection to Königsberg . The ship 's guns were badly worn out by March and in need of repair . On 8 March , Admiral Scheer departed the eastern Baltic to have her guns relined in Kiel ; she carried 800 civilian refugees and 200 wounded soldiers . An uncleared minefield prevented her from reaching Kiel , and so she unloaded her passengers in Swinemünde . Despite her worn @-@ out gun barrels , the ship then shelled Soviet forces outside Kolberg until she used up her remaining ammunition . 
 The ship then loaded refugees and left Swinemünde ; she successfully navigated the minefields on the way to Kiel , arriving on 18 March . Her stern turret had its guns replaced at the Deutsche Werke shipyard by early April . During the repair process , most of the ship 's crew went ashore . On the night of 9 April 1945 , a general RAF bombing raid by over 300 aircraft struck the harbor in Kiel . Admiral Scheer was hit by five Tallboy bombs and capsized . She was partially broken up for scrap after the end of the war , though part of the hull was left in place and buried with rubble from the attack in the construction of a new quay . The number of casualties from her loss is unknown . 
 = Barrhill , New Zealand = 
 Barrhill is a lightly populated locality in the Canterbury region of New Zealand 's South Island . It is situated on the Canterbury Plains , on the right bank of the Rakaia River , about 17 kilometres ( 11 mi ) inland from Rakaia . It was founded by Cathcart Wason in the mid @-@ 1870s and named by him after his old home Barrhill in South Ayrshire , Scotland . Wason set it up as a model village for the workers of his large sheep farm . The population of the village peaked in the mid @-@ 1880s before the general recession initiated a downturn for the village . Wason had expected for the Methven Branch railway to run past Barrhill , but the line was built in 1880 on an alignment many miles away , which caused Barrhill population to decrease . 
 Three of the original buildings of Barrhill plus the gatehouse at Wason 's homestead were constructed of concrete , and they still exist to this day . One of those buildings , St John 's Church , is registered by Heritage New Zealand as a Category II heritage building , and the gatehouse is a museum that is open on request . Today , few buildings exist in the village , but the formal layout of avenues still exists , giving the setting a charming appearance . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Barrhill is a small settlement between the Rakaia Barrhill Methven Road and the Rakaia River , located 210 metres ( 690 ft ) above sea level . It is about 17 kilometres ( 11 mi ) from the town of Rakaia and 21 kilometres ( 13 mi ) from Methven . The four outer streets , one of which is the Rakaia Barrhill Methven Road , form a trapezoid with the longest side at 200 metres ( 660 ft ) . Two internal roads run at right angles to one another , dividing the area into four quadrants . The intersection of the internal roads forms the market place . 
 Apart from the main road , there are five avenues , each planted in its own species and named accordingly : oak , poplar , birch , lime , and sycamore . The tree @-@ lined avenues give Barrhill a charming appearance . Wason had trees planted in an unusual pattern around the market square . Residents only noticed in 1975 when viewing an aerial photo that those trees form what appears to be the three circles of Trinity , with the two inner avenues possibly symbolising a crucifix . 
 = = History = = 
 Wason emigrated from Scotland to New Zealand in late 1868 . In February 1869 or April 1870 ( sources vary ) , he bought the <unk> sheep run ( Run 116 ) in mid @-@ Canterbury . <unk> was a 20 @,@ 000 acres ( 81 km2 ) run on the south bank of the Rakaia River . The land had first been taken up by John Hall , but had changed ownership several times before Wason bought it , including 1 @,@ 250 acres ( 5 @.@ 1 km2 ) of freehold land . Wason renamed his property Corwar after his father 's lands in Scotland , and the first advertisement placed in newspapers by Wason mentions Corwar in October 1869 , hence the April 1870 date appears less likely . Wason set about trying to create an estate village on land bought from the adjacent Lavington run ( Run 117 ) . He also bought part of the Hororata Station on the other side of the Rakaia River from John Cordy ( Run 67 ) . 
 His planting of pine trees and of oaks , walnuts and poplars extended over 600 acres ( 2 @.@ 4 km2 ) and allowed shelter from the prevailing north @-@ west winds to allow sheep farming and the growing of wheat , while water power was used for agricultural machinery . He bought and sold land , and by 1882 Corwar was consolidated as a freehold estate of just over 5 @,@ 000 acres ( 20 km2 ) with a large mansion overlooking the river , complete with gate lodge and gate @-@ keeper . 
 On the estate , Wason built a model village called Barrhill , with avenues forming a grid layout and a central market square . Barrhill had 28 sections , including a post office , bakery , school , church , other facilities , and fifteen cottages were built . Wason named the village after his old home in South Ayrshire , Scotland . The post office opened in 1876 and in the same year , construction of the church began , and these buildings mark the beginning of Barrhill . 
 However , Wason had expected the Methven Branch railway to be built near Barrhill , but when it was built on a more southerly route along Thompsons Track and what was later to become known as Lauriston , the village began to decline . Dwindling population forced the closure of the school in 1938 , although the Church of St John the Evangelist is still in use . Most of the buildings were constructed from pine wood grown on the estate , but the three original concrete buildings remain : church , school and schoolhouse . 
 Without the railway , Wason saw his project as doomed , and sold up in 1900 . A rural mail service was discussed for the Ashburton District in September 1924 and after the contracts were let in February 1925 , the Barrhill post office was closed . The school closed in 1938 . 
 The Ashburton Branch of New Zealand Historic Places Trust , since renamed to Heritage New Zealand , unveiled an information panel on Anzac Day in 2012 in Barrhill 's market square . It was their last project as a branch committee before the pending disestablishment of branch committees through the Heritage New Zealand <unk> <unk> Bill , and they chose Barrhill to relaunch themselves as the Historic Places Mid Canterbury regional society as part of the unveiling of the historic panel . 
 = = = Population = = = 
 Barrhill flourished until about 1885 , when population in the village itself peaked at 50 , and two effects caused a population decline . Firstly , a recession set in across New Zealand that made people move to where work opportunities presented themselves , and locally those opportunities were created near the stations of the Methven Branch railway . Wason began to gradually sell off parts of his land holdings from the mid @-@ 1880s . 
 More recent population data can be obtained from Statistics New Zealand . The smallest unit for which data are available is a meshblock , and Barrhill is located within the meshblock with ID <unk> . This meshblock has an area of 36 square kilometres ( 14 sq mi ) , i.e. a rural area much larger than just the village , and 5 square kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 sq mi ) is within the river bed . Population in this meshblock was recorded at 60 in the 1996 census , 60 in 2001 , 69 in 2006 , and 66 in 2013 . 
 = = Notable places = = 
 Three buildings in the township remain from the time of its founding . In addition , there is the historic gatehouse some 2 @.@ 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 4 mi ) northwest of Barrhill . Those buildings remain partly because they were built in concrete , with some of the walls 30 centimetres ( 12 in ) thick . The cement was landed in barrels on <unk> Spit , barged across Lake Ellesmere / Te <unk> , and then transported by dray overland and along the bed of the Rakaia River . All four buildings are registered as Category A ( " high value " ) heritage structures by Ashburton District Council . 
 St John 's Church was mostly paid for by Wason , and construction started in 1876 , with the first service held on 8 July 1877 by the vicar of Ashburton , W. E. Paige . A vicarage was also envisaged , but it was never built . A lych gate was added as a centennial project . St John 's belongs to the Rakaia parish of the Waipounamu diocese of the Anglican Church in Aotearoa , New Zealand and Polynesia , with services each second Sunday of the month . The church was registered as a heritage building by the New Zealand Historic Places Trust ( since renamed to Heritage New Zealand ) on 23 June 1983 with registration number 1765 classified as C. With the change of the classification system , the building later became a Category II listing . The church is owned by Church Property Trustees ( i.e. the Anglican Church ) . 
 After the land had been surveyed , the first buyer was the Education Board , securing land for a school in the market square , and a teacher 's house on the adjacent section . Both these buildings were also built in concrete and exist to this day . The school was built to a northern hemisphere design and has windows on the south side only to stop children from becoming distracted , but the windows are on the wrong side to utilise the sun . Since the school closed in 1938 it has been used for functions and as a hall . The former teacher 's house is used as a bach . Both buildings are owned by Ashburton District Council . 
 The other remaining 1870s concrete building is the gate house , located some distance away on the Rakaia Barrhill Methven Road . Wason 's homestead was at the end of a drive starting at this gate house , on a cliff top overlooking the Rakaia River . The homestead burnt down not long after Wason had left the country , and a new homestead was built nearby . The gatekeeper 's lodge originally had a slate roof , but this was later replaced by iron . The last family moved out in 1935 . During the second world war , the iron was stripped off the empty building , and it fell into ruin . A later owner , Colin McLachlan , donated the land and the ruin to the people of the district ; it is now vested in the Ashburton District Council . The renovation began in 1970 , with work carried out and financed by descendants of previous inhabitants of the building . A plaque on the building states that it was reopened in March 1979 by the Prime Minister of the time , Robert Muldoon , but his plane ran late and the opening ceremony was conducted by Colin McLachlan . The gate house is fitted out as a museum , and viewing can be arranged through the Ashburton or Methven information centres . 
 Barrhill Cemetery is located 200 metres ( 660 ft ) south @-@ west of the village on Lauriston Barrhill Road . It is one of 11 open cemeteries in the Ashburton District . The oldest recorded burial was in 1881 . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 Barrhill 's founder , Cathcart Wason , was a member of parliament in two countries : first in New Zealand for a total of six years , and then in the United Kingdom for twenty years . New Zealand actress Tania Nolan , born in nearby Rakaia , lived in Barrhill for two years as a child . 
 = 243 Ida = 
 243 Ida ( / <unk> / ) is an asteroid in the Koronis family of the asteroid belt . It was discovered on 29 September 1884 by Austrian astronomer Johann Palisa and named after a nymph from Greek mythology . Later telescopic observations categorized Ida as an S @-@ type asteroid , the most numerous type in the inner asteroid belt . On 28 August 1993 , Ida was visited by the unmanned Galileo spacecraft , while en route to Jupiter . It was the second asteroid visited by a spacecraft and the first found to have a natural satellite . 
 Like all main @-@ belt asteroids , Ida 's orbit lies between the planets Mars and Jupiter . Its orbital period is 4 @.@ 84 years , and its rotation period is 4 @.@ 63 hours . Ida has an average diameter of 31 @.@ 4 km ( 19 @.@ 5 mi ) . It is irregularly shaped and elongated , and apparently composed of two large objects connected together . Its surface is one of the most heavily cratered in the Solar System , featuring a wide variety of crater sizes and ages . 
 Ida 's moon , Dactyl , was discovered by mission member Ann <unk> in images returned from Galileo . It was named after the <unk> , creatures which inhabited Mount Ida in Greek mythology . Dactyl , being only 1 @.@ 4 kilometres ( 4 @,@ 600 ft ) in diameter , is about one @-@ twentieth the size of Ida . Its orbit around Ida could not be determined with much accuracy . However , the constraints of possible orbits allowed a rough determination of Ida 's density , which revealed that it is depleted of metallic minerals . Dactyl and Ida share many characteristics , suggesting a common origin . 
 The images returned from Galileo , and the subsequent measurement of Ida 's mass , provided new insights into the geology of S @-@ type asteroids . Before the Galileo flyby , many different theories had been proposed to explain their mineral composition . Determining their composition permits a correlation between meteorites falling to the Earth and their origin in the asteroid belt . Data returned from the flyby pointed to S @-@ type asteroids as the source for the ordinary chondrite meteorites , the most common type found on the Earth 's surface . 
 = = Discovery and observations = = 
 Ida was discovered on 29 September 1884 by Austrian astronomer Johann Palisa at the Vienna Observatory . It was his 45th asteroid discovery . Ida was named by Moriz von <unk> , a Viennese brewer and amateur astronomer . In Greek mythology , Ida was a nymph of Crete who raised the god Zeus . Ida was recognized as a member of the Koronis family by Kiyotsugu Hirayama , who proposed in 1918 that the group comprised the remnants of a destroyed precursor body . 
 Ida 's reflection spectrum was measured on 16 September 1980 by astronomers David J. Tholen and Edward F. Tedesco as part of the eight @-@ color asteroid survey ( <unk> ) . Its spectrum matched those of the asteroids in the S @-@ type classification . Many observations of Ida were made in early 1993 by the US Naval Observatory in Flagstaff and the Oak Ridge Observatory . These improved the measurement of Ida 's orbit around the Sun and reduced the uncertainty of its position during the Galileo flyby from 78 to 60 km ( 48 to 37 mi ) . 
 = = Exploration = = 
 = = = Galileo flyby = = = 
 Ida was visited in 1993 by the Jupiter @-@ bound space probe Galileo . Its encounters of the asteroids Gaspra and Ida were secondary to the Jupiter mission . These were selected as targets in response to a new NASA policy directing mission planners to consider asteroid flybys for all spacecraft crossing the belt . No prior missions had attempted such a flyby . Galileo was launched into orbit by the Space Shuttle Atlantis mission STS @-@ 34 on 18 October 1989 . Changing Galileo 's trajectory to approach Ida required that it consume 34 kg ( 75 lb ) of propellant . Mission planners delayed the decision to attempt a flyby until they were certain that this would leave the spacecraft enough propellant to complete its Jupiter mission . 
 Galileo 's trajectory carried it into the asteroid belt twice on its way to Jupiter . During its second crossing , it flew by Ida on 28 August 1993 at a speed of 12 @,@ 400 m / s ( 41 @,@ 000 ft / s ) relative to the asteroid . The onboard imager observed Ida from a distance of 240 @,@ 350 km ( 149 @,@ 350 mi ) to its closest approach of 2 @,@ 390 km ( 1 @,@ 490 mi ) . Ida was the second asteroid , after Gaspra , to be imaged by a spacecraft . About 95 % of Ida 's surface came into view of the probe during the flyby . 
 Transmission of many Ida images was delayed due to a permanent failure in the spacecraft 's high @-@ gain antenna . The first five images were received in September 1993 . These comprised a high @-@ resolution mosaic of the asteroid at a resolution of 31 – 38 m / pixel . The remaining images were sent in February 1994 , when the spacecraft 's proximity to the Earth allowed higher speed transmissions . 
 = = = Discoveries = = = 
 The data returned from the Galileo flybys of Gaspra and Ida , and the later NEAR Shoemaker asteroid mission , permitted the first study of asteroid geology . Ida 's relatively large surface exhibited a diverse range of geological features . The discovery of Ida 's moon Dactyl , the first confirmed satellite of an asteroid , provided additional insights into Ida 's composition . 
 Ida is classified as an S @-@ type asteroid based on ground @-@ based spectroscopic measurements . The composition of S @-@ types was uncertain before the Galileo flybys , but was interpreted to be either of two minerals found in meteorites that had fallen to the Earth : ordinary chondrite ( OC ) and stony @-@ iron . Estimates of Ida 's density are constrained to less than 3 @.@ 2 g / cm3 by the long @-@ term stability of Dactyl 's orbit . This all but rules out a stony @-@ iron composition ; were Ida made of 5 g / cm3 iron- and nickel @-@ rich material , it would have to contain more than 40 % empty space . 
 The Galileo images also led to the discovery that space weathering was taking place on Ida , a process which causes older regions to become more red in color over time . The same process affects both Ida and its moon , although Dactyl shows a lesser change . The weathering of Ida 's surface revealed another detail about its composition : the reflection spectra of freshly exposed parts of the surface resembled that of OC meteorites , but the older regions matched the spectra of S @-@ type asteroids . 
 Both of these discoveries — the space weathering effects and the low density — led to a new understanding about the relationship between S @-@ type asteroids and OC meteorites . S @-@ types are the most numerous kind of asteroid in the inner part of the asteroid belt . OC meteorites are , likewise , the most common type of meteorite found on the Earth 's surface . The reflection spectra measured by remote observations of S @-@ type asteroids , however , did not match that of OC meteorites . The Galileo flyby of Ida found that some S @-@ types , particularly the Koronis family , could be the source of these meteorites . 
 = = Physical characteristics = = 
 Ida 's mass is between 3 @.@ 65 and 4 @.@ 99 × 1016 kg . Its gravitational field produces an acceleration of about 0 @.@ 3 to 1 @.@ 1 cm / s2 over its surface . This field is so weak that an astronaut standing on its surface could leap from one end of Ida to the other , and an object moving in excess of 20 m / s ( 70 ft / s ) could escape the asteroid entirely . 
 Ida is a distinctly elongated asteroid , with an irregular surface . Ida is 2 @.@ 35 times as long as it is wide , and a " waist " separates it into two geologically dissimilar halves . This constricted shape is consistent with Ida being made of two large , solid components , with loose debris filling the gap between them . However , no such debris was seen in high @-@ resolution images captured by Galileo . Although there are a few steep slopes tilting up to about 50 ° on Ida , the slope generally does not exceed 35 ° . Ida 's irregular shape is responsible for the asteroid 's very uneven gravitational field . The surface acceleration is lowest at the extremities because of their high rotational speed . It is also low near the " waist " because the mass of the asteroid is concentrated in the two halves , away from this location . 
 = = Surface features = = 
 Ida 's surface appears heavily cratered and mostly gray , although minor color variations mark newly formed or uncovered areas . Besides craters , other features are evident , such as grooves , ridges , and protrusions . Ida is covered by a thick layer of regolith , loose debris that obscures the solid rock beneath . The largest , boulder @-@ sized , debris fragments are called ejecta blocks , several of which have been observed on the surface . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The surface of Ida is covered in a blanket of pulverized rock , called regolith , about 50 – 100 m ( 160 – 330 ft ) thick . This material is produced in impact events and redistributed across Ida 's surface by geological processes . Galileo observed evidence of recent downslope regolith movement . 
 Ida 's regolith is composed of the silicate minerals olivine and pyroxene . Its appearance changes over time through a process called space weathering . Because of this process , older regolith appears more red in color compared to freshly exposed material . 
 About 20 large ( 40 – 150 m across ) ejecta blocks have been identified , embedded in Ida 's regolith . Ejecta blocks constitute the largest pieces of the regolith . Because ejecta blocks are expected to break down quickly by impact events , those present on the surface must have been either formed recently or uncovered by an impact event . Most of them are located within the craters Lascaux and Mammoth , but they may not have been produced there . This area attracts debris due to Ida 's irregular gravitational field . Some blocks may have been ejected from the young crater Azzurra on the opposite side of the asteroid . 
 = = = Structures = = = 
 Several major structures mark Ida 's surface . The asteroid appears to be split into two halves , here referred to as region 1 and region 2 , connected by a " waist " . This feature may have been filled in by debris , or blasted out of the asteroid by impacts . 
 Region 1 of Ida contains two major structures . One is a prominent 40 km ( 25 mi ) ridge named Townsend <unk> that stretches 150 degrees around Ida 's surface . The other structure is a large indentation named Vienna Regio . 
 Ida 's region 2 features several sets of grooves , most of which are 100 m ( 330 ft ) wide or less and up to 4 km ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) long . They are located near , but are not connected with , the craters Mammoth , Lascaux , and <unk> . Some grooves are related to major impact events , for example a set opposite Vienna Regio . 
 = = = Craters = = = 
 Ida is one of the most densely cratered bodies yet explored in the Solar System , and impacts have been the primary process shaping its surface . Cratering has reached the saturation point , meaning that new impacts erase evidence of old ones , leaving the total crater count roughly the same . It is covered with craters of all sizes and stages of degradation , and ranging in age from fresh to as old as Ida itself . The oldest may have been formed during the breakup of the Koronis family parent body . The largest crater , Lascaux , is almost 12 km ( 7 @.@ 5 mi ) across . Region 2 contains nearly all of the craters larger than 6 km ( 3 @.@ 7 mi ) in diameter , but Region 1 has no large craters at all . Some craters are arranged in chains . 
 Ida 's major craters are named after caves and lava tubes on Earth . The crater Azzurra , for example , is named after a submerged cave on the island of Capri , also known as the Blue Grotto . Azzurra seems to be the most recent major impact on Ida . The ejecta from this collision is distributed discontinuously over Ida and is responsible for the large @-@ scale color and albedo variations across its surface . An exception to the crater morphology is the fresh , asymmetric Fingal , which has a sharp boundary between the floor and wall on one side . Another significant crater is Afon , which marks Ida 's prime meridian . 
 The craters are simple in structure : bowl @-@ shaped with no flat bottoms and no central peaks . They are distributed evenly around Ida , except for a protrusion north of crater <unk> which is smoother and less cratered . The ejecta excavated by impacts is deposited differently on Ida than on planets because of its rapid rotation , low gravity and irregular shape . Ejecta blankets settle asymmetrically around their craters , but fast @-@ moving ejecta that escapes from the asteroid is permanently lost . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Ida was classified as an S @-@ type asteroid based on the similarity of its reflectance spectra with similar asteroids . S @-@ types may share their composition with stony @-@ iron or ordinary chondrite ( OC ) meteorites . The composition of the interior has not been directly analyzed , but is assumed to be similar to OC material based on observed surface color changes and Ida 's bulk density of 2 @.@ 27 – 3 @.@ 10 g / cm3 . OC meteorites contain varying amounts of the silicates olivine and pyroxene , iron , and feldspar . Olivine and pyroxene were detected on Ida by Galileo . The mineral content appears to be homogeneous throughout its extent . Galileo found minimal variations on the surface , and the asteroid 's spin indicates a consistent density . Assuming that its composition is similar to OC meteorites , which range in density from 3 @.@ 48 to 3 @.@ 64 g / cm3 , Ida would have a porosity of 11 – 42 % . 
 Ida 's interior probably contains some amount of impact @-@ fractured rock , called megaregolith . The megaregolith layer of Ida extends between hundreds of meters below the surface to a few kilometers . Some rock in Ida 's core may have been fractured below the large craters Mammoth , Lascaux , and Undara . 
 = = Orbit and rotation = = 
 Ida is a member of the Koronis family of asteroid @-@ belt asteroids . Ida orbits the Sun at an average distance of 2 @.@ 862 AU ( 428 @.@ 1 Gm ) , between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter . Ida takes 4 @.@ <unk> years to complete one orbit . 
 Ida 's rotation period is 4 @.@ 63 hours , making it one of the fastest rotating asteroids yet discovered . The calculated maximum moment of inertia of a uniformly dense object the same shape as Ida coincides with the spin axis of the asteroid . This suggests that there are no major variations of density within the asteroid . Ida 's axis of rotation precesses with a period of 77 thousand years , due to the gravity of the Sun acting upon the <unk> shape of the asteroid . 
 = = Origin = = 
 Ida originated in the breakup of the roughly 120 km ( 75 mi ) diameter Koronis parent body . The progenitor asteroid had partially differentiated , with heavier metals migrating to the core . Ida carried away insignificant amounts of this core material . It is uncertain how long ago the disruption event occurred . According to an analysis of Ida 's cratering processes , its surface is more than a billion years old . However , this is inconsistent with the estimated age of the Ida – Dactyl system of less than 100 million years ; it is unlikely that Dactyl , due to its small size , could have escaped being destroyed in a major collision for longer . The difference in age estimates may be explained by an increased rate of cratering from the debris of the Koronis parent body 's destruction . 
 = = Moon = = 
 Ida has a moon named Dactyl , official designation ( 243 ) Ida I Dactyl ( / <unk> / <unk> @-@ til ) . It was discovered in images taken by the Galileo spacecraft during its flyby in 1993 . These images provided the first direct confirmation of an asteroid moon . At the time , it was separated from Ida by a distance of 90 kilometres ( 56 mi ) , moving in a prograde orbit . Dactyl is heavily cratered , like Ida , and consists of similar materials . Its origin is uncertain , but evidence from the flyby suggests that it originated as a fragment of the Koronis parent body . 
 = = = Discovery = = = 
 Dactyl was found on 17 February 1994 by Galileo mission member Ann <unk> , while examining delayed image downloads from the spacecraft . Galileo recorded 47 images of Dactyl over an observation period of 5 @.@ 5 hours in August 1993 . The spacecraft was 10 @,@ 760 kilometres ( 6 @,@ 690 mi ) from Ida and 10 @,@ 870 kilometres ( 6 @,@ 750 mi ) from Dactyl when the first image of the moon was captured , 14 minutes before Galileo made its closest approach . 
 Dactyl was initially designated 1993 ( 243 ) 1 . It was named by the International Astronomical Union in 1994 , for the mythological dactyls who inhabited Mount Ida on the island of Crete . 
 = = = Physical characteristics = = = 
 Dactyl is an " egg @-@ shaped " but " remarkably spherical " object measuring 1 @.@ 6 by 1 @.@ 4 by 1 @.@ 2 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 99 mi × 0 @.@ 87 mi × 0 @.@ 75 mi ) . It was oriented with its longest axis pointing towards Ida . Like Ida , Dactyl 's surface exhibits saturation cratering . It is marked by more than a dozen craters with a diameter greater than 80 m ( 260 ft ) , indicating that the moon has suffered many collisions during its history . At least six craters form a linear chain , suggesting that it was caused by locally produced debris , possibly ejected from Ida . Dactyl 's craters may contain central peaks , unlike those found on Ida . These features , and Dactyl 's spheroidal shape , imply that the moon is gravitationally controlled despite its small size . Like Ida , its average temperature is about 200 K ( − 73 ° C ; − 100 ° F ) . 
 Dactyl shares many characteristics with Ida . Their albedos and reflection spectra are very similar . The small differences indicate that the space weathering process is less active on Dactyl . Its small size would make the formation of significant amounts of regolith impossible . This contrasts with Ida , which is covered by a deep layer of regolith . 
 The two largest imaged craters on Dactyl were named <unk> and <unk> , after two of the mythological dactyls . <unk> is the largest crater in the above image , and <unk> is near the bottom , mostly obscured in shadow . The craters are 300 and 200 meters in diameter , respectively . 
 = = = Orbit = = = 
 Dactyl 's orbit around Ida is not precisely known . Galileo was in the plane of Dactyl 's orbit when most of the images were taken , which made determining its exact orbit difficult . Dactyl orbits in the prograde direction and is inclined about 8 ° to Ida 's equator . Based on computer simulations , Dactyl 's <unk> must be more than about 65 km ( 40 mi ) from Ida for it to remain in a stable orbit . The range of orbits generated by the simulations was narrowed down by the necessity of having the orbits pass through points at which Galileo observed Dactyl to be at 16 : 52 : 05 UT on 28 August 1993 , about 90 km ( 56 mi ) from Ida at longitude 85 ° . On 26 April 1994 , the Hubble Space Telescope observed Ida for eight hours and was unable to spot Dactyl . It would have been able to observe it if it were more than about 700 km ( 430 mi ) from Ida . 
 If in a circular orbit at the distance at which it was seen , Dactyl 's orbital period is about 20 hours . Its orbital speed is roughly 10 m / s ( 33 ft / s ) , " about the speed of a fast run or a slowly thrown baseball " . 
 = = = Age and origin = = = 
 Dactyl may have originated at the same time as Ida , from the disruption of the Koronis parent body . However , it may have formed more recently , perhaps as ejecta from a large impact on Ida . It is extremely unlikely that it was captured by Ida . Dactyl may have suffered a major impact around 100 million years ago , which reduced its size . 
 = Trobairitz = 
 The trobairitz ( Occitan pronunciation : [ <unk> ] ) were Occitan female troubadours of the 12th and 13th centuries , active from around 1170 to approximately 1260 . The word trobairitz was first used in the 13th @-@ century romance <unk> . It comes from the Provençal word <unk> , the literal meaning of which is " to find " , and the technical meaning of which is " to compose " . The word trobairitz is used very rarely in medieval Occitan , as it does not occur in lyrical poetry , grammatical treatises , or in the biographies of the trobairitz or troubadours . Trobairitz composed , wrote verses , and performed for the Occitan noble courts . They are exceptional in musical history as the first known female composers of Western secular music ; all earlier known female composers wrote sacred music . The trobairitz were part of courtly society , as opposed to their lower class counterparts the <unk> . Although troubadours sometimes came from humble origins — <unk> de Ventadorn may have been the son of a castle 's baker — the trobairitz were nobly born . The most important trobairitz are <unk> de Castelnau , Azalais de <unk> , Maria de Ventadorn , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> de Proença , <unk> de <unk> , and the <unk> de <unk> . 
 = = Position in medieval society = = 
 Throughout the 13th century , women of the court were expected to be able to sing , play instruments , and write <unk> <unk> , or <unk> ( a debate or dialogue in the form of a poem ) . The cultivation of these womanly skills may have led to the writings of the trobairitz . 
 The trobairitz may also have arisen due the power women held in southern France during the 12th and 13th centuries . Women had far more control over land ownership , and Occitan society was far more accepting of women than were most other societies of the time . During the Crusades many men were away , which left women with more administrative responsibility , and thus , power . Nevertheless , this society was not " feminist " , nor was fin ' amor , which exalted women while at the same time circumscribing many aspects of their lives and behavior . 
 There is difficulty in labeling the trobairitz as either amateurs or professionals . The distinction between these two roles was complicated in the medieval era , since professionals were generally lower class , and amateurs had as much time as professionals to devote to their craft . <unk> were lower class , professional composers far less respected than the trobairitz . 
 Both troubadours and trobairitz wrote of fin ' <unk> , or courtly love . Women were generally the subject of the writings of troubadours , however : " No other group of poets give women so exalted a definition within so tightly circumscribed a context of female suppression . " The tension between the suppression of women present in the poetry of the troubadours and similar themes in the poetry of the trobairitz is a major source of discussion for modern commentators . Trobairitz poetry pertaining to love tended to offer a less idealized conception of the subject than the poetry of their male counterparts , with a more conversational and less flourished style of writing intended to more closely emulate a more grounded vision of relationships . The trobairitz wrote in the <unk> ( strophic song ) and <unk> ( debate poem ) genres . Besides <unk> and <unk> , trobairitz also wrote <unk> ( political poems ) , <unk> ( lament ) , <unk> d ’ amor ( a love letter not in strophic form ) , alba ( dawn songs ) , and <unk> ( dance songs ) . Judging by what survives today , the trobairitz wrote no <unk> or <unk> songs , unlike their troubadour counterparts . Furthermore , in keeping with the troubadour tradition , the trobairitz closely linked the action of the singing to the action of loving . <unk> de Dia demonstrates this in her poem Fin <unk> me don <unk> , stating that " Fin <unk> me dona <unk> / per qu <unk> chan plus <unk> , " translated as " Happiness brings me pure joy / which makes me sing more cheerfully . " 
 = = Attribution = = 
 The number of works attributed to the trobairitz is estimated at thirty @-@ two songs , but ranges anywhere from 23 to 46 . There are a number of reasons why an exact number is not known . In the courtly love tradition it was common for poems to be written as an exchange of letters , or a debate , as in a <unk> . Some of these may have been originally written by one poet ; however , some were originally an actual exchange of epistles , later gathered together in a manuscript . Some of these were between men , and some were between a man and a woman . Some modern editors attribute these solely to the man who originated the exchange , and some attribute them to both the man and the woman involved . There is a long history of attributing these solely to men , even when all evidence points to the contrary . 
 Since poetry was highly stylized , it is difficult to determine when a poet speaking as a woman actually was a woman , or a man speaking as a woman . This adds to the difficulty of attribution , especially of anonymous writers . There is some debate as to whether or not the poems by the trobairitz represent genuine feminine voices , since they worked within the highly circumscribed conventions of the troubadours . Matilda Bruckner suggests that the trobairitz " spoke in her own voice as channeled through the voices of many others " . By manipulating the strict constructs of troubadour lyric , the trobairitz were able to create their own " fictions of the female voice " . 
 There is one notable instance where clear attribution is given to a woman , <unk> de Romans ( also given as Beatritz ) , but the subject of the poem is another woman , Na Maria . In the poem " Na Maria " Beatritz expresses her love for Maria in the traditional fin ' <unk> style , both in terms of physical longing and courtly admiration . This poem , if not clearly marked as by a woman , would be assumed to be by a man . Some controversy surrounds the works of the <unk> de Romans , as scholars have suggested that her <unk> expresses " lesbian desire . " The troubadour would typically speak to the <unk> ( woman ) ; the fact that the lyrical dialogue takes place exclusively between one woman and another is an extreme rarity . 
 = = List of trobairitz works = = 
 = = = Anonymous = = = 
 Bona <unk> , un <unk> vos <unk> 
 = = = Attributed = = = 
 Alais <unk> and Carenza : Na Carenza al bel cors <unk> 
 <unk> de Castelnau 
 <unk> de Castelnau and <unk> de Capio : Domna n ’ <unk> , si @-@ us <unk> 
 Azalais d <unk> 
 Azalais de <unk> 
 Beatriz de <unk> 
 Beatritz de Romans : Na Maria , <unk> e <unk> <unk> 
 <unk> 
 Clara d <unk> 
 <unk> 
 <unk> de Proença : Vos <unk> ’ m <unk> dels corals <unk> 
 <unk> : <unk> e <unk> ( not extant ) 
 <unk> de <unk> 
 <unk> de <unk> 
 Domna H. 
 <unk> 
 Maria de Ventadorn : Gui d <unk> , <unk> <unk> de vos 
 <unk> de <unk> 
 <unk> 
 = Ny @-@ Ålesund Airport , Hamnerabben = 
 Ny @-@ Ålesund Airport , Hamnerabben ( Norwegian : Ny @-@ Ålesund flyplass , Hamnerabben ; ICAO : <unk> ) is an airport serving the research community of Ny @-@ Ålesund in Svalbard , Norway . The airport is owned by Kings Bay , who also owns the company town . The only flights available are to Svalbard Airport , Longyear , operated two to four times a week by Lufttransport using Dornier Do 228 aircraft . The services are organized as corporate charters and tickets are only available after permission from Kings Bay . 
 Between 1925 and 1928 , Ny @-@ Ålesund saw four air expeditions to the North Pole , two of which required the construction of an airship hangar and mast . The first proposal for an airport in Ny @-@ Ålesund was launched in 1956 by Norsk Polar <unk> , who proposed an airport at <unk> . Soviet protests against the airport caused the Norwegian authorities to oppose the plans , which were laid to rest in the early 1960s . Construction at Hamnerabben started in 1965 following the decision to build Kongsfjord Telemetry Station . The airport first hosted service to temporary landing strips near Longyearbyen , but from 1975 served Svalbard Airport . Lufttransport started flights with helicopters in the 1980s , but from 1989 has flown with fixed @-@ wing aircraft . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early aviation in Ny @-@ Ålesund = = = 
 Ny @-@ Ålesund was established as a mining company town by Kings Bay in 1916 . Between 1925 and 1928 , four attempts were made to reach the North Pole by air from Ny @-@ Ålesund . In May 1925 , Roald Amundsen used Ny @-@ Ålesund as a base for two flying boats , but the expedition failed to come closer than 88 degrees north . On 9 May 1926 , Floyd Bennett and Richard E. Byrd used Ny @-@ Ålesund as both the starting and landing for their expedition . Although they claimed to have reached the pole , there is strong evidence that they could not have accomplished this . On 11 May , Amundsen and Umberto Nobile 's airship Norge left Ny @-@ Ålesund and traveled via the North Pole to Alaska . This is regarded as the first successful expedition to the North Pole . After two short skirmishes , Nobile 's airship Italia left Ny @-@ Ålesund on 23 May 1928 to reach the North Pole , but crashed on the return . 
 The flying boats did not require any specific infrastructure , although they had to be brought by ship to Ny @-@ Ålesund , where they were assembled . They took off from a manually groomed air strip on snow . For the airship expeditions , a hangar and a mast were needed . Twenty @-@ two carpenters arrived in October 1925 along with supplies on SS <unk> . Materials were transported to the site by railway after a track had been laid to the site from the port . The 35 @-@ meter ( 115 ft ) tall steel mast was completed in December . The wooden hangar was 110 by 34 meters ( 361 by 112 ft ) with a height of 30 meters ( 98 ft ) . It was covered in 10 @,@ 000 square meters ( 110 @,@ 000 sq ft ) of tarp . The hangar was completed on 15 February 1926 . 
 Mining ceased in Ny @-@ Ålesund in 1929 ; it was taken up again in 1941 , but because of the Second World War the town was evacuated the following year . From 1946 , the Royal Norwegian Air Force started serving Ny @-@ Ålesund with their Consolidated PBY Catalina amphibian aircraft . The aircraft were able to land if there was no ice on the fjord and lighting and weather permitted it . The first flight took place on 10 May and consisted of post drops . No further flights were carried out until 1949 ; one of the flights that year was an air ambulance operation . The service also dropped post at the other Norwegian settlements in Svalbard . In 1961 , the Catalinas were replaced with Grumman HU @-@ 16B Albatross aircraft . 
 = = = <unk> proposal = = = 
 The first proposal for an airport serving Ny @-@ Ålesund was launched by the brothers Einar Sverre Pedersen and Gunnar Sverre Pedersen . Einar worked as chief navigator in the Scandinavian Airlines System ( SAS ) and was instrumental in developing the airline routes over the North Pole . He envisioned that the airport in Svalbard could serve as an emergency landing aerodrome for intercontinental flights , and proposed that the Norwegian trunk airline service be extended to Svalbard . 
 The brothers went on an expedition to Spitsbergen in 1956 to conduct further surveys . Their initial observations concluded that <unk> , the outermost part of <unk> , was the best @-@ suited place for a major airport . They initially planned for a 1 @,@ 600 @-@ meter ( 5 @,@ 200 ft ) long runway , which could easily be expanded to 3 @,@ 000 meters ( 9 @,@ 800 ft ) . Hotellneset and Adventdalen , both close to Longyearbyen , were rejected because the areas were too small and due to poor weather conditions . 
 The brothers presented the idea to the Government of Norway and SAS , but neither party was interested in investing in an airport . They contacted Kings Bay and asked the company to lease or purchase land to build the airport . The company was positive , but required that the airport remained under Norwegian ownership and regulations . On 22 October 1958 , negotiations started with Vestlandske <unk> to start an airline service from the mainland to Svalbard . Financing of the airport was in part to be secured through a Hilton hotel , which would provide accommodation for tourists , and the " Roald Amundsen Institute , " a planned research station . 
 Although the brothers received initial support from the government , the Soviet Union officially protested the airport on 5 November 1958 . They claimed it could be used as an air force base — and thus would be a violation of the Svalbard Treaty — and pointed out that planning was partially financed with American military funding and that Gunnar was a military officer . From then on the Norwegian government started actively opposing the airport . At first they asked the company to cease operations , then asked the American military to cut funding . They also instructed all government @-@ owned companies to not allow an airport to be built on their ground . The government also used Gunnar 's military rank to hinder him , to limited extent , from pursuing the plans . The Aviation Act , which required all airports to have a concession to operate , came into effect from 1961 , effectively stopping the plans . 
 = = = Hamnerabben = = = 
 Following the 1962 mining accident and the subsequent Kings Bay Affair , Ny @-@ Ålesund was transformed from a mining town to a research outpost . The need for an airport to support commercial activity in Ny @-@ Ålesund arose in 1965 with the construction of Kongsfjord Telemetry Station . The Royal Norwegian Council for Scientific and Industrial Research needed to have an aviation connection with Longyearbyen to send magnetic tapes with the downloaded data to Germany . A road was built from the settlement to Hamnerabben , the site of the telemetry station . The top of the hill was sufficiently flat that a runway could be constructed . It was built by giving a 850 @-@ meter ( 2 @,@ 790 ft ) long straight section of the road a width of 40 meters ( 130 ft ) . Waste oil was poured on the gravel to bind it . A smaller road was built to the north of the runway to allow road transport while the runway was in use . 
 The airport was largely used to fly to Longyearbyen , although a limited number of flights were undertaken to the mainland . In addition to magnetic tapes , the aircraft were used to transport personnel and cargo , particularly during winter . Services were originally operated by <unk> og <unk> , but were later taken over by Svalbard @-@ Fly , both of which had their Cessna 185 aircraft stationed in Ny @-@ Ålesund . On 3 June 1970 , a miner with a fractured skull was transported by ship from Longyearbyen to Ny @-@ Ålesund and sent on board a Piper PA @-@ 31 Navajo to the mainland for treatment . After the telemetry station closed in 1974 , the airport was taken over by Kings Bay . During this period , Longyearbyen was served by a planed section of tundra in Adventdalen . 
 Svalbard Airport , Longyear , opened in 1975 , allowing better facilities and connection with scheduled flights to the mainland . At the same time , Lufttransport established itself at Svalbard Airport . During the summer of 1975 , the Norwegian Polar Institute stationed two helicopters at Ny @-@ Ålesund Airport to support their expeditions . During the late 1970s there was little winter activity in Ny @-@ Ålesund , but the air strip was kept operational for the few groups of researchers who did visit . A radio line repeater was installed at <unk> in 1980 , resulting in Ny @-@ Ålesund receiving a telephone connection . A radio beacon was subsequently installed at the airport . 
 During the 1980s , the services were gradually taken over by Lufttransport , who used both small aircraft and helicopters . These gradually became more regular and became de facto scheduled services every fortnight . Lufttransport replaced the helicopter service with a two @-@ engine five @-@ seat aircraft in 1989 , which cut the cost of transport significantly . In 1993 , Widerøe established itself at Svalbard Airport and flew services to Ny @-@ Ålesund , but this only lasted the one season . In 1996 , Lufttransport and Kings Bay made an agreement that the airline would fly once per week during the winter and up to five times per week during the summer . The airline would use a Dornier Do 228 , which was also used for flights from Longyearbyen to Svea Airport for Store Norske Spitsbergen Kulkompani . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 Ny @-@ Ålesund Airport , Hamnerabben , is located at Hamnerabben , 0 @.@ 65 nautical miles ( 1 @.@ 20 km ; 0 @.@ 75 mi ) west of the main settlement of Ny @-@ Ålesund . It consists of a single 808 @-@ meter ( 2 @,@ 651 ft ) long and 30 @-@ meter ( 98 ft ) wide gravel runway . It is located at 40 meters ( 130 ft ) elevation and aligned 12 / 30 . The airport has a single 30 @-@ by @-@ 75 @-@ meter ( 98 by 246 ft ) apron . The airport has aerodrome flight information service but lacks terminal and hangar facilities . 
 = = Airlines and destinations = = 
 The only airline to provide service to and from Hamnerabben is Lufttransport , which operates 16 @-@ seat Dornier Do 228 aircraft to Svalbard Airport , Longyear . The airline provides two flights per week during the winter and four flights per week during the summer . All departures are charter flights organized by Kings Bay and tickets are only available through the company . Occasional ad hoc charter flights are also sometimes operated . At Longyearbyen , connections are provided onwards to Tromsø Airport and Oslo Airport , Gardermoen . 
 = Louis Braille = 
 Louis Braille ( / <unk> / , listen ; French : [ lwi <unk> ( ə ) ] ; 4 January 1809 – 6 January 1852 ) was a French educator and inventor of a system of reading and writing for use by the blind or visually impaired . His system remains known worldwide simply as braille . 
 Blinded in both eyes as a result of an early childhood accident , Braille mastered his disability while still a boy . He excelled in his education and received scholarship to France 's Royal Institute for Blind Youth . While still a student there , he began developing a system of tactile code that could allow blind people to read and write quickly and efficiently . Inspired by the military cryptography of Charles Barbier , Braille constructed a new method built specifically for the needs of the blind . He presented his work to his peers for the first time in 1824 . 
 In adulthood , Braille served as a professor at the Institute and enjoyed an avocation as a musician , but he largely spent the remainder of his life refining and extending his system . It went unused by most educators for many years after his death , but posterity has recognized braille as a revolutionary invention , and it has been adapted for use in languages worldwide . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Louis Braille was born in Coupvray , France , a small town about twenty miles east of Paris . He and his three elder siblings – Monique Catherine ( <unk> ) , Louis @-@ Simon ( <unk> ) , and Marie Céline ( <unk> ) – lived with their parents , Simon @-@ René and Monique , on three hectares of land and vineyards in the countryside . Simon @-@ René maintained a successful enterprise as a <unk> and maker of horse tack . 
 As soon as he could walk , Braille spent time playing in his father 's workshop . At the age of three , the child was toying with some of the tools , trying to make holes in a piece of leather with an awl . <unk> closely at the surface , he pressed down hard to drive the point in , and the awl glanced across the tough leather and struck him in one of his eyes . A local physician bound and patched the affected eye and even arranged for Braille to be met the next day in Paris by a highly respected surgeon , but no treatment could save the damaged organ . In agony , the young boy suffered for weeks as the wound became severely infected ; an infection which then spread to his other eye , likely due to sympathetic <unk> 
 Louis Braille survived the torment of the infection but by the age of five he was completely blind in both eyes . Due to his young age , Braille did not realize at first that he had lost his sight , and often asked why it was always dark . His devoted parents made great efforts – quite uncommon for the era – to raise their youngest child in a normal fashion , and he prospered in their care . He learned to navigate the village and country paths with canes his father hewed for him , and he grew up seemingly at peace with his disability . Braille 's bright and creative mind impressed the local teachers and priests , and he was accommodated with higher education . 
 = = Education = = 
 Braille studied in Coupvray until the age of ten . Because of his combination of intelligence and diligence , Braille was permitted to attend one of the first schools for blind children in the world , the Royal Institute for Blind Youth , since renamed to the National Institute for Blind Youth in Paris . Braille , the last of the family 's children to leave the household , departed for the school in February 1819 . At that time the Royal Institute was an underfunded , ramshackle affair , but it provided a relatively stable environment for blind children to learn and associate together . 
 = = = Haüy system = = = 
 The children were taught how to read by a system devised by the school 's founder , Valentin Haüy . Not blind himself , Haüy was a committed philanthropist who devoted his life to helping the blind . He designed and manufactured a small library of books for the children using a technique of embossing heavy paper with the raised imprints of Latin letters . Readers would trace their fingers over the text , comprehending slowly but in a traditional fashion which Haüy could appreciate . 
 Braille was helped by the Haüy books , but he also despaired over their lack of depth : the amount of information kept in such books was necessarily small . Because the raised letters were made in a complex artisanal process using wet paper pressed against copper wire , the children could not hope to " write " by themselves . So that the young Louis could send letters back home , Simon @-@ René provided him with an alphabet fashioned from bits of thick leather . It was a slow and cumbersome process , but the boy could at least trace the letters ' outlines and write his first sentences . 
 The handcrafted Haüy books all came in uncomfortable sizes and weights . They were laboriously constructed , exquisitely delicate , and greatly expensive to obtain : when Haüy 's school first opened , it had a total of three books . Despite their drawbacks , Haüy promoted their use with zeal . To him , the books presented a new and handsome system which would be readily approved by those with eyesight . Certainly no better method yet existed for the blind to read , and the books seemed – to the sighted – to offer the best achievable results . Braille and his schoolmates , however , could detect all too well the books ' crushing limitations . Nonetheless , Haüy 's well @-@ intentioned efforts still provided a breakthrough achievement – the recognition of the sense of touch as a workable strategy for sightless reading . Haüy 's only personal limitation was that he was " talking to the fingers [ with ] the language of the eye . " 
 = = = Teacher and musician = = = 
 Braille read the Haüy books repeatedly , and he was equally attentive to the oral instruction offered by the school . He proved to be a highly proficient student and , after he had exhausted the school 's curriculum , he was immediately asked to remain as a teacher 's aide . By 1833 , he was elevated to a full professorship . For much of the rest of his life , Braille stayed at the Institute where he taught history , geometry , and algebra . 
 Braille 's ear for music enabled him to become an accomplished cellist and organist in classes taught by Jean @-@ Nicholas <unk> . Later in life , his musical talents led him to play the organ for churches all over France . A devout Catholic , Braille held the position of organist in Paris at the Church of Saint @-@ Nicolas @-@ des @-@ Champs from 1834 to 1839 , and later at the Church of Saint @-@ Vincent @-@ de @-@ Paul . 
 = = Braille system = = 
 Braille was determined to fashion a system of reading and writing that could bridge the critical gap in communication between the sighted and the blind . In his own words : " Access to communication in the widest sense is access to knowledge , and that is vitally important for us if we [ the blind ] are not to go on being despised or patronized by condescending sighted people . We do not need pity , nor do we need to be reminded we are vulnerable . We must be treated as equals – and communication is the way this can be brought about . " 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 In 1821 , Braille learned of a communication system devised by Captain Charles Barbier of the French Army . Some sources depict Braille learning about it from a newspaper account read to him by a friend , while others say the officer , aware of its potential , made a special visit to the school . In either case , Barbier willingly shared his invention called " night writing " which was a code of dots and dashes impressed into thick paper . These impressions could be interpreted entirely by the fingers , letting soldiers share information on the battlefield without having light or needing to speak . The captain 's code turned out to be too complex to use in its original military form , but it inspired Braille to develop a system of his own . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 Braille worked tirelessly on his ideas , and his system was largely completed by 1824 , when he was fifteen years old . From Barbier 's night writing , he innovated by simplifying its form and maximizing its efficiency . He made uniform columns for each letter , and he reduced the twelve raised dots to six . He published his system in 1829 , and by the second edition in 1837 had discarded the dashes because they were too difficult to read . Crucially , Braille 's smaller cells were capable of being recognized as letters with a single touch of a finger . 
 Braille created his own raised @-@ dot system by using an awl , the same kind of implement which had blinded him . In the process of designing his system , he also designed an ergonomic interface for using it , based on Barbier 's own slate and stylus tools . By soldering two metal strips across the slate , he created a secure area for the stylus which would keep the lines straight and readable . 
 By these modest means , Braille constructed a robust communication system . " It bears the stamp of genius " wrote Dr. Richard <unk> French , former director of the California School for the Blind , " like the Roman alphabet itself . " 
 = = = Musical adaptation = = = 
 The system was soon extended to include braille musical notation . Passionate about his own music , Braille took meticulous care in its planning to ensure that the musical code would be " flexible enough to meet the unique requirements of any instrument . " In 1829 , he published the first book about his system , Method of Writing Words , Music , and Plain Songs by Means of Dots , for Use by the Blind and Arranged for Them . Ironically this book was first printed by the raised letter method of the Haüy system . 
 = = = Publications = = = 
 Braille produced several written works about braille and as general education for the blind . Method of Writing Words , Music , and Plain Songs ... ( 1829 ) was revised and republished in 1837 ; his mathematics guide , Little Synopsis of Arithmetic for Beginners , entered use in 1838 ; and his monograph New Method for Representing by Dots the Form of Letters , Maps , Geometric Figures , Musical Symbols , etc . , for Use by the Blind was first published in 1839 . Many of Braille 's original printed works remain available at the Braille birthplace museum in Coupvray . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 New Method for Representing by Dots ... ( 1839 ) put forth Braille 's plan for a new writing system with which blind people could write letters that could be read by sighted people . Called <unk> , the system combined his method of dot @-@ punching with a new specialized grill which Braille devised to overlay the paper . When used with an associated number table ( also designed by Braille and requiring memorization ) , the grill could permit a blind writer to faithfully reproduce the standard alphabet . 
 After the introduction of <unk> , Braille gave assistance to his friend Pierre @-@ François @-@ Victor Foucault , who was working on the development of his <unk> , a device that could <unk> letters in the manner of a typewriter . Foucault 's machine was hailed as a great success and was exhibited at the World 's Fair in Paris in 1855 . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Although Braille was admired and respected by his pupils , his writing system was not taught at the Institute during his lifetime . The successors of Valentin Haüy , who had died in 1822 , showed no interest in altering the established methods of the school , and indeed , they were actively hostile to its use . Dr. Alexandre François @-@ René <unk> , headmaster at the school , was dismissed from his post after he had a history book translated into braille . 
 Braille had always been a sickly child , and his condition worsened in adulthood . A persistent respiratory illness , long believed to be tuberculosis , dogged him , and by the age of forty , he was forced to relinquish his position as a teacher . When his condition reached mortal danger , he was admitted to the infirmary at the Royal Institution , where he died in 1852 , two days after he had reached the age of forty @-@ three . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Through the overwhelming insistence of the blind pupils , Braille 's system was finally adopted by the Institute in 1854 , two years after his death . The system spread throughout the French @-@ speaking world , but was slower to expand in other places . However , by the time of the first all @-@ European conference of teachers of the blind in 1873 , the cause of braille was championed by Dr. Thomas Rhodes Armitage and thereafter its international use increased rapidly . By 1882 , Dr. Armitage was able to report that " There is now probably no institution in the civilized world where braille is not used except in some of those in North America . " Eventually even these holdouts relented : braille was officially adopted by schools for the blind in the United States in 1916 , and a universal braille code for English was formalized in 1932 . 
 New variations in braille technology continue to grow , including such innovations as braille computer terminals ; <unk> email delivery service ; and Nemeth Braille , a comprehensive system for mathematical and scientific notation . Almost two centuries after its invention , braille remains a system of powerful and enduring utility . 
 = = = Honors and tributes = = = 
 The immense personal legacy of Louis Braille was described in a 1952 essay by T.S. Eliot : 
 Braille 's childhood home in Coupvray is a listed historic building and houses the Louis Braille Museum . A large monument to him was erected in the town square which was itself renamed Braille Square . On the centenary of his death , his remains were moved to the Panthéon in Paris . In a symbolic gesture , Braille 's hands were left in Coupvray , reverently buried near his home . 
 Statues and other memorials to Louis Braille can be found around the world . He has been commemorated in postage stamps worldwide , and the asteroid <unk> Braille was named for him in 1992 . The Encyclopædia Britannica lists him among the " 100 Most Influential Inventors Of All Time " . 
 The 200th anniversary of Braille 's birth in 2009 was celebrated throughout the world by exhibitions and symposiums about his life and achievements . Among the commemorations , Belgium and Italy struck 2 @-@ euro coins , India struck a 2 @-@ rupee coin , and the USA struck a one dollar coin , all in Braille 's honor . 
 = = = In popular culture = = = 
 Because of his accomplishments as a young boy , Braille holds a special place as a hero for children , and he has been the subject of a large number of works of juvenile literature . Other appearances in the arts include the American TV special Young Heroes : Louis Braille ( 2010 ) ; the French TV movie Une lumière dans la nuit ( 2008 ) ( released in English as The Secret of Braille ) ; and the dramatic play Braille : The Early Life of Louis Braille ( 1989 ) by Lola and Coleman Jennings . In music , Braille 's life was subject of the song called " Merci , Louis " , composed by the Halifax singer @-@ songwriter Terry Kelly , chair of the Canadian Braille Literacy Foundation . 
 = Paper Hearts = 
 " Paper Hearts " is the tenth episode of the fourth season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network on December 15 , 1996 . It was written by Vince Gilligan , directed by Rob Bowman , and featured guest appearances by Tom Noonan , Rebecca Toolan and Vanessa Morley . The episode is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , unconnected to , but conversant with , the series ' wider mythology . " Paper Hearts " was viewed by 16 @.@ 59 million people in its initial broadcast , and received positive reviews , with critics praising Noonan 's guest role . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) , who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . Mulder is a believer in the paranormal , and the skeptical Scully has been assigned to debunk his work . In this episode , Mulder and Scully find that a child killer ( Tom Noonan ) who Mulder had helped to apprehend several years earlier had claimed more victims than he had confessed to ; and in the resulting investigation , learn that the killer is now claiming to have killed Mulder 's sister Samantha . 
 Gilligan came up with the concept for " Paper Hearts " when thinking about the series ' longest running storyline , the abduction of Samantha Mulder ; he came up with a story questioning whether Samantha had not been abducted by aliens , but was rather murdered by a child killer instead . " Paper Hearts " was written specifically with Tom Noonan in mind for the role of Roche , and was amongst the first television work the actor had done . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) dreams of a red light that leads him to the corpse of a young girl buried in a park in Manassas , Virginia . When he awakens , he heads to the park and finds the girl 's skeleton . The girl was determined to have been murdered by John Lee Roche ( Tom Noonan ) , a serial killer who murdered thirteen girls throughout the 1980s ; his modus operandi was cutting a heart out of the clothes of each victim . Mulder had captured Roche by deducing that he committed the murders while traveling as a vacuum cleaner salesman . Roche 's hearts were never found , although he confessed to all of the murders . 
 Dana Scully 's ( Gillian Anderson ) autopsy of the skeleton finds that the victim died in 1975 , suggesting that Roche 's killing spree started much earlier than the FBI had previously thought . The agents search Roche 's old car , where they discover sixteen cut @-@ out hearts . Mulder and Scully subsequently visit Roche in prison , hoping to learn the identities of the remaining two victims . Roche , however , tries to play mind games with Mulder . That night Mulder dreams of the night of Samantha 's abduction , seemingly showing that his sister was abducted by Roche rather than aliens . 
 The next day , Mulder asks Roche where he was the night Samantha was abducted . Roche claims he was on Martha 's Vineyard and had sold a vacuum cleaner to Mulder 's father . Mulder later finds the vacuum in his mother 's house . After convincing Walter Skinner to grant them further access to Roche , the agents question the killer and are told the location of one of his remaining victims . He also claims exactly what happened the night of Samantha 's abduction . An autopsy of the body reveals it does not belong to Samantha . Roche tells Mulder the final body is Samantha 's , but says that he will only reveal where it is if Mulder takes him to the scene of her abduction . Mulder secretly releases Roche from prison and brings him to Martha 's Vineyard . 
 Upon arriving at his family 's old summer house , Roche explains exactly what happened the night of Samantha 's abduction . However , Mulder tells him that the house was bought by his father after Samantha 's abduction , convincing him that Roche is not telling the truth . Mulder plans to bring Roche back to prison , but — following another dream about Samantha — awakens to find Roche gone , with his badge , gun , and phone stolen . 
 Using Mulder 's credentials , Roche kidnaps a girl in Swampscott , Massachusetts whom he met on his flight with Mulder to Boston . Scully and Skinner arrive the next day and the agents head to the site of Roche 's old apartment in Revere . They find him with the girl in an abandoned bus nearby . Roche holds the gun on the girl and tells Mulder that he 'll never know for sure whether the last victim is Samantha or not if he kills him . Mulder is then forced to shoot Roche , as he starts to pull on the trigger of the stolen gun . In his office Mulder stares at the final cloth heart and puts it away , unsure of whether it belonged to Samantha or not . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Paper Hearts " was written specifically with Tom Noonan in mind for the role of Roche , and was amongst the first television work the actor had done . Writer Vince Gilligan came up with the concept for the episode when thinking about the series ' longest running storyline , the abduction of Samantha Mulder . Gilligan came up with a story questioning whether Samantha had not been abducted by aliens , but was rather murdered by a child killer instead . He decided to help convince Fox Mulder of this through a series of prophetic dreams . The laser lights in Mulder 's dreams were influenced by Gilligan 's experience with laser holograms while he was a film student . The laser was supposed to be the color blue , but was changed to red in production to reduce costs . Wanting to include some kind of fetish for the killer , Gilligan settled on having Roche cut heart shaped fragments from his victim 's clothing , thinking that having him mutilate his victims ' bodies would be going too far . 
 Guest actor Tom Noonan , who played the killer John Lee Roche , recalled filming the scene in which his character is introduced , playing basketball in prison . Noonan , a capable basketball player , was asked to " downplay " how well he could play ; although he regretted not being able to play against David Duchovny , who had played basketball for Princeton University . Episode writer Vince Gilligan and director Rob Bowman assert that Duchovny 's successful basketball shot in this scene was filmed in just one take , without special effects . While the episode was the eighth produced in the season , it was the tenth aired , having been delayed to free up production resources for the two part episodes " Tunguska " and " Terma " . The episode 's climactic scene was filmed in a " bus graveyard " in Surrey , British Columbia , a location which had been scouted months previously with the intention of eventually including it in an episode of the series ; although filming at the location did not even last a full day despite the long wait to use it . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Paper Hearts " premiered on the Fox network on December 15 , 1996 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC Two on November 12 , 1997 . The episode 's initial broadcast was viewed by approximately 16 @.@ 59 million people , which represented 16 % of the viewing audience during that time . 
 Both Gillian Anderson and David Duchovny consider this among the best episodes of the fourth season . Composer Mark Snow was nominated for an Emmy Award for the music he produced for this episode . He said of the episode 's music , " It was a different kind of texture for the show . Light , magic , nothing terribly threatening " . Snow received many requests for a recording of the music used at the end of the episode . 
 Website IGN named " Paper Hearts " their sixth favorite " standalone " episode of the show , calling it " creepy and unsettling " , and claiming Noonan 's character was " one of the most disturbing villains to make an appearance in the series " . Noonan 's acting has also been praised by Vince Gilligan , who says the " understated " manner in which Roche is portrayed " sends chills down [ his ] spine every time " . The A.V. Club 's Todd VanDerWerff reviewed the episode positively , rating it an A. He felt that Noonan 's performance was " terrific " , noting that the actor " makes Roche into one of the series ' great human monsters " ; and believed that the episode 's premise was important to developing the character of Mulder further . The website later named the episode the sixth best example of a television dream sequence , noting that it " suggest [ s ] how this methodical man [ Mulder ] might puzzle over cold cases in his subconscious " . The article also complimented the entry 's metaphor that laser pointers were Mulder 's mind that pointed " out bits of evidence his conscious brain missed all those many years ago . " Starpulse named it the second best episode of the series . 
 = Retreat of glaciers since 1850 = 
 The retreat of glaciers since 1850 affects the availability of fresh water for irrigation and domestic use , mountain recreation , animals and plants that depend on glacier @-@ melt , and , in the longer term , the level of the oceans . Studied by glaciologists , the temporal coincidence of glacier retreat with the measured increase of atmospheric greenhouse gasses is often cited as an evidentiary underpinning of global warming . Mid @-@ latitude mountain ranges such as the Himalayas , Alps , Rocky Mountains , Cascade Range , and the southern Andes , as well as isolated tropical summits such as Mount Kilimanjaro in Africa , are showing some of the largest proportionate glacial losses . 
 Glacier mass balance is the key determinant of the health of a glacier . If the amount of frozen precipitation in the accumulation zone exceeds the quantity of glacial ice lost due to melting or in the ablation zone a glacier will advance ; if the accumulation is less than the ablation , the glacier will retreat . Glaciers in retreat will have negative mass balances , and if they do not find an equilibrium between accumulation and ablation , will eventually disappear . 
 The Little Ice Age was a period from about 1550 to 1850 when the world experienced relatively cooler temperatures compared to the present . Subsequently , until about 1940 , glaciers around the world retreated as the climate warmed substantially . Glacial retreat slowed and even reversed temporarily , in many cases , between 1950 and 1980 as global temperatures cooled slightly . Since 1980 , a significant global warming has led to glacier retreat becoming increasingly rapid and ubiquitous , so much so that some glaciers have disappeared altogether , and the existences of many of the remaining glaciers are threatened . In locations such as the Andes of South America and Himalayas in Asia , the demise of glaciers in these regions has the potential to affect water supplies in those areas . 
 The retreat of mountain glaciers , notably in western North America , Asia , the Alps and tropical and subtropical regions of South America , Africa and Indonesia , provide evidence for the rise in global temperatures since the late 19th century . The acceleration of the rate of retreat since 1995 of key outlet glaciers of the Greenland and West Antarctic ice sheets may foreshadow a rise in sea level , which would affect coastal regions . 
 = = Glacier mass balance = = 
 The mass balance , or difference between accumulation and ablation ( melting and sublimation ) , of a glacier is crucial to its survival . Climate change may cause variations in both temperature and snowfall , resulting in changes in mass balance . A glacier with a sustained negative balance loses equilibrium and retreats . A sustained positive balance is also out of equilibrium and will advance to reestablish equilibrium . Currently , nearly all glaciers have a negative mass balance and are retreating . 
 Glacier retreat results in the loss of the low @-@ elevation region of the glacier . Since higher elevations are cooler , the disappearance of the lowest portion decreases overall ablation , thereby increasing mass balance and potentially reestablishing equilibrium . If the mass balance of a significant portion of the accumulation zone of the glacier is negative , it is in disequilibrium with the climate and will melt away without a colder climate and or an increase in frozen precipitation . 
 Methods for measuring retreat include staking terminus location , global positioning mapping , aerial mapping and laser altimetry . The key symptom of disequilibrium is thinning along the entire length of the glacier . This indicates a diminishment of the accumulation zone . The result is marginal recession of the accumulation zone margin , not just of the terminus . In effect , the glacier no longer has a consistent accumulation zone and without an accumulation zone cannot survive . For example , Easton Glacier in Washington state , U.S. will likely shrink to half its size but at a slowing rate of reduction and stabilize at that size despite the warmer temperature over a few decades . However , the Grinnell Glacier in Montana , U.S. will shrink at an increasing rate until it disappears . The difference is that the upper section of Easton Glacier remains healthy and snow @-@ covered , while even the upper section of the Grinnell Glacier is bare , is melting and has thinned . Small glaciers with minimal altitude range are most likely to fall into disequilibrium with the climate . 
 = = Middle latitude glaciers = = 
 Middle latitude glaciers are located either between the Tropic of Cancer and the Arctic Circle , or between the Tropic of Capricorn and the Antarctic Circle . Both areas support glacier ice from mountain glaciers , valley glaciers and even smaller icecaps , which are usually located in higher mountainous regions . All are located in mountain ranges , notably the Himalayas ; the Alps ; the Pyrenees ; Rocky Mountains and Pacific Coast Ranges of North America ; the Patagonian Andes in South America ; and mountain ranges in New Zealand . Glaciers in these latitudes are more widespread and tend to be greater in mass the closer they are to the polar regions . They are the most widely studied over the past 150 years . As with examples located in the tropical zone , virtually all the glaciers in the mid @-@ latitudes are in a state of negative mass balance and are retreating . 
 = = = Eastern hemisphere = = = 
 = = = = Europe = = = = 
 In France all six of the major glaciers in that country are in retreat . On Mont Blanc , the highest peak in the Alps , the Argentière Glacier has receded 1 @,@ 150 m ( 3 @,@ 770 ft ) since 1870 . Other Mont Blanc glaciers have also been in retreat , including the Mer de Glace , which is the largest glacier in France at 12 km ( 7 @.@ 5 mi ) in length but retreated 500 m ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) between 1994 and 2008 . The glacier has retreated 2 @,@ 300 m ( 7 @,@ 500 ft ) since the end of the Little Ice Age . The Bossons Glacier once extended from the summit of Mont Blanc at 4 @,@ 807 m ( 15 @,@ 771 ft ) to an elevation of 1 @,@ 050 m ( 3 @,@ 440 ft ) in 1900 . By 2008 Bossons Glacier had retreated to a point that was 1 @,@ 400 m ( 4 @,@ 600 ft ) above sea level . 
 Other researchers have found that glaciers across the Alps appear to be retreating at a faster rate than a few decades ago . In a paper published in 2009 by the University of Zurich , the Swiss glacier survey of 89 glaciers found 76 retreating , 5 stationary and 8 advancing from where they had been in 1973 . The <unk> Glacier had the greatest recorded retreat , losing 350 m ( 1 @,@ 150 ft ) of its length between the years 2003 and 2005 . The Grosser Aletsch Glacier is the largest glacier in Switzerland and has been studied since the late 19th century . Aletsch Glacier retreated 2 @.@ 8 km ( 1 @.@ 7 mi ) from 1880 to 2009 . This rate of retreat has also increased since 1980 , with 30 % , or 800 m ( 2 @,@ 600 ft ) , of the total retreat occurring in the last 20 % of the time period . 
 The <unk> Glacier in Switzerland has had one of the longest periods of scientific study with yearly measurements of the glacier 's length commencing in 1878 . The overall retreat from 1878 to 1998 has been 2 km ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) with a mean annual retreat rate of approximately 17 m ( 56 ft ) per year . This long @-@ term average was markedly surpassed in recent years with the glacier receding 30 m ( 98 ft ) per year during the period between 1999 – 2005 . Similarly , of the glaciers in the Italian Alps , only about a third were in retreat in 1980 , while by 1999 , 89 % of these glaciers were retreating . In 2005 , the Italian Glacier Commission found that 123 glaciers in Lombardy were retreating . A random study of the <unk> Glacier in the Italian Alps indicated that the rate of retreat from 2002 to 2006 was much higher than in the preceding 35 years . To study glaciers located in the alpine regions of Lombardy , researchers compared a series of aerial and ground images taken from the 1950s through the early 21st century and deduced that between the years 1954 @-@ 2003 the mostly smaller glaciers found there lost more than half of their area . Repeat photography of glaciers in the Alps indicates that there as been significant retreat since studies commenced . 
 Though the glaciers of the Alps have received more attention from glaciologists than in other areas of Europe , research indicates that glaciers in northern Europe are also retreating . Since the end of World War II , <unk> in Sweden has undergone the longest continuous mass balance study in the world conducted from the <unk> research station . In the <unk> Mountains of northern Sweden , a study of 16 glaciers between 1990 and 2001 found that 14 glaciers were retreating , one was advancing and one was stable . In Norway , glacier studies have been performed since the early 19th century , with systematic surveys undertaken regularly since the 1990s . Inland glaciers have had a generally negative mass balance , whereby during the 1990s , maritime glaciers showed a positive mass balance and advanced . The maritime advances have been attributed to heavy snowfall in the period 1989 @-@ 1995 . However , reduced snowfall since has caused most Norwegian glaciers to retreat significantly . A survey of 31 Norwegian glaciers in 2010 indicated that 27 were in retreat , one had no change and three advanced . Similarly , in 2013 , of 33 Norwegian glaciers surveyed , 26 were retreating , four showed no change and three advanced . 
 <unk> Glacier in Norway , an outlet glacier of the <unk> ice cap , had several advances in the 20th century , though it retreated 200 m ( 660 ft ) between 1999 and 2014 . <unk> glacier retreated 56 m ( 184 ft ) between the years 2000 and 2014 , while the <unk> glacier , which has retreated 2 km ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) since the end of the Little Ice Age , retreated 200 m ( 660 ft ) between 1997 @-@ 2007 . The Briksdalsbreen glacier retreated 230 m ( 750 ft ) between 1996 and 2004 with 130 m ( 430 ft ) of that in the last year of that study ; the greatest annual retreat recorded on that glacier since studies began there in 1900 . This figure was exceeded in 2006 with five glaciers retreating over 100 m ( 330 ft ) from the fall of 2005 to the fall of 2006 . Four outlets from the <unk> ice cap , the largest body of ice in continental Europe , <unk> , <unk> , Briksdalsbreen and <unk> had a frontal retreat of more than 100 m ( 330 ft ) . Overall , from 1999 to 2005 , Briksdalsbreen retreated 336 metres ( 1 @,@ 102 ft ) . <unk> , an outlet glacier of the Folgefonna ice cap , had a retreat of almost 100 m ( 330 ft ) . 
 In the Spanish Pyrenees , recent studies have shown important losses in extent and volume of the glaciers of the <unk> massif during the period 1981 – 2005 . These include a reduction in area of 35 @.@ 7 % , from 2 @.@ 41 km2 ( 600 acres ) to 0 @.@ 627 km2 ( 155 acres ) , a loss in total ice volume of 0 @.@ <unk> km3 ( 0 @.@ 0033 cu mi ) and an increase in the mean altitude of the glacial termini of 43 @.@ 5 m ( 143 ft ) . For the Pyrenees as a whole 50 – 60 % of the glaciated area has been lost since 1991 . The <unk> , <unk> and La <unk> glaciers have disappeared in this period . Monte Perdido Glacier has shrunk from 90 hectares to 40 hectares . 
 As initial cause for glacier retreat in the alps since 1850 , a decrease of the glaciers albedo , caused by industrial black carbon can be identified . According to a report , this may have accelerated the retreat of glaciers in Europe which otherwise may have continued to expand until approximately the year 1910 . 
 = = = = Siberia and the Russian Far East = = = = 
 Siberia is typically classified as a polar region , owing to the dryness of the winter climate and has glaciers only in the high Altai Mountains , Verkhoyansk Range , <unk> Range and <unk> @-@ <unk> Range , plus possibly a few very small glaciers in the ranges near Lake Baikal , which have never been monitored and may have completely disappeared since 1989 . Between the years 1952 and 2006 , the glaciers found in the <unk> Basin region shrank by 7 @.@ 2 percent . This shrinkage has been primarily in the ablation zone of the glaciers , with recession of several hundred meters being observed for some glaciers . The Altai region has also experienced an overall temperature increase of 1 @.@ 2 degrees Celsius in the last 120 years according to a report from 2006 , with most of that increase occurring since the late 20th century . 
 In the more maritime and generally wetter Russian Far East , Kamchatka , exposed during winter to moisture from the Aleutian Low , has much more extensive glaciation totaling around 906 km2 ( 350 sq mi ) with 448 known glaciers as of 2010 . Despite generally heavy winter snowfall and cool summer temperatures , the high summer rainfall of the more southerly Kuril Islands and Sakhalin in historic times melt rates have been too high for a positive mass balance even on the highest peaks . In the <unk> Peninsula small alpine glaciers are numerous , but the extent of glaciation , though larger than further west , is much smaller than in Kamchatka , totalling around 300 square kilometres ( 120 sq mi ) . 
 Details on the retreat of Siberian and Russian Far East glaciers less adequate than in most other glaciated areas of the world . There are several reasons for this , the principal one being that since the collapse of Communism there has been a large reduction in the number of monitoring stations . Another factor is that in the Verkhoyansk and <unk> Ranges it was thought glaciers were absent before they were discovered during the 1940s , whilst in ultra @-@ remote Kamchatka and Chukotka , although the existence of glaciers was known earlier , monitoring of their size dates back no earlier than the end of World War II . Nonetheless , available records do indicate a general retreat of all glaciers in the Altai Mountains with the exception of volcanic glaciers in Kamchatka . Sakha ’ s glaciers , totaling seventy square kilometers , have shrunk by around 28 percent since 1945 reaching several percent annually in some places , whilst in the Altai and <unk> mountains and non @-@ volcanic areas of Kamchatka , the shrinkage is considerably larger . 
 = = = = Asia = = = = 
 The Himalayas and other mountain chains of central Asia support large glaciated regions . An estimated 15 @,@ 000 glaciers can be found in the greater Himalayas , with double that number in the Hindu Kush and Karakoram and Tien Shan ranges , and comprise the largest glaciated region outside the poles . These glaciers provide critical water supplies to arid countries such as Mongolia , western China , Pakistan , Afghanistan and India . As with glaciers worldwide , those of the greater Himalayan region are experiencing a decline in mass , and researchers claim that between the early 1970s and early 2000s , there had been a 9 percent reduction in ice mass . Change in temperature has led to melting and the formation and expansion of glacial lakes which could cause an increase in the number of glacial lake outburst floods ( GLOFs ) . If the present trends persist the ice mass will gradually be reduced , and will affect the availability of water resources , though water loss is not expected to cause problems for many decades . 
 In the Wakhan Corridor of Afghanistan 28 of 30 glaciers examined retreated significantly between 1976 – 2003 , with an average retreat of 11 m ( 36 ft ) per year . One of these glaciers , the <unk> Glacier , retreated 460 m ( 1 @,@ 510 ft ) during this period , not quite 10 % of its 5 @.@ 2 km ( 3 @.@ 2 mi ) length . In examining 612 glaciers in China between 1950 and 1970 , 53 % of the glaciers studied were retreating . After 1990 , 95 % of these glaciers were measured to be retreating , indicating that retreat of these glaciers was becoming more widespread . Glaciers in the Mount Everest region of the Himalayas are all in a state of retreat . The <unk> Glacier , draining the north side of Mount Everest into Tibet , has been retreating 20 m ( 66 ft ) per year . In the Khumbu region of Nepal along the front of the main Himalaya of 15 glaciers examined from 1976 – 2007 all retreated significantly and the average retreat was 28 m ( 92 ft ) per year . The most famous of these , the Khumbu Glacier , retreated at a rate of 18 m ( 59 ft ) per year from 1976 – 2007 . In India , the Gangotri Glacier retreated 1 @,@ 147 m ( 3 @,@ 763 ft ) between the years 1936 and 1996 with 850 m ( 2 @,@ 790 ft ) of that retreat occurring in the last 25 years of the 20th century . However , the glacier is still over 30 km ( 19 mi ) long . In Sikkim , 26 glaciers examined between the years 1976 and 2005 were retreating at an average rate of 13 @.@ 02 m ( 42 @.@ 7 ft ) per year . Overall , glaciers in the Greater Himalayan region that have been studied are retreating an average of between 18 and 20 m ( 59 and 66 ft ) annually . The only region in the Greater Himalaya that has seen glacial advances is in the Karakoram Range and only in the highest elevation glaciers , but this has been attributed possibly increased precipitation as well as to the correlating glacial surges , where the glacier tongue advances due to pressure build up from snow and ice accumulation further up the glacier . Between the years 1997 and 2001 , 68 km ( 42 mi ) long Biafo Glacier thickened 10 to 25 m ( 33 to 82 ft ) mid @-@ glacier , however it did not advance . 
 With the retreat of glaciers in the Himalayas , a number of glacial lakes have been created . A growing concern is the potential for GLOFs researchers estimate 21 glacial lakes in Nepal and 24 in Bhutan pose hazards to human populations should their terminal moraines fail . One glacial lake identified as potentially hazardous is Bhutan 's <unk> Tsho , which measured 1 @.@ 6 km ( 0 @.@ 99 mi ) long , 0 @.@ 96 km ( 0 @.@ 60 mi ) wide and 80 m ( 260 ft ) deep in 1986 . By 1995 the lake had swollen to a length of 1 @.@ 94 km ( 1 @.@ 21 mi ) , 1 @.@ 13 km ( 0 @.@ 70 mi ) in width and a depth of 107 m ( 351 ft ) . In 1994 a GLOF from <unk> Tsho , a glacial lake adjacent to <unk> Tsho , killed 23 people downstream . 
 Glaciers in the Ak @-@ <unk> Range in Kyrgyzstan experienced a slight loss between 1943 and 1977 and an accelerated loss of 20 % of their remaining mass between 1977 and 2001 . In the Tien Shan mountains , which Kyrgyzstan shares with China and Kazakhstan , studies in the northern areas of that mountain range show that the glaciers that help supply water to this arid region , lost nearly 2 km3 ( 0 @.@ 48 cu mi ) of ice per year between 1955 and 2000 . The University of Oxford study also reported that an average of 1 @.@ 28 % of the volume of these glaciers had been lost per year between 1974 and 1990 . 
 The Pamirs mountain range located primarily in Tajikistan , has approximately eight thousand glaciers , many of which are in a general state of retreat . During the 20th century , the glaciers of Tajikistan lost 20 km3 ( 4 @.@ 8 cu mi ) of ice . The 70 km ( 43 mi ) long <unk> Glacier , which is the largest in Tajikistan and the largest non @-@ polar glacier on Earth , retreated 1 km ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) between the years 1933 and 2006 , and lost 44 km2 ( 17 sq mi ) of its surface area due to shrinkage between the years 1966 and 2000 . Tajikistan and neighboring countries of the Pamir Range are highly dependent upon glacial runoff to ensure river flow during droughts and the dry seasons experienced every year . The continued demise of glacier ice will result in a short @-@ term increase , followed by a long @-@ term decrease in glacial melt water flowing into rivers and streams . 
 = = = = Oceania = = = = 
 In New Zealand , mountain glaciers have been in general retreat since 1890 , with an acceleration since 1920 . Most have measurably thinned and reduced in size , and the snow accumulation zones have risen in elevation as the 20th century progressed . Between 1971 – 75 Ivory Glacier receded 30 m ( 98 ft ) from the glacial terminus , and about 26 % of its surface area was lost . Since 1980 numerous small glacial lakes formed behind the new terminal moraines of several of these glaciers . Glaciers such as Classen , Godley and Douglas now all have new glacial lakes below their terminal locations due to the glacial retreat over the past 20 years . Satellite imagery indicates that these lakes are continuing to expand . There has been significant and ongoing ice volume losses on the largest New Zealand glaciers , including the Tasman , Ivory , Classen , Mueller , Maud , Hooker , Grey , Godley , Ramsay , Murchison , <unk> , Volta and Douglas Glaciers . The retreat of these glaciers has been marked by expanding proglacial lakes and terminus region thinning . The loss in Southern Alps total ice volume from 1976 – 2014 is 34 percent of the total . 
 Several glaciers , notably the much @-@ visited Fox and Franz Josef Glaciers on New Zealand 's West Coast , have periodically advanced , especially during the 1990s , but the scale of these advances is small when compared to 20th @-@ century retreat . Both are more than 2 @.@ 5 km ( 1 @.@ 6 mi ) shorter than a century ago . These large , rapidly flowing glaciers situated on steep slopes have been very reactive to small mass @-@ balance changes . A few years of conditions favorable to glacier advance , such as more westerly winds and a resulting increase in snowfall , are rapidly echoed in a corresponding advance , followed by equally rapid retreat when those favorable conditions end . The glaciers that have been advancing in a few locations in New Zealand have been doing so due to transient local weather conditions , which have brought more precipitation and cloudier , cooler summers since 2002 . 
 = = = Western hemisphere = = = 
 North American glaciers are primarily located along the spine of the Rocky Mountains in the United States and Canada , and the Pacific Coast Ranges extending from northern California to Alaska . While Greenland is geologically associated with North America , it is also a part of the Arctic region . Apart from the few tidewater glaciers such as Taku Glacier , in the advance stage of their tidewater glacier cycle prevalent along the coast of Alaska , virtually all of those in North America are in a state of retreat . This rate has increased rapidly since around 1980 , and overall each decade since has seen greater rates of retreat than the preceding one . There are also small remnant glaciers scattered throughout the Sierra Nevada mountains of California and Nevada . 
 = = = = Cascade Range = = = = 
 The Cascade Range of western North America extends from southern British Columbia in Canada to northern California . Excepting Alaska , about half of the glacial area in the U.S. is contained within the over 700 glaciers of the North Cascades , a portion of those located between the Canadian border and I @-@ 90 in central Washington . These contain much water as is found in all the lakes and reservoirs in the rest of the state , and provide much of the stream and river flow in the dry summer months , approximating some 870 @,@ 000 m3 ( 1 @,@ 140 @,@ 000 cu yd ) . 
 As recently as 1975 many North Cascade glaciers were advancing due to cooler weather and increased precipitation that occurred from 1944 to 1976 . By 1987 the North Cascade glaciers were retreating and the pace had increased each decade since the mid @-@ 1970s . Between 1984 and 2005 the North Cascade glaciers lost an average of more than 12 @.@ 5 metres ( 41 ft ) in thickness and 20 – 40 percent of their volume . 
 Glaciologists researching the North Cascades found that all 47 monitored glaciers are receding while four glaciers — Spider Glacier , Lewis Glacier , Milk Lake Glacier and David Glacier — have disappeared completely since 1985 . The White Chuck Glacier ( near Glacier Peak ) is a particularly dramatic example . The glacier area shrank from 3 @.@ 1 km2 ( 1 @.@ 2 sq mi ) in 1958 to 0 @.@ 9 km2 ( 0 @.@ 35 sq mi ) by 2002 . Between 1850 and 1950 , the Boulder Glacier on the southeast flank of Mount Baker retreated 8 @,@ 700 feet ( 2 @,@ 700 m ) . William Long of the United States Forest Service observed the glacier beginning to advance due to cooler / wetter weather in 1953 . This was followed by a 743 metres ( 2 @,@ 438 ft ) advance by 1979 . The glacier again retreated 450 m ( 1 @,@ 480 ft ) from 1987 to 2005 , leaving barren terrain behind . This retreat has occurred during a period of reduced winter snowfall and higher summer temperatures . In this region of the Cascades , winter snowpack has declined 25 % since 1946 , and summer temperatures have risen 0 @.@ 7 ° C ( 1 @.@ 2 ° F ) during the same period . The reduced snowpack has occurred despite a small increase in winter precipitation — thus , it reflects warmer winter temperatures leading to rainfall and melting on glaciers even during the winter . As of 2005 , 67 % of the North Cascade glaciers observed are in disequilibrium and will not survive the continuation of the present climate . These glaciers will eventually disappear unless temperatures fall and frozen precipitation increases . The remaining glaciers are expected to stabilize , unless the climate continues to warm , but will be much reduced in size . 
 = = = = U.S. Rocky Mountains = = = = 
 On the sheltered slopes of the highest peaks of Glacier National Park in Montana , the eponymous glaciers are diminishing rapidly . The area of each glacier has been mapped for decades by the National Park Service and the U.S. Geological Survey . Comparing photographs from the mid @-@ 19th century with contemporary images provides ample evidence that they have retreated notably since 1850 . Repeat photography since clearly show that glaciers such as Grinnell Glacier are all retreating . The larger glaciers are now approximately a third of their former size when first studied in 1850 , and numerous smaller glaciers have disappeared completely . Only 27 % of the 99 km2 ( 38 sq mi ) area of Glacier National Park covered by glaciers in 1850 remained covered by 1993 . Researchers believe that by the year 2030 , the vast majority of glacial ice in Glacier National Park will be gone unless current climate patterns reverse their course . Grinnell Glacier is just one of many glaciers in Glacier National Park that have been well documented by photographs for many decades . The photographs below clearly demonstrate the retreat of this glacier since 1938 . 
 The semiarid climate of Wyoming still manages to support about a dozen small glaciers within Grand Teton National Park , which all show evidence of retreat over the past 50 years . <unk> Glacier is located slightly southwest of Grand Teton is one of the more easily reached glaciers in the park and it is expected to disappear by 2025 . Research between 1950 and 1999 demonstrated that the glaciers in Bridger @-@ Teton National Forest and Shoshone National Forest in the Wind River Range shrank by over a third of their size during that period . Photographs indicate that the glaciers today are only half the size as when first photographed in the late 1890s . Research also indicates that the glacial retreat was proportionately greater in the 1990s than in any other decade over the last 100 years . Gannett Glacier on the northeast slope of Gannett Peak is the largest single glacier in the Rocky Mountains south of Canada . It has reportedly lost over 50 % of its volume since 1920 , with almost half of that loss occurring since 1980 . Glaciologists believe the remaining glaciers in Wyoming will disappear by the middle of the 21st century if the current climate patterns continue . 
 = = = = Canadian Rockies and Coast and Columbia Mountains = = = = 
 In the Canadian Rockies , glaciers are generally larger and more widespread than to the south in the Rocky Mountains . One of the more accessible in the Canadian Rockies is the Athabasca Glacier , which is an outlet glacier of the 325 km2 ( 125 sq mi ) Columbia Icefield . The Athabasca Glacier has retreated 1 @,@ 500 m ( 4 @,@ 900 ft ) since the late 19th century . Its rate of retreat has increased since 1980 , following a period of slow retreat from 1950 to 1980 . The Peyto Glacier in Alberta covers an area of about 12 km2 ( 4 @.@ 6 sq mi ) , and retreated rapidly during the first half of the 20th century , stabilized by 1966 , and resumed shrinking in 1976 . 
 The Illecillewaet Glacier in British Columbia 's Glacier National Park ( Canada ) , part of the Selkirk Mountains ( west of the Rockies ) has retreated 2 km ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) since first photographed in 1887 . 
 In Garibaldi Provincial Park in Southwestern British Columbia over 505 km2 ( 195 sq mi ) , or 26 % , of the park , was covered by glacier ice at the beginning of the 18th century . Ice cover decreased to 297 km2 ( 115 sq mi ) by 1987 – 1988 and to 245 km2 ( 95 sq mi ) by 2005 , 50 % of the 1850 area . The 50 km2 ( 19 sq mi ) loss in the last 20 years coincides with negative mass balance in the region . During this period all nine glaciers examined have retreated significantly . 
 = = = = Alaska = = = = 
 There are thousands of glaciers in Alaska but only few have been named . The Columbia Glacier near Valdez in Prince William Sound has retreated 15 km ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) in the last 25 years . Its calved icebergs partially caused the Exxon Valdez oil spill , when the tanker changed course to avoid the ice tips . The Valdez Glacier is in the same area , and though it does not calve , has also retreated significantly . " A 2005 aerial survey of Alaskan coastal glaciers identified more than a dozen glaciers , many former tidewater and calving glaciers , including Grand Plateau , Alsek , Bear , and Excelsior Glaciers that are rapidly retreating . Of 2 @,@ 000 glaciers observed , 99 % are retreating . " Icy Bay in Alaska is fed by three large glaciers — Guyot , <unk> , and Tyndall Glaciers — all of which have experienced a loss in length and thickness and , consequently , a loss in area . Tyndall Glacier became separated from the retreating Guyot Glacier in the 1960s and has retreated 24 km ( 15 mi ) since , averaging more than 500 m ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) per year . 
 The Juneau Icefield Research Program has monitored outlet glaciers of the Juneau Icefield since 1946 . On the west side of the ice field , the terminus of the Mendenhall Glacier , which flows into suburban Juneau , Alaska , has retreated 580 m ( 1 @,@ 900 ft ) . Of the nineteen glaciers of the Juneau Icefield , eighteen are retreating , and one , the Taku Glacier , is advancing . Eleven of the glaciers have retreated more than 1 km ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) since 1948 — Antler Glacier , 5 @.@ 4 km ( 3 @.@ 4 mi ) ; Gilkey Glacier , 3 @.@ 5 km ( 2 @.@ 2 mi ) ; Norris Glacier , 1 @.@ 1 km ( 0 @.@ 68 mi ) and Lemon Creek Glacier , 1 @.@ 5 km ( 0 @.@ 93 mi ) . Taku Glacier has been advancing since at least 1890 , when naturalist John Muir observed a large iceberg calving front . By 1948 the adjacent fjord had filled in , and the glacier no longer calved and was able to continue its advance . By 2005 the glacier was only 1 @.@ 5 km ( 0 @.@ 93 mi ) from reaching Taku Point and blocking Taku Inlet . The advance of Taku Glacier averaged 17 m ( 56 ft ) per year between 1988 and 2005 . The mass balance was very positive for the 1946 – 88 period fueling the advance ; however , since 1988 the mass balance has been slightly negative , which should in the future slow the advance of this mighty glacier . 
 Long @-@ term mass balance records from Lemon Creek Glacier in Alaska show slightly declining mass balance with time . The mean annual balance for this glacier was − 0 @.@ 23 m ( 0 @.@ 75 ft ) each year during the period of 1957 to 1976 . Mean annual balance has been increasingly negatively averaging − 1 @.@ 04 m ( 3 @.@ 4 ft ) per year from 1990 to 2005 . Repeat glacier altimetry , or altitude measuring , for 67 Alaska glaciers find rates of thinning have increased by more than a factor of two when comparing the periods from 1950 to 1995 ( 0 @.@ 7 m ( 2 @.@ 3 ft ) per year ) and 1995 to 2001 ( 1 @.@ 8 m ( 5 @.@ 9 ft ) per year ) . This is a systemic trend with loss in mass equating to loss in thickness , which leads to increasing retreat — the glaciers are not only retreating , but they are also becoming much thinner . In Denali National Park , all glaciers monitored are retreating , with an average retreat of 20 m ( 66 ft ) per year . The terminus of the <unk> Glacier has been retreating 26 m ( 85 ft ) per year and the Muldrow Glacier has thinned 20 m ( 66 ft ) since 1979 . Well documented in Alaska are surging glaciers that have been known to rapidly advance , even as much as 100 m ( 330 ft ) per day . Variegated , Black Rapids , Muldrow , Susitna and <unk> are examples of surging glaciers in Alaska that have made rapid advances in the past . These glaciers are all retreating overall , punctuated by short periods of advance . 
 = = = = Andes and Tierra del Fuego = = = = 
 A large region of population surrounding the central and southern Andes of Argentina and Chile reside in arid areas that are dependent on water supplies from melting glaciers . The water from the glaciers also supplies rivers that have in some cases been dammed for hydroelectric power . Some researchers believe that by 2030 , many of the large ice caps on the highest Andes will be gone if current climate trends continue . In Patagonia on the southern tip of the continent , the large ice caps have retreated a 1 km ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) since the early 1990s and 10 km ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) since the late 19th century . It has also been observed that Patagonian glaciers are receding at a faster rate than in any other world region . The Northern Patagonian Ice Field lost 93 km2 ( 36 sq mi ) of glacier area during the years between 1945 and 1975 , and 174 km2 ( 67 sq mi ) from 1975 to 1996 , which indicates that the rate of retreat is increasing . This represents a loss of 8 % of the ice field , with all glaciers experiencing significant retreat . The Southern Patagonian Ice Field has exhibited a general trend of retreat on 42 glaciers , while four glaciers were in equilibrium and two advanced during the years between 1944 and 1986 . The largest retreat was on O 'Higgins Glacier , which during the period 1896 – 1995 retreated 14 @.@ 6 km ( 9 @.@ 1 mi ) . The Perito Moreno Glacier is 30 km ( 19 mi ) long and is a major outflow glacier of the Patagonian ice sheet , as well as the most visited glacier in Patagonia . Perito Moreno Glacier is in equilibrium , but has undergone frequent oscillations in the period 1947 – 96 , with a net gain of 4 @.@ 1 km ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) . This glacier has advanced since 1947 , and has been essentially stable since 1992 . Perito Moreno Glacier is one of three glaciers in Patagonia known to have advanced , compared to several hundred others in retreat . The two major glaciers of the Southern Patagonia Icefield to the north of Moreno , Upsala and <unk> Glacier have retreated 4 @.@ 6 km ( 2 @.@ 9 mi ) in 21 years and 1 km ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) in 13 years respectively . In the Aconcagua River Basin , glacier retreat has resulted in a 20 % loss in glacier area , declining from 151 km2 ( 58 sq mi ) to 121 km2 ( 47 sq mi ) . The Marinelli Glacier in Tierra del Fuego has been in retreat since at least 1960 through 2008 . 
 = = Tropical glaciers = = 
 Tropical glaciers are located between the Tropic of Cancer and the Tropic of Capricorn , in the region that lies 23 ° 26 ′ 22 ″ north or south of the equator . Strictly , a tropical glacier is located within the astronomical tropics ; the area where the annual temperature variation is less than the daily variation , and is within the oscillation area of the Intertropical Convergence Zone . 
 Tropical glaciers are the most uncommon of all glaciers for a variety of reasons . Firstly , the regions are the warmest part of the planet . Secondly , the seasonal change is minimal with temperatures warm year round , resulting in a lack of a colder winter season in which snow and ice can accumulate . Thirdly , few taller mountains exist in these regions upon which enough cold air exists for the establishment of glaciers . Overall , tropical glaciers are smaller than those found elsewhere and are the most likely glaciers to show rapid response to changing climate patterns . A small temperature increase of only a few degrees can have almost immediate and adverse effect on tropical glaciers . 
 Near the Equator , ice is still found in East Africa , the Andes of South America and New Guinea . The retreat of equatorial glaciers has been documented via maps and photographs covering the period from the late 1800s to nearly the present . 99 @.@ 64 % of tropical glaciers are in Andean mountains of South America , 0 @.@ 25 % on the African glaciers of Rwenzori , Mount Kenya and Kilimanjaro , and 0 @.@ 11 % in the Irian Jaya region in New Guinea . 
 = = = Africa = = = 
 Almost the entirety of Africa is located within tropical and subtropical climate zones . Its glaciers are found only in two isolated ranges and the Ruwenzori Range . Kilimanjaro , at 5 @,@ 895 m ( 19 @,@ 341 ft ) , is the highest peak on the continent . Since 1912 the glacier cover on the summit of Kilimanjaro has apparently retreated 75 % , and the volume of glacial ice is now 80 % less than it was a century ago due to both retreat and thinning . In the 14 @-@ year period from 1984 to 1998 , one section of the glacier atop the mountain receded 300 m ( 980 ft ) . A 2002 study determined that if current conditions continue , the glaciers atop Kilimanjaro will disappear sometime between 2015 and 2020 . A March 2005 report indicated that there is almost no remaining glacial ice on the mountain , and it is the first time in 11 @,@ 000 years that barren ground has been exposed on portions of the summit . Researchers reported Kilimanjaro 's glacier retreat was due to a combination of increased sublimation and decreased snow fall . 
 The Furtwängler Glacier is located near the summit of Kilimanjaro . Between 1976 and 2000 , the area of Furtwängler Glacier was cut almost in half , from 113 @,@ 000 m2 ( 1 @,@ 220 @,@ 000 sq ft ) to 60 @,@ 000 m2 ( 650 @,@ 000 sq ft ) . During fieldwork conducted early in 2006 , scientists discovered a large hole near the center of the glacier . This hole , extending through the 6 m ( 20 ft ) remaining thickness of the glacier to the underlying rock , was expected to grow and split the glacier in two by 2007 . 
 To the north of Kilimanjaro lies Mount Kenya , which at 5 @,@ 199 m ( 17 @,@ 057 ft ) is the second tallest mountain on the continent . Mount Kenya has a number of small glaciers that have lost at least 45 % of their mass since the middle of the 20th century . According to research compiled by the U.S. Geological Survey ( USGS ) , there were eighteen glaciers atop Mount Kenya in 1900 , and by 1986 only eleven remained . The total area covered by glaciers was 1 @.@ 6 km2 ( 0 @.@ 62 sq mi ) in 1900 , however by the year 2000 only about 25 % , or 0 @.@ 4 km2 ( 0 @.@ 15 sq mi ) remained . To the west of Mounts Kilimanjaro and Kenya , the Ruwenzori Range rises to 5 @,@ 109 m ( 16 @,@ 762 ft ) . Photographic evidence indicates a marked reduction in glacially covered areas over the past century . In the 35 @-@ year period between 1955 and 1990 , glaciers on the Rwenzori Mountains receded about 40 % . It is expected that due to their proximity to the heavy moisture of the Congo region , the glaciers in the Ruwenzori Range may recede at a slower rate than those on Kilimanjaro or in Kenya . 
 = = = South America = = = 
 A study by glaciologists of two small glaciers in South America reveals another retreat . More than 80 % of all glacial ice in the northern Andes is concentrated on the highest peaks in small plains of approximately 1 km2 ( 0 @.@ 39 sq mi ) in size . A 1992 to 1998 observation of the Chacaltaya Glacier in Bolivia and <unk> Glacier in Ecuador indicate that between 0 @.@ 6 m ( 2 @.@ 0 ft ) and 1 @.@ 9 m ( 6 @.@ 2 ft ) of ice was lost per year on each glacier . Figures for Chacaltaya show a loss of 67 % of its volume and 40 % of its thickness over the same period . Chacaltaya Glacier has lost 90 % of its mass since 1940 and is expected to disappear altogether sometime between 2010 and 2015 . <unk> is also reported to have lost 40 % of its surface area between 1979 and 2007 . Research also indicates that since the mid @-@ 1980s , the rate of retreat for both of these glaciers has been increasing . In Colombia , the glaciers atop Nevado del Ruiz have lost more than half their area in the last 40 years . Further south in Peru , the Andes are at a higher altitude overall , and there are approximately 722 glaciers covering an area of 723 km2 ( 279 sq mi ) . 
 Research in the region has been less extensive but indicates an overall recline of 7 % between 1977 and 1983 . The Quelccaya Ice Cap is the largest tropical icecap in the world , and all of the outlet glaciers from the icecap are retreating . In the case of <unk> <unk> Glacier , which is one of <unk> ' outlet glaciers , the rate of retreat had reached 155 m ( 509 ft ) per year during the three @-@ year period of 1995 to 1998 . The melting ice has formed a large lake at the front of the glacier since 1983 , and bare ground has been exposed for the first time in thousands of years . 
 = = = Oceania = = = 
 Jan Carstensz 's 1623 report of glaciers covering the equatorial mountains of New Guinea was originally met with ridicule , but in the early 20th century at least five subranges of the <unk> Mountains ( meaning " Snowy Mountains " ) were indeed still found to be covered with large ice caps . Due to the location of the island within the tropical zone , there is little to no seasonal variation in temperature . The tropical location has a predictably steady level of rain and snowfall , as well as cloud cover year round , and there has been no noticeable change in the amount of moisture which has fallen during the 20th century . 
 In 1913 , 4 @,@ 550 m ( 14 @,@ 930 ft ) high Prins Hendrik peaks ( now Puncak Yamin ) was named and reported to have " eternal " snow , but this observation was never repeated . The ice cap of 4 @,@ 720 m ( 15 @,@ 490 ft ) Wilhelmina Peaks , which reached below 4 @,@ 400 m ( 14 @,@ 400 ft ) in 1909 , vanished between 1939 and 1963 . The Mandala / Juliana ice cap disappeared in the <unk> and the Idenburg glacier on <unk> <unk> dried up in 2003 . This leaves only the remnants of the once continuous icecap on New Guinea 's highest mountain , Mount Carstensz with the 4 @,@ 884 m ( 16 @,@ 024 ft ) high Puncak Jaya summit , which is estimated to have had an area of 20 km2 ( 7 @.@ 7 sq mi ) in 1850 . 
 For this mountain there is photographic evidence of massive glacial retreat since the region was first extensively explored by airplane in 1936 in preparation for the peak 's first ascent ( see e.g. [ 1 ] ) . Between then and 2010 , the mountain lost 80 percent of its ice — two @-@ thirds of which since another scientific expedition in the 1970s . That research between 1973 and 1976 showed glacier retreat for the <unk> Glacier of 200 m ( 660 ft ) while the Carstensz Glacier lost 50 m ( 160 ft ) . The Northwall Firn , the largest remnant of the icecap that once was atop Puncak Jaya , has itself split into two separate glaciers after 1942 . <unk> satellite imagery of the New Guinean glaciers indicated that by 2002 only 2 @.@ 1 km2 ( 0 @.@ 81 sq mi ) glacial area remained , that in the two years from 2000 to 2002 , the East Northwall Firn had lost 4 @.@ 5 % , the West Northwall Firn 19 @.@ 4 % and the Carstensz 6 @.@ 8 % of their glacial mass , and that sometime between 1994 and 2000 , the <unk> Glacier had disappeared altogether . An expedition to the remaining glaciers on Puncak Jaya in 2010 discovered that the ice on the glaciers there is about 32 metres ( 105 ft ) thick and thinning at a rate of 7 metres ( 23 ft ) annually . At that rate , the remaining glaciers are expected to last only to the year 2015 . 
 = = Polar regions = = 
 Despite their proximity and importance to human populations , the mountain and valley glaciers of tropical and mid @-@ latitude glaciers amount to only a small fraction of glacial ice on the Earth . About 99 percent of all freshwater ice is in the great ice sheets of polar and subpolar Antarctica and Greenland . These continuous continental @-@ scale ice sheets , 3 km ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) or more in thickness , cap much of the polar and subpolar land masses . Like rivers flowing from an enormous lake , numerous outlet glaciers transport ice from the margins of the ice sheet to the ocean . 
 = = = Iceland = = = 
 The northern Atlantic island nation of Iceland is home to Vatnajökull , which is the largest ice cap in Europe . The <unk> glacier is one of Vatnajökull 's outlet glaciers , and receded by as much as 2 km ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) between 1973 and 2004 . In the early 20th century , <unk> extended to within 250 m ( 820 ft ) of the ocean , but by 2004 its terminus had retreated 3 km ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) further inland . This glacier retreat exposed a rapidly expanding lagoon , <unk> , which is filled with icebergs calved from its front . <unk> is 110 m ( 360 ft ) deep and nearly doubled its size between 1994 and 2004 . Mass @-@ balance measurements of Iceland 's glaciers show alternating positive and negative mass balance of glaciers during the period 1987 – 95 , but the mass balance has been predominantly negative since . On <unk> ice cap , mass balance has been negative each year from 1995 – 2005 . 
 Most of the Icelandic glaciers retreated rapidly during the warm decades from 1930 to 1960 , slowing down as the climate cooled during the following decade , and started to advance after 1970 . The rate of advance peaked in the 1980s , after which it slowed down until about 1990 . As a consequence of rapid warming of the climate that has taken place since the mid @-@ 1980s , most glaciers in Iceland began to retreat after 1990 , and by 2000 all monitored non @-@ surge type glaciers in Iceland were retreating . An average of 45 non @-@ surging termini were monitored each year by the Icelandic <unk> Society from 2000 – 2005 . 
 = = = Canada = = = 
 The Canadian Arctic islands contain the largest area and volume of land ice on Earth outside of the Greenland and Antarctic Ice Sheets and is home to a number of substantial ice caps , including Penny and Barnes ice caps on Baffin Island , Bylot Ice Cap on Bylot Island , and Devon Ice Cap on Devon Island . Glaciers in the Canadian Arctic were near equilibrium between 1960 and 2000 , losing 23 Gt of ice per year between 1995 and 2000 . Since this time , Canadian Arctic glaciers have experienced a sharp increase in mass loss in response to warmer summer temperature , losing 92 Gt per year between 2007 and 2009 . 
 Other studies show that between 1960 and 1999 , the Devon Ice Cap lost 67 km3 ( 16 cu mi ) of ice , mainly through thinning . All major outlet glaciers along the eastern Devon Ice Cap margin have retreated from 1 km ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) to 3 km ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) since 1960 . On the Hazen Plateau of Ellesmere Island , the Simmon Ice Cap has lost 47 % of its area since 1959 . If the current climatic conditions continue , the remaining glacial ice on the Hazen Plateau will be gone around 2050 . On August 13 , 2005 , the <unk> Ice Shelf broke free from the north coast of Ellesmere Island . The 66 km2 ( 25 sq mi ) ice shelf drifted into the Arctic Ocean . This followed the splitting of the Ward Hunt Ice Shelf in 2002 . The Ward Hunt has lost 90 % of its area in the last century . 
 = = = Northern Europe = = = 
 Arctic islands north of Norway , Finland and Russia have all shown evidence of glacier retreat . In the Svalbard archipelago , the island of Spitsbergen has numerous glaciers . Research indicates that <unk> ( Hans Glacier ) on Spitsbergen retreated 1 @.@ 4 km ( 0 @.@ 87 mi ) from 1936 to 1982 and another 400 m ( 1 @,@ 300 ft ) during the 16 @-@ year period from 1982 to 1998 . <unk> , a glacier in the King 's Bay area of Spitsbergen , has retreated approximately 2 km ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) in the past 80 years . Since 1960 the average retreat of <unk> has been about 35 m ( 115 ft ) a year , and this average was enhanced due to an accelerated rate of retreat since 1995 . Similarly , <unk> <unk> retreated 200 m ( 660 ft ) between 1977 and 1995 . In the Novaya Zemlya archipelago north of Russia , research indicates that in 1952 there was 208 km ( 129 mi ) of glacier ice along the coast . By 1993 this had been reduced by 8 % to 198 km ( 123 mi ) of glacier coastline . 
 = = = Greenland = = = 
 In Greenland , glacier retreat has been observed in outlet glaciers , resulting in an increase of the ice flow rate and destabilization of the mass balance of the ice sheet that is their source . The net loss in volume and hence sea level contribution of the Greenland Ice Sheet ( GIS ) has doubled in recent years from 90 km3 ( 22 cu mi ) to 220 km3 ( 53 cu mi ) per year . Researchers also noted that the acceleration was widespread affecting almost all glaciers south of 70 N by 2005 . The period since 2000 has brought retreat to several very large glaciers that had long been stable . Three glaciers that have been researched — Helheim Glacier , Kangerdlugssuaq Glacier , and <unk> <unk> — jointly drain more than 16 % of the Greenland Ice Sheet . In the case of Helheim Glacier , researchers used satellite images to determine the movement and retreat of the glacier . Satellite images and aerial photographs from the 1950s and 1970s show that the front of the glacier had remained in the same place for decades . In 2001 the glacier began retreating rapidly , and by 2005 the glacier had retreated a total of 7 @.@ 2 km ( 4 @.@ 5 mi ) , accelerating from 20 m ( 66 ft ) per day to 35 m ( 115 ft ) per day during that period . 
 <unk> <unk> in west Greenland , a major outlet glacier of the Greenland Ice Sheet , has been the fastest moving glacier in the world over the past half century . It had been moving continuously at speeds of over 24 m ( 79 ft ) per day with a stable terminus since at least 1950 . In 2002 the 12 km ( 7 @.@ 5 mi ) long floating terminus of the glacier entered a phase of rapid retreat , with the ice front breaking up and the floating terminus disintegrating and accelerating to a retreat rate of over 30 m ( 98 ft ) per day . On a shorter timescale , portions of the main trunk of Kangerdlugssuaq Glacier that were flowing at 15 m ( 49 ft ) per day from 1988 to 2001 were measured to be flowing at 40 m ( 130 ft ) per day in the summer of 2005 . Not only has Kangerdlugssuaq retreated , it has also thinned by more than 100 m ( 330 ft ) . 
 The rapid thinning , acceleration and retreat of Helheim , <unk> and Kangerdlugssuaq glaciers in Greenland , all in close association with one another , suggests a common triggering mechanism , such as enhanced surface melting due to regional climate warming or a change in forces at the glacier front . The enhanced melting leading to lubrication of the glacier base has been observed to cause a small seasonal velocity increase and the release of meltwater lakes has also led to only small short term accelerations . The significant accelerations noted on the three largest glaciers began at the calving front and propagated inland and are not seasonal in nature . Thus , the primary source of outlet glacier acceleration widely observed on small and large calving glaciers in Greenland is driven by changes in dynamic forces at the glacier front , not enhanced meltwater lubrication . This was termed the <unk> Effect by Terence Hughes at the University of Maine in 1986 . Indeed , a study published in 2015 on glacial underwater topography at 3 sites found cavities , due to warm subglacial water intrusion , which has been identified as a possible dominant force for ablation ( surface erosion ) . Thus , suggests ocean temperature controls ice sheet surface runoff at specific sites . These findings also show that models underestimate the sensitivity of Greenland glaciers to ocean warming and resulting ice sheet runoff . Hence , without better modelling , new observations suggest that past projections of sea level rise attribution from the Greenland Ice Sheet require upward revision . 
 = = = Antarctica = = = 
 Antarctica is <unk> cold and arid . Most of the world 's freshwater ice is contained within its sheets . Its most dramatic example of glacier retreat is the loss of large sections of the Larsen Ice Shelf on the Antarctic Peninsula . The recent collapse of Wordie Ice Shelf , Prince Gustav Ice Shelf , Mueller Ice Shelf , Jones Ice Shelf , Larsen @-@ A and Larsen @-@ B Ice Shelf on the Antarctic Peninsula has raised awareness of how dynamic ice shelf systems are . 
 The Antarctic sheet is the largest known single mass of ice . It covers almost 14 million km2 and some 30 million km3 of ice . Around 90 % of the fresh water on the planet 's surface is held in this area and if melted would raise sea levels by 58 metres . The continent @-@ wide average surface temperature trend of Antarctica is positive and significant at > 0 @.@ 05 ° C / decade since 1957 . 
 The Antarctic sheet is divided by the Transantarctic Mountains into two unequal sections known as the East Antarctic ice sheet ( EAIS ) and the smaller West Antarctic Ice Sheet ( WAIS ) . The EAIS rests on a major land mass but the bed of the WAIS is , in places , more than 2 @,@ 500 metres below sea level . It would be seabed if the ice sheet were not there . The WAIS is classified as a marine @-@ based ice sheet , meaning that its bed lies below sea level and its edges flow into floating ice shelves . The WAIS is bounded by the Ross Ice Shelf , the <unk> Ice Shelf , and outlet glaciers that drain into the Amundsen Sea . 
 Ice shelves are not stable when surface melting occurs , and the collapse of Larsen Ice Shelf has been caused by warmer melt season temperatures that have led to surface melting and the formation of shallow ponds of water on the ice shelf . The Larsen Ice Shelf lost 2 @,@ 500 km2 ( 970 sq mi ) of its area from 1995 to 2001 . In a 35 @-@ day period beginning on January 31 , 2002 , about 3 @,@ 250 km2 ( 1 @,@ 250 sq mi ) of shelf area disintegrated . The ice shelf is now 40 % the size of its previous minimum stable extent . In 2015 a study concluded that the remaining Larsen B ice @-@ shelf will disintegrate by the end of the decade , based on observations of faster flow and rapid thinning of glaciers in the area . Jones Ice Shelf had an area of 35 km2 ( 14 sq mi ) in the 1970s but by 2008 it had disappeared . Wordie Ice Shelf has gone from an area of 1 @,@ 500 km2 ( 580 sq mi ) in 1950 to 1 @,@ 400 km2 ( 540 sq mi ) in 2000 . Prince Gustav Ice Shelf has gone from an area of 1 @,@ 600 km2 ( 620 sq mi ) to 1 @,@ 100 km2 ( 420 sq mi ) in 2008 . After their loss the reduced buttressing of feeder glaciers has allowed the expected speed @-@ up of inland ice masses after shelf ice break @-@ up . The Ross Ice Shelf is the largest ice shelf of Antarctica ( an area of roughly 487 @,@ 000 square kilometres ( 188 @,@ 000 sq mi ) and about 800 kilometres ( 500 mi ) across : about the size of France ) . Wilkins Ice Shelf is another ice shelf that has suffered substantial retreat . The ice shelf had an area of 16 @,@ 000 km2 ( 6 @,@ 200 sq mi ) in 1998 when 1 @,@ 000 km2 ( 390 sq mi ) was lost that year . In 2007 and 2008 significant rifting developed and led to the loss of another 1 @,@ 400 km2 ( 540 sq mi ) of area and some of the calving occurred in the Austral winter . The calving seemed to have resulted from preconditioning such as thinning , possibly due to basal melt , as surface melt was not as evident , leading to a reduction in the strength of the pinning point connections . The thinner ice then experienced spreading rifts and breakup . This period culminated in the collapse of an ice bridge connecting the main ice shelf to Charcot Island leading to the loss of an additional 700 km2 ( 270 sq mi ) between February and June 2009 . 
 Dakshin Gangotri Glacier , a small outlet glacier of the Antarctic ice sheet , receded at an average rate of 0 @.@ 7 m ( 2 @.@ 3 ft ) per year from 1983 to 2002 . On the Antarctic Peninsula , which is the only section of Antarctica that extends well north of the Antarctic Circle , there are hundreds of retreating glaciers . In one study of 244 glaciers on the peninsula , 212 have retreated an average of 600 m ( 2 @,@ 000 ft ) from where they were when first measured in 1953 . Pine Island Glacier , an Antarctic outflow glacier that flows into the Amundsen Sea . A study from 1998 concluded that the glacier thinned 3 @.@ 5 m ( 11 ft ) ± 0 @.@ 9 m ( 3 @.@ 0 ft ) per year and retreated a total of 5 km ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) in 3 @.@ 8 years . The terminus of the Pine Island Glacier is a floating ice shelf , and the point at which it starts to float retreated 1 @.@ 2 km ( 0 @.@ 75 mi ) per year from 1992 to 1996 . This glacier drains a substantial portion of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet . 
 A study published in 2014 found , rapid grounding line retreat in the years 1992 @-@ 2011 . Based on a study from 2005 , the greatest retreat was seen in Sjogren Glacier , which is now 13 km ( 8 @.@ 1 mi ) further inland than where it was in 1953 . There are 32 glaciers that were measured to have advanced ; however , these glaciers showed only a modest advance averaging 300 m ( 980 ft ) per glacier , which is significantly smaller than the massive retreat observed . Thwaites Glacier , which has also shown evidence of thinning , has been referred to as the weak underbelly of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet . A study published in 2014 found rapid grounding line retreat in the years 1992 @-@ 2011 . Totten Glacier , is a large glacier draining a major portion of the East Antarctic Ice Sheet . A study in 2008 concluded that Totten Glacier is currently losing mass . A study published in 2015 concluded that Totten Glacier , has the largest contribution of ice thinning rate on the East Antarctic continent , and that the thinning is driven by enhanced basal melting , because of ocean processes , and affected by <unk> activity . Additionally , warm Circumpolar Deep Water , has been observed during summer and winter months at the nearby continental shelf below 400 to 500 meters of cool Antarctic Surface Water . 
 = = Effects of glacier retreat = = 
 The continued retreat of glaciers will have a number of different quantitative effects . In areas that are heavily dependent on water runoff from glaciers that melt during the warmer summer months , a continuation of the current retreat will eventually deplete the glacial ice and substantially reduce or eliminate runoff . A reduction in runoff will affect the ability to irrigate crops and will reduce summer stream flows necessary to keep dams and reservoirs replenished . This situation is particularly acute for irrigation in South America , where numerous artificial lakes are filled almost exclusively by glacial melt . Central Asian countries have also been historically dependent on the seasonal glacier melt water for irrigation and drinking supplies . In Norway , the Alps , and the Pacific Northwest of North America , glacier runoff is important for hydropower . 
 Some of this retreat has resulted in efforts to slow down the loss of glaciers in the Alps . To retard melting of the glaciers used by certain Austrian ski resorts , portions of the <unk> and <unk> Glaciers were partially covered with plastic . In Switzerland plastic sheeting is also used to reduce the melt of glacial ice used as ski slopes . While covering glaciers with plastic sheeting may prove advantageous to ski resorts on a small scale , this practice is not expected to be economically practical on a much larger scale . 
 Many species of freshwater and saltwater plants and animals are dependent on glacier @-@ fed waters to ensure the cold water habitat to which they have adapted . Some species of freshwater fish need cold water to survive and to reproduce , and this is especially true with salmon and cutthroat trout . Reduced glacial runoff can lead to insufficient stream flow to allow these species to thrive . Alterations to the ocean currents , due to increased freshwater inputs from glacier melt , and the potential alterations to thermohaline circulation of the World Ocean , may affect existing fisheries upon which humans depend as well . 
 One major concern is the increased risk of Glacial Lake Outburst Floods ( GLOF ) , which have in the past had great effect on lives and property . Glacier meltwater left behind by the retreating glacier is often held back by moraines that can be unstable and have been known to collapse if breached or displaced by earthquakes , landslides or avalanches . If the terminal moraine is not strong enough to hold the rising water behind it , it can burst , leading to a massive localized flood . The likelihood of such events is rising due to the creation and expansion of glacial lakes resulting from glacier retreat . Past floods have been deadly and have resulted in enormous property damage . Towns and villages in steep , narrow valleys that are downstream from glacial lakes are at the greatest risk . In 1892 a GLOF released some 200 @,@ 000 m3 ( 260 @,@ 000 cu yd ) of water from the lake of the Glacier de Tête Rousse , resulting in the deaths of 200 people in the French town of Saint @-@ Gervais @-@ les @-@ Bains . GLOFs have been known to occur in every region of the world where glaciers are located . Continued glacier retreat is expected to create and expand glacial lakes , increasing the danger of future GLOFs . 
 The potential for major sea level rise depends mostly on a significant melting of the polar ice caps of Greenland and Antarctica , as this is where the vast majority of glacial ice is located . If all the ice on the polar ice caps were to melt away , the oceans of the world would rise an estimated 70 m ( 230 ft ) . Although previously it was thought that the polar ice caps were not contributing heavily to sea level rise ( IPCC 2007 ) , recent studies have confirmed that both Antarctica and Greenland are contributing 0 @.@ 5 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 020 in ) a year each to global sea level rise . The fact that the IPCC estimates did not include rapid ice sheet decay into their sea level predictions makes it difficult to ascertain a plausible estimate for sea level rise but recent studies find that the minimum sea level rise will be around 0 @.@ 8 metres ( 2 @.@ 6 ft ) by 2100 . 
 = Livermorium = 
 Livermorium is a synthetic superheavy element with symbol Lv and atomic number 116 . It is an extremely radioactive element that has only been created in the laboratory and has not been observed in nature . The element is named after the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in the United States , which collaborated with the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research in Dubna , Russia to discover livermorium in 2000 . The name of the laboratory honors the city of Livermore , California where it is located , which in turn was named after the rancher and landowner Robert Livermore . The name was adopted by IUPAC on May 30 , 2012 . Four isotopes of livermorium are known , with mass numbers between 290 and 293 inclusive ; the longest @-@ lived among them is livermorium @-@ 293 with a half @-@ life of about 60 milliseconds . 
 In the periodic table , it is a p @-@ block transactinide element . It is a member of the 7th period and is placed in group 16 as the heaviest chalcogen , although it has not been confirmed to behave as the heavier homologue to the chalcogen polonium . Livermorium is calculated to have some similar properties to its lighter homologues ( oxygen , sulfur , selenium , tellurium , and polonium ) , although it should also show several major differences from them . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Unsuccessful synthesis attempts = = = 
 In late 1998 , Polish physicist Robert <unk> published calculations on the fusion of atomic nuclei towards the synthesis of superheavy atoms , including ununoctium and livermorium . His calculations suggested that it might be possible to make these two elements by fusing lead with krypton under carefully controlled conditions . 
 In 1999 , researchers at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory made use of these predictions and announced the discovery of livermorium and ununoctium , in a paper published in Physical Review Letters , and very soon after the results were reported in Science . The researchers reported to have performed the reaction 
 86 
 <unk> + 208 
 82Pb → 293 
 118Uuo + n → 289 
 116Lv + α 
 The following year , they published a retraction after researchers at other laboratories were unable to duplicate the results and the Berkeley lab itself was unable to duplicate them as well . In June 2002 , the director of the lab announced that the original claim of the discovery of these two elements had been based on data fabricated by principal author Victor Ninov . 
 = = = Discovery = = = 
 Livermorium was first synthesized on July 19 , 2000 , when scientists at Dubna ( JINR ) bombarded a curium @-@ 248 target with accelerated calcium @-@ 48 ions . A single atom was detected , decaying by alpha emission with decay energy 10 @.@ 54 MeV to an isotope of flerovium . The results were published in December 2000 . 
 248 
 96Cm + 48 
 20Ca → 296 
 116Lv * → 293 
 116Lv + 3 1 
 0n → 289 
 114Fl + α 
 The daughter flerovium isotope had properties matching those of a flerovium isotope first synthesized in June 1999 , which was originally assigned to 288Fl , implying an assignment of the parent livermorium isotope to <unk> . Later work in December 2002 indicated that the synthesized flerovium isotope was actually 289Fl , and hence the assignment of the synthesized livermorium atom was correspondingly altered to 293Lv . 
 = = = Road to confirmation = = = 
 Two further atoms were reported by the institute during their second experiment during April – May 2001 . In the same experiment they also detected a decay chain which corresponded to the first observed decay of flerovium in December 1998 , which had been assigned to 289Fl . No flerovium isotope with the same properties as the one found in December 1998 has ever been observed again , even in repeats of the same reaction . Later it was found that 289Fl have different decay properties and that the first observed flerovium atom may have been its nuclear isomer 289mFl . The observation of 289mFl in this series of experiments may indicate the formation of a parent isomer of livermorium , namely <unk> , or a rare and previously unobserved decay branch of the already @-@ discovered state 293Lv to 289mFl . Neither possibility is certain , and research is required to positively assign this activity . 
 The team repeated the experiment in April – May 2005 and detected 8 atoms of livermorium . The measured decay data confirmed the assignment of the first @-@ discovered isotope as 293Lv . In this run , the team also observed the isotope <unk> for the first time . In further experiments from 2004 to 2006 , the team replaced the curium @-@ 248 target with the lighter curium isotope curium @-@ 245 . Here evidence was found for the two isotopes 290Lv and 291Lv . 
 In May 2009 , the IUPAC / IUPAP Joint Working Party reported on the discovery of copernicium and acknowledged the discovery of the isotope 283Cn . This implied the de facto discovery of the livermorium @-@ 291 isotope , from the acknowledgment of the data relating to its granddaughter 283Cn , although the livermorium data was not absolutely critical for the demonstration of copernicium 's discovery . Also in 2009 , confirmation from Berkeley and the Gesellschaft für Schwerionenforschung ( GSI ) in Germany came for the flerovium isotopes 286 to 289 , immediate daughters of the four known livermorium isotopes . In 2011 , IUPAC evaluated the Dubna team experiments of 2000 – 2006 . Whereas they found the earliest data ( not involving 291Lv and 283Cn ) inconclusive , the results of 2004 – 2006 were accepted as identification of livermorium , and the element was officially recognized as having been discovered . 
 In recent years , the synthesis of livermorium has been separately confirmed in two other laboratories . 
 = = = Naming = = = 
 Using Mendeleev 's nomenclature for unnamed and undiscovered elements , livermorium is sometimes called eka @-@ polonium . In 1979 IUPAC recommended that the placeholder systematic element name <unk> ( with the corresponding symbol of <unk> ) be used until the discovery of the element was confirmed and a name was decided . Although widely used in the chemical community on all levels , from chemistry classrooms to advanced textbooks , the recommendations were mostly ignored among scientists in the field , who called it " element 116 " , with the symbol of ( 116 ) or even simply 116 . 
 According to IUPAC recommendations , the discoverer or discoverers of a new element have the right to suggest a name . The discovery of livermorium was recognized by the Joint Working Party ( JWP ) of IUPAC on 1 June 2011 , along with that of flerovium . According to the vice @-@ director of JINR , the Dubna team originally wanted to name element 116 moscovium , after the Moscow Oblast in which Dubna is located . The name livermorium and the symbol Lv were adopted on May 23 , 2012 after an approval process by the IUPAC . The name recognises the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory , within the city of Livermore , California , USA , which collaborated with JINR on the discovery . The city in turn is named after the American rancher Robert Livermore , a naturalized Mexican citizen of English birth . 
 = = Predicted properties = = 
 = = = Nuclear stability and isotopes = = = 
 Livermorium is expected to be near an island of stability centered on copernicium ( element 112 ) and flerovium ( element 114 ) . The reasons for the presence of this island are still not well understood . Due to the expected high fission barriers , any nucleus within this island of stability exclusively decays by alpha decay and perhaps some electron capture and beta decay . While the known isotopes of livermorium do not actually have enough neutrons to be on the island of stability , they can be seen to approach the island as in general , the heavier isotopes are the longer @-@ lived ones . 
 Superheavy elements are produced by nuclear fusion . These fusion reactions can be divided into " hot " and " cold " fusion , depending on the excitation energy of the compound nucleus produced . In hot fusion reactions , very light , high @-@ energy projectiles are accelerated toward very heavy targets ( actinides ) , giving rise to compound nuclei at high excitation energy ( ~ 40 – 50 MeV ) that may either fission or evaporate several ( 3 to 5 ) neutrons . In cold fusion reactions ( which use heavier projectiles , typically from the fourth period , and lighter targets , usually lead and bismuth ) , the produced fused nuclei have a relatively low excitation energy ( ~ 10 – 20 MeV ) , which decreases the probability that these products will undergo fission reactions . As the fused nuclei cool to the ground state , they require emission of only one or two neutrons . Hot fusion reactions tend to produce more neutron @-@ rich products because the actinides have the highest neutron @-@ to @-@ proton ratios of any elements that can presently be made in macroscopic quantities . 
 Important information could be gained regarding the properties of superheavy nuclei by the synthesis of more livermorium isotopes , specifically those with a few neutrons more or less than the known ones – <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and 295Lv . This is possible because there are many reasonably long @-@ lived isotopes of curium that can be used to make a target . The light isotopes can be made by fusing curium @-@ 243 with calcium @-@ 48 . They would undergo a chain of alpha decays , ending at transactinide isotopes that are too light to achieve by hot fusion and too heavy to be produced by cold fusion . 
 The synthesis of <unk> and 295Lv could be accomplished by fusing the heavy curium isotope curium @-@ 250 with calcium @-@ 48 . The cross section of this nuclear reaction would be about 1 <unk> . After a few alpha decays , these livermorium isotopes would reach nuclides at the line of beta stability . Additionally , electron capture may also become an important decay mode in this region , allowing affected nuclei to reach the middle of the island . For example , 295Lv would alpha decay to 291Fl , which would undergo successive electron capture to <unk> and then 291Cn which is expected to be in the middle of the island of stability and have a half @-@ life of about 1200 years , affording the most likely hope of reaching the middle of the island using current technology . A drawback is that the decay properties of superheavy nuclei this close to the line of beta stability are largely unexplored . 
 Other possibilities to synthesize nuclei on the island of stability include quasifission ( partial fusion followed by fission ) of a massive nucleus . Such nuclei tend to fission , expelling doubly magic or nearly doubly magic fragments such as calcium @-@ 40 , tin @-@ 132 , lead @-@ 208 , or bismuth @-@ 209 . Recently it has been shown that the multi @-@ nucleon transfer reactions in collisions of actinide nuclei ( such as uranium and curium ) might be used to synthesize the neutron @-@ rich superheavy nuclei located at the island of stability , although formation of the lighter elements nobelium or seaborgium is more favored . One last possibility to synthesize isotopes near the island is to use controlled nuclear explosions to create a neutron flux high enough to bypass the gaps of instability at 258 – 260Fm and at mass number 275 ( atomic numbers 104 to 108 ) , mimicking the r @-@ process in which the actinides were first produced in nature and the gap of instability around radon bypassed . Some such isotopes ( especially 291Cn and 293Cn ) may even have been synthesized in nature , but would have decayed away far too quickly ( with half @-@ lives of only thousands of years ) and be produced in far too small quantities ( about 10 − 12 the abundance of lead ) to be detectable as primordial nuclides today outside cosmic rays . 
 = = = Physical and atomic = = = 
 In the periodic table , livermorium is a member of group 16 , the chalcogens , in the periodic table , below oxygen , sulfur , selenium , tellurium , and polonium . Every previous chalcogen has six electrons in its valence shell , forming a valence electron configuration of <unk> . In livermorium 's case , the trend should be continued and the valence electron configuration is predicted to be <unk> ; therefore , livermorium will have some similarities to its lighter congeners . Differences are likely to arise ; a large contributing effect is the spin – orbit ( SO ) interaction — the mutual interaction between the electrons ' motion and spin . It is especially strong for the superheavy elements , because their electrons move much faster than in lighter atoms , at velocities comparable to the speed of light . In relation to livermorium atoms , it lowers the 7s and the 7p electron energy levels ( stabilizing the corresponding electrons ) , but two of the 7p electron energy levels are stabilized more than the other four . The stabilization of the 7s electrons is called the inert pair effect , and the effect " tearing " the 7p subshell into the more stabilized and the less stabilized parts is called subshell splitting . Computation chemists see the split as a change of the second ( azimuthal ) quantum number l from 1 to 1 ⁄ 2 and 3 ⁄ 2 for the more stabilized and less stabilized parts of the 7p subshell , respectively : the 7p1 / 2 subshell acts as a second inert pair , though not as inert as the 7s electrons , while the 7p3 / 2 subshell can easily participate in chemistry . For many theoretical purposes , the valence electron configuration may be represented to reflect the 7p subshell split as 7s27p2 
 1 / <unk> 
 3 / 2 . 
 The inert pair effects in livermorium should be even stronger than for polonium and hence the + 2 oxidation state becomes more stable than the + 4 state , which would be stabilized only by the most electronegative ligands ; this is reflected in the expected ionization energies of livermorium , where there are large gaps between the second and third ionization energies ( corresponding to the breaching of the unreactive 7p1 / 2 shell ) and fourth and fifth ionization energies . Indeed , the 7s electrons are expected to be so inert that the + 6 state will not be possible to attain . The melting and boiling points of livermorium are expected to continue the trends down the chalcogens ; thus livermorium should melt at a higher temperature than polonium , but boil at a lower temperature . It should also be denser than polonium ( Lv : 12 @.@ 9 g / cm3 ; α @-@ Po : 9 @.@ 2 g / cm3 ) . The electron of the hydrogen @-@ like livermorium atom ( oxidized so that it only has one electron , <unk> + ) is expected to move so fast that it has a mass 1 @.@ 86 times that of a stationary electron , due to relativistic effects . For comparison , the figures for hydrogen @-@ like polonium and tellurium are expected to be 1 @.@ 26 and 1 @.@ 080 respectively . 
 = = = Chemical = = = 
 Livermorium is projected to be the fourth member of the 7p series of chemical elements and the heaviest member of group 16 ( VIA ) in the Periodic Table , below polonium . While it is the least theoretically studied of the 7p elements , its chemistry is expected to be quite similar to that of polonium . The group oxidation state of + 6 is known for all the chalcogens apart from oxygen which lacks available d @-@ orbitals for expansion of its octet and is itself one of the strongest oxidizing agents among the chemical elements . Oxygen is thus limited to a maximum + 2 state , exhibited in the fluoride <unk> . The + 4 state is known for sulfur , selenium , tellurium , and polonium , undergoing a shift in stability from reducing for sulfur ( IV ) and selenium ( IV ) through being the most stable state for tellurium ( IV ) to being oxidizing in polonium ( IV ) . This suggests a decreasing stability for the higher oxidation states as the group is descended due to the increasing importance of relativistic effects , especially the inert pair effect . The most stable oxidation state of livermorium should thus be + 2 , with a rather unstable + 4 state . The + 2 state should be about as easy to form as it is for beryllium and magnesium , and the + 4 state should only be achieved with strongly electronegative ligands , such as in livermorium ( IV ) fluoride ( <unk> ) . The + 6 state should not exist at all due to the very strong stabilization of the 7s electrons , making the valence core of livermorium only four electrons . The lighter chalcogens are also known to form a − 2 state as oxide , sulfide , selenide , telluride , and <unk> ; due to the destabilization of livermorium 's 7p3 / 2 subshell , the − 2 state should be very unstable for livermorium , whose chemistry should be essentially cationic , though the larger subshell and spinor energy <unk> of livermorium as compared to polonium should stabilize <unk> − slightly . 
 <unk> ( LvH2 ) would be the heaviest chalcogen hydride and the heaviest homolog of water ( the lighter ones being H2S , H2Se , <unk> , and PoH2 ) . <unk> ( polonium hydride ) is a more covalent compound than most metal hydrides because polonium straddles the border between metals and metalloids and has some nonmetallic properties : it is intermediate between a hydrogen halide like hydrogen chloride ( HCl ) and a metal hydride like <unk> ( <unk> ) . <unk> should continue this trend : it should be a hydride rather than a <unk> , but would still be a covalent molecular compound . Spin @-@ orbit interactions are expected to make the Lv – H bond longer than expected simply from periodic trends alone , and make the H – Lv – H bond angle larger than expected : this is theorized to be because the unoccupied 8s orbitals are relatively low in energy and can hybridize with the valence 7p orbitals of livermorium . This is the first molecule to be studied in detail to display this phenomenon , dubbed " <unk> hybridization " , although it was earlier predicted that the same phenomenon would occur with elements 156 – 164 , which would use 7d – 9s – <unk> / 2 hybridizations despite only the 7d ( and occasionally 9s ) orbitals being partially filled . The heavier livermorium dihalides are predicted to be linear , but the lighter ones are predicted to be bent . 
 = = Experimental chemistry = = 
 Unambiguous determination of the chemical characteristics of livermorium has not yet been established . In 2011 , experiments were conducted to create ununtrium , flerovium , and ununpentium isotopes in the reactions between calcium @-@ 48 projectiles and targets of americium @-@ 243 and plutonium @-@ 244 . The targets included lead and bismuth impurities and hence some isotopes of bismuth and polonium were generated in nucleon transfer reactions . This , while an unforeseen complication , could give information that would help in the future chemical investigation of the heavier homologs of bismuth and polonium , which are respectively ununpentium and livermorium . The produced nuclides bismuth @-@ 213 and polonium @-@ <unk> were transported as the hydrides <unk> and <unk> at 850 ° C through a quartz wool filter unit held with tantalum , showing that these hydrides were surprisingly thermally stable , although their heavier congeners UupH3 and LvH2 would be expected to be less thermally stable from simple extrapolation of periodic trends in the p @-@ block . Further calculations on the stability and electronic structure of <unk> , UupH3 , PoH2 , and LvH2 are needed before chemical investigations take place . Ununpentium and livermorium are expected to be volatile enough as pure elements for them to be chemically investigated in the near future , a property livermorium would then share with its lighter congener polonium . The chief barrier to their chemical investigation at present is the lack of known isotopes of these elements which are long @-@ lived enough . 
 = American white ibis = 
 The American white ibis ( Eudocimus albus ) is a species of bird in the ibis family , <unk> . It is found from North Carolina via the Gulf Coast of the United States south through most of the coastal New World tropics . This particular ibis is a medium @-@ sized bird with an overall white plumage , bright red @-@ orange down @-@ curved bill and long legs , and black wing tips that are usually only visible in flight . Males are larger and have longer bills than females . The breeding range runs along the Gulf and Atlantic Coast , and the coasts of Mexico and Central America . Outside the breeding period , the range extends further inland in North America and also includes the Caribbean . It is also found along the northwestern South American coastline in Colombia and Venezuela . Populations in central Venezuela overlap and interbreed with the scarlet ibis . The two have been classified by some authorities as a single species . 
 Their diet consists primarily of small aquatic prey , such as insects and small fishes . Crayfish are its preferred food in most regions , but it can adjust its diet according to the habitat and prey abundance . Its main foraging behavior is probing with its beak at the bottom of shallow water to feel for and capture its prey . It does not see the prey . 
 During the breeding season , the American white ibis gathers in huge colonies near water . Pairs are predominantly monogamous and both parents care for the young , although males tend to engage in extra @-@ pair copulation with other females to increase their reproductive success . Males have also been found to pirate food from unmated females and juveniles during the breeding season . 
 Human pollution has affected the behavior of the American white ibis via an increase in the concentrations of methylmercury , which is released into the environment from untreated waste . Exposure to methylmercury alters the hormone levels of American white ibis , affecting their mating and nesting behavior and leading to lower reproduction rates . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The American white ibis was one of the many bird species originally described by Carl Linnaeus in the 1758 10th edition of his Systema Naturae , where it was given the binomial name of <unk> albus . The species name is the Latin adjective albus " white " . Alternative common names that have been used include Spanish curlew and white curlew . English naturalist Mark Catesby mistook immature birds for a separate species , which he called the brown curlew . Local creole names in Louisiana include bec <unk> and petit <unk> . 
 Johann Georg Wagler gave the species its current binomial name in 1832 when he erected the new genus Eudocimus , whose only other species is the scarlet ibis ( E. ruber ) . There has long been debate on whether the two should be considered subspecies or closely related species , and the American Ornithologists ' Union considers the two to be a superspecies as they are parapatric . The lack of observed hybrids was a large factor in the view that the species were separate . 
 However , in a field study published in 1987 , researchers Cristina Ramo and Benjamin Busto found evidence of interbreeding in a population where the ranges of the scarlet and white ibises overlap along the coast and in the Llanos region of Colombia and Venezuela . They observed individuals of the two species mating and pairing , as well as hybrid ibises with pale orange plumage , or white plumage with occasional orange feathers ; their proposal that these birds be classified as a single species , has been followed by least one field guide . Hybrid ibises have also been recorded in Florida , where the scarlet ibis has been introduced into wild populations of American white ibis . Birds of intermediate to red plumage have persisted for generations . 
 Ornithologists James Hancock and Jim <unk> also consider the two to be a single species , with the differences in plumage , size , skin coloration and degree of bill darkening during breeding season forming the diagnostic characters . They have proposed the populations <unk> in northwestern South America after a period of separation , and that the color difference is likely due to the presence of an enzyme that allows uptake of pigment in the diet . They have questioned whether white @-@ plumaged birds of South America are in fact part of the ruber rather than the albus taxon , and acknowledge that more investigation is needed to determine this . 
 = = Description = = 
 The white plumage and pink facial skin of adult American white ibises are distinctive . Adults have black wingtips that are usually only visible in flight . In non @-@ breeding condition the long downcurved bill and long legs are bright red @-@ orange . During the first ten days of the breeding season , the skin darkens to a deep pink on the bill and an almost purple @-@ tinted red on the legs . It then fades to a paler pink , and the tip of the bill becomes blackish . It is difficult to determine the sex of an adult American white ibis from its external appearance , since the sexes have similar plumage . However , there is sexual dimorphism in size and proportion as males are significantly larger and heavier than females and have longer and stouter bills . A study of the American white ibis in southern Florida yielded weight ranges of 872 @.@ 9 to 1 @,@ 261 g ( 1 @.@ 924 to 2 @.@ 780 lb ) for males and 592 @.@ 7 to 861 @.@ 3 g ( 1 @.@ 307 to 1 @.@ 899 lb ) for females , with average weights of 1 @,@ 036 @.@ 4 g ( 2 @.@ 285 lb ) for males and 764 @.@ 5 g ( 1 @.@ 685 lb ) for females . The length of adult female and male birds ranges from 53 to 70 cm ( 21 to 28 in ) with a 90 to 105 cm ( 35 to 41 in ) wingspan . Among standard measurements , American white ibis measure 20 @.@ 5 – 31 cm ( 8 @.@ 1 – 12 @.@ 2 in ) along each wing , have a tail measurement of 9 @.@ 3 – 12 @.@ 2 cm ( 3 @.@ 7 – 4 @.@ 8 in ) , a tarsus of 6 @.@ 75 – 11 @.@ 3 cm ( 2 @.@ 66 – 4 @.@ 45 in ) and a culmen of 11 – 16 @.@ 9 cm ( 4 @.@ 3 – 6 @.@ 7 in ) . 
 The newly hatched American white ibis is covered with purple down feathers , deepening to dark brown or black on the head and wings . The chest is often bare and there can be a white tuft on the head . The irises are brown . The exposed skin is pinkish initially , apart from the tip of the bill which is dark gray , but turns gray within a few days of hatching . The bill is short and straight at birth and has an egg tooth which falls off between days five and nine , and develops three black rings from around day six , before turning gray by around six weeks of age . The gray to sandy gray brown juvenile plumage appears between weeks two and six , and face and bill become pink a few weeks later , while the legs remain gray . The irises have turned slate @-@ gray by this stage . Once fledged , the juvenile American white ibis has largely brown plumage and only the rump , underwing and underparts are white . The legs become light orange . As it matures , white feathers begin appearing on the back and it undergoes a gradual molt to obtain the white adult plumage . This is mostly complete by the end of the second year , although some brown feathers persist on the head and neck until the end of the third year . Juvenile birds take around two years to reach adult size and weight . 
 Like other species of ibis , the American white ibis flies with neck and legs outstretched , often in long loose lines or V formations — a 1986 field study in North Carolina noted over 80 % of adult ibis doing so , while juveniles rapidly took up the practice over the course of the summer . The resulting improvement in aerodynamics may lower energy expenditure . These lines fly in an undulating pattern as they alternately flap and glide . Soaring in a circular pattern is also seen . Heights of 500 to 1 @,@ 000 m ( 1 @,@ 600 to 3 @,@ 300 ft ) may be reached as birds glide over flights of 20 km ( 12 mi ) or more . More commonly , birds fly between 60 and 100 m ( 200 and 330 ft ) above the ground , gliding or flapping at a rate of around 3 @.@ 3 wingbeats a second . 
 The main call of the American white ibis is a honking sound , transcribed as <unk> , <unk> , or hunk , hunk . The call is used in flight , courtship or when disturbed . Birds also utter a muted huu @-@ huu @-@ huu call while foraging , and make a squealing call in courtship . Young in the nest give a high @-@ pitched <unk> as a begging call . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Immature American white and scarlet ibises are very difficult to tell apart , although scarlet ibises tend to have darker legs and bare skin around the face . An immature American white ibis could be mistaken for an immature glossy ibis , but the latter is wholly dark brown and lacks the white belly and rump . The adult is distinguishable from the wood stork , which is much larger and its wings have more black on them . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The American white ibis is most common in Florida , where over 30 @,@ 000 have been counted in a single breeding colony . It also occurs throughout the Caribbean , on both coasts of Mexico ( from Baja California southwards ) and Central America , and as far south as Columbia and Venezuela . The non @-@ breeding range extends further inland , reaching north to Virginia , and west to eastern Texas . 
 The species is known to wander , and has been sighted , sometimes in small flocks , in states far out of its usual range . 
 In North America , breeding takes place along the Atlantic coast , from the Carolinas south to Florida and thence west along the Gulf Coast . Laguna Cuyutlán is an isolated and regionally important wetland in the state of Colima on México 's west coast where a breeding colony has been recorded . American white ibises are not faithful to the sites where they breed , and large breeding colonies composed of ten thousand birds or more can congregate and disband in one or two breeding seasons . Breeding populations across its range have fluctuated greatly with wholesale movement between states . Until the 1940s , the species only bred in large numbers in Florida , mostly within the Everglades . Drought conditions elsewhere in the United States led to over 400 @,@ 000 American white ibis breeding there in the 1930s . In the 1950s and 1960s , large colonies appeared in Alabama , Louisiana , and then North and South Carolina and the Gulf Coast of Florida , and finally Texas in the 1970s . Then , between the 1970s and early 1990s , breeding colonies declined and disappeared in South Carolina and Florida , and greatly increased in Louisiana , and North Carolina . Colonies last between one and seventeen years , their longevity related to size and quality of nearby wetlands . The longest @-@ lasting are associated with wetlands over 800 km2 ( 310 sq mi ) in size . Degradation of wetland or breeding sites are reasons for abandonment . The population of American white ibises in a colony at Pumpkinseed Island in Georgetown County , South Carolina dropped from 10 @,@ 000 to zero between 1989 and 1990 as Hurricane Hugo had inundated nearby freshwater foraging areas with salt water . 
 The American white ibis is found in a variety of habitats , although shallow coastal marshes , wetlands and mangrove swamps are preferred . It is also commonly found in muddy pools , on mudflats and even wet lawns . Populations that are away from the coast and shoreline , particularly in southern Florida , often reside in other forms of wetlands such as marshes , ponds and flooded fields . In summer , these move to more coastal and estuarine habitats as inland waterways become flooded with summer rains and the ibis find the water levels too deep to forage effectively . 
 = = = Fossil record = = = 
 Remains similar to the American white ibis have been found in Middle Pliocene deposits of the Bone Valley formation in central Florida , and Lower Pliocene deposits of the Yorktown Formation at Lee Creek in North Carolina . Two species , one living and one extinct , have been recovered from the Talara Tar <unk> in northern coastal Peru . Eudocimus peruvianus was described from a tarsometatarsus that differed slightly from E. albus , whose remains were also found there . Remains of neither species are common in the beds . The tar seeps have been dated at 13 @,@ 900 years old . The American white ibis is still found in Peru . 
 = = Behavior = = 
 A field study late in the Florida nesting season revealed that on an average day , adult American white ibis spent 10 @.@ 25 hours looking for food , 0 @.@ 75 hours flying , 13 hours resting , roosting , and attending to their nests . Much of the time roosting is spent preening , biting and working their feathers with their long bills , as well as rubbing the oil glands on the sides of their heads on back plumage . American white ibis generally only preen themselves , not engaging in allopreening unless part of courtship behavior . Bathing often takes place before preening ; ibis squat in water 5 – 20 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 – 7 @.@ 9 in ) deep and flick water over themselves with each wing in succession . Hundreds of birds may bathe together around the time of courtship . 
 The American white ibis is territorial , defending the nesting and display sites against intruders . Agonistic or threat displays include lunging forward with the bill in a horizontal posture , and standing upright and snapping the bill opposite another bird engaging in the same display . Birds also lunge and bite , often holding onto an opponent 's head or wings . 
 = = = Breeding and lifespan = = = 
 The American white ibis pairs up in spring and breeds in huge colonies , often with other waterbird species . Nesting begins as soon as suitable foraging and nesting habitat is available . The female selects the site , usually in the branches of a tree or shrub , which is often over water , and builds the nest , and males assist by bringing nest material . Anywhere from one to five eggs are typically laid , with two or three being the most common . The eggs are matt pale blue @-@ green in color with brown splotches and measure 5 @.@ 8 cm × 3 @.@ 9 cm ( 2 @.@ 3 in × 1 @.@ 5 in ) and weigh on average 50 @.@ 8 g ( 1 @.@ 79 oz ) . Clutch sizes are usually lower in coastal colonies as compared to inland colonies , although there are no statistically significant differences in the fledging rate of both colonies . Throughout the mating and incubation period , the male undergoes a period of starvation to stay close to the nest and aggressively defend his nest and mate from both predators and other ibises in preference to foraging for food . In the 2006 breeding season , a non @-@ breeding adult female was observed to be tending to multiple nests that belonged to other American white ibises — the first time the behavior has been documented for this species . 
 Although the American white ibis is predominantly monogamous and both sexes provide parental care to their young , the male often flies off to engage in extra pair copulation with other nesting females after mating with its primary female partner . These extra @-@ pair copulations are usually done after the within @-@ pair copulations , and make up about 45 % of all total matings , although only about 15 % of all extra @-@ pair copulations are successful . By not restricting the number of females it copulates with , the male is able to increase its reproductive success considerably . Although females are receptive towards extra @-@ pair copulations , male mate @-@ guarding greatly reduces the rate of successful female involvement in attempted extra @-@ pair copulations by other males . 
 The breeding success of the American white ibis is sensitive to the hydrological conditions of the ecosystem such as rainfall and water levels . Low and decreasing water levels predict good prey accessibility . Water level reversals , where levels rise in the breeding season , disperse prey and impact on foraging success . Nest numbers and average clutch sizes are smaller in periods of reduced prey availability . The success rate of parents raising one or more young to 20 days of age ranges widely from 5 to 70 % of nests , and varies greatly between nearby colonies . American white ibis parents have been known to supplement their chicks ' diet with items such as cockroaches and rotting food from human garbage in poorer years , when fish and crayfish are more scarce . Studies have also shown that years with higher nesting numbers had significantly faster spring drying rates of water bodies than years with low nesting numbers . This is because faster drying rates means that there are fewer fish and increased available area where crayfish can be hunted . This highlights the fact that American white ibises do not use probability of nesting failure as a key factor in determining nesting sites but instead , rely on other criteria such as prey availability and nest @-@ site predation rates . The draining of wetlands in south Florida has also impacted on species that forage in shallow water such as the American white ibis , and its increase in numbers is a key indicator of restoration of habitat within the Everglades . 
 The main cause of nest failure among the species is due to nest abandonment , the leading cause of which is inundation from extremely high tides . Parents abandoned 61 % of all nesting starts either during or immediately after extremely high tides . The eggs float out of the flooded nests , or get washed out into the sea by wave action . <unk> parents usually abandon the nest when the water or tidal levels reaches 3 to 8 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 to 3 @.@ 1 in ) above the bottom of the nest cup . Nevertheless , there have been instances where the parents have been observed to transport their eggs to another nest in an attempt to salvage some eggs . However , despite the fact that some nesting sites face high chance of tidal damage every breeding season , American white ibises still continue to nest in these areas because of other favorable conditions such as abundant nearby food sources and low egg predation rates . 
 The eggs hatch after about three weeks and the young are attended by both parents . Males are present around the nest for most of the day , and females most of the night . The parents exchange nest duties in the morning and in the evening . Most of the feeding of the chicks occurs during the period where they swap nesting duties . Little feeding is done in the period of the day that is between the two duty swaps and no feeding is done between midnight and 6 a.m. Chick mortality is highest in the first twenty days post hatching , with anywhere from 37 to 83 % of hatchlings surviving to three weeks of age in the Everglades . During periods of food limitations and starvation events , the American white ibis tends to exhibit sex @-@ dependent pre @-@ fledgling mortality . For many bird species that have sexually dimorphic nestlings , mortality rates are higher for larger @-@ sized male nestlings as a result of the parents ' inability to meet its greater nutritional needs . However , in the case of the American white ibis , the male nestlings actually have a lower mortality rate as compared to the females despite being on average 15 % greater in mass as compared to its female counterparts . Although current research has yet to discover the underlying factors to why the males tend to have better survival rates under such conditions , it is suspected that the parents tend to feed the larger male nestlings first because they are either perceived by the parents to have a higher chance of survival , or , being generally larger , the male nestlings simply out @-@ compete the small females for food . 
 Bird predators may seize anywhere from 7 % to 75 % of the progeny in a breeding colony . The fish crow ( Corvus ossifragus ) is common raider of American white ibis nests , accounting for up to 44 % of egg loss in a field study at Battery Island , North Carolina . Other predators of eggs and young include the boat @-@ tailed grackle ( <unk> major ) , black @-@ crowned night heron ( Nycticorax nycticorax ) , gulls , and possibly vultures , as well as the common opossum ( Didelphis marsupialis ) , raccoon ( Procyon lotor ) , and rat snakes ( <unk> species ) . Egg predation rates of the American white ibis decline with nest age owing to increased nest attentiveness by the parents , especially during the last week of incubation . High nest densities and reduced synchrony increase egg predation rates because of the increased opportunities afforded by the longer incubation times , as well as the greater availability of nests available for predation . 
 The American white ibis begins breeding in its third summer , although birds in captivity may breed as young as nine or ten months of age . The oldest member of the species recorded in captivity was over 20 years of age , and a wild bird has been picked up 16 years and 4 months after being banded . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 The American white ibis prefers to eat crayfish and other crustaceans , but also takes aquatic insects and small fish . Outside the nesting season , the diet is highly variable , as abundance and types of prey depend on the both region and habitat . In Los Llanos , located on the border of Columbia and Venezuela , the most frequent prey are insects , such as fly larvae and beetles . Generally in North America the main prey are crustaceans , mostly crayfish . In the Everglades and cypress swamps , the diet is primarily made up of crayfish , while those that feed in willow ponds eat predominantly fish . American white ibises that feed in mangrove swamps focus on crabs . The tactile nature of the ibis 's probing for food in mud means that it catches prey that are too slow to evade the ibis once located by its bill . In the Everglades , this means that crayfish make up a large part of the diet , but a more diverse array of invertebrates are taken in coastal areas . Although crayfish are sought by foraging ibises , prey switching to fish does occur if fish are found in great abundance . It is unclear whether the fish are more easily caught if overcrowded , or whether sheer numbers of fish mean that ibises are catching them instead of crayfish — normally , fish are more agile than crayfish and hence elude the ibis 's bill more easily . Fish are a more energy @-@ rich source of food for the American white ibis . In the breeding season , American white ibises in a colony at Pumpkinseed Island travelled further to forage in freshwater wetlands and catch crayfish , than nearby saltwater areas where fiddler crabs predominated , indicating their benefit was worth the extra energy expended in fetching them for their young . This travel results in the wholesale transport of nutrients across the landscape by the colony ; in a successful breeding year the colony at Pumpkinseed Island was estimated to have contributed a third as much phosphorus to the neighboring estuary as other environmental processes . 
 The American white ibis is found in mixed @-@ species foraging flocks with the glossy ibis ( Plegadis falcinellus ) in flooded fields , and the two species select different food items with little overlap ; the former foraging for crabs and aquatic insects and the latter feeding mainly on grain . The wood stork is also found in the same habitat in Florida , but hunts larger prey and a higher percentage of fish , so there is little overlap . In the Llanos , where American white ibis coexist with the scarlet ibis , their diets differ , the former consuming more bugs , fish and crustaceans , while the latter eat a much higher proportion of beetles . The <unk> ( Tringa <unk> ) has been observed trailing American white ibis and catching prey disturbed by them , and even <unk> ( stealing ) from them , in J. N. " Ding " Darling National Wildlife Refuge on Sanibel Island in Florida . An isolated event of intraspecific predation in juvenile American white ibis has been observed , where a juvenile attacked and consumed a chick from another nest . 
 = = = Foraging = = = 
 During the summer , the American white ibis roams along the coast of tidal flats and mangrove swamps as the inland marshes are usually flooded . However , as the water level recedes in the fall , populations at the coast shift their foraging area inland , to inland marshes and swamplands . It has become more common in urban landscapes in Florida since the late 1990s , and is one of a number of wetland @-@ dependent bird species which forages in man @-@ made ponds on golf courses in the southwest of the state . 
 The American white ibis is a tactile , <unk> forager , which limits its ability to choose from a wide variety of prey . For the most part , the American white ibis forages for food by tactile probing . It wades slowly through shallow water and sticks its long , downcurved bill into the substrate of the water body with its bill held at around 1 to 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 39 to 0 @.@ 79 in ) agape at the tip , and sweeps its long bill back and forth across the bottom to pick out suitable food items . Birds may also probe when standing still . <unk> with a wide open bill is a technique used by ibis in deeper water when alone , as is head swinging , in which the ibis swings its wide open bill widely in open water . Others copy this type of foraging if they see one ibis doing it . On land , the American white ibis locates prey by sight and pecks , and does not have to insert its bill into the substrate . The American white ibis seeks small prey when other birds are around , as it needs time to break up larger food items into smaller pieces to eat , and other predators such as herons and egrets often take the opportunity to rob the ibis of its catch . Along with the scarlet ibis , the species coexists with another five species of ibis in the Llanos in Venezuela . American white ibis males are aggressive to and take prey items from smaller ibises , but the smaller females are more often the victims of this behavior . 
 Juveniles have lower foraging efficiency compared to adults and in most feeding flocks , the juveniles are usually outnumbered by the adults . They usually tend to stay close to one another and forage for food together at the peripheral region of the group . During the breeding season , adult male ibises have been recorded raiding other parent ibises who are feeding their young in the colony . The raiders force their bill down the throat of the victim — either the parent about to disgorge their food or recently fed young — and extract the ball of food . This behavior allows the otherwise starving adult males to obtain food without having to spend long periods of time away from the nest , and prevent its female mate copulating with another male ibis , which would reduce its own reproductive success . Females and juveniles almost never try to drive off the larger and more aggressive pirating males , but instead try to avoid or move away from them . This pirating behavior is less common between two male ibises as the males will actively fight off the pirate . The explanation of the species ' sexual dimorphism of body size is unclear , because no differences between the sexes in feeding success rates or the foraging behavior have been observed and , as males are larger , they need more food than females . 
 = = Parasites and mortality = = 
