 Causes of death of adult ibis are not well known . Alligators could feasibly prey on nesting ibises but there has been little research in the area . A flock of fifty adult American white ibis were killed in a fire in the Everglades . The corpses were found in a dense swathe of cattail ( Typha angustifolia ) , which suggested they had taken shelter there . It is unclear why they had not been able to fly away from the fire , but one hypothesis was that they had been foraging for insects disturbed by the fire . 
 A total of 51 species of parasitic worm have been recovered from the American white ibis , predominantly from the gastrointestinal system and particularly the small intestine . These include Cestoda ( tapeworms ) , <unk> ( thorny headed worms ) , Nematoda ( roundworms ) , Digenea and <unk> . Several roundworm and <unk> species have been found in the lining of the gizzard . Nematodes are more prevalent in American white ibis from freshwater habitats , and cestodes more frequent in those from saltwater areas . One nematode found in adult birds , <unk> <unk> , is borne in the fiddler crab as an intermediate host , while the thorny headed worm species <unk> dimorpha is carried in crayfish and infests both adult and juvenile ibis . 
 Parasitic protozoa of the genus <unk> have been recovered from the smooth muscles of adult American white ibis , and another species , Haemoproteus <unk> , has been recovered from the blood of adults and nestlings , and can hence be transmitted before the young leave the nest . The larvae of two species of mite of the family <unk> , <unk> <unk> and <unk> <unk> , have been recovered from under the skin . Two species of the louse suborder Mallophaga , <unk> <unk> and <unk> robusta , also parasitise the bird . 
 = = Status = = 
 The American white ibis is classed as being of least concern on the IUCN Red List . The population consists of 150 @,@ 000 mature adults , and is stable , although some populations have unknown trends . A partial survey of under 50 % of the North American population published in 2007 found an almost six @-@ fold increase in the last four decades . The estimated breeding range is huge , at 1 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 km2 ( 460 @,@ 000 sq mi ) . Fluctuating breeding populations and high mobility of colonies make estimating the population difficult . Attempted censuses of breeding colonies across Texas , Louisiana , Florida , and the Carolinas yielded a count of 166 @,@ 000 breeding birds in 2001 , and 209 @,@ 000 in 2004 . The conservation status has been listed in two states — it is a Species of Special Concern in Florida , and a species of Moderate Conservation Concern in Alabama . The preservation of colony sites and freshwater foraging areas is important to maintaining populations ; however , the highly mobile nature of breeding colonies makes this challenging . 
 = = = Human impact = = = 
 John James Audubon reported that the American white ibis was hunted and sold in Louisiana , and mainly eaten by American Indians . It had orange flesh and a strong fishy taste . Elsewhere , the flesh has been described as appealing on account of the crayfish diet , and both members of the genus Eudocimus have been hunted , which has been responsible for decline , across their range . Crawfish farmers in Louisiana have also shot them for foraging in crawfish ponds . Overall , the impact of hunting is not thought to be major . 
 The pollutant methylmercury is a globally distributed neurotoxin and an endocrine system disruptor . In the Everglades ecosystem , human pollution has led to increased concentrations of methylmercury , which have impacted the behaviors of the American white ibis . Hormone levels in males are affected , leading to a decrease in the rates of key courtship behavior , and fewer approaches by females during the mating season . In addition , methylmercury also increased male @-@ male pairing behaviors by 55 % . Both the chemically induced " homosexual " behavior and the diminished ability to attract females by males have reduced reproduction rates in affected populations . Exposure of American white ibises to methylmercury causes reduced foraging efficiency and it also makes them more likely to abandon nests owing to the disruptive effect of the pollutant on the bird 's hormone systems , which in turn affects parental care behavior . Tests on captive birds have not shown a decreased survival of American white ibis exposed to methylmercury . 
 = = In culture = = 
 Native American folklore held that the bird was the last to seek shelter before a hurricane , and the first to emerge afterwards . The bird was thus a symbol for danger and optimism . 
 The University of Miami adopted the American white ibis as its official athletics mascot in 1926 , and the yearbook was known as The Ibis from that year . The mascot was initially known as Ibis before adopting the name Sebastian in 1957 . It was named after San Sebastian Hall , a residence hall on campus , which sponsored an Ibis entry in the college 's homecoming celebration . 
 = H @-@ 13 ( Michigan county highway ) = 
 H @-@ 13 is a county @-@ designated highway in the Upper Peninsula of the US state of Michigan that runs north – south for approximately 36 @.@ 2 miles ( 58 @.@ 3 km ) between Nahma Junction in Delta County and the Munising area in Alger County . The highway is also signed as Federal Forest Highway 13 ( FFH @-@ 13 ) , a Federal Forest Highway between Nahma Junction and Wetmore . The roadway runs through rural national forest lands providing access to several campgrounds and parks . The area contains several lakes as well . The Forest Highway System dates back to the 1920s , and an earthen roadway was present along the route of FFH @-@ 13 by the 1930s . It was paved by the late 1940s and added to the county @-@ designated highway system in the 1970s . A section of H @-@ 13 in Alger County originally continued north to Miners Castle , but the roadway designation was truncated in the first decade of the 21st century . 
 = = Route description = = 
 H @-@ 13 / FFH @-@ 13 starts at an intersection with US Highway 2 ( US 2 ) west of Moss Lake . The roadway runs north crossing a line of the Canadian National Railway . It heads through the Hiawatha National Forest , running parallel to the Sturgeon River . H @-@ 13 / FFH @-@ 13 crosses the river near the Flowing Well National Forest Campground on a T @-@ beam bridge built in 1941 . The road meanders from there northeasterly through rural Delta County forests , passing to the west of Dana and Skeels lakes and crossing several small streams . It crosses into the southeastern corner of Alger County near Straits Lake . The road continues northeasterly and then meanders back and forth along the Alger – Schoolcraft county line in an area dotted with several lakes . 
 H @-@ 13 / FFH @-@ 13 crosses east into Schoolcraft County completely and provides access to the Pete 's Lake National Forest Campground near the lake of the same name . The road shifts back westerly to follow the county line near the <unk> National Forest Campground ; from here north the forest highway will follow the county line north to the northwestern corner of Schoolcraft County . Along the way , H @-@ 13 meets the southern terminus of the unsigned H @-@ 09 . Once the road crosses back into Alger County completely , it provides access to Wagner Falls State Park and passes Hanley Field , a private airport south of Wetmore . The forest highway crosses another branch of the Canadian National Railway south of the junction with M @-@ 28 / M @-@ 94 in Wetmore . At that junction , the FFH @-@ 13 designation ends and H @-@ 13 continues north as a gravel surface along Connors Road through Munising Township . The county road ends at the intersection with H @-@ 58 ( Munising – Van Meer – Shingleton Road ) in the Pictured Rocks National Lakeshore . As a county @-@ designated highway , H @-@ 13 is maintained by the county road commissions of Delta , Alger and Schoolcraft counties ( DCRC , ACRC and <unk> respectively ) with support for the FFH @-@ 13 segment as part of the Forest Highway System that is funded and administered by the United States Forest Service and the Federal Highway Administration . H @-@ 13 / FFH @-@ 13 forms a major north – south artery for the Hiawatha National Forest . 
 = = History = = 
 The Forest Highway System was created by the Federal Aid Highway Act of 1921 . An earthen road was present along the route of H @-@ 13 by the middle of 1936 . Later that year , the segment along the Alger – Schoolcraft county line was built as a gravel road , and Miners Castle Road was upgraded to gravel as well . Additional segments were under construction in 1940 in Delta County and south of Wetmore . During World War II , the gravel surface was downgraded to earth along Miners Castle Road . The rest of the modern H @-@ 13 was paved in 1948 or 1949 . 
 The county @-@ designated highway system was created around October 5 , 1970 , when the state approved the system . The H @-@ 13 designation debuted in 1972 between Nahma Junction and H @-@ 58 ; H @-@ 13 turned east and ran concurrently with H @-@ 58 before turning north on Miners Castle Road . The northernmost segment was paved in 1987 , completing the paving along the entire route . The H @-@ 58 concurrency was removed in 2004 when the northern segment of H @-@ 13 along Miners Castle Road was redesignated H @-@ 11 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Double Seven Day scuffle = 
 The Double Seven Day scuffle was a physical altercation on July 7 ( 7 / 7 ) , 1963 , in Saigon , South Vietnam . The secret police of Ngô Đình Nhu — the brother of President Ngô Đình Diệm — attacked a group of journalists from the United States who were covering protests held by Buddhists on the ninth anniversary of Diệm 's rise to power . Peter Arnett of the Associated Press ( AP ) was punched on the nose , and the quarrel quickly ended after David Halberstam of The New York Times , being much taller than Nhu 's men , counterattacked and caused the secret police to retreat . Arnett and his colleague , the Pulitzer Prize @-@ winning journalist and photographer Malcolm Browne , were later accosted by police at their office and taken away for questioning on suspicion of attacking police officers . 
 After their release , the journalists went to the US embassy in Saigon to complain about their treatment at the hands of Diệm 's officials and asked for US government protection . Their appeals were dismissed , as was a direct appeal to the White House . Through the efforts of US Ambassador Frederick Nolting , the assault charges laid against the journalists were subsequently dropped . Vietnamese Buddhists reacted to the incident by contending that Diệm 's men were planning to assassinate monks , while Madame Nhu repeated earlier claims that the US government had been trying to overthrow her brother @-@ in @-@ law . 
 Browne took photographs of Arnett 's bloodied face , which were published in newspapers worldwide . This drew further negative attention to the behaviour of the Diệm régime amidst the backdrop of the Buddhist crisis . 
 = = Background = = 
 The incident occurred during a period of popular unrest by the Buddhist majority against the Roman Catholic rule of Diệm . Buddhist discontent had grown since the Huế Phật Đản shootings on May 8 , 1963 . The government decided to selectively invoke a law , prohibiting the display of religious flags , by banning the use of the Buddhist flag on Vesak , the birthday of Gautama Buddha . One week earlier , the Vatican flag had been flown at a celebration for Archbishop Ngô Đình Thục , Diệm 's brother . The Buddhists defied the ban , flying their flags on Vesak and holding a demonstration , which was ended with government gunfire and eight deaths . The killings sparked nationwide protests by South Vietnam 's Buddhist majority against the policies of Diệm 's regime . The Buddhists demanded that Diệm give them religious equality , but with their demands unfulfilled , the protests increased in magnitude . The most notable of these was the self @-@ immolation of Thích Quảng Đức on June 11 , which was iconically photographed by the media and became a negative symbol of the Diệm régime . 
 Known as Double Seven Day , July 7 was the ninth anniversary of Diệm 's 1954 ascension to Prime Minister of the State of Vietnam . In October 1955 , following a fraudulent referendum , Diệm established the Republic of Vietnam , generally known as South Vietnam , and declared himself President . The night of July 6 , 1963 , had started in a festive mood as Diệm awarded decorations to military officers at a ceremony . Among those in the audience were Generals Trần Văn Đôn and Dương Văn Minh , the Chief of Staff of the Army of the Republic of Vietnam and the Presidential Military Advisor , respectively . They had returned from observing SEATO military exercises in Thailand , where they had been informed about the regional disquiet over Diem 's policies towards the Buddhists . 
 = = Incident = = 
 American pressmen had been alerted to an upcoming Buddhist demonstration to coincide with Double Seven Day at <unk> Pagoda in the north of Saigon . The group , which included Arnett , Browne , David Halberstam , Neil Sheehan of United Press International , and CBS 's Peter <unk> waited outside the building with their equipment . After an hour @-@ long religious ceremony , the Buddhists filed out of the pagoda into a narrow alley along a side street , where they were blocked and ordered to stop by plain @-@ clothed policemen . The Buddhists did not resist , but Arnett and Browne began taking photos of the confrontation . The police , who were loyal to Ngô Đình Nhu , thereupon punched Arnett in the nose , knocked him to the ground , kicked him with their pointed @-@ toe shoes , and broke his camera . Halberstam , who won a Pulitzer Prize for his coverage of the Buddhist crisis , was a tall man , standing around 20 centimetres ( 8 in ) taller than the average Vietnamese policeman . He waded into the fracas swinging his arms , reportedly saying " Get back , get back , you sons of bitches , or I 'll beat the shit out of you ! " Nhu 's men ran away without waiting for a Vietnamese translation , but not before Browne had clambered up a power pole and taken photos of Arnett 's bloodied face . The police smashed Browne 's camera , but his photographic film survived the impact . The other journalists were jostled and rocks were thrown at them . Photos of Arnett 's bloodied face were circulated in US newspapers and caused further ill @-@ feeling towards Diệm 's regime , with the images of the burning Thích Quảng Đức on the front pages still fresh in the minds of the public . 
 Diệm 's address on Double Seven Day worsened the mood of Vietnamese society . He stated that the " problems raised by the General Association of Buddhists have just been settled . " He reinforced perceptions that he was out of touch by attributing any lingering problems to the " underground intervention of international red agents and Communist fellow travelers who in collusion with fascist ideologues disguised as democrats were surreptitiously seeking to revive and rekindle disunity at home while arousing public opinions against us abroad " . The remark about fascists was seen as a reference to the conspiratorial Đại Việt Quốc dân đảng who had long been enemies of Diem , but his address attacked all those who had criticised him in the past . He no longer trusted anyone outside his family and considered himself to be a martyr . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 The indignant reporters stridently accused the Diệm regime of causing the altercation , whereas the police claimed that the journalists threw the first punch . Embassy official John Mecklin noted that even Diem 's media officials were privately skeptical about the veracity of the testimony of Nhu 's men . In a heated meeting at the embassy , the press corps demanded that William Trueheart , the acting US Ambassador to South Vietnam in the absence of the vacationing Frederick Nolting , deliver a formal protest to Diệm on behalf of the American government . Trueheart angered them by refusing to do so and blaming both sides for the confrontation . In his report to Washington , Trueheart asserted that the uniformed policemen had tacitly helped their <unk> counterparts , but he also had " no doubt that [ the ] reporters , at least once [ the ] fracas had started , acted in [ a ] belligerent manner towards [ the ] police " . Trueheart contended that since the journalists had a long history of bad blood with the Diem regime , their word could not be taken over that of the Vietnamese police . 
 Since the embassy was unwilling to provide government protection against police aggression , the journalists appealed directly to the White House . Browne , Halberstam , Sheehan and <unk> wrote a letter to US President John F. Kennedy , asserting that the regime had begun a full @-@ scale campaign of " open physical intimidation to prevent the covering of news which we feel Americans have a right to know " . The protests did not garner any Presidential sympathy for the journalists , but instead resulted in trouble from their media employers . UPI 's Tokyo office criticised Sheehan for trying to " make Unipress policy " on his own when " Unipress must be neutral , neither pro @-@ Diem , pro @-@ Communist or pro @-@ anybody else " . Emanuel Freedman , the foreign editor of The New York Times reprimanded Halberstam , writing : " We still feel that our correspondents should not be firing off cables to the President of the United States without authorization . " 
 The incident provoked reactions from both the Buddhists and the Diệm regime . A monk called on the US embassy to send a military unit from the American advisors already present in Vietnam to Xá Lợi Pagoda , the main Buddhist temple in Saigon and the organisational hub of the Buddhist movement . The monk claimed that the attack on Arnett indicated that Xá Lợi 's monks were targets of assassination by Nhu 's men , something that Trueheart rejected , turning down the protection request . Xá Lợi and other Buddhist centers across the country were raided a month later by Special Forces under the direct control of the Ngo family . On the part of the South Vietnamese government , the de facto first lady Madame Nhu used her English @-@ language mouthpiece newspaper , the Times of Vietnam , to accuse the United States of supporting the failed coup attempt against Diem in 1960 . 
 = = Arrest and interrogation = = 
 Later on during the day of the altercation , the police collected Browne and Arnett from the AP bureau in Saigon and took the pair to what they described as a " safe house " . The police interrogators said that they would be arrested but were unspecific about the charges . One charge was that of assaulting two police officers , but the interrogators hinted that more serious offences such as organising illegal demonstrations were being considered . The officers conversed among themselves in French , a language which the reporters did not speak , but Arnett thought that they mentioned the word espionage . After four hours of questioning , the pair were charged with assault . Browne and Arnett in turn filed charges against the police over the altercation , and demanded compensation for the damage to their photographic equipment . Arnett and Browne were temporarily released in the evening , after which the whole Saigon press corps stormed the US embassy . 
 Browne and Arnett were called in for five hours of questioning on the following day . Arnett was accompanied by a British embassy official who , reflecting Arnett 's New Zealand citizenship , provided consular assistance on behalf of Wellington . In the end , Diem agreed to have the charges against Browne and Arnett dropped after hours of heated argument with US Ambassador Frederick Nolting , who had returned from his vacation . 
 = Freedom Planet = 
 Freedom Planet is a two @-@ dimensional platform video game created by independent developer GalaxyTrail , a studio set up for the project by designer Stephen DiDuro . The player controls one of three anthropomorphic animal protagonists : the dragon Lilac , the wildcat Carol , or the basset hound Milla . Aided by the duck @-@ like Torque , the player attempts to defeat the evil Lord Brevon , who plans to conquer the galaxy . While the game focuses on fast @-@ paced platforming , its levels are interspersed with slower action scenes . 
 Freedom Planet began development as a Sonic the Hedgehog fangame , but DiDuro lost interest in creating a derivative work and reconceived the project as his own intellectual property . He visited the website DeviantArt to recruit artist Ziyo Ling , who replaced the existing cast of characters with her own . Lilac , originally a hedgehog , became a dragon ; antagonist Doctor Eggman was replaced by Brevon ; and the Sonic series ' ring @-@ based health system was abandoned . Further changes were suggested by fans and incorporated throughout development . Freedom Planet was developed in Denmark and the United States and its art direction has East Asian influences : its background visuals were inspired by medieval Chinese art , and the game 's title is written in katakana . 
 The game was released for Microsoft Windows , first as a demo in August 2012 , then — after a successful Kickstarter campaign and a few delays — as a full game via Steam on July 21 , 2014 . A version for the Wii U console was announced in March 2015 , but was postponed that August due to a troublesome glitch ; however , the game was finally released successfully on October 1 , 2015 . Freedom Planet has been widely compared to the Sega Genesis Sonic games . Critics praised its gameplay , aesthetics , and balance of Sonic elements with original content , but were more mixed on its pacing and length . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Freedom Planet is a 2D platform and action game featuring anthropomorphized animal characters and 16 @-@ bit style graphics mimicking the look of games released for the Sega Genesis , particularly the Sonic the Hedgehog series . The game puts players in the role of one of the available playable characters as they traverse each level , fighting through enemies and obstacles before facing a boss at the end . Players have a health meter , which can be replenished by collecting red leaves , and a regenerative energy meter used to perform each character 's unique special moves . Players can earn extra lives by collecting enough blue crystals found throughout the level , or by rescuing creatures trapped in cages . Players can also obtain various types of shields , some of which often bonus attributes such as <unk> to fire or the ability to breathe underwater , and invincibility power @-@ ups . Also hidden through the levels are cards , which unlock bonus content such as music and concept art , and bonus tokens which allows access to a bonus game at the end of the level . 
 The game currently has three playable characters ; Lilac the dragon , Carol the wildcat , and Milla the dog . In addition to melee attacks that can be used to attack enemies , each character has a unique array of moves which allow them to traverse the environment in different ways . Lilac can perform a double @-@ jump attack and can launch herself into an air dash , allowing her to bounce off walls and reach high areas . Carol is able to curl into a spin @-@ attack while running and can climb up walls . By picking up gas canisters , Carol can bring out her motorcycle , which can double @-@ jump and ride up vertical walls . Milla can throw gelatinous cubes and put up an offensive shield , combining the two to perform a Shield Blast , and flap her ears to reach high areas . Players can play through the main game in one of two ways ; Adventure , which tells the game 's story through the perspective of a chosen character , and Classic , in which the levels are played in order without any story cutscenes . They can also select Time Attack to try and play through completed levels in the quickest time possible . At launch , only Lilac and Carol are playable in Adventure mode , but additional playable characters and Adventure campaigns will be released through downloadable content . These include Torque , who can fire a blaster in multiple directions , and Spade , who attacks using playing cards . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The game begins as Sash Lilac and Carol Tea — an anthropomorphic dragon and wildcat , respectively — rescue a duck @-@ billed creature named Torque after his spacecraft crash lands . At Torque 's request , the three set out to protect a powerful relic called the Kingdom Stone . This involves them in a conflict between three nations on their planet : Shuigang , a country militarized by its new king , Dail ; Shang Mu , led by the wealth @-@ obsessed Mayor Zao ( / <unk> / or / <unk> / ) ; and Shang Tu , whose Royal Magister is unprepared for war . Lilac and Carol rush to the Kingdom Stone 's shrine but are waylaid by the Shang Tu officers General Gong and Neera Li , who doubt that the Stone is threatened . The protagonists arrive just as the Stone is stolen by Spade , a henchman of Zao . After the shrine collapses , Carol is separated from Lilac and pinned by rubble , but she is saved by the timid basset hound Milla ( / <unk> / ) Basset . 
 That night , Torque tells Lilac , Carol , and Milla that he is an alien sent to apprehend the intergalactic warlord <unk> Brevon , whose spacecraft wrecked on the planet . Brevon has invaded Shuigang , murdered its king , and brainwashed Dail to be his servant . He intends to steal the Stone to power his ship . The protagonists decide to reclaim the Stone from Zao , but they are accosted en route by Spade and by Brevon 's assistant Serpentine . The delays give Dail and Brevon 's forces time to steal the relic . Afterwards , Zao sends the protagonists as emissaries to Shang Tu to discuss an alliance against Shuigang . They are detained by the Magister upon their arrival , as Neera blames them for the Stone 's original disappearance . Torque is acquitted when Lilac falsely pleads guilty . She , Carol , and Milla quickly break out of jail to reunite with Torque , only to see him captured by Brevon and Serpentine . 
 Carol quarrels with Lilac and storms off . Feeling guilty , Lilac sends Milla to find her and then goes by herself to save Torque from Brevon 's nearby base , but she is captured and tortured by Brevon . Meanwhile , Carol and Milla ally with Spade to storm the base , where they rescue Torque and Lilac . However , they are all separated in the ensuing conflict . Neera finds Lilac , arrests her , and brings her back to Shang Tu , where the Magister determines that she is innocent and reveals that Zao is challenging Shuigang for the Stone . Lilac rejoins her friends and convinces Shang Mu and Shang Tu to unite against Dail and Brevon 's army . During the battle , Brevon announces that his ship is repaired , and Lilac , Milla , and Carol board it . The team combats Brevon 's minions , including a mutated Serpentine . Brevon captures Milla and turns her into a grotesque monster that attacks the other protagonists , who are forced to render her unconscious . Enraged , Lilac and Carol attack and defeat Brevon , but the Kingdom Stone is destroyed in the process . Shortly after the battle , Milla awakens in a medical tent and sees the sky lit up by swirling , crystalline energy released from the Kingdom Stone . The three kingdoms resolve to harness the Stone 's power and share it equally , thereby bringing an end to the war . Torque says goodbye to Lilac , Carol , and Milla and returns to space . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 Freedom Planet was conceived by American game designer and programmer Stephen DiDuro , who founded the independent developer GalaxyTrail to create the project . The soundtrack was composed by DiDuro in collaboration with user Shane " Blue Warrior " Ellis of <unk> and user Leila " <unk> " Wilson from Fur Affinity . Although it is an original intellectual property , Freedom Planet was first developed as a Sonic fangame : it contained rings , and Doctor Eggman was the villain . DiDuro decided that the Sonic affiliation would hold back the game and attempted without success to design his own characters . Afterward , he received permission from the Chinese artist Ziyo Ling — whom he had found on the art website DeviantArt — to use her characters Lilac , Carol , and Milla in his game . 
 Viewers of early footage from the developing product encouraged DiDuro to separate it further from Sonic , so he replaced rings with red leaves and altered the characters ' abilities . Ziyo had drawn Lilac as a hedgehog , but DiDuro redesigned the character to be a dragon . Lilac 's wall @-@ jump ability was based on a similar game mechanic from <unk> . Originally , her level of energy was to be dependent on her speed , but this proved too difficult to control . 
 While Freedom Planet was developed in Denmark and the United States , its art direction was influenced by medieval East Asian art , particularly that of China . The game 's visuals reference modern science fiction and fantasy as well . Much of the text in the game world is written in Chinese characters , and the title text is subtitled in Japanese katakana as <unk> <unk> ( <unk> ・ <unk> ) . However , no Japanese @-@ language version of the game has been released . 
 Freedom Planet was first released as a demo for Microsoft Windows in August 2012 . After a full version of the game was funded through Kickstarter , it was taken to Steam Greenlight and approved for Steam . Its release was first projected for early 2014 , then delayed to June 30 . Shortly before that date , it was delayed again to July 19 : the developers wanted to promote the game at a convention in Miami , Florida , and to avoid competition from the heavily discounted products in Steam 's Summer Sale . The game was released , after a third delay , on July 21 . To advertise the game , GalaxyTrail created branded T @-@ shirts , and Lilac was included as an easter egg in the 2013 game Sonic : After the Sequel . DiDuro considered and rejected the idea of developing an Android version of Freedom Planet , but he is saving money to port the game to the PlayStation Vita . The game was released on the website GOG.com in late 2014 . GalaxyTrail also developed versions for Mac OS X and Linux , which were released on Steam on April 17 , 2015 . 
 On March 9 , 2015 , Stephen DiDuro announced through Twitter that a version of the game for Nintendo 's Wii U console was planned for release on the eShop online store for late 2015 , later specified as August 13 . A demo was released as part of a promotion titled " <unk> @ home " , wherein players were invited to try out several upcoming Wii U games between June 15 and June 22 . On July 28 , however , GalaxyTrail confirmed that production of the final version of the game was taking longer than expected , suggesting that the game 's actual release would be later . DiDuro announced the cause of the delay on August 18 : the Wii U version had been set back by a " console @-@ freezing bug " , which would postpone the Wii U release indefinitely until the issue was fixed . He later explained that the bug had taken so long to detect because it only occurred in retail versions of the console , which had prevented GalaxyTrail and Nintendo from learning of the issue . The bug required a hard reset of the system to address the problem , which could potentially cause damage to the Wii U hardware . However , the bug was eventually fixed , and the game was successfully released on the eShop on October 1 ; customers who had tried out the game 's demo were rewarded with a 15 @-@ percent discount . 
 Downloadable content ( DLC ) is being created for the game . The first packs , which add Torque as a playable character and an adventure story for Milla , was released for computers in December 2015 , with a Wii U update yet to be announced . Additional DLC , which will make Spade a playable character , will be released in 2016 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ release = = = 
 Tony Ponce of Destructoid felt positively about the demo for Freedom Planet ; he found it " nice to see a well @-@ established style or formula applied to a new world with original characters " . Similarly , Eurogamer 's Jeffrey Matulef described the game 's preview as " an indie Sonic @-@ esque platformer done right " , and he enjoyed the redesigned health system . Dominic <unk> of <unk> , whom GalaxyTrail gave an exclusive demo build featuring Milla , complimented the game 's " new and unfamiliar configuration " of elements from classic 16 @-@ bit games . However , he felt that it " maybe adheres a little too closely to 16 @-@ bit limits , especially in the amount of viewable gameplay area . " John Polson of IndieGames.com believed that " the spectacles like loops and wall runs ... [ are not ] as magical to do or watch " as in Sonic games , but he nonetheless concluded that " every platformer fan " ought to download the demo . 
 Nathan Grayson of Kotaku praised the demo for its balance of Genesis Sonic elements and original content : he described the product as " a love letter to classic Sonic , except when it 's not " . He also praised the game 's enemies , and , while he experienced minor control issues , guessed that they may have resulted from his use of an Xbox 360 controller instead of a keyboard . He found the game 's pacing to be slower than that of the Genesis Sonic games because of the added combat sequences , which sacrificed the feeling of " getting into a groove with a classic Sonic level " , though felt that this gave the player " time to look around , take in the sights , and think , ' Hey , I want to explore that ' " . He concluded that the game 's sense of speed was " solid " . Grayson was , however , critical of the voice acting , exclaiming " Yikes " . 
 Ponce strongly praised the visuals , which he found pleasant to the eye because of their light outlines , though he criticized the bland foreground design . Polson noted minor audio and visual flaws , most notably the recycling of sound effects from Genesis Sonic games , but he lauded the game 's music . <unk> praised the music and visuals , as well as the varied designs of the environments and playable characters . 
 = = = Post @-@ release = = = 
 <unk> Khan of Hardcore Gamer felt that it was a worthy successor to the 1994 game Sonic 3 & Knuckles — which he considered the series ' pinnacle — and that it was " perhaps the most Sonic game to have come out since 1994 , one that feels like a true evolution and more importantly a resounding step forward . " Jonatan Allin of the Danish version of Eurogamer , who had not enjoyed any Sonic games since the Genesis era , concurred with Khan . Polygon 's Griffin McElroy argued that Freedom Planet successfully performs " a difficult balancing act , borrowing and transforming elements from games like Sonic the Hedgehog and Rocket Knight Adventures without coming off as derivative " . McElroy and Pablo Taboada of the Spanish @-@ language website <unk> both compared the game to the work of developer Treasure . Taboada lamented the game 's obscurity and suggested that , had Treasure obtained the rights to Sonic and released Freedom Planet as an official sequel , it would have been more popular . 
 Khan commented that the levels " never feel like they 're over too soon nor do they drag on unnecessarily " , and he appreciated the setpiece moments such as " explosive chase / escape sequences , maze like labyrinths , traps , and even shoot- ' em @-@ up style shooting segments " . Taboada was mixed on the game 's brevity : he thought it was suitable for speedrunning but unsatisfying for those seeking a deeper experience . By contrast , Japanese website 4Gamer stated that the game 's quirks allowed one to play extensively without boredom , and Taboada enjoyed the large , Metroidvania @-@ style levels . 
 Regarding the game 's visuals , Taboada said , " <unk> es excelso " ( technically , it is excellent ) . He praised the colorful and detailed backgrounds , expressive character animations , sound effects , and music . Khan agreed : he commented that " every inch of it <unk> [ es ] artistic diversity with high resolution sprites that resemble the quality of yesteryear " . He called the audio a " nice mix of catchy chiptune style melodies with infectious synthetic beats " . Both Khan and 4Gamer were intrigued by the game 's East Asian visual style . Taboada believed that each character was likeable and interesting to play . Allin found himself unexpectedly captivated by the story , which he guessed many players would miss due to impatience with cutscenes . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 In December 25 , 2015 , GalaxyTrail announced Freedom Planet 2 is in development . With the goal of " <unk> [ ing ] Freedom Planet 's identity as a franchise , " the characters underwent a design overhaul . In contrast to the original title , it is being built using the Unity framework . The game is slated for release on PC and various Nintendo platforms at a later date . 
 = Battle of Suoi Chau Pha = 
 The Battle of Suoi Chau Pha ( 6 August 1967 ) was fought during the Vietnam War between Australian troops and the Viet Cong . The battle took place during Operation Ballarat , an Australian search and destroy operation in the eastern Hat Dich area , north @-@ west of Nui Dat in Phuoc Tuy province . Following a covert insertion the day before which had caught a number of Viet Cong sentries by surprise , A Company , 7th Battalion , Royal Australian Regiment ( 7 RAR ) had patrolled forward unaware of the presence of a large Viet Cong main force unit nearby . <unk> with a reinforced company from the Viet Cong 3rd Battalion , 274th Regiment , a classic encounter battle ensued between two forces of roughly equal size . Fought at close quarters in dense jungle amid a heavy monsoon rain , both sides suffered heavy casualties as neither was able to gain an advantage . Finally , after a battle lasting several hours , the Australian artillery proved decisive and the Viet Cong were forced to withdraw , dragging many of their dead from the battlefield after having suffered crippling losses . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Military situation = = = 
 By the second half of 1967 the Viet Cong seemed to have melted away in Phuoc Tuy province , abandoning many of their bunker systems and avoiding the main roads and towns . The Battle of Long Tan and Operation Bribie had weakened the communist forces in the province , while further operations had restricted their movement and logistics . This prompted the commander of the 1st Australian Task Force ( 1 ATF ) — Brigadier Stuart Graham — to speculate that the Viet Cong may have fled to the border , perhaps leaving the province altogether . Graham reasoned that a succession of operations in the south @-@ east of the province and the completion of the barrier minefield at Dat Do meant that no single , sizable threat remained to the populated areas of Phuoc Tuy . 
 The Australians had continued to operate independently within Phuoc Tuy province , and while the war had become a series of big unit search and destroy operations in a war of attrition for the Americans , they had pursued their own counter @-@ insurgency campaign . Regardless , differences of opinion between Australian and American methods had produced friction , and increasingly impatient with the Australian approach , in early 1967 the Commander US MACV , General William Westmoreland , had complained to the Commander Australian Forces Vietnam , Major General Tim Vincent , demanding a more aggressive approach . However , the Australians were convinced that deliberate patrolling techniques were more effective in separating communist forces from the population in the villages while working towards slowly extending government control , and such urgings went largely unheeded . 
 The highway to Xuyen Moc in the east had been reopened by the Australians in March and April , and with the Viet Cong 275th Regiment believed to have been severely weakened following Long Tan , a series of operations aimed at destroying the Viet Cong 274th Regiment were subsequently launched by 1 ATF . Australian assessments of the Viet Cong 275th Regiment were seemingly reinforced by its unsuccessful attempt to ambush a convoy from US 11th Armoured Cavalry Regiment ( 11 ACR ) on 2 December 1966 . Meanwhile , after Westmoreland had again pressed Vincent on what he saw as the limited results achieved by Australian tactics , a large joint US @-@ Australian operation was mounted against the May Tao mountains in Phuoc Tuy , moving against the communist bases in the area . The largest search and destroy operation mounted by the Australians to that point , Operation Paddington ( 9 – 15 July ) was carried out in co @-@ operation with American and South Vietnamese units based in Bien Hoa province , and targeted the Viet Cong 5th Division . 
 Mounted on a large scale under American command and involving nearly 15 @,@ 000 troops , Paddington failed to result in significant contact , in spite of the employment of well co @-@ ordinated search techniques and blocking forces . A large number of Viet Cong camps , bunkers and storage areas were however uncovered and destroyed , resulting in significant disruption to the communist logistic system . Under the overall command of Major General George G. O 'Connor , commander US 9th Infantry Division , allied forces for Operation Paddington included the US 1st Brigade , 9th Infantry Division , the 2nd Battalion , US 47th Infantry Regiment ( Mechanised ) , the US 11th Armoured Cavalry Regiment , Task Force B Marine Corps ( RVN ) and the 1st Australian Task Force , as well as various supporting arms including two artillery batteries and more than a thousand armoured vehicles and helicopters . Viet Cong casualties included 92 killed , including 31 by 1 ATF for the loss of one Australian killed and another wounded . Nonetheless , the results were disappointing for the Australians , and the Viet Cong continued to elude them . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = Opposing forces = = = 
 Based at Nui Dat in the III Corps Tactical Zone as part of US II Field Force , Vietnam , 1 ATF now included two infantry battalions plus armour , aviation , engineers and artillery support , with total Australian troop strength in Vietnam reaching 6 @,@ 300 men . Logistic arrangements were provided by the 1st Australian Logistic Support Group based at the port of Vung Tau . The 5th and 6th Battalions , Royal Australian Regiment ( 6 RAR ) subsequently returned to Australia in May and June 1967 , and were replaced by the 2nd and 7th Battalions , Royal Australian Regiment ( 7 RAR ) . Meanwhile , Viet Cong units operating in the province in early 1967 included Main Forces from the Viet Cong 5th Division , which consisted of the 274th Regiment and 275th Regiment , each of three infantry battalions under the command of Senior Colonel Nguyen The <unk> . Supporting this force were a number of artillery , engineer , medical and logistic units . Group 89 ( Artillery ) was equipped with recoilless rifles , medium mortars and heavy machine @-@ guns . Local Forces included D445 Provincial Mobile Battalion , a provincial unit normally operating in the south of the province and in Long Khanh , while guerrilla forces included two companies in the Chau Duc district , one in Long Dat and a platoon in Xuyen Moc ; in total around 4 @,@ 500 men . 
 Despite the optimistic Australian assessments of Viet Cong capability , rather than having left Phuoc Tuy the communists were more likely reinforcing and consolidating in preparation for future operations , avoiding battle with the Australians in order to preserve their strength . Regardless , D445 Battalion had suffered heavy casualties and posed a diminished threat , while the headquarters of the Viet Cong 5th Division was located near the northern border , west of the May Tao mountains , with its fighting formations widely dispersed . The Viet Cong 275th Regiment was reported to have moved north to War Zone D for retraining and refitting , and the Viet Cong 274th Regiment had moved from its scattered locations in the north @-@ west Hat Dich to replace it in the north @-@ east of the province , and was now operating in unfamiliar terrain . Meanwhile , casualties , illness and poor local recruitment meant they were now largely reliant on reinforcements from North Vietnam . Unsure of the next move , the Viet Cong 5th Division adopted a cautious posture , with only the 1st Battalion , 275th Regiment remaining in the May Tao mountains while the 274th Regiment dispersed east of Route 2 for the remainder of the month . 
 = = = Planning and preliminary operations = = = 
 The province now seemed secure and Graham saw the opportunity to continue pacification on a more methodical basis in Phuoc Tuy . Planning to attack the remaining Viet Cong where they were most vulnerable , the Australians returned to interdicting communist supply lines and bases , with 2 RAR conducting two search and destroy operations to the east of Dat Do — Operation Cairns in late @-@ July followed by Operation Atherton in mid @-@ August , both of which resulted in only minor contact . Meanwhile , the Hat Dich area had been quiet since US forces had swept of the area as part of Operation Akron ( 9 – 29 June ) , and Australian intelligence assessed that it was free of Viet Cong main force combat units . By late @-@ July communist rear services units and other supporting units were believed to have begun moving back into the area , in an attempt to rehabilitate their base areas that had been destroyed in the earlier fighting . Yet in reality the location of communist forces was largely unknown to the Australians . In mid @-@ July , the Viet Cong 274th Regiment — now believed to be commanded by Ut Thoi — had been forced to move from the Hat Dich towards its north @-@ eastern base areas due to Operation Paddington and Australian signals intelligence had been able to effectively track the regiment 's movement due to the location of its transmitter . However , 1 ATF intelligence officers had then lost track of the unit . 
 Operation Ballarat was subsequently planned to assess the extent of the Viet Cong 's efforts to re @-@ establish their supply lines and to repair bunkers and camps in the eastern Hat Dich that had been destroyed by previous operations . The concept of operations envisioned 7 RAR , under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Eric Smith , creating a series of company patrol bases , from which platoon fighting patrols would gather intelligence on Viet Cong activities . An ambush plan would then be developed . The twelve @-@ day battalion search and destroy operation subsequently commenced on 4 August 1967 , within AO Lion , 9 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 6 mi ) north @-@ west of Nui Dat . In an attempt to achieve surprise the rifle companies moved into their respective areas of operation by foot , rather than by helicopter , carrying five days rations and supplies to reduce the need for resupply and the likelihood of detection by the Viet Cong . With stealth considered key to the operation it was intended that any bunkers and camps located during the patrol phase of the operation would not be destroyed until after the ambush phase . Regardless , the Australians expected only to encounter rear guard elements . 
 Fire Support Base Giraffe was subsequently established with the new 105 @-@ millimetre ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) M2A2 Howitzers of 106th Field Battery and 81 @-@ millimetre ( 3 @.@ 2 in ) mortars from Mortar Platoon , 7 RAR providing indirect fire support , while elements of the Australian Reinforcement Holding Unit provided protection . Further support was provide by 155 @-@ millimetre ( 6 @.@ 1 in ) M109 self @-@ propelled medium guns from the US 2 / 35th Artillery Regiment , while American 8 @-@ inch ( 200 mm ) and 175 @-@ millimetre ( 6 @.@ 9 in ) heavy artillery were also available if required . Meanwhile , elements of 1st Field Squadron , Royal Australian Engineers had been tasked with clearing Route 2 of vegetation and rubber north of Nui Dat and D Company , 2 RAR was attached for the operation , providing security for the engineers and additional protection to the fire support base in conjunction with a troop of M113 armoured personnel carriers from A Squadron , 3rd Cavalry Regiment which would support the infantry during the day . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Insertion and patrolling , 5 – 6 August = = = 
 A Company , 7 RAR had already been patrolling in the Hat Dich since 3 August when the orders for the operation were issued . Utilising an insertion technique perfected by the Special Air Service Regiment they were subsequently re @-@ supplied early on the evening of 5 August , with the supplies successfully unloaded and the helicopters departing within three minutes . The covert infiltration of the infantry companies went undetected , and on the morning of 6 August A Company began to patrol towards the intended site of their initial patrol base . Under the command of Major Ewart O 'Donnell , by @-@ mid morning the Australians were approximately 10 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) east of Phu My . At 10 : 40 , moving north @-@ west with 2 Platoon leading , the Australians crossed a creek , the Suoi Chau Pha , and shortly afterwards located a fresh track which had only recently been used . O 'Donnell ordered the lead platoon into ambush positions astride the track , while he moved forward to conduct a reconnaissance . Minutes later two Viet Cong sentries walked into the ambush with their weapons slung , and they were killed instantly by a short burst from an M60 machine @-@ gun , likely surprised by the silent insertion of the Australians . 
 The incident alerted the remainder of the Australians and the company prepared for action . Considering it unlikely that the dead men had been alone , O 'Donnell assessed that the remainder of a Viet Cong squad was located somewhere further along the track and he subsequently requested artillery fire to block any escape , while 2 Platoon was ordered to sweep forward . Under the command of Second Lieutenant Graham Ross , 2 Platoon commenced its advance before coming under automatic fire 100 metres ( 110 yd ) along the track by a Viet Cong squad which then went to ground after the Australians returned fire . Attempting to take the initiative , Ross began to manoeuvre for a quick attack , moving two sections to the high ground on the right flank , while the third section provided fire support . Meanwhile , the Viet Cong force , which turned out to be larger than first thought by the Australians , also attempted a flanking manoeuvre , moving one squad into a defensive position while two squads moved to their left flank . Deploying to the high ground at about the same time the two assault groups came face to face and a fierce fire @-@ fight followed at close range , with both sides throwing grenades in an attempt to gain the initiative . Two Australians were killed and several more were wounded in the initial clashes . 
 2 Platoon was in trouble and the Australians were forced to fight hard in order to survive , with numerous acts of heroism on both sides . Repeatedly exposing himself to the fire to throw grenades and to direct his platoon 's fire , Ross dragged two of his wounded men to safety during the fighting and despite being wounded in the leg by shrapnel he refused to be treated until the other wounded had received first aid . Meanwhile , Private Dennis <unk> , although wounded in the right arm , remained behind his M60 throwing two grenades with his left arm and only withdrawing in order to drag another wounded Australian to safety . Finally , after his right arm went numb , Ross ordered <unk> to hand over his machine @-@ gun and he was evacuated to the rear . Elsewhere , Private Keith Downward , one of the forward scouts , after edging forward to within 10 metres ( 11 yd ) then single handedly charged one of the Viet Cong machine @-@ guns , killing the operator and capturing the weapon before then dragging a wounded Australian soldier out of danger despite himself being wounded . Amid the chaos , a wasp nest in a nearby tree was disturbed , and a number of Australians were so badly stung that they were incapacitated and also needed to be evacuated . 
 = = = Move and counter @-@ move , 6 August 1967 = = = 
 O 'Donnell attempted to probe the Viet Cong flank , and after locating it on the high ground he committed 1 Platoon — under Second Lieutenant Rod Smith — to conduct a right flanking attack . Beginning at 11 : 30 the Australian assault soon ran into another Viet Cong platoon conducting a similar manoeuvre , and they became involved in an intense battle at close quarters with each side blocking the manoeuvre of the other . A heavy monsoon rain began , drenching the men as they faced each other at a range of just 30 metres ( 33 yd ) , with seven Viet Cong machine @-@ guns facing six Australian machine @-@ guns at the height of the battle as the two Viet Cong platoons clashed with two Australian platoons . The Australians suffered heavily , losing two section commanders killed and a dozen men wounded in the first few minutes . The fighting continued for another two hours as both forces traded shots , with neither the Australians nor the Viet Cong able to achieve a decisive advantage . 
 A Company 's forward observer , Lieutenant Neville Clark , a Citizens Military Force ( CMF ) officer , had moved to the forward platoon and proceeded to calmly direct artillery from the guns at Fire Support Base Giraffe on to the Viet Cong . Meanwhile , the Viet Cong attempted to use " hugging tactics " to remain in close contact under the artillery barrage , while utilising rockets , grenades , machine @-@ guns and small arms to inflict casualties on the Australians . Finally , with the communists massing for an all @-@ out attack Clark adjusted the artillery to within 50 metres ( 55 yd ) of his own position , disregarding his own safety in order to break up the attack . Firing from over 10 @,@ 000 metres ( 11 @,@ 000 yd ) away , the Australian 105 mm howitzers were nearly at their 11 @,@ 000 @-@ metre ( 12 @,@ 000 yd ) maximum range , yet they proved to be highly accurate and the rounds caused heavy casualties among the assaulting troops as they stood up to charge the Australian positions , while a few Australians were also slightly wounded after one of the rounds struck a tree . In total , the 106th Field Battery and the supporting American battery of the US 2 / 35th Artillery Battalion fired 1 @,@ 026 rounds in support of A Company during the fighting , while American 8 @-@ inch and 175 mm heavy artillery fired another 156 rounds . A number of airstrikes had also supported the Australians . 
 By 14 : 30 the Viet Cong commander finally made the decision to withdraw , with the artillery deciding the battle in favour of the Australians . O 'Donnell had commanded the battle with cool resolve under constant fire throughout , setting the standard for his men and on one occasion he had run 30 metres ( 33 yd ) through heavy fire to drag a wounded medic to safety . Withdrawing through the barrage and a number of airstrikes called in to pursue them , the Viet Cong proceeded to drag their dead from the battlefield , having suffered crippling casualties . B Company , 7 RAR was subsequently inserted by helicopter into blocking positions to the north , however they made no contact and were unable to prevent the withdrawal . Numerous blood trails were later found as the Australians attempted to follow up the Viet Cong . 
 Meanwhile , even as the battle had continued the evacuation of the Australian casualties had begun , with a number of Iroquois helicopters from No. 9 Squadron , Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) under Squadron Leader Jim Cox , flying through heavy ground fire to complete the dust @-@ off . Hindered by artillery fire and the dense foliage the operation proved difficult and Cox 's aircraft was hit by heavy machine @-@ gun fire , wounding him and an orderly on board . Safely landing the damaged aircraft he then directed the operation by radio from the ground . Among the worst of the casualties was Sergeant Alexander Sutherland , from 2 Platoon . Losing an eye and suffering heavy blood loss from multiple shrapnel wounds after a Viet Cong rocket exploded within a metre of him , he was evacuated to 8 Field Ambulance in Vung Tau with no pulse . His left leg later amputated , his wounds were so bad he had to be given a general anaesthetic each time his bandages were changed . Making a miraculous recovery however , he was personally recommended for the US Medal of Honor by Westmoreland for his resolute spirit , although this was later reduced to a lesser Australian award . Many casualties were beyond help however , and the battalion chaplain was inserted by winch from a helicopter to administer last rites . 
 On the basis of documents captured by the Australians during the battle the Viet Cong were identified as being from C12 Company , 3rd Battalion , 274th Regiment , probably assisted by the battalion Reconnaissance Platoon and a number of local force guides . It was assessed that at least a second company had helped in the recovery of many of the Viet Cong dead . Later , during operations the following day , a recently occupied battalion @-@ sized camp was subsequently located about 900 metres ( 980 yd ) from the site of the battle , and it was considered likely that the Viet Cong company had fought the vigorous action in order the delay the Australians and enable the withdrawal of the remainder of the battalion from their base camp . Meanwhile , elements of the Chau Duc District Company were also believed to be located in the area . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Casualties = = = 
 Australian casualties had been heavy with five killed , one died of wounds and 20 wounded . Meanwhile , the extent of Viet Cong casualties were difficult to assess , as most had been removed from the battlefield by the communists as they had during previous battles . A sweep of the area by the Australians subsequently resulted in the recovery of a further five dead Viet Cong , however drag marks and extensive blood trails indicated that they had suffered heavily , with perhaps another 33 killed or wounded in the contact . A further 200 casualties were estimated to have occurred from artillery and mortar fire , as well as a number of airstrikes . Terry <unk> , in his controversial book Vietnam – The Australian Dilemma , lists these casualties as " possibles " only , questioning the efficacy of the Australian reporting . However <unk> 's agenda and research methodology have been widely criticised , and official records make it clear that five bodies were indeed counted , while a further five bodies were observed but not recovered . Among the dead were one officer , believed to have been the platoon commander , and two non @-@ commissioned officers . Also recovered were a light machine @-@ gun , a 40 mm recoilless rifle and three AK @-@ 47 assault rifles , while other weapons , a quantity of rice and a battalion @-@ sized bunker system were subsequently also captured . 
 = = = Assessment = = = 
 A classic encounter battle , the action had been fought between two forces of roughly equal size in the heavy monsoon rain at close quarters . Both companies had deployed to the high ground at around the same time in a bid to outflank the other , with the Australian infantry skilfully using their supporting artillery while the Viet Cong had attempted to nullify the Australian tactics by remaining in close contact . Ultimately , the artillery had decided the outcome in favour of the Australians however , and the Viet Cong had been forced to withdraw with heavy casualties . In this way the fighting bore many similarities to the victory twelve months earlier at Long Tan , yet it remained largely unheralded in Australia . Eight Australian soldiers received gallantry awards for their actions , including Military Crosses to O 'Donnell , Ross and Clark , while Sutherland was awarded the Distinguished Conduct Medal . A number of awards were also made to the RAAF pilots and aircrew , including Cox who was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross . Meanwhile , the bravery evident by the Viet Cong during the battle had also made an impression on the Australians , who later acknowledged their tight fire discipline and the <unk> of their battle drills and tactics which they found to be similar to those used by the Australians themselves . 
 A month after disappearing the Viet Cong 274th Regiment had emerged without warning and had caught 7 RAR by surprise , with the unexpected presence of a Viet Cong Main Force regiment in the Hat Dich forcing the Australians to change their tactics for the remainder of Operation Ballarat . The Australians became more cautious as a result and while 7 RAR continued its search and destroy mission , only two companies patrolled while the other two remained on standby in fire support bases nearby to provide support if required . Additional artillery support was also made available , with 161st Field Battery , Royal New Zealand Artillery airlifted into Fire Support Base Giraffe . Meanwhile , Graham placed 2 RAR on standby to fly into the area if needed and US forces were also positioned to the north . In this manner Ballarat continued until 16 August , however there was only minor contact which resulted in two more Viet Cong killed , two wounded and one captured for no further loss to the Australians . 
 = = = Subsequent operations = = = 
 Australian operations in Phuoc Tuy province continued throughout the remainder of 1967 , and although they were largely successful at the tactical level , the Viet Cong continued to be able to enter most of the villages in the province , and were causing increasingly heavy Allied casualties with mines lifted from the controversial barrier minefield laid by the Australians . Operation Santa Fe , a further large @-@ scale joint US @-@ Australian operation , took place between October and November , but it too ended with only limited success in comparison to the resources committed . Meanwhile , despite allegations of corruption and ballot rigging by the ruling military junta , South Vietnam 's presidential elections in September had been unhampered by security concerns and were largely considered successful , with 83 percent of eligible voters turning out nationwide ; in Phuoc Tuy this number was higher still at over 90 percent . Graham believed that the large public turnout in Phuoc Tuy had been due to the long @-@ term effects of Australian operations in the province which had increased the population 's sense of security . As a result , 1 ATF now turned its attention to expanding its area of operations . 
 However , with the war approaching a stalemate strategically , the Australians were substantially reinforced following the trend of further American troop increases , with a third infantry battalion arriving in December , while a squadron of Centurion tanks and additional Iroquois helicopters were added in early 1968 . Total Australian strength in Vietnam grew to over 8 @,@ 000 men , its highest level during the war , effectively doubling the combat power available to the task force commander . Likewise , American military strength in Vietnam had risen to 486 @,@ 000 men while South Vietnamese forces had expanded to 643 @,@ 000 by the end of the year . In spite of this build up North Vietnamese strength in South Vietnam also increased growing to 278 @,@ 000 men , and although communist strategy remained fundamentally one of protracted war , preparations for a strategic offensive had reached an advanced stage . <unk> in the Tet Offensive in early 1968 , the offensive would aim to provoke a popular general uprising among the South Vietnamese people against the government and its American supporters and would take the form of a massive simultaneous surprise attack on population centres throughout South Vietnam . 1 ATF would be heavily involved in the fighting during Tet , deploying astride communist lines of communication in support of American and South Vietnamese forces defending the Long Binh @-@ Bien Hoa complex north @-@ east of Saigon during Operation Coburg , while also repelling repeated Viet Cong attacks against Ba Ria and Long Dien in Phuoc Tuy province . 
 = Patrik Berger = 
 Patrik Berger ( Czech pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> ̩ ] ; born 10 November 1973 ) is a retired Czech footballer . He started his career in his own country with Slavia Prague and spent a season in Germany playing for Borussia Dortmund . He moved to England in 1996 , where he spent seven years with Liverpool , winning six trophies in his time there . This was followed by spells at Portsmouth , Aston Villa and Stoke City . He spent the last two years of his career back in his native Czech Republic playing for Sparta Prague . 
 Internationally , Berger played in two major tournaments for the Czech Republic . He played an important part in his nation 's Euro 1996 campaign , scoring in the final as the Czech Republic finished runners @-@ up to Germany . He took a 17 @-@ month break from the national team between 1997 and 1998 after a dispute with manager Dušan Uhrin , returning to the setup following Uhrin 's departure from the post . His second and final major tournament was Euro 2000 , but due to suspension and his country 's early exit , he only played one game . He retired from the national team in 2002 at the age of 28 with a total of 44 senior international caps and 18 goals . 
 Capable of occupying midfield and forward positions , Berger became noted for his powerful strikes , surging runs , and strong left foot . Berger was beset with injuries throughout his career and received specialist treatment in the United States . He retired on 6 January 2010 due to knee injuries . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Berger was born in Prague , Czechoslovakia . His uncle is the Czech footballer Jan Berger . He married wife <unk> , and has two children , son Patrik and daughter <unk> . He gained a British passport in 2001 after having spent five years playing club football in England . This enabled him to play without needing a work permit , which he had previously required due to the Premier League 's rules on non @-@ EU players . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Prague and Dortmund = = = 
 He began his footballing career as a youth player at Sparta Prague in 1989 , securing a professional contract two years later with rivals Slavia Prague . Establishing himself as a senior regular , Berger competed in Europe and earned selection for Czechoslovakia and , following its establishment , the Czech Republic . 
 After 90 league games and 24 goals , Berger was purchased by Ottmar Hitzfeld 's Borussia Dortmund in 1995 for a reported £ 500 @,@ 000 . In August 1995 he played in the DFL @-@ Supercup , as Dortmund beat Borussia Mönchengladbach to win the title . While Dortmund went on to win the Bundesliga title in the 1995 – 96 season , Berger was frequently used as a substitute , making 12 of his 25 league appearances from the bench . Hitzfeld preferred to employ Berger as a defensive midfielder as he considered him to be most suited to the role . 
 Liverpool 's interest in Berger was stimulated by the performances of the Czech Republic during Euro 1996 , organised in England , where he scored a penalty in the final . The club approached both Berger and Karel Poborský , who elected to transfer to Manchester United after the competition 's conclusion . Berger did accept Liverpool 's contract offer and completed his transfer in August 1996 for £ 3 @.@ 25 million . 
 = = = Liverpool = = = 
 Berger and his family settled in Southport , Merseyside , where they resided near retired players Kenny Dalglish and Alan Hansen . Debuting as a substitute in a 2 – 1 home win against Southampton on 7 September 1996 , Berger performed well in his first month with the club , endearing him to supporters and earning praise from colleagues . In his second match , he replaced Stan Collymore as half time substitute , going on to score two goals in a 3 – 0 win against Leicester City . A second double was registered against Chelsea in the latter 's 5 – 1 defeat at Anfield , which he followed with a fifth goal in four games in a Cup Winners ' Cup match against <unk> . The series of displays were recognised in October 1996 with the FA 's Player of the Month award for September . 
 First @-@ team opportunities became limited in Berger 's second season . Despite scoring a hat @-@ trick against Chelsea in October 1997 , he often found himself named as a substitute . His dissatisfaction at manager Roy Evans placed his Liverpool career in jeopardy . Evans criticised Berger 's perceived indifference to teamwork and publicly expressed a willingness to sell after he refused to be used as a substitute against Bolton Wanderers in March 1998 . Berger was linked with a move away from Liverpool in May 1998 , with Italian club A.S. Roma , the manager of which was his countryman Zdeněk Zeman , and Portuguese club Benfica both mentioned as possible destinations . The appointment of Gérard Houllier as co @-@ manager before the 1998 – 99 season and subsequent departure of Evans proved to be pivotal in Berger 's decision to remain with the club . 
 Playing regularly in his first season under Houllier 's reign , Berger scored nine goals and improved as a player . An injury sustained in a 4 – 3 defeat to Leeds United in November 2000 rendered Berger unavailable for much of the 2000 – 01 season and required specialist treatment in the United States from knee surgeon Richard Steadman . By March 2001 , Berger had recovered and he went on to feature in the final of both the UEFA Cup and the FA Cup , with Liverpool winning both trophies . In the 2001 FA Cup Final he provided the assist for Michael Owen to score the deciding goal against Arsenal . 
 He appeared in the 2001 FA Charity Shield , coming on as a substitute as Liverpool won the competition . He then underwent knee surgery in August 2001 , ruling him out of the 2001 UEFA Super Cup . 
 Recurring injuries between 2001 and 2003 continued to disrupt Berger 's career and deprived him of a presence in the first team , resulting in his decision to leave Liverpool after the expiration of his contract following the conclusion of the 2002 – 03 season . Berger had been confined to the bench for the duration of his final season when selected , limiting him to four appearances . He left Liverpool , having scored 35 goals during his seven seasons with the club . 
 = = = Portsmouth = = = 
 Newly promoted to the Premier League , Portsmouth manager Harry Redknapp signed Berger on a free transfer . Redknapp said of the deal : " Patrik 's [ sic ] a quality player , free - and the type of player who 'll bring good experience to Portsmouth . I had a bit of competition for him but he 's looked round the area and is very happy to join us . " Berger made his first appearance for Portsmouth on the opening day against Aston Villa ; he scored the club 's second goal . Berger scored the winning goal in Portsmouth 's victory over his former club Liverpool in October 2003 . A month later , he set up the first and fourth Portsmouth goals and scored the fifth in Portsmouth 's 6 – 1 win against Leeds United . On Boxing Day 2003 , Berger helped Portsmouth to a 2 – 0 win against Tottenham , scoring both goals of the game from free kicks , the first of which was scored from 35 yards ( 32 m ) . Berger underwent an operation upon his knee in February 2004 , forcing him to miss the remainder of the season . 
 Berger started the 2004 – 05 season with note , scoring August 's contender for Goal of the Season against Charlton Athletic . His second goal of the campaign came in a 3 – 1 win away to Crystal Palace , striking from 25 yards ( 23 m ) . October 2004 saw his final league goal for Portsmouth in a 2 – 2 away draw at Norwich , scoring a 25 @-@ yard free kick . 
 The club endured a difficult end to the season , winning just once in a period of 12 matches , which prompted the appointment of Alain Perrin as Portsmouth 's new manager . Berger was one of a number of players including Steve Stone and Shaka Hislop whose contracts were due to expire in the summer . Portsmouth successfully avoided relegation close to the end of the season , following a 2 – 0 loss away at Manchester City on 30 April . In spite of Portsmouth having retained their Premier League status , Berger then joined Aston Villa on a two @-@ year @-@ deal , citing manager David O 'Leary as the main reason for choosing Villa . 
 = = = Aston Villa = = = 
 Berger was hampered by injury during his early Villa career , making few league appearances . During the first part of his second season , he only played two matches under new manager Martin O 'Neill . In November 2006 he was sent to Championship side Stoke City on loan until 4 January 2007 , following a fine of two weeks ' wages for refusing to play in a reserve game . During his time at Stoke , he started just one match and took part in a further six as a substitute . Following his return from Stoke , Berger was commended by O 'Neill on his fitness and on 7 April 2007 , Berger started his first game for Villa since October 2005 . He marked this occasion by scoring a goal in a 2 – 1 victory against Blackburn Rovers . Berger scored again on 5 May 2007 in the penultimate game of the season against Sheffield United . On 28 May 2007 , Berger agreed to sign a one @-@ year contract extension with Aston Villa . 
 Berger was injured in the pre @-@ season of the 2007 – 08 Premier League , keeping him out of league matches until October 2007 . He then suffered a recurrence of the same injury and was ruled out for a further period of time . On 6 May 2008 , Berger was told he had played his last game for Aston Villa after urging captain Gareth Barry to move to Liverpool . This came just days after manager Martin O 'Neill claimed he was " desperate " to keep Barry following interest from Premier League rivals Chelsea and Liverpool . At the end of his contract Berger was released by the club , having appeared in just 29 league matches in three seasons . 
 = = = Return to Prague = = = 
 On 29 May 2008 , Berger returned to Prague as a free agent , signing a two @-@ year contract with boyhood club Sparta Prague , also becoming captain of the club for the 2008 – 09 Gambrinus liga . In November 2008 , Berger scored a hat @-@ trick against SK Kladno in a 5 – 0 Sparta victory . Sparta went on to finish the season in second place , thus ensuring qualification for the following season 's UEFA Champions League tournament . Berger was the club 's top league goalscorer with six goals . 
 During the 2009 – 10 season , Berger played just two league matches before undergoing more knee surgery . On 6 January 2010 he announced his retirement after failing to recover from a ligament injury . 
 = = = Post @-@ professional career = = = 
 Berger continued playing football on an amateur basis in August 2010 for sixth @-@ tier Czech Republic side Dolní <unk> . At the age of 40 he was still playing for the side . 
 = = International career = = 
 Berger represented the youth teams of Czechoslovakia from the under @-@ 15 level , working his way up through under @-@ 16 , under @-@ 17 and under @-@ 18 between 1988 and 1991 . For these junior teams he had a record of a total of six goals in 49 appearances . During this time he won the 1990 UEFA European Under @-@ 16 Football Championship with the under @-@ 16 side , scoring in the final against Yugoslavia . 
 Berger made his senior international debut on 23 March 1993 in a FIFA World Cup qualifier for Czechoslovakia against Cyprus , which ended 1 – 1 . In October 1995 he scored the second goal in a must @-@ win qualification match for Euro 1996 against Belarus , which the Czechs won 2 – 0 . In his first 12 international appearances , Berger totalled eight goals . 
 Berger was part of the Czech Republic team who took part in Euro 1996 , being singled out as the only player in the squad with the potential to become a " major international star " . In spite of this , Martin Frýdek was preferred to Berger in the starting lineup for the first match against Germany . Berger went on to play in all of his nation 's matches in the tournament , famously scoring in the final from the penalty spot to give the Czech Republic a 1 – 0 lead against Germany . However , the Czech Republic ultimately lost on the golden goal rule in extra time . 
 Between 1997 and 1998 , Berger boycotted the Czech national team due to a conflict with head coach Dušan Uhrin . He returned to the national set @-@ up after a 17 @-@ month absence following the appointment of Jozef Chovanec as Uhrin 's replacement . He made a notable return to the national team , scoring two goals from free kicks in a qualification match against Estonia . 
 The next major international tournament Berger took part in was Euro 2000 . Having been suspended for his nation 's first two matches after being sent off in a qualifier against the Faroe Islands , Berger played just one match . Berger announced his retirement from international football in March 2002 at the age of 28 . He finished his career having made a total of 44 appearances for national teams , including 42 for the Czech Republic and 2 for Czechoslovakia . He scored a total of 18 international goals , all for the Czech Republic . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 Berger played mainly as an attacking midfielder , also being known as a winger . He became noted for his powerful strikes , surging runs , and strong left foot . Team @-@ mate at Liverpool Steven Gerrard said of Berger that " he was the best left @-@ footed striker of a ball I have seen " . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = = = International goals = = = = 
 Scores and results list Czech Republic 's goal tally first . 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = Player = = = 
 Borussia Dortmund 
 Bundesliga : 1995 – 96 
 DFL @-@ Supercup : 1995 
 Liverpool 
 FA Cup : 2000 – 01 
 League Cup : 2000 – 01 , 2002 – 03 
 FA Charity Shield : 2001 
 UEFA Cup : 2000 – 01 
 UEFA Super Cup : 2001 
 = = = Individual = = = 
 Czech Footballer of the Year : 1996 ( shared with Karel Poborský ) 
 Golden Ball : 1999 
 = Lodewijk van den Berg = 
 Lodewijk van den Berg ( Dutch pronunciation : [ <unk> fɑn <unk> <unk> ] ; born March 24 , 1932 ) is a Dutch American chemical engineer , specializing in crystal growth , who flew on a 1985 Space Shuttle Challenger mission as a Payload Specialist . 
 He was the first Dutch @-@ born astronaut , a fact that is often ignored in the Netherlands because he was a naturalized American and no longer a Dutch citizen at the time of flight . He is married and has two children . As of 2014 , he resides in Florida and works as a chief scientist at the Constellation Technology Corporation . 
 = = Education and early career = = 
 Van den Berg was born on March 24 , 1932 , in <unk> , Netherlands . Van den Berg was educated in the Netherlands where he attended the Delft University of Technology from 1949 to 1961 and earned his Engineer 's degree in chemical engineering . He then moved to the United States to continue studying at the University of Delaware , where he obtained a MSc degree in applied science , followed by a PhD degree in 1974 , also in applied science . 
 After he had completed his doctoral study , he was offered a job at EG & G Corporation Energy Measurements in Goleta , California , to work on crystal growth . EG & G was a defense contractor of the United States government and dealt with sensitive information and science . In 1975 , this required Van den Berg to become a naturalized U.S. citizen . Van den Berg gathered years of research and management experience in the preparation of crystalline materials — in particular , the growth of single crystals of chemical compounds , and the investigation of associated defect chemistry and electronic properties . He became an international authority on vapor growth techniques with an emphasis on mercuric iodide crystals and its application in the nuclear industry as gamma ray detectors . During his work at EG & G , Van den Berg asked NASA for permission to conduct crystal growth experiments in space , which NASA approved . 
 = = Spaceflight = = 
 = = = Selection = = = 
 Van den Berg and his colleagues designed the EG & G Vapor Crystal Growth System experiment apparatus for a Space Shuttle flight . The experiment required an in @-@ flight operator and NASA decided that it would be easier to train a crystal growth scientist to become an astronaut , than it would be the other way around . NASA asked EG & G and Van den Berg to compile a list of eight people who would qualify to perform the science experiments in space and to become a Payload Specialist . Van den Berg and his chief , Dr. Harold A. <unk> could only come up with seven names . <unk> subsequently proposed adding Van den Berg to the list , joking with Van den Berg that due to his age , huge glasses and little strength , he would probably be dropped during the first selection round ; but at least they would have eight names . Van den Berg agreed to be added to the list , but didn 't really consider himself being selected to be a realistic scenario . 
 The first selection round , consisted of a selection based on science qualifications in the field in question , which Van den Berg easily passed . The final four candidates were tested on physical and mental qualifications which he also passed , while two of the others failed due to possible heart issues . He was now part of the final two , and NASA always trains two astronauts , a prime and a back @-@ up . In 1983 he started to train as an astronaut and six months before the launch he was told that he would be the prime astronaut , much to his own surprise . When he went into space he was 53 years old , making him one of the oldest rookie astronauts . 
 = = = STS @-@ 51B = = = 
 Van den Berg was assigned as Payload Specialist on STS @-@ 51B Challenger ( April 29 – May 6 , 1985 ) . STS @-@ 51B , the Spacelab @-@ 3 mission , was launched from the Kennedy Space Center , Florida , and returned to land at Edwards Air Force Base , California . It was the first operational Spacelab mission . The seven @-@ man crew aboard Challenger conducted investigations into crystal growth , drop dynamics leading to <unk> material processing , atmospheric trace gas spectroscopy , solar and planetary atmospheric simulation , cosmic rays , and laboratory @-@ animal and human medical monitoring . 
 As a co @-@ investigator of the Vapor Crystal Growth System ( VCGS ) experiment , Van den Berg was responsible for the crystal growth aspects of the VCGS experiment . He had intimate knowledge of VCGS and Fluid Experiment System ( FES ) hardware , and had participated in all major design and science reviews of those systems . 
 By the end of the mission , Van den Berg had traveled over 2 @.@ 9 million miles in 110 Earth orbits , and logged over 168 hours in space . 
 = = Career after NASA = = 
 After returning to Earth , Van den Berg continued to work on crystal growth experiments at EG & G in California and he became the head for the section of materials science . At a later time he moved to Florida to become a chief scientist at the Constellation Technology Corporation . At age 72 , he continued to work up to 40 hours a week and grow crystals , a process he compares to gardening . The crystals he grows ( <unk> Iodide crystals ) are used to make precision detectors for nuclear radiation . These detectors are used in medical applications , by the defense industry and the International Atomic Energy Agency . 
 He visits the Netherlands every two years , and was the subject of a short 2004 documentary by <unk> called : The <unk> <unk> . 
 = = Asteroid = = 
 On September 28 , 2007 the main belt asteroid <unk> ( <unk> P @-@ L ) was named after him and is now known as <unk> <unk> . The asteroid was discovered October 17 , 1960 by Cornelis Johannes van Houten and Ingrid van Houten @-@ <unk> at Leiden Observatory , where they were studying photographic plates taken by Tom <unk> using the Palomar Observatory 's Samuel Oschin telescope . 
 = = Academic publications ( incomplete ) = = 
 " Fabrication of mercuric iodide radiation detectors " , Lodewijk van den Berg and Ron D. Vigil , Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section A : Accelerators , <unk> , Detectors and Associated Equipment , Volume 458 , Issues 1 @-@ 2 , 1 February 2001 , Pages 148 @-@ 151 
 " Improved yield of high resolution mercuric iodide gamma @-@ ray spectrometers " , Vernon <unk> and Lodewijk van den Berg , Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section A : Accelerators , <unk> , Detectors and Associated Equipment , Volume 299 , Issues 1 @-@ 3 , 20 December 1990 , Pages 41 @-@ 44 
 " Vapor growth of <unk> by periodic source or crystal temperature oscillation " , by M. Schieber ∗ , W.F. <unk> , L. Van den Berg . Journal of Crystal Growth , Volume 33 , Issue 1 , April 1976 , Pages 125 – 135 
 = Wrigley Square = 
 Wrigley Square is a public square located in the northwest section of Millennium Park in the Historic Michigan Boulevard District of the Loop area of Chicago in Cook County , Illinois , United States . The square is located at the southeast corner of the intersection of East Randolph Street and North Michigan Avenue . It contains the Millennium Monument , a nearly full @-@ sized replica of the semicircle of paired Roman Doric @-@ style columns ( called a peristyle ) that originally sat in this area of Grant Park , near Michigan Avenue and Randolph Street , between 1917 and 1953 . The square also contains a large lawn and a public fountain . 
 = = Detail = = 
 Lying between Lake Michigan to the east and the Loop to the west , Grant Park has been Chicago 's front yard since the mid 19th century . Its northwest corner , north of Monroe Street and the Art Institute , east of Michigan Avenue , south of Randolph Street , and west of Columbus Drive , had been Illinois Central rail yards and parking lots until 1997 , when it was made available for development by the city as Millennium Park . Today , Millennium Park trails only Navy Pier as a Chicago tourist attraction . 
 The square is a tree @-@ lined section of Millennium Park with a large lawn . The area broadcasts free wifi wireless technology . The square has earned a reputation as an outdoor culture spot by hosting a wide range of cultural events such as local and international art and photography exhibitions , as well as occasional live musical performances . This reputation is reminiscent of the earlier neo @-@ classical meeting place . When Mayor of Chicago Richard M. Daley dedicated the square , it was dedicated to the donors , known as the Founders Group , who funded Millennium Park . 
 In 2005 , Millennium Park was marked for updates and improvements . Benches were to be added to the 56 original benches . Landscape architect Kathryn Gustafson designed 14 new 320 @-@ pound ( 145 @.@ 1 kg ) , aluminum “ Maggie benches ” benches in Millennium Park , mostly in Wrigley square , in honor of Mayor Daley ’ s wife . 
 The square was intended to serve as an exhibit space for outdoor sculpture as well as small cultural performances , according to Christopher <unk> , vice president of the Wrigley Square Foundation . The square 's peristyle monument is in remembrance of the corporation , foundations , and individuals who made Millennium Park possible . 
 An architectural model of Wrigley Square and Millennium Monument , designed by O 'Donnell , <unk> , Pigozzi and Peterson Architects , Inc . ( OWP & P ) in 2000 , is on display at the Harold Washington Library Center . 
 = = = Original peristyle = = = 
 In 1917 , the original peristyle was designed by renowned Chicago planner Edward H. Bennett , who was Daniel Burnham 's partner in the Plan of Chicago and who was known for designing the nearby Buckingham Fountain . It was located in Grant Park in the same location as the current Wrigley Square . The original peristyle rose to 40 feet ( 12 @.@ 2 m ) and had a diameter of 100 feet ( 30 @.@ 5 m ) . The original was made of concrete , which did not stand up to the Lake Michigan lakefront weather . In 1953 it was razed to make way for the Grant Park North Garage . The original peristyle was on a promenade with balustrades . 
 = = = Millennium Monument = = = 
 A gift from the William Wrigley , Jr . Company , the limestone replica peristyle rises to a height of nearly 40 feet ( 12 @.@ 2 m ) ( one source says the columns were planned to rise to 36 feet ( 11 @.@ 0 m ) ) , restoring a classical elegance to Grant Park . The William Wrigley , Jr . Foundation contributed $ 5 million to the monument , and the entire square , which cost $ 5 million to build , was named in its honor . The Millennium Monument is a tribute to the individual , corporate and foundation benefactors of Millennium Park . The pedestal of the peristyle is inscribed with the names of the 115 financial donors ( including Oprah Winfrey ) who made the 91 contributions of at least $ 1 million each to help pay for Millennium Park . The New York Times describes the pedestal as French marble , but other sources mention the use of French limestone . These 115 donors are referred to as the founders of Millennium Park in official park brochures published by the City of Chicago and distributed at the visitor 's centers as well as in other press accounts . Their contributions not only paid for the construction of the park , but also provide for its ongoing conservation . 
 The David Dillon and Michael Patrick Sullivan ( of OWP & P ) design is based on original drawings by Bennett found in the Chicago Park District 's archive . 
 The naming rights of the space belong to Wm . Wrigley Jr , the foundation that created the world ’ s famous chewing gum . Wrigley Company officials , including William Wrigley , Jr . II , wanted to contribute to Millennium Park , and the historic aspect of the peristyle was attractive to them partly because the original peristyle was constructed around the same time as the Wrigley Building , the corporate headquarters located a few blocks to the north , and because the classical architectural styles of both are similar . 
 The 24 paired , fluted columns are the same height as the original peristyle . However , the structure was scaled down to an 80 @-@ foot ( 24 @.@ 4 m ) diameter in order to accommodate the accessible ramp that runs behind the monument . Each of the limestone columns is cut from an Indiana quarry and made of five 2 @,@ 200 pounds ( 997 @.@ 9 kg ; 157 @.@ 1 st ) sections reinforced by steel rods and plates . The fountain in front of the monument is a bronze @-@ cast replica of the finials that adorn the Wrigley Building . The brass spout was made from a mold of a terra cotta <unk> on the Wrigley Building . 
 The front of the monument has a dedication plaque ( pictured left ) . In addition , on the reverse side in approximately the same location , the monument has a special plaque commemorating John H. Bryan 's contribution as the head of fundraising for the Park . 
 The original model of the Millennium Monument was the starting point of the Peristyle appearance in Chicago . To this day , it is said to not compare to the once “ commanding presence ” that once stood in its place , before being demolished and replaced with an underground parking garage . The new monument was downsized by approximately 15 % to accommodate a wheel @-@ chair ramp for the disabled in a tight space . It also includes a “ classical ” take on the original , incorporating a fountain at the base of the limestone , Doric , column monument . The monument , despite being relatively small in comparison to the rest of Grant Park , makes it presence known as the central focus to shape Wrigley Square and the surrounding landscape . Wrigley Square is unique for its fountain that , unlike Buckingham Fountain , which is fenced off , remains open with a circular ledge to allow park @-@ goers the freedom to sit next to the open water to enjoy the atmosphere . 
 = Homologous recombination = 
 Homologous recombination is a type of genetic recombination in which nucleotide sequences are exchanged between two similar or identical molecules of DNA . It is most widely used by cells to accurately repair harmful breaks that occur on both strands of DNA , known as double @-@ strand breaks . Homologous recombination also produces new combinations of DNA sequences during meiosis , the process by which eukaryotes make gamete cells , like sperm and egg cells in animals . These new combinations of DNA represent genetic variation in offspring , which in turn enables populations to adapt during the course of evolution . Homologous recombination is also used in horizontal gene transfer to exchange genetic material between different strains and species of bacteria and viruses . 
 Although homologous recombination varies widely among different organisms and cell types , most forms involve the same basic steps . After a double @-@ strand break occurs , sections of DNA around the 5 ' ends of the break are cut away in a process called resection . In the strand invasion step that follows , an overhanging 3 ' end of the broken DNA molecule then " invades " a similar or identical DNA molecule that is not broken . After strand invasion , the further sequence of events may follow either of two main pathways discussed below ( see Models ) ; the DSBR ( double @-@ strand break repair ) pathway or the SDSA ( synthesis @-@ dependent strand annealing ) pathway . Homologous recombination that occurs during DNA repair tends to result in non @-@ crossover products , in effect restoring the damaged DNA molecule as it existed before the double @-@ strand break . 
 Homologous recombination is conserved across all three domains of life as well as viruses , suggesting that it is a nearly universal biological mechanism . The discovery of genes for homologous recombination in protists — a diverse group of eukaryotic microorganisms — has been interpreted as evidence that meiosis emerged early in the evolution of eukaryotes . Since their dysfunction has been strongly associated with increased susceptibility to several types of cancer , the proteins that facilitate homologous recombination are topics of active research . Homologous recombination is also used in gene targeting , a technique for introducing genetic changes into target organisms . For their development of this technique , Mario Capecchi , Martin Evans and Oliver Smithies were awarded the 2007 Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine ; Capecchi and Smithies independently discovered applications to mouse embryonic stem cells , however the highly conserved mechanisms underlying the DSB repair model , including uniform homologous integration of transformed DNA ( gene therapy ) , were first shown in plasmid experiments by Orr @-@ Weaver , <unk> and Rothstein . Researching the plasmid @-@ induced DSB , using γ @-@ irradiation in the 1970 's @-@ 1980 's , led to later experiments using endonucleases ( e.g. I @-@ <unk> ) to cut chromosomes for genetic engineering of mammalian cells , where <unk> recombination is more frequent than in yeast . 
 = = History and discovery = = 
 In the early 1900s , William Bateson and Reginald Punnett found an exception to one of the principles of inheritance originally described by Gregor Mendel in the 1860s . In contrast to Mendel 's notion that traits are independently assorted when passed from parent to child — for example that a cat 's hair color and its tail length are inherited independent of each other — Bateson and Punnett showed that certain genes associated with physical traits can be inherited together , or genetically linked . In 1911 , after observing that linked traits could on occasion be inherited separately , Thomas Hunt Morgan suggested that " crossovers " can occur between linked genes , where one of the linked genes physically crosses over to a different chromosome . Two decades later , Barbara McClintock and Harriet Creighton demonstrated that chromosomal crossover occurs during meiosis , the process of cell division by which sperm and egg cells are made . Within the same year as McClintock 's discovery , Curt Stern showed that crossing over — later called " recombination " — could also occur in somatic cells like white blood cells and skin cells that divide through mitosis . 
 In 1947 , the microbiologist Joshua Lederberg showed that bacteria — which had been assumed to reproduce only asexually through binary fission — are capable of genetic recombination , which is more similar to sexual reproduction . This work established E. coli as a model organism in genetics , and helped Lederberg win the 1958 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine . Building on studies in fungi , in 1964 Robin Holliday proposed a model for recombination in meiosis which introduced key details of how the process can work , including the exchange of material between chromosomes through Holliday junctions . In 1983 , Jack Szostak and colleagues presented a model now known as the DSBR pathway , which accounted for observations not explained by the Holliday model . During the next decade , experiments in Drosophila , budding yeast and mammalian cells led to the emergence of other models of homologous recombination , called SDSA pathways , which do not always rely on Holliday junctions . 
 = = In eukaryotes = = 
 Homologous recombination ( HR ) is essential to cell division in eukaryotes like plants , animals , fungi and protists . In cells that divide through mitosis , homologous recombination repairs double @-@ strand breaks in DNA caused by ionizing radiation or DNA @-@ damaging chemicals . Left unrepaired , these double @-@ strand breaks can cause large @-@ scale rearrangement of chromosomes in somatic cells , which can in turn lead to cancer . 
 In addition to repairing DNA , homologous recombination also helps produce genetic diversity when cells divide in meiosis to become specialized gamete cells — sperm or egg cells in animals , pollen or ovules in plants , and spores in fungi . It does so by facilitating chromosomal crossover , in which regions of similar but not identical DNA are exchanged between homologous chromosomes . This creates new , possibly beneficial combinations of genes , which can give offspring an evolutionary advantage . Chromosomal crossover often begins when a protein called Spo11 makes a targeted double @-@ strand break in DNA . These sites are non @-@ randomly located on the chromosomes ; usually in intergenic promoter regions and preferentially in GC @-@ rich domains These double @-@ strand break sites often occur at recombination hotspots , regions in chromosomes that are about 1 @,@ 000 – 2 @,@ 000 base pairs in length and have high rates of recombination . The absence of a recombination hotspot between two genes on the same chromosome often means that those genes will be inherited by future generations in equal proportion . This represents linkage between the two genes greater than would be expected from genes that independently assort during meiosis . 
 = = = Timing within the mitotic cell cycle = = = 
 Double @-@ strand breaks can be repaired through homologous recombination or through non @-@ homologous end joining ( NHEJ ) . NHEJ is a DNA repair mechanism which , unlike homologous recombination , does not require a long homologous sequence to guide repair . Whether homologous recombination or NHEJ is used to repair double @-@ strand breaks is largely determined by the phase of cell cycle . Homologous recombination repairs DNA before the cell enters mitosis ( M phase ) . It occurs during and shortly after DNA replication , in the S and G2 phases of the cell cycle , when sister chromatids are more easily available . Compared to homologous chromosomes , which are similar to another chromosome but often have different alleles , sister chromatids are an ideal template for homologous recombination because they are an identical copy of a given chromosome . In contrast to homologous recombination , NHEJ is predominant in the G1 phase of the cell cycle , when the cell is growing but not yet ready to divide . It occurs less frequently after the G1 phase , but maintains at least some activity throughout the cell cycle . The mechanisms that regulate homologous recombination and NHEJ throughout the cell cycle vary widely between species . 
 <unk> @-@ dependent kinases ( <unk> ) , which modify the activity of other proteins by adding phosphate groups to ( that is , <unk> ) them , are important regulators of homologous recombination in eukaryotes . When DNA replication begins in budding yeast , the cyclin @-@ dependent kinase <unk> begins homologous recombination by <unk> the Sae2 protein . After being so activated by the addition of a phosphate , Sae2 uses its endonuclease activity to make a clean cut near a double @-@ strand break in DNA . This allows a three @-@ part protein known as the MRX complex to bind to DNA , and begins a series of protein @-@ driven reactions that exchange material between two DNA molecules . 
 = = = Models = = = 
 Two primary models for how homologous recombination repairs double @-@ strand breaks in DNA are the double @-@ strand break repair ( DSBR ) pathway ( sometimes called the double Holliday junction model ) and the synthesis @-@ dependent strand annealing ( SDSA ) pathway . The two pathways are similar in their first several steps . After a double @-@ strand break occurs , the MRX complex ( MRN complex in humans ) binds to DNA on either side of the break . Next a resection , in which DNA around the 5 ' ends of the break is cut back , is carried out in two distinct steps . In the first step of resection , the MRX complex recruits the Sae2 protein . The two proteins then trim back the 5 ' ends on either side of the break to create short 3 ' overhangs of single @-@ strand DNA . In the second step , 5 ' → 3 ' resection is continued by the Sgs1 helicase and the <unk> and <unk> nucleases . As a helicase , Sgs1 " <unk> " the double @-@ strand DNA , while <unk> and <unk> 's nuclease activity allows them to cut the single @-@ stranded DNA produced by Sgs1 . 
 The RPA protein , which has high affinity for single @-@ stranded DNA , then binds the 3 ' overhangs . With the help of several other proteins that mediate the process , the Rad51 protein ( and Dmc1 , in meiosis ) then forms a filament of nucleic acid and protein on the single strand of DNA coated with RPA . This nucleoprotein filament then begins searching for DNA sequences similar to that of the 3 ' overhang . After finding such a sequence , the single @-@ stranded nucleoprotein filament moves into ( invades ) the similar or identical recipient DNA duplex in a process called strand invasion . In cells that divide through mitosis , the recipient DNA duplex is generally a sister chromatid , which is identical to the damaged DNA molecule and provides a template for repair . In meiosis , however , the recipient DNA tends to be from a similar but not necessarily identical homologous chromosome . A displacement loop ( D @-@ loop ) is formed during strand invasion between the invading 3 ' overhang strand and the homologous chromosome . After strand invasion , a DNA polymerase extends the end of the invading 3 ' strand by synthesizing new DNA . This changes the D @-@ loop to a cross @-@ shaped structure known as a Holliday junction . Following this , more DNA synthesis occurs on the invading strand ( i.e. , one of the original 3 ' overhangs ) , effectively restoring the strand on the homologous chromosome that was displaced during strand invasion . 
 = = = = DSBR pathway = = = = 
 After the stages of resection , strand invasion and DNA synthesis , the DSBR and SDSA pathways become distinct . The DSBR pathway is unique in that the second 3 ' overhang ( which was not involved in strand invasion ) also forms a Holliday junction with the homologous chromosome . The double Holliday junctions are then converted into recombination products by nicking endonucleases , a type of restriction endonuclease which cuts only one DNA strand . The DSBR pathway commonly results in crossover , though it can sometimes result in non @-@ crossover products ; the ability of a broken DNA molecule to collect sequences from separated donor loci was shown in mitotic budding yeast using plasmids or endonuclease induction of chromosomal events . Because of this tendency for chromosomal crossover , the DSBR pathway is a likely model of how crossover homologous recombination occurs during meiosis . 
 Whether recombination in the DSBR pathway results in chromosomal crossover is determined by how the double Holliday junction is cut , or " resolved " . Chromosomal crossover will occur if one Holliday junction is cut on the crossing strand and the other Holliday junction is cut on the non @-@ crossing strand ( in Figure 4 , along the horizontal purple arrowheads at one Holliday junction and along the vertical orange arrowheads at the other ) . Alternatively , if the two Holliday junctions are cut on the crossing strands ( along the horizontal purple arrowheads at both Holliday junctions in Figure 4 ) , then chromosomes without crossover will be produced . 
 = = = = SDSA pathway = = = = 
 Homologous recombination via the SDSA pathway occurs in cells that divide through mitosis and meiosis and results in non @-@ crossover products . In this model , the invading 3 ' strand is extended along the recipient DNA duplex by a DNA polymerase , and is released as the Holliday junction between the donor and recipient DNA molecules slides in a process called branch migration . The newly synthesized 3 ' end of the invading strand is then able to anneal to the other 3 ' overhang in the damaged chromosome through complementary base pairing . After the strands anneal , a small flap of DNA can sometimes remain . Any such flaps are removed , and the SDSA pathway finishes with the resealing , also known as ligation , of any remaining single @-@ stranded gaps . 
 During mitosis , the major homologous recombination pathway for repairing DNA double @-@ strand breaks appears to be the SDSA pathway ( rather than the DSBR pathway ) . The SDSA pathway produces non @-@ crossover recombinants ( Figure 4 ) . During meiosis non @-@ crossover recombinants also occur frequently and these appear to arise mainly by the SDSA pathway as well . Non @-@ crossover recombination events occurring during meiosis likely reflect instances of repair of DNA double @-@ strand damages or other types of DNA damages . 
 = = = = SSA pathway = = = = 
 The single @-@ strand annealing ( SSA ) pathway of homologous recombination repairs double @-@ strand breaks between two repeat sequences . The SSA pathway is unique in that it does not require a separate similar or identical molecule of DNA , like the DSBR or SDSA pathways of homologous recombination . Instead , the SSA pathway only requires a single DNA duplex , and uses the repeat sequences as the identical sequences that homologous recombination needs for repair . The pathway is relatively simple in concept : after two strands of the same DNA duplex are cut back around the site of the double @-@ strand break , the two resulting 3 ' overhangs then align and anneal to each other , restoring the DNA as a continuous duplex . 
 As DNA around the double @-@ strand break is cut back , the single @-@ stranded 3 ' overhangs being produced are coated with the RPA protein , which prevents the 3 ' overhangs from sticking to themselves . A protein called <unk> then binds each of the repeat sequences on either side of the break , and aligns them to enable the two complementary repeat sequences to anneal . After annealing is complete , leftover non @-@ homologous flaps of the 3 ' overhangs are cut away by a set of nucleases , known as <unk> / <unk> , which are brought to the flaps by the <unk> and <unk> proteins . New DNA synthesis fills in any gaps , and ligation restores the DNA duplex as two continuous strands . The DNA sequence between the repeats is always lost , as is one of the two repeats . The SSA pathway is considered mutagenic since it results in such deletions of genetic material . 
 = = = = BIR pathway = = = = 
 During DNA replication , double @-@ strand breaks can sometimes be encountered at replication forks as DNA helicase <unk> the template strand . These defects are repaired in the break @-@ induced replication ( BIR ) pathway of homologous recombination . The precise molecular mechanisms of the BIR pathway remain unclear . Three proposed mechanisms have strand invasion as an initial step , but they differ in how they model the migration of the D @-@ loop and later phases of recombination . 
 The BIR pathway can also help to maintain the length of telomeres ( regions of DNA at the end of eukaryotic chromosomes ) in the absence of ( or in cooperation with ) telomerase . Without working copies of the telomerase enzyme , telomeres typically shorten with each cycle of mitosis , which eventually blocks cell division and leads to senescence . In budding yeast cells where telomerase has been inactivated through mutations , two types of " survivor " cells have been observed to avoid senescence longer than expected by elongating their telomeres through BIR pathways . 
 Maintaining telomere length is critical for cell immortalization , a key feature of cancer . Most cancers maintain telomeres by <unk> telomerase . However , in several types of human cancer , a BIR @-@ like pathway helps to sustain some tumors by acting as an alternative mechanism of telomere maintenance . This fact has led scientists to investigate whether such recombination @-@ based mechanisms of telomere maintenance could thwart anti @-@ cancer drugs like telomerase inhibitors . 
 = = In bacteria = = 
 Homologous recombination is a major DNA repair process in bacteria . It is also important for producing genetic diversity in bacterial populations , although the process differs substantially from meiotic recombination , which repairs DNA damages and brings about diversity in eukaryotic genomes . Homologous recombination has been most studied and is best understood for Escherichia coli . Double @-@ strand DNA breaks in bacteria are repaired by the RecBCD pathway of homologous recombination . Breaks that occur on only one of the two DNA strands , known as single @-@ strand gaps , are thought to be repaired by the RecF pathway . Both the RecBCD and RecF pathways include a series of reactions known as branch migration , in which single DNA strands are exchanged between two intercrossed molecules of duplex DNA , and resolution , in which those two intercrossed molecules of DNA are cut apart and restored to their normal double @-@ stranded state . 
 = = = RecBCD pathway = = = 
 The RecBCD pathway is the main recombination pathway used in many bacteria to repair double @-@ strand breaks in DNA , and the proteins are found in a broad array of bacteria . These double @-@ strand breaks can be caused by UV light and other radiation , as well as chemical mutagens . Double @-@ strand breaks may also arise by DNA replication through a single @-@ strand nick or gap . Such a situation causes what is known as a collapsed replication fork and is fixed by several pathways of homologous recombination including the RecBCD pathway . 
 In this pathway , a three @-@ subunit enzyme complex called RecBCD initiates recombination by binding to a blunt or nearly blunt end of a break in double @-@ strand DNA . After RecBCD binds the DNA end , the RecB and <unk> subunits begin unzipping the DNA duplex through helicase activity . The RecB subunit also has a nuclease domain , which cuts the single strand of DNA that emerges from the unzipping process . This unzipping continues until RecBCD encounters a specific nucleotide sequence ( 5 ' <unk> @-@ 3 ' ) known as a Chi site . 
 Upon encountering a Chi site , the activity of the RecBCD enzyme changes drastically . DNA unwinding pauses for a few seconds and then resumes at roughly half the initial speed . This is likely because the slower RecB helicase unwinds the DNA after Chi , rather than the faster <unk> helicase , which unwinds the DNA before Chi . Recognition of the Chi site also changes the RecBCD enzyme so that it cuts the DNA strand with Chi and begins loading multiple RecA proteins onto the single @-@ stranded DNA with the newly generated 3 ' end . The resulting RecA @-@ coated nucleoprotein filament then searches out similar sequences of DNA on a homologous chromosome . The search process induces stretching of the DNA duplex , which enhances homology recognition ( a mechanism termed conformational proofreading ) . Upon finding such a sequence , the single @-@ stranded nucleoprotein filament moves into the homologous recipient DNA duplex in a process called strand invasion . The invading 3 ' overhang causes one of the strands of the recipient DNA duplex to be displaced , to form a D @-@ loop . If the D @-@ loop is cut , another swapping of strands forms a cross @-@ shaped structure called a Holliday junction . Resolution of the Holliday junction by some combination of RuvABC or <unk> can produce two recombinant DNA molecules with reciprocal genetic types , if the two interacting DNA molecules differ genetically . Alternatively , the invading 3 ’ end near Chi can prime DNA synthesis and form a replication fork . This type of resolution produces only one type of recombinant ( non @-@ reciprocal ) . 
 = = = RecF pathway = = = 
 Bacteria appear to use the RecF pathway of homologous recombination to repair single @-@ strand gaps in DNA . When the RecBCD pathway is inactivated by mutations and additional mutations inactivate the <unk> and <unk> nucleases , the RecF pathway can also repair DNA double @-@ strand breaks . In the RecF pathway the <unk> helicase unwinds the DNA and the <unk> nuclease degrades the strand with a 5 ’ end , leaving the strand with the 3 ’ end intact . RecA protein binds to this strand and is either aided by the RecF , <unk> , and <unk> proteins or stabilized by them . The RecA nucleoprotein filament then searches for a homologous DNA and exchanges places with the identical or nearly identical strand in the homologous DNA . 
 Although the proteins and specific mechanisms involved in their initial phases differ , the two pathways are similar in that they both require single @-@ stranded DNA with a 3 ’ end and the RecA protein for strand invasion . The pathways are also similar in their phases of branch migration , in which the Holliday junction slides in one direction , and resolution , in which the Holliday junctions are cleaved apart by enzymes . The alternative , non @-@ reciprocal type of resolution may also occur by either pathway . 
 = = = Branch migration = = = 
 Immediately after strand invasion , the Holliday junction moves along the linked DNA during the branch migration process . It is in this movement of the Holliday junction that base pairs between the two homologous DNA duplexes are exchanged . To catalyze branch migration , the RuvA protein first recognizes and binds to the Holliday junction and recruits the RuvB protein to form the <unk> complex . Two sets of the RuvB protein , which each form a ring @-@ shaped ATPase , are loaded onto opposite sides of the Holliday junction , where they act as twin pumps that provide the force for branch migration . Between those two rings of RuvB , two sets of the RuvA protein assemble in the center of the Holliday junction such that the DNA at the junction is sandwiched between each set of RuvA . The strands of both DNA duplexes — the " donor " and the " recipient " duplexes — are unwound on the surface of RuvA as they are guided by the protein from one duplex to the other . 
 = = = Resolution = = = 
 In the resolution phase of recombination , any Holliday junctions formed by the strand invasion process are cut , thereby restoring two separate DNA molecules . This cleavage is done by <unk> complex interacting with RuvC , which together form the RuvABC complex . RuvC is an endonuclease that cuts the degenerate sequence 5 ' - ( A / T ) TT ( G / C ) -3 ' . The sequence is found frequently in DNA , about once every 64 nucleotides . Before cutting , RuvC likely gains access to the Holliday junction by displacing one of the two RuvA tetramers covering the DNA there . Recombination results in either " splice " or " patch " products , depending on how RuvC cleaves the Holliday junction . Splice products are crossover products , in which there is a rearrangement of genetic material around the site of recombination . Patch products , on the other hand , are non @-@ crossover products in which there is no such rearrangement and there is only a " patch " of hybrid DNA in the recombination product . 
 = = = Facilitating genetic transfer = = = 
 Homologous recombination is an important method of integrating donor DNA into a recipient organism 's genome in horizontal gene transfer , the process by which an organism incorporates foreign DNA from another organism without being the offspring of that organism . Homologous recombination requires incoming DNA to be highly similar to the recipient genome , and so horizontal gene transfer is usually limited to similar bacteria . Studies in several species of bacteria have established that there is a log @-@ linear decrease in recombination frequency with increasing difference in sequence between host and recipient DNA . 
 In bacterial conjugation , where DNA is transferred between bacteria through direct cell @-@ to @-@ cell contact , homologous recombination helps integrate foreign DNA into the host genome via the RecBCD pathway . The RecBCD enzyme promotes recombination after DNA is converted from single @-@ strand DNA – in which form it originally enters the bacterium – to double @-@ strand DNA during replication . The RecBCD pathway is also essential for the final phase of transduction , a type of horizontal gene transfer in which DNA is transferred from one bacterium to another by a virus . Foreign , bacterial DNA is sometimes <unk> in the capsid head of bacteriophage virus particles as DNA is packaged into new bacteriophages during viral replication . When these new bacteriophages infect other bacteria , DNA from the previous host bacterium is injected into the new bacterial host as double @-@ strand DNA . The RecBCD enzyme then incorporates this double @-@ strand DNA into the genome of the new bacterial host . 
 = = = Bacterial transformation = = = 
 Natural bacterial transformation involves the transfer of DNA from a donor bacterium to a recipient bacterium , where both donor and recipient are ordinarily of the same species . Transformation , unlike bacterial conjugation and transduction , depends on numerous bacterial gene products that specifically interact to perform this process . Thus transformation is clearly a bacterial adaptation for DNA transfer . In order for a bacterium to bind , take up and integrate donor DNA into its resident chromosome by homologous recombination , it must first enter a special physiological state termed competence . The RecA / Rad51 / DMC1 gene family plays a central role in homologous recombination during bacterial transformation as it does during eukaryotic meiosis and mitosis . For instance , the RecA protein is essential for transformation in Bacillus subtilis and Streptococcus pneumoniae , and expression of the RecA gene is induced during the development of competence for transformation in these organisms . 
 As part of the transformation process , the RecA protein interacts with entering single @-@ stranded DNA ( ssDNA ) to form RecA / ssDNA <unk> that scan the resident chromosome for regions of homology and bring the entering ssDNA to the corresponding region , where strand exchange and homologous recombination occur . Thus the process of homologous recombination during bacterial transformation has fundamental similarities to homologous recombination during meiosis . 
 = = In viruses = = 
 Homologous recombination occurs in several groups of viruses . In DNA viruses such as herpesvirus , recombination occurs through a break @-@ and @-@ rejoin mechanism like in bacteria and eukaryotes . There is also evidence for recombination in some RNA viruses , specifically positive @-@ sense ssRNA viruses like retroviruses , picornaviruses , and coronaviruses . There is controversy over whether homologous recombination occurs in negative @-@ sense ssRNA viruses like influenza . 
 In RNA viruses , homologous recombination can be either precise or imprecise . In the precise type of RNA @-@ RNA recombination , there is no difference between the two parental RNA sequences and the resulting crossover RNA region . Because of this , it is often difficult to determine the location of crossover events between two recombining RNA sequences . In imprecise RNA homologous recombination , the crossover region has some difference with the parental RNA sequences – caused by either addition , deletion , or other modification of nucleotides . The level of precision in crossover is controlled by the sequence context of the two recombining strands of RNA : sequences rich in adenine and uracil decrease crossover precision . 
 Homologous recombination is important in facilitating viral evolution . For example , if the genomes of two viruses with different disadvantageous mutations undergo recombination , then they may be able to regenerate a fully functional genome . Alternatively , if two similar viruses have infected the same host cell , homologous recombination can allow those two viruses to swap genes and thereby evolve more potent variations of themselves . 
 Homologous recombination is the proposed mechanism whereby the DNA virus human herpesvirus @-@ 6 integrates into human telomeres . 
 When two or more viruses , each containing lethal genomic damage , infect the same host cell , the virus genomes can often pair with each other and undergo homologous recombinational repair to produce viable progeny . This process , known as multiplicity reactivation , has been studied in several bacteriophages , including phage T4 . Enzymes employed in recombinational repair in phage T4 are functionally homologous to enzymes employed in bacterial and eukaryotic recombinational repair . In particular , with regard to a gene necessary for the strand exchange reaction , a key step in homologous recombinational repair , there is functional homology from viruses to humans ( i. e. <unk> in phage T4 ; recA in E. coli and other bacteria , and <unk> and <unk> in yeast and other eukaryotes , including humans ) . Multiplicity reactivation has also been demonstrated in numerous pathogenic viruses . 
 = = Effects of dysfunction = = 
 Without proper homologous recombination , chromosomes often incorrectly align for the first phase of cell division in meiosis . This causes chromosomes to fail to properly segregate in a process called <unk> . In turn , <unk> can cause sperm and ova to have too few or too many chromosomes . Down 's syndrome , which is caused by an extra copy of chromosome 21 , is one of many abnormalities that result from such a failure of homologous recombination in meiosis . 
 Deficiencies in homologous recombination have been strongly linked to cancer formation in humans . For example , each of the cancer @-@ related diseases Bloom 's syndrome , Werner 's syndrome and <unk> @-@ Thomson syndrome are caused by malfunctioning copies of <unk> helicase genes involved in the regulation of homologous recombination : BLM , WRN and <unk> , respectively . In the cells of Bloom 's syndrome patients , who lack a working copy of the BLM protein , there is an elevated rate of homologous recombination . Experiments in mice deficient in BLM have suggested that the mutation gives rise to cancer through a loss of heterozygosity caused by increased homologous recombination . A loss in heterozygosity refers to the loss of one of two versions — or alleles — of a gene . If one of the lost alleles helps to suppress tumors , like the gene for the <unk> protein for example , then the loss of heterozygosity can lead to cancer . 
 Decreased rates of homologous recombination cause inefficient DNA repair , which can also lead to cancer . This is the case with BRCA1 and BRCA2 , two similar tumor suppressor genes whose malfunctioning has been linked with considerably increased risk for breast and ovarian cancer . Cells missing BRCA1 and BRCA2 have a decreased rate of homologous recombination and increased sensitivity to ionizing radiation , suggesting that decreased homologous recombination leads to increased susceptibility to cancer . Because the only known function of BRCA2 is to help initiate homologous recombination , researchers have speculated that more detailed knowledge of BRCA2 's role in homologous recombination may be the key to understanding the causes of breast and ovarian cancer . 
 = = Evolutionary Conservation = = 
 While the pathways can mechanistically vary , the ability of organisms to perform homologous recombination is universally conserved across all domains of life . Based on the similarity of their amino acid sequences , homologs of a number of proteins can be found in multiple domains of life indicating that they evolved a long time ago , and have since diverged from common ancestral proteins . 
 RecA recombinase family members are found in almost all organisms with RecA in bacteria , Rad51 and DMC1 in eukaryotes , RadA in archaea , and <unk> in T4 phage . 
 Related single stranded binding proteins that are important for homologous recombination , and many other processes , are also found in all domains of life . 
 <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and a number of other proteins are also found in both archaea and eukaryotes . 
 = = = The RecA <unk> Family = = = 
 The proteins of the RecA recombinase family of proteins are thought to be descended from a common ancestral recombinase . The RecA recombinase family contains RecA protein from bacteria , the Rad51 and Dmc1 proteins from eukaryotes , and RadA from archaea , and the recombinase <unk> proteins . Studies modeling the evolutionary relationships between the Rad51 , Dmc1 and RadA proteins indicate that they are monophyletic , or that they share a common molecular ancestor . Within this protein family , Rad51 and Dmc1 are grouped together in a separate clade from RadA . One of the reasons for grouping these three proteins together is that they all possess a modified helix @-@ turn @-@ helix motif , which helps the proteins bind to DNA , toward their N @-@ terminal ends . An ancient gene duplication event of a eukaryotic RecA gene and subsequent mutation has been proposed as a likely origin of the modern RAD51 and DMC1 genes . 
 The proteins generally share a long conserved region known as the RecA / Rad51 domain . Within this protein domain are two sequence motifs , Walker A motif and Walker B motif . The Walker A and B motifs allow members of the RecA / Rad51 protein family to engage in ATP binding and ATP hydrolysis . 
 = = = <unk> specific proteins = = = 
 The discovery of Dmc1 in several species of Giardia , one of the earliest protists to diverge as a eukaryote , suggests that meiotic homologous recombination — and thus meiosis itself — emerged very early in eukaryotic evolution . In addition to research on Dmc1 , studies on the Spo11 protein have provided information on the origins of meiotic recombination . Spo11 , a type II topoisomerase , can initiate homologous recombination in meiosis by making targeted double @-@ strand breaks in DNA . Phylogenetic trees based on the sequence of genes similar to <unk> in animals , fungi , plants , protists and archaea have led scientists to believe that the version Spo11 currently in eukaryotes emerged in the last common ancestor of eukaryotes and archaea . 
 = = Technological applications = = 
 = = = Gene targeting = = = 
 Many methods for introducing DNA sequences into organisms to create recombinant DNA and genetically modified organisms use the process of homologous recombination . Also called gene targeting , the method is especially common in yeast and mouse genetics . The gene targeting method in knockout mice uses mouse embryonic stem cells to deliver artificial genetic material ( mostly of therapeutic interest ) , which represses the target gene of the mouse by the principle of homologous recombination . The mouse thereby acts as a working model to understand the effects of a specific mammalian gene . In recognition of their discovery of how homologous recombination can be used to introduce genetic modifications in mice through embryonic stem cells , Mario Capecchi , Martin Evans and Oliver Smithies were awarded the 2007 Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine . 
 Advances in gene targeting technologies which hijack the homologous recombination mechanics of cells are now leading to the development of a new wave of more accurate , <unk> human disease models . These engineered human cell models are thought to more accurately reflect the genetics of human diseases than their mouse model predecessors . This is largely because mutations of interest are introduced into endogenous genes , just as they occur in the real patients , and because they are based on human genomes rather than rat genomes . Furthermore , certain technologies enable the knock @-@ in of a particular mutation rather than just knock @-@ outs associated with older gene targeting technologies . 
 = = = Protein engineering = = = 
 Protein engineering with homologous recombination develops chimeric proteins by swapping fragments between two parental proteins . These techniques exploit the fact that recombination can introduce a high degree of sequence diversity while preserving a protein 's ability to fold into its tertiary structure , or three @-@ dimensional shape . This stands in contrast to other protein engineering techniques , like random point mutagenesis , in which the probability of maintaining protein function declines exponentially with increasing amino acid substitutions . The chimeras produced by recombination techniques are able to maintain their ability to fold because their swapped parental fragments are structurally and evolutionarily conserved . These <unk> " building blocks " preserve structurally important interactions like points of physical contact between different amino acids in the protein 's structure . Computational methods like <unk> and statistical coupling analysis can be used to identify structural subunits suitable for recombination . 
 Techniques that rely on homologous recombination have been used to engineer new proteins . In a study published in 2007 , researchers were able to create chimeras of two enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of isoprenoids , a diverse class of compounds including hormones , visual pigments and certain pheromones . The chimeric proteins acquired an ability to catalyze an essential reaction in isoprenoid biosynthesis — one of the most diverse pathways of biosynthesis found in nature — that was absent in the parent proteins . Protein engineering through recombination has also produced chimeric enzymes with new function in members of a group of proteins known as the cytochrome P450 family , which in humans is involved in detoxifying foreign compounds like drugs , food additives and preservatives . 
 = = = Cancer therapy = = = 
 Cancer cells with BRCA mutations have deficiencies in homologous recombination , and drugs to exploit those deficiencies have been developed and used successfully in clinical trials . <unk> , a PARP1 inhibitor , shrunk or stopped the growth of tumors from breast , ovarian and prostate cancers caused by mutations in the BRCA1 or BRCA2 genes , which are necessary for HR . When BRCA1 or BRCA2 is absent , other types of DNA repair mechanisms must compensate for the deficiency of HR , such as base @-@ excision repair ( BER ) for stalled replication forks or non @-@ homologous end joining ( NHEJ ) for double strand breaks . By inhibiting BER in an HR @-@ deficient cell , <unk> applies the concept of synthetic lethality to specifically target cancer cells . While PARP1 inhibitors represent a novel approach to cancer therapy , researchers have cautioned that they may prove insufficient for treating late @-@ stage metastatic cancers . Cancer cells can become resistant to a PARP1 inhibitor if they undergo deletions of mutations in BRCA2 , undermining the drug 's synthetic lethality by restoring cancer cells ' ability to repair DNA by HR . 
 = Ronnie Mann = 
 Ronnie Mann ( born 12 October 1986 ) is an English professional mixed martial artist who competes in the featherweight division . A professional MMA competitor since 2003 , Mann has mostly fought in England and Japan . 
 Mann is a veteran of the former top English organisation Cage Rage Championships and was a quarter @-@ finalist in the Sengoku Featherweight Grand Prix in 2009 , losing to Hatsu Hioki . Mann is also the current Shark Fights Featherweight champion , after defeating Doug Evans in September 2010 . 
 = = Mixed martial arts career = = 
 = = = Background and early career = = = 
 Mann grew up in Cheltenham , England . Mann also idolised Marco <unk> and Royce Gracie as a youngster after being introduced to the Ultimate Fighting Championship . Mann began taking Muay Thai lessons at the age of 11 and participated in jiu @-@ jitsu and kickboxing tournaments at the age of 13 . Mann competed in his first amateur fight at the age of 16 and turned professional a year later . In Japan , he fought under the name of Ronnie Ushiwaka , his mother 's maiden name . ( His Mothers Maiden Name was <unk> ( <unk> ) Mann 's professional mixed martial arts career began in November 2003 with a win over Andy Dicks . A few months later , Mann made his Shooto debut , at Shooto Holland where he won via triangle choke after 56 seconds . Staying in Holland , Mann won a further fight , knocking his opponent out in under two minutes . Mann then recorded five successive submission victories . 
 = = = Domestic prominence = = = 
 In mid @-@ 2006 , Mann signed with top domestic organisation , Cage Rage and made his promotional debut at the Cage Rage : Contenders 1 event against Ashleigh Grimshaw . Mann later stated that the fight was one of his toughest , especially after being hit with an early low blow . The organisation , at the time , adopted the " open guard rule , " allowing fighters to stomp on each other . At the end of the third round , the fight was declared a draw , despite Mann feeling that he had the better of the fight , after a knockdown in the first round and a triangle choke attempt in the second round . 
 Mann later joined the Cage Gladiators promotion in England and made his promotional debut at Cage Gladiators 2 , against <unk> <unk> , winning via submission ( strikes ) at 1 : 42 of the first round . Three months later , Mann returned at Cage Gladiators 3 , defeating Chris Freeborn via submission ( triangle choke ) at 2 : 46 of the first round . 
 At Cage Rage 20 , in a rematch with Ashleigh Grimshaw , whom Mann had earlier drawn with , Mann controlled the stand @-@ up and the top position on the floor . Towards the end of the fight , Grimshaw attempted a comeback , utilising ground @-@ and @-@ pound offense , though Mann was declared the winner via unanimous decision after three rounds . 
 Mann 's next fight ( and third in the Cage Rage organisation ) was against top domestic prospect , Robbie Olivier . The fight saw both fighters neutralise the other 's ground game . In the stand @-@ up , Mann was regarded as being unusually tentative , which gave Olivier the opportunity to take him to the floor , where again , neither fighter was able to advance position or do anything of note . After three rounds , Olivier was declared the winner via unanimous decision . 
 At Cage Rage 24 , Mann faced Jordan Miller , who took the fight at short notice . Mann was able to take Miller down almost immediately in the fight and took a rear naked choke . Mann dominated from that point and soon after , transitioned to a triangle choke after just 53 seconds of the first round . 
 After this , Cage Rage became defunct and Mann re @-@ joined Cage Gladiators , immediately competing against Frederic Fernandez for the Cage Gladiators World Featherweight Championship at the Cage Gladiators 6 event . Mann was able to utilise his wrestling skills again , dominating the takedowns , neutralising his opponent . Mann was able to take the unanimous decision after effective striking , leading Sherdog to once again label him " a star in the making . " 
 Mann was then scheduled to face future World Extreme Cagefighting standout Brad Pickett , though the fight was later cancelled after Pickett suffered a broken arm defending a high kick . 
 Mann instead took a fight in Croatia , defeating Ivica <unk> via TKO ( injury ) . Returning to Cage Gladiators at the Cage Gladiators 8 event , Mann defeated Steve McCombe via submission ( choke ) in the first round . 
 = = = Sengoku = = = 
 Mann then signed with Sengoku Raiden Championship in Japan , to participate in their Featherweight Grand Prix . In the opening round , Mann faced Tetsuya Yamada and defeated him via unanimous decision ( 30 – 29 , 30 – 29 , 30 – 29 ) . During the first round of the fight , Mann was able to land powerful punches , before falling into a deep <unk> attempt from Yamada . After escaping , Mann was able to gain top position to end the first round . The second round saw Yamada attempt a standing Kimura , which was fought off by Mann , who was later able to take down Yamada twice , whilst fighting off a second kimura attempt . The final round saw poor kickboxing attempts by Yamada , which was countered by two takedowns . Finally , Mann looked to utilise an ankle lock , which was reversed into another <unk> by Yamada . After the third round ended , Mann was declared the winner via decision . 
 In the quarter finals of the tournament , Mann faced early tournament favourite , Hatsu Hioki who had previously defeated World Extreme Cagefighting veteran Chris Manuel . Mann weighed in at 142 @.@ 6 lbs , whilst Hioki , who was unbeaten in his last seven fights , weighed in at 143 @.@ 3 lbs . Mann stated that " [ I ] plan for an exciting and explosive fight . " 
 During the fight , Mann was able to land several successful punches , before Hioki took Mann down with a trip , where he was able to land knees and execute a D <unk> choke . After scrambling to avoid an armbar attempt , Mann fell to a triangle choke , tapping out at 3 : 09 of the first round . After the fight , Mann stated " I started off well , standing up , but I fell into his game . Fell into his trap . The punches were only small punches , but it was the triangle that was slowly coming on , so in the end , I tapped . " 
 After his elimination from the Featherweight Grand Prix , Mann competed in his third fight in Sengoku against Shigeki Osawa , who Sherdog labelled a talented young prospect . After three rounds , Mann was victorious , via unanimous decision . 
 = = = Move to North America = = = 
 Mann still had one more fight left on his Sengoku contract and also expressed a desire to join World Extreme Cagefighting and eventually fight Featherweight Champion Jose Aldo . 
 Despite his contract with Sengoku , Mann went on to make his North American debut against Doug Evans on 11 September 2010 at Shark Fights 13 . The bout saw Mann hit Evans with multiple combinations and low kicks , before utilising a flying knee . Evans counter @-@ attacked with takedowns , which he kept up into the final round . Mann won the bout via split decision ( 47 – 48 , 48 – 47 , 48 – 47 ) to become the new Shark Fights Featherweight champion . 
 = = = Bellator Fighting Championships = = = 
 On 17 February , it was announced Mann had signed with Bellator Fighting Championships . He had his first fight for the promotion against Josh <unk> at Bellator 42 . Mann was able to dominate the fight with superior wrestling and won the fight via unanimous decision ( 30 @-@ 25 , 30 @-@ 27 , 30 @-@ 27 ) . 
 That win earned Mann a place in the Bellator 2011 Summer Series Featherweight Tournament where he faced Adam Schindler at Bellator 46 in his quarter final match @-@ up . Mann stuffed all attempts from the wrestler to take the fight to the ground before he scored a stunning first round KO win with a right uppercut left hook combination which dropped Schindler before swarming on him with <unk> to leave him unconscious on the mat . 
 Mann faced Pat Curran in the Featherweight tournament semifinals at Bellator 47 . He lost the fight via unanimous decision . 
 Mann fought Kenny Foster at Bellator 53 for a spot in the next Featherweight tournament . He dominated the stand @-@ up but then got taken down which gave him the opportunity to finish via submission ( triangle choke ) in the first round . 
 Mann was defeated by Mike Corey via unanimous decision ( 29 @-@ 28 , 29 @-@ 28 , 29 @-@ 28 ) in the Bellator Season Six Featherweight Tournament . In the first round he dropped Corey twice , but was <unk> in the next two to lose the decision . 
 = = = Cage Warriors = = = 
 On 6 June 2013 Cage Warriors announced that they signed Mann to a five fight deal . He is scheduled to meet Jose Luis <unk> at Cage Warriors 57 . And he would go on to defeat <unk> by way of TKO ( punches ) in the 1st round . 
 He next fought Marat <unk> at Cage Warriors Fight Night 9 on 25 October 2013 . He won the fight via unanimous decision . 
 Mann faced Marcelo Costa at Cage Warriors 68 on 3 May 2014 . Mann lost the fight via rear naked choke in the second round . 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 Shark Fights 
 Shark Fights Featherweight Championship ( One time ) 
 = = Mixed martial arts record = = 
 = Man Enters the Cosmos = 
 Man Enters the Cosmos is a cast bronze sculpture by Henry Moore located on the Lake Michigan lakefront outside the Adler Planetarium in the Museum Campus area of downtown Chicago in Cook County , Illinois , United States . The planetarium , which is both a National Historic Landmark and listed on the National Register of Historic Places , is located in the Near South Side community area of Chicago . Moore 's sculpture is a functional bowstring equatorial sundial created in 1980 measuring approximately 13 feet ( 4 @.@ 0 m ) . The sundial was formerly located slightly further south at the steps of the main entry plaza to the Planetarium , but it now sits directly on the lakefront . The work is a later copy of a composition first created in the 1960s for the offices of The Times newspaper at Printing House Square in London , and according to the Henry Moore Foundation is titled Sundial 1965 @-@ 66 . 
 = = Details = = 
 The sundial has two plaques on its base . The one on the left is a commemorative one discussing the benefactor and purpose of the sculpture . The benefactor of the sculpture was the B.F. Ferguson Monument fund , which has commissioned several works of art throughout Chicago . Many of the Ferguson fund 's commissioned works , such as the Fountain of the Great Lakes , are housed in and on the grounds of the Art Institute of Chicago or elsewhere in Grant Park . The purpose of the commission was to recognize the space exploration program . The plaque on the right is an equation of time table to correct for the time differences caused by the axial tilt of the Earth as well as its orbital eccentricity . As the plaque indicates with an additional correction , the equation of time table does not correct for daylight saving time . 
 Like most of Moore 's work completed after 1954 , this was a modeled sculpture instead of a direct carving . The sculpture is composed of two bronze semicircles , one set inside and at right angles to the other and a slim bronze rod that extends from one end of the outer semicircle to the other that serves as the gnomon ( indicator ) . The bowstring equatorial sundial derives its name from the appearance of the shadow @-@ casting gnomon , which resembles a bow string . The shadow of the rod projects onto the inner semicircle , which serves as the dial face ( or dial plate ) , to mark the time of day when there is sufficient sunlight to produce shadows . 
 Over the course of the year different sections of the rod serve as the style , which is the part of the gnomon that indicates the time by casting its shadow on the dial face . At the summer solstice , when the Sun is highest ( farthest above the equatorial plane ) , the style is closest to the top of the rod , and at the winter solstice , when the Sun is lowest , it is closest to the bottom . At the equinoxes , when the Sun is on the equatorial plane , the style is exactly in the center of the length of the rod . The style of the equatorial sundial is parallel to the Earth 's axis of rotation . 
 This type of sundial is known as an equatorial sundial because the plane of the dial face is parallel to the Earth 's equatorial plane . Two primary examples of modified equatorial sundials are bowstring equatorial and armillary dials . Both of these modified equatorial sundials can be read year @-@ round on the same surface , regardless of whether the Sun is above or below the equatorial plane whereas a standard equatorial sundial changes sides with each equinox and is virtually unreadable near the equinoxes when the Sun is located on the equatorial plane . 
 Between 1997 and 1999 , The Adler Planetarium added a sky pavilion to the original 1930 architecture . When it did so , the roads were moved and the sundial was moved to its current location . The move was performed by contractors of the Adler Planetarium in two phases . First , the sculpture was removed and placed in storage to make way for the current roadway . It was later moved to its current position after the new roadway was built and the old roadway was replaced with a walkway . Now , a u @-@ turn in Solidarity Drive runs through the original location of the sundial , and the sundial is located on the walkway that replaced the previous roadway that went around the planetarium . The new location and the u @-@ turn can be seen on a Museum Campus map . This construction was contemporaneous with the $ 100 million project that reconfigured of traffic around the Museum Campus and caused Lake Shore Drive to be moved during the mid @-@ 1990s . 
 = = Moore in Chicago = = 
 When Moore was alive , he took pride in viewing his sculptures in the open @-@ air environment . He once said he would prefer to see his sculptures in any open landscape than in even the most beautiful buildings he knew . Including this sculpture , Moore has a total of four public sculptures that are listed in the Smithsonian Institution 's Research Information System ( <unk> ) on display outdoors , in Chicago . All of them are bronze . His Nuclear Energy is situated on the campus of the University of Chicago at the site of the first self @-@ sustaining nuclear reaction , which is listed in the National Register of Historic Places . The site is also listed as a National Historic Landmark , and Chicago Landmark . Other Chicago works include Large Interior Form , which is located in the north garden at the Art Institute of Chicago , and Reclining Figure , which is on loan to the University of Chicago and which is located in the Cochrane @-@ Woods Art Center courtyard . The Henry Moore Foundation lists several other indoor Chicago works at locations such as the Art Institute of Chicago and The Smart Museum . 
 = Never Been Kissed ( Glee ) = 
 " Never Been Kissed " is the sixth episode of the second season of the American television series Glee , and the twenty @-@ eighth episode overall . It was written by Brad Falchuk , directed by Bradley Buecker and premiered on Fox on November 9 , 2010 . In " Never Been Kissed " , the glee club members are assigned a boys against girls singing competition . The bullying of club member Kurt Hummel ( Chris Colfer ) intensifies , but he meets a new ally in Blaine Anderson ( Darren Criss ) , the lead singer of a rival glee club . Puck ( Mark Salling ) is released from juvenile detention and forms a friendship with Artie Abrams ( Kevin McHale ) , and football coach Shannon Beiste ( Dot @-@ Marie Jones ) is hurt when she learns that several of the students are visualizing her to quell their amorous moods . 
 The episode began a story arc about bullying which spanned the remainder of the season . It coincided with a spate of suicides among bullied youths , which reportedly gave the cast and crew additional inspiration to do their best work . Six songs were covered — four in the form of two mash @-@ ups — and all were released as singles which charted on the Billboard Hot 100 . Critics were less enthused by the mash @-@ ups than the other performances ; Criss 's cover of " Teenage Dream " was particularly well @-@ received , and became the first Glee single to top the Billboard Digital Songs chart . 
 10 @.@ 99 million US viewers watched " Never Been Kissed " . It was one of six episodes that were submitted to the judges for Glee 's nomination in the Outstanding Comedy Series category at the 63rd Primetime Emmy Awards . Jones received an Outstanding Guest Actress in a Comedy Series nomination for her work on the show , and submitted this episode for judging . Reviewers approved of her performance but were very critical of her storyline and polarized by the plotting of the bullying story , though they generally approved of the episode 's Puck and Artie sub @-@ plot . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Glee club director Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) announces the second New Directions boys against girls singing competition . He later sees a shaken Kurt Hummel in the hallway — he had been slammed against a locker by school bully Dave Karofsky ( Max Adler ) — and takes Kurt to his office to recover . Kurt criticizes both the school 's failure to act against homophobic bullying and the lack of challenge in the club 's competition ; Will decides to modify the assignment to have the teams perform songs by groups of the opposite gender . Kurt is happier with the new spin , but the other boys are unreceptive to his ideas for their team . Puck is especially dismissive , and suggests that he go spy on the Dalton Academy Warblers , one of their competitors at the forthcoming Sectionals round of show choir competition . The girls ' team decides on and sings a mash @-@ up of " Start Me Up / Livin ' on a Prayer " . 
 Kurt visits Dalton Academy , an all @-@ boys private school , and watches the Warblers perform " Teenage Dream " . He is befriended by lead singer Blaine Anderson , who is also gay and encourages Kurt to stand up for himself . The next time he is attacked by Karofsky , Kurt confronts him in the boys ' locker room , and as the argument intensifies he is kissed by Karofsky , which leaves Kurt stunned . After Kurt tells Blaine of this , he and Kurt later try to talk to Karofsky about the difficulties and confusion his homosexual feelings must be causing him , but he denies that anything happened and soon returns to bullying Kurt . 
 Puck has been granted early release from juvenile detention on the condition that he performs community service . He picks Artie Abrams , a paraplegic , to fulfill that service , and the two busk in the school courtyard . They sing a duet of " One Love / People Get Ready " while Puck surreptitiously intimidates their schoolmates into giving donations . He then helps Artie get back together with Brittany Pierce ( Heather Morris ) , by setting up a double date with them and Santana Lopez ( Naya Rivera ) . Puck 's caseworker Joan Martin ( Michael Hyatt ) had believed he was working to rehabilitate gang members , and tells him he will have to return to the detention center unless he finds an alternative type of service . Puck admits to Artie that despite his bravado , he was miserable when locked up and does not want to return ; Artie convinces him to complete the required real community service and offers to tutor him in school . 
 Some members of New Directions , who need to cool their arousal while making out , discover that picturing football coach Shannon Beiste is very effective . When she finds out about their technique , Beiste is deeply hurt and submits her resignation . Will attempts to convince her to stay , and gives her a friendly kiss when she admits she has never been kissed . He then invites Beiste to watch the boys ' competition performance ; they apologize , dedicate their mash @-@ up of " Stop ! In the Name of Love / Free Your Mind " to her , and win her forgiveness . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Never Been Kissed " was written by series co @-@ creator Brad Falchuk , directed by Bradley Buecker , and premiered on November 9 , 2010 . It launched a story arc about bullying , which Glee co @-@ creator Ryan Murphy had been building to for a season and a half . He explained that he wanted Kurt to reach a point where he would not accept the abusive treatment he received any more , and planned to follow the developments through the rest of the year , as all of the other characters were affected . The revelation that Karofsky 's antagonism stemmed from his own homosexual feelings was based on a personal acquaintance of Murphy 's . After the episode had been written , a spate of suicides occurred around the nation among teenage victims of bullying , which Murphy said added extra significance to " Never Been Kissed " and " ignite [ d ] the cast and the crew to do their best and push themselves with the story . " 
 The episode introduced Criss as Blaine , a gay member of a rival glee club , the Dalton Academy Warblers . In September 2010 , a casting call was released for an actor to portray a " cute , charismatic , gay high school junior " who would lead a competing glee club . Criss had auditioned for Glee several times before , once for the role of Finn Hudson . The character breakdown for Blaine was the first he believed he had a chance of securing , and indeed his audition was successful . Blaine was introduced primarily as a mentor to Kurt . Criss explained , " At this point , Kurt 's [ sexuality ] has been such a sense of discord in his life . Blaine finds [ being gay ] empowering . He embraces who he is , and sees Kurt [ struggling with ] the same things that he had to deal with , and I think he wants to impart that knowledge . " Murphy described Blaine as a character with " great self @-@ loathing " and regret for having run away from his own tormentors ; he intended this to form part of his story arc for the season , as Blaine tries to set right some past mistakes . Neither he nor Criss knew whether Blaine would eventually become Kurt 's boyfriend — a role originally intended for new club member Sam Evans ( Chord Overstreet ) until the producers decided to change Sam to heterosexual and paired him with Quinn — but based on the characters ' chemistry and the " immediate outcry " from fans who wanted to see them as a couple , Murphy later decided to pair them romantically . 
 Other recurring characters who appeared were glee club members Sam and Mike Chang ( Harry Shum , Jr . ) , Principal Figgins ( Iqbal Theba ) , jock bully Dave Karofsky , cheerleader Becky Jackson ( Lauren Potter ) , students Jacob Ben Israel ( Josh Sussman ) and Lauren Zizes ( Ashley Fink ) , and Coach Shannon Beiste . Although Beiste 's physical appearance was used as comedy in the episode , Jones was not offended ; she called it hysterical , said " it serves a purpose for the message " and hoped " maybe it will make people think outside of the show . " Murphy intended her storyline to highlight the fact that bullying can be damaging without necessarily being overt . He stated : " Th [ e ] episode is completely about accountability . If you can change any young impressionable minds and make them aware of the consequences of their actions and all different forms of cruelty , I think that ’ s a great , great gift . " Telly Leung and Titus Makin , Jr. guest starred as Wes and David respectively , two additional members of the Dalton Academy Warblers . Hyatt guest starred as Joan Martin , Puck 's probation officer . 
 The episode featured cover versions of " Teenage Dream " by Katy Perry , " One Love / People Get Ready " by Bob Marley & the Wailers , and mash @-@ ups of The Rolling Stones ' " Start Me Up " with Bon Jovi 's " Livin ' on a Prayer " , and The Supremes ' " Stop ! In the Name of Love " with En Vogue 's " Free Your Mind " . All of the songs performed were released as singles , available for download , and " Teenage Dream " and " One Love / People Get Ready " are featured on the soundtrack album Glee : The Music , Volume 4 . " Teenage Dream " was later also included as the opening track on the seventh soundtrack album , Glee : The Music Presents the Warblers . The background vocals of " Teenage Dream " were provided by collegiate a cappella group the Beelzebubs from Tufts University . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 During its original broadcast , " Never Been Kissed " was watched by 10 @.@ 99 million American viewers and attained a 4 @.@ 6 / 13 Nielsen rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic . Its rating was a season low to that point ; however , Glee was the top @-@ rated show for the night of broadcast in all under @-@ 50 categories . It was the most @-@ viewed scripted show of the week amongst adults 18 – 49 , and ranked twenty @-@ first amongst all viewers . In Australia , the episode was watched by 1 @.@ 081 million viewers , a decline from previous weeks , which was attributed by David Dale of The Sydney Morning Herald to many regular viewers being away on <unk> week . In Canada , 1 @.@ 97 million viewers watched the episode , placing twelfth for the week . In the UK , the episode was watched by 2 @.@ 64 million viewers ( 2 @.@ 20 million on E4 , and 438 @,@ 000 on E4 + 1 ) , which made it the most @-@ watched show on cable for the week . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Glee was nominated in the Outstanding Comedy Series category at the 63rd Primetime Emmy Awards : " Never Been Kissed " was one of six episodes submitted for consideration , paired with the season 's fourth episode , " Duets " . Jones received an Outstanding Guest Actress in a Comedy Series nomination for her work on Glee 's second season , and submitted her performance in the episode for final judging . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 " Never Been Kissed " received mixed reviews from critics , who were polarized by Kurt 's storyline . While CNN 's Lisa Respers France thought it was Glee 's best episode thus far and IGN 's Robert Canning rated it 9 out of 10 , which signifies an outstanding episode , Linda Holmes of National Public Radio dismissed it as " one of the most facile and emotionally inauthentic episodes the show has ever produced " , and Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club deemed it a failure on " almost every level . " The Huffington Post 's Leah Anthony Libresco found it an " extraordinarily counterproductive " response to the string of teenage gay suicides in early 2010 . Bobby Hankinson of the Houston Chronicle and James Poniewozik of Time approved of the storyline in principle — the former opined that Glee 's willingness to raise mainstream awareness of such issues was " incredibly courageous " , and the latter appreciated that it would span a multi @-@ episode arc — but both were critical of its depiction in practice . 
 Many elements of the plot were highlighted as being problematic . Holmes felt that Karofsky 's swift transition from bullying to kissing Kurt was absurd and " emotionally unsound " . Libresco disapproved of Will for treating Kurt 's upset as the key problem , rather than the unchecked bullying which provoked it . She found Blaine 's advice to Kurt " misleading and dangerous " , especially the suggestion that targeted children should be held responsible for confronting their attackers and putting themselves at risk of further injury , rather than for protecting themselves . VanDerWerff and Poniewozik were critical of Dalton Academy : the former found its tolerance unrealistic and the latter was disappointed that Glee declined to depict a flawed high school tackling bullying in favor of creating " an almost otherworldly paradise " . Poniewozik also noted that the storyline was inherently flawed , as the show had previously treated bullying in a light @-@ hearted manner , but opined that its saving grace was the focus it placed on Colfer , " probably the strongest actor with the most interesting character among the Glee kids " . 
 Further praise for Colfer 's performance came from Canning and Entertainment Weekly 's Tim Stack , who approved of the episode for its depiction of there being no simple solution to the bullying . Amy Reiter of the Los Angeles Times commented that it was testament to the writers and cast that Karofsky 's kiss startled the audience as much as it did Kurt , and commended the transitioning of Karofsky from a faceless jock into " a nuanced character with a back story and hidden motives of his own . " MTV 's Aly Semigran wrote that , should the episode inspire a single teenager to have courage in the face of discrimination , or re @-@ consider bullying , it would be an impressive accomplishment . 
 The Beiste storyline was met with criticism . Reiter questioned why Beiste was made to look to high school students to " gauge her own desirability " , an element she found " hazy and creepy " . Poniewozik criticized the depiction of Beiste as an object of pity , and felt that Will 's behavior was worse than the students ' when he acted with " amazing condescension " and kissed her . Both Poniewozik and Semigran disliked the way viewers were made complicit in Beiste 's humiliation by being invited to laugh at her expense , and Holmes criticized Glee for denying Beiste dignity , with the observation that such a plot would never have been given to Kurt . VanDerWerff commented negatively on the way Glee plays up Beiste 's " masculine nature " while simultaneously lecturing viewers against mocking her . He called the kiss " somehow both heartfelt and completely horrifying " . Canning praised Jones in her " best performance this season " , as well as Beiste 's " raw and real " confession to Will . 
 The Puck sub @-@ plot received generally positive reviews . Poniewozik called it the " best and most authentic of the night " , with praise for Salling 's performance , and Canning felt that it served well as a comical break from the episode 's other storylines . Brett Berk of Vanity Fair enjoyed the additional depth given to Puck , and he , Stack and New York 's Rebecca Milzoff commented positively on Puck 's budding friendship with Artie . VanDerWerff deemed it the episode 's " least objectionable " storyline , though wrote that the awkward inclusion of their duet , the abruptness of Artie 's feelings for Brittany , and the " forced nature " of the scene in which Puck confesses that he does not want to return to juvenile detention all " conspired to keep the storyline from lifting off . " 
 = = = Music and performances = = = 
 Reviews of the episode 's musical numbers were also mixed , with the mash @-@ ups less favorably received than the other performances . Canning felt that the songs intruded on the storytelling . Hankinson wrote that the mash @-@ ups were " shoehorned in [ to an ] already over @-@ stuffed hour " , and Emily Yahr of The Washington Post said they served " no real purpose " . 
 BuddyTV 's Jen Harper enjoyed the harmonies and simple arrangement of " One Love / People Get Ready " , and Anthony Benigno of the Daily News gave it an " A " , with praise for the vocals . Stack graded it " B- " . He called it a " nice performance " , but incongruous in context , a concern shared by Erica Futterman of Rolling Stone , who preferred Salling 's rendition of " Only the Good Die Young " in the episode " Grilled Cheesus " . 
 Perry expressed approval of the cover of her song , " Teenage Dream " , through the social networking website Twitter . Harper found the choreography uncomfortable viewing , and Hanh Nguyen of Zap2it agreed that the performers appeared to be " rockin ' out a bit too much to it " , but felt that the song worked " remarkably well " overall . Futterman deemed it the best song of the episode , and appreciated that it was more understated than numbers performed by rival glee club Vocal Adrenaline during the show 's first season . Stack went further and called the performance one of his favorites on Glee ; he enjoyed the choreography and arrangement and graded it " A + " . Benigno again gave the song an " A " ; he called it " flawless " and an improvement on Perry 's original . In December 2012 , TV Guide named the rendition one of Glee 's best performances . 
 The girls ' Bon Jovi – Rolling Stones mash @-@ up was received favorably by Stack and Milzoff — the former graded it " A " , the latter called it " brash and fun " , and both writers appreciated the black leather costumes . While Harper also liked the costumes and the energetic performance , she felt it " paled in comparison " to the last mash @-@ up the girls performed , in the season one episode " Vitamin D " . Futterman commented that the costumes and choreography overwhelmed the vocals , to the point of being " a little too Miley and not enough Glee " . Benigno called the song a " cacophony " and gave it his lowest performance grade of the episode , a " D " . He suggested that Glee had been responsible for " reviving the mashup fad " , but hoped the girls ' performance would serve to end it again . The boys ' Supremes – En Vogue mash @-@ up was graded " A " by Stack , who liked the combination of artists . Harper preferred the girls ' costumes but felt the boys gave the better performance , while Futterman found it overly @-@ sentimental in context , but also preferred it to the girls ' song . Benigno gave it a " C " , and commented , " Not quite the debacle the previous mash @-@ up was , but given how fantastic this episode was , the sendoff should 've been better . " 
 = = = Chart history = = = 
 All four of the cover versions featured debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 , and appeared on other musical charts . On the Hot 100 , the show 's rendition of " Teenage Dream " debuted at number eight , and sold 55 @,@ 000 downloads on its first day and a total of 214 @,@ 000 copies in its first week , the best first @-@ day and first @-@ week sales numbers for any Glee Cast single . It was the first Glee single to top Billboard 's Digital Songs chart , and debuted at number ten on the Canadian Hot 100 . " Teenage Dream " was also the first single since the pilot 's " Don 't Stop Believin ' " to be certified gold in the US . The other three songs on the Hot 100 were " Start Me Up / Livin ' on a Prayer " at number thirty @-@ one , which also made number twenty @-@ two on the Canadian Hot 100 ; " Stop ! In the Name of Love / Free Your Mind " at number thirty @-@ eight , which also made number twenty @-@ eight on the Canadian Hot 100 ; and " One Love / People Get Ready " at number forty @-@ one , which also made number thirty @-@ two on the Canadian Hot 100 . 
 = Wet season = 
 The rainy season , or monsoon season , is the time of year when most of a region 's average annual rainfall occurs . It usually lasts one or more months . The term " green season " is also sometimes used as a euphemism by tourist authorities . Areas with wet seasons are dispersed across portions of the tropics and subtropics . 
 Under the Köppen climate classification , for tropical climates , a wet season month is defined as a month where average precipitation is 60 millimetres ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) or more . In contrast to areas with savanna climates and monsoon regimes , Mediterranean climates have wet winters and dry summers . Dry and rainy months are characteristic of tropical seasonal forests : in contrast to tropical rainforests , which do not have dry or wet seasons , since their rainfall is equally distributed throughout the year . Some areas with pronounced rainy seasons will see a break in rainfall mid @-@ season , when the intertropical convergence zone or monsoon trough moves to higher latitudes in the middle of the warm season . 
 When the wet season occurs during a warm season , or summer , precipitation falls mainly during the late afternoon and early evening . In the wet season , air quality improves , fresh water quality improves , and vegetation grows substantially , leading to crop yields late in the season . Rivers overflow their banks , and some animals retreat to higher ground . Soil nutrients diminish and erosion increases . The incidence of malaria increases in areas where the rainy season coincides with high temperatures , particularly in tropical areas . Some animals have adaptation and survival strategies for the wet season . Often , the previous dry season leads to food shortages in the wet season , as the crops have yet to mature . 
 = = Character of the rainfall = = 
 In areas where the heavy rainfall is associated with a wind shift , the wet season is known as the monsoon . Rainfall in the wet season is mainly due to daytime heating which leads to diurnal thunderstorm activity within a pre @-@ existing moist airmass , so the rain mainly falls in late afternoon and early evening in savannah and monsoon regions . Further , much of the total rainfall each day occurs in the first minutes of the downpour , before the storms mature into their stratiform stage . Most places have only one wet season , but areas of the tropics can have two wet seasons , because the monsoon trough , or Intertropical Convergence Zone , can pass over locations in the tropics twice per year . However , since rain forests have rainfall spread evenly through the year , they do not have a wet season . 
 It is different for places with a Mediterranean climate . In the western United States , during the cold season from September – May , extratropical cyclones from the Pacific Ocean move inland into the region due to a southward migration of the jet stream during the cold season . This shift in the jet stream brings much of the annual precipitation to the region , and sometimes also brings heavy rain and strong low pressure systems . The peninsula of Italy has weather very similar to the western United States in this regard . 
 = = Areas affected = = 
 Areas with a savanna climate in Sub @-@ Saharan Africa , such as Ghana , Burkina Faso , Darfur , Eritrea , Ethiopia , and Botswana have a distinct rainy season . Also within the savanna climate regime , Florida and South Texas have a rainy season . Monsoon regions include Southeast Asia ( including Indonesia and Philippines ) , northern sections of Australia 's North , Polynesia , Central America , western and southern Mexico , the Desert Southwest of the United States , southern Guyana , portions of northeast Brazil . 
 Northern Guyana has two wet seasons : one in early spring and the other in early winter . In western Africa , there are two rainy seasons across southern sections , but only one across the north . Within the Mediterranean climate regime , the west coast of the United States and the Mediterranean coastline of Italy , Greece , and Turkey experience a wet season in the winter months . Similarly , the wet season in the Negev desert of Israel extends from October through May . At the boundary between the Mediterranean and monsoon climates lies the Sonoran desert , which receives the two rainy seasons associated with each climate regime . 
 The wet season is known by many different local names throughout the world . For example , in Mexico it is known as " storm season " . Different names are given to the various short " seasons " of the year by the Aboriginal tribes of Northern Australia : the wet season typically experienced there from December to March is called <unk> . The precise meaning of the word is fairly disputable , although it is widely accepted to relate to the severe thunderstorms , flooding , and abundant vegetation growth commonly experienced at this time . 
 = = Effects = = 
 In tropical areas , when the monsoon arrives , high daytime high temperatures drop and overnight low temperatures increase . During the wet season , a combination of heavy rainfall and , in some places such as Hong Kong , an onshore wind , improve air quality . In Brazil , the wet season is correlated with weaker trade winds off the ocean . The pH level of water becomes more balanced due to the charging of local aquifers during the wet season . Water also softens , as the concentration of dissolved materials reduces during the rainy season . Erosion is also increased during rainy periods . Arroyos that are dry at other times of the year fill with runoff , in some cases with water as deep as 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) . Leaching of soils during periods of heavy rainfall depletes nutrients . The higher runoff from land masses affects nearby ocean areas , which are more stratified , or less mixed , due to stronger surface currents forced by the heavy rainfall runoff . 
 = = = Floods = = = 
 High rainfall can cause widespread flooding , which can lead to landslides and mudflows in mountainous areas . Such floods cause rivers to burst their banks and submerge homes . The Ghaggar @-@ <unk> River , which only flows during India 's monsoon season , can flood and severely damage local crops . Floods can be exacerbated by fires during the previous dry season , which cause soils which are sandy or composed of loam to become hydrophobic , or water repellent . In various ways governments may help people deal with wet season floods . Flood plain mapping identifies which areas are more prone to flooding . Instructions on controlling erosion through outreach are also provided by telephone or the internet . 
 = = Life adaptations = = 
 = = = Humans = = = 
 The wet season is the main period of vegetation growth within the Savanna climate regime . However , this also means that wet season is a time for food shortages before crops reach their full maturity . This causes seasonal weight changes for people in developing countries , with a drop occurring during the wet season until the time of the first harvest , when weights rebound . Malaria incidence increases during periods of high temperature and heavy rainfall . 
 = = = Animals = = = 
 Cows calve , or give birth , at the beginning of the wet season . The onset of the rainy season signals the departure of the Monarch butterfly from Mexico . Tropical species of butterflies show larger dot markings on their wings to fend off possible predators and are more active during the wet season than the dry season . Within the tropics and warmer areas of the subtropics , decreased salinity of near shore wetlands due to the rains causes an increase in crocodile nesting . Other species , such as the arroyo toad , spawn within the couple of months after the seasonal rains . Armadillos and rattlesnakes seek higher ground . 
 = McLaren MP4 @-@ 30 = 
 The McLaren MP4 @-@ 30 was a Formula One racing car designed by Tim Goss and Neil Oatley for McLaren to compete in the 2015 Formula One season . The car was driven by 2005 and 2006 World Drivers ' Champion Fernando Alonso , who returned to McLaren eight years after he last drove for the team and 2009 World Champion Jenson Button . Kevin Magnussen , who drove for the team in 2014 , temporarily stood in for Alonso after a test accident . Additional testing and development work was carried out by Magnussen , Stoffel Vandoorne and Oliver Turvey . The car was the first built by McLaren since the MP4 / 7A — which contested the 1992 season — to be powered by a Honda engine , known as the RA615H , after McLaren ended their twenty @-@ year partnership with Mercedes at the end of the 2014 season . 
 The car was nicknamed the " size zero Formula One car " by the team for its distinct sharply tapered rear end , which was achieved by designing the Honda engine to operate at higher temperatures than other engines . At the end of the season , the car recorded a best finish of fifth place at the Hungarian Grand Prix , and had scored just twenty @-@ seven points , leaving McLaren ninth in the World Constructors ' Championship . Button and Alonso were classified in sixteenth and seventeenth positions respectively , in the World Drivers ' Championship , while Magnussen was not formally classified , as he did not start the one race that he entered . This made 2015 the most difficult season in Formula One that the team had endured in thirty @-@ five years , as a string of technical problems and retirements compromised the car 's performance . An analysis of the project pointed towards failure in communication between McLaren and Honda , Honda under @-@ estimating the technology required for the engine , and critical faults in the engine 's design , as the cause of the team 's problems . 
 = = Design and development = = 
 = = = Design team = = = 
 Having developed the McLaren MP4 @-@ 29 in 2014 , Tim Goss and Neil Oatley returned to design and build the MP4 @-@ 30 . Peter Prodromou , who previously worked for McLaren between 1991 and 2006 , was recruited back to the team from Red Bull Racing — where he had served as the team 's Head of Aerodynamics — to aid in designing the MP4 @-@ 30 and to oversee the team 's trackside operations alongside former Sauber designer Matt Morris . 
 The RA615H engine was developed at Honda 's Automobile Research and Development facilities in Utsunomiya in Tochigi Prefecture — the same facility used to develop the Honda Civic <unk> for use in the World Touring Car Championship and the Honda NSX @-@ GT to compete in the Japanese Super GT championship — with the project led by Yasuhisa Arai . 
 = = = Early development = = = 
 Honda had previously competed in Formula One as a constructor when they purchased British American Racing in 2006 , before selling the team to Brawn GP ahead of the 2009 season . With the sport introducing a brand @-@ new engine formula in 2014 and Mercedes , their engine @-@ supplier , establishing their own team , McLaren sought a new engine supplier with a view to a long @-@ term relationship . The partnership with Honda was first announced in May 2013 , and the RA615H engine spent the next eighteen months in development . The team used Mercedes ' <unk> Hybrid engine in the McLaren MP4 @-@ 29 throughout the 2014 season . 
 Development of the McLaren MP4 @-@ 30 started with the McLaren MP4 @-@ <unk> / <unk> , a variation of the MP4 @-@ 29 that was developed to test the new engine . The car made appearances at test sessions at the Silverstone and Yas Marina Circuits , where it was driven by McLaren 's testing and development driver Stoffel Vandoorne . The testing programme of the MP4 @-@ <unk> / <unk> was limited by technical problems with the engine that prevented significant running and the chassis was shelved following its appearance at Yas Marina , with the team carrying the engine over to the MP4 @-@ 30 chassis ahead of the first pre @-@ season test of the 2015 season at Jerez de la Frontera . The car was the first of the 2015 entries to pass its mandatory crash tests , getting final approval from the FIA in December 2014 . 
 = = = Pre @-@ season testing = = = 
 The MP4 @-@ 30 made its début at the first pre @-@ season test at the Circuito de Jerez . The team endured a difficult start , with the RA615H engine suffering from a series of recurring mechanical faults that restricted the team 's running over the four days , and they finished the test having completed the least amount of mileage among those present . The issues that had plagued the car were not resolved in time for the second test at the Circuit de Barcelona @-@ Catalunya , prompting McLaren to replace some parts supplied by Honda with parts that they had developed independently in 2014 . The team finally managed to get some substantial running in during the final test in Barcelona ; after completing just seven laps on the first day , Jenson Button was able to complete over one hundred on the second . However , with two weeks until the opening race , the longest stint of continuous running that the MP4 @-@ 30 had completed was twelve laps of the Barcelona circuit . This distance — 55 @.@ 8 km ( 34 @.@ 7 mi ) — is less than a quarter of a full Grand Prix distance of 307 @.@ 1 km ( 190 @.@ 8 mi ) . 
 = = = = Testing accident = = = = 
 The team 's pre @-@ season preparations were overshadowed by an accident involving Fernando Alonso on the final day of testing that saw Alonso hospitalised with a concussion and ruled out of the third and final test . Kevin Magnussen , McLaren 's test and reserve driver , was drafted in as his replacement for the remainder of the test and the opening round of the season . Alonso later attributed the accident to a steering failure , although McLaren maintained that there was no evidence of a car failure in the telemetry data following the accident . 
 = = Power unit — Honda RA615H = = 
 An analysis of the RA615H revealed that Honda had developed the power unit with the 2016 season in mind ; although no substantial revisions to the Technical Regulations had been put forward , the decision was made so that Honda could make a head @-@ start on developing its 2016 engine without wasting time trying to maintain development of a juvenile power unit in 2015 . Furthermore , with McLaren developing the MP4 @-@ 30 to have tight packaging , Honda introduced several radical concepts to the engine that allowed them to develop a smaller engine that weighed just 145 kg ( 320 lb ) and would fit within the confines of the chassis , with the trade @-@ off being that it required additional water cooling to keep temperatures under control . 
 First , the turbocharger was split and positioned alongside the Motor Generator Unit @-@ Heat ( MGU @-@ H ) — the generator harvesting heat energy from the exhaust manifold used to power the turbine — and positioned within the cylinder banks forming the ' V ' configuration of the engine . In order to make this fit , Honda eschewed the use of a centrifugal fan in its single @-@ stage compressor in favour of using several smaller fans positioned at intervals along a shaft . Although this would limit the ability of the turbocharger to build up the maximum amount of boost pressure , the 100 kg / h fuel flow limit introduced in 2014 minimised the impact of this . The Motor Generator Unit @-@ Kinetic ( MGU @-@ K ) — the generator harvesting energy from the engine spinning while under braking — was positioned in front of the engine to deliver energy directly to the crankshaft , following the convention established with the introduction of the kinetic energy recovery system ( KERS ) in 2009 . The batteries housing the energy harvested by the MGU @-@ H and MGU @-@ K were merged with the Electronic Control Unit and positioned in front of the engine . Both the MGU @-@ H and MGU @-@ K were capable of harvesting 4 megajoules ( 1 @.@ 1 kWh ) of energy per lap . However , under the 2015 regulations , both systems could only deploy 2 megajoules ( 0 @.@ 56 kWh ) of energy per lap . 
 At the Hungarian Grand Prix , it was noted that Honda had taken the unusual step of giving each engine an individual designation such as " <unk> ' Greyhawk ' " and " <unk> ' Erica ' " . 
 = = = In @-@ season development = = = 
 With each engine manufacturer on the 2015 grid being granted some limited scope to develop their engines , McLaren and Honda were given some leeway to develop the RA615H power unit before it was required to be homologated despite having had eighteen months of uninterrupted development prior to the first race . Under the 2015 regulations , the power units were divided into thirty @-@ two areas for development , and Honda were given permission to develop nine over the course of the season . The first engine updates were introduced at the Canadian Grand Prix , aimed at improving the reliability of the motor generator units , but by mid @-@ season , the engine was reported to be producing 120 bhp ( 89 kW ) less power than the Mercedes <unk> Hybrid engine , the benchmark of the 2015 grid . 
 During preparations for the British Grand Prix , Ron Dennis , the McLaren CEO and Chairman , noted that the team was encouraged by the aerodynamic data they had collected on the chassis , particularly its mid @-@ corner speeds which he claimed were similar to those produced by other teams . He further added that the car 's performance issues could be traced back to a lack of outright power and poor fuel efficiency from the engine . Éric Boullier , the team principal , further suggested that the main problem that the team faced was improving the efficiency of the RA615H 's energy recovery systems , both in harvesting and deploying the additional power , and that by developing these areas , the car could make up several seconds on lap time , enough for the car to compete regularly for podium finishes . 
 After the engine struggled with reliability issues throughout the first half of the season , Yasuhisa Arai declared himself happy with Honda 's progress following the British Grand Prix and announced that the development focus would switch to improving the performance of the RA615H ahead of the next round of planned updates at the Belgian Grand Prix , with plans for a wider range of updates spread out over the remainder of the season , with the Singapore Grand Prix earmarked as the first race that would be representative of the new engine 's performance . Honda predicted that the updated RA615H would produce enough horsepower to rival the Ferrari 059 / 4 engine . Despite being an average 13 @.@ 3 km / h ( 8 @.@ 3 mph ) slower than the fastest driver through the speed trap over the first half of the season , an analysis of the engine 's performance revealed that it had gradually reduced the deficit to the Renault Energy @-@ F1 2015 . Yasuhisa Arai went on to suggest that the engine had a 25 bhp ( 18 @.@ 6 kW ) advantage over Renault , but was still an estimated 50 bhp ( 37 @.@ 3 kW ) behind Mercedes . 
 The updates introduced in Belgium included changes to the combustion chamber , intake and exhaust aimed at reducing stress on other engine components to allow them to operate at peak efficiency . An analysis of the team 's mechanical problems further suggested that there was a critical fault in the internal combustion chamber that was having a residual effect on the other components by placing undue stress on them , and an inefficient MGU @-@ H that was using energy faster than it could be harvested with the net effect that the engine would lose up to 160 bhp ( 120 kW ) halfway through a lap . During the race , the car was observed to be harvesting energy at the top of the Kemmel Straight — the fastest point on the circuit — while other cars were deploying their energy at the same place . Despite Arai 's insistence that the RA615H had an advantage over the Renault engine , Fernando Alonso estimated that the car was losing up to three seconds per lap to Mercedes at the Italian Grand Prix and was unable to attack or defend its position against the Renault @-@ powered Scuderia Toro Rosso cars , even with the drag reduction system ( DRS ) deployed . Alonso 's comments came amidst the first public signs of tension between McLaren and Honda with reports that the team had requested that Arai be removed from his position as Project Manager . An analysis of the development carried out by rival manufacturers revealed that both Mercedes and Ferrari had found an additional 40 bhp ( 29 @.@ 8 kW ) over the course of the season through the development of bespoke fuel blends and the reconfiguration of their combustion chambers to promote more efficient fuel burning , offsetting the gains made by Honda . 
 Honda started to introduce their third and final round of upgrades ahead of the Russian Grand Prix , focusing on the internal combustion engine and associated exhaust parts with the aim of improving the efficiency of the MGU @-@ H and gradually introducing new parts over the next three rounds . The engine ancillaries were reconfigured to allow for better packaging within the chassis , while the axial compressor was replaced with a more conventional — albeit smaller — design . The exhaust wastegate was also updated ahead of planned development for 2016 , with the exhaust outlets reconfigured to improve the engine 's power curve . Honda chose to focus on the internal combustion engine instead of directly addressing the problems with the MGU @-@ H as they felt that the problems could not be adequately addressed with their remaining allowance for in @-@ season development , and instead deferred development of the MGU @-@ H until the end of the season when the restrictions on development would be lifted . The upgrades were given to Alonso , with Button scheduled to receive them two rounds later at the Mexican Grand Prix . The updates were received positively by Alonso , who pointed out that he had been setting lap times that were faster than those recorded by Lewis Hamilton during the opening phase of the race , and that the team had identified the potential to gain two and a half seconds per lap in 2016 through further refining of the engine and by adopting aerodynamic design elements used by other teams . Button was less optimistic , pointing out that the engine would struggle in Mexico as the high altitude of the Autódromo Hermanos Rodríguez — some 2 @,@ 229 metres ( 7 @,@ 313 @.@ 0 ft ) above sea level — would leave the turbine down on power given the low density of the air . Although the team 's predictions of a difficult weekend were proven true after qualifying , they highlighted the deficit to the leading Mercedes through the less power @-@ dependent sectors of the circuit as being consistently within three tenths of a second , the narrowest the margin had been over the course of the season . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The RA615H was widely criticised by the wider Formula One community , with the team 's struggles becoming a recurring theme throughout the 2015 season . This criticism was particularly directed at Honda 's Project Manager Yasuhisa Arai and the rigidly compartmentalised structure between the two companies that saw Honda develop the engine independently of and with minimal input from McLaren , and their failure to recruit any engineers from rival engine manufacturers Mercedes , Ferrari and Renault , even after Arai 's acknowledgement that Honda had underestimated the demands of the sport and the technology required to compete . Responding to the criticism , Arai claimed that the " size zero " approach demanded by McLaren — attempting to create a more compact design to fit the tight packaging of the MP4 @-@ 30 chassis — had compromised the overall design of the engine and limited the ability to develop it over the course of the season . Fernando Alonso defended the move , suggesting that Honda 's independent development programme would make it difficult for other manufacturers to copy the RA615H 's design . McLaren CEO Ron Dennis took a broader view , attributing the team 's difficult season to a range of factors — including chassis development and staff morale — rather than the engine performance alone . 
 Further criticism was directed towards the decision to consciously limit Honda 's involvement in the sport to supplying a single team , with Scuderia Toro Rosso and the embattled Manor Marussia touted as a potential Honda customer to gather additional data . However , the team rejected the criticism , arguing that the infrastructure needed to establish such a partnership would distract from their own campaign , and earmarking the 2017 season as the earliest possible date that an expansion could be considered . With the team revising its performance targets down from podiums to regular points , Éric Boullier acknowledged that the team would be facing a budgetary shortfall for the 2016 season , estimated to be some US $ 23 million ( £ 15 million ) , as the team had originally anticipated finishing fifth rather than ninth in World Constructors ' Championship , and with it , a great share of prize money . 
 In the build @-@ up to the Japanese Grand Prix , Alonso noted that although addressing the power unit 's shortcomings remained the team 's biggest challenge , he was unhappy with some of their trackside operations , citing a lack of running in Friday practice sessions , under @-@ preparedness in starting procedures and pit stops , and unreliability of other parts — such as the gearbox — as compounding the problems with the engine . After being powerless to defend against repeated overtakes during the race , Alonso was overheard condemning the RA615H as " embarrassing " and a " GP2 engine " over the radio . 
 Despite Honda alluding to running the engine at its peak performance at the Hungarian Grand Prix , the former driver and Sky Sports commentator Martin Brundle opined that he felt McLaren were pursuing a research and development programme rather than a pure racing programme , and so were looking for different outcomes for the season rather than outright results . With Button qualifying thirteenth for the Russian Grand Prix , half a second behind the Red Bull of Daniil Kvyat , Brundle described the team as having made " their first meaningful progress of the season " . However , three races later and following the upgrade introduced in Mexico , Brundle said that the engine was still down on power , inefficient , and lacking reliability and therefore suffering the same issues that had plagued it since the start of the season . 
 At the conclusion of the 2015 season , Yasuhisa Arai left his role within the team . He was replaced by Yusuke Hasegawa , the managing director of Honda Research and Development , as Honda focused on development of the RA615H 's successor , the <unk> . 
 = = Competition history = = 
 = = = Season review = = = 
 = = = = Opening rounds = = = = 
 Two weeks before the Australian Grand Prix , Fernando Alonso withdrew from the race on medical advice following his testing accident . Having driven in Alonso 's stead during pre @-@ season testing , Kevin Magnussen remained with the team for the race . The team endured a difficult start to the season in Melbourne as Button and Magnussen qualified on the final row of the grid , detuning the engine ahead of the race to preserve its reliability ; Button would later be recorded going through the speed trap at 288 km / h ( 179 mph ) , some 21 km / h ( 13 mph ) slower than the fastest car . In a race of attrition , Button was the final classified finisher , in eleventh position , two laps behind the race winner . In doing so , he completed the MP4 @-@ 30 's first full race distance . Magnussen did not make it to the start after his engine failed whilst driving to the grid . 
 Alonso returned to the team for the Malaysian Grand Prix , where the engine was retuned to operate at a higher level of performance and the team introduced a range of aerodynamic updates including sidepod fins and a new front wing . However , Alonso and Button still qualified on the penultimate row of the grid ahead of the Manor Marussia drivers Roberto Merhi and Will Stevens . Both cars retired from the race with mechanical problems . The team did not score any points during the first round of flyaway races , struggling with poor reliability and a lack of engine performance ; the Chinese Grand Prix was the only race where both cars were classified as finishing . Although Alonso repeated the team 's best finish of eleventh place in Bahrain , any hope of improved performance was arrested with the start of the European season at the next round in Spain , where Button finished sixteenth and Alonso retired with brake problems . 
 = = = = European season = = = = 
 Button scored the car 's first points in Monaco , with an eighth @-@ place finish . He later attributed the result to having confidence in the car , noting that he could raise the ride height at the front end of the car and brake heavily without locking the brakes or bottoming out and hitting the road , but without compromising the performance of the car when turning in to the apex of a corner . However , in the following races in Canada and Austria , the team 's struggles came to a head as they were forced to reduce the power output of the engine to levels that had not been used since Australia , and could not therefore provide a competitive package for the long straights and slow corners of the Circuit Gilles Villeneuve and Red Bull Ring . In addition , with their arrival in Austria , both Button and Alonso had used up their quota of engine components for the season , which combined with unscheduled gearbox changes , resulted in both drivers receiving twenty @-@ five place grid penalties . The team also introduced their first major aerodynamic updates for the season , replacing the snub nose of the original design with a squared @-@ off front end similar to the designs of the Williams FW37 and Red Bull <unk> . The rear of the floor was also revised , with a series of slots cut into the body in front of the rear wheels to change the air pressure flowing towards the diffuser . The team only saw limited running as Alonso retired on the opening lap after a collision with Kimi Räikkönen , but they were able to assess the new design at a post @-@ race test . After enduring four consecutive retirements , Alonso scored his first point of the season with a tenth @-@ place finish in Great Britain . 
 With the Sporting Regulations amended to allow Honda to supply an extra engine without penalty , McLaren opted to use it in Hungary , where the tight confines of the Hungaroring and lower demands on outright power were expected to benefit the MP4 @-@ 30 . Despite further reliability problems preventing the car from reaching the final qualifying session as the team expected , both Button and Alonso expressed satisfaction with the feeling of the chassis and the team 's development , describing it as their best weekend of the season . The team went on to record their first finish with both cars in the points after Alonso finished fifth and Button ninth , and the team went into the summer break with seventeen points , five points behind Sauber in the World Constructors ' Championship . 
 McLaren deliberately introduced two brand @-@ new engines for both Alonso and Button at the Belgian Grand Prix , effectively moving them to the back of the grid , but allowing them to contest the Italian and Singapore Grands Prix — deemed to be crucial races in assessing the engine 's development — without the risk of a penalty . Despite this plan , the team were forced to take another penalty in Italy when further engine changes were needed , bringing their total use up to nine engines from the original allocation of four . Belgium also saw the team 's second major aerodynamic update : the team added extra fins to the front of the floor to improve air flow under the car , lowered the height of the sidepods and revised the engine cover . The position of the radiator used to cool the energy recovery system was also changed . Both cars completed the Belgian Grand Prix , but once again finished outside the points , one lap down in thirteenth and fourteenth place . Button described the result as " embarrassing " after both cars were classified as finishing behind Sebastian Vettel despite Vettel retiring from the race on the final lap . The team reverted to the longer @-@ specification snub nose for the Italian Grand Prix in order to provide better aerodynamic balance and lower drag on the high @-@ speed Autodromo Nazionale Monza circuit . The change proved to be of little benefit , as both drivers were eliminated in the first qualifying period and struggled throughout the race . Button finished in fourteenth , while Alonso retired with an electrical problem but was classified in eighteenth position as he had completed 90 % of race winner Lewis Hamilton 's race distance . The race marked a milestone of fifty races since McLaren 's last Grand Prix win at the 2012 Brazilian Grand Prix . 
 = = = = Asian and American rounds = = = = 
 With the championship returning to Asia for the second round of flyaway races , the team arrived in Singapore confident of scoring points ; despite both cars advancing to the second period of qualifying and running in the top ten throughout the race , both cars retired with gearbox problems . Alonso was forced out after his car kept selecting neutral without input — a problem that affected several drivers ; Button was involved in contact with Pastor Maldonado while trying to pass the slow @-@ moving Alexander Rossi during a safety car restart before his gearbox overheated . After experimenting with a new front wing designed to improve air flow around the front tyres during free practice in Singapore , the team introduced the parts at the next race in Japan one week later . However , the team struggled with tyre pressures ; following Sebastian Vettel 's high @-@ speed tyre blow @-@ out during the Belgian Grand Prix , the FIA introduced a mandatory minimum tyre pressure setting on the advice of tyre supplier Pirelli . For the Japanese Grand Prix , these pressures were raised by 2 psi ( 14 kPa ) compared to the levels used during the 2014 race , which affected the MP4 @-@ 30 's ride height and vertical suspension travel and produced increased understeer . Despite taking advantage of grid penalties that saw them start twelfth and fourteenth respectively , Alonso and Button went on to finish eleventh and sixteenth . With the team acknowledging that the Singapore Grand Prix had represented their final opportunity to score points on merit , their focus shifted to development of their 2016 car over the final leg of the championship . In addition to the engine upgrades Honda brought to Russia , the team sought to use the high @-@ speed and low @-@ degradation characteristics of the Sochi Autodrom circuit to test experimental bodywork parts , including the exhaust configuration . In a race of attrition , both Button and Alonso initially finished in the points , with Button in ninth and Alonso taking tenth until Alonso was given a five @-@ second penalty after the race that relegated him to eleventh place . 
 In addition to the engine upgrades Honda introduced for the United States Grand Prix , McLaren brought a new aerodynamic package for the MP4 @-@ 30 which revised the front wing to increase downforce , altered the turning vanes to improve air flow over the front splitter , and adopted a concept pioneered by Ferrari to the rear floor designed to reduce the impact of airflow washing over the rear wheels and disrupting the rear diffuser , which in turn opened up a wider range of set @-@ up options for the ride height and rake , or the angle between the front and rear ride height . These updates were designed to bring the MP4 @-@ 30 in line with the designs developed by other teams . With the engine and aerodynamic updates , the team had hoped to compete for points on merit , and while Alonso clashed with Felipe Massa on the opening lap , he was running as high as fifth on the closing stages — and was on course to replicate the team 's best result of the season — before suffering a loss of power and slipping back down the order to finish eleventh . With Alonso out of the points , Button was promoted to sixth . The race also saw what would be the car 's best qualifying performance as Alonso started eleventh , while the six points Button scored saw the team close to within ten points of Sauber in the World Constructors ' Championship . However , the result also meant that McLaren had endured its longest winless streak of fifty @-@ three races , previously set between the 1977 Japanese Grand Prix and the 1981 British Grand Prix . Despite the progress that the team made over the previous rounds , the MP4 @-@ 30 's struggles continued in Mexico , with both drivers eliminated early in qualifying , and Jenson Button setting a new record for grid penalties , changing enough parts to warrant a seventy @-@ place penalty . Alonso retired from the race with an incurable ERS problem that the team had identified the night before and Button finished fourteenth overall . 
 The team 's struggles continued as the championship moved to Brazil for the penultimate round , with Alonso stopping twice on the circuit during free practice with a recurring engine fault that forced him to miss qualifying . Button and Alonso finished the race in fifteenth and sixteenth place respectively , which became fourteenth and fifteenth when Felipe Massa was disqualified for a tyre pressure irregularity . Button later noted that the speed deficit of the RA615H around the Interlagos circuit relative to the other engines was " scary " despite Honda 's extensive development programme . By the time the season came to a close in Abu Dhabi , McLaren had completely shifted the MP4 @-@ 30 's development so that the car became a testing platform for the 2016 season , with " more than half " of the parts being considered experimental , including a brand @-@ new configuration for the rear suspension geometry . Despite an expected speed deficit on the long straights of the Yas Marina Circuit — with the MP4 @-@ 30 recording speeds some 30 km / h ( 18 @.@ 6 mph ) slower than the fastest cars through the speed trap — and minor contact with Valtteri Bottas in the pits , Button was complimentary of the car in his drive to twelfth , describing it as " the best it had felt all year " . Alonso went on to finish seventeenth after receiving a drive @-@ through penalty for his role in causing a collision with Pastor Maldonado and Felipe Nasr on the opening lap . McLaren used Alonso 's race as a chance to experiment with full and continuous deployment of the RA615H 's Energy Recovery Systems — the first time the team had done so under race conditions — which saw Alonso set the third @-@ fastest lap of the race , less than three tenths of a second slower than the fastest lap of the race recorded by Lewis Hamilton . 
 = = = Final standings = = = 
 McLaren finished the season ninth in the World <unk> ' Championship with twenty @-@ seven points , nine points behind their nearest rivals Sauber . The MP4 @-@ 30 scored points in five of its nineteen starts , with a best result of fifth place in Hungary ; the race was also the only time in which both cars finished inside the points . Jenson Button was the team 's best points scorer with sixteen points to Alonso 's eleven , though Alonso scored the team 's best individual race result in Hungary and qualifying performance , with eleventh in the United States . The result marked Button 's worst individual season since driving for Honda Racing F1 in 2008 , and Alonso 's worst since his début season with Minardi in 2001 . 
 = = = Retirement from competition = = = 
 Following its final race in Abu Dhabi , the MP4 @-@ 30 took part in a series of tests organised by tyre supplier Pirelli to assess their planned allotment of tyre compounds for the 2016 season and to give teams the opportunity to acquaint themselves with the new compounds , including four different builds of the brand @-@ new <unk> compound . Stoffel Vandoorne resumed testing duties for the team for the duration of the test , where he completed ninety @-@ nine laps and set the fastest time of the test , three tenths of a second faster than the rest of the field and four tenths faster than the fastest time set during the race . The MP4 @-@ 30 made one final appearance before being retired from competition , taking part in wet tyre tests at the Circuit Paul Ricard in preparation for the 2016 season . The car was subsequently replaced by the McLaren MP4 @-@ 31 . 
 Under rules introduced in 2014 , the MP4 @-@ 30 was declared a " previous car " by the FIA — as were all of the cars that contested the 2015 season — restricting its use in testing and promotional filming as a means of preventing illegal testing given the similarities between the 2015 and 2016 Technical Regulations . 
 = = Complete Formula One results = = 
 ( key ) ( results in bold indicate pole position ; results in italics indicate fastest lap ) 
 Notes : 
 † — Driver failed to finish the race , but was classified as they had completed more than 90 % of the winner 's race distance . 
 ‡ — Results adjusted post @-@ race following the application of penalties . 
 = Reed v. Town of Gilbert = 
 Reed v. Town of Gilbert , 576 U.S. _ _ _ ( 2015 ) was a case in which the United States Supreme Court clarified when municipalities may impose content @-@ based restrictions on signage . The case also clarified the level of constitutional scrutiny that should be applied to content @-@ based restrictions on speech . In 2005 , Gilbert , Arizona adopted a municipal sign ordinance that regulated the manner in which signs could be displayed in public areas . The ordinance imposed stricter limitations on signs advertising religious services than signs that displayed " political " or " ideological " messages . When the town 's Sign Code compliance manager cited a local church for violating the ordinance , the church filed a lawsuit in which they argued the town 's sign regulations violated its First Amendment right to the freedom of speech . 
 Writing for a majority of the Court , Justice Clarence Thomas held that the town 's sign ordinance imposed content @-@ based restrictions that did not survive strict scrutiny because the ordinance was not narrowly tailored to further a compelling government interest . Justice Thomas also clarified that strict scrutiny should always be applied when a law is content @-@ based on its face . Justice Stephen Breyer and Justice Elena Kagan both wrote opinions concurring in the judgment , in which they argued that content @-@ based regulations should not always automatically trigger strict scrutiny . Although some commentators praised the court 's decision as a victory for " individual liberty " , other commentators criticized the Court 's methodology . Some analysts have also suggested that the case left open several important questions within First Amendment jurisprudence that may be re @-@ litigated in future years . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Content @-@ based restrictions on speech = = = 
 The First Amendment to the United States Constitution prohibits states from enacting laws that abridge the freedom of speech . Municipal governments may not " restrict expression because of its message , its ideas , its subject matter , or its content " . Laws that regulate speech based on the expressive content of the speech are presumptively unconstitutional ; such restrictions are only permissible when they are narrowly tailored to serve a compelling state interest . For the purposes of the First Amendment , government regulation of speech is considered " content @-@ based " when it targets speech because of ideas or messages that are expressed . Furthermore , some laws may still be considered " content @-@ based " even though they appear to be facially content @-@ neutral . Laws are considered " content @-@ based " if they cannot be " justified without reference to the content of the regulated speech " or if they were adopted " because of disagreement with the message [ the speech ] conveys " . 
 = = = Gilbert , Arizona municipal sign ordinance = = = 
 In 2005 , the town of Gilbert , Arizona adopted a municipal sign ordinance that regulated the manner in which signs could be displayed in public areas . Although the ordinance banned the display of most outdoor signs without a permit , twenty three categories of signs were exempt from the permit requirement . Three of those categories were relevant to this case . First , " ideological signs " , which contained " a message or ideas for noncommercial purposes " , could be up to twenty square feet in size and could be placed in any " zoning district " for any length of time . Second , " political signs " , which included content " designed to influence the outcome of an election called by a public body " , could be no larger than thirty two square feet on nonresidential property and sixteen square feet on residential property . Additionally , political signs could only be displayed " up to 60 days before a primary election and up to 15 days following a general election " . Third , “ temporary directional signs relating to a qualifying event " , which directed " pedestrians , motorists , and other passersby " to events hosted by non @-@ profit organizations , could be no larger than six square feet . Additionally , temporary directional signs relating to a qualifying event could be displayed no earlier than twelve hours before the start of a qualifying event and no later than one hour after the end of the event ; these signs could only be displayed in private property or public rights @-@ of @-@ way , but no more than four signs could be placed on a single property at the same time . 
 = = = Good News Community Church = = = 
 The named plaintiff , Clyde Reed , is the pastor of Good News Community Church . The church is a " small , cash @-@ strapped entity that own [ ed ] no building " and held services in elementary schools and other buildings in Gilbert , Arizona . On the original docket , the name was Good News Presbyterian Church because according to Reed , the church 's name has actually " vacillated " between that and Good News Community Church . Because the briefs had used " Community " , the District Court used it as well . To advertise their services , the church placed fifteen @-@ to @-@ twenty temporary signs in various locations around Gilbert . The signs would typically include the church 's name as well as the location and time of services . Members of the church " would post the signs early in the day on Saturday and then remove them around midday on Sunday " . However , the town 's Sign Code compliance manager cited the church on two occasions , for exceeding time limits when displaying signs and for failing to include the date of the event on a sign , respectively . 
 = = = Initial lawsuit = = = 
 The church filed suit in the United States District Court for the District of Arizona in March 2008 , where they claimed the town " abridged their freedom of speech in violation of the First and Fourteenth Amendments " . The district court first denied the church 's request for a preliminary injunction , and the church then appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit . The Ninth Circuit , analyzing the likelihood of success on the merits requirement for a preliminary injunction , affirmed the decision of the district court , holding that the town 's restrictions for temporary directional signs " did not regulate speech on the basis of content " Although the Ninth Circuit conceded that enforcement officers would need to read a sign to determine which portions of the sign ordinance applied to the sign , the Ninth Circuit concluded that this " cursory examination " was not equivalent to " synthesizing the expressive content of the sign " . The Ninth Circuit then remanded the case back to the district court to determine " in the first instance whether the Sign Code ’ s distinctions among temporary directional signs , political signs , and ideological signs nevertheless constituted a content @-@ based regulation of speech . " 
 = = = Remand and appeal to the Supreme Court of the United States = = = 
 At a subsequent status conference after the appellate court decision , the parties decided to resolve all the issues on summary judgment , rather than via new preliminary injunction motions . The United States District Court for the District of Arizona granted the Town 's motion for summary judgment . The church then appealed that ruling to the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit , but the Ninth Circuit affirmed the judgment of the district court , holding the town 's ordinance was content neutral . Citing Hill v. Colorado , the Ninth Circuit ruled that " Gilbert did not adopt its regulation of speech because it disagreed with the message conveyed ” and that the town 's “ interests in <unk> [ ing ] temporary signs are unrelated to the content of the sign " . Additionally , the Ninth Circuit concluded that the distinctions between ideological signs , political signs , and temporary directional signs were " based on objective factors relevant to Gilbert ’ s creation of the specific exemption from the permit requirement and do not otherwise consider the substance of the sign ” . Based on its determination that the ordinance was content @-@ neutral , the Ninth Circuit " applied a lower level of scrutiny to the Sign Code " and held it did not violate the First Amendment . The church then appealed to the Supreme Court of the United States , which granted certiorari on July 1 , 2014 . 
 = = Opinion of the Court = = 
 Writing for a majority of the Court , Justice Clarence Thomas held that the town 's sign ordinance was " content based on its face " in light of the fact that the " restrictions in the Sign Code that apply to any given sign [ depend ] entirely on the communicative content of the sign " . Because the church 's signs were " treated differently from signs conveying other types of ideas " , there was " no need to consider the government ’ s justifications or purposes for enacting the Code to determine whether it is subject to strict scrutiny " . Justice Thomas rejected the Ninth Circuit 's conclusion that the ordinance was content @-@ neutral because the regulations were not based on " disagree [ ment ] with the message conveyed " and the reasons for regulating the various categories of signs were " unrelated to the content of the sign [ s ] " . Rather , he emphasized that " [ a ] law that is content based on its face is subject to strict scrutiny regardless of the government ’ s benign motive , content @-@ neutral justification , or lack of ' animus toward the ideas contained ' in the regulated speech " . Justice Thomas explained that " innocent motives " do not eliminate the danger of censorship , because governments may one day use content @-@ based laws to regulate " disfavored speech " . 
 Additionally , Justice Thomas rejected the town 's assertion that a law is only content based if it " censor [ s ] or favor [ s ] " specific viewpoints or ideas . The town argued that its sign code was not unconstitutional because it neither endorsed nor suppressed any particular viewpoints or ideas . However , Justice Thomas clarified that a statute is content @-@ based if it singles out a specific subject , even though it may not target ideas or viewpoints within that subject matter . Furthermore , he also rejected the Ninth Circuit 's conclusion that the ordinance was content @-@ neutral because it targeted specific classes of speakers , rather than the content of their speech . Although he recognized that speaker @-@ based restrictions were only " the beginning — not the end — of the inquiry " , Justice Thomas held that " laws favoring some speakers over others demand strict scrutiny when the legislature ’ s speaker preference reflects a content preference " . 
 Because the ordinance imposed content @-@ based restrictions on free speech , Justice Thomas held that the ordinance would only be constitutional if it survived strict scrutiny . Assuming that the town 's interests of preserving aesthetic appeal and traffic safety were compelling , he concluded that these were " hopelessly <unk> " because the ordinance allowed for the proliferation of an unlimited number of larger , ideological signs that pose the same threats to aesthetics and traffic as directional signs . In fact , Justice Thomas suggested that a " sharply worded " ideological sign may be more likely to distract drivers than a directional sign . Justice Thomas also suggested that some directional signs " may be essential , both for vehicles and pedestrians , to guide traffic or to identify hazards and ensure safety " . Therefore , Justice Thomas remanded the case for reconsideration in light of the Court 's opinion . 
 = = = Justice Alito 's concurring opinion = = = 
 Justice Samuel Alito wrote a separate concurring opinion , in which he was joined by Justice Anthony Kennedy and Justice Sonia Sotomayor . He agreed that content @-@ based regulations present the same dangers as viewpoint @-@ based regulations because content @-@ based regulations " may interfere with democratic self @-@ government and the search for truth " . He also agreed that the town 's ordinance was " replete with content @-@ based distinctions " that were subject to strict scrutiny . However , Justice Alito wrote separately to emphasize that the Court 's opinion would not " prevent cities from regulating signs in a way that fully protects public safety and serves legitimate esthetic objectives " . To support his argument , Justice Alito provided a list of examples of content @-@ neutral sign regulations , including : regulations that target the size of signs , regulations that target the locations at which signs may be placed , regulations distinguishing between lighted and <unk> signs , regulations that distinguish between the placement of signs on public and private property , rules that restrict the total number of signs " per mile of roadway " , and rules that distinguish between freestanding signs and signs that are attached to buildings . 
 = = = Justice Breyer 's opinion concurring in the judgment = = = 
 Justice Stephen Breyer wrote an opinion concurring in the judgment , in which he argued that content @-@ based discrimination should be considered a " rule of thumb , rather than as an automatic ' strict scrutiny ' trigger , leading to almost certain legal condemnation " . Justice Breyer conceded that content @-@ based regulations sometimes reveal weaknesses in the government 's rationale for limiting speech , and that content @-@ based regulations interfere with the " free marketplace of idea [ s ] " . However , he also argued that " virtually all government activities involve speech " , and many involve content @-@ based regulations on speech . Therefore , he concluded that a rule triggering strict scrutiny for all cases involving content @-@ based restrictions would be a " recipe for judicial management of ordinary government regulatory activity " . Justice Breyer argued that instead of the automatic trigger , courts should determine the constitutionality of content @-@ based regulations by " examining the seriousness of the harm to speech , the importance of the countervailing objectives , the extent to which the law will achieve those objectives , and whether there are other , less restrictive ways of doing so " . Although he did not believe strict scrutiny should be applied to the town 's sign ordinance , he agreed that the town 's ordinance was unconstitutional because the town did not provide a rational justification for treating some signs differently than other . 
 = = = Justice Kagan 's opinion concurring in the judgment = = = 
 Justice Elena Kagan also wrote an opinion concurring in the judgment , in which she was joined by Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Justice Stephen Breyer . Like Justice Breyer , Justice Kagan argued that it was not necessary to apply strict scrutiny to all content @-@ based restrictions on speech . She argued that the majority 's opinion would jeopardize too many " entirely reasonable " existing sign ordinances across the country . In light of the court 's opinion , Justice Kagan suggested that municipalities will now be forced to choose between repealing " exemptions that allow for helpful signs on streets and sidewalks " and lifting " sign restrictions altogether and resign [ ing ] themselves to the resulting clutter " . Instead of applying strict scrutiny in every case , Justice Kagan claimed that strict scrutiny is only appropriate when there is a " realistic possibility that official suppression of ideas is afoot " . Likewise , she also claimed that strict scrutiny is not necessary when there is no risk that regulations will " skew the public ’ s debate of ideas " . Applying these principles to this case , Justice Kagan held the ordinance " does not pass strict scrutiny , or intermediate scrutiny , or even the laugh test " because the town did not provide " any sensible basis " for the content @-@ based distinctions within its sign ordinance . 
 = = Analysis and commentary = = 
 After the court issued its decision , some commentators praised the Court 's ruling for " further [ ing ] individual liberty by striking down a government ’ s unjustified censorship of protected speech " . David A. <unk> , counsel for Good News Community Church , said the Court 's ruling was an " important victory for all the little guys who have ever found their speech silenced by the strong arm of government " . Likewise , Nina <unk> reported that one consequence of the Court 's decision is that " the government has much less power to regulate how other people speak . " However , other commentators criticized the majority opinion 's methodology ; Hadley <unk> , for example , wrote that the Court 's decision " revealed the unlovely spectacle of the conservatives talking themselves ever deeper into a genuine moral relativism in the regulation of speech " . Some analysts also claimed the majority 's opinion left open unanswered questions within the Court 's First Amendment jurisprudence . Lyle Denniston , for example , suggested that after the Court issued its decisions in Reed and Walker v. Texas Division , Sons of Confederate Veterans , " the meaning of the First Amendment , in general , became somewhat more confusing " . Eugene Volokh also suggested the Court 's opinion is likely to be litigated again in lower courts . 
 = Zaculeu = 
 Zaculeu or <unk> is a pre @-@ Columbian Maya archaeological site in the highlands of western Guatemala , about 3 @.@ 7 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 3 mi ) outside of the modern city of Huehuetenango . Occupation at the site dates to the Early Classic period ( AD 250 – 600 ) of Mesoamerican history . Zaculeu was the capital of the Postclassic Mam kingdom , and was conquered by the K 'iche ' Kingdom of Q 'umarkaj . It displays a mixture of Mam and K 'iche ' style architecture . 
 In AD 1525 the city was attacked by Spanish conquistadors under Gonzalo de Alvarado y Contreras during a siege that lasted several months . Kayb 'il B 'alam , the city 's last ruler , finally surrendered to the Spanish due to starvation . 
 The site contains a number of temple @-@ pyramids with talud @-@ tablero style architecture and double stairways . The pyramids and governmental palaces are grouped around a series of large public plazas . The site also holds a ballcourt for playing the Mesoamerican ballgame . The site was originally fortified with walls . 
 The site was restored by the United Fruit Company in the late 1940s . It is open to tourists and includes a small museum . 
 = = Etymology and location = = 
 The name Zaculeu means " white earth " in the Mam , K 'iche ' and Q 'anjob 'al languages , from <unk> ( <unk> ) meaning " white " and <unk> ( n ) meaning " earth " . In the Mam language , the site is also called <unk> . 
 The archaeological site is located in the present @-@ day village of San Lorenzo on the outskirts of Huehuetenango city , in the Guatemalan department of Huehuetenango . Zaculeu is the main tourist attraction in the Huehuetenango area . Zaculeu is located at an altitude of 1 @,@ 900 metres ( 6 @,@ 200 ft ) above mean sea level , and is bordered by the Sierra de los Cuchumatanes mountain range . 
 Zaculeu is located in an area of fertile soils close to the <unk> and Viña rivers . The site is situated on a plateau overlooking the <unk> River , which flows to the west of the city . Deep ravines bordering the site to the south and east protected its access . The only access to the site is via a narrow land bridge to the north which unites the plateau to the general level of the valley floor . The Zaculeu plateau measures 11 @,@ 178 square <unk> ( 4191 square metres ) . 
 = = History = = 
 Zaculeu was first occupied in the Early Classic Period ( AD 250 – 600 ) , and the buildings from this era show the architectural influence of the great metropolis of <unk> in the Valley of Mexico . The largest constructions date from the Classic Period ( AD 250 – 900 ) . To these were added other plaza groups and buildings in the Early Postclassic ( AD 900 – 1200 ) and Late Postclassic ( AD 1200 – 1525 ) in an unbroken history . Zaculeu has been used as a ceremonial site by Mam Maya continuously to the present . 
 Zaculeu came under the influence of central Mexico again in the Late Classic . The architectural influence is so distinct that it suggests that a foreign Mexican elite may have settled at the city and continued in occupation there until the K 'iche ' conquered the site in the Postclassic . 
 = = = K 'iche ' conquest = = = 
 The K 'iche ' Kingdom of Q 'umarkaj conquered Zaculeu in the Postclassic . Traditionally that has been calculated as during the 15th century AD based on <unk> accounts . Radiocarbon dating has pushed back the calculations of the K 'iche ' conquests by three centuries , and researchers now say their conquest of the Mam kingdoms may have taken place as early as the 12th century . The city was dominated by the K 'iche ' until the Spanish Conquest of the early 16th century . 
 The K 'iche ' king Q 'uq 'umatz died in battle against a group of the northern Mam . His son K 'iq 'ab continued where his father had left off and completed the conquest of the people . K 'iq 'ab was ruler when Zaculeu was conquered by the K 'iche . ' This appears to have been a second K 'iche ' conquest of the city , having previously fallen some time earlier . When the K 'iche ' conquered another kingdom , its practice was to place the newly subject kingdom under the control of one of the K 'iche ' noble lineages . Based on the style of Structure 4 , archeologists believe that Zaculeu was likely controlled by the Nija 'ib . ' The <unk> , who had conquered much of the region , are another possibility . The K 'iche ' tended to place their newly installed ruling elite in a mountain @-@ top fortress securing the population in the valleys below . However , substantial portions of the original Mam population remained in place in the plateau area . 
 The K 'iche ' rebuilt over earlier Classic period structures in a distinctively K 'iche ' style . The basic K 'iche layout consists of a westward @-@ facing temple with a steep talud @-@ tablero facade , flanked by two unequally sized wings . This was likely to have been the temple of Awilix , patron goddess of the Nija 'ib ' K 'iche ' . A longer palace structure lies to the north , facing southwards and the ballcourt to the southwest . This K 'iche ' layout was somewhat distorted by the reuse of the earlier architecture , because the typical Mam settlement layout was built along an axis running from southeast to northwest . As the K 'iche ' did not completely redesign the entire site along a K 'iche ' pattern , the juxtaposition of <unk> and K 'iche ' -style complexes demonstrates the fusing of the local and intrusive elite lineages . 
 Excavations have uncovered examples of metalwork at Zaculeu . These were small ornamental pieces . An example is a representation of a butterfly worked from <unk> , an alloy of gold and copper , dated to the Postclassic period . 
 = = = Spanish conquest = = = 
 Although hostilities existed between the Mam and the K 'iche ' of Q 'umarkaj after the rebellion of the Kaqchikel people against their K 'iche ' allies , the arrival of the Spanish conquistadors shifted the political landscape . Conquistador Pedro de Alvarado described how the Mam king Kayb 'il B 'alam was received with great honour in Q 'umarkaj . 
 At the time of the Spanish Conquest , the main Mam population was situated in Xinabahul ( also spelled <unk> ) , now the city of Huehuetenango . They retreated to Zaculeu as a refuge during the Spanish attacks because of its fortifications . The refuge was attacked by Gonzalo de Alvarado y Contreras , brother of conquistador Pedro de Alvarado , in 1525 , with 120 soldiers , and some 2 @,@ 000 Mexican and K 'iche ' allies . The city was defended by Kayb 'il B 'alam commanding some 5 @,@ 000 people ( the chronicles are not clear if this is the number of soldiers or the total population of Zaculeu ) . 
 After a siege lasting several months , the Mam were reduced to starvation . Kayb 'il B 'alam finally surrendered the city to the Spanish in October 1525 . When the Spanish entered the city , they found 1 @,@ 800 dead Indians , with the survivors eating the corpses of the dead . The Spanish forced the abandonment of Zaculeu after they built the new city of Huehuetenango some 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) away . 
 = = = Modern history = = = 
 American explorer John Lloyd Stephens and English architect Frederick Catherwood visited the site in 1840 , at which time the site was a confused jumble of overgrown ruins . Stephens published a description of the archaeological remains a year later . Catherwood did not draw any of the structures due to the poor state of the remains . The two excavated one of the mounds and recovered some ceramic vessels , which Catherwood drew . 
 On 24 April 1931 , Guatemala declared the site as a National Monument under the name of <unk> . On 23 February 1946 , the site was renamed as Zaculeu . The government gave a license to excavate to the United Fruit Company , which immediately began archaeological excavations and related restorations of the structures under the direction of John M. <unk> . This later included re @-@ coating a number of the buildings with white plaster , as it was known that many were originally finished that way . This has seldom been done in other restorations of Pre @-@ Columbian buildings . 
 On 12 June 1970 the site was declared a National <unk> Monument by accord of the Guatemalan Ministry of Education ( <unk> ) . 
 = = Site description = = 
 Zaculeu was likely originally developed because of its proximity to the <unk> River , providing a permanent water supply and transportation waterway , together with its easily defensible hilltop location . Zaculeu has 43 structures . The majority of construction activity took place in one burst in the Early Classic , with minor alterations thereafter . The smaller platforms situated in the plazas were late additions ; they show the influence of central Mexican civilization . The entrance to the site was via a narrow land bridge to the north , which was protected by a fortified structure that occupied three @-@ quarters of the width of the land bridge . 
 The ceremonial centre of the city consisted of 43 structures clustered in an area of 1 @,@ 400 square metres ( 15 @,@ 000 sq ft ) . The architecture at the site includes talud @-@ tablero style buildings with double stairways . The facades of some of the buildings have cylindrical columns , a feature found in other parts of Mesoamerica . Artefacts recovered from the site include items fashioned from turquoise and precious metals . The metal artefacts crafted from gold , silver and copper and their alloys demonstrate the city 's participation in the wider trade networks of the Postclassic Period . These metal artefacts were either influenced by or imported from Mexico and southern Central America . 
 The structures at Zaculeu were grouped around small plazas and were generally built from masonry , coated with a thick layer of plaster . Fragments bear floral and geometric designs , indicating the structures were originally brightly painted . Stones were undressed and cemented in adobe mortar . No evidence of corbel vaulting has been found and very little in the way of stone sculpture . The architecture completely lacks stone sculpture . Burials from the Early Classic yielded a rich array of finds , but Late Classic burials were accompanied by a lesser variety of grave offerings . 
 An Early Classic tomb was inserted under the main pyramid at Zaculeu ; it had been tunnelled from the volcanic ash underlying the structure . A broad stairway descended to the tomb from the main plaza . The tomb interior was painted red and the floor was scattered with the remains of more than 100 ceramic vessels . These were crushed when the roof of the tomb collapsed . Also found were the remains of 34 pyrite mirrors of a type similar to those found at Kaminaljuyu . A sizeable quantity of jade was recovered from the tomb , including beads and earplugs . Some of the jade beads had been carved to represent human and parrot faces . The tomb contained the bones of four or more individuals . The ceramic offerings included decorated tripod vessels , polychrome bowls and a polychrome cylindrical vase that had a painted band of hieroglyphs . One ceramic bowl is painted in a negative painting style that is similar to finds from Nebaj . 
 The site core is laid out around eight plazas . Some of the structures were restored by the United Fruit Company ; most of these border Plazas 1 and 2 . Structures 1 and 2 are pyramid temples . Structures 4 , 6 and 10 are palace structures , long buildings with internal chambers and benches used as residences and for administrative purposes . 
 = = = Plazas = = = 
 Plaza 1 is the main plaza at the site . It measures 54 by 38 metres ( 177 by 125 ft ) and is closed on all four sides by pyramid temples . 
 Plaza 2 is a large plaza at the southeast of the site core , south of Plaza 1 . It is bordered on the southeastern side by Structure 4 , on the northeast by Structure 1 , on the northwest by the ballcourt and on the southwest by Plaza 3 . 
 Plaza 3 is a small plaza at the southern extreme of the site core , southwest of Plaza 2 and south of the ballcourt . 
 Plaza 4 is at the northwest side of the site core . It is closed on the northeastern side by Structure 10 , on the southeast by Structure 13 and on the southwest by the ballcourt . Plazas 5 and 6 are located immediately to the west . 
 Plaza 5 is a small plaza immediately west of Plaza 4 and northwest of the ballcourt . It is divided from Plaza 6 to the northwest by Structure 21 . 
 Plaza 6 is another small plaza to the west of Plaza 4 . It is enclosed on three sides by a building complex with Structure 21 on the southeast side . 
 Plaza 7 is a small plaza at the western extreme of the site core , to the west of Plazas 5 and 6 . 
 Plaza 8 is an enclosed plaza to the southwest of the ballcourt . Structure 2 , a pyramid , closes the northwest side and Structure 3 closes the southeast side . 
 = = = Structures = = = 
 Structure 1 is a 39 @-@ foot ( 12 m ) high pyramid on the southeast side of Plaza 1 . It has eight stepped sections topped by a summit shrine . The shrine has three doorways approached via a double stairway rising from the plaza below . The pyramid was rebuilt seven times with the visible remains dating to the Early Postclassic . The earliest phase of construction dates to the Early Classic period . 
 Structure 2 is a pyramid on the northwest side of the sunken Plaza 8 . It is largely unrestored . Structure 3 lies across the plaza to the southeast . It is a platform with a twin stairway facing northwest onto the plaza . 
 Structure 3 is on the southeast side of Plaza 8 , facing onto the plaza opposite Structure 2 . It is immediately south of the ballcourt . 
 Structure 4 is an unusual combination of temple and palace . It is situated on the southeast side of Plaza 2 . The structure consists of a central pyramidal base flanked by two attached range structures . The pyramidal base is topped by a shrine containing three rooms , the final room of the three is circular . The temple has three steep stairways flanked by balustrades . The main stairway ascends directly from the plaza , those on either side are perpendicular to the main stairway . The balustrade of each stairway terminates at the top in a vertical panel . The temple facade is in good condition although the roof of the temple is missing . The range structures are unequal in size and each contains a single long room atop a low platform . The facade of each of these rooms once possessed a row of columns although only stumps remain in situ . This temple @-@ palace is K 'iche ' in style and has been identified with the Nija 'ib ' lineage of the K 'iche ' , being very similar to the Temple of Awilix at Q 'umarkaj . A tomb was excavated in Structure 4 , it consisted of a complete skeleton with associated offerings that included two tripod earthenware bowls , one with duck effigies , a tripod incense burner , a flint knife , nine obsidian knives , five jade beads and some fragments of gold . 
 Structure 6 is a temple on the northeast side of Plaza 1 . It rises in stepped sections topped by a summit shrine and was accessed via a stairway from the plaza that divided in two near the summit . Only the lower sections of the walls and columns of the shrine remain . 
 Structure 9 is a large mound on the northwest side of Plaza 1 . The last phase of construction shows evidence of the interruption of construction by the Spanish Conquest . Terraces were absent on three sides of the structure with only the lowest level having been built on the fourth . Early Classic ceramic caches were discovered under Structure 9 . 
 Structure 10 borders the northeast side of Plaza 4 and is unrestored although some original stonework is evident . It is a very long building accessed via three stairways ascending from the plaza . The structure has been investigated by archaeologists and was found to have multiple doorways opening into a single long room . 
 Structures 11 and 12 are small platforms in the middle of Plaza 1 . They have both been restored . 
 Structure 13 is on the southwest side of Plaza 1 , dividing that Plaza from Plaza 2 . It was accessed via a double stairway ascending from Plaza 1 . This double stairway gave access to the first level of the temple structure only ; from there , a wide single stairway continued to the summit shrine . Only the lower sections of the walls and columns of the temple superstructure remain . The earliest phase of construction dates to the Early Classic and consisted of a low platform that supported a perishable superstructure . 
 Structures 15 and 16 are both low platforms located in Plaza 2 , on an axis running directly northwest across the plaza from the central temple of Structure 4 . 
 Structure 17 is a pyramidal base in Plaza 2 , to the west of Structures 15 and 16 . It supported two rooms accessed via a double stairway on the northwest side of the temple . The entrance to outermost room once had two columns , although now only the lower portions of the walls and columns remain . 
 Structure 21 is a low platform in Plaza 5 , it is partially restored and has a stairway on the northwest side . 
 The Ballcourt consists of Structures 22 and 23 , it was used for the ceremonial Mesoamerican ballgame . It is an I @-@ shaped sunken ballcourt with sloping walls . The two structures forming the sides of the ballcourt once supported buildings , now only the lower sections of their walls remain . The ballcourt is oriented northwest to southeast and is 48 metres ( 157 ft ) long . 
 Structure 37 is not associated with any of the eight plazas of the site core , standing about 50 metres ( 160 ft ) northeast of Structure 4 and a similar distance east of Structure 1 . It was investigated by archaeologists but has not been restored , although some of the original stonework and plaster coating is visible . 
 = Fried chicken = 
 Fried chicken ( also referred to as Southern fried chicken for the variant in the United States ) is a dish consisting of chicken pieces usually from broiler chickens which have been <unk> or battered and then pan @-@ fried , deep fried , or pressure fried . The breading adds a crisp coating or crust to the exterior . What separates fried chicken from other fried forms of chicken is that generally the chicken is cut at the joints , and the bones and skin are left intact . Crisp well @-@ seasoned skin , rendered of excess fat , is a hallmark of well made fried chicken . 
 The first dish known to have been deep fried was fritters , which were popular in the Middle Ages . However , it was the Scottish who were the first to deep fry their chicken . The dish was first brought to the United States by Scottish immigrants . Prior to the Second World War , fried chicken was often very expensive and was only enjoyed on special occasions . In the late 1900s and early 2000s , however , fried chicken has been mass @-@ produced and the price of the dish has gone down significantly . 
 When being cooked , fried chicken is often divided into smaller pieces . The chicken is then generally covered in a batter , often consisting of ingredients such as eggs or milk . This is used to create a crust on the exterior of the meat . In addition , seasoning is often added at this stage . Once the chicken is ready to be cooked , it is placed in a deep fryer , frying pan or pressure cooker ( depending on the method used ) and fried in lard or a type of oil . 
 The dish has created a large number of spin @-@ off recipes which are commonly used around the world . For example , Korean fried chicken , a dish which is commonly served as fast food in Korea and is known for being crispier than normal fried chicken . There is also a racial stereotype surrounding fried chicken and African @-@ American people , mostly because it was popular among slaves in the American Civil War . 
 = = History = = 
 <unk> have existed in Europe since the middle ages ( from the 5th to the 15th century ) . The Scots had a tradition of deep frying chicken in fat , unlike their English counterparts who baked or boiled chicken . Scottish immigrants to America continued this frying chicken tradition and are responsible for the introduction of it to African slaves . A number of West African cuisines featured dishes where chicken was fried , typically in palm oil , sometimes having been battered before . These would be served on special occasions in some areas , or sometimes sold in the streets as snacks in others . This provided some means of independent economy for enslaved and segregated African @-@ American women , who became noted sellers of poultry ( live or cooked ) as early as the 1730s . Because of this and the expensive nature of the ingredients , it was , despite popular perception , a rare and special dish in the African @-@ American community . 
 After the development of larger and faster @-@ growing hogs ( due to crosses between European and Asian breeds ) in the 18th and 19th century in the United States , backyard and small @-@ scale hog production provided an inexpensive means of converting waste food , crop waste , and garbage into calories ( in a relatively small space and in a relatively short period of time ) . Many of those calories came in the form of fat and rendered lard . Lard was used for almost all cooking and was a fundamental component in many common homestead foods ( many that today are still regarded as holiday and comfort foods ) like biscuits and pies . The economic / caloric necessity of consuming lard and other saved fats may have led to the popularity of fried foods , not only in the US , but worldwide . In the 19th century cast iron became widely available for use in cooking . The combination of flour , lard , a chicken and a heavy pan placed over a relatively controllable flame became the beginning of today 's fried chicken . 
 When it was introduced to the American South , fried chicken became a common staple . Later , as the slave trade led to Africans being brought to work on southern plantations , the slaves who became cooks incorporated seasonings and spices that were absent in traditional Scottish cuisine , enriching the flavor . Since most slaves were unable to raise expensive meats , but generally allowed to keep chickens , frying chicken on special occasions continued in the African @-@ American communities of the South . It endured the fall of slavery and gradually passed into common use as a general Southern dish . Since fried chicken traveled well in hot weather before refrigeration was commonplace , it gained further favor in the periods of American history when segregation closed off most restaurants to the black population . Fried chicken continues to be among this region 's top choices for " Sunday dinner " . Holidays such as Independence Day and other gatherings often feature this dish . 
 Since the American Civil War , traditional slave foods like fried chicken , watermelon , and <unk> have suffered a strong association with African @-@ American stereotypes and blackface minstrelsy . This was commercialized for the first half of the 20th century by restaurants like Sambo 's and Coon Chicken Inn , which selected exaggerated depictions of blacks as mascots , implying quality by their association with the stereotype . Although also being acknowledged positively as " soul food " today , the affinity that African @-@ American culture has for fried chicken has been considered a delicate , often pejorative issue . While the perception of fried chicken as an ethnic dish has been fading for several decades , with the ubiquity of fried chicken dishes in the US , it persists as a racial stereotype . 
 Before the industrialization of chicken production , and the creation of broiler breeds of chicken , only young spring chickens ( <unk> or <unk> ) would be suitable for the higher heat and relatively fast cooking time of frying , making fried chicken a luxury of spring and summer . Older , tougher birds require longer cooking times at lower temperatures . To compensate for this , sometimes tougher birds are simmered till tender , allowed to cool and dry , and then fried . ( This method is common in Australia . ) Another method is to fry the chicken pieces using a pan fried method . The chicken pieces are then simmered in liquid , usually , a gravy made in the pan that the chicken pieces were cooked in . This process ( of flouring , frying and simmering in gravy ) is known as " smothering " and can be used for other tough cuts of meat , such as <unk> steak . Smothered chicken is still consumed today , though with the exception of people who raise their own chickens , or who seek out stewing hens , it is primarily made using commercial broiler chickens . 
 = = Description = = 
 Fried chicken has been described as being " crunchy " and " juicy " , as well as " crispy " . In addition , the dish has also been called " spicy " and " salty " . Occasionally , fried chicken is also topped with a chili like paprika , or hot sauce to give it a spicy taste . This is especially common in fast food restaurants and chains such as KFC . 
 The dish is renowned for being greasy and unhealthy , especially when coming from fast food outlets . Out of the various parts of the animal used in fried chicken , the wings generally tend to contain the most fat , with almost 40 grams ( 0 @.@ 088 lb ) of fat for every 100 grams ( 0 @.@ 22 lb ) . However , the average whole fried chicken contains only around 12 % fat , or 12 grams ( 0 @.@ 026 lb ) per every 100 grams ( 0 @.@ 22 lb ) . As well as this , 100 grams ( 0 @.@ 22 lb ) grams of fried chicken generally contains around 240 calories of energy . 
 One of the main causes of the large amounts of fat which can be found in fried chicken is the oil which is used to cook it . Vegetable oil , one of the most common oils used to cook fried chicken and other fried foods , consists mainly of fat and a large number of calories . 
 = = Preparation = = 
 Generally , chickens are not fried whole ; instead , the chicken is divided into its constituent pieces . The two white meat sections are the breast and the wing from the front of the chicken , while the dark meat sections are the thigh and leg or " drumstick " , are from the rear of the chicken . These pieces are usually subdivided into the wings , the breasts ( the wishbone is often cut out first in home cooking ) , the legs , and the thighs . The ribs are sometimes left on the breast , but commercially they and the back are usually discarded . 
 To prepare the chicken pieces for frying , they may be coated in a batter of flour and liquid ( and seasonings ) mixed together . The batter can contain ingredients like eggs , milk , and leavening . Alternatively , they may be dredged in flour or a similar dry substance , to coat the meat and to develop a crust . Seasonings such as salt , pepper , cayenne pepper , paprika , garlic powder , onion powder , or ranch dressing mix can be mixed in with the flour . Either process may be preceded by <unk> or by dipping in milk or buttermilk . As the pieces of chicken cook , some of the moisture that exudes from the chicken is absorbed by the coating of flour and browns along with the flour , creating a flavorful crust . According to Nathan Bailey 's 1736 cookbook , <unk> <unk> , for example , the chicken can be covered in a marinade that consists of the juice of two large fresh lemons , malt vinegar , bay leaves , salt , pepper , ground cloves , and green onions ; it then must be settled in the marinade for three hours before being dipped in the batter that consists of all @-@ purpose flour , white wine , three egg yolks and salt , and then slowly submerged in a deep pot of either oil , lard , or clarified butter over an open fire . It can then be topped with fresh , dried parsley dipped in the same frying oil . 
 Traditionally , lard is used to fry the chicken , but corn oil , peanut oil , canola oil , or vegetable oil are also frequently used ( although clarified butter may be used as well like in colonial times ) . The flavor of olive oil is generally considered too strong to be used for traditional fried chicken , and its low smoke point makes it unsuitable for use . There are three main techniques for frying chickens : pan frying , deep frying and <unk> . 
 Pan frying ( or shallow frying ) requires a frying pan of sturdy construction and a source of fat that does not fully immerse the chicken . The chicken pieces are prepared as above , then fried . Generally the fat is heated to a temperature hot enough to seal ( without browning , at this point ) the outside of the chicken pieces . Once the pieces have been added to the hot fat and sealed , the temperature is reduced . There is debate as to how often to turn the chicken pieces , with one camp arguing for often turning and even browning , and the other camp pushing for letting the pieces render skin side down and only turning when absolutely necessary . Once the chicken pieces are close to being done the temperature is raised and the pieces are browned to the desired color ( some cooks add small amounts of butter at this point to enhance browning ) . The moisture from the chicken that sticks and browns on the bottom of the pan become the <unk> required to make gravy . 
 Deep frying requires a deep fryer or other device in which the chicken pieces can be completely submerged in hot fat . The process of deep frying is basically placing food fully in oil and then cooking it at a very high temperature . The pieces are prepared as described above . The fat is heated in the deep fryer to the desired temperature . The pieces are added to the fat and a constant temperature is maintained throughout the cooking process . 
 <unk> uses a pressure cooker to accelerate the process . The moisture inside the chicken becomes steam and increases the pressure in the cooker , lowering the cooking temperature needed . The steam also cooks the chicken through , but still allows the pieces to be moist and tender while maintaining a crisp coating . Fat is heated in a pressure cooker . Chicken pieces are prepared as described above and then placed in the hot fat . The lid is placed on the pressure cooker , and the chicken pieces are thus fried under pressure . 
 The derivative phrases " country fried " and " chicken fried " often refer to other foods prepared in the manner of fried chicken . Usually , this means a boneless , tenderized piece of meat that has been <unk> or battered and cooked in any of the methods described above or simply chicken which is cooked outdoors . Chicken fried steak and " country fried " boneless chicken breast are two common examples . 
 = = Global variants = = 
 Throughout the world , different seasoning and spices are used to augment the flavor of fried chicken . Because of the versatility of fried chicken , it is not uncommon to flavor the chicken 's crisp exterior with a variety of spices ranging from spicy to savory . Depending on regional market ubiquity , local spice variations may be labeled as distinct from traditional Southern U.S. flavors , or may appear on menus without notation . With access to chickens suitable for frying broadening on a global scale with the advent of industrialized poultry farming , many localities have added their own mark on fried chicken , tweaking recipes to suit local preferences . 
 = = = North America = = = 
 Barberton Chicken : also known as Serbian Fried Chicken , created by Serbian immigrants in Barberton , Ohio and has been popularized throughout Ohio . 
 Buffalo wings : Named for their place of origin , Buffalo , New York , this is one of the few kinds of fried chicken that is not traditionally battered before frying . 
 Buffalo strips , fingers , crisp wings and boneless wings : using the same cayenne @-@ pepper sauce as Buffalo wings , these chicken products are battered before frying . See also : chicken fingers and chicken nuggets . 
 Chicken fingers : also known as chicken tenders or chicken strips , this is one of the most common forms of fried chicken , generally pieces of chicken breast ( sometimes with rib meat ) cut into long strips , breaded or battered dipped , and deep fried . 
 Chicken fries : chicken nuggets in the shape of French fries , popularized by the fast @-@ food chains Burger King and KFC . These may also be referred to as chicken sticks . 
 Chicken Maryland , a form of pan @-@ fried chicken , often marinated in buttermilk , served with cream gravy and native to the state of Maryland . The recipe spread beyond the United States to the haute cuisine of Auguste Escoffier and , after heavy modification , found a place in the cuisines of Britain and Australia . The dish is made when a pan of chicken pieces and fat , as for pan frying , is placed in the oven to cook , for a majority of the overall cooking time , basically " fried in the oven " . 
 Chicken nuggets : an industrially reconstituted boneless chicken product invented by Cornell poultry science professor Robert C. Baker in the 1950s . 
 Popcorn chicken : occasionally known as chicken bites or other similar terms , small morsels of boneless chicken , battered and fried , resulting in little nuggets that resemble <unk> chicken is also occasionally topped with peanuts , or peanut sauce . 
 Chicken patties : breaded , fried patties of chicken meat used in sandwiches . 
 Country Fried Chicken : chicken meat that has been coated with flour or breaded , fried and served topped with country cream gravy . Related tangentially to Chicken fried steak . 
 Chicken and waffles , a combination platter of foods traditionally served at breakfast and dinner in one meal , common to soul food restaurants in the American South and beyond . 
 Hot chicken : common in the Nashville , Tennessee area , a pan @-@ fried variant of fried chicken coated with lard and cayenne pepper paste . 
 Fried chicken sandwiches : a bun , biscuit or doughnut which is filled with fried chicken and assorted toppings , popular in Washington , D.C. 
 = = = Asia = = = 
 <unk> goreng : various kinds of Indonesian , Singapore and Malaysian dish of chicken deep fried in coconut oil , this Southeast Asian version is absent of batter and richer in spices . 
 Crispy fried chicken : a dish from the regional Cantonese cuisine of China . 
 Har Cheong Gai : a Singaporean chicken wings fried in a batter with fermented shrimp paste . 
 Chicken <unk> : a Japanese marinated and fried method of preparing fried chicken . 
 Salt and pepper chicken : ( <unk> or <unk> ) Cubes of chicken leg meat marinated and deep @-@ fried , similar to <unk> but flavoured with pepper salt and / or five @-@ spice powder . Originating in Taiwanese night markets , it has also been popularized in North American Taiwanese bubble tea restaurants . 
 Taiwan fried chicken fillet : Chicken fillet prepared in a similar way to salt and pepper chicken , as one large piece eaten in a paper bag . Popular in Taiwanese night markets . 
 Chicken <unk> : ( <unk> ) , a Japanese panko @-@ breaded , deep fried chicken cutlet , adapted from <unk> , a pork chop variant . Occasionally used in curry . 
 Korean fried chicken : ( <unk> <unk> ) , fried chicken pieces flavored with Korean <unk> sauce with garlic . 
 <unk> : fried chicken with Korean seasonings like gochujang . 
 Prawn paste chicken or " shrimp paste chicken " : popular in Hong Kong @-@ style restaurants in Singapore and Malaysia . <unk> puréed shrimp and ginger juice into its breading mixture . 
 Sweet and sour chicken : deep @-@ fried balls of chicken breast in batter . 
 <unk> : Japanese tempura style fried chicken . 
 Chicken with chilies : ( <unk> ) , a Sichuan @-@ style dish with small deep @-@ fried pieces of chicken that are then stir @-@ fried with chilies . 
 Chicken lollipop : An Indian snack of fried chicken <unk> , coated in a spiced batter and fried . 
 = = Racial stereotype = = 
 In the United States , fried chicken has stereotypically been associated with African @-@ Americans . The reasons for this are various . Chicken dishes were popular among slaves before the Civil War , as chickens were generally the only animals slaves were allowed to raise on their own . With the prevalence of such a stereotype being due in large part to minstrel shows and the film Birth of a Nation . 
 On two occasions the golfer Tiger Woods has been the target of remarks regarding fried chicken . The first occurred in 1997 when golfer Fuzzy Zoeller said that Woods should avoid choosing fried chicken for the Masters champions ' dinner the following year ; the second when golfer Sergio García was asked in a press conference in 2013 whether he would invite Woods to dinner during the U.S. Open to settle their ongoing feud . García said : " We will have him round every night . . . We will serve fried chicken " , which Woods said was " wrong , hurtful and clearly inappropriate " . Both Zoeller and García subsequently apologized to Woods . 
 In 2009 , a Bangladeshi immigrant to the U.S. renamed his restaurant " Obama Fried Chicken " in honor of recently inaugurated President Barack Obama . Despite controversy at the time , the owner refused to change the name back , and the restaurant continues to operate under this name . 
 At a dinner during Black History Month , an NBC chef , Leslie Calhoun , served fried chicken . The drummer of the Roots , Questlove , was angered by this and thought it both offensive and ignorant . 
 In 2012 , Burger King withdrew a commercial which featured Mary J. Blige singing about a crispy chicken wrap , due to the racial stereotypes surrounding fried chicken . 
 = Clare Winger Harris = 
 Clare Winger Harris ( January 18 , 1891 – October 1968 ) was an early science fiction writer whose short stories were published during the 1920s . She is credited as the first woman to publish stories under her own name in science fiction magazines . Her stories often dealt with characters on the " borders of humanity " such as cyborgs . 
 Harris began publishing in 1926 , and soon became well liked by readers . She sold a total of eleven stories , which were collected in 1947 as Away From the Here and Now . Her gender was a surprise to Gernsback , the editor who first bought her work , as she was the first woman to publish science fiction stories under her own name . Her stories , which often feature strong female characters , have been occasionally reprinted and have received some positive critical response , including a recognition of her pioneering role as a woman writer in a male @-@ dominated field . 
 = = Life = = 
 Clare Winger was born on January 18 , 1891 , in Freeport , Illinois and later attended Smith College in Massachusetts . In 1912 she married Frank Clyde Harris . Her husband was an architect and engineer who served in World War I and was chief engineer with the Loudon Machinery Company in Iowa and one of the organizers of the American Monorail Company of Cleveland , Ohio . 
 Harris gave birth to three sons ( Clyde Winger , born 1915 ; Donald Stover , born 1916 ; and Lynn <unk> , born 1918 ) . She died in Pasadena , California in 1968 . 
 Harris wrote her most acclaimed works during the 1920s . In 1930 , she stopped writing to raise and educate her children . 
 = = Writing career = = 
 Harris published her first short story , " The Runaway World , " in the July 1926 issue of Weird Tales . In December of that year , she submitted a story for a contest being run by Amazing Stories editor Hugo Gernsback . Harris 's story , " The Fate of the Poseidonia " ( a space opera about Martians who steal earth 's water , placed third . Harris soon became one of <unk> 's most popular writers . 
 Harris eventually published eleven short stories in pulp magazines , most of them in Amazing Stories ( although she also published in other places such as Science Wonder Quarterly ) . 
 In 1947 Harris 's short stories were collected under the title Away from the Here and Now . Her stories have also been reprinted in anthologies such as Daughters of Earth : Feminist Science Fiction in the 20th Century ( with a critical essay ) , Sci @-@ Fi <unk> , Amazing Science Fiction Anthology : The Wonder Years 1926 @-@ 1935 , and Gosh Wow ! Sense of Wonder Science Fiction . She wrote one novel , Persephone of Eleusis : A Romance of Ancient Greece ( 1923 ) . 
 Harris also wrote one of the first attempts to classify science fiction when , in the August 1931 issue of Wonder Stories , she listed 16 basic science fiction themes , including , " Interplanetary space travel , " " Adventures on other worlds , " and " The creation of synthetic life . " 
 = = Critical view and influence = = 
 When <unk> published Harris 's first short story in Amazing Stories , he praised her writing while also expressing amazement that a woman could write good scientifiction ( as science fiction was then called ) , saying " That the third prize winner should prove to be a woman was one of the surprises of the contest , for , as a rule , women do not make good <unk> writers , because their education and general tendencies on scientific matters are usually limited . But the exception , as usual , proves the rule , the exception in this case being extraordinarily impressive . " 
 For many years Harris claimed to have been the first woman science @-@ fiction writer in the United States . While this can be debated ( since Gertrude Barrows Bennett , writing under the pseudonym Francis Stevens , published science fiction stories as early as 1917 ) , Harris is recognized as the first woman to publish stories in science fiction magazines under her own name . 
 Even though Harris published only a handful of stories , almost all of them have been reprinted over the years . Of these , " The Miracle of the Lily " has been reprinted the most and praised by many critics , with Richard Lupoff saying the story would have " won the Hugo Award for best short story , if the award had existed then . " Lupoff also wrote that " [ w ] hile today 's reader may find her prose creaky and old @-@ fashioned , the stories positively teem with still @-@ fresh and provocative ideas . 
 " The Fate of the Poseidonia " has also been reprinted a number of times and is credited as an early example of a science fiction story with a heroic female lead character . Other of Harris 's stories are also noted for featuring strong female characters , such as Sylvia , the airplane pilot and mechanic in " The Ape Cycle " ( 1930 ) . Harris also wrote one story utilizing a female point of view ( in 1928 's " The Fifth Dimension " ) . 
 Because Harris was the first woman published in science fiction magazines , and because of her embrace of female characters and themes , she has been recognized in recent years as a pioneer of women 's and feminist science fiction . 
 = = = Novels = = = 
 Persephone of Eleusis : A Romance of Ancient Greece ( 1923 ) 
 = = = Collections = = = 
 Away from the Here and Now : Stories in Pseudo @-@ Science ( Philadelphia : Dorrance , 1947 ) 
 = = = Short stories = = = 
 ( All stories included in Away from the Here and Now ) . 
 " A Runaway World " ( Weird Tales , July 1926 ) 
 " The Fate of the Poseidonia " ( Amazing Stories , June 1927 ) 
 " A Certain Soldier " ( Weird Tales , November 1927 ) 
 " The Fifth Dimension " ( Amazing Stories , December 1928 ) 
 " The Menace From Mars " ( Amazing Stories , October 1928 ) 
 " The Miracle of the Lily " ( Amazing Stories , April 1928 ) 
 " The Artificial Man " ( Science Wonder Quarterly , Fall 1929 ) 
 " A Baby on Neptune " with Miles J. Breuer , M.D. ( Amazing Stories , December 1929 ) 
 " The Diabolical Drug " ( Amazing Stories , May 1929 ) 
 " The Evolutionary Monstrosity " ( Amazing Stories Quarterly , Winter 1929 ) 
 " The Ape Cycle " ( Science Wonder Quarterly , Spring 1930 ) 
 = = = Essays = = = 
 Letter ( Air Wonder Stories , September 1929 ) 
 Letter ( Wonder Stories , August 1931 ) 
 = Richard Rennison = 
 Richard Rennison ( 29 October 1889 – 5 August 1969 ) was the last " anvil priest " at Gretna Green , Scotland . Between 1926 and 1940 , he performed " irregular marriages " of couples over the anvil at the Old Blacksmith Shop , where the couple proclaimed that they were single and wanted to get married in front of witnesses . As " anvil priest " , Rennison generally requested a fee of £ 1 , but was known to earn up to £ 20 for a ceremony ( approximately £ 3 @,@ 030 in 2012 ) . 
 The popularity of the marriages grew whilst he was performing them , to the point that a special committee was formed to look at marriage in Scotland , to which Rennison was called as a witness . By the time " irregular marriages " were outlawed in Scotland by the Marriage ( Scotland ) Act 1939 , Rennison had conducted 5 @,@ 147 ceremonies . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Richard Rennison was born on 29 October 1889 in <unk> , Northumberland to coalminer James Rennison and his wife Ann . He spent time working as a " General Dealer " and as a photographer . He also spent time as a Methodist preacher in Tyneside . In 1923 , he married Jessie Little in <unk> , Cumberland . The pair moved to Gretna in 1926 , by which time Rennison was describing himself as a saddler , an ironmonger and a boot maker . When he moved to Gretna , he initially set himself up as a saddler and opened a cafe , before being taken on by Hugh Mackie , the manager of the Old Blacksmith 's Shop . Rennison died on 5 August 1969 at <unk> , Northumberland . 
 = = The last " anvil priest " = = 
 Before 1940 , marriage in Scotland was based on Celtic customs , rather than Catholic religious customs . As such , marriage only required a couple to agree to be married in front of witnesses . The simplicity of these " irregular marriages " meant that they were used by couples who wished to elope , and Gretna Green became a hotspot for elopement because it was the village in Scotland nearest to the English border . The marriages were provided by the blacksmith as he was certain to be a citizen of Scotland and was easy to find at the forge . 
 Hugh Mackie purchased the Old Blacksmith 's Shop at Gretna Green in 1890 and resided there as " anvil priest " until 1926 when he was looking to retire and find a replacement . Mackie found Richard Rennison , who had recently joined the community , and by October 1927 , Rennison was presiding over marriages and acting as caretaker of the shop . The shop had ceased any metalwork in 1900 and was solely used for marriage ceremonies . A natural showman , Rennison soon became the resident " anvil priest " and set about marrying people . He would regularly point out that , although he was not a member of the clergy , he could marry people as he was " No Sinner " – the reverse of his surname ! In his first ten years , he married around 2000 couples , the majority of whom were couples between 40 and 60 years old . By 1939 , the number of marriages he had performed had increased past 4000 due to the many young men who wanted to get married before starting their service in World War II . 
 Marriages at the blacksmith shop were inconsistent during Rennison 's time as " anvil priest " . Although they followed the same pattern , and both parties were to declare in front of witnesses they were single and that one had lived in Scotland for 21 days , there are documented cases where these requirements were not confirmed . At this point , Rennison would strike the hammer on the anvil , and the couple would be married . Rennison 's wife often acted as a witness to the couples getting married , and sometimes performed the ceremonies herself . The marriage fee was supposedly £ 1 , but Rennison would sometimes perform the ceremony for free or however much he was given ; in one case he received £ 20 ( worth approximately £ 3 @,@ 030 in 2012 ) . If witnesses were required , they would be provided at the cost of 2s 6d each . 
 Rennison travelled to London in 1931 for a " sight @-@ seeing visit " , and he brought the anvil with him to protect it from theft . The anvil never left his side , despite weighing 240 pounds ( 110 kg ) . The Leader @-@ Post suggested that , since the cost of a new anvil was much less than the cost of transporting the old one , this was more likely to be a publicity stunt . 
 In 1935 , due to the increasing popularity of the Gretna Green " irregular marriages " , a special committee headed by Lord Morison was appointed to look at marriage in Scotland . Rennison gave evidence before the committee in 1936 . There he claimed that he was known as " the Gretna priest " , but did not dress like one and stated that he knew he was not one . He also confirmed that he had been removing the word " priest " from marriage certificates and telling couples that they needed to confirm their marriage with the registrar at Dumfries . The committee 's findings led to the Marriage ( Scotland ) Act 1939 , which outlawed the process of " irregular marriages " . When the new law came into force in 1940 , Rennison had performed 5 @,@ 147 marriages . His role then changed to a symbolic one , " blessing " marriages and acting as caretaker of the forge . He also regularly appeared at court to ensure the marriages he performed were judicially recognised . 
 = Finite subdivision rule = 
 In mathematics , a finite subdivision rule is a recursive way of dividing a polygon or other two @-@ dimensional shape into smaller and smaller pieces . Subdivision rules in a sense are generalizations of fractals . Instead of repeating exactly the same design over and over , they have slight variations in each stage , allowing a richer structure while maintaining the elegant style of fractals . Subdivision rules have been used in architecture , biology , and computer science , as well as in the study of hyperbolic manifolds . Substitution tilings are a well @-@ studied type of subdivision rule . 
 = = Definition = = 
 A subdivision rule takes a tiling of the plane by polygons and turns it into a new tiling by subdividing each polygon into smaller polygons . It is finite if there are only finitely many ways that every polygon can subdivide . Each way of subdividing a tile is called a tile type . Each tile type is represented by a label ( usually a letter ) . Every tile type subdivides into smaller tile types . Each edge also gets subdivided according to finitely many edge types . Finite subdivision rules can only subdivide tilings that are made up of polygons labelled by tile types . Such tilings are called subdivision complexes for the subdivision rule . Given any subdivision complex for a subdivision rule , we can subdivide it over and over again to get a sequence of tilings . 
 For instance , binary subdivision has one tile type and one edge type : 
 Since the only tile type is a quadrilateral , binary subdivision can only subdivide tilings made up of quadrilaterals . This means that the only subdivision complexes are tilings by quadrilaterals . The tiling can be regular , but doesn 't have to be : 
 Here we start with a complex made of four quadrilaterals and subdivide it twice . All quadrilaterals are type A tiles . 
 = = Examples of finite subdivision rules = = 
