 St Nidan 's is built mainly from red gritstone rubble , dressed with sandstone , with buttresses at the corners ; the roof , which is made from slate , has stone copings with a cross at the east end . The church is built in a cross @-@ shape , in Early English style . There is a tower at the west end , which has battlements at the top along with a clock on the east and west sides , a belfry in the middle , and an entrance porch with an arched doorway at the bottom . There are two transepts leading from the nave , one to the north and one to the south , and a chancel at the east end . There are four " equal and bold " arches at the crossing where nave , transepts and chancel meet . The quadrant @-@ shaped organ room and vestry are built into the eastern external angles of the chancel and transepts , one on each side of the church . 
 The gallery at the west end of the nave , supported by octagonal columns , is reached from the entrance porch ; it has its pews set at an angle . A step leads up from the nave into the chancel , with a further two steps up from the chancel into the sanctuary . The floor of the chancel and the sanctuary are made from encaustic tiles . The internal walls have been plastered . The nave has two bays , each lit with a lancet window ; the transepts have groups of three large <unk> windows , as does the east end of the building . The chancel window depicts " Faith , Hope and Charity " , by Heaton , Butler and Bayne ( 1877 ) ; it is dedicated to the 5th Lord Boston who died in 1897 . One transept set of windows by Shrigley and Hunt depicts the Ascension , in memory of Anna Maria Evans ( died 1929 , wife of the vicar Richard Evans ) . 
 A sandstone chest with a glass front was moved here from the old church ; local tradition maintains that it holds the relics of St Nidan . It was discovered under the altar of the old church , and may date from the 16th century . The church also has pews made of pine , and a semi @-@ octagonal pulpit with decorated panels . 
 A survey by the Royal Commission on Ancient and Historical Monuments in Wales and Monmouthshire in 1937 noted which of the church 's contents had come from the old church . The report listed the font , which has carved decoration and dates from the early 13th century ; two bells , one from the first half of the 14th century ( inscribed " + E : D : A : N " ) and another from the latter part of the 15th century ( inscribed " <unk> AP <unk> " ) ; and a carved oak chair from the time of Charles II . 
 In 1906 , a survey of church plate within the Bangor diocese recorded that St Nidan 's had a silver chalice and alms dish . These were donated probably in 1701 and remade in 1871 – 72 . It also had a silver paten and two <unk> with silver handles , all marked with the date 1871 – 72 . Records from the 19th century indicated that two tankards ( one silver , one pewter ) and a silver chalice had been lost . 
 The churchyard contains the grave of Sir Ellis Ellis @-@ Griffith , 1st Baronet , who was MP for Anglesey for 25 years . The grave , by the church 's north wall , has a bust of the politician wearing a wing collar . Other people buried here include the Presbyterian minister and theologian J. E. Hughes , who died in 1959 . There are four Commonwealth war graves , of a British Army soldier of World War I and three soldiers of World War II . 
 = = Assessment = = 
 The church has national recognition and statutory protection from alteration as it has been designated as a Grade II listed building – the lowest of the three grades of listing , designating " buildings of special interest , which warrant every effort being made to preserve them " . It was given this status on 30 January 1968 , and has been listed as " a small early 19th @-@ century church " . Cadw ( the Welsh Assembly Government body responsible for the built heritage of Wales and the inclusion of Welsh buildings on the statutory lists ) describes the church as " a distinctive example of pre @-@ archaeological gothic revival work . " 
 Writing in 1846 , the clergyman and antiquarian Harry Longueville Jones condemned the treatment of the old church , which he said was " one of the largest and most important in the island of Anglesey " , given its architecture , contents and traditions . He said that the new church had been built " in a debased barbarous style , showing neither architectural science nor taste , and without any example or analogy amongst the ecclesiastical edifices of any age , except the present . " He also described it in 1863 as " that hideous pile ... a painfully impressive example of architectural bad taste . " He said that the font was " one of the most interesting as a work of art ( not later than the thirteenth century ) extent in Anglesey " , and although he did not consider that its design or execution matched that of the font at St Ceinwen 's Church , Llangeinwen , it was " a highly valuable specimen of medieval taste . " The reliquary , he added , was " unique , so far as Wales is concerned " . 
 The 19th @-@ century writer Samuel Lewis said that the new church was " apparently of substantial construction , but is much inferior in style to the old building . " The historian and clergyman Edmund Tyrrell Green , writing a survey of Anglesey church architecture and contents in 1929 , described the church as " hideous " , although he said that the font was " remarkable " for its " very graceful patterns in relief showing influence of Greek classical design . " 
 A 2006 guide to the churches of Anglesey says that it is " of fairly unusual appearance , not at all typical of Anglesey churches in its stonework or the shape of the <unk> tower " . It comments that the organ and vestry were in " unusually @-@ shaped rooms " , and notes the " ornate stained glass " of the Ascension . A 2009 guide to the buildings of the region says that the church is " bolder " than John Welch 's similarly designed church at Llandudno . It describes the tower as " top @-@ heavy with battlements ... like a water tower " , and adds that the seating is " crowded " . 
 = The Avengers ( 2012 film ) = 
 Marvel 's The Avengers ( classified under the name Marvel Avengers Assemble in the United Kingdom and Ireland ) , or simply The Avengers , is a 2012 American superhero film based on the Marvel Comics superhero team of the same name , produced by Marvel Studios and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures.1 It is the sixth film in the Marvel Cinematic Universe . The film was written and directed by Joss Whedon and features an ensemble cast that includes Robert Downey Jr . , Chris Evans , Mark Ruffalo , Chris Hemsworth , Scarlett Johansson , Jeremy Renner , Tom Hiddleston , Clark Gregg , Cobie Smulders , Stellan Skarsgård , and Samuel L. Jackson . In the film , Nick Fury , director of the peacekeeping organization S.H.I.E.L.D. , recruits Iron Man , Captain America , the Hulk , and Thor to form a team that must stop Thor 's brother Loki from subjugating Earth . 
 The film 's development began when Marvel Studios received a loan from Merrill Lynch in April 2005 . After the success of the film Iron Man in May 2008 , Marvel announced that The Avengers would be released in July 2011 . With the signing of Johansson in March 2009 , the film was pushed back for a 2012 release . Whedon was brought on board in April 2010 and rewrote the original screenplay by Zak Penn . Production began in April 2011 in Albuquerque , New Mexico , before moving to Cleveland , Ohio , in August and New York City in September . The film was converted to 3D in post @-@ production . 
 The Avengers premiered on April 11 , 2012 , at Hollywood 's El Capitan Theatre and was released theatrically in the United States on May 4 , 2012 . The film garnered numerous critical awards and nominations , including Academy Award and BAFTA nominations for achievements in visual effects and has set or tied numerous box office records , including the biggest opening weekend in North America . The Avengers grossed over $ 1 @.@ 5 billion worldwide , and became the third @-@ highest @-@ grossing film during its theatrical run — as well as the first Marvel production to generate $ 1 billion in ticket sales . The film was released on Blu @-@ ray Disc and DVD on September 25 , 2012 . A sequel , titled Avengers : Age of Ultron , was released on May 1 , 2015 , while a two @-@ part sequel , titled Avengers : Infinity War is currently in development , with Part 1 scheduled for a May 4 , 2018 release date , and Part 2 scheduled to be released on May 3 , 2019 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Asgardian Loki encounters the Other , the leader of an extraterrestrial race known as the Chitauri . In exchange for retrieving the Tesseract , 2 a powerful energy source of unknown potential , the Other promises Loki an army with which he can subjugate Earth . Nick Fury , director of the espionage agency S.H.I.E.L.D. , and his lieutenant Agent Maria Hill arrive at a remote research facility during an evacuation , where physicist Dr. Erik Selvig is leading a research team experimenting on the Tesseract . Agent Phil Coulson explains that the object has begun radiating an unusual form of energy . The Tesseract suddenly activates and opens a wormhole , allowing Loki to reach Earth . Loki takes the Tesseract and uses his scepter to enslave Selvig and a couple of agents , including Clint Barton , to aid him in his getaway . 
 In response to the attack , Fury reactivates the " Avengers Initiative " . Agent Natasha Romanoff is sent to Calcutta to recruit Dr. Bruce Banner to trace the Tesseract through its gamma radiation emissions . Coulson visits Tony Stark to have him review Selvig 's research , and Fury approaches Steve Rogers with an assignment to retrieve the Tesseract . 
 In Stuttgart , Barton steals iridium needed to stabilize the Tesseract 's power while Loki causes a distraction , leading to a confrontation with Rogers , Stark , and Romanoff that ends with Loki 's surrender . While Loki is being escorted to S.H.I.E.L.D. , Thor , his adoptive brother , arrives and frees him , hoping to convince him to abandon his plan and return to Asgard . After a confrontation with Stark and Rogers , Thor agrees to take Loki to S.H.I.E.L.D. ' s flying aircraft carrier , the Helicarrier . There Loki is imprisoned while Banner and Stark attempt to locate the Tesseract . 
 The Avengers become divided , both over how to approach Loki and the revelation that S.H.I.E.L.D. plans to harness the Tesseract to develop weapons as a deterrent against hostile extraterrestrials . As the group argues , Barton and Loki 's other possessed agents attack the Helicarrier , disabling its engines in flight and causing Banner to transform into the Hulk . Stark and Rogers try to restart the damaged engine , and Thor attempts to stop the Hulk 's rampage . Romanoff fights Barton , and knocks him unconscious , breaking Loki 's mind control . Loki escapes after killing Coulson and ejecting Thor from the airship , while the Hulk falls to the ground after attacking a S.H.I.E.L.D. fighter jet . Fury uses Coulson 's death to motivate the Avengers into working as a team . Stark and Rogers realize that for Loki , simply defeating them will not be enough ; he needs to overpower them publicly to validate himself as ruler of Earth . Loki uses the Tesseract , in conjunction with a device Selvig built , to open a wormhole above Stark Tower to the Chitauri fleet in space , launching his invasion . 
 The Avengers rally in defense of New York City , the wormhole 's location , but quickly realize they will be overwhelmed as wave after wave of Chitauri descend upon Earth . Banner arrives and transforms into the Hulk , and together he , Rogers , Stark , Thor , Barton , and Romanoff battle the Chitauri while evacuating civilians . The Hulk finds Loki and beats him into submission . Romanoff makes her way to the wormhole generator , where Selvig , freed of Loki 's control , reveals that Loki 's scepter can be used to shut down the generator . Meanwhile , Fury 's superiors attempt to end the invasion by launching a nuclear missile at Midtown Manhattan . Stark intercepts the missile and takes it through the wormhole toward the Chitauri fleet . The missile detonates , destroying the Chitauri mothership and disabling their forces on Earth . Stark 's suit runs out of power , and he falls back through the wormhole just as Romanoff closes it . Stark goes into freefall , but the Hulk saves him from crashing to the ground . In the aftermath , Thor returns Loki and the Tesseract to Asgard , while Fury expresses confidence that the Avengers will return if and when they are needed . 
 In a mid @-@ credits scene , the Other confers with his <unk> about the failed attack on Earth . In a post @-@ credits scene , the Avengers eat in silence at a shawarma restaurant . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Robert Downey Jr. as Tony Stark / Iron Man : 
 A self @-@ described genius , billionaire , playboy , and philanthropist with an electromechanical suit of armor of his own invention . Downey was cast as part of his four @-@ picture deal with Marvel Studios , which includes Iron Man 2 and The Avengers . Downey said that he initially pushed Whedon to make Stark the lead : " Well , I said , ' I need to be in the opening sequence . I don 't know what you 're thinking , but Tony needs to drive this thing . ' He was like , ' Okay , let 's try that . ' We tried it and it didn 't work , because this is a different sort of thing , the story and the idea and the theme is the theme , and everybody is just an arm of the octopus . " About the character 's evolution from previous films , Downey said , " In Iron Man , which was an origin story , he was his own epiphany and redemption of sorts . Iron Man 2 is all about not being an island , dealing with legacy issues and making space for others . . . In The Avengers , he 's throwing it down with the others " . 
 Chris Evans as Steve Rogers / Captain America : 
 A World War II veteran who was enhanced to the peak of human physicality by an experimental serum and frozen in suspended animation before waking up in the modern world . Evans was cast as part of a deal to star in three Marvel films , in addition to The Avengers . Evans said that Steve Rogers is much darker in The Avengers : " It 's just about him trying to come to terms with the modern world . You 've got to imagine , it 's enough of a shock to accept the fact that you 're in a completely different time , but everybody you know is dead . Everybody you cared about . . . He was a soldier , obviously , everybody he went to battle with , all of his brothers in arms , they 're all dead . He 's just lonely . I think in the beginning it 's a fish @-@ out @-@ of @-@ water scene , and it 's tough . It 's a tough pill for him to swallow . Then comes trying to find a balance with the modern world . " Regarding the dynamic between Rogers and Tony Stark , Evans said , " I think there 's certainly a dichotomy — this kind of friction between myself and Tony Stark , they 're polar opposites . One guy is flash and spotlight and smooth , and the other guy is selfless and in the shadows and kind of quiet and they have to get along . They explore that , and it 's pretty fun . " 
 Mark Ruffalo as Bruce Banner / Hulk : 
 A genius scientist who , because of exposure to gamma radiation , transforms into a monster when enraged or agitated . Ruffalo , who was considered to play Banner in The Incredible Hulk before Edward Norton took the role , was cast after negotiations between Marvel and Norton broke down . About replacing Norton , Ruffalo said , " I 'm a friend of Ed 's , and yeah , that wasn 't a great way for all that to go down . But the way I see it is that Ed has bequeathed this part to me . I look at it as my generation 's Hamlet . " About the character , he said , " He 's a guy struggling with two sides of himself — the dark and the light — and everything he does in his life is filtered through issues of control . I grew up on the Bill Bixby TV series , which I thought was a really nuanced and real human way to look at the Hulk . I like that the part has those qualities " . Regarding the Hulk 's place on the team , Ruffalo said , " He 's like the teammate none of them are sure they want on their team . He 's a loose cannon . It 's like , ' Just throw a grenade in the middle of the group and let 's hope it turns out well ! " This is the first production in which the actor playing Banner also plays the Hulk . Ruffalo told New York magazine , " I 'm really excited . No one 's ever played the Hulk exactly ; they 've always done CGI . They 're going to do the Avatar stop @-@ action , stop @-@ motion capture . So I 'll actually play the Hulk . That 'll be fun " . The 3D model used to create the Hulk 's body was modeled after Long Island bodybuilder and male stripper Steve Romm , while the Hulk 's face was modeled after Ruffalo . To create the Hulk 's voice , Ruffalo 's voice was blended with those of Lou Ferrigno and others ; however , the Hulk 's only speaking line ( " <unk> god . " ) was provided solely by Ruffalo . 
 Chris Hemsworth as Thor : 
 The crown prince of Asgard , based on the Norse mythological deity of the same name . Hemsworth was cast as part of a multiple movie deal . He had previously worked with Joss Whedon on The Cabin in the Woods . Hemsworth said that he was able to maintain the strength he built up for Thor by increasing his food intake , consisting of chicken breasts , fish , steak , and eggs every day . When asked exactly how much , Hemsworth said , " My body weight in protein pretty much ! " He remarked that Thor 's motivation " is much more of a personal one , in the sense that it 's his brother that is stirring things up . Whereas everyone else , it 's some bad guy who they 've gotta take down . It 's a different approach for me , or for Thor . He 's constantly having to battle the greater good and what he should do vs. it 's his little brother there . . . I 've been frustrated with my brothers at times , or family , but I 'm the only one who is allowed to be angry at them . There 's a bit of that . " 
 Scarlett Johansson as Natasha Romanoff / Black Widow : 
 A highly trained spy working for S.H.I.E.L.D. About the character and her relationship with Hawkeye , Johansson said , " Our characters have a long history . They 've fought together for a long time in a lot of battles in many different countries . We 're the two members of this avenging group who are skilled warriors – we have no superpowers . Black Widow is definitely one of the team , though . She 's not in the cast simply to be a romantic foil or eye candy . She 's there to fight , so I never felt like I was the only girl . We all have our various skills and it feels equal " . Regarding her training , Johansson said , " Even though Iron Man 2 was ' one @-@ for @-@ them , ' I 'd never done anything like that before . I 'd never been physically driven in something , or a part of something so big . For The Avengers , I 've spent so many months training with our stunt team , and fighting all the other actors , it 's crazy . I do nothing but fight — all the time . " 
 Jeremy Renner as Clint Barton / Hawkeye : 
 A master archer working as an agent for S.H.I.E.L.D. Renner said it was a very physical role and that he trained physically and practiced archery as much as possible in preparation . About the role , Renner said , " When I saw Iron Man , I thought that was a really kick @-@ ass approach to superheroes . Then they told me about this Hawkeye character , and I liked how he wasn 't really a superhero ; he 's just a guy with a high skill set . I could connect to that . " Regarding Hawkeye 's sniper mentality , Renner said , " It 's a lonely game . He 's an outcast . His only connection is to Scarlett 's character , Natasha . It 's like a left hand / right hand thing . They coexist , and you need them both , especially when it comes to a physical mission . " Renner said Hawkeye is not insecure about his humanity . " Quite the opposite , he 's the only one who can really take down the Hulk with his [ tranquilizer @-@ tipped ] arrows . He knows his limitations . But when it comes down to it , there has to be a sense of confidence in any superhero . " 
 Tom Hiddleston as Loki : 
 Thor 's adoptive brother and nemesis , based on the Norse mythological deity of the same name . About his character 's evolution from the film Thor , Hiddleston said , " I think the Loki we see in The Avengers is further advanced . You have to ask yourself the question : How pleasant an experience is it disappearing into a wormhole that has been created by some kind of super nuclear explosion of his own making ? So I think by the time Loki shows up in The Avengers , he 's seen a few things . " About Loki 's motivations , Hiddleston said , " At the beginning of The Avengers , he comes to Earth to subjugate it and his idea is to rule the human race as their king . And like all the delusional <unk> of human history , he thinks this is a great idea because if everyone is busy worshipping him , there will be no wars so he will create some kind of world peace by ruling them as a tyrant . But he is also kind of deluded in the fact that he thinks unlimited power will give him self @-@ respect , so I haven 't let go of the fact that he is still motivated by this terrible jealousy and kind of spiritual desolation . " 
 Clark Gregg as Phil Coulson : 
 An agent with S.H.I.E.L.D. who oversees many of the division 's field operations . Gregg was cast as part of a multi @-@ picture deal with Marvel . Gregg said his role was expanded in The Avengers : " [ What ] Agent Coulson had become in terms of the import of this particular story , and how important his job is in bringing the Avengers together , it kind of felt a little surreal , like somebody was playing a prank and that wasn 't the real script . But it wasn 't , it was the real thing , I got to show up and do that stuff , and it felt like such an amazing payoff to what the journey had been and the fact I had been doing it for five years . " Gregg said Whedon provided insight into his character 's backstory , particularly about Coulson being a fan of Captain America . 
 Cobie Smulders as Maria Hill : 
 A high @-@ ranking agent with S.H.I.E.L.D. who works closely with Jackson 's Nick Fury . Smulders , whom Joss Whedon once considered for his unproduced live @-@ action Wonder Woman film , was selected from a short list of potential actresses including Morena Baccarin . Smulders ' deal would integrate her into nine films . Regarding her preparation , Smulders said , " I hired this amazing black @-@ ops trainer to teach me how to hold a gun , take me to a shooting range , how to hit , how to hold myself , how to walk and basically how to look . I don 't do a ton of fighting in the movie , which is why I wasn 't offered a trainer , but I wanted to look like I had the ability to . " On relating to the character , Smulders said , " I can relate to her being a mom and being a businesswoman and trying to work full @-@ time and raising a family and having a career . We 're asked to do a lot of things these days . I feel she is just all about her job and keeping things going . " 
 Stellan Skarsgård as Erik Selvig : 
 An astrophysicist and a friend of Thor under Loki 's control , who is studying the Tesseract 's power . Regarding Loki 's control over Selvig , Skarsgård said , " Well with the scene we did in Thor , it was like Loki , one way or the other , entered Erik 's mind . And in Avengers , you will see more clarity in how Loki is using Erik 's mind . " About his role , he said , " [ My character ] is of importance but the size of the role is not big . " 
 Samuel L. Jackson as Nick Fury : 
 The director of S.H.I.E.L.D. , who was revealed in previous films to be coordinating the " Avengers Initiative " . Jackson was brought to the project with a deal containing an option to play the character in up to nine Marvel films . Jackson said he does more in The Avengers than in any of the previous films : " You don 't have to wait until the end of the movie to see me " . About the role , Jackson said , " It 's always good to play somebody [ who ] is a positive in society as opposed to somebody who is a negative . . . I tried to make him as honest to the story and as honest to what real @-@ life would seem . " Jackson compared the character to <unk> in Jackie Brown , calling him " a nice guy to hang out with . You just don 't want to cross him " . 
 Gwyneth Paltrow and Maximiliano Hernández reprise their roles from previous films as Pepper Potts and Jasper Sitwell , respectively . Paul Bettany returns to voice J.A.R.V.I.S. Frequent Whedon collaborator Alexis Denisof portrays the Other , and Damion Poitier portrays his master , Thanos ( unnamed in the film ) , in a post @-@ credit scene . Powers Boothe and Jenny Agutter appear as members of the World Security Council . Avengers co @-@ creator Stan Lee has a cameo appearance in a news report . Harry Dean Stanton cameos as a security guard , and Polish film director Jerzy Skolimowski appears as Georgi <unk> , Romanoff 's interrogator . Enver Gjokaj , who later went on to play Agent Daniel Sousa in the series Agent Carter , appears as a police officer . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Avi Arad , the CEO of Marvel Studios , first announced plans to develop the film in April 2005 , after Marvel Enterprises declared independence by allying with Merrill Lynch to produce a slate of films that would be distributed by Paramount Pictures . Marvel discussed their plans in a brief presentation to Wall Street analysts ; the studio 's intention was to release individual films for the main characters — to establish their identities and familiarize audiences with them — before merging the characters together in a crossover film . Screenwriter Zak Penn , who wrote The Incredible Hulk ( 2008 ) , was hired by Marvel Studios to write the film in June 2007 . In the wake of the 2007 – 2008 Writers Guild of America strike , Marvel negotiated with the Writers Guild of America to ensure that it could create films based on its comic book counterparts , including Captain America , Ant @-@ Man and The Avengers . After the successful release of Iron Man ( 2008 ) in May , the company set a July 2011 release date for The Avengers . In September 2008 , Marvel Studios reached an agreement with Paramount — an extension of a previous partnership — which gave the company distribution rights for five future Marvel films . 
 Casting began in October 2008 with Downey 's signing . Though Don Cheadle was also reported to be reprising his Iron Man 2 role of War Machine for The Avengers , he later stated that he did not think the character would appear in the film . At the same time , two major prospects occurred for Marvel : Jon Favreau was brought in as an executive producer for the film , and the company signed a long @-@ term lease with Raleigh Studios to produce three other big @-@ budget films — Iron Man 2 , Thor ( 2011 ) , and Captain America : The First Avenger ( 2011 ) — at their Manhattan Beach , California complex . Lou Ferrigno , who voiced Hulk in The Incredible Hulk , stated that he would be involved in the film . In February 2009 , Samuel L. Jackson signed a nine @-@ picture deal with Marvel Entertainment to play Nick Fury in Iron Man 2 and other films . In September 2009 , Edward Norton , who played Bruce Banner in The Incredible Hulk stated that he was open to returning in the film . The next month , executive producer Jon Favreau stated that he would not direct the film , but would " definitely have input and a say " . Favreau also expressed concerns , stating , " It 's going to be hard , because I was so involved in creating the world of Iron Man , and Iron Man is very much a tech @-@ based hero , and then with Avengers you 're going to be introducing some supernatural aspects because of Thor ... [ Mixing ] the two of those works very well in the comic books , but it 's going to take a lot of thoughtfulness to make that all work and not blow the reality that we 've created " . In March 2009 , actress Scarlett Johansson replaced Emily Blunt in portraying Natasha Romanoff in Iron Man 2 , a deal that subsequently attached her to The Avengers . The female superhero Wasp was included in an earlier draft of the script written before Johansson 's involvement . The following day , Marvel announced that the film 's release date had been pushed back to May 4 , 2012 , almost a full year later . Chris Hemsworth and Tom Hiddleston joined the film 's cast in June , returning as Thor and Loki , respectively . 
 In July 2009 , Penn talked about the crossover process , stating , " My job is to kind of shuttle between the different movies and make sure that finally we 're mimicking that comic book structure where all of these movies are connected . . . There 's just a board that tracks ' Here 's where everything that happens in this movie overlaps with that movie ' . . . I 'm pushing them to do as many animatics as possible to animate the movie , to draw boards so that we 're all working off the same visual ideas . But the exigencies of production take first priority " . 
 In January 2010 , Marvel Studios chief Kevin Feige was asked if it would be difficult to meld the fantasy of Thor with the high @-@ tech science fiction in Iron Man and The Avengers . " No , " he said , " because we 're doing the Jack Kirby / Stan Lee / Walt Simonson / J. Michael Straczynski Thor . We 're not doing the blow @-@ the @-@ dust @-@ off @-@ of @-@ the @-@ old @-@ Norse @-@ book @-@ in @-@ your @-@ library Thor . And in the Thor of the Marvel Universe , there 's a race called the Asgardians . And we 're linked through this Tree of Life that we 're unaware of . It 's real science , but we don 't know about it yet . The ' Thor ' movie is about teaching people that " . In March , it was reported that Penn had completed the first draft of the script , and that Marvel editor @-@ in @-@ chief Joe Quesada and Avengers comic @-@ book writer Brian Michael Bendis had received copies . Also in March , Chris Evans accepted an offer to play Captain America in three films including The Avengers . 
 = = = Pre @-@ production = = = 
 By April 2010 , Joss Whedon was close to completing a deal to direct the film and to rework Penn 's script , and was officially announced in July 2010 . When Whedon received Penn 's draft , he told Feige he felt the studio did not " have anything " and they should " pretend this draft never happened " . Whedon went on to write a five page treatment of his plan for the film , and created the tagline " Avengers : Some Assembly Required " , riffing on the " Avengers Assemble " slogan from the comic books . Marvel quickly began working to sign Whedon to write and direct , only stipulating that he include the Avengers against Loki , a battle among the heroes in the middle , a battle against the villains at the end , and he get the movie done for its May 2012 release . On the hiring , Arad stated : " My personal opinion is that Joss will do a fantastic job . He loves these characters and is a fantastic writer ... It 's part of his life so you know he is going to protect it ... I expect someone like him is going to make the script even better " . Feige added , " I 've known Joss for many years . We were looking for the right thing and he came in and met on it ... we want [ ed ] to find a director that ’ s on the verge of doing something great , as we think Joss is . " Whedon stated at the 2010 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International , that what drew him to the film is that he loves how " these people shouldn 't be in the same room let alone on the same team — and that is the definition of family " . 
 The casting process continued into much of 2010 , with the additions of Jeremy Renner , Mark Ruffalo , and Clark Gregg . Ruffalo replaced Edward Norton , who Marvel declined to have back . " We have made the decision to not bring Ed Norton back to portray the title role of Bruce Banner in The Avengers , " stated Feige . " Our decision is definitely not one based on monetary factors , but instead rooted in the need for an actor who embodies the creativity and collaborative spirit of our other talented cast members . The Avengers demands players who thrive working as part of an ensemble , as evidenced by Robert , Chris H , Chris E , Samuel , Scarlett , and all of our talented casts . We are looking to announce a name actor who fulfills these requirements , and is passionate about the iconic role in the coming weeks . " In response , Norton 's agent Brian <unk> decried Feige 's statement , calling it " purposefully misleading " and an " inappropriate attempt to paint our client in a negative light " . In October 2014 , Norton claimed it was his own decision never to play Hulk again because he " wanted more diversity " with his career , and did not want to be associated with only one character . 
 In August 2010 , it was reported that Paramount Pictures and Marvel Studios were planning to start shooting in February . Simultaneously , it was declared that the film would be shot in 3D , although Mark Ruffalo later tweeted that this was not the case . In October 2010 , Grumman Studios in Bethpage , New York and the Steiner Studios in Brooklyn , New York City , were announced as filming locations , with set construction slated to begin in November , but as Whedon later explained , " Originally we were supposed to be in Los Angeles , then for a short period we were supposed to be in New York , and then somehow we ended up in Albuquerque . " Also that October , Walt Disney Studios agreed to pay Paramount at least $ 115 million for the worldwide distribution rights to Iron Man 3 and The Avengers . The deal also allowed Paramount to continue to collect the 8 percent box office fee it would have earned for distributing the film and a marquee credit — placement of the company 's production logo on marketing materials and the film 's opening titles . As a result , the onscreen production credit reads " Marvel Studios presents in association with Paramount Pictures " though the film is solely owned , distributed , financed , and marketed by Disney . Paramount 's Epix retained pay TV rights . 
 In December 2010 , Governor of New Mexico Bill Richardson and Marvel Studios Co @-@ president Louis D 'Esposito announced The Avengers would film primarily in Albuquerque , New Mexico , with principal photography scheduled for April through September 2011 . Parts of the film were also scheduled to be shot in Michigan , but a plan to film in Detroit ended after Governor Rick Snyder issued a budget proposal that would eliminate a film tax incentive . Three months later in March , Governor of Ohio John Kasich announced before Mayor Frank G. Jackson 's State of the City address that The Avengers would film in Cleveland . 
 Concept illustrator and designer of Iron Man 's Mark VII armor Phil Saunders stated that " Joss Whedon was looking for something that had the ' cool ' factor of the suitcase suit [ from Iron Man 2 ] , while still being a fully armored , heavy duty suit that could take on an army in the final battle . " To that end , Saunders borrowed ideas that had been proposed in Iron Man 2 as well as some ideas that had been abandoned in Iron Man and merged them together in a modular suit that has big ammo packets on the arms and a backpack . The Science & Entertainment Exchange also provided science consultation for the film . 
 Casting reached its final stages the following year . In February 2011 , Cobie Smulders acquired the role of Maria Hill , after participating in screen tests conducted by Marvel for the role of a key S.H.I.E.L.D. member , who Samuel L. Jackson described as Nick Fury 's sidekick . Over the successive months , the film 's cast expanded to include Stellan Skarsgård , Paul Bettany , and Gwyneth Paltrow . Paltrow was cast at Downey 's insistence ; prior to this , Whedon had not intended the film to include supporting characters from the heroes ' individual films , commenting , " You need to separate the characters from their support systems in order to create the isolation you need for a team . " 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography began on April 25 , 2011 , in Albuquerque , New Mexico . In June 2011 , stuntman Jeremy Fitzgerald injured his head while attempting a stunt involving a 30 @-@ foot fall from a building after getting hit by an arrow . A Marvel spokesperson later told TMZ.com that despite the injury , Fitzgerald recovered and continued working on set . The following month , secondary filming took place about an hour outside Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania in the Butler area . A chase sequence was also shot in Worthington , Pennsylvania at Creekside Mushroom Farms , the world 's largest single @-@ site mushroom farm , which provided 150 miles of abandoned limestone tunnels 300 feet below the ground for filming . 
 Production relocated to Cleveland , Ohio in August 2011 , where filming transpired over a period of four weeks . The city 's East 9th Street was chosen as a double for New York City 's 42nd Street to be used in climactic battle scenes . Army Reserve soldiers assigned to the Columbus , Ohio @-@ based 391st Military Police Battalion provided background action during the battle scenes in Cleveland . Staff Sergeant Michael T. Landis stated the use of real soldiers made the scenes more realistic and helped portray the military in a more positive light , explaining that , " It 's easy for us to make on @-@ the @-@ spot corrections to tactics and uniforms , the director actually took our recommendation on one scene and let us all engage the enemy as opposed to only the gunners in the trucks engaging " . Filming also took place in the large vacuum chamber at the NASA Plum Brook Station near Sandusky , Ohio . The station 's Space Power Facility was used to portray a S.H.I.E.L.D. research facility . A series of explosions were filmed at the Chevrolet powertrain plant in Parma , Ohio as part of the battle sequence that began in Cleveland . Scenes from the film were also shot on Public Square and the Detroit – Superior Bridge . Public Square 's southwest quadrant was turned into Stuttgart , Germany , for filming . 
 Principal photography concluded in New York City , where filming occurred over two days . Filming locations in New York City included Park Avenue and Central Park . For scenes taking place in Manhattan , visual effects supervisor Jake Morrison shot aerial footage for over three days to use as background plates , elaborating that his main objective was to " get as much aerial work in as possible for the audience to see the big expanses , the wide establishing shots , while also making sure that the effects work doesn 't look too computer generated " . " We 're getting much better at making entirely computer @-@ generated environments , " Morrison explained , " but there is no substitute for starting with a real image and adding what you need . " 
 Cinematographer Seamus McGarvey stated that he composed the frame with a 1 @.@ 85 : 1 aspect ratio to cope with the varying heights of the main characters , explaining that " shooting 1 @.@ 85 : 1 is kind of unusual for an epic film like this , but we needed the height in the screen to be able to frame in all the characters like Hulk , Captain America and Black Widow , who is much smaller . We had to give them all precedence and width within the frame . Also , Joss [ Whedon ] knew the final battle sequence was going to be this extravaganza in Manhattan , so the height and vertical scale of the buildings was going to be really important . " The film was McGarvey 's first venture shooting with a digital camera , the Arri Alexa . The Canon EOS 5D Mark II and Canon EOS 7D digital SLR cameras were used for some shots , and high @-@ speed shots were captured on 35 mm film with the Arriflex 435 . About his visual approach , McGarvey remarked , " Joss and I were keen on having a very visceral and naturalistic quality to the image . We wanted this to feel immersive and did not want a ' comic book look ' that might distance an audience with the engagement of the film . We moved the camera a lot on Steadicam , cranes and on dollies to create kinetic images ; and we chose angles that were dramatic , like low angles for heroic imagery . " 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 In December 2011 , Disney announced that the film would be converted to 3D . Said Whedon , " I 'm not a big fan of extreme long lens , talky movies – I like to see the space I 'm in and relate to it , so 3D kinda fits my aesthetic anyway . And the technology has advanced so far in the past couple years . " Whedon also said that " there definitely are movies that shouldn 't be in 3D " but " The Avengers isn 't obnoxiously 3D . There 's no , ' Oh look , we 're going to spend 20 minutes going through this tunnel because it 's in 3D ! ' And no one is pointing at the screen the entire time . But it 's an action movie . Things tend to <unk> toward the screen anyway " . In January 2012 , it was reported that the film would be digitally remastered for IMAX 3D and open in IMAX theaters on May 4 , 2012 , the same day it opens in regular theaters . The film 's IMAX release follows Marvel 's IMAX releases of Iron Man 2 and Thor . 
 In a May 2012 interview , Whedon said that it was his decision to include Thanos in a post @-@ credits scene , although the character is not identified in the film . " He for me is the most powerful and fascinating Marvel villain . He 's the great grand daddy of the <unk> and he 's in love with Death and I just think that 's so cute . For me , the greatest Avengers [ comic book ] was Avengers Annual # 7 ( 1977 ) that Jim Starlin did followed by Marvel Two @-@ in @-@ One Annual # 2 ( 1977 ) that contained the death of Adam Warlock . Those were some of the most important texts and I think underrated milestones in Marvel history and Thanos is all over that , so somebody had to be in control and had to be behind Loki 's work and I was like ' It 's got to be Thanos . ' And they said ' Okay ' and I 'm like ' Oh my God ! ' " An additional coda involving the Avengers eating shawarma was shot on April 12 , 2012 , a day after the world premiere . Shawarma sales in Los Angeles , St. Louis , and Boston reportedly skyrocketed in the days following the film 's release . 
 The film contains more than 2 @,@ 200 visual effects shots completed by 14 companies : Industrial Light & Magic ( ILM ) , Weta Digital , Scanline VFX , Hydraulx , Fuel VFX , Evil Eye Pictures , Luma Pictures , Cantina Creative , Trixter , Modus FX , <unk> , Digital Domain , The Third Floor and Method Design . ILM was the lead vendor and shared responsibility for creating many of the film 's key effects , including the Helicarrier , the New York cityscape , digital body doubles , Iron Man and the Hulk . To create the on @-@ screen Hulk , Ruffalo performed in a motion @-@ capture suit on set with the other actors while four motion @-@ capture HD cameras ( two full body , two focused on his face ) captured his face and body movements . Jeff White , ILM 's visual effects supervisor , said , " We really wanted to utilize everything we 've developed the last 10 years and make it a pretty spectacular Hulk . One of the great design decisions was to incorporate Mark Ruffalo into the look of him . So , much of Hulk is based on Ruffalo and his performance , not only in motion capture and on set , but down to his eyes , his teeth , and his tongue . " 
 ILM digitally recreated the vast majority of the New York cityscape used in the film . In total , ILM artists rendered an area of about ten city blocks by about four city blocks . To do this , ILM sent out a team of four photographers to take pictures of the area in a shoot that lasted 8 weeks . Disney and Sony Pictures agreed for OsCorp Tower from The Amazing Spider @-@ Man to be included in the film , but the idea was dropped because much of the skyline had already been completed . 
 Weta Digital took over duties for animating Iron Man during the forest duel from ILM . Guy Williams , Weta 's visual effects supervisor , said , " We shared assets back and forth with ILM , but our pipelines are unique and it 's hard for other assets to plug into it . But in this case , we got their models and we had to redo the texture spaces because the way we texture maps is different . " Williams said the most difficult part was re @-@ creating Iron Man 's reflective metal surfaces . 
 Scanline VFX completed the reveal shots of the Helicarrier , from the moment Black Widow and Captain America arrive on the carrier deck to the point where it lifts off . Evil Eye Pictures composited digital backgrounds into shots filmed against a greenscreen for scenes taking place inside the Helicarrier . Colin Strause of Hydraulx said , " We did the opening ten minutes of the movie , other than the opening set @-@ up in space " including Loki 's arrival on Earth and subsequent escape from the S.H.I.E.L.D. base . Luma Pictures worked on shots featuring the Helicarrier 's bridge and incorporated the graphic monitor displays that were developed by Cantina Creative . Fuel VFX completed shots taking place in and around Tony Stark 's penthouse at Stark Tower . Digital Domain created the asteroid environment , where Loki encounters The Other . Method Design in Los Angeles created the film 's closing credits . Steve Viola , creative director at Method Design , said , " This piece was a two @-@ minute , self @-@ contained main on end sequence created entirely in CG . For each of the shots in the sequence , we designed , modeled , textured , and lit all of the environments and many of the foreground objects . We received assets from Marvel to include in the piece , then heavily re @-@ modeled and re @-@ surfaced them to create a post @-@ battle macro sequence . We also designed a custom typeface for the Main Title of The Avengers as well as 30 credits set in @-@ scene . " 
 = = Music = = 
 In November 2011 , Marvel announced that Alan Silvestri , who scored Captain America : The First Avenger , would write and compose the score for The Avengers . Silvestri said , " I 've worked on films where there have been a number of stars and certainly worked on films where there have been characters of equal weight in terms of their level of importance and profile in the film , but this one is somewhat extreme in that regard because each of these characters has their own world and it 's a very different situation . It 's very challenging to look for a way to give everyone the weight and consideration they need , but at the same time the film is really about the coming together of these characters , which implies that there is this entity called the Avengers which really has to be representative of all of them together . " Silvestri developed the score with the London Symphony Orchestra at Abbey Road Studios in London , England . Whedon said , " The score is very old @-@ fashioned , which is why [ Silvestri ] was letter @-@ perfect for this movie because he can give you the heightened emotion , the [ Hans Zimmer ] school of ' I 'm just feeling a lot right now ! ' but he can also be extraordinarily cue and character specific , which I love . " 
 In March 2012 , American alternative rock band Soundgarden announced through its Facebook page that its song " Live to Rise " would be included on the film 's soundtrack . Additionally , the Indian rock band <unk> released a music video for its single " Hello <unk> " , which serves as the theme song for the film 's Indian release . Hollywood Records released the soundtrack concept album inspired by the film , Avengers Assemble , on May 1 , 2012 , the same day as the score . 
 = = Release = = 
 In February 2012 , Disney announced that the film 's title would be changed in the United Kingdom to avoid confusion with the British TV series of the same name , as well as its 1998 film adaptation . This led to confusion over the film 's actual title . Empire magazine reported that the film would be titled Marvel Avengers Assemble while The Hollywood Reporter said that it would be called simply Avengers Assemble . Marvel 's UK website refers to the film as Marvel 's Avengers Assemble , although David Cox of The Guardian , in arguing that it was one of the worst film titles ever , considered this to be an error in the production notes , albeit grammatically clearer . According to the British Board of Film Classification and the Irish Film Classification Office , the title is Marvel Avengers Assemble . Frank Lovece in <unk> addressed the discrepancy , writing , " The Avengers — formally titled Marvel 's The Avengers onscreen , though no apostrophe @-@ s appears on the posters ... " Producer Kevin Feige said there are only two words in the UK title , one more than in the U.S. title , and stated that " decisions like that aren 't made lightly and there are lots of marketing research , lawyers and things that get into the mix on it " . 
 The film 's world premiere was April 11 , 2012 , at Hollywood 's El Capitan Theatre . The Avengers closed the 11th Annual Tribeca Film Festival with a screening on April 28 , 2012 . The film received an expanded one @-@ week theatrical push for the 2012 U.S. Labor Day weekend , increasing the number of theaters from 123 to 1 @,@ 700 . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 The film was promoted at the 2010 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International , during which a teaser trailer narrated by Samuel L. Jackson was shown followed by an introduction of the cast . In June 2011 , Marvel Studios announced that it would not hold a panel at the 2011 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International after studio executives decided it was not prepared to compete with its own past and fan expectations with filming still in production . In July 2011 , a teaser trailer that was meant to be the post @-@ credits scene of Captain America : The First Avenger was briefly leaked online . Entertainment Weekly speculated it came from a preview screening and described the footage as " shaky , fuzzy , flickering and obviously filmed on a cell phone " . 
 In August 2011 , Walt Disney Pictures , Pixar Animation Studios and Marvel Studios presented a look at Walt Disney Studios ' upcoming film slate , which included The Avengers , at the D23 Expo in Anaheim , California . The presentation featured footage from the film and appearances by the cast members . Later in August , Disney dismissed Marvel 's executive vice president of worldwide marketing , vice president of worldwide marketing and manager of worldwide marketing to bring their functions in @-@ house . 
 In October 2011 , Marvel Studios held a presentation at the New York Comic Con that featured new footage and a panel discussion including producer Kevin Feige and several cast members . The first full @-@ length trailer was also released in October . Comic Book Resources said , " The two @-@ minute teaser handily establishes the movie 's premise " and is " heavy on the assembling , but fans are also treated to plenty of action , as well glimpses [ sic ] of Iron Man 's new armor and , best of all , the new take on the Incredible Hulk . Naturally , Robert Downey Jr . ' s Tony Stark gets the best lines " . However , The Hollywood Reporter called it , " Awesome . Or it would be if we hadn 't seen all of this before and expected every single thing that we saw in the trailer " . The trailer , which debuted exclusively on iTunes Movie Trailers , was downloaded over 10 million times in its first 24 hours , breaking the website 's record for the most @-@ viewed trailer . This record was surpassed by the trailer for The Dark Knight Rises , which was downloaded more than 12 @.@ 5 million times in its first 24 hours . The trailer received 20 @.@ 4 million views in the 24 hours after it debuted . A second full @-@ length trailer was released on iTunes in February 2012 , reaching a record 13 @.@ 7 million downloads in 24 hours . The theatrical trailers of The Avengers appeared with many films , including Mission : Impossible – Ghost Protocol , 21 Jump Street and The Hunger Games . 
 In January 2012 , Marvel Studios held a global Twitter chat . The 30 @-@ minute live tweeting event featured writer / director Joss Whedon , cast members Samuel L. Jackson , Tom Hiddleston and Clark Gregg and a 10 @-@ second tease of the 30 @-@ second Super Bowl commercial that would air during Super Bowl XLVI in February . According to the Los Angeles Times , Disney paid an estimated $ 4 million for the 30 @-@ second spot . On May 1 , 2012 , executives from Marvel Studios , along with actors Tom Hiddleston and Clark Gregg , rang the opening bell of the New York Stock Exchange in honor of the film 's theatrical release . 
 = = = = Tie @-@ in comics = = = = 
 In December 2011 , Marvel announced that an eight @-@ issue comic @-@ book prelude to the film , written by Christopher Yost and Eric Pearson with art by Luke Ross and Daniel HDR , would be released in March 2012 . In February 2012 , Marvel announced the release of a second limited series comic book tie @-@ in , Black Widow Strikes written by Fred Van Lente , who wrote Captain America : First Vengeance , the comic @-@ book prequel to Captain America : The First Avenger . The story is set between Iron Man 2 and The Avengers and follows Black Widow as she runs down some loose ends from Iron Man 2 . Additionally , the title Avengers Assemble was launched in March 2012 , written by Brian Michael Bendis with art by Mark Bagley and features the same Avengers line @-@ up as the film battling a new incarnation of the supervillain team Zodiac . 
 = = = = Promotional partners = = = = 
 Paul Gitter , Marvel Entertainment 's president of consumer products , commented that the build @-@ up to the film helped strengthen retail partnerships : " Retailers have been less tolerant with [ intellectual property ] films , so we decided that if we started on this coordinated strategy several years ago , retailers would give us shelf space throughout the years and we would have a more sustainable position in the marketplace " . 
 In September 2011 , set photos of Robert Downey Jr. driving a new model Acura were published online . An Acura spokesperson later released a statement confirming the company 's involvement with the film , " As you may know , Acura has been in the Marvel Comics Universe films as the official car of their fictional law enforcement agency called S.H.I.E.L.D. That relationship continues for The Avengers . The open @-@ top sports car that was photographed yesterday is a one @-@ off , fictional car that was made just for the movie and will not be produced . That said , as you may also know , our CEO has said publicly that we are studying the development of a new sportscar , but we can 't say any more about it at this time . " In December 2011 , Acura announced that a new NSX styled along the lines of the concept built for The Avengers would be unveiled at the 2012 North American International Auto Show . A series of 10 S.H.I.E.L.D. SUVs , based on the Acura MDX with modifications by Cinema Vehicle Services , were also made for the film . 
 In February 2012 , it was announced that Marvel has partnered with fragrance company <unk> to promote The Avengers with character @-@ based fragrances . The announcement was just ahead of the Toy Industry Association 's annual February exhibition , where representatives held a sampling booth of the products . Other promotional partners include bracelet @-@ maker <unk> , Dr Pepper , Farmers Insurance , Harley @-@ Davidson , Hershey , Land O <unk> <unk> , Oracle , Red Baron pizza , Symantec , Visa and Wyndham Hotels & Resorts . In total , Marvel and its parent @-@ company Disney secured an estimated $ 100 million in worldwide marketing support for the film . Notable exclusions include Baskin @-@ Robbins , Burger King and Dunkin ' Donuts , who had partnered with Marvel in the past when their films were distributed by Paramount . Disney does not generally promote through fast food outlets . 
 = = = = Video game = = = = 
 A video game based on the film was planned for concurrent release . The game was to be a first @-@ person shooter / brawler for the Xbox 360 , PlayStation 3 , Wii U , and Microsoft Windows and published by THQ , with THQ Studio Australia developing the console versions and Blue Tongue Entertainment the PC version . After THQ closed both studios , the game was cancelled . Intellectual property rights for an Avengers video game reverted to Marvel , which said it was exploring potential publishing and licensing opportunities . 
 In May 2012 , Ubisoft and Marvel Entertainment announced that they were partnering to develop a motion @-@ controlled game titled Marvel Avengers : Battle for Earth for the Wii U and Xbox 360 Kinect . The game was inspired by the " Secret Invasion " storyline and features 20 different characters . Marvel also announced a four @-@ chapter mobile game titled Avengers Initiative , with one chapter focusing on each of Hulk , Captain America , Thor and Iron Man . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The film was released by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment on Blu @-@ ray Disc , Blu @-@ ray 3D , DVD and digital download on September 25 , 2012 in the United States and as early as August 29 , 2012 in various international markets . Producer Kevin Feige said the Blu @-@ ray features a new Marvel One @-@ Shot titled Item 47 and " a number of deleted scenes and a few storylines that fell by the wayside during the editing process " including " a few more scenes with the S.H.I.E.L.D. agent Maria Hill , played by Cobie Smulders " and " some slightly different versions of Maria Hill and Nick Fury 's interaction with the World Security Council " . 
 The film was also collected in a 10 @-@ disc box set titled " Marvel Cinematic Universe : Phase One – Avengers Assembled " which includes all of the Phase One films in the Marvel Cinematic Universe . It was released on April 2 , 2013 . 
 Some fans have criticized the UK DVD and Blu @-@ ray release for omitting Joss Whedon 's audio commentary , and for altering the scene involving Phil Coulson 's death from the film 's theatrical version . Disney 's UK division said the " less graphic depiction of Agent Coulson 's confrontation with Loki " occurred because " [ e ] ach country has its own compliance issues relative to depictions of violence . Unfortunately , another region 's elements were inadvertently used to create the UK in @-@ home release " . 
 Upon its first week of release on home media in the U.S. , the film topped the Nielsen VideoScan First Alert chart , which tracks overall disc sales , as well as the dedicated Blu @-@ ray Disc sales chart with 72 % of unit sales coming from Blu @-@ ray , a record for a new release in which both the DVD and Blu @-@ ray formats were released simultaneously . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The Avengers grossed $ 623 @.@ 4 million in North America and $ 895 @.@ 2 million in other countries , for a worldwide total of $ 1 @.@ 518 billion . It became the third highest @-@ grossing film worldwide as well as highest @-@ grossing 2012 film . It is the highest @-@ grossing comic @-@ book adaptation , the highest grossing superhero film and the second highest @-@ grossing film ever released by Walt Disney Studios . The film 's worldwide opening of $ 392 @.@ 5 million is the fourth largest . The Avengers also became the fifth film distributed by Disney and the twelfth film overall to earn more than $ 1 billion . It reached this milestone in 19 days , matching the record for speed previously set by Avatar and Deathly Hallows – Part 2 . Its grosses exceeded its estimated $ 220 million production cost 12 days after its release . It was the first Marvel production to generate $ 1 billion in ticket sales . 
 = = = = North America = = = = 
 The film became the third highest @-@ grossing film , the highest @-@ grossing 2012 film , the highest grossing film distributed by Disney , the highest @-@ grossing superhero film and the highest @-@ grossing film based on comics . It opened Friday , May 4 , 2012 , on around 11 @,@ 800 screens across 4 @,@ 349 theaters , and earned $ 80 @.@ 8 million , marking the second @-@ biggest opening and second @-@ biggest single @-@ day gross . The film 's Friday gross included an $ 18 @.@ 7 million midnight run , a record for a superhero film Without midnight grosses , the film earned the largest opening @-@ day gross ( $ 62 @.@ 1 million ) . It also set a <unk> and Sunday @-@ gross record ( $ 69 @.@ 6 million and $ 57 @.@ 1 million respectively ) . In total , it earned a total of $ 207 @,@ 438 @,@ 708 for its debut weekend , setting an opening @-@ weekend record , including an IMAX opening @-@ weekend record of $ 15 @.@ 3 million and a record for opening @-@ weekend grosses originating from 3D showings ( $ 108 million ) . The opening @-@ weekend audience was evenly split among those under and over the age of 25 , with 60 % of the audience male , 55 % couples , 24 % families and 21 % teenagers . Earning $ 103 @.@ 1 million on its second weekend , the film set a record for the largest second @-@ weekend gross . Other records set by the film include the biggest weekend per @-@ theater average for a wide release ( $ 47 @,@ 698 per theater ) , the fastest film to reach $ 100 million and each additional $ 50 million through $ 550 million , and the largest cumulative gross through every day of release until , and including , its forty @-@ third day ( with the exception of its first day ) . It was in first place at the North American box office for three consecutive weekends . The film set a record for the highest monthly share , with its $ 532 @.@ 5 million total ( through May 31 , 2012 ) accounting for 52 % of the total earnings at the North American box office during May . 
 = = = = = Records = = = = = 
 The following are records set by the film upon its theatrical release . 
 = = = = Outside North America = = = = 
 The film became the third @-@ highest grossing film , the highest @-@ grossing Disney @-@ distributed film , the highest @-@ grossing 2012 film , and the highest @-@ grossing superhero film . It opened Wednesday , April 25 , 2012 , in 10 countries , earning $ 17 @.@ 1 million . It opened in 29 more countries on April 26 and 27 , earning $ 73 @.@ 1 million in three days . Through Sunday , April 29 , it earned an opening @-@ weekend total of $ 185 @.@ 1 million from 39 countries . It was in first place at the box office outside North America for four consecutive weekends . The film set opening @-@ day records in New Zealand , Malaysia and Iceland , a single @-@ day record in the Philippines , as well as both single- and opening @-@ day records in Singapore and in Thailand . It also earned the second highest @-@ grossing opening day in Australia ( $ 6 @.@ 2 million ) , behind Deathly Hallows – Part 2 , in Mexico , in the Philippines and in Vietnam . It set opening @-@ weekend records in many territories , including Mexico , Brazil , Ecuador , Bolivia , Taiwan , the Philippines , Hong Kong , the United Arab Emirates , Argentina , Peru and Central America . It also earned the second largest five @-@ day opening in Australia ( $ 20 @.@ 2 million ) . 
 In the UK , Ireland and Malta , the film earned £ 2 @.@ 5 million ( $ 4 @.@ 1 million ) on its opening day and £ 15 @.@ 8 million ( $ 25 @.@ 7 million ) during the weekend , setting an opening @-@ weekend record for a superhero film . It became the market 's highest @-@ grossing superhero film . In Latin America , it became the highest @-@ grossing film ( $ 207 million ) and the first film to earn more than $ 200 million . It also became the highest @-@ grossing film in the Philippines , in Singapore and in Indonesia . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported a 92 % approval rating with an average rating of 8 / 10 based on 315 reviews . The website 's consensus reads , " Thanks to a script that emphasizes its heroes ' humanity and a wealth of superpowered set pieces , The Avengers lives up to its hype and raises the bar for Marvel at the movies . " On Metacritic , the film achieved an average score of 69 out of 100 based on 43 reviews , signifying " generally favorable reviews " . CinemaScore reported that audiences gave the film a rare " A + " grade . 
 Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter gave a positive review of the film , remarking , " It 's clamorous , the save @-@ the @-@ world story is one everyone 's seen time and again , and the characters have been around for more than half a century in 500 comic book issues . But Whedon and his cohorts have managed to stir all the personalities and ingredients together so that the resulting dish , however familiar , is irresistibly tasty again . " To Rolling Stone journalist Peter Travers , the film epitomized an exceptional blockbuster . " It 's also the blockbuster , " Travers said , " I saw in my head when I imagined a movie that brought together the idols of the Marvel world in one shiny , stupendously exciting package . It 's Transformers with a brain , a heart and a working sense of humor . " Justin Chang of Variety wrote , " Like a superior , state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art model built from reconstituted parts , Joss Whedon 's buoyant , witty and robustly entertaining superhero smash @-@ up is escapism of a sophisticated order , boasting a tonal assurance and rich reserves of humor that offset the potentially lumbering and unavoidably formulaic aspects of this 143 @-@ minute team @-@ origin story . " Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times complimented the film 's frenetic pace , while Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times commented that it " provides its fans with exactly what they desire . Whether it is exactly what they deserve is arguable " . Conversely , A. O. Scott of The New York Times believed that " while The Avengers is hardly worth raging about , its failures are significant and dispiriting . The light , amusing bits cannot overcome the grinding , hectic emptiness , the bloated cynicism that is less a shortcoming of this particular film than a feature of the genre . " 
 The performances of several cast members was a frequent topic in the critiques . In particular , Mark Ruffalo 's portrayal of Dr. Bruce Banner / the Hulk was well @-@ received by commentators . Joe Neumaier opined that his performance was superior to the rest of the cast ; " Ruffalo is the revelation , turning Banner into a wry reservoir of calm ready to become a volcano . " Similarly , The New Yorker 's Anthony Lane proclaimed Ruffalo 's acting to be one of the film 's highlights — alongside Downey . The Village Voice 's Karina Longworth concluded : " Ruffalo successfully refreshes the Hulk myth , playing Banner as an adorably bashful nerd @-@ genius who , in contrast to the preening hunks on the team , knows better than to draw attention to himself . " Travers asserted that the actor resonated a " scruffy warmth and humor " vibe , while Turan felt that he surpassed predecessors Edward Norton and Eric Bana in playing the character . Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly wrote that " the smartest thing the filmmakers did was to get Mark Ruffalo to play Bruce Banner as a man so sensitive that he 's at war , every moment , with himself . ( The film finally solves the Hulk problem : He 's a lot more fun in small doses . ) " 
 Referring to Downey , Joe <unk> of The Wall Street Journal — despite complimenting Downey 's performance — favored his work in Iron Man over his acting in The Avengers : " His Iron Man is certainly a team player , but Mr. Downey comes to the party with two insuperable superpowers : a character of established sophistication — the industrialist / inventor Tony Stark , a sharp @-@ tongued man of the world — and his own quicksilver presence that finds its finest expression in self @-@ irony . " Neumaier praised Evans , stating that he accurately conveyed his character 's internal conflicts . 
 Commentators appreciated the character development and dialogue . Associated Press reviewer Christy Lemire wrote that the script " sparkles as brightly as the special effects ; these people may be wearing ridiculous costumes but they 're well fleshed @-@ out underneath . " Scott suggested that certain parts of the film permeated a charm that he felt was similar to the western film Rio Bravo ( 1959 ) . Longworth felt that while Whedon 's script demonstrated the backstory of the characters , the film does not explore it " in a substantive way " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The Avengers has garnered numerous awards and nominations , including an Academy Award nomination for Best Visual Effects and a British Academy Film Award nomination for Best Special Visual Effects . The film has also been nominated for three Critics ' Choice Movie Awards , thirteen People 's Choice Awards ( winning three ) , eleven Teen Choice Awards ( winning two ) , six Saturn Awards ( winning four ) , and six VES Awards ( winning two ) , as well as the 2013 Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation Long Form . 
 = = Sequels = = 
 = = = Avengers : Age of Ultron = = = 
 A sequel , titled Avengers : Age of Ultron , written and directed by Whedon , was released on May 1 , 2015 . Much of the cast returns , with the addition of Elizabeth Olsen as Scarlet Witch , Aaron Taylor @-@ Johnson as Quicksilver , Paul Bettany as Vision , and James Spader as Ultron . 
 = = = Avengers : Infinity War = = = 
 The two @-@ part Avengers : Infinity War will be directed by Anthony and Joe Russo , from a script by Christopher Markus & Stephen McFeely . Part 1 is scheduled to be released on May 4 , 2018 with Part 2 scheduled for May 3 , 2019 . 
 = Secrets of a Successful Marriage = 
 " Secrets of a Successful Marriage " is the twenty @-@ second and final episode of The Simpsons ' fifth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on May 19 , 1994 . In the episode , Homer fears he may be a little slow , so he goes to the adult education center . While there , he decides to teach a class of his own on the secrets of a successful marriage , since that is the only class he is qualified to teach . However , to keep his students interested , he is forced to tell personal secrets about his wife Marge , which she dislikes , leading up to Homer getting kicked out of the house . 
 The episode was written by Greg Daniels and directed by Carlos Baeza . It features cultural references to the plays Cat on a Hot Tin Roof and A Streetcar Named Desire , and the films ... And Justice for All , A Few Good Men , Patton , and Chinatown . The episode has been analyzed in books such as Leaving Springfield and Education in Popular Culture . Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . It acquired a Nielsen rating of 9 @.@ 8 , and was the second highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network the week it aired . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After Homer realizes that he is " slow " , Marge recommends that he take an adult education course at the annex center . Down at the center , however , Homer changes his mind and decides to become a teacher . He talks to the administrator and accepts an opening to teach a class on having a successful marriage . Despite being confident that he can pull it off , he is frightened on his first day and is unable to help his pupils with their relationship problems . The class collectively gets up to leave , but when Homer mentions his conversation with Marge in bed , the class decides to stay , eager to hear gossip . Marge soon discovers that everyone in town knows her personal secrets , reacting by confronting Homer about it and he promises to stop . He instead continues telling her secrets anyway . Homer then takes the night off teaching class by having his class observe the family over dinner . 
 Marge finally loses her temper and sends Homer and the class out of the house . When Homer tries to get back in , Marge stops him , saying she can no longer trust him , and refuses to let him back in . Homeless , Homer stays in Bart 's tree house . Marge tries to reassure Bart and Lisa that she and Homer love the children , despite their current situation , but Lisa and Bart are worried their parents will get divorced . Marge tries to get advice from Reverend Lovejoy , who tells her to get a divorce . 
 While Homer longs for his wife , Moe comes by the Simpsons ' house to declare his interest in Marge , who turns him down . When Homer comes into the house with flowers he picked for Marge , Moe sees him and jumps out the window . Standing before her in rags , Homer professes his total and utter dependency on Marge , and she tells him that that is not a good thing , but Homer then makes his winning argument : he loves her , he needs her to love him , and can not afford to ever lose her trust again or he will end up dead . Marge is won over and allows Homer to return to the house . The family is glad that he has returned , although Moe is less than thrilled . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by Greg Daniels and directed by Carlos Baeza . It was the second script Daniels wrote for the show . He thought the staff had previously done many episodes where Homer " wasn 't good at anything " , so he tried to figure out something Homer was really good at , and he came up with the idea of Homer being a good husband . While Bart had been the star of the show during the early years , by Season 5 , the focus had clearly shifted to Homer . Writer / showrunner Al Jean stated that because Homer is an adult character , he has more depth to him and thus storyline possibilities . Showrunner David Mirkin commented : " Bart , to write him accurately as a child , he can only have so much depth at a certain age . With Homer , we try to explore all levels of adulthood . There are just more places to go . Writing Homer properly is the trick , he 's our main rock of the whole series . Homer 's IQ is fairly flexible , he won 't necessarily understand how to open a door at some point , but he can name the Supreme Court justices . Finding that balance is key to making the show work and making it surprising and making it believable and emotionally grounded . " Mirkin was very fond of the fact that Homer and Marge have the biggest fight they have ever had on the show in the episode , and he thought it was a " really great " exploration of their marriage . He noticed that because Homer is thrown out of the house , the audience really worry about their relationship . Mirkin had been asked many times why Marge and Homer are still together , to which he replied that all people stay together even if they argue , " there 's some sort of connection " . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Homer sings the end of the theme song to Family Ties while talking to an administrator at the annex center . Smithers 's recollection of his marriage parodies the two plays Cat on a Hot Tin Roof and A Streetcar Named Desire , both written by American playwright Tennessee Williams . Homer 's bedroom rant to Marge is a parody mishmash of four popular films : ... And Justice for All ( 1979 ) , A Few Good Men ( 1992 ) , Patton ( 1970 ) , and Chinatown ( 1974 ) . He says : " Look Marge , you don 't know what it 's like . I 'm the one out there every day putting his ass on the line . And I 'm not out of order ! You 're out of order . The whole freaking system is out of order . You want the truth ? You want the truth ? ! You can 't handle the truth ! ' Cause when you reach over and put your hand into a pile of goo that was your best friend 's face , you 'll know what to do ! Forget it , Marge , it 's Chinatown , " all of which are lines from those films . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 It was revealed in a flashback in the episode that Smithers was briefly married to a woman , but the two split up when he devoted too much time to his boss Mr. Burns . Smithers 's relationship with Mr. Burns has long been a running joke on The Simpsons . His sexual orientation has often come into question , with some fans claiming he is a " Burns @-@ sexual " and only attracted to his boss , while others maintain that he is , without a doubt , gay . Matthew Henry wrote in the book Leaving Springfield that this episode is " perhaps the best " example of an attempt to portray an actual gay lifestyle on the show . Henry added that the flashback is a " wonderfully rendered parody of scenes from two of Tennessee Williams 's most famous plays , Cat on a Hot Tin Roof and A Streetcar Named Desire . To fully appreciate it , one must know something of not only the two plays cited but also of Williams himself , of his own struggles with both heterosexual and homosexual desires and the way in which these struggles were incorporated into his art . The creators of The Simpsons offer what I think is a perfect parallel for the relationship between Smithers and Mr. Burns by combining Williams 's two most notable male characters and their defining characteristics : the suppressed homosexual desire of Brick and desperate dependence of Stanley . " 
 In their book Education in Popular Culture , Alma Harris , Roy Fisher , Ann Harris , and Christine Jarvis analyzes the adult education aspects of this episode that portrays adult learners as " stupid and lazy " . After Homer is appointed as a teacher , he feels immensely proud and boasts to all his acquaintances about it , initially making it seem like if the show is indicating that adult education tutors have a relatively high status in society . " However , " the authors added , " Homer 's pride is undercut for the audience by the awareness of how he came to be appointed and by the subsequent representation of the adult education center . It seems that anyone can become a tutor . [ ... ] Homer 's fellow tutors are drunks , incompetents and down @-@ and @-@ outs , adult education is therefore presented as an amateur business staffed by the dregs of society . " The writers of the book thought the whole idea of storytelling and building on experience that Homer uses , and that many adult education tutors uses in real life , is represented in the episode " simply as an excuse for gossip and prurient curiosity " . They also thought that statements like " I can 't believe I paid ten thousand dollars for this course . What the heck was the lab fee for ? " imply that adult education is " exploitative and poor value for money , and that the students themselves contribute to this by demanding an essentially recreational service . " The authors concluded that the episode " certainly sustains a popular view of adult education as pointless and recreational . Similarly , no value whatsoever is attributed to the extensively researched , proven through practice and well @-@ argued perspective that adult learners do best when the curriculum builds on and values their experience . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Secrets of a Successful Marriage " finished forty @-@ third in the ratings for the week of May 16 to May 22 , 1994 , with a Nielsen rating of 9 @.@ 8 . The episode was the second highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following Melrose Place . 
 Since airing , the episode has received positive reviews from television critics . The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , thought it was a " confident finale " to the fifth season , which " had seen the series become progressively more surreal and self @-@ aware . " DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson wrote that he thought the episode ended the season with a " high note " , and that Homer ’ s insensitive gossiping about his relationship " presents lots of good bits . It completes this excellent year well . " Jacobson 's favorite line of the episode was " This is a place of learning , not a house of hearing about things ! " , which Homer tells his class after they demand him to reveal more secrets about him and Marge . Patrick Bromley of DVD Verdict gave the episode a grade of A − , and commented that episodes focusing on the relationship between Homer and Marge can " never fail " , and there are " numerous opportunities for some classic Homer @-@ isms " in the episode . Bill Gibron of DVD Talk gave the episode a score of 4 out of 5 . One @-@ time Simpsons writer and comedian Ricky Gervais named " Secrets of a Successful Marriage " his fifth favorite episode of the show , and commented that Homer 's line to Marge , " I know now what I can offer you that no one else can . Complete and utter dependence , " is " so sweet , because he 's right ! " It was placed at number seven on MSNBC 's top ten The Simpsons episodes list . They felt the episode embodied Homer 's qualities of being " stupid , good @-@ natured and mildly pathetic , [ ... ] from his conversations with his brain [ ... ] to his final proclamation that the one thing he can give Marge that no one else can is ' complete and utter dependence ' . " 
 = The Boat Race 1877 = 
 The 34th Boat Race took place on 24 March 1877 . The Boat Race is an annual side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . The race ended in a dead heat , the first and only time the event has ended in such a fashion . Despite the formal declaration of a tie , Oxford believed that they were the victors . The controversy surrounding the result led to significant changes to the way in which the race was conducted including the introduction of finishing posts and former Blues as umpires . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities ; it is followed throughout the United Kingdom and , as of 2014 , broadcast worldwide . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions , having beaten Oxford " easily " in the previous year 's race . However Oxford held the overall lead , with 17 victories to Cambridge 's 16 . 
 Oxford were coached by Reverend William Sherwood ( who rowed for Oxford in the 1873 and 1874 races ) and Edmund Warre ( who represented the Dark Blues in the 1857 and the 1858 races ) . Cambridge 's coach was James Brooks Close ( who rowed for the Light Blues in the 1872 , 1873 and 1874 races ) . Cambridge had practised at Putney a fortnight before the race and were initially the bookmaker 's clear favourites . Oxford 's practice rows a week later impressed and brought them back into contention . 
 The race was umpired by Joseph William Chitty who had rowed for Oxford twice in 1849 ( in the March and December races ) and the 1852 race , while the starter was Edward Searle . Chitty was assisted by " Honest " John Phelps who acted as the finishing judge . Phelps , a professional waterman , was over 70 years old and reportedly blind in one eye . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Oxford crew weighed an average of 12 st 3 @.@ 875 lb ( 77 @.@ 8 kg ) , 4 @.@ 125 pounds ( 1 @.@ 9 kg ) more than their opponents . The Cambridge crew featured seven former Blues , including the cox George Latham Davies and number four William Brooks Close , both of whom were participating in their third Boat Races . Oxford saw four Blues return : J. M. Boustead , Tom Cottingham Edwards @-@ Moss and H. J. Stayner and H. P. Marriott , all of whom had rowed in the previous two races . 
 = = Race = = 
 The race started on Saturday 24 March 1877 at 8 : 27 a.m. Oxford had won the toss and elected to start from the Middlesex station , handing the Surrey side of the river to Cambridge . The Dark Blues took an early lead and were ahead at the Mile Post , but by the Crab Tree pub , the crews were level . Cambridge pulled ahead and held a quarter @-@ of @-@ a @-@ length lead by Hammersmith Bridge which they extended until the crews arrived at Chiswick Reach where Oxford re @-@ took the lead . At Chiswick Steps the Dark Blues were leading by half @-@ a @-@ length , and by Barnes Bridge they were clear . Experiencing strong head winds and rough water , Cowles , the Oxford bow man , suffered serious damage to his oar , nullifying further contribution to the race . Described by an Oxford undergraduate watching the race : " suddenly Oxford staggered and stood still in a mass of foam : the bow @-@ oar , Cowles , had struck the top of a big wave in feathering and broken his blade clean off . " Almost immediately , Cambridge took the advantage , but were held off by a determined Oxford crew who " spurted magnificently and drew up steadily inch by inch , so that it was a near thing as they passed the post " . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 In the Official Centenary History it was noted that " it is too perhaps too much to expect , even from the stoical discipline of old Blues , a unanimous acquiescence in a verdict of " dead @-@ heat , " for no conclusion could be more unsatisfactory to the competitors themselves . " Oxford firmly believed that they had won the race by feet , but following a subsequent meeting in a law court with representatives of both universities and the umpire Chitty , the official result was declared as " Dead Heat " . Punch declared " Oxford won , Cambridge too . " W. W. Rouse Ball , a Fellow of Trinity College , Cambridge , writing in A History of The First Trinity Boat Club suggested that the broken oar was the deciding factor : " ... but for this Oxford would have won . " A correspondent writing in The Sydney Mail said both teams should " consider themselves lucky " that they did not lose , and speculated that the race would be looked back as " the great gooseberry " year . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 This was the last year that the result was judged by a professional waterman and the controversy resulted in the introduction of the finishing posts . They remain , as of 2014 , 113 metres ( 371 ft ) downstream of Chiswick Bridge and are engraved with " <unk> " for University Boat Race . The controversy also led to the selection of a former Blue as the umpire , selected by one university from a shortlist drawn up from the other , and alternating each year . 
 Phelps himself was replaced as finishing judge by E. H. <unk> . Phelps died on 5 December 1890 . His great @-@ great @-@ great @-@ great @-@ nephew Richard Phelps umpired the 2014 race which also ended controversially : Cambridge lost five strokes after a clash of oars , Oxford won by 11 lengths ( the biggest margin for more than 40 years ) and Phelps declined an appeal from the Light Blues for a re @-@ row . 
 = Mycena cinerella = 
 Mycena cinerella , commonly known as the mealy bonnet , is an inedible species of mushroom in the family Mycenaceae . It is found in Europe and the United States , where it grows in groups on fallen leaves and needles under pine and Douglas fir . The small grayish mushrooms have caps that are up to 1 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 6 in ) wide atop stipes that are 5 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) long and 2 @.@ 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 10 in ) thick . Its gills are grayish @-@ white and adnate , with a " tooth " that runs slightly down the stipe . The fungus has both two- and four @-@ spored basidia . As its common name suggests , it smells mealy . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 First called Agaricus <unk> by Finnish mycologist Petter Karsten in 1879 , he transferred it to the genus Mycena that same year . In his 1936 Flora <unk> Danica ( Agaric flora of Denmark ) Jakob Emanuel Lange referred it to the genus Omphalia ; Omphalia cinerea ( P. Karst . ) J.E. Lange is now a synonym . Mycena <unk> was named and described as a new species distinct from M. cinerella by Hintikka in 1963 , who thought it to be unique due to its narrowly acute cap that lacked brownish or yellowish tones , decurrent gills , and two @-@ spored basidia . However , intermediate forms of it have been found , and some authorities , like Dutch Mycena specialist Maas Geesteranus , believe it should be treated as a synonym of M. cinerella . 
 The mushroom is commonly known as the " mealy bonnet " . The specific epithet cinerella means " somewhat ashy color " . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap of M. cinerella is white and small , with a diameter typically ranging from 0 @.@ 5 to 1 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 2 to 0 @.@ 6 in ) . Initially hemispherical , obtusely conic , and then convex , it expands during maturity , developing visible grooves on the surface that correspond to the gills underneath the cap . The cap has a broad , flattened umbo . The cap surface is smooth and moist , with a slimy margin that is initially pressed against the stipe ; with age the margin becomes notched and sometimes scalloped , turning translucent . The cap color is dark gray to pale gray , somewhat hygrophanous , fading to ashy white or brown when dry . The flesh is thin , gray , cartilaginous and tough , with a strongly farinaceous ( mealy , similar to raw potatoes ) odor and taste if crushed or chewed . The whitish to grayish gills are moderately broad ( 2 – 3 mm ) with a spacing that is close to subdistant , and 18 – 26 reach the stipe , interspersed with two or three tiers of lamellae ( short gills that do not extend fully from the cap margin to the stipe ) . The stipe attachment is adnate or arcuate , but later develops a pronounced decurrent tooth . The decurrent tooth occasionally separates from the stipe and forms a collar around it . The stipe is 2 – 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 – 2 @.@ 0 in ) long , 1 – 2 @.@ 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 04 – 0 @.@ 10 in ) thick , equal in width throughout , hollow , cartilaginous , and brittle . The stipe surface is smooth or polished , with the apex initially faintly pruinose ( as if covered with a fine whitish powder ) . The base of the stipe is sparsely covered with sharp , straight , stiff hairs , and is the same color as the cap or paler . The mushroom is inedible . 
 = = = Microscopic characteristics = = = 
 The spores are 7 – 9 by 4 – 5 μm , ellipsoid , smooth , amyloid ( reaction very weak in some collections ) . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are four @-@ spored , or occasionally a combination of two- and four @-@ spored . The four @-@ spored forms have clamp connections that are absent in the two @-@ spored forms . The pleurocystidia ( cystidia found on the face of the gills ) are not differentiated . The cheilocystidia ( cystidia found on the edges of the gills ) are embedded in the hymenium and inconspicuous , measuring 22 – 36 by 5 – 11 μm . They are roughly filiform ( like thin filaments ) , with numerous contorted branches or protuberances , and club @-@ shaped with finger @-@ like prolongations . The flesh of the gills is homogenous , and turns vinaceous @-@ brown when stained in iodine . The flesh of the cap has a well @-@ differentiated pellicle , with a differentiated but not very well @-@ developed hypoderm , and hyphae that are 10 – 20 μm wide . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Mycena cinerella is a saprobic fungus , and derives nutrients by decomposing leaf litter and similar detritus , converting it to humus and mineralizing organic matter in the soil . The fruit bodies grow in groups on needles under pine and Douglas fir , typically in the late summer and autumn . In the United States , it has been collected from Michigan , Washington , Oregon , and California . In Europe , it has also been collected from the Great Britain , Norway , Poland , and Sweden . 
 = The Beverly Hills Hotel = 
 The Beverly Hills Hotel , also called The Beverly Hills Hotel and Bungalows , is located on Sunset Boulevard in Beverly Hills , California . One of the world 's most iconic and best @-@ known hotels , it is closely associated with Hollywood film stars , rock stars and celebrities . The hotel has 208 guest rooms and suites , and 23 bungalows , each designed in the peachy pink and green colors which are a trademark of the hotel . 
 The Beverly Hills Hotel was established in May 1912 , before the city 's existence . The original owners were Margaret J. Anderson , a wealthy widow , and her son , Stanley S. Anderson , who had been managing the Hollywood Hotel . The original hotel was designed by Pasadena architect Elmer Grey , in the Mediterranean Revival style . From 1928 to 1932 , the hotel was owned by the Van Noy Railway News and Hotel Company . In 1941 , Hernando Courtright , the vice president of the Bank of America , purchased the hotel with friends including Irene Dunne , Loretta Young and Harry Warner . Courtright established the Polo Lounge , which was for many years the premier dining spot in Los Angeles , hosting luminaries such as the Rat Pack , Humphrey Bogart and Marlene Dietrich . Courtright paid for a significant renovation in the late forties , during which the hotel was first painted its famous pink color in 1948 , to match that period 's country club style . The following year , architect Paul Williams added the Crescent Wing . 
 The strict resident owner of The Beverly Hills Hotel from 1954 until his death in 1979 was former Detroit real estate magnate Ben L. Silberstein . In 1986 , Marvin Davis bought the Hotel from Silberstein 's sons @-@ in @-@ law Burt Slatkin and Ivan F. Boesky . On December 30 , 1992 , the hotel closed for a complete restoration , reopening in 1995 . Since 1996 it has been run as part of the prestigious Dorchester Collection . In 2012 the hotel was named the first historic landmark in Beverly Hills , and two new Presidential Bungalows were added . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 In early 1911 , Margaret J. Anderson , a wealthy widow , and her son , Stanley S. Anderson , who had been managing the Hollywood Hotel , ordered the construction of the Beverly Hills Hotel , in close proximity to the Burton Green mansion . Burton Green , an oil tycoon and real estate developer , President of the Rodeo Land and Water Company , had purchased land in the foothills of the Santa Monica Mountains , which had once been owned by the Mexican government . He had begun building mansions on the land , including his own residence , investing some $ 500 @,@ 000 , but was having difficulty selling them . He hired Anderson to build a hotel , which he named Beverly Farms , after his home in Massachusetts , believing that it would attract people to the area , billing it as " halfway between Los Angeles and the sea " . The Hollywood film industry was taking off at the time and investors were looking to develop the area . A May 11 , 1911 edition of The Los Angeles Times announced the news that a " huge Mission @-@ style hotel " was to be built by Anderson , with the motto that " her guests were entitled to the best of everything regardless of cost " . 
 The hotel opened May 12 , 1912 , before the city 's existence . Margaret and Stanley took up residence within the hotel grounds . By 1914 , Hollywood directors , actors and actresses such as Mary Pickford and Douglas Fairbanks , Charlie Chaplin , Gloria Swanson , Buster Keaton , Rudolph Valentino and Will Rogers had purchased homes in the area , " transforming bean fields surrounding The Beverly Hills Hotel into prime real estate " . The city of Beverly Hills was established . The first five bungalows of the hotel were built in 1915 . In 1919 , Douglas Fairbanks bought a lodge above the hotel , and expanded it with his wife Mary Pickford , which became known as " Pickfair . " According to one publication , a star would know they would finally " made it " when they received a dinner invitation from " Pickfair " . Gloria Swanson resided in one of the bungalows of the hotel during her divorce . 
 In 1915 , the Andersons donated a portion of the hotel 's original grounds to the community of Beverly Hills . It was used to create the community 's first public park . Originally known as Sunset Park , it is now Will Rogers Memorial Park . An early tradition was the annual Easter Egg hunt , put on for the children of the guests and employees . Silent film star Harold Lloyd was an early hotel patron , and in 1921 he decided to film a scene at the hotel for A Sailor @-@ Made Man . From 1928 to 1932 , the hotel was owned by the Van Noy Railway News and Hotel Company . Van Noy had to close the hotel during the Great Depression years , although he leased the bungalows out as properties . With Bank of America funding , the hotel reopened in 1932 . 
 = = = The glamour years = = = 
 During the 1930s , The Beverly Hills Hotel became increasingly popular with Hollywood film stars . Fred Astaire took a shine to the hotel , and enjoyed reading the Daily Variety and the Hollywood Reporter by the pool . Cesar Romero and Carole Lombard were pictured together at the hotel in 1937 . In 1938 , the Sand and Pool Club was established at the hotel . It proved extremely popular , with white sand imported from Arizona , which made the pool area look like a beach . The following year , it began hosting fashion shows sponsored by local department stores such as Bullock 's Wilshire . In 1940 , one of the hotel 's long @-@ time patrons , Marlene Dietrich , was instrumental in bringing about a change in policy in the Polo Lounge , which had made it compulsory for women to don skirts which she refused to wear . 
 In 1941 , Hernando Courtright , the vice president of the Bank of America , purchased the hotel with friends . Irene Dunne , Loretta Young and Harry Warner also became owners of the hotel as a result of their investment with Courtright . Courtright established the Polo Lounge " in honor of a celebrity band of polo players who toasted victories at the restaurant after matches in the bean fields " . In 1942 , Howard Hughes bought up half a dozen of the bungalows and lived there on several occasions throughout the decades . The hotel accommodated his eccentricities , including his request for " roast beef sandwiches delivered to a nook in a tree " . The Beverly Hills Hotel underwent significant renovation in the late forties when the porte cochere was expanded and painted in stripes . In 1947 Courtright opened the Crystal Room and the Lanai Restaurant , later called The <unk> . The building was first painted its famous pink color in 1948 to match the country club style of the period , and it became known as " The Pink Palace " . The following year , architect Paul Williams added the Crescent Wing . The Fountain Coffee Shop also opened at this time . 
 In 1954 , Detroit real estate magnate Ben L. Silberstein bought the hotel for $ 5 @.@ 5 million . Courtright later became hotelier at the Beverly Wilshire Hotel . The reputation of the Beverly Hills Hotel , as a leading luxury hotel with glamorous patrons , took off during the 1950s and attracted eminent guests such as the Duke and Duchess of Windsor , Princess Margaret and Lord Snowdon , King Albert of Belgium , the Crown Prince of Monaco and Grace Kelly , John Wayne and Henry Fonda . Elizabeth Taylor , one of the hotel 's best known guests , would stay with her numerous husbands in the bungalows , and spent six of her eight honeymoons there . Her father owned an art gallery on the ground floor of the hotel . The Polo Lounge became associated with Frank Sinatra , Dean Martin and the Rat Pack , where they held heavy drinking bouts . In 1956 , the pool of the hotel and cabana club was a filming location for Designing Women , starring Gregory Peck and Lauren Bacall . Marilyn Monroe and Yves Montand stayed at the hotel during the production of George Cukor 's Let 's Make Love . Monroe 's favorite bungalow was No. 7 . George Hamilton and Rex Harrison enjoyed sunbathing at the hotel ; Harrison would sunbathe in the nude in Cabana One , and answer the door wearing " just a handkerchief over his private parts " . 
 In 1963 , the comedy picture Who 's Been Sleeping in My Bed ? , starring Dean Martin , Elizabeth Montgomery , Jill St. John and Carol Burnett , was shot at the hotel . In the 1970s , John Lennon and Yoko Ono hid out in one of the bungalows for a week . Richard M. Nixon 's chief of staff , H.R. Haldeman , and presidential aide John Ehrlichman were eating breakfast in the Polo Lounge when they were informed of the Watergate in 1972 . In January , 1976 , Peter Finch died of a sudden heart attack while sitting in the hotel lobby . Two months later , he was posthumously awarded the Academy Award for Best Actor for his role as Howard Beale in the film Network . His co @-@ star Faye Dunaway stayed at the hotel after winning the Academy Award for Best Actress for the same film ; in one memorable photograph she was seated by the hotel pool lounging back in a chair surrounded by newspapers and her Oscar trophy . The exterior of the hotel was featured on the album cover art of The Eagles 's LP " Hotel California " that same year . Two years later , California Suite was filmed at the hotel . 
 = = = Later history = = = 
 Owner Ben Silberstein died in 1979 , and passed the hotel to his two daughters , Muriel Slatkin and Seema Boesky , wife of stock trader Ivan Boesky . In 1986 , Marvin Davis bought the hotel from Silberstein 's sons @-@ in @-@ law Burt Slatkin and Ivan Boesky . Boesky had bought the outstanding 5 % of stock for a reported fortune and decided to sell , despite Slatkin 's desire to keep the hotel . Less than a year later , Davis sold the hotel to the Sultan of Brunei , Hassanal Bolkiah , for $ 110 million . 
 On December 30 , 1992 , the hotel closed for a complete restoration , said to be in the region of $ 100 – 125 million . The project lasted two and a half years with the hotel reopening on June 3 , 1995 , with upgrades to furniture and fittings . The hotel is now managed and owned by the Dorchester Collection , organized in 1996 to manage the hotel interests of the Brunei Investment Agency . The west coast regional director for the Dorchester Collection oversees The Beverly Hills Hotel as well as the Hotel Bel @-@ Air . In 2012 , the hotel celebrated its 100 @-@ year anniversary and began to remodel its lobby , with the Polo Lounge , pool cabanas and Cabana Cafe , and guest @-@ rooms and suites to be renovated by 2014 . The hotel was also named the first historic landmark in Beverly Hills in September 2012 . 
 = = = Controversy and boycott = = = 
 The Sultan of Brunei 's stake in the ownership of the hotel drew controversy in April 2014 when he initiated the first phase of a three @-@ phase plan to adapt Brunei 's legal system to include aspects of Sharia law implicating his approval of the persecution of homosexuals in the complex legal system there ( a two part system involving separate courts and legislation for Islamic and non @-@ Islamic citizens ) . In protest , a United States national LGBT advocacy organization , the Gill Action Fund , canceled its reservation to hold a conference of major donors at the Beverly Hills Hotel and demanded a refund of its deposit . The hotel management responded by issuing a statement asserting that it does not discriminate on the basis of sexual orientation . Fashion designers Brian Atwood and Peter Som subsequently called for wider protests , urging the fashion industry to boycott all of the hotels owned by the Dorchester Collection . 
 Meanwhile , the boycott had attracted support from Sir Richard Branson of Virgin Group , as well as numerous Hollywood executives and stars , including Jay Leno and Ellen DeGeneres . In addition , a string of organizations joined the boycott , cancelling reservations to hold conferences and other high @-@ profile events at the establishment ; travel industry firms likewise signed on to a boycott of all Dorchester Collection hotels . Others , including Russell Crowe and Kim Kardashian , have spoken out against the boycott . Crowe stated that despite his disapproval of the new laws in Brunei , it is unfair to punish the hardworking employees of the hotel . Similarly , Kardashian published a blog post voicing her criticism of the boycott and expressing her sympathies for the hotel workers . HR Magazine said that the protests are " misguided " and will not affect the government policy of Brunei when the Dorchester Collection 's annual revenue is $ 300 million while the BIA has over $ 30 billion in assets from oil and gas . 
 By May 2014 , the Beverly Hills City Council passed a resolution urging the Sultan of Brunei to sell the Beverly Hills Hotel . Lili Bosse , the mayor of Beverly Hills at the time , welcomed the resolution and added that she had made a " personal decision " not to return to the hotel until the situation had been solved . The decision was lauded by Rabbi Laura Geller of Temple Emanuel , where Bosse is a congregant . By then the Jewish Journal reported that " more than $ 2 million worth of events have been canceled at the Beverly Hills Hotel by dozens of groups . " Dorchester Collection Chief Executive Officer Christopher Cowdray then responded to the controversy by asking the public to consider the issue at hand in a broader perspective , citing the fact that many brands are backed by foreign investors . Sharia law exists alongside other normative systems and has been adopted by many other Muslim countries , including Saudi Arabia which has major investments in the American hospitality industry , including the Four Seasons and Fairmont hotel chains . Adweek declared that " the bad press and protests have tarnished the glamorous image of the Beverly Hills Hotel , one of the most famous hotels in the world " and added that " such extreme brand damage will be difficult to repair " . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 = = = Exterior = = = 
 Judith Kirkwood of Orange Coast Magazine has stated that " The Beverly Hills Hotel is such an icon that my friend , Gretchen , and I wondered if it was a mirage when the taxi pulled up in the porte cochere and deposited us on a red carpet , but realized that it was " more like a peachy pink dream dusted with gold — and green and white striped accents " . The original main building of The Beverly Hills Hotel was designed by Pasadena architect Elmer Grey , in the Mediterranean Revival style . Built on a prominence above the main road below , it resembled a white colonial palatial mansion or mission , with verandas and arches fitted with wicker furniture , and at the time was set in the countryside . High above the main entrance are three domes ; two flanking the center which are smaller and lower in height , with flags hoisted on them . A trolley @-@ stop pavilion was situated on the western side . The iconic signage and the addition were designed by architect Paul Williams . 
 The extensive gardens , covering 12 acres ( 4 @.@ 9 ha ) , were designed by landscape architect Wilbur David Cook . They contain bougainvillea , banana plants , hibiscus and other tropical flora . Svend Petersen , the Danish @-@ American pool manager at the hotel for forty @-@ two years , became a Hotel Ambassador in 2002 . He had notably opened up the pool after hours for The Beatles and taught Faye Dunaway to swim a 1940s freestyle crawl for her appearance in the film Mommie Dearest . 
 = = = Interior = = = 
 The <unk> of the hotel , containing Californian craftsman furniture , provides vistas of the Pacific Ocean . A room , known as the Crystal Room , was allocated for small private dinner parties . The principal dining room could accommodate up to 500 people . The Children 's dining room , which became the El Jardin Restaurant , is now the iconic Polo Lounge . The Polo Lounge was seen as the premier power dining spot in all of Los Angeles . The lounge was renovated in 1974 , and given a softer design with table lamps and flowers . It is fashioned in peachy pink with dark green booths , each featuring a plug @-@ in phone . The photograph behind the bar depicts Will Rogers and Darryl F. Zanuck , two lounge regulars , playing polo . The menu offers a classic Neil McCarthy salad , named after the polo @-@ playing millionaire . The hotel has its own bakery and herb garden , makes its own vinegar and smokes meats . The chef in 2003 was Katsuo Sugiura , who cooked " oak @-@ grilled food with an Asian flair " . In 2007 , one large suite was converted into the Bar <unk> . The fireplace in the hotel 's lobby has a fire going every day of the year . 
 A new wing was added to the east side of the main building in the late 1940s . The " Crescent Wing , " as it became known , features mature plantings on the balconies . 
 = = = = Rooms and bungalows = = = = 
 As of 2012 , rooms cost from $ 550 up to $ 15 @,@ 380 for a night in one of the presidential bungalows . A typical room as of August 2015 is $ 1 @,@ 045 a night . Each of the rooms has their own balcony and is designed in the Beverly Hills Hotel colors of peachy pinks and greens , apricots and yellows . Several of the more expensive rooms have private patios , <unk> and their own kitchens . 
 Five bungalows were originally added to the gardens in 1915 to provide for families who could return each year with their own staff . As of 2015 , the hotel has 23 bungalows set out across the gardens . Bungalows 14 @-@ 21 are known as " Bachelor 's Row " , due to their association with film stars and their affairs , including Warren Beatty and Orson Welles . In 1990 , a private pool and Jacuzzi were added to Bungalow No. 5 to accommodate businessman Walter Annenberg . No.5 had been a favorite of Elizabeth Taylor and Richard Burton who had " a standing room service order for two bottles of vodka at breakfast , and two more at lunch " . Taylor also liked No.3 , where she stayed during her marriage to Eddie Fisher . Marilyn Monroe favored No. 1 and No. 7 . No.1 , the most secluded of the bungalows , features an interior described by CNN as " creamy , lush and traditional , decorated in the manner of one 's wealthy grandparents " . No. 7 has become known as " the " Norma Jean " . Dietrich ordered a 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) by 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) bed added to No. 10 , the bungalow where John Lennon and Yoko Ono stayed in the 1970s . In 2011 two Presidential Bungalows were established , replacing the tennis courts , with each containing three bedrooms and a private swimming pool and shower . 
 Howard Hughes permanently kept a bungalow at the hotel , however it was a secret whether he was on the premises or not . Often the only person who knew Hughes was at the Beverly Hills was the hotel 's chef . Hughes would awaken him in the middle of the night to prepare food for him . It has been alleged that several of the bungalows are haunted . Guests have reported hearing what is believed to be Harpo Marx playing the harp , and seeing an apparition of Sergei Rachmaninoff . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = The Boat Race 1992 = 
 The 138th Boat Race took place on 4 April 1992 . Held annually , the Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . Oxford 's cox Andrew Probert was the oldest competitor in Boat Race history at the age of 38 years and 86 days . Oxford won by one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ quarter lengths , the closest margin of victory for twenty years . The race also featured the first German competitor in the history of the event in Dirk Bangert . Umpired by former Cambridge rower Roger Stephens , Mike Rosewell writing in The Times described the race as " one of the greatest races since 1829 " . 
 In the reserve race , Cambridge 's Goldie defeated Oxford 's Isis , while Cambridge won the Women 's Boat Race . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . First held in 1829 , the race takes place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a " hotly contested point of honour " between the two universities , followed throughout the United Kingdom , and broadcast on several international television networks . Oxford went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 1991 race by four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ quarter lengths , with Cambridge leading overall with 69 victories to Oxford 's 67 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 The first Women 's Boat Race took place in 1927 , but did not become an annual fixture until the 1960s . Up until 2014 , the contest was conducted as part of the Henley Boat Races , but as of the 2015 race , it is held on the River Thames , on the same day as the men 's main and reserve races . The reserve race , contested between Oxford 's Isis boat and Cambridge 's Goldie boat has been held since 1965 . It usually takes place on the Tideway , prior to the main Boat Race . 
 President of the Cambridge University Boat Club , Max <unk> , said of the previous year 's race : " We were burned on that day . Badly burned . It was worse than other defeats because we thought we could win ... Oxford just rowed through us ; with every stroke they took they destroyed our belief in ourselves . " His crew mate , Nick <unk> , focused on the approach to this year 's race : " This year it 's heads down and get on with the job . We know that if we don 't cross the line first on the day , nobody could care less who we are . " 
 Beefeater Gin sponsored the event ; prior to this year 's race they had announced a £ 1 million deal to continue their close involvement for a further three years . 
 = = Crews = = 
 Aged 38 years and 3 months , Cambridge 's cox , Andrew Probert , was the oldest competitor in the history of the Boat Race . Oxford 's crew featured four returning Blues and two former Isis crew members , while Cambridge saw three old Blues participate . The Oxford boat was made up from five Britons , an Australian , an American and a Yugoslav ; Cambridge was represented by seven Britons , an American and Dirk Bangert , the first German to participate in the event . Oxford 's crew were coached by Steve Royle and Patrick Sweeney , and assisted by the former East Germany Olympic coach Jürgen Gröbler , while Cambridge were guided Oxford 's successful coach of 1991 , John Wilson . <unk> Bert Green and Jim Cobb provided advice to the Oxford and Cambridge coxes respectively . 
 = = Race = = 
 The race commenced at 2 @.@ 35 pm . Oxford won the toss and elected to start from the Middlesex station . The boats raced side @-@ by @-@ side for the first three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half miles of the race , for fourteen minutes neither crew held a lead of more than half @-@ a @-@ length over the other , and umpire Roger Stephens was forced to issue warnings to both coxes for steering too close to one another . The Dark Blues held a slight early advantage but Cambridge pulled ahead at Hammersmith Bridge . Oxford edged ahead at Barnes Bridge , and passed the finishing post in a time of 17 minutes 44 seconds , one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ quarter lengths ahead of Cambridge , the closest finish in the last 20 years . Oxford 's Yugoslav rower Boris <unk> had to be lifted from the boat at the end of the race . The Beefeater Gin Trophy was presented to the winning boat club president by Raymond Seitz . 
 In the reserve race , Cambridge 's Goldie won by three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ quarter lengths over Isis , their fifth victory in six years . Cambridge won the 47th Women 's Boat Race by one @-@ third @-@ of @-@ a @-@ length in a time of 6 minutes and 20 seconds , their third victory in four years . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 Mike Rosewell , writing in The Times complimented all of the race participants : " the 18 individuals involved produced one of the greatest races since 1829 . " Former Oxford coach Daniel Topolski , writing for The Observer , described the Oxford 's win as " scintillating " and noted that the crews were " locked in combat for fully three and a half miles . " Christopher Dodd , writing in The Guardian suggested that " the promise was delivered ; a rare race " . 
 Oxford 's number five and Great Britain international Peter Bridge noted Gröbler 's impact : " We really felt the strength that we had built up over six months under Jürgen 's methods . " He continued : " [ Cambridge ] were slower off the start than we expected which was nice . " Referring to Cambridge 's lead at Hammersmith Bridge , their number seven Steve Fowler said " we were feeling good but we should have closed the door there and then . We should have killed them on the bend . " Cambridge cox Probert conceded to his counterpart Liz Chick : " she steered very well . " Oxford coach Gröbler stated : " It was wonderful . Both crews ... were very good — and so disciplined . I like these university students . " Cambridge coach Wilson lamented : " we failed to capitalise at Hammersmith and they grew in confidence thereafter . " 
 = MNM ( professional wrestling ) = 
 MNM ( Mercury , Nitro , and Melina ) was a villainous professional wrestling stable in World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) and Ohio Valley Wrestling ( OVW ) that consisted of Joey Mercury ( previously Joey Matthews ) , Johnny Nitro , and their manager Melina Perez . 
 Mercury and Nitro first began teaming together in 2004 in OVW , WWE 's developmental territory in Louisville , Kentucky . Melina , who at the time was Nitro 's actual girlfriend , joined them as their manager in February 2005 . While working in OVW , Mercury and Nitro captured the OVW Southern Tag Team Championship on one occasion . 
 MNM were called up to the SmackDown ! roster in April 2005 , in which Mercury and Nitro went on to win the WWE Tag Team Championship . While in WWE , their ring personas was that of a trio of Hollywood celebrities , complete with a red carpet ring entrance , that had them accompanied by " paparazzi " . The duo lost the title in July 2005 . After their third and final reign ended in May 2006 , Nitro and Melina blamed Mercury for the loss and attacked him , splitting the team . Nitro and Melina were let go from the SmackDown ! roster and debuted on the Raw brand . In November 2006 , MNM reunited for a brief period , before Mercury was released from his contract in March 2007 . 
 = = Concept = = 
 Partly inspired by Paris Hilton , the concept behind the group was that they were Hollywood celebrities . Upon their debut on SmackDown ! , they claimed to be the " hot new team on the scene " , because of their good looks and celebrity status . 
 As part of their in @-@ ring personas , MNM had a distinctive ring entrance . They walked to the ring on a red carpet , while members of the " paparazzi " took photos of them . The male members of MNM usually wore fur coats to the ring . As they took them off , Melina suggestively rubbed their abs while removing the title belts from their pants , where they hung in an exaggerated phallic fashion . Melina has a signature entrance which involves her doing a split on the ring apron — from the floor — then bending forward and crawling under the bottom rope . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Ohio Valley Wrestling ( 2004 – 2005 ) = = = 
 MNM was formed in the former World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) " farm territory " Ohio Valley Wrestling ( OVW ) . Melina Perez , Johnny Nitro 's real @-@ life girlfriend , was introduced into the company in 2004 as his ex @-@ girlfriend , an ally of Matt Cappotelli with whom Nitro was engaged in a scripted rivalry . Almost immediately , however , Perez betrayed Cappotelli and sided with Nitro . Together they introduced Joey Matthews to become MNM . While in OVW , Nitro and Matthews won the OVW Southern Tag Team Championship once , holding it for over two months . 
 = = = SmackDown and dissolution ( 2005 – 2006 ) = = = 
 MNM was called up to WWE 's SmackDown ! roster in April 2005 , with Matthews undergoing a name change to " Joey Mercury " . They made their debut during Carlito 's interview segment Carlito 's Cabana , where they interrupted an interview between Carlito and Rey Mysterio , and attacked Mysterio . This provoked a feud between MNM and Mysterio and his partner , Eddie Guerrero , over the WWE Tag Team Championship . Two weeks later , in their debut match on the SmackDown ! brand , they defeated Mysterio and Guerrero to win the WWE Tag Team Championship after Guerrero refused to tag into the match . While Nitro and Mercury held the championship , Melina was placed in an angle with Heidenreich . She publicly mocked him and was the impetus for an attack on him by Nitro and Mercury . In July , MNM were scheduled to face Heidenreich in a two @-@ on @-@ one handicap match , but attacked him before the match started . Road Warrior Animal saved Heidenreich from the attack and as a result , Heidenreich and Road Warrior Animal challenged Mercury and Nitro for the tag team title at The Great American Bash . MNM lost the match and the championship . 
 The loss of the tag team championship was seen as " bad publicity " by Melina so she introduced Jillian Hall , a storyline spin doctor to repair their image . Hall got them a cover article in SmackDown ! magazine , and began to introduce the team before and aid them during matches . In September 2005 , Hall left the group to join John " Bradshaw " Layfield ( JBL ) , who had lost a match to Rey Mysterio . 
 On the October 28 episode of SmackDown ! , Mercury and Nitro were placed into a tag team title fatal four @-@ way match against the teams of the Mexicools ( Super Crazy and Psicosis ) , William Regal and Paul <unk> , and the WWE Tag Team Champions Legion of Doom 2005 ( Heidenreich and Road Warrior Animal ) . During the match , Mercury and Nitro were able to perform the Snapshot on Heidenreich , to win the championship for a second time . MNM successfully defended the championship against Eddie Guerrero and Batista . In December , they began a feud with the Mexicools , who earned the right to face MNM at Armageddon for the WWE Tag Team Championship . Before Armageddon however , on the December 16 episode of SmackDown ! , MNM lost the tag team championship to Batista and Rey Mysterio . A storyline was begun before the match , where Melina attempted to seduce Batista into forfeiting the match . The storyline played over to the next episode of SmackDown ! when , before MNM invoked their rematch clause , Melina held a press conference in the ring where she claimed that Batista had sexually harassed her . During the tag team match , Mark Henry aided MNM in winning back the WWE Tag Team Championship . The following week , MNM defeated Batista and Mysterio in a steel cage match to retain the championship , Henry 's aid . Henry was only with the group a short time before his contract was sold to Daivari in storyline . They went on to successfully defend the championship against The Mexicools and the team of Matt Hardy and Tatanka in early 2006 . 
 In April 2006 , MNM were placed in an angle in which they found themselves in a losing streak against the team of Paul London and Brian Kendrick . In non @-@ title tag team matches , singles matches , and even a six @-@ man tag match , London and Kendrick defeated the duo every time . At the Judgment Day pay @-@ per @-@ view in May 2006 , MNM lost the tag team championship to London and Kendrick . After the match , Nitro and Mercury started brawling , disbanding the group . Later that night , Melina lost a singles match against Jillian Hall and after slapping General Manager Theodore Long in anger , she and Nitro were fired from the SmackDown ! brand in storyline . Off @-@ screen , Nitro and Mercury did not get along , and WWE management decided to split the tag team and send Nitro and Melina to the Raw brand . In addition , Mercury was about to begin serving a suspension for violating the WWE Wellness program . 
 = = = Reunion ( 2006 – 2007 ) = = = 
 After serving his suspension and a brief stint back in OVW , Mercury returned to WWE , reuniting MNM , in late November 2006 to answer an open challenge put out by The Hardys ( Matt and Jeff ) for the December to Dismember pay @-@ per @-@ view . At the event , MNM lost to the Hardys . MNM and the Hardys met again at Armageddon as part of a four @-@ way ladder match , which also included the teams of Dave Taylor and William Regal and Paul London and Brian Kendrick . During the match , which saw London and Kendrick retain the WWE Tag Team Championship , Mercury was legitimately injured when he was struck in the face with a ladder , necessitating a trip to the emergency room where his broken nose received 15 stitches . The facial injury was worked into the angle , and when Mercury returned wearing a protective covering on his face , the rivalry between the teams intensified with MNM actively seeking to injure one or both of the Hardys , even going so far as to attack and perform a Snapshot on Matt on exposed concrete following a match . MNM lost to The Hardys at the Royal Rumble , and again at the No Way Out pay @-@ per @-@ view in February , which concluded the feud . 
 = = = Post @-@ breakup = = = 
 After their feud with the Hardys was over , Nitro and Melina continued to team on Raw , while Mercury wrestled in singles competition on SmackDown ! . On March 26 , 2007 , through WWE 's official website , it was announced that Mercury had been released from his contract . 
 Mercury returned in 2010 , first as a member of CM Punk 's Straight Edge Society , and later began working as a trainer in Florida Championship Wrestling ( later renamed NXT Wrestling ) He most recently worked alongside The Authority and as part of J & J Security , former WWE World Heavyweight Champion Seth Rollins 's " personal security " . 
 Melina and Nitro 's association began to fizzle out when Melina became the WWE Women 's Champion and began garnering attention as a singles performer . Melina was released from her contract in 2011 . 
 During the 2007 supplemental draft , Nitro moved to the ECW brand , renamed John Morrison in the ECW brand , & would go on to capture the ECW World Championship . Morrison formed a partnership with The Miz , capturing both the WWE Tag Team Championship and the World Tag Team Championship . He also gained his third WWE Intercontinental Championship shortly after his alliance with The Miz . Morrison departed from WWE in 2011 and signed with Lucha Underground in 2014 as Johnny Mundo . 
 Currently under his Mundo character , Nitro and Melina had a brief reunion when Melina debuted in Lucha Underground at Ultima Lucha , attacking Alberto El Patron during his match with Mundo , allowing Mundo to pick up the win . She departed from Lucha Underground shortly after her debut . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Double @-@ team finishing moves 
 Snapshot ( Delayed flapjack ( Mercury ) / Elevated DDT ( Nitro ) combination ) 
 Double @-@ team signature moves 
 Double baseball slide 
 Simultaneous leg drops to the throat and leg 
 Entrance theme 
 " Paparazzi " by Jim Johnston 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 Ohio Valley Wrestling 
 OVW Southern Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Pro Wrestling Illustrated 
 Tag Team of the Year ( 2005 ) 
 World Wrestling Entertainment 
 WWE Tag Team Championship ( 3 times ) 
 WWE Women 's Championship ( 1 time ) – Melina 
 = New York State Route 9N = 
 New York State Route 9N ( NY 9N ) is a north – south state highway in northeastern New York in the United States . It extends from an intersection with U.S. Route 9 ( US 9 ) , NY 29 , and NY 50 in the city of Saratoga Springs to a junction with US 9 and NY 22 in the Clinton County village of Keeseville . At 143 @.@ 49 miles ( 230 @.@ 92 km ) in total length , NY 9N is the longest letter @-@ suffixed route in the state . It is concurrent with its parent route for 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) in the village of Lake George and for three blocks in the hamlet of Elizabethtown . 
 Much of NY 9N runs alongside either a river or a lake . It follows the Hudson River through northern Saratoga County and southern Warren County , the entirety of Lake George 's western shoreline , the west edge of Lake Champlain between Ticonderoga and Westport , and the Ausable River from Keene to Keeseville . The other portions of NY 9N pass through predominantly rural and mountainous regions of the Adirondack Mountains . 
 The NY 9N designation was originally created as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York to replace New York State Route 9W , a route assigned to an alternate routing of US 9 from Elizabethtown to Keeseville . NY 9N was extended southward to Lake George c . 1936 and to Saratoga Springs in the early 1950s , supplanting several other routes ( including New York State Route 9K ) in the process . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 9N is the longest suffixed route in the state , extending for 143 @.@ 5 miles ( 230 @.@ 9 km ) from Saratoga Springs to Keeseville . The route stretches through four counties — Saratoga , Warren , Essex and Clinton — and serves several villages and hamlets , including Lake George , Ticonderoga , and Elizabethtown . It overlaps its parent route , US 9 , in Lake George and Elizabethtown and meets Interstate 87 ( I @-@ 87 ) four times . 
 = = = Saratoga County = = = 
 NY 9N begins at the intersection of Church Street , Broadway ( US 9 , NY 29 westbound , and NY 50 ) and Lake Avenue ( NY 29 eastbound ) in the city of Saratoga Springs . Situated on the northwestern corner of the junction is the city 's post office . The route heads west , following Church Street out of the city 's center . At Bensonhurst Avenue , ownership and maintenance of NY 9N shifts from the city of Saratoga Springs to the New York State Department of Transportation . As NY 9N exits the city limits and enters the town of Greenfield , it turns to follow a more northerly routing . It meets County Route 21 ( CR 21 ) just north of the town line , where the Church Street name ends , and CR 36 ( Wilton Road ) 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) to the north in the hamlet of Greenfield Center . 
 The route continues on into the town of Corinth , where it crosses the Blue Line into Adirondack Park . Not far to the north , NY 9N enters the village of Corinth , situated on the west bank of the Hudson River . The highway follows Saratoga Avenue and Maple Streets into the village center , where it turns north and exits the village on Main Street . NY 9N follows the western edge of the river north for roughly 4 miles ( 6 km ) through the towns of Corinth and Hadley before crossing over it and passing from Saratoga County to Warren County . 
 = = = Warren County = = = 
 Across the county line in Lake Luzerne , NY 9N begins to deviate from the Hudson River , gradually curving to the northeast as it passes through the hamlets of Lake Luzerne , Fourth Lake , and Lake <unk> , all of which are named for small lakes bearing those names near the center of the communities . Just northeast of Lake <unk> , NY 9N enters the town of Lake George , where it connects to I @-@ 87 ( the Adirondack Northway ) at exit 21 and meets US 9 . Here , it joins its parent route northward toward the village of Lake George . The conjoined routes intersect the northern end of NY 9L just south of the village line before becoming Canada Street and entering the village limits upon crossing over West Brook . US 9 and NY 9N serve as the primary north – south thoroughfare through the village before splitting at the north end of the village . While US 9 continues to the north , NY 9N heads northeast along the western edge of Lake George . 
 The portion of NY 9N between Lake George village and Hague is relatively isolated , with mountains lining the western edge of the highway and the lakeshore located to the immediate east . Along this stretch , NY 9N serves numerous lakeside hamlets , the southernmost of which is Diamond Point , a community just south of the Lake George – Bolton town line . The route continues on , passing through the hamlets of Bolton and Bolton Landing , the latter of which is home to The Sagamore , a resort situated on an island in Lake George . 
 North of Bolton Landing , the route leaves the main lake and instead follows the edge of Northwest Bay , an inlet separated from Lake George itself by a large , mountainous peninsula . The bay abruptly ends about 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) to the north , at which point NY 9N curves to the east and proceeds through a pass in the mountains to rejoin the western edge of Lake George at Sabbath Day Point in the town of Hague . Here , the route turns back to the north and follows Lake George to the hamlet of Hague , where it meets the northern ( signed as the eastern ) terminus of NY 8 . NY 9N continues to serve as the lakeside roadway for another 3 miles ( 5 km ) before curving away from the lake and entering Essex County . 
 = = = Essex and Clinton counties = = = 
 Now in the town of Ticonderoga , NY 9N passes through a valley before curving to the east and entering the hamlet of Ticonderoga . For the most part , NY 9N bypasses the community as it turns north onto Wicker Street , the westernmost north – south through street in the hamlet . Northwest of the former village 's center , NY 9N meets NY 22 and NY 74 , the latter of which serves as a northerly bypass of Ticonderoga . NY 22 joins NY 9N here , following the route out of the hamlet . 
 NY 9N and NY 22 head generally northward through an area of lowlands , which eventually give way to Lake Champlain as the conjoined routes pass into the town of Crown Point . Once again , NY 9N serves as the lakeside highway as it follows the western edge of the lake through the hamlet of Crown Point to the peninsula that gives the town its name . While NY 9N and NY 22 pass by Crown Point to the west , NY 185 directly serves the peninsula and the Crown Point State Historic Site , located at its tip . 
 The routes continue northward along the lakeshore through the town of Moriah and the village of Port Henry to the town of Westport , where NY 9N and NY 22 split in the hamlet of Westport . While NY 22 continues north towards Essex , NY 9N heads west to follow a more inland routing through a series of narrow valleys . NY 9N intersects I @-@ 87 once again at exit 31 just before entering the town of Elizabethtown . The route continues west , passing over the Bouquet River and entering the hamlet of Elizabethtown , where it rejoins US 9 in the former village 's center . Unlike the overlap in Lake George , this concurrency lasts for only three blocks before the two routes split . 
 NY 9N continues to the west for 12 miles ( 19 km ) through deep , narrow valleys to Keene , where it meets NY 73 north of Keene Valley . Here , NY 9N turns north , joining NY 73 for 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) to the hamlet of Keene , located on the east branch of the Ausable River . NY 73 heads off to the west from this point toward Lake Placid ; however , NY 9N follows the river northward into the town of Jay , where it intersects the east end of NY 86 . The highway continues alongside the western bank of the river branch to the hamlet of Au Sable Forks , situated on the Essex – Clinton County line and at the point where the Ausable River 's east and west branches come together . 
 The highway enters Au Sable Forks from the south on South Main Street and becomes North Main Street upon crossing the west branch of the river and entering Clinton County and the town of Black Brook . NY 9N immediately turns east upon crossing the river , following Ausable Street out of the hamlet and along the northern edge of the Ausable River into the town of Au Sable . Here , NY 9N meets I @-@ 87 one final time at exit 34 just southwest of the village of Keeseville . NY 9N continues on into Keeseville , where it meets NY 22 once again at an intersection across the river from the village center . NY 22 and NY 9N come together once more , overlapping for 0 @.@ 25 miles ( 0 @.@ 40 km ) to an intersection with US 9 a short distance downstream from the center of Keeseville . NY 9N comes to an end here while NY 22 turns south onto US 9 . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1908 , the New York State Legislature created Route 22 , an unsigned legislative route that was initially split into two segments . The northern half of the route ran from <unk> to Rouses Point and mostly followed what is now US 9 between the two locations . From Elizabethtown to Keeseville , however , Route 22 followed a more westerly alignment via Keene , Jay , and Au Sable Forks . When the first set of posted routes in New York were assigned in 1924 , all of legislative Route 22 north of <unk> became part of NY 6 , which continued south toward Glens Falls on what is now US 9 . At the same time , the section of modern NY 9N between Saratoga Springs and Lake George was designated as part of NY 10 . The portion between Ticonderoga and Westport became part of a realigned NY 30 by the following year . 
 By 1926 , the piece of current NY 9N from Hague to Ticonderoga was designated as the easternmost leg of NY 47 , which continued west to Chestertown on modern NY 8 . In 1927 , most of NY 6 north of Round Lake was replaced by US 9 when U.S. Highways were first signed in New York . The lone exception was between Elizabethtown and Keeseville , where US 9 followed a previously unnumbered highway to the east instead . The bypassed section of NY 6 between the two locations was redesignated as NY 9W at this time . NY 9W was renumbered to NY 9N as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , eliminating the <unk> duplication between itself and US 9W . 
 NY 47 , meanwhile , became part of the new NY 8 in the 1930 renumbering , allowing the NY 47 designation to be reassigned to a previously unnumbered roadway along the western shore of Lake George between NY 8 in Hague and US 9 in Lake George village . At the same time , NY 10 was realigned south of Long Lake and replaced with NY 9K from Saratoga Springs to Lake George while the roadway connecting Ticonderoga to Westport became part of NY 22 after NY 30 was reassigned elsewhere in the state . The segment of modern NY 9N from Westport to Elizabethtown , previously unnumbered , was designated NY 195 . 
 NY 9N was extended south to Lake George c . 1936 , supplanting both NY 47 and NY 195 . From Westport to Hague , NY 9N overlapped with NY 22 ( from Westport to Ticonderoga ) and NY 8 ( from Crown Point to Hague ) . The route was extended once more in the early 1950s to its current southern terminus in Saratoga Springs , replacing NY 9K and creating a short overlap with US 9 through Lake George village in the process . The overlap with NY 8 was eliminated in the mid @-@ 1960s when that route was truncated to end at its junction with NY 9N in Hague . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = The Fires of Pompeii = 
 " The Fires of Pompeii " is the second episode of the fourth series of the British science fiction television series Doctor Who . It was broadcast on BBC One on 12 April 2008 . Set shortly before and during the eruption of Mount Vesuvius in AD 79 , this episode depicts alien time traveller the Doctor ( David Tennant ) and his new companion Donna Noble ( Catherine Tate ) on a trip to Pompeii , where they uncover an alien invasion . Their clashing worldviews present an ethical dilemma for the Doctor . 
 The episode was filmed in Rome 's Cinecittà studios , and was the first time the Doctor Who production team took its cast abroad for filming since its revival . The production of the episode was impeded by a fire near the sets several weeks before filming and by problems for the production team crossing into Europe . 
 Critics ' opinions regarding the episode were generally mixed . The premise of the episode — the moral dilemma the Doctor faces , and Donna 's insistence that he save a family from Pompeii — were widely praised . However , the episode 's writing was criticised , in particular , for the characterisation of the supporting cast : The dialogue was described as " one @-@ dimensional " and Peter Capaldi and Phil Davis 's dialogue as " whimpering and scowling " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Doctor and Donna arrive in what the Doctor believes to be Rome in the first century AD . After an earthquake and witnessing a nearby mountain begin to smoulder , he realises he has in fact materialised in Pompeii one day before the eruption of Mount Vesuvius . When he and Donna return to where the TARDIS landed , he discovers that a local merchant sold it to sculptor Lobus Caecilius . The Doctor and Donna go to Caecilius 's house to retrieve it . Unknown to them , they have been followed by a soothsayer who reports to the Sibylline Sisterhood that the <unk> man in the blue box has arrived , and the Sisters fear the prediction that his arrival brings fire and death . 
 At the house , the Doctor is surprised by Caecilius 's daughter Evelina , who seems to have extrasensory perception ( ESP ) and knows personal details about the Doctor and Donna . They are interrupted by the local augur , Lucius Petrus <unk> , who has arrived to collect a sculpture he commissioned . The Doctor is intrigued by the sculpture , which resembles a segment of an oversized circuit board . Lucius Petrus reveals that he also has powerful ESP and calls out the name of the Doctor 's home planet , Gallifrey . The Doctor wishes to learn more about the sculptures and enlists Caecilius 's son Quintus to help him break into Lucius Petrus ' house . Inside , the Doctor deduces that the circuits will make an energy converter , but he is caught by Lucius Petrus . The two escape , but Lucius Petrus beckons a large stone creature to attack and kill them . The stone creature appears in Caecilius 's house and attacks them , but Quintus saves them by dousing the creature in water and killing it . In the confusion , the Sisterhood kidnap Donna , and the Doctor sets off to rescue her . He meets the high priestess of the Sisterhood , who is revealed to be transforming into a stone creature . The Doctor discovers that they are being controlled by the Pyroviles , volcanic creatures whose home planet of <unk> was lost ( see Story arcs in Doctor Who # Medusa Cascade ) . The Doctor is attacked by the Sisterhood , but he escapes with Donna into an underground tunnel that leads into the heart of Mount Vesuvius . 
 The Doctor discovers that the volcano is being used by the Pyroviles to convert the human race and conquer Earth . The Doctor realises the volcano will not erupt if the energy converter is running , and tells Donna that the volcanic eruption is a fixed point in time and must always happen . The Doctor and Donna get into an escape pod and together press a lever which overloads the converter and triggers the eruption , killing the Pyroviles and launching the pod clear of the blast . The Doctor and Donna run for the TARDIS and the Doctor coldly leaves Caecilius and his family cowering in their home and dematerialises . Donna tearfully begs him to go back and at least save one person . The Doctor finally relents and goes back for Caecilius and his family . He leaves them on a hill overlooking the destruction , and together with Donna slips out quietly as the family mourns Pompeii . The Doctor comments to Donna that she was right - he does need someone to stop him . 
 Six months later in Rome , Caecilius 's family are shown to be successful . He is running a profitable business , Evelina has a social life in comparison to her seclusion in Pompeii , and his son Quintus is studying to become a doctor . Before Quintus leaves , he pays tribute to the family 's household gods ( in marked contrast to his disrespectful attitude towards them at the start of the episode ) , a bas relief depiction of which are in the form of the Doctor , Donna and the TARDIS . 
 = = = Cultural references = = = 
 The Doctor identifies himself as " Spartacus " , to which Donna replies " So am I. " This is a reference to a scene in the film Spartacus , where all the slaves shield Spartacus by each shouting " I 'm Spartacus ! " 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Executive producer Russell T Davies originally planned to include a serial set in Pompeii in the first new series of Doctor Who , after seeing the documentary Pompeii : The Last Day . That episode 's position was given to " Boom Town " and the idea was shelved for three years . 
 The episode was written by James Moran , who previously wrote the film Severance and the Torchwood episode " Sleeper " ; Moran was requested to write the episode as a consequence of the latter . Moran had difficulty writing the episode , and had to rewrite the Doctor 's opening line over twenty times . The Pyrovile were also edited during writing : they were previously called <unk> and <unk> . 
 Moran worked closely with Davies because of the constraints imposed by filming . Davies encouraged Moran to insert linguistic jokes similar to those in the comic book series Asterix , such as Lucius Petrus <unk> ( " Lucius Stone Right Arm " ) , TK Maxximus , and Spartacus ; the use of the phrase " I 'm Spartacus ! " refers to the 1960 film . Moran based the ancillary characters of Metella ( Tracey Childs ) and Quintus from Caecilius 's family in the Cambridge Latin Course ; the character of Evelina was the only member of the family created by Moran . At the end of Book I of the Cambridge Latin Course , Caecilius and Metella perish in Pompeii on the day of the eruption , but Quintus survives . This episode creates an alternate ending to their story , where they are all rescued by the Doctor and move to Rome . The line " You must excuse my friend , she 's from Barcelona " was a reference to an apologetic catchphrase from Fawlty Towers , attributed by the production team to Sybil Fawlty ( and forming a meta @-@ pun on the Sibylline Sisterhood ) , but also harks back to previous mentions of Barcelona by the ninth and tenth Doctors . 
 The episode was heavily based on a moral question posed to the Doctor by Donna : whether to warn the population of Pompeii , or to recuse themselves from the situation . Moran also had to deal with the intensity and sensitivity required when writing about the eruption . Davies and Moran both appreciated Catherine Tate 's performance , and cited Donna 's ability to humanise the Doctor and help him deal with " lose @-@ lose situations " as the reason the Doctor travels with companions . 
 The series ' story arc was hinted at by the Doctor 's invocation of the Shadow Proclamation , an intergalactic code previously invoked in " Rose " , " The Christmas Invasion " , " Fear Her " and " Partners in Crime " , and referencing the " Medusa Cascade " , which executive producer Russell T Davies stated in Doctor Who Magazine would " come back to haunt us " later in the series . Moran also added continuity links independent of the story arc : as a " fun continuity thing " , the script includes a scene in which the Doctor admits partial responsibility for the Great Fire of Rome , as depicted at the end of the 1965 serial The Romans ; and the sale of the TARDIS as modern art refers to the 1979 serial City of Death , which includes a scene in which the TARDIS is appraised in a similar fashion . Additionally , Lucius Petrus , while under prophetic influence , informs Donna that " there is something on your back " — a foreshadowing of the story development in the season 's later episode " Turn Left " . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The episode was filmed at the Cinecittà studios in Rome in September 2007 . The filming reused some of the sets from the show Rome . Other locations suggested were in Malta and Wales , but the size of the project , the biggest since the show 's revival , resulted in production taking place in Italy . This was the first time the majority of an episode was filmed abroad and the first time the cast had filmed abroad since 1996 ; the television movie was filmed in Vancouver and pick @-@ up shots had previously been made in New York City for " Daleks in Manhattan " . Cinecittà had accepted the BBC 's request in order to promote the studios , despite the show 's small budget . 
 Filming an episode abroad had been suggested in 2004 , but the episode was the first such occasion . Planning began in April 2007 , before Moran had written the script , and continued until the production team travelled to Italy . Several weeks before filming started , a fire disrupted the production . Moving to Rome caused problems for the production team : the equipment truck was delayed for several hours at the Swiss border ; the special effects team were delayed for twenty @-@ four hours at Customs in Calais . The production team only had 48 hours to film on location . The aftermath of the eruption was filmed on the same night as the location shots . To create the falling ash , the special effects team used a large mass of cork , with a " constant supply of debris raining down " . Scenes set at the Temple of Sibyl were filmed at the Temple of Peace , Cardiff on 18 and 19 September 2007 . 
 = = = Cast notes = = = 
 Two of the cast members of " The Fires of Pompeii " were later cast in starring roles for Doctor Who . Karen Gillan returned in the fifth series to play Amy Pond , full @-@ time companion of Matt Smith 's Eleventh Doctor . Casting director Andy Pryor suggested her to new executive producer Steven Moffat based on her performance in this episode as one of the soothsayers . 
 Peter Capaldi was cast as the Twelfth Doctor in 2013 , and made his first appearance in the 2013 Christmas special " The Time of the Doctor " ( with an uncredited cameo appearance in the anniversary special " The Day of the Doctor " ) Capaldi also played John Frobisher throughout Children of Earth , the third series in the Doctor Who spin @-@ off Torchwood . 
 Tracey Childs and Phil Davis have also performed on Doctor Who audio productions for Big Finish . 
 = = Broadcast = = 
 Overnight figures estimated the episode was watched by 8 @.@ 1 million viewers , with a peak of 8 @.@ 5 million viewers . The consolidated figure was 9 @.@ 04 million . The episode was the second most watched programme on 12 April ; Britain 's Got Talent was viewed by 9 @.@ 44 million people . The episode was the tenth most @-@ watched programme of the week and received an Appreciation Index score of 87 ( considered Excellent ) . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The episode received generally mixed reviews . Ian Hyland , writing for News of the World , said that Tate " was almost bearable this week " . He also complimented the " TK Maxximus " joke . He was ambivalent to Donna 's reaction to the Doctor leaving Caecilius 's family to die : he criticised her acting , comparing her to The Catherine Tate Show character <unk> " Nan " Taylor , but said " top again if that was intentional " . He closed saying " this week was a hundred times better than that lame opening episode . <unk> aliens , stronger guest stars and a proper adult @-@ friendly storyline involving <unk> and soothsayers . " 
 Scott Matthewman of The Stage said that Donna 's insistence to change the past " formed the emotional backbone of this episode , producing some truly heartbreaking performances " . He liked the joke about the TARDIS 's translating the Doctor 's and Donna 's Latin phrases to Celtic , saying it was " subtly played throughout the episode [ ... ] in a way that builds the joke without trampling it into the ground " . His favourite part was Donna 's attempts to divert the population of Pompeii away from the beach ; the scene was " the emotional highpoint of a series of heart rending scenes " . However , he criticised Moran 's writing , specifically , Quintus 's and Metella 's dialogue , saying the former " remained pretty much one @-@ dimensional throughout " . Alan Stanley Blair of SyFy Portal also gave a positive review . He was highly appreciative of Tate , saying " [ she ] moved even further away from her " Runaway " character that initially joined the show . " The phrase " TK Maxximus " and the Doctor 's use of a water pistol to subdue the Pyrovile were complimented , as were the special effects used to animate the Pyrovile . However , he disapproved of the use of Cockney colloquialisms in the episode , most notably the <unk> ( Phil Cornwell ) saying " lovely <unk> " . 
 Ben Rawson @-@ Jones of Digital Spy gave the episode three stars out of five . His opening said " Fantastic effects and a well developed moral dilemma bolster ' The Fires Of Pompeii ' , although the episode fails to erupt . " Rawson @-@ Jones felt that Moran 's script took " too long to actively engage the viewer and tap into the compelling premise of the time travellers arriving in the doomed city shortly before ' volcano day ' . " and that " the subplots are <unk> muddled for the majority of the narrative . " He also complained about the characterisation of the supporting cast , saying that " Peter Capaldi and Phil Davis [ deserved ] better " . However , he said the moral dilemma the Doctor faced was " compelling " and the Doctor 's use of the water pistol " adds a pleasing sense of fun to counterbalance the impending stench of death and harks nicely back to the Tom Baker era of the show . " Overall , he appreciated the premise of the episode , but thought the episode " deserved better writing " . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " The Fires of Pompeii " reviews at The Doctor Who Ratings Guide 
 = Zennor Head = 
 Zennor Head / <unk> <unk> / is a 750 @-@ metre ( 2 @,@ 460 ft ) long promontory on the Cornish coast of England , between Pendour Cove and Porthzennor Cove . Facing the Atlantic Ocean , it lies 1 kilometre north @-@ west of the village of Zennor and 1 @.@ 6 kilometres east of the next promontory , Gurnard 's Head . The granite ( Killas ) cliffs rise over 200 feet ( 60 m ) from the sea and the highest point of the headland is 314 feet ( 96 m ) above sea level , with an Ordnance Survey triangulation station . Zennor Head is on the South West Coast Path , which follows the cliff edge closely , skirting the entire perimeter of the headland . The promontory is part of the Penwith Heritage Coast , and is the largest coastal feature in the United Kingdom that begins with the letter " Z " . It gets its name from a local saint , Senara . Zennor Head was mined for copper and tin in the Victorian Era . There is no longer any residential or commercial occupancy on the headland , but it is occupied by a variety of coastal animals and plants , such as kestrels and gorse . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The name " Zennor Head " originates from the name of a local saint , Senara . According to local legend , Senara was thrown off a headland in Brittany in a barrel after being falsely accused of adultery by her husband and washed up on the Cornish coast , founding Zennor and giving her name to the eponymous village ( and subsequently Zennor Head , Zennor Quoit and Porthzennor Cove ) , before continuing to Ireland . The " s " changed to a " z " , an occurrence common in the West Country but rare elsewhere , and as such is the largest coastal feature in the United Kingdom to begin with the letter " Z " . 
 = = History = = 
 The headland is bordered by Cornish granite hedges , and the farming system dates from about 4000 BC , the time of the Bronze Age in Cornwall . The surrounding area and village of Zennor has been continually occupied for over 4 @,@ 000 years . Zennor Head was mined extensively for copper and tin in the 19th century , and drainage adits remain visible on the eastern side . 
 The promontory was donated to the National Trust in December 1953 . The Southwest Coast Path was created in 1978 , and runs along the top of Zennor Head as part of its 630 miles ( 1 @,@ 010 km ) , following the edge of the cliffs closely . Zennor in Darkness , the 1994 <unk> Prize @-@ winning novel by Helen Dunmore , was partly set around Zennor Head . In 2009 the headland suffered flooding which affected the cliff @-@ top footpath . The promontory has been designated as part of the Penwith Heritage Coast . 
 = = Geography and geology = = 
 Zennor Head is located on the north coast of Cornwall , England , facing the Atlantic Ocean . A headland extending some 750 metres ( 2 @,@ 460 ft ) , it is surrounded by steep cliffs plunging into the sea below . It is west of the town of St Ives , and north @-@ east of the town of Penzance . The nearest human settlement is the village of Zennor , and the headland is flanked by two coves , Pendour and Porthzennor . The nearest headland is Gurnard 's Head , 1 @.@ 6 kilometres to the west . Access is from the South West Coast Path , or the <unk> road ( West Cornwall coast road ) . There is a deep inlet known as Horseback <unk> on the western side , where seabirds nest . The headland is topped by an Ordnance Survey " Trig Point " . The Killas strata , which is exposed over the majority of Zennor Head , is a sedimentary rock formation laid down in the Devonian period , between approximately 415 and 375 million years ago ( <unk> ) . Zennor Head is on the surface boundary of the so @-@ called " Land 's End Granite " , part of the <unk> batholith which dates from 279 to 274 <unk> . However , the intrusion of the granite into the Killas strata altered it <unk> into a shale @-@ type rock . 
 = = Fauna and Flora = = 
 Zennor Head is home to a variety of wildlife , including the re @-@ introduced Cornish choughs ( Pyrrhocorax pyrrhocorax pyrrhocorax ) . Grey seals ( Halichoerus grypus ) have been sighted off the coast . Many seabirds nest on the cliffs , especially around Horseback <unk> , including herring gulls ( Larus argentatus ) and fulmars ( <unk> glacialis ) . Kestrels ( Falco tinnunculus ) hunt inland of the shoreline . 
 The headland is primarily covered with grass , as well as heather ( Calluna vulgaris ) , bracken ( Pteridium aquilinum ) , thyme ( Thymus <unk> ) and western gorse ( Ulex gallii ) . In 1962 , specimens of the comparatively rare western clover ( Trifolium occidentale ) were found on Zennor Head . The lichen <unk> <unk> has also been found high on the acid schist cliffs on the north- , seaward @-@ side of the headland . The parasitic plant <unk> ( <unk> x . ) is also found amongst the other plants . There are also typical coastal flowering plants such as kidney vetch ( <unk> <unk> ) , sea campion ( Silene uniflora ) , and thrift ( Armeria maritima ) . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Emily Ratajkowski = 
 Emily O 'Hara Ratajkowski ( / <unk> / ; born June 7 , 1991 ) is an American model and actress . Born to American parents in London and raised primarily in California , she rose to prominence in 2013 after appearing in the music video for Robin Thicke 's " Blurred Lines " , which became the number one song of the year in several countries and attracted controversy over its purported sexist content . 
 Ratajkowski 's modeling career has progressed from retail ad work to art house erotica and high fashion . She appeared on the cover of the March 2012 issue of the erotic magazine treats ! , which led to her being asked to appear in two music videos – " Blurred Lines " and Maroon 5 's " Love Somebody " . She appeared in the 2014 and 2015 Sports Illustrated swimsuit issues . Ratajkowski made her professional runway modeling debut for Marc Jacobs at New York Fashion Week in 2015 and has since walked on the Paris Fashion Week runway for Miu Miu . She appeared in a Buick Super Bowl commercial during Super Bowl 50 . 
 Ratajkowski began acting as a child in the San Diego area before she gained a recurring role on iCarly and later roles in major films . Her feature film debut was as the mistress of Ben Affleck 's character in the 2014 film Gone Girl . Ratajkowski 's 2015 roles included the films Entourage and We Are Your Friends ( her first leading role ) as well as the miniseries The Spoils Before Dying . 
 Ratajkowski is an advocate for women 's health issues as a spokesperson for Planned Parenthood and supports the right of women to express their sexuality . Her claim to being a feminist has been both supported and disputed . She is known for her sex appeal and fashion sense . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Ratajkowski was born in Westminster , London , the only child of Kathleen Balgley and John David " J. D. " Ratajkowski , both American . Balgley , a professor of English , was teaching under the Fulbright Program , when she met J. D. , a painter and art teacher , while they were both teaching at San Dieguito Academy . At the time of their daughter 's birth , they were aged 39 and 45 , respectively , and unmarried . Ratajkowski describes her mother as a " feminist and intellectual " . The family lived in West Kensington and Bloomsbury before they settled in the United States in San Diego , California , when Ratajkowski was five . She was raised primarily in nearby Encinitas in a small house near the ocean . Balgley formerly taught at California Polytechnic State University . 
 Ratajkowski is of Polish , Irish , and Polish Jewish descent . Her father was raised Catholic , while her mother was raised Jewish . Ratajkowski describes her heritage as " Polish Israeli " . She lived in , and traveled to , many parts of Europe as a youth , including long periods in the Irish town of Bantry and on the Spanish island of Mallorca . She spent her young adult summers in Ireland until she became a full @-@ time model . 
 Before Ratajkowski left London at the age of five , she was obsessed with theater . She began acting as a child , staging shows for her family . Ratajkowski 's first formal role was as Elsa in an adaptation of The Little Match Girl at the North Coast Repertory Theatre School in Solana Beach , California . Later , in 2004 , she played Harriet in the interactive Lyceum Theatre production of Harriet Potter and the Throne of <unk> . Ratajkowski grew up without television ; she tried soccer , acting , and ballet before modeling . 
 Ratajkowski visited nude beaches in Europe with her family during her youth . Exposure to the nude female figure in photography and art during her formative years , including the work of her father , as well as the photography of Helmut Newton and Herb Ritts , prepared Ratajkowski for nude work . She is comfortable with the naked body , and states , " We have this culture of men , especially , watching pornography , but then [ they are ] offended by a classic nude portrait or photograph , and I 've never felt that way . " Ratajkowski was also influenced by third @-@ wave feminism and works such as The Beauty Myth and <unk> by Naomi Wolf . She was a physically mature young teenager who endured pressure to limit expressing her sexuality and how she presented herself . 
 = = Career = = 
 With encouragement from an acting coach , Ratajkowski met and signed with a talent agent who contacted Ford Models . That same day , she signed with Ford at age 14 and went on to do teen print catalog modeling for Kohl 's and Nordstrom . At 15 , Ratajkowski began auditioning for Disney and iCarly roles , but as she pursued acting she was often cast as a " bitchy girl " , cheerleader , or other limited role . She attended San Dieguito Academy high school in San Diego , while modeling and acting in Los Angeles . After two nondescript movie roles , she appeared as Gibby 's girlfriend , Tasha , in two episodes of the third season of Nickelodeon 's iCarly ( 2009 – 2010 ) . Her manager discouraged her from pursuing many acting engagements until she could be more selective . 
 Ratajkowski attended the University of California , Los Angeles ( UCLA ) for one year in 2009 , then decided to model full @-@ time . She found the fine art education at the UCLA School of the Arts and Architecture arbitrary and in conflict with her artistic concepts . She did not enjoy socializing with fellow students . 
 After campaigns and editorials with photographer Tony Duran , Ratajkowski began shooting more fashion editorials and posed for several early issues of the artistic erotica magazine treats ! , including the cover of its third issue , in March 2012 . She credits that cover for bringing her the two unsolicited , high @-@ profile , music video roles . Ratajkowski later filmed commercials for Nikon and Carl 's Jr . , including multiple versions of a 2012 Carl 's Jr. commercial with Sara Jean Underwood . She also did nude and clothed art magazine modeling , as well as work for Frederick 's of Hollywood ; a 2012 holiday video and a 2011 Valentine 's video in which Ratajkowski appeared for the company are among the most popular videos on the company 's YouTube channel . Ratajkowski worked with photographer Tony Kelly for the March 2013 GQ Turkey cover . 
 = = = Music video performances = = = 
 Ratajkowski appeared in Robin Thicke , T.I. , and Pharrell Williams 's 2013 video , " Blurred Lines " . Previously , Ratajkowski had been cast in two other music videos : " Fast Car " by Taio Cruz , which was released on November 5 , 2012 , and Maroon 5 's " Love Somebody " , which was released two months after " Blurred Lines " . 
 " Love Somebody " , shot on January 13 , and " Blurred Lines " were both produced in 2013 . The video for " Love Somebody " was released on May 21 , 2013 . Directed by Rich Lee , it shows bare @-@ chested Adam Levine using inverse green screen technology to rub paint onto Ratajkowski with his hands . As they touch , they reveal each other . 
 Thicke had seen Ratajkowski 's treats ! cover that The New York Times 's Bee Shapiro described as " an artfully composed black @-@ and @-@ white photograph of Ms. Ratajkowski sitting completely nude with her knees tucked to her chest " and convinced director Diane Martel to cast her in the " Blurred Lines " music video . Martel felt that " she looked smart and stunningly beautiful " in the photo . Ratajkowski initially declined the role , fearing being classified as a music video model , but Martel persuaded her . The video was released on March 20 , 2013 . On March 28 , Thicke posted an explicit version , with a topless Ratajkowski . 
 " Blurred Lines " was controversial : its video was called sexist for its perceived degradation of women , and some felt its lyrics promoted rape . Others disagreed , asserting that the lyrics supported female power and sexual freedom . Martel defended Ratajkowski 's performance , saying : " it 's very , very funny and subtly ridiculing . " Ratajkowski did not think of the video as sexist and claimed that the producers , through the use of humor and sarcasm , " took something that on paper sounded really sexist and misogynistic and made it more interesting " . She said that the song " gave me an opportunity to say the things that I felt about feminism today and about women in general in pop culture . " Ratajkowski did not feel objectified and enjoyed performing in a sexual manner : the attention given to the nudity in the video , she said , shows that America has not advanced as far as it should have , and , she believes , society represses sexuality , which is bad for both sexes . 
 " Blurred Lines " , and Ratajkowski 's associated video performance , was prominent beyond the sociopolitical controversies . The song became the number one song of 2013 on music charts in many countries , including Canada , Ireland , the Netherlands , New Zealand , and the United Kingdom . Although second on the year @-@ end US Billboard Hot 100 chart , the song 's twelve consecutive weeks at number one made it the longest @-@ running number one song of the decade until " Uptown Funk " spent fourteen consecutive weeks at number one in 2015 . The song also remained in the news due to a copyright infringement lawsuit and appeal . 
 = = = Breakthrough = = = 
 The " Blurred Lines " video garnered Ratajkowski notoriety , especially as a sex symbol . In October 2013 , Esquire magazine named Ratajkowski " Woman of the Year " , over online fan vote finalist Jennifer Lawrence . That December , Rolling Stone magazine listed her among its twenty hottest sex symbols . In February 2014 , Sports Illustrated magazine named Ratajkowski as one of twelve 50th anniversary swimsuit issue rookies . In April , FHM ranked her the fourth sexiest woman in the world . Maxim magazine included Ratajkowski at number 62 on its 2014 Hot 100 list . AskMen ranked her the third most desirable woman of 2014 . 
 Ratajkowski was on the July 2013 cover of CR Fashion Book , which included erotic scenes with <unk> Kloss and male models , photographed by Bruce Weber . On June 24 , she appeared topless in the July 2014 American GQ cover story , photographed by Michael Thompson . A controversy ensued at retailer Lands ' End , some of whose customers received the issue for free . Some customers objected to the racy images , forcing Lands ' End CEO Edgar Huber to apologize . 
 Ratajkowski leveraged her sudden prominence into supporting roles in major films . Ratajkowski played Andie Hardy , the mistress of Ben Affleck 's character , in David Fincher 's 2014 adaptation of Gillian Flynn 's novel Gone Girl . Affleck encouraged Fincher to consider Ratajkowski after seeing the " Blurred Lines " video . U @-@ T San Diego described Ratajkowski 's performance as " nuanced " , while Andrew O 'Hehir of Salon and Wesley Morris of Grantland wrote that her small role as a " duplicitous and manipulative former student " was critical . Reflecting on the performance in 2016 , Wolf described Ratajkowski 's portrayal as sympathetic and compassionate . 
 Days after Gone Girl 's September 26 , 2014 , New York Film Festival premiere , Ratajkowski became the cover model for the November 2014 issue of Cosmopolitan . On October 30 , 2014 , she appeared with Taylor Kitsch in the Call of Duty : Advanced Warfare live @-@ action trailer . Ratajkowski appeared on the February 2015 FHM cover , but she tweeted that her picture was used without her consent . FHM responded that " we liked the pictures so much we stuck one on our front cover " . 
 Ratajkowski co @-@ starred in the 2015 film Entourage as a fictionalized version of herself , playing the love interest of Adrian Grenier 's character , Vincent Chase . Her performance received critical commentary ranging from " less than compelling " , by the The Hollywood Reporter 's Sheri Linden , to " uncanny realism " , by The Philadelphia Inquirer 's Steven Rea . Grantland 's Morris described her role and performance with scathing sarcasm . She was also cast in the 2015 miniseries The Spoils Before Dying as Agent Day , appearing late in the series . Her performance was favorably reviewed by Emily L. Stephens of The A.V. Club , while other critics commented that she was part of a solid supporting cast . 
 Ratajkowski <unk> her first leading role , opposite Zac Efron , in We Are Your Friends , a musical drama released in August 2015 , and was part of the film 's promotional tour to Europe and North America . Starting with the August 11 London premiere , this tour marked her ascension as a style icon as she earned multiple best dressed citations from various sources . She played Stanford University dropout Sophie , the love interest of Efron 's character and girlfriend / personal assistant of Wes Bentley 's character . Her performance received mixed reviews . Alonso Duralde of TheWrap described the role as thin , as did Ty Burr of The Boston Globe . Burr said that Ratajkowski 's performance was " <unk> dull " , while Nell Minow of Beliefnet stated that she " does more posing than acting " . Kyle Smith of the New York Post described her performance as " quietly entrancing " , and Jordan Hoffman of the Daily News described Ratajkowski 's performance as " stunning and sweet " . Robbie Collin of The Daily Telegraph and Grantland 's Morris noted Ratajkowski 's rhythmic dancing skills and sex appeal , as previously seen in " Blurred Lines " . 
 Around the time of the release of We Are Your Friends , Ratajkowski appeared on the covers of Grazia France , British GQ , harper by Harper 's Bazaar , InStyle UK , and InStyle Australia , as well as a role as a 2015 MTV Video Music Awards presenter . The British GQ cover story was photographed by Mario Testino , who produced a short film featuring Ratajkowski for the magazine 's website . Soon after , on September 17 , 2015 , she made her runway debut for Marc Jacobs at the spring / summer 2016 New York Fashion Week finale . This appearance contributed to her number one listing among Vogue 's 12 Breakout Beauty Stars of 2015 . For fall / winter 2016 fashions , Ratajkowski walked the Paris Fashion Week runway for Miu Miu on March 9 , 2016 . She has expressed the desire to break barriers for shorter and more curvaceous models , commenting : " You don ’ t have to be 5 ' 9 " and an A @-@ cup to be a successful model . " 
 A Buick Super Bowl ad for its Cascada convertible during Super Bowl 50 on February 7 , 2016 , featured Ratajkowski and Odell Beckham , Jr . The ad , in which she made a wedding bouquet catch reminiscent of Beckham 's famous catch from 2014 , received average ratings , according to USA Today 's <unk> . The ad was filmed with a stunt double making the catch . Los Angeles @-@ based jewelry designer Jacquie <unk> featured Ratajkowski in a spring 2016 campaign wearing almost nothing but body chains , rings , bracelets , pendants , and <unk> . In May , Ratajkowski appeared in the Russian @-@ language music video " Inseparable " ( sometimes translated as " Indivisible " ) with Russian entertainer Dima Bilan as a photographer and Ratajkowski as his muse . 
 As of June 2016 , Ratajkowski has a variety of upcoming roles . She will play Jessica Weintraub , the female lead opposite Spencer <unk> in the film Cruise , which is written and directed by Robert Siegel . Ratajkowski was hired as part of the cast of the film In Darkness , alongside Natalie Dormer , Ed <unk> , and Stacy Martin . She will also be involved in Joe Swanberg 's Netflix series , Easy . In June 2016 , she stated she was filming for Project Runway . Ratajkowski was one of five models to appear on the August 2016 Vogue Germany alternate covers along with Stella Maxwell , <unk> <unk> , Lily Aldridge and Rosie Huntington @-@ Whiteley . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In February 2014 , Ratajkowski broke up with her boyfriend Andrew Dryden , a creative director and menswear buyer . In September 2014 , Ratajkowski was a victim in a female celebrity hacking and internet posting wave of stolen nude iCloud photographs . In December 2014 , Us Weekly confirmed she had begun dating musician Jeff <unk> . 
 Ratajkowski has raised funds , done public service announcements , and committed to a short film promoting reproductive and sexual health for Planned Parenthood ( PPFA ) . She describes PPFA as her main charity because of its role in women 's health . Ratajkowski 's involvement has drawn ire from right to life advocates such as the National Right to Life Committee . 
 Ratajkowski says that she enjoys freedom of sexual expression " while still being a feminist " , and is outspoken about using her celebrity to support the empowerment of women and women 's sexuality . Amanda Hess of Slate questioned whether she is a feminist or an opportunist exploiting feminism . In The New York Times , Ratajkowski expressed her frustration that " society somehow feels that women can 't manage to be political , feminist and a sex symbol " . She has called society 's reaction to the naked female form " weird " . As a woman who enjoys expressions of the body ranging from ballet to pornography , Ratajkowski feels that she can be nude in her professional work and also support equality for women . British GQ 's Charlie Burton stated that she is a feminist with more to say than others . He said that her message is one of sexual empowerment , because sex should not feel like a service and should be beneficial to all involved parties . Wolf said Ratajkowski is a modern feminist in a Harper 's Bazaar interview of Ratajkowski , in which Ratajkowski defended her form of feminism . 
 On the eve of the February 2016 New Hampshire Democratic primary , Ratajkowski spoke at a Bernie Sanders rally in New Hampshire to endorse his campaign . One of the main points of her speech , and her social media activity surrounding it , was to counter Gloria Steinem 's statement that young female Sanders supporters were involved in the campaign ( rather than supporting fellow female Hillary Clinton ) to meet potential male romantic partners . 
 = = Media image = = 
 Ratajkowski has been frequently named in lists and polls that rank beauty or fashion in the media . She was ranked in Maxim 's Hot 100 list in both 2014 ( No. 62 ) and 2015 ( No. 2 ) . AskMen ranked her among its most desirable women of 2014 ( No. 3 ) and 2016 ( No. 14 ) ; while FHM ranked her among the sexiest in 2014 ( No. 4 ) , and 2015 ( No. 18 ) . She is also praised for her fashion sense : Ratajkowski made Vogue Italia 's Best Dressed List of 2015 , and Harper 's Bazaar placed her atop its best dressed list at the February 2016 New York Fashion Week . 
 Ratajkowski 's acting career had a slow start . After a minor acting role in Gone Girl , she played herself in Entourage . In their respective reviews of We Are Your Friends , Richard Roeper and Wesley Morris said that Ratajkowski , again playing the attractive object of affection , again failed to demonstrate acting prowess . 
 Ratajkowski described the pressure that she endured as a youth around her sexuality and her thoughts on female sexual empowerment , in Lena Dunham 's Lenny Letter newsletter on February 16 , 2016 . Elle magazine , Esquire magazine , and Harper 's Bazaar republished her letter . Critics , including Glamour magazine 's Hayley Spencer , The Huffington Post 's <unk> Hatch , and Rachael Moon of the Daily Mirror , praised it . According to Cosmopolitan magazine 's Nikki <unk> and Georgia Simmonds of Marie Claire , Ratajkowski finds self @-@ empowerment in defining and owning the expression of her sexuality and body . Salon 's Erin Coulehan described the essay 's identification of a societal catch @-@ 22 , in which showcasing female sexuality that may " offend , excite , or create envy " leads to criticism and body shaming . InStyle 's Isabella Silvers concurred that " female sexuality isn 't always for the benefit of someone else " . Charlotte Gill of The Independent admitted that she was in the minority in finding the letter " rambling " and " dull " . 
 Ratajkowski defended Kim Kardashian from criticism when Kardashian posted a controversial naked selfie on Instagram in March , saying that women have the right to " express their sexuality and share their bodies however they choose " . Then , Kardashian and Ratajkowski jointly advocated via social media for female sexual empowerment and against body shaming ; nearly one million social media followers responded positively , and prominent global media outlets took notice . 
 Following her letter and social media statement , the controversy about her feminism heightened . Piers Morgan stated that Ratajkowski 's form of feminism was a misguided affront to true feminism , labeling it pseudo @-@ feminist gibberish . After Morgan wrote that " feminism as it was intended is dead " , the Chicago Tribune 's Heidi Stevens , as well as The Daily Telegraph 's Helen Pankhurst ( Emmeline Pankhurst 's great @-@ granddaughter ) said that Ratajkowski neither killed nor bolstered feminism . Women 's Wear Daily 's Taylor Harris questioned the impact of Ratajkowski 's feminism . The Independent 's Gill questioned Ratajkowski 's feminism , saying that her professional activities " continued to advocate industries that treat us as pieces of meat " . Heather Saul of The Independent wrote in support of Ratajkowski in an article subtitled " Ratajkowski is becoming an important feminist voice in the debate over female censorship and sexuality " . New York 's Allie Jones called Ratajkowski " the best feminist celeb " . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = = Music videos = = = 
 = = Magazine cover history = = 
 = Spafford Farm massacre = 
 The Spafford Farm massacre , also referred to as the Wayne massacre , was an attack upon U.S. militia and civilians that occurred as part of the Black Hawk War near present @-@ day South Wayne , Wisconsin . Spafford Farm was settled in 1830 by Omri Spafford and his partner Francis Spencer . 
 Before the war started they made numerous improvements to the parcel of land . On June 14 , 1832 five men were attacked by a Kickapoo war party , three whites were killed instantly , including Spafford . In total at least one Native and four white settlers were killed in the action . Two men managed to escape , though one was fooled into thinking Fort Hamilton had been overtaken by a group of friendly Menominee for days before he finally sought refuge there . The incident at Spafford Farm eventually led to the Battle of Horseshoe Bend ( also known as the Battle of Pecatonica ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 As a consequence of an 1804 treaty between the Governor of Indiana Territory and a group of Sauk and Fox leaders regarding land settlement , in 1828 the Sauk and Fox tribes vacated their lands in Illinois and moved west of the Mississippi River . However , Sauk Black Hawk and others disputed the treaty , claiming that the full tribal councils had not been consulted , nor did those representing the tribes have authorization to cede land . Angered by the loss of his birthplace , Black Hawk led a number of incursions across the Mississippi River beginning in 1830 . Each time , he was persuaded without bloodshed to return west . In April 1832 , encouraged by promises of alliance with other tribes and the British , he again moved his so @-@ called " British Band " of around 1 @,@ 000 warriors and civilians into Illinois . Finding no allies , he attempted to return to Iowa , but events overtook him and led to the Battle of Stillman 's Run . A number of other engagements followed , and the state militias of Wisconsin and Illinois were mobilized to hunt down Black Hawk 's band . The ensuing conflict became known as the Black Hawk War . On May 19 , a group of militia volunteers were ambushed at Buffalo Grove and the same day as the raid at Plum River , May 21 , a more famous war event , the Indian Creek massacre , occurred . The Indian Creek event , believed to mostly a peripheral event to the Black Hawk War was followed on by more violence preceding the attack at Spafford Farm . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 The Spafford Farm massacre , also known as the Wayne massacre , occurred in LaFayette County , Wisconsin , near present @-@ day South Wayne , Wisconsin during the course of the Black Hawk War . The first land claim in Lafayette County was made in tandem by Omri Spafford and Francis Spencer in 1830 . The location that become known as Spafford Farm , was located near the junction of the Spafford 's Branch and the Pecatonica River . The pair made many improvements on the land prior to the onset of the war in 1832 . Present at Spafford Farm the day of the massacre besides Spafford was Spencer , Bennett Million , Abraham Searles , James <unk> , and an Englishman identified only by the moniker " John Bull " , but probably being John Compton . 
 = = Massacre = = 
 On June 14 , 1832 the six men were sent from Fort Hamilton to work on Spafford Farm . The group had just commenced working when they were attacked by a band of Kickapoo warriors . The warriors had concealed themselves in some trees near the farmstead and opened fire in a surprise attack . The men dropped their tools and broke for the Pecatonica River , reaching the river and making a hasty crossing . Having crossed the river , four of the men were shot as they clambered up the opposite bank . 
 Spafford , Searles and <unk> were killed instantly in the melee ; also killed was " Bull " ( probably John Compton ) . Spencer and 17 @-@ year @-@ old Million were able to escape the attackers . Million escaped by jumping into the Pecatonica River , hiding in brush and making his way to Fort Hamilton . Spencer 's escape was a longer process . He did not jump into the river , but hid along the banks . One of the attackers pursued him but Spencer killed the warrior before he could be overtaken . He wandered the woods for several days before reaching Fort Hamilton . 
 Spencer reached Fort Hamilton around the same time that Colonel William S. Hamilton arrived with a large group of Menominee who had volunteered against the Sauk and Fox . Afraid that the fort had also been attacked , Spencer retreated back into the woods . He avoided the fort for between six and nine days , when hunger finally drove him into the open where he realized his mistake . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Word of the attack at Spafford 's farm spread quickly to Fort Defiance , about five miles southeast of Mineral Point . A small volunteer force of 13 men was assembled at Fort Defiance and they set off to hunt down the band of Native Americans responsible for the massacre . The group reached Fort Hamilton at around midnight on June 15 . On the morning of June 15 survivor , Bennett Million guided the militia volunteers back to the site of the massacre ; one of the volunteers was Alexander Higgenbotham , a survivor of the St. Vrain massacre . The bodies of the dead were badly mutilated and Spafford 's corpse was headless ; his head was found scalped and tossed into the grass along the river bank . The volunteers buried the mangled bodies of the fallen and searched in vain for Spencer , whom they also assumed dead . 
 Colonel Henry Dodge was at Gratiot 's Grove when the war descended upon Spafford Farm , having just sent his volunteers to their forts to resupply and recuperate . Shortly after he arrived back at his home fort , he received word of the Aubrey murder at Fort Blue Mounds and the incident at Spafford Farm . Dodge ordered militia detachments from Fort Defiance , Fort Jackson , and Fort Hamilton to the scene of the massacre . 
 After the massacre , General Henry Atkinson was informed that Dodge was to take over General Alexander Posey 's brigade at Fort Hamilton . While Dodge was on his way to visit the brigade , he heard a rifle shot from a group of Native Americans . Dodge quickly returned to his command post and gathered as many men as he could to pursue the enemy . With Dodge in quick pursuit , a group of approximately 25 Native warriors criss @-@ crossed the Pecatonica River until , finding flight hopeless , they prepared to make a stand at the Battle of Pecatonica . 
 = I Miss You ( Miley Cyrus song ) = 
 " I Miss You " is a song by American recording artist , Miley Cyrus . It was co @-@ written by Cyrus ( credited under her birth name Destiny Hope Cyrus ) , Brian Green , Wendy Foy Green , and produced by Brian Green . " I Miss You " is a homage to Cyrus ' late grandfather , Ron Cyrus , who died in February 28 , 2006 . He was diagnosed with mesothelioma , and , seeing her grandfather nearing death , Cyrus wanted to write him a song prior to his decease . It was released to Radio Disney mid @-@ year 2007 as promotion for the dual disc Hannah Montana 2 : Meet Miley Cyrus . The song is a ballad with rock and country influences . 
 The song received generally positive reviews from music critics ; some commented on how it deviated from her usual material at the time and how effective the message was . " I Miss You " appeared on two United States charts : it peaked at number nine on Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles , an extension of the Billboard Hot 100 chart , and at number ninety @-@ two on the defunct Pop 100 . Cyrus performed the song on acoustic guitar as an encore at several stops on her first headlining concert tour , the Best of Both Worlds Tour ( 2007 – 08 ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 The singer had a very close relationship with her paternal grandfather , Ron Cyrus , a Democratic legislator in the state of Kentucky and public servant , whom she referred to as " Pappy " . He was diagnosed with mesothelioma , a rare form of cancer that develops from the protective lining that covers many of the body 's internal organs , and struggled with the illness for several years as result of exposure to asbestos . Cyrus then relocated from Franklin , Tennessee to Los Angeles , California to commence work on the Disney Channel original series Hannah Montana . At the sight of her grandfather ailing from afar , Cyrus was inspired to compose " I Miss You " . In her autobiography Miles to Go ( 2009 ) , she explained , " That 's how I ended up writing the song ' I Miss You ' for Pappy . He was so sick . I knew he was dying , and slowly so did my heart . I couldn 't imagine life without him . " She co @-@ wrote the song with her mother 's dear friends Wendy Foy Green and Brian Green , and described it as the most difficult song for her write because of the subject matter . Cyrus attempted to halt writing " I Miss You " , telling her co @-@ writers she could not bear anymore . 
 However , Cyrus later desired to resume writing , saying she " knew what [ her ] heart wanted to say , and whatever is in [ her ] heart finds its way to [ her ] fingertips . " Moreover , she desired for her grandfather to listen to the song before passing away . Although Cyrus was never able to sing it for him , her father played a quick cut of " I Miss You " for Ron towards the end of his life . The singer said she liked to believe that the song gave her grandfather hope , in a similar fashion which he gave and continues to give hope to her . At the age of 70 , Ron Cyrus died on February 28 , 2006 , two days prior the red carpet premiere of Hannah Montana . In the episode " She 's a <unk> " , Cyrus sang a part of the song as Miley Stewart , in memory of the character 's late mother . Cyrus then recorded the song for her debut album , Meet Miley Cyrus . The singer believed that , despite having personal significance to her , " I Miss You " could have a variety of meanings for distinct people in divergent situations , including moving away from home , the loss of a parent , or a breakup in a romantic relationship . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " I Miss You " is a pop music song with a length of three minutes and fifty @-@ eight seconds . It is a ballad that maintains low @-@ key with an acoustic styling . " I Miss You " is influenced by elements of the country music genre ; nevertheless , it has a rock music @-@ based musical arrangement , relying prominently on a gentle strumming guitar for instrumentation . Written in the key of B ♭ major but will transpose at the key of C major at the end of the bridge , " I Miss You " is set in common time with a tempo of 85 beats per minute . Cyrus ' low and throaty vocals span a one octave , ranging from G3 to B ♭ 4 . The song has the following chord progression , B ♭ – Gm7 – F – F – <unk> . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 " I Miss You " has received generally positive reviews from music critics . Heather Phares of Allmusic complimented " I Miss You " , and categorized it as one of the tracks on Meet Miley Cyrus that bared much resemblance to Hannah Montana songs . Andy Webster of The New York Times wrote that " I Miss You " is " as doleful as it gets " . Andy <unk> of the Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer believed the track had a level a sincerity that was void from the remainder of Cyrus ' repertoire at the time . He added , " The songs are more guitar @-@ driven , the outfits more adult , and the lyrics imply a string of bad boyfriends -- but it feels like imaginary drama taken from high school poetry , as if she 's pretending to be older than she is . " In a similar note , Elysa Gardner of USA Today stated the song was the exception to the " heavy on flash and fantasy " that characterized Cyrus at the time . Joseph P. Kahn of the Boston Globe mentioned the song while remarking that Cyrus ' songs surpass much of the music played on Radio Disney . Maitland McDonagh of TV Guide believed the track a was a clear demonstration of how affectionate Cyrus was with her grandfather . Kelly Jane Torrance of The Washington Times said " I Miss You " was an unpredictable effort , which , according to her , was both empathetic and executed properly , from Cyrus . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 On the week ending July 14 , 2007 , " I Miss You " debuted on two US Billboard charts . It entered at number nine on the Billboard Hot 100 extension , the Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart , and at number ninety @-@ two in its only week on the discontinued Pop 100 chart . The following week , the song fell to number twenty @-@ five in its second and final appearance on the Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Cyrus performed " I Miss You " as an encore on sporadic dates of her first headlining tour , the Best of Both Worlds Tour , which extended from October 2007 to January 2008 . The tour 's concert film uses the performance within the set , although it was not performed as such . The performance had Cyrus dressed in a white tank top , blue cardigan , and denim pants , and sole on the stage . She sat on a stool that placed towards the end of the runaway , performing with an acoustic guitar , as images and home footage of Ron Cyrus appeared on the screens . Chris William of Entertainment Weekly attended the November 8 , 2007 concert at the San Diego Sports Arena in San Diego , California , and wrote , " So it was especially sweet when , for the encore , she ditched the dancers and enhancers and strummed an acoustic guitar on ' I Miss You , ' vulnerably serenading her late <unk> — and , for once , really looking and sounding 14 . Not everyone noticed because , when she finished , half the seats were empty . " Alison <unk> Dressed of the Chicago Tribune stated that , despite its simplicity , the performance on December 8 , 2007 at the Allstate Arena in Rosemont , Illinois felt like as though it was the largest production of all . In a gray shirt and black pants , Cyrus performed the song , along with " Ready , Set , Don 't Go " and " The Best of Both Worlds " , on The Oprah Winfrey Show on December 20 , 2007 , as a screen displayed a light @-@ blue background . On October 5 , 2013 , as part of a Saturday Night Live skit , Cyrus performed an excerpt from " I Miss You " with actress Vanessa Bayer . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = 55 Cancri b = 
 55 Cancri b ( abbreviated 55 Cnc b ) , occasionally designated 55 Cancri Ab ( to distinguish it from the star 55 Cancri B ) , also named Galileo , is an extrasolar planet orbiting the Sun @-@ like star 55 Cancri A every 14 @.@ 65 days . It is the second planet in order of distance from its star , and is an example of a hot Jupiter , or possibly rather " warm Jupiter " . 
 In July 2014 the International Astronomical Union launched a process for giving proper names to certain exoplanets and their host stars . The process involved public nomination and voting for the new names . In December 2015 , the IAU announced the winning name was Galileo for this planet . The winning name was submitted by the Royal Netherlands Association for Meteorology and Astronomy of the Netherlands . It honors early @-@ 17th century astronomer and physicist Galileo Galilei . 
 = = Discovery = = 
 55 Cancri b was discovered in 1996 by Geoffrey Marcy and R. Paul Butler . It was the fourth known extrasolar planet , excluding pulsar planets . Like the majority of known extrasolar planets , it was discovered by detecting variations in its star 's radial velocity caused by the planet 's gravity . By making sensitive measurements of the Doppler shift of the spectrum of 55 Cancri A , a 15 @-@ day periodicity was detected . The planet was announced in 1996 , together with the planet of Tau Boötis and the innermost planet of Upsilon Andromedae . 
 Even when this inner planet , with a mass at least 78 % times that of Jupiter was accounted for , the star still showed a drift in its radial velocity . This eventually led to the discovery of the outer planet 55 Cancri d in 2002 . 
 = = Orbit and mass = = 
 55 Cancri b is in a short @-@ period orbit , though not so extreme as that of the previously detected hot Jupiter 51 Pegasi b . The orbital period indicates that the planet is located close to a 1 : 3 mean motion resonance with 55 Cancri c , however investigations of the planetary parameters in a Newtonian simulation indicate that while the orbital periods are close to this ratio , the planets are not actually in the resonance . 
 In 2012 , b 's upper atmosphere was observed transiting the star ; so its inclination is about 85 degrees , coplanar with 55 Cancri e . This helped to constrain the mass of the planet but the inclination was too low to constrain its radius . 
 The mass is about .85 that of Jupiter . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 55 Cancri b is a gas giant with no solid surface . The atmospheric transit has demonstrated hydrogen in the upper atmosphere . 
 That transit is so tangential , that properties such as its radius , density , and temperature are unknown . Assuming a composition similar to that of Jupiter and that its environment is close to chemical equilibrium , 55 Cancri b 's upper atmosphere is predicted to be cloudless with a spectrum dominated by alkali metal absorption . 
 The atmosphere 's transit indicates that it is slowly evaporating under the sun 's heat . The evaporation is slower than that for previously studied ( hotter ) hot Jupiters . 
 The planet is unlikely to have large moons , since tidal forces would either eject them from orbit or destroy them on short timescales relative to the age of the system . 
 = Ridge Racer ( video game ) = 
 Ridge Racer ( <unk> , <unk> Rēsā ) is a 1993 racing video game developed and published by Namco . It was initially released on the Namco System 22 arcade system board , and later ported to the PlayStation console in 1994 . It is the first title in the Ridge Racer series released for arcades and home consoles . The objective is to finish in first place in a series of races . Ridge Racer was among the first racing games to use polygon graphics to its full potential . The PlayStation version supports Namco 's NeGcon controller . 
 The first home version of Ridge Racer was released in Japan in 1994 as a launch title for the PlayStation ; the versions for North America and Europe were released in 1995 . It was re @-@ released in Japan for the PlayStation The Best range in July 1997 , and for the Greatest Hits and Platinum ranges in North America and PAL regions respectively the same year . The game played a major role in establishing the new system and giving it an early edge over its nearest competitor , the Sega Saturn , and was considered a rival to Sega 's Daytona USA . 
 Ridge Racer received a highly positive reception . Reviewers praised the graphics , audio , drifting mechanics , and arcade @-@ like gameplay , although some were critical of the lack of strong artificial intelligence and multiplayer mode . The arcade version was followed by a sequel , Ridge Racer 2 , in 1994 , whereas the PlayStation sequel , Ridge Racer Revolution , was released in December 1995 in Japan , and in 1996 in North America and PAL regions . The soundtrack was remixed and released on the Namco Game Sound Express Vol . 11 album . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 In the PlayStation version , a mini @-@ game of Galaxian can be played as the game loads . If won , eight additional cars become available . The cars are varied in their specifications ; some feature a high top speed , others excelling at acceleration or turning , and others being more balanced . Certain cars are named after other Namco games such as <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and Xevious . Once the game has loaded , all the CD is needed for is to play six music tracks . The disc can be replaced at any time during gameplay , although the game does not update ; regardless of what disc is inserted , there will always be six tracks , corresponding the starting points of the tracks on the game disc . 
 A course , transmission ( automatic or six @-@ speed manual ) , car , and song are chosen . The racetrack can be observed from the first @-@ person perspective ( or from the third @-@ person perspective for the PlayStation version ) . Namco 's NeGcon controller can be used to play . Being an arcade racer , collisions do no damage , and merely slow the player down . There is a time limit , which ends the game if counted down to zero . 
 A single course is featured , although it consists of four configurations of increasing difficulty ; Novice , Intermediate , Advanced and Time Trial ( the latter two are extended ) . The player races eleven opponents except in Time Trial , where there is only one . The higher the difficulty , the faster the cars run , with Time Trial being the fastest . Each race consists of three laps ( two on the beginner course ) . Checkpoints that grant additional time when passed through are present throughout . In the PlayStation version , after every race is won , reversed ones become available , and an additional opponent is encountered in Time Trial ; the 13th Racing " Devil " , the fastest car . On winning , the car is unlocked . In the arcade version , the winning player 's score is saved in action @-@ replay highlights after finishing the game . 
 The PlayStation version features hidden " mirror " version of the tracks . It becomes a " mirror image " of itself ; left turns become right turns and vice @-@ versa , and the surroundings switch sides of the road . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 At JAMMA 's 1992 Amusement Machine Show in Japan , held during 27 – 19 August 1992 , Namco debuted a racing game called Sim Drive , for the Namco System 22 arcade system board . It was a sequel to Eunos Roadster Driving Simulator , a Mazda MX @-@ 5 driving simulation arcade game that Namco developed with Mazda and released in 1990 . Its 3D polygon graphics stood out for its use of Gouraud shading and texture mapping . After a location test at the show , where it was previewed by the November 1992 issue of Electronic Gaming Monthly , Sim Drive had a limited Japanese release in December 1992 , but did not get a mass @-@ market release . It served as a prototype for Ridge Racer . 
 Ridge Racer had a development cycle of eight months . The development team was under pressure to complete it before their rivals , and designer <unk> Tanaka commented that " the other company " was in the same position . Ridge Racer was originally planned to be an F1 racing game , but the concept was replaced with one based on a trend among Japanese car enthusiasts at the time . Namco Bandai 's general manager <unk> Sakagami explained that they liked racing on mountain roads and did not want to slow down around corners , so drifted around them instead . The team therefore decided to create a game which lets the player test his driving skills and experience the car 's manipulation at high speeds while mastering drifting . 
 Development for the PlayStation version began in April 1994 . Because of the radical differences , that version essentially had to be done from scratch , and took nearly as long to develop , being completed in November 1994 . The PlayStation port was developed by the same team . Due to technical limitations , the PlayStation port was difficult to program and runs at a lower resolution , lower framerate ( 30 frames per second for NTSC , 25 for PAL ) , and was less detailed . Specialised graphics libraries had to be developed because it was felt the standard ones provided by Sony were too limited . Visual director <unk> Sakagami remarked that the hardest element to port was the experience of driving a car . It was felt that the NeGcon controller would provide a more analogue feel than the standard PlayStation controller . Sakagami was concerned about loading times due to the CD @-@ ROM format ; the team countered this by having all the data loaded into memory by the time the title screen appeared , and having the player play a mini @-@ game of Galaxian while waiting . Sakagami chose Galaxian because he was part of its arcade team , and wanted to honour his former boss . Due to CDs being cheaper to produce , the retail price was cheaper than cartridge games despite an increase in development costs . Ridge Racer sold for under ¥ 6000 ( £ 37 ) in Japan . 
 During release for arcade system board , Ridge Racer was called by Namco " the most realistic driving game ever " . It featured three @-@ dimensional polygon graphics with texture mapping . The PlayStation version was shown at the 1995 Electronic Entertainment Expo event , and was an innovation in the use of three @-@ dimensional polygons . Ridge Racer was released in Japan on 3 December 1994 , in North America on 9 September 1995 , and in Europe on 29 September as a launch title for the PlayStation . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The soundtrack was produced alongside the game by Shinji Hosoe , with contributions from Nobuyoshi Sano and Ayako Saso , as the development team didn 't have enough time to produce them separately . The team did not initially plan to have music , but ended up producing techno , which Tanaka believed helped players to enjoy a fun feeling while playing . Hiroshi Okubo believed techno would give a feeling of energy , journey , and speed , and commented that the genre was chosen because it embodied the game 's " unrealistic speed and tension " . This was commemorated by the release of Namco Game Sound Express Vol . 11 , which featured remixed versions , on 21 January 1994 in Japan . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Ridge Racer received critical acclaim . The graphics and sound in particular were praised . In the April 1994 issue of the UK magazine Computer and Video Games , Paul Rand gave high marks , remarking that it was " far and away the most realistic arcade game ever seen " on reviewing the arcade machine ( based on the full @-@ scale unit ) . In a review of its Japanese console release , GamePro called the PlayStation version " a near carbon copy of the original " and praised the graphics , soundtrack , and the entire game being loaded into the PlayStation 's RAM , eliminating mid @-@ game loading and giving the option of removing the game disc and using the PlayStation as a music CD player during gameplay . Although they criticised the graphical glitches and slowdown , the game was recommended . Next Generation applauded the conversion 's faithful recreation of the arcade version , smooth graphics , and additional cars . Although they noted the lack of variety in the different cars ' performance and the absence of a multiplayer mode as downsides , they found the game overall remarkable and commented that the fact that Ridge Racer was an early game for the PlayStation , and a rushed project at that , made it " an excellent harbinger of what 's to come " . GamePro 's review of the later North American release judged that the game surpassed competitor Daytona USA in graphics , audio , and control responsiveness , and called it " The best racing game to date for home systems " . Commenting on the realism , Game Informer remarked that Ridge Racer " does a better job of capturing the feel of high performance car racing than any existing driving game " . 
 The two sports reviewers of Electronic Gaming Monthly praised the gameplay and music . Maximum commented that " Ridge Racer isn 't without its bad points - basically , there is only one track and the game lacks the awesome crash sequences of Daytona USA , but everything else in the title is sheer class " . They commented positively on the " feeling of smoothness and speed " , the " distinctly European " dance music , the engine sounds , and the unrealistically exaggerated driving manoeuvres . In 1996 , IGN commented that despite two years of release the game " has definitely stood the test of time " , but complained that " there is no two @-@ player mode " and that " the cars don 't really vary in performance that much " . AllGame 's Shawn Sackenheim praised the game , particularly the graphics and audio , and concluded that it " is a fun title that racing fans will love " . Coming Soon Magazine praised its " ultra fluid and very realistic " graphics , but criticised the game for being too short . The Electric Playground 's Victor Lucas gave top marks , remarking " The experience of playing RR supersedes the thrills generally attributed to playing other racing video games " , and further commented " I really can 't stress enough how deserving of your video game dollars Ridge Racer is " . Edge praised the " dazzling " graphics and " arcade @-@ perfect " music . 
 Despite positive reviews , the game was criticised by 1UP.com for the arcade style of gameplay . The lack of artificial intelligence has received criticism — the movement of the computer @-@ controlled cars is restricted to predetermined waypoints . The game was reviewed in 1995 in Dragon No. 221 by Jay & Dee in the " Eye of the Monitor " column , where Dee called it " just another racing game " . 
 Ridge Racer was awarded Best Driving Game of 1995 by Electronic Gaming Monthly . It was listed as one of the best games of all time by Game Informer in 2001 , Yahoo in 2005 , Electronic Gaming Monthly in 2006 , Guinness World Records in 2008 and 2009 , NowGamer in 2010 , and FHM in 2012 . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Ridge Racer has been followed by many sequels and helped establish the position of the PlayStation console . IGN stated that Ridge Racer had been " one of PlayStation 's first big system pushers " and " an excellent port of the arcade version that showed the true potential of Sony 's 32 @-@ bit wonder " . UGO Networks 's Michael Hess and Chris Plante said that it had " set the stage for Gran Turismo by adding an option to choose between automatic and manual transmission " . John Davison of 1UP.com said that Ridge Racer was an " unbelievable demonstration of what the PlayStation could do " . 
 Ridge Racer is mentioned in the song My Console ( 1999 ) from the Italian electronic dance group Eiffel 65 . 
 = = Other releases = = 
 The PlayStation version was re @-@ released for The Best , Greatest Hits , and Platinum ranges in 1997 . Ridge Racer received a number of ports and spin @-@ offs : 
 = = = Ridge Racer Full Scale = = = 
 A Full Scale arcade version was released alongside the standard arcade version in 1993 . This version was designed to give the player a more realistic driving experience . Players ( a passenger could sit in the car next to the driver ) sat inside an adapted red Eunos Roadster , the Japanese right @-@ hand @-@ drive version of the Mazda MX @-@ 5 <unk> , and controlled the same car on @-@ screen . The game was played in front of a 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) wide , front @-@ projected triple screen ( which benefited from dimmed ambient lighting ) , with the wheel , gear stick and pedals functioning as the controls . The ignition key was used to start , the speed and RPM gauges were functional , and fans blew wind on the player from inside the air vents . Speakers concealed inside the car provided realistic engine and tyre sounds ; overhead speakers provided surround music . The <unk> was located under the bonnet of the car . 
 = = = Ridge Racer : 3 Screen Edition = = = 
 A version with three screens was released in arcades to give a peripheral vision effect . The machine used multiple System 22 arcade boards to drive the additional monitors and was only available in the sit down version . 
 = = = Pocket Racer = = = 
 Pocket Racer ( <unk> , Poketto Rēsā ) is a super deformed version with cars resembling <unk> @-@ Q models , and aimed towards children . It was released in 1996 in Japan . It was only available in upright cabinet version , and uses Namco System 11 hardware . A similar game is included in Ridge Racer Revolution using the same cars under the name Pretty Racer ( also known as buggy mode ) , the inspiration for this game . 
 = = = Ridge Racer Turbo = = = 
 R4 : Ridge Racer Type 4 ( released on 3 December 1998 in Japan , 1 May 1999 in North America , and on 1 September 1999 in Europe ) includes a bonus disc containing a new version of the original Ridge Racer , called Ridge Racer Turbo in North America , Ridge Racer Hi @-@ Spec Demo in Europe , and Ridge Racer Hi Spec Version ( <unk> , <unk> Rēsā Hai <unk> <unk> ) in Japan . It featured improved graphics , runs at 60 frames per second ( 50 for PAL ) , as opposed to the original 30 , and supports vibration feedback and the <unk> controller . There is only one opponent ( two in time trial boss races ) , and the White Angel from Ridge Racer Revolution appears in addition to the 13th Racing as a boss and unlockable car . A Time Attack mode is added , in which the player attempts to beat the time record without any opponent cars . This is distinct from Time Trial , where there are opponent cars . 
 = = = Mobile versions = = = 
 On 31 December 2005 , a version for mobile phones was released . It received mixed reviews . GameSpot 's Jeff Gerstmann gave the game 6 @.@ 1 / 10 . He praised graphics as " somewhat impressive for a mobile game " , but criticised the steering , saying that " it doesn 't take long to master the game . " Levi Buchanan of IGN gave Ridge Racer 6 @.@ 2 / 10 , complaining about the problematic controls and saying that the game without the analogue control " feels really lacking " . In 2005 , a version of Ridge Racer was released for mobile phones under the name Ridge Racer 3D ( not to be confused with the later Ridge Racer 3D for the Nintendo 3DS ) . On 11 August 2009 , this version was ported to Zeebo . 
 = Peterborough ( UK Parliament constituency ) = 
 Peterborough is a borough constituency represented in the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom , sharing the name of a smaller constituency represented in the Parliament of England until 1707 and then in that of Great Britain until 1800 . It elects one Member of Parliament by the first past the post system of election . 
 The serving Member is Conservative Stewart Jackson . He defeated Labour 's Helen Clark in 2005 , and was re @-@ elected in 2010 with an increased majority . In 2015 , he held the seat with a reduced majority . 
 = = Boundaries = = 
 1918 @-@ 1950 : The administrative county of the Soke of Peterborough , the Urban District of Oundle , the Rural Districts of Easton @-@ on @-@ the @-@ Hill and Gretton , and parts of the Rural Districts of Oundle and Thrapston . 
 1950 @-@ 1974 : The Municipal Borough of Peterborough , the Urban District of Oundle , the Rural Districts of Barnack and Peterborough , and part of the Rural District of Oundle and Thrapston . 
 1974 @-@ 1983 : The Municipal Borough of Peterborough , and the Rural Districts of Barnack , Peterborough , and Thorney . 
 1983 @-@ 1997 : The City of Peterborough wards of Bretton , Central , Dogsthorpe , East , Fletton , North , Orton Longueville , Orton Waterville , Park , Paston , Ravensthorpe , Stanground , Walton , and West . 
 1997 @-@ 2010 : The City of Peterborough wards of Bretton , Central , Dogsthorpe , East , North , Park , Paston , Ravensthorpe , Walton , Werrington , and West . 
 2010 @-@ present : The City of Peterborough wards of Bretton North , Bretton South , Central , Dogsthorpe , East , Eye and Thorney , Newborough , North , Park , Paston , Ravensthorpe , Walton , Werrington North , Werrington South , and West . 
 The City of Peterborough formed a parliamentary borough returning two Members in 1541 . The rest of the Soke of Peterborough was part of the Northamptonshire parliamentary county , except the area south of the River Nene in the historic county of Huntingdonshire and Thorney , which was considered part of Cambridgeshire . Until 1832 when the whole of the parish of Saint John the Baptist was encompassed , the boundary , as far as is known , excluded the villages of <unk> , Dogsthorpe and Newark with Eastfield . The Great Reform Act did not affect the borough , while the rural portion of the Soke was included in the northern division of Northamptonshire . New Fletton was transferred from Huntingdonshire in 1868 and in 1918 the parliamentary borough was abolished and replaced with a new division of the parliamentary county of Northampton with the Soke of Peterborough , including the whole of the Soke and neighbouring parts of the administrative county of Northamptonshire , extending down to and beyond Thrapston and Corby . This became a county constituency under the 1948 revisions , when the boundaries of the constituency were adjusted to correspond to those of the Soke and they remained much the same until 1970 . Peterborough became a county constituency in 1974 . 
 Following their review of parliamentary representation in Cambridgeshire in 2005 , the Boundary Commission for England made minor alterations to the existing constituencies to deal with population changes . The electoral wards used to create the modified Peterborough constituency fought at the 2010 general election are : Bretton North , Bretton South , Central , Dogsthorpe , East , Eye and Thorney , Newborough , North , Park , Paston , Ravensthorpe , Walton , Werrington North , Werrington South , and West . These changes increased the electorate from 64 @,@ 893 to 70 @,@ 640 . On the enumeration date of 17 February 2000 , the electoral quota for England was 69 @,@ 934 voters per constituency . 
 The Peterborough wards of Barnack , Fletton , <unk> and Wittering , Northborough , Orton Longueville , Orton Waterville , Orton with Hampton , Stanground Central , and Stanground East form part of the North West Cambridgeshire constituency created in 1997 from parts of Peterborough and Huntingdon constituencies . The serving member for North West Cambridgeshire is the Conservative , <unk> Vara MP , who succeeded Sir Brian Mawhinney , former Secretary of State for Transport and Chairman of the Conservative Party , in 2005 . Mawhinney , who had previously served as Member of Parliament for Peterborough from 1979 , was created Baron Mawhinney , of Peterborough in the county of Cambridgeshire in 2005 . Eye and Thorney was previously included in the North East Cambridgeshire ( prior to 1983 Isle of Ely ) constituency . 
 = = Franchise = = 
 In the unreformed House of Commons to be either a candidate or an elector for a county seat , a man had to own ( not rent ) freehold property valued for the land tax at two pounds a year ( women could neither vote nor stand for election ) . This was known as the 40 / - freehold . The franchise for borough seats varied enormously . Originally in Peterborough the dean and chapter had claimed the franchise and held that only residents of Minster Precincts were burgesses . By the interregnum , the city was one of 37 boroughs in which suffrage was restricted to those paying scot and lot , a form of municipal taxation . In 1800 there were 2 @,@ 000 registered voters in Northamptonshire and 400 in Peterborough . By 1835 this was 576 , or about one per cent of the population . Bribery was general until the introduction of the secret ballot under the Ballot Act 1872 . Votes were cast by spoken declaration , in public , at the hustings , erected on the Market Place ( now Cathedral Square ) . 
 In 1832 the Great Reform Act enfranchised those who owned or leased land worth £ 10 or more and the Second Reform Act extended this to all householders paying £ 10 or more in rent per annum , effectively enfranchising the skilled working class , so by 1868 the percentage of voters in Peterborough had risen to about 20 % of the population . The Third Reform Act extended the provisions of the previous act to the counties and the Fourth Reform Act widened suffrage further by abolishing practically all property qualifications for men and by enfranchising women over 30 who met minimum property qualifications . This system , known as universal manhood suffrage , was first used in the 1918 general election . However , full electoral equality wouldn 't occur until the Fifth Reform Act ten years later . 
 According to the 2001 census , the population count of Peterborough constituency is 95 @,@ 103 persons , comprising 46 @,@ 131 males and 48 @,@ 972 females . 67 @.@ 56 % of those aged 16 – 74 are economically active , including 5 @.@ 92 % <unk> ; a further 12 @.@ 26 % are retired and 3 @.@ 08 % students . Of a total 39 @,@ 760 households , 63 @.@ 80 % are owner occupied , fewer than the regional ( 72 @.@ 71 % ) and national ( 68 @.@ 72 % ) averages . Turnout at the 2005 general election was 41 @,@ 194 or 61 @.@ 0 % of those eligible to vote , below the regional ( 63 @.@ 6 % ) and national ( 61 @.@ 3 % ) figures . 
 = = Members of Parliament = = 
 Peterborough sent two members to parliament for the first time in 1547 . Before the civil war , many were relatives of the clergy ; then for two hundred years after the restoration there was always a Fitzwilliam , or a Fitzwilliam nominee , sitting as member for Peterborough , making it a Whig stronghold . Representation was reduced to one member under the Redistribution of Seats Act 1885 . From the formal merger of the breakaway Liberal Unionists with the Conservatives in 1912 and the absorption of rural North Northamptonshire in 1918 , Peterborough has been predominantly Conservative . The growth in the New Town from 1967 may in part account for Labour 's victory here in 1974 . Since its formation in 1997 , North West Cambridgeshire has been one of the safest Conservative seats in the country . At the election which followed , Peterborough was ranked 93rd in the Conservatives 's one hundred most vulnerable seats ( the ones which the other parties must take if there is to be a change of government ) and 73rd on Labour 's target list . 
 In 1966 , the closest poll in UK history , Sir Harmar Nicholls held the seat by three votes after seven recounts . Nicholls was the Conservative member from 1950 to 1974 , when he lost in the October election of that year to Labour 's Michael Ward , having held on by just 22 votes after four recounts in the election eight months earlier . After he lost his seat he was created Baron Harmar @-@ Nicholls , of Peterborough in the county of Cambridgeshire and served , from 1979 to 1984 , as Member of the European Parliament for Greater Manchester South . David Cecil , 6th Marquess of Exeter , winner of 400m hurdles at the 1928 Summer Olympics , member of the International Olympic Committee for 48 years and chairman of the organising committee of the 1948 Summer Olympics , was the Conservative member from 1931 to 1943 . Lord Burghley , as he then was , succeeded the socialist writer and illustrator , Frank Horrabin , who was born in the city and elected under the leadership of Ramsay MacDonald in 1929 . 
 The most recent Labour MP for Peterborough , Helen Clark ( née Brinton ) , won the seat in 1997 . She was defeated at the 2005 general election , following which it was widely reported that Clark was planning to defect to the Conservative Party , an announcement which was not popular locally . However , by early June it emerged that while she had left the Labour Party , she had not in fact joined the Conservatives and did not intend to . 
 One of the earliest incumbents , Sir Walter Mildmay , member for Peterborough from 1553 to 1554 , subsequently became Chancellor of the Exchequer from 1559 to 1589 . Later , in the nineteenth century , William Elliot , Whig member from 1802 until his death in 1819 , was Chief Secretary to the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland between 1806 and 1807 ; the Hon. William Lamb ( later the 2nd Viscount Melbourne ) , Whig member from 1816 to 1819 , became Home Secretary in 1830 then Prime Minister from 1834 to 1841 ; and Sir James Scarlett ( later the 1st Baron Abinger ) , Whig member from 1819 to 1830 , was , from 1827 , Attorney General for England and Wales . 
 = = = Parliamentary Borough 1547 – 1918 = = = 
 = = = = MPs 1542 – 1660 = = = = 
 = = = = MPs 1660 – 1883 = = = = 
 The Tories ( or Abhorrers ) and Whigs ( or Petitioners ) originated in the Court and Country parties that emerged in the aftermath of the civil war , although it is more accurate to describe them as loose tendencies , both of which might be regarded as conservative in modern terms . Modern party politics did not really begin to coalesce in Great Britain until at least 1784 . 
 = = = = MPs 1885 – 1918 = = = = 
 In 1832 the Tory Party evolved into the Conservative Party and in 1859 the Whig Party evolved , with Radicals and Peelites , into the Liberal Party . In opposition to Irish home rule , the Liberal Unionists ceded from the Liberals in 1886 , aligning themselves with the Conservatives . The Labour Party was later founded , as the Labour Representation Committee , in 1900 . 
 = = = Division and County Constituency = = = 
 The parliamentary borough of Peterborough was abolished under the Representation of the People Act 1918 , and the name was transferred to a division of the new parliamentary county of Northampton with the Soke of Peterborough . The Peterborough division became a county constituency in 1950 . 
 = = = = MPs 1918 – 1974 = = = = 
 = = = Borough Constituency = = = 
 Peterborough was redefined as a borough constituency with effect from the February 1974 general election . Successors of the historic parliamentary boroughs , the spending limits for election campaigns are slightly lower than in county constituencies . 
 = = = = MPs since 1974 = = = = 
 = = Election results = = 
 = = = Elections in the 2010s = = = 
 = = = Elections in the 2000s = = = 
 = = = Elections in the 1990s = = = 
 = = = Elections in the 1980s = = = 
 = = = Elections in the 1970s = = = 
 = = = Elections in the 1960s = = = 
 = = = Elections in the 1950s = = = 
 = = = Elections in the 1940s = = = 
 General Election 1939 / 40 Another general election was required to take place before the end of 1940 . The political parties had been making preparations for an election to take place from 1939 and by the end of this year , the following candidates had been selected : 
 Conservative : David George Brownlow Cecil , Lord Burghley 
 Labour : Samuel Bennett 
 = = = Elections in the 1930s = = = 
 = = = Elections in the 1920s = = = 
 = = = Elections in the 1910s = = = 
 † denotes a candidate endorsed by the Coalition Government 
 = Bart 's Girlfriend = 
 " Bart 's Girlfriend " is the seventh television episode of The Simpsons ' sixth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on November 6 , 1994 . The plot of the episode follows the secret romance of Bart and Jessica Lovejoy , Reverend Lovejoy 's daughter . Bart tries to end the romance when he discovers that , behind her innocent façade as a preacher 's kid , she is an even bigger troublemaker than he is . Jessica then steals the money from the collection plate , leaving Bart to take the blame until Lisa exposes the truth . 
 The episode was written by Jonathan Collier , and directed by Susie Dietter . Former The Simpsons ' show runner David Mirkin originally came up with the idea of Bart having a girlfriend that was more evil than he was . Meryl Streep guest stars in the episode as Jessica Lovejoy . It features cultural references to films such as Planet of the Apes and The Silence of the Lambs . Since airing , the episode has received acclaim from both critics and fans , and Entertainment Weekly named Meryl Streep 's role as one of the best guest appearances on The Simpsons . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Bart falls in love with Reverend Lovejoy 's daughter , Jessica . However , when he approaches her , she ignores him . The next Sunday , Bart decides to attend Sunday school to try to convince Jessica that he is a good person , but she still ignores him . Frustrated , Bart goes to the park to play a prank on Groundskeeper Willie , and is punished with detention . Jessica approaches him to express sympathy and invites him to her house for dinner with her family . 
 During a formal dinner with the Lovejoys , Bart 's crude mannerisms and foul language cause Reverend Lovejoy to forbid him from ever seeing Jessica again . However , Jessica realizes that Bart is a bad boy and tells Bart that she likes him . They begin secretly dating and causing mischief through the town . Bart quickly realizes that Jessica ( an example of the preacher 's kid stereotype ) is even more badly behaved than he is , so at the next Sunday service he tries to make her see the error of her ways . Although she seems to agree , Jessica immediately steals from the collection plate before forcing it back upon the hapless Bart. The congregation mistakenly believes that Bart took the money when they see him with the empty plate . Bart attempts to explain , but they refuse to listen . Although Homer assumes Bart is guilty , Marge is willing to hear him out , but Bart claims he does not know who did it . The following day , Bart visits Jessica at her house , and admits that he does not like her after Jessica refuses to own up to the crime . 
 Upon finding out the truth , Lisa is determined not to allow her brother to take blame for something he did not do , and she tells their congregation that Jessica is the guilty party . The townspeople then search Jessica 's room , where the money is found under her bed . Rev. Lovejoy refuses to believe that his daughter is guilty until Jessica admits to him she did it to gain attention . She is punished by being forced to scrub the church steps , and Bart receives an apology from the congregation at Marge 's insistence . Later , Bart approaches Jessica at church and tells her what he has learned , to which Jessica responds that she has learned that she can make boys do whatever she wants . Bart then agrees to finish Jessica 's chores as she runs off with another boyfriend . However , as soon as she leaves , he snickers about how bad a job he is going to do on the steps to get back at her . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Bart 's Girlfriend " was written by Jonathan Collier and directed by Susie Dietter . David Mirkin , who was show runner at the time , originally had the idea of Bart having a girlfriend that was more evil than he was . Mirkin gave the idea to Collier to write it with the help of the show 's executive producer , James L. Brooks . Collier said later that he thought it was a case of Brooks coming up with good ideas and him " giggling <unk> " . The idea for the ending of the episode was to have none of the characters learn anything from the experience . 
 Matt Groening , the creator of The Simpsons , felt that Jessica Lovejoy was hard to draw in his own style but at the same time make her attractive . Julie Kavner , who provides the voice of Marge Simpson on the show , was particularly impressed by the eyes . Jessica was made the Reverend 's daughter to give the impression that she was good at first and then to show that she was rebelling against the righteousness of her family . In the scene where Bart talks to Jessica outside her house , her baton playing was in the script but the exact choreography was not . Dietter liked its incorporation because it gave Jessica something else , other than Bart , to pay attention to . This was also done in the final scene when Jessica scrubs the church steps and plays with the scrub brush . 
 Academy Award winning actress Meryl Streep was called in to do the voice of Jessica . Nancy Cartwright , who provides the voice of Bart Simpson on the show , was a huge fan of Streep and she assumed that Streep would record her lines individually , but all of their recordings were done together . Streep showed up alone with no entourage at the Village Recorder in West Los Angeles at 2 : 30 P.M. , where she recorded her parts with Cartwright . Streep was continually doing many different versions of her lines . Mirkin felt she was easy to work with because she was versatile and keen to do a lot of different things , and as Mirkin expressed it , " easily evil " . Cartwright said in an interview with The Pantagraph that she really wanted Streep 's autograph , but was afraid to ask for it . After the recording session , Streep tapped Cartwright on the shoulder , and said her kids were big The Simpsons fans and that she would be in " big trouble " if she did not get Cartwright 's autograph . 
 In a take off of John Travolta in the 1983 film Staying Alive , Bart struts down a street in Springfield after he is invited to dinner at the Lovejoys , just as Travolta strutted through Times Square to the same tune , in a joke written by Jace Richdale , who was the co @-@ executive producer of The Simpsons at the time . When Homer is musing over Bart 's first date , he begins to sing " Sunrise , Sunset " from Fiddler on the Roof , before moving on to " Cat 's in the Cradle " , and then " Yes , We Have No Bananas " . He then begins to weep due to the people in the song having no bananas . The joke was reportedly very expensive for the writers to put in because they had to pay thousands of dollars for the rights to use the songs on the show . 
 " Bart 's Girlfriend " originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on November 6 , 1994 . The episode was selected for release in a 2001 video collection of selected episodes titled : The Simpsons – Love , Springfield Style . Other episodes included in the collection set were " It 's a Mad , Mad , Mad , Mad Marge " , " The Two Mrs. Nahasapeemapetilons " , and " I 'm with Cupid " . The episode was included in The Simpsons season 6 DVD set , which was released on August 16 , 2005 , as The Simpsons – The Complete Sixth Season . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 In the beginning of the episode , the parents chase the children in a cornfield to eventually round them up for church , which parodies a similar scene from the 1968 film Planet of the Apes , where the humans are rounded up by apes . After Bart is accused of stealing from the church collection plate , he is forced to wear a straitjacket in church , which is a reference to Hannibal Lecter 's straight @-@ jacket in The Silence of the Lambs . " Misirlou " , the theme song of the 1994 film Pulp Fiction , plays during Bart and Jessica 's date . Bart calls Jessica " smart , beautiful and a liar ... " and then claims she is " ... so much better than that Sarah , plain and tall " . The scene then cuts to a shot of a plain and tall girl named Sarah that overhears Bart and begins to cry . The Lovejoy family has a replica of Leonardo da Vinci 's painting The Last Supper hanging on the wall in their dining room . The sign on the Springfield Church marquee reads : " Evil Women in History : From Jezebel to Janet Reno " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Bart 's Girlfriend " finished 53rd in the ratings for the week of October 31 to November 6 , 1994 , with a Nielsen rating of 9 @.@ 6 . The episode was the third highest rated show on the Fox network that week , beaten only by Beverly Hills , 90210 , and Married ... with Children . 
 Since airing , the episode has received many positive reviews from fans and television critics . Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , the authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , said : " Poor Bart gets picked on very cruelly by Jessica in a cleverly drawn study of pre @-@ pubescent love . We 're very fond of the scene in which Bart leaps out of the window at the church , after which Homer cries : He 's heading for the window ! " Colin Jacobson at DVD Movie Guide said in a review of the sixth season DVD : " We don ’ t often see Bart in a sympathetic light , so shows like this one are fun . " Girlfriend " reminds me of Season Four ’ s " New Kid on the Block " since it also featured Bart in love , though the programs differ since here the girl reciprocates . Streep does nicely as the bad kid and we get many fine moments in this memorable program . " TV Squad 's Adam Finley said : " Homer and Marge remained in the background for most of this episode , with Bart and Lisa becoming the main focus . Earlier episodes seemed to focus more on the dynamics between the two siblings , and it 's always a nice change of pace when the show examines their love for one another as opposed to constant rivalries . Lisa really wants to help Bart in this episode , and it 's actually quite touching . " 
 In a 2008 article , Entertainment Weekly named Meryl Streep 's role as Jessica Lovejoy as one of the sixteen best guest appearances on The Simpsons . Total Film 's Nathan Ditum ranked Streep 's performance as the fifth best guest appearance in the show 's history , commenting that she is " the perfect mix of beguiling and devilish as Reverend Lovejoy ’ s rebellious daughter . " David Mirkin told the Daily News of Los Angeles that " Bart 's Girlfriend " and " Homer the Great " are his favorite episodes of the season . Mirkin liked the scene where Bart is punched by Nelson at the playground because Bart takes a while to recover , which made the scene more realistic . Nancy Cartwright told the Chicago Tribune that this episode , and " Lisa 's Substitute " from season two , are her two favorite The Simpsons episodes . 
 = Delhi Metro = 
 The Delhi Metro is a metro system serving Delhi and its satellite cities of Faridabad , Gurgaon , Noida and Ghaziabad in National Capital Region in India . Delhi Metro is the world 's 12th largest metro system in terms of both length and number of stations . , the network consists of five colour @-@ coded regular lines and the faster Airport Express line , with a total length of 213 kilometres ( 132 mi ) serving 160 stations ( including 6 on Airport Express line ) . The system has a mix of underground , at @-@ grade , and elevated stations using both broad @-@ gauge and standard @-@ gauge . The metro has an average daily ridership of 2 @.@ 4 million passengers , and , as of August 2010 , had already carried over 1 @.@ 25 billion passengers since its <unk> named second best metro in world 
 Delhi Metro Rail Corporation Limited ( DMRC ) , a state @-@ owned company with equal equity participation from Government of India and Government of Delhi , built and operates the Delhi Metro . The Delhi Metro Rail Corporation has been certified by the United Nations as the first metro rail and rail @-@ based system in the world to get " carbon credits for reducing greenhouse gas emissions " and helping in reducing pollution levels in the city by 630 @,@ 000 tonnes every year . DMRC operates around 2000 trips daily between 05 : 30 till 00 : 00 running with a headway varying between 1 – 2 minutes and 4 – 10 minutes . The trains are usually of four , six and eight @-@ coach . The power output is supplied by 25 @-@ kilovolt , 50 @-@ hertz alternating current through overhead catenary . 
 Planning for the metro started in 1984 , when the Delhi Development Authority and the Urban Arts Commission came up with a proposal for developing a multi @-@ modal transport system for the city . Delhi Metro Rail Corporation ( DMRC ) was incorporated in May 1995 , construction started in 1998 , and the first section , on the Red Line , opened in 2002 . The development of network was divided into phases , Phase I containing 3 lines was completed by 2006 and Phase II in 2011 . Phase III is scheduled for completion by 2016 . Phase IV has been approved by the Delhi government , awaiting cabinet approval , to be completed by 2020 . 
 Rapid MetroRail Gurgaon which opened in 2013 , whilst linked to Delhi Metro by the Yellow Line is a separate metro system ( with a different owner / operator than the Delhi Metro ) , although tokens and cards from the Delhi Metro can be used in its network . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The concept of a mass rapid transit for New Delhi first emerged from a traffic and travel characteristics study which was carried out in the city in 1969 . Over the next several years , many official committees by a variety of government departments were commissioned to examine issues related to technology , route alignment , and governmental jurisdiction . In 1984 , the Delhi Development Authority and the Urban Arts Commission came up with a proposal for developing a multi @-@ modal transport system , which would consist of constructing three underground mass rapid transit corridors as well augmenting the city 's existing suburban railway and road transport networks . 
 While extensive technical studies and the raising of finance for the project were in progress , the city expanded significantly resulting in a twofold rise in population and a fivefold rise in the number of vehicles between 1981 and 1998 . Consequently , traffic congestion and pollution soared , as an increasing number of commuters took to private vehicles with the existing bus system unable to bear the load . An attempt at privatising the bus transport system in 1992 merely compounded the problem , with inexperienced operators plying poorly maintained , noisy and polluting buses on lengthy routes , resulting in long waiting times , unreliable service , extreme overcrowding , unqualified drivers , speeding and reckless driving . To rectify the situation , the Government of India and the Government of Delhi jointly set up a company called the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation ( DMRC ) on 3 May 1995 , with E. Sreedharan as the managing director . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 Physical construction work on the Delhi Metro started on 1 October 1998 . After the previous problems experienced by the Kolkata Metro , which was badly delayed and 12 times over budget due to " political meddling , technical problems and bureaucratic delays " , DMRC is a special purpose organisation vested with great autonomy and powers to execute this gigantic project involving many technical complexities , under a difficult urban environment and within a very limited time frame . DMRC was given full powers to hire people , decide on tenders and control funds . The DMRC then consulted the Hong Kong MTRC on rapid transit operation and construction techniques . As a result , construction proceeded smoothly , except for one major disagreement in 2000 , where the Ministry of Railways forced the system to use broad gauge despite the DMRC 's preference for standard gauge . 
 The first elevated line of the Delhi Metro was inaugurated by Atal Bihari Vajpayee , the Prime Minister of India , on 24 December 2002 & the first underground line was inaugurated by Dr Manmohan Singh on 20 December 2004 , and thus , it became the second underground rapid transit system in India , after the Kolkata Metro . The first underground section of Delhi Metro was Vishwa Vidyalaya - Kashmere Gate section which included 4 @.@ 5 km tunnel & 4 stations namely Vishwa Vidyalaya , Vidhan Sabha , Civil Lines & Kashmere Gate station . This project was constructed by Kumagai @-@ Skanska @-@ HCC @-@ Itochu JV or <unk> @-@ JV , a joint venture between Kumagai Gumi , Skanska , Hindustan Construction Company & Itochu . 
 The first phase of the project was completed in 2006 , on budget and almost three years ahead of schedule , an achievement described by Business Week as " nothing short of a miracle " . 
 = = = Construction accidents = = = 
 On 19 October 2008 , a girder launcher and a part of the overhead Blue Line extension under construction in Laxmi Nagar , East Delhi collapsed and fell on passing vehicles underneath . Workers were using a crane to lift a 400 @-@ tonne concrete span of the bridge when the launcher collapsed along with a 34 @-@ metre ( 112 ft ) long span of the bridge on top of a <unk> bus killing the driver and a labourer . 
 On 12 July 2009 , a section of bridge collapsed while it was being erected at <unk> , near East of Kailash , on the Central Secretariat – Badarpur corridor . Six people died and 15 were injured . The following day , on 13 July 2009 , a crane that was removing the debris collapsed , and with a bowling pin effect collapsed two other nearby cranes , injuring six . On 22 July 2009 , worker at Ashok Park Metro station was killed when a steel beam fell on him . Over a hundred people , including 93 workers , have died since work on the metro began in 1998 . 
 = = Network = = 
 The Delhi Metro is being built in phases . Phase I completed 58 stations and 65 @.@ 0 km ( 40 @.@ 4 mi ) of route length , of which 13 @.@ 0 km ( 8 @.@ 1 mi ) is underground and 52 @.@ 1 km ( 32 @.@ 4 mi ) surface or elevated . The inauguration of the Dwarka – Barakhamba Road corridor of the Blue Line marked the completion of Phase I on October 2006 . Phase II of the network comprises 124 @.@ 6 km ( 77 @.@ 4 mi ) of route length and 85 stations , and is fully completed , with the first section opened in June 2008 and the last line opened in August 2011 . Phase III ( 140 km , 69 stations ) and Phase IV ( 106 km , 51 stations ) are planned to be completed by 2016 and 2020 respectively , with the network spanning 436 km ( 271 mi ) by then . 
 = = = Current routes = = = 
 As of November 2015 , with the completion of Phase I , Phase II and the beginning of operations on Phase III , the Delhi Metro network comprises five coloured lines ( plus the Airport Express line ) , serving 154 metro stations ( with 6 more stations on the Airport Express line , for a total of 160 ) , and operating on a total route length of 213 kilometres ( 132 mi ) . 
 = = = = Red Line = = = = 
 The Red Line was first line of the Metro to be opened and connects Rithala in the west to <unk> Garden in the east , covering a distance of 25 @.@ 09 kilometres ( 15 @.@ 59 mi ) . It is partly elevated and partly at grade , and crosses the Yamuna River between Kashmere Gate and Shastri Park stations . The inauguration of the first stretch between Shahdara and Tis Hazari on 24 December 2002 caused the ticketing system to collapse due to the line being crowded to four times its capacity by citizens eager to have a ride . Subsequent sections were inaugurated from Tis Hazari – <unk> ( later renamed Inderlok ) on 4 October 2003 , Inderlok – Rithala on 31 March 2004 , and Shahdara – <unk> Garden on 4 June 2008 . The red line has two interchange stations , the first Kashmere Gate with the yellow line and the second Inderlok with the green <unk> from 24 November 2013 six coach trains will be inducted in a phased manner in red line . 
 = = = = Yellow Line = = = = 
 The Yellow Line was the second line of the Metro and was the first underground line to be opened . It runs for 49 kilometres ( 30 mi ) from north to south and connects <unk> <unk> with <unk> City Centre in Gurgaon . The northern and southern parts of the line are elevated , while the central section passes through some of the most congested parts of Delhi is underground . The first section between Vishwa Vidyalaya and Kashmere Gate ( built by Kumagai @-@ Skanska @-@ HCC @-@ Itochu Joint Venture ) opened on 20 December 2004 , and the subsequent sections of Kashmere Gate – Central Secretariat opened on 3 July 2005 , and Vishwa Vidyalaya – <unk> on 4 February 2009 . This line also possesses the country 's deepest Metro station ( the second deepest metro station in the world ) at <unk> Bazaar , situated 30 metres ( 98 ft ) below ground level . On 21 June 2010 , an additional stretch from Qutub Minar to <unk> City Centre was opened , initially operating separately from the main line . However , Chhatarpur station on this line opened on 26 August 2010 . Due to delay in acquiring the land for constructing the station , it was constructed using pre @-@ fabricated structures in a record time of nine months and is the only station in the Delhi metro network to be made completely of steel . The connecting link between Central Secretariat and Qutub Minar opened on 3 September 2010 @.@ re on 10 November 2015 , the line was further extended between <unk> and <unk> <unk> in Outer Delhi . Interchanges are available with the Red Line and Kashmere Gate ISBT at Kashmere Gate station , Blue Line at Rajiv Chowk Station , Violet Line at Central Secretariat , Airport Express ( Orange ) Line at New Delhi , Rapid MetroRail Gurgaon at <unk> and with the Indian Railways network at Chandni chowk Delhi Junction Railway station and New Delhi New Delhi railway stations . Yellow line is the first line of Delhi Metro which has phased out all four coach trains with six and eight coach configuration . The Metro Museum at Patel Chowk Metro station is a collection of display panels , historical photographs and exhibits , tracing the genesis of the Delhi Metro . The museum was opened on 1 January 2009 . 
 = = = = Blue Line = = = = 
 The Blue Line was the third line of the Metro to be opened , and the first to connect areas outside Delhi . Mainly elevated and partly underground , it connects Dwarka Sub City in the west with the satellite city of Noida in the east , covering a distance of 47 @.@ 4 kilometres ( 29 @.@ 5 mi ) . The first section of this line between Dwarka and Barakhamba Road was inaugurated on 1 January 2006 , and subsequent sections opened between Dwarka – Dwarka Sector 9 on 1 April 2006 , Barakhamba Road – Indraprastha on 11 November 2006 , Indraprastha – Yamuna Bank on 10 May 2009 , Yamuna Bank – Noida City Centre on 12 November 2009 , and Dwarka Sector 9 – Dwarka Sector 21 on 30 October 2010 . This line crosses the Yamuna River between Indraprastha and Yamuna Bank stations , and has India 's second <unk> bridge across the Northern Railways mainlines near Pragati Maidan . A branch of the Blue line , inaugurated on 8 January 2010 , takes off from Yamuna Bank station and runs for 6 @.@ 25 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 88 mi ) up to Anand Vihar in east Delhi . It was further extended up to Vaishali which was opened to public on 14 July 2011 . A small stretch of 2 @.@ 76 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 71 mi ) from Dwarka Sector 9 to Dwarka Sector 21 was inaugurated on 30 October 2010 . Interchanges are available with the Yellow Line at Rajiv Chowk station , Green line at Kirti Nagar , Violet line at Mandi House , Airport Express ( Orange ) line at Dwarka Sector 21 and with the Indian Railways network and Interstate Bus Station ( ISBT ) at Anand Vihar station , which connects with Anand Vihar Railway Terminal and Anand Vihar ISBT . 
 = = = = Green Line = = = = 
 Opened in 2010 , Green Line ( Line 4 ) is the fifth line of the Delhi Metro network and the first line on standard gauge , as opposed to previous broad gauge lines . It runs between Inderlok ( station on the Red Line ) and Mundka with a branch line connecting the line 's Ashok Park Main station with Kirti Nagar station on the Blue Line . The completely elevated line , built as part of the Phase @-@ II of Delhi Metro runs mostly along the busy NH 10 route in West Delhi . The line consists of 17 stations including an interchange station covering a total length of 18 @.@ 46 <unk> line also has the country 's first standard @-@ gauge maintenance depot at Mundka . The line was opened in two stages , with the 15 @.@ 1 km Inderlok – Mundka section opening on 3 April 2010 [ 1 ] and the 3 @.@ 5 km Kirti Nagar – Ashok Park Main branch line on 27 August 2011 . On 6 August 2012 , in a step that will improve commuting in National Capital Region , the Union government has approved extension of Delhi Metro from Mundka to Bahadurgarh in Haryana . The 11 @.@ 18 km metro stretch will have seven stations at Mundka Industrial Area , <unk> , Tikri Kalan , Tikri Border , Modern Industrial Estate , Bahadurgarh Bus Stand and City Park between Mundka and Bahadurgarh . 
 = = = = Violet Line = = = = 
 The Violet Line is the most recent line of the Metro to be opened , and the second standard @-@ gauge corridor after the Green Line . The 37 km ( 23 mi ) long line connects Escorts Mujesar in Faridabad to ITO , with 22 @.@ 8 km ( 14 @.@ 2 mi ) being overhead and the rest underground . The first section between Central Secretariat and Sarita Vihar was inaugurated on 3 October 2010 , just hours before the inaugural ceremony of the 2010 Commonwealth Games , and connects the Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium , which was the venue for the opening and closing ceremonies of the event . Completed in just 41 months , it includes a 100 m ( 330 ft ) long bridge over the Indian Railways mainlines and a 167 @.@ 5 m ( 550 ft ) long cable @-@ stayed bridge across an operational road flyover , and connects several hospitals , tourist attractions , and a major industrial estate along its route . Services are provided at intervals of 5 min . An interchange with the Yellow Line is available at Central Secretariat through an integrated concourse . On 14 January 2011 , the remaining portion from Sarita Vihar to Badarpur was opened for commercial service , adding three new stations to the network and marking the completion of the line . The section between Mandi House and Central Secretariat , was opened on 26 June 2014 . After that a 971 @-@ metre section between ITO and Mandi House was opened on 8 June 2015 . The latest addition to the line , an 14 km ( 8 @.@ 7 mi ) extension southwards till Escorts Mujesar in Faridabad was inaugurated by Prime Minister Narendra Modi on 6 September 2015 . All the nine Metro stations of the Badarpur – Escorts Mujesar ( Faridabad ) section of Delhi Metro 's Phase 3 , have been awarded the highest possible rating ( platinum ) for adherence to green building norms , by the Indian Green Building Council ( <unk> ) , which has devised a rating mechanism for Metro stations and buildings on a scale of platinum , gold , silver etc. for following the green building specifications . The awards for these stations were given to DMRC 's managing director , Dr. <unk> Singh by Dr. P C Jain , Chairperson , <unk> in the presence of DMRC 's directors and senior officials on 10 September 2015 . Currently the Faridabad corridor of Delhi Metro Violet Line is the longest metro corridor outside of Delhi , consisting of 9 stations and the total length of corridor being 14 km . 
 = = = = Airport Express = = = = 
 The Airport Express line runs for 22 @.@ 7 km ( 14 @.@ 1 mi ) from New Delhi Railway Station to Dwarka Sector 21 , linking the Indira Gandhi International Airport . The line was operated by Delhi Airport Metro Express Pvt. Limited ( <unk> ) , a subsidiary of Reliance Infrastructure , the concessionaire of the line till 30 June 2013 and is now being operated by DMRC . The line was constructed at a cost of ₹ 57 billion ( US $ 850 million ) , of which Reliance Infrastructure invested ₹ 28 @.@ 85 billion ( US $ 430 million ) and will pay fees on a revenue @-@ share model . The line has six stations ( <unk> Kuan and Delhi <unk> became operational on 15 August 2011 ) , with some featuring check @-@ in facilities , parking , and eateries . Rolling stock consists of six @-@ coach trains operating at intervals of ten minutes and having a maximum speed of 135 km / h ( 84 mph ) . Originally scheduled to open before the 2010 Commonwealth Games , the line failed to obtain the mandatory safety clearance , and was opened on 24 February 2011 , after a delay of around 5 months . After 16 months of commencement of operations , the line was shut down for repairs of the viaducts on 8 July 2012 . The line reopened on 22 January 2013 . On 27 June 2013 Reliance Infrastructure Ltd intimated DMRC that they are unable to operate the line beyond 30 June 2013 . Following this DMRC took over operations of Airport Express line from 1 July 2013 with an Operations and Maintenance team of 100 officials to handle the line . In Jan 2015 , DMRC reported that Airport Metro has recorded about 30 per cent rise in its ridership following the fare reduction of up to 40 per cent in July last year On 14 September 2015 DMRC announced to reduce fares even further to improve the ridership of the line , the new fare structure will have maximum fare of Rs 60 and minimum of Rs 10 instead of Rs 100 and Rs 20 charged earlier , a reduction of about 40 % . DMRC has stated that this was done to reduce the crowding on Blue line , diverting some of the Dwarka @-@ bound passengers to Airport Express Line , which is underutilised and faster compared to the Blue Line . 
 = = = Planned extensions = = = 
 Delhi Metro was planned to be built in phases spread over around 20 years as with each phase having a target of five years and end of one phase marking the beginning of another . Phase I ( 65 km ) and Phase II ( 125 km ) were completed in 2006 and 2011 , respectively , and Phase III and Phase IV are scheduled for completion in 2016 and 2021 , respectively . Work on Phase III started in 2011 while planning for Phase IV has begun . Ex @-@ chief of DMRC hinted that by the time Phase IV is completed , the city will need Phase V to cope with rising population and transport needs . 
 = = = = Phase III = = = = 
 The deadline for completion of Phase 3 is 2016 . Out of 2 new lines and 11 route extensions proposed for Phase III , cabinet approvals have been obtained for 2 new lines and 10 route extensions totalling 167 @.@ 27 km , with an estimated cost of ₹ 350 billion ( US $ 5 @.@ 2 billion ) . Construction has already begun on many of these . In April 2014 the Delhi Lt. Governor gave approval for two further extensions . All the approved lines are : . 
 Phase III will have 28 underground stations covering 41 km . More than 20 tunnel boring machines are expected to be simultaneously used during construction of Phase III . Delhi Metro is expecting a ridership of 4 million after completion of Phase III . DMRC has decided to use communication based train control ( CBTC ) for signalling which will allow trains to run at a short headway of 90 seconds . Keeping this in mind and other constraints , DMRC changed its decision to build 9 car long stations for new lines and instead opting for shorter stations which can accommodate 6 car trains . 
 For the first time Delhi Metro will construct ring lines in Phase III . Till Phase II , Delhi Metro focused on expanding the reach of metro and thus built long radial lines . However , in Phase III , Delhi Metro is aiming to interconnect existing lines by ring lines to improve connectivity . This will not only help in reducing distances but will also relieve radial lines of some congestion . 
 = = = = Phase IV = = = = 
 Phase IV has a 2021 deadline , and tentatively includes further extensions to Sonia Vihar , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> <unk> , Palam , <unk> , <unk> , Ghazipur , Noida sector 62 , extensions of Violet line , Green line , Line 8 , having a total length of over 100 km . There might be some changes in plan before actual construction starts on these lines . Delhi metro phase 4 got delhi government approval awaiting union cabinet approval . The proposed corridors : Rithala <unk> ( 21 @.@ 73 km ) Inderlok Indraprastha ( 12 @.@ 57 km ) <unk> Terminal 1 ( 22 @.@ 20 km ) Lajpat Nagar Saket G @-@ Block ( 7 @.@ 96 km ) <unk> ( west ) RK Ashram ( 28 @.@ 92 km ) <unk> <unk> ( 12 @.@ 54 km ) Along with that the <unk> government planning a metro corridor between gurgaon and <unk> . As well as gurgaon will soon see a multiple extension of rapid metro and delhi metro . Some of are a metro corridor between <unk> to <unk> chowk line , A new <unk> lines covering old and new gurgaon region like gurgaon railway station and bus stand and various sectors like sector 10 , <unk> chowk , <unk> connecting <unk> expressway metro line etc , yellow line extension from <unk> city centre to <unk> via <unk> chowk ( gurgaon ) interchanging with old gurgaon metro line , connecting with delhi regional rapid rail system ( delhi gurgaon <unk> corridor ) , pod taxi system . Dwarka expressway metro line . As well as plans have been mooted to construct a new line from Noida Sector 62 to Greater Noida which will intersect Indraprastha – Noida Sector 32 line . The Ghaziabad Development Authority is planning to extend Delhi Metro lines deeper into Ghaziabad through extension of the Blue Line from Vaishali to Mehrauli via <unk> . The independently operated Gurgaon Metro , opened in November 2013 , will also interchange with the Delhi Metro at <unk> station on Yellow line . For the year 2012 – 13 , Noida development Authority has allocated Rs 5 billion for Metro extension , with City Centre Metro line being extended till the crossing of Sector 71 and 72 . After phase 4 , delhi metro will focus on phase 5 covering outer region of delhi . And phase 6 , 7 and many more plan according it . 
 = = Finances = = 
 = = = Summary financials = = = 
 The table below is based on the 2014 – 15 Annual Report . 
 EBITDA stands for " Earnings before Interest Taxes <unk> & <unk> " 
 EBT stands for " Earnings Before Tax " 
 Of note , Delhi Metro has been operating with a loss on an EBT basis for the past few years . EBITDA margin declined from 73 % in Fiscal 2007 to 35 % in Fiscal 2015 . That said , Debt to Equity improved from 1 @.@ 43 in FY07 to 1 @.@ 15 in <unk> . 
 = = = Funding and capitalisation = = = 
 DMRC is owned equally by the Delhi government and the Government of India . As of March 2015 , total debt stood at ₹ 246 billion ( US $ 3 @.@ 7 billion ) , while equity capital was ₹ 214 billion ( US $ 3 @.@ 2 billion ) . Cost of the debt is 0 % for <unk> of India and Delhi government loans , and between 0 @.@ 01 % and 2 @.@ 3 % for Japan International Cooperation Agency loans . Of the equity capital , ₹ 163 billion ( US $ 2 @.@ 4 billion ) is paid @-@ up capital and rest is reserves and surplus . 
 = = Operations = = 
 Trains operate at a frequency of one to two minutes to five to ten minutes between 05 : 00 and 00 : 00 , depending upon the peak and off @-@ peak hours . Trains operating within the network typically travel at speed up to 50 km / h ( 31 mph ) , and stop for about 20 seconds at each station . Automated station announcements are recorded in Hindi and English . Many stations have services such as ATMs , food outlets , cafés , convenience stores and mobile recharge . Eating , drinking , smoking and chewing of gum are prohibited in the entire system . The Metro also has a sophisticated fire alarm system for advance warning in emergencies , and fire retardant material is used in trains as well as on the premises of stations . Navigation information is available on Google Transit . Since October 2010 , the first coach of every train is reserved for women . However , last coaches are also reserved when the train changes tracks at the terminal stations in the Red , Green and Violet Lines . To make travelling by metro a smoother experience , Delhi Metro has launched its own official app for smartphone users , ( iPhone and Android ) that will provide information on various facilities like nearest metro station , fare , parking availability , tourist spots near metro stations , security and emergency helpline numbers . 
 = = = Security = = = 
 Security on the Delhi Metro is handled by the Central Industrial Security Force ( CISF ) , who have been guarding the system ever since they took over from the Delhi Police in 2007 . Closed @-@ circuit cameras are used to monitor trains and stations , and feed from these is monitored by both the CISF and Delhi Metro authorities at their respective control rooms . Over 3500 CISF personnel have been deployed to deal with law and order issues in the system , in addition to metal detectors , X @-@ ray baggage inspection systems , and dog squads which are used to secure the system . About 5 @,@ 200 CCTV cameras have been installed , which cover every nook and corner of each Metro station . Each of the underground stations has about 45 to 50 cameras installed while the elevated stations have about 16 to 20 cameras each . The monitoring of these cameras is done by the CISF , which is in charge of security of the Metro , as well as the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation . <unk> are provided in each train car for emergency communication between the passengers and the train operator . Periodic security drills are carried out at stations and on trains to ensure preparedness of security agencies in emergency situations . DMRC is also looking at raising the station walls and railings for the safety of passengers . 
 = = = Ticketing and recharge = = = 
 For the convenience of customers , Delhi Metro commuters have three choices for ticket purchase . The RFID tokens are valid only for a single journey on the day of purchase and the value depends on the distance travelled , with fares for a single journey ranging from ₹ 8 ( 12 ¢ US ) to ₹ 30 ( 45 ¢ US ) . Fares are calculated based on the origin and destination stations using a fare chart . A common ticketing facility for commuters travelling on Delhi Transport Corporation ( DTC ) buses and the Metro was introduced in 2011 . Travel cards are available for longer durations and are most convenient for frequent commuters . They are valid for one year from the date of purchase or the date of last recharge , and are available in denominations of ₹ 200 ( US $ 3 @.@ 00 ) to ₹ 1 @,@ 000 ( US $ 14 @.@ 90 ) . A 10 % discount is given on all travel made on it . A deposit of ₹ 50 ( 74 ¢ US ) needs to be made to buy a new card which is refundable on the return of the card any time before its expiry if the card is not physically damaged . Tourist cards can be used for unlimited travel on the Delhi Metro network over short periods of time . There are two kinds of tourist cards valid for one and three days respectively . The cost of a one @-@ day card is ₹ 150 ( US $ 2 @.@ 20 ) and that of a three @-@ day card is ₹ 300 ( US $ 4 @.@ 50 ) , besides a refundable deposit of ₹ 50 ( 74 ¢ US ) that must be paid at the time of purchasing the card . According to new regime , the maximum permissible time limit for stay within the Metro system – 170 minutes at present – will now be 180 minutes for those buying tickets of Rs . 23 or above , 100 minutes for tickets costing Rs . 19 – 23 , and 65 minutes for tickets up to Rs . 18 . 
 = = = Problems = = = 
 As the network has expanded , high ridership in new trains have led to increasing instances of overcrowding and delays on the Delhi Metro . To alleviate the problem , 8 coach trains have been introduced in Yellow line and Blue line and an increase in the frequency of trains has been proposed . Infrequent , overcrowded and erratic feeder bus services connecting stations to nearby localities have also been reported as an area of concern . 
 = = = Ridership = = = 
 Delhi Metro has been registering a continuous increase in ridership since its inception . When Metro services were introduced in 2002 , the average ridership was 80 @,@ 000 passengers per day . As of 2015 , daily ridership has risen to 2 @.@ 6 million , with the latest ridership record set on 28 August 2015 . On 4 August 2014 daily ridership crossed the 2 @.@ 7 million figure . Since then the highest ridership has kept on surpassing the previous best , compelling metro authorities to keep increasing the services on busy routes . Most recent Delhi Metro daily ridership record of 3 @.@ 175 million passengers was reached on the eve of the <unk> ( 28 August 2015 ) , when commuters poured in large numbers throughout the day . On 25 December 2014 , it was reported that the ridership of the Airport Express had almost doubled in the past year to almost 600 @,@ 000 passengers per month now , as compared to just above 300 @,@ 000 at the beginning of the calendar year . Currently , Delhi Metro has about 220 trains of four , six and eight coaches totalling 1 @,@ 290 coaches . It is further planning to add 421 more coaches on the existing route before the completion of phase 3 . During the financial year 2015 , DMRC on an average pressed 1 @,@ 083 coaches in an hour ( during peak hour ) , in 2012 – 13 , the number was 819 . On an average trains make 2 @,@ 880 trips per day . 
 = = Infrastructure = = 
 = = = Rolling Stock = = = 
 The Metro uses rolling stock of two different gauges . Phase I lines use 1 @,@ 676 mm ( 5 @.@ 499 ft ) broad gauge rolling stock , while three Phase II lines use 1 @,@ 435 mm ( 4 @.@ 708 ft ) standard gauge rolling stock . Trains are maintained at seven depots at Khyber Pass and <unk> for the Yellow Line , Mundka for the Green Line , <unk> and Yamuna Bank for the Blue Line , Shastri Park for the Red Line , and Sarita Vihar for the Violet Line . Maglev trains were initially considered for some lines of Phase 3 , but DMRC decided to continue with conventional rail in August 2012 . 
 = = = = Broad gauge = = = = 
 The rolling stock is manufactured by two major suppliers . For the Phase I , the rolling stock was supplied by a consortium of companies comprising Hyundai Rotem , Mitsubishi Corporation , and <unk> coaches have a very similar look to MTR Rotem EMU , except with only 4 doors and use sliding doors . The coaches were initially built in South Korea by ROTEM , then in Bangalore by <unk> through a technology transfer arrangement . These trains consist of four 3 @.@ 2 @-@ metre ( 10 ft ) wide stainless steel lightweight coaches with vestibules permitting movement throughout their length and can carry up to 1500 passengers , with 50 seated and 330 standing passengers per coach . The coaches are fully air conditioned , equipped with automatic doors , microprocessor @-@ controlled brakes and secondary air suspension , and are capable of maintaining an average speed of 32 km / h ( 20 mph ) over a distance of 1 @.@ 1 km ( 0 @.@ 68 mi ) . The system is extensible up to eight coaches , and platforms have been designed accordingly . 
 The rolling stock for Phase II is being supplied by Bombardier Transportation , which has received an order for 614 cars worth approximately US $ 1 @.@ 1 billion . While initial trains were made in Görlitz , Germany and Sweden , the remainder will be built at Bombardier 's factory in <unk> , near Vadodara . These trains are a mix of four @-@ car and six @-@ car consists , capable of accommodating 1178 and 1792 commuters per train respectively . The coaches possess several improved features like Closed Circuit Television ( CCTV ) cameras with eight @-@ hour backup for added security , charging points in all coaches for cell phones and laptops , improved air conditioning to provide a temperature of 25 degrees Celsius even in packed conditions and heaters for winter . 
 = = = = Standard gauge = = = = 
 The standard gauge rolling stock is manufactured by <unk> at its factory in Bangalore . The trains are four @-@ car consists with a capacity of 1506 commuters per train , accommodating 50 seated and 292 standing passengers in each coach . These trains will have CCTV cameras in and outside the coaches , power supply connections inside coaches to charge mobiles and laptops , better humidity control , microprocessor @-@ controlled disc brakes , and will be capable of maintaining an average speed of 34 km / h ( 21 mph ) over a distance of 1 @.@ 1 km ( 0 @.@ 68 mi ) . 
 = = = = Airport Express = = = = 
 Eight 6 @-@ car trains supplied by CAF <unk> were imported from Spain . CAF held 5 % equity in the <unk> project , and Reliance Infrastructure held the remaining 95 % before DMRC took over the operations . The trains on this line are of a premium standard compared to the existing metro trains and have in @-@ built noise reduction and padded fabric seats . The coaches are equipped with LCD screens for entertainment of the passengers and also provide flight information for convenience of air travellers . The trains are fitted with an event recorder which can withstand high levels of temperature and impact and the wheels have flange lubrication system for less noise and better riding comfort . 
 = = = Signalling and Telecommunication = = = 
 The Delhi Metro uses cab signalling along with a centralised automatic train control system consisting of automatic train operation , Automatic Train Protection and automatic train signalling modules . A 380 MHz digital trunked TETRA radio communication system from Motorola is used on all lines to carry both voice and data information . For Blue Line Siemens Transportation Systems has supplied the electronic interlocking <unk> , the operation control system <unk> OC 500 and the automation control system <unk> 700 M. An integrated system comprising optical fibre cable , on @-@ train radio , CCTV , and a centralised clock and public address system is used for telecommunication during train operations as well as emergencies . For Red and Yellow lines <unk> has supplied signalling system and for line Green and <unk> Bombardier Transportation has supplied <unk> 350 signalling system . 
 The Airport Express line has introduced WiFi services at all stations along the route on 13 January 2012 . Connectivity inside metro trains travelling on the route is expected in the future . The WiFi service is provided by You Broadband . A fully automated , <unk> train system has been offered to Delhi Metro by the French defence and civilian technologies major Thales . 
 = = Environmental Impact = = 
 The Delhi Metro has won awards from <unk> environmentally friendly practices from organisations including the United Nations , <unk> , and the International Organization for Standardization , becoming the second metro in the world , after the New York City Subway , to be ISO 14001 certified for environmentally friendly construction . Most of the Metro stations on the Blue Line conduct rainwater harvesting as an environmental protection measure . It is also the first railway project in the world to earn carbon credits after being registered with the United Nations under the Clean Development Mechanism , and has so far earned 400 @,@ 000 carbon credits by saving energy through the use of regenerative braking systems on its trains . To reduce its dependence on non @-@ renewable sources of energy , DMRC is looking forward to harness solar energy and install solar panels at the <unk> , Noida Sector @-@ 21 , Anand Vihar and Pragati Maidan Metro stations and DMRC 's residential complex at <unk> Vihar . 
 The Metro has been promoted as an integral part of community infrastructure , and community artwork depicting the local way of life has been put on display at stations . Students of local art colleges have also designed decorative murals at Metro stations , while pillars of the viaduct on some elevated sections have been decorated with mosaic murals created by local schoolchildren . The Metro station at INA Colony has a gallery showcasing artwork and handicrafts from across India , while all stations on the Central Secretariat – Qutub Minar section of the Yellow Line have panels installed on the monumental architectural heritage of Delhi . The Nobel Memorial Wall at Rajiv Chowk has portraits of the seven Nobel Laureates from India : Rabindranath Tagore , CV Raman , <unk> Khorana , Mother Teresa , Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar , Amartya Sen and Venkatraman Ramakrishnan and provide details about their contribution to society and a panel each on Alfred Nobel and the Nobel Prizes . 
 = Time Enough at Last = 
 " Time Enough at Last " is episode 8 of the American television anthology series The Twilight Zone . The episode was adapted from a short story written by Lynn Venable ( pen name of Marilyn Venable ) . The short story appeared in the January 1953 edition of the science fiction magazine If : Worlds of Science Fiction about seven years before the television episode first aired . " Time Enough at Last " became one of the most famous episodes of the original Twilight Zone and has been frequently parodied since . It is " the story of a man who seeks salvation in the rubble of a ruined world " and tells of Henry Bemis / <unk> / , played by Burgess Meredith , who loves books , yet is surrounded by those who would prevent him from reading them . The episode follows Bemis through the post apocalyptic world , touching on such social issues as anti @-@ intellectualism , the dangers of reliance upon technology , and the difference between aloneness ( solitude ) and loneliness . 
