 = = Opening narration = = 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 <unk> , far sighted bank teller and avid bookworm Henry Bemis ( Meredith ) works at his window in a bank , while reading David Copperfield , which causes him to <unk> an annoyed customer . Bemis 's angry boss ( Taylor ) , and later his nagging wife ( <unk> ) , both complain to him that he wastes far too much time reading " doggerel " . As a cruel joke , his wife asks him to read poetry from one of his books to her ; he eagerly obliges , only to find that she has inked over the text on every page , obscuring the words . Seconds later , she destroys the book by ripping the pages from it much to Henry 's dismay . 
 The next day , as usual , Henry takes his lunch break in the bank 's vault , where his reading will not be disturbed . Moments after he sees a newspaper headline , which reads " H @-@ Bomb Capable of Total Destruction " , an enormous explosion outside the bank violently shakes the vault , knocking Bemis unconscious . After regaining consciousness and recovering the thick glasses required for him to see , Bemis emerges from the vault to find the bank demolished and everyone in it dead . Leaving the bank , he sees that the entire city has been destroyed , and realizes that a nuclear war has devastated the Earth , but that his being in the vault has saved him . 
 Finding himself totally alone in a shattered world with food to last him a lifetime but no one to share it with , Bemis succumbs to despair . As he prepares to commit suicide using a revolver he has found , Bemis sees the ruins of the public library in the distance . Investigating , he finds that the books are still intact and readable ; all the books he could ever hope for are his for the reading , and ( as he gazes upon a huge fallen face of a clock ) learns that he has all the time in the world to read them without interruption . 
 His despair gone , Bemis contentedly sorts the books he looks forward to reading for years to come . Just as he bends down to pick up the first book , he stumbles , and his glasses fall off and shatter . In shock , he picks up the broken remains of the glasses he is virtually blind without , and says , " That 's not fair . That 's not fair at all . There was time now . There was — was all the time I needed … ! It 's not fair ! It 's not fair ! " and bursts into tears , surrounded by books he now can never read . 
 = = Closing narration = = 
 = = Production = = 
 " Time Enough at Last " was one of the first episodes written for The Twilight Zone . It introduced Burgess Meredith to the series ; he went on to star in three more episodes , being introduced as " no stranger to The Twilight Zone " in promotional spots for season two 's " The Obsolete Man " . He also narrated for the 1983 film Twilight Zone : The Movie , which made reference to " Time Enough at Last " during its opening sequence , with the characters discussing the episode in detail . 
 Footage of the exterior steps of the library was filmed several months after production had been completed . These steps can also be seen on the exterior of an Eloi public building in MGM 's 1960 version of The Time Machine . John Brahm was nominated for a Directors Guild award for his work on the episode . The book that Bemis was reading in the vault and that flips open when the bomb explodes is A History of the Life and Voyages of Christopher Columbus by Washington Irving . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Although the overriding message may seem to be " careful what you wish for " , there are other themes throughout the episode as well . Paramount among these is the question of solitude versus loneliness , as embodied by Bemis ' moment of near @-@ suicide . Additionally , the portrayal of societal attitudes towards books speaks to the contemporary decline of traditional literature and how , given enough time , reading may become a relic of the past . At the same time , the ending " punishes Bemis for his antisocial behavior , and his greatest desire is thwarted . " 
 Rod Serling 's concluding statement in the episode - that Bemis has become " just a fragment of what man has deeded to himself " - alludes to Robert Burns ' Scots language poem " To a Mouse " ( 1785 , for which John Steinbeck 's book , Of Mice and Men ( 1938 ) , was also named ) . The poem concludes : " The best @-@ laid schemes o ' mice an men / Gang aft <unk> " ( translation : " Often go awry " ) . 
 Although " Time Enough at Last " implies that nuclear warfare has destroyed humanity , film critic Andrew Sarris notes that the episode 's necessarily unrealistic format may have been what allowed its production to commence : 
 In the era of the Internet and eBooks , the irony depicted in " Time Enough at Last " has an information age counterpart , according to Weston Ochse of Storytellers Unplugged . As Ochse points out , when Bemis becomes the last person on Earth , he finally has time to read , with all his books at his fingertips and the only impediment is technology when his medium for accessing them — his glasses — breaks . In a hypothetical world where all books are published electronically , Ochse observes , readers would be " only a lightning strike , a faulty switch , a sleepy workman or a natural disaster away from becoming Henry Bemis at the end of the world " — that is , a power outage has the potential to give them time to read , yet like Bemis , they too would lose their medium for accessing their books — namely the computer . This analogy has been taken further by those who suggest that today 's technology @-@ dependent world , where books have become passé ( cf . Bradbury 's " The Pedestrian " ) , could render an outage both a liberator and an executioner : As the gateway to both work and entertainment ( be it a computer , video games or television ) , removing electricity from the equation presents Henry Bemis ' heaven but modern society 's hell . 
 = = = Similar episodes = = = 
 The Twilight Zone often explored similar themes throughout its run . " Time Enough at Last " has strong thematic ties to a number of other episodes in the series , starting with that of isolation , first explored in the series pilot , " Where Is Everybody ? " . It is also a prominent theme in the previous episode " The Lonely " . Additionally , in a plot very similar to that of " Time " , " The Mind and the Matter " tells of a man who uses his mind to erase humanity , only to find that existence without other people is unbearable . The notion of being an outsider , lost in a sea of conformity , was one of the most common themes of the series . 
 Other thematic elements in this episode can be found throughout the series , as well . " The Obsolete Man " takes the episode 's literary subtext — the notion that reading may eventually be considered " obsolete " — to an extreme : The state has declared books obsolete and a librarian ( also played by Meredith ) finds himself on trial for his own obsolescence . This notion , akin to Ray Bradbury 's short story " The Pedestrian " ( 1951 ) , is also alluded to in the episode " Number 12 Looks Just Like You " , in which a perfect and equal world <unk> considers works like those of Shakespeare " smut " . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = Critical and fan favorite = = = 
 " Time Enough at Last " was a ratings success in its initial airing and " became an instant classic " . It " remains one of the best @-@ remembered and best @-@ loved episodes of The Twilight Zone " according to Marc <unk> , author of The Twilight Zone Companion . When a poll asked readers of Twilight Zone Magazine which episode of the series they remembered the most , " Time Enough at Last " was the most frequent response , with " To Serve Man " coming in a distant second . In TV Land 's presentation of TV Guide 's " 100 Most Memorable Moments in Television " , " Time Enough at Last " was ranked at # 25 . 
 In an interview years after this episode aired , Serling cited " Time Enough at Last " as one of his two favorites from the entire series . ( The other episode was " The Invaders " , with Agnes Moorehead . ) 
 = = = In popular culture = = = 
 Many elements of American popular culture frequently pay homage to " Time Enough at Last " . 
 = = = = Amusement park attractions = = = = 
 The Twilight Zone Tower of Terror , a theme park ride at Disney 's Hollywood Studios and Disney California Adventure Park , displays a replica of Henry Bemis ' broken glasses in the lobby . It is noted that , while they are indeed reading glasses , Burgess Meredith wears them the entire episode to make Bemis look more bookish . 
 = = = Comics = = = 
 The comic book version of The Simpsons , Simpsons Comics , published a story called " The Last Fat Man " , based partially on " Time Enough at Last " , and includes a short scene where Homer Simpson <unk> a bespectacled man who is reading a book out of a nuclear bunker so he can eat in it , unintentionally taking shelter in it . 
 = = = Film = = = 
 In Twilight Zone : The Movie ( 1983 ) , Albert Brooks recounts the episode to Dan Aykroyd as they drive along an empty stretch of highway . " This thing freaked me out when I was 7 years old , " says Brooks ' character , adding : " I bought another pair of glasses just in case that would happen . " 
 The episode 's title was borrowed by a 2004 independent film about a man who tries to escape an office building . The film 's official website listed the webmaster 's e @-@ mail alias as " <unk> " . 
 The Pixar movie WALL @-@ E ( 2008 ) , which takes place in a desolate future , also contains a scene in which a pair of broken glasses can be seen in the foreground . 
 = = = Games = = = 
 The PC game Fallout Tactics ( 2001 ) includes a librarian in a desolate world who wants the player to find his missing glasses so he can read his books . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The episode 's title was borrowed by a song on The Fall 's 1992 album Code : Selfish ( 1992 ) 
 = = = Television = = = 
 There are numerous , notable television spoofs of the episode . Examples include : 
 Stephen Colbert 's A Colbert Christmas : The Greatest Gift of All ! ( in the DVD 's second alternative ending ) 
 Family Guy ( at the end of the season 2 episode " Wasted Talent " ) 
 Futurama ( during an episode of " The Scary Door " [ a Twilight Zone @-@ style TV show that airs in the year 3000 ] on " A Head in the Polls " ) 
 SpongeBob SquarePants 
 The Adventures of Jimmy Neutron : Boy Genius ( " Return of the Nanobots " ) 
 The Drew Carey Show ( " Y2K You 're OK " ) 
 Episodes of other television shows that refer to " Time Enough at Last " include : 
 The Modern Family episode " Airport 2010 " references " Time " when the screen on Jay 's electronic reader gets broken . Jay pours the broken glass to the floor while saying " Not fair . It 's not fair " . 
 Episode 12 of Revolution , titled " Ghosts " , has Jim Hudson 's character who goes by the name of Henry Bemis . Henry ( Jim ) has become the town librarian , until Miles convinces him to help the rebels and go back to his real name . 
 The line , " Seconds , minutes , hours , they crawl by on hands and knees " was referenced to in The Powerpuff Girls Season 2 episode , " Speed Demon " , where the villain , HIM , torments the Powerpuff Girls before revealing that they have unknowingly arrived 50 years into the future , landing in a Townsville that HIM now controls . 
 " The HΩmega Man " segment of The Simpsons episode " Treehouse of Horror VIII " features Homer , who accidentally survives by hiding in a nuclear bunker and comes out to discover that he is apparently the last person alive . 
 In the season 14 episode of The Simpsons , " Strong Arms of the Ma , " a postman is accidentally trapped under a car in front of the Simpson house . He intends to read The Twilight Zone Magazine but discovers that his glasses were broken in the accident and says , " That 's not fair ! " , while the Twilight Zone main @-@ theme music is heard in the background . 
 The sitcom Two and a Half Men made references to it when the character Alan has a nervous breakdown in a bookstore . 
 This episode was mentioned in the CBS drama series , Under the Dome 's third season . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 " Time Enough at Last " has been released in numerous formats over the years . 
 In 1988 it was available on VHS as part of a Twilight Zone collector 's edition . 
 Two releases were made in 1998 and 1999 , as part of a more widely available two @-@ episodes @-@ per @-@ tape release scheme . 
 Although similar individual multi @-@ episode DVDs were released , it is now exclusively available as part of The Twilight Zone – The Definitive Edition , the first volume of which was released December 24 , 2004 . Included is an audio @-@ only interview with Burgess Meredith as well as the clip of The Drew Carey Show 's parody of the episode . 
 The story which inspired it has been released in eBook and MP3 form , capitalizing on the success of the episode . 
 In 2003 , the Falcon Picture Group produced a series of radio dramas based on the series — stating , " In the 1950s many radio series were turned into television series – so why not the reverse ? " — which were broadcast on about 200 stations through the USA ; " Time " was included in volume six . 
 In 2005 , " Time " became one of the first Twilight Zone episodes offered for download via Google Video and later on sites such as Amazon.com. 
 = Dead Head Fred = 
 Dead Head Fred ( Japanese : <unk> ～ <unk> ～ , Hepburn : <unk> <unk> <unk> ~ <unk> Tantei no <unk> ~ ) is a horror @-@ themed action @-@ adventure video game for the PlayStation Portable , developed by Vicious Cycle Software and published by D3 Publisher . It was released in North America on August 28 , 2007 and is powered by Vicious Cycle 's proprietary Vicious Engine . It features a premise that is a combination of 1940s @-@ style noir and contemporary horror , dubbed " twisted noir " by the design team . 
 The game is a single @-@ player experience whose title character , Fred Neuman , is a private investigator with the ability to switch heads . Fred has recently been murdered and decapitated , and has few memories of the events leading to his death . The plot follows Fred as he pieces together the clues of his murder and tries to get revenge on the man who killed him . Unlike many action game heroes , Fred has no conventional weapons — he relies solely on the powers available to him from the severed heads of fallen enemies . 
 The game received generally positive reviews , with reviewers mentioning its dark humor and noir @-@ inspired motif as high points . It received criticism for its controls and lack of combat depth . In 2008 , it won the Writers Guild of America 's first @-@ ever award for video game writing . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Dead Head Fred is a third @-@ person action @-@ adventure game that incorporates a variety of gameplay styles , including combat , platforming , and puzzles . The core gameplay of Dead Head Fred revolves around Fred 's missing head and his ability to " switch " heads by defeating certain enemies , decapitating them , and collecting their heads ( referred to as " headhunting " ) . As Fred explores the city of Hope Falls , he can collect an assortment of heads , each of which has unique abilities . Examples include the Stone Idol head , which Fred can use as a battering ram , and the Corpse head , which can be used to suck up and spit out water , gasoline , and other materials . Fred uses these heads to navigate the city of Hope Falls , and certain parts of the city are not accessible until certain heads are found . The high level of radiation in Hope Falls has led to a proliferation of grossly mutated worms , which the player can collect and use to upgrade Fred 's heads and temporarily increase his fighting abilities , among other benefits . Also collectible are money and special items , which can be earned by defeating enemies or completing various side @-@ missions . There are several minigames unrelated to the plot , such as pinball and fishing , scattered around the city . 
 In combat , players have several attacks at their disposal , depending on the head Fred is equipped with . These attacks include combos , head @-@ specific counterattacks , and ranged attacks . During a counterattack , the player can complete a Quick Time Event to instantly kill an enemy by removing its head , which gives Fred " Rage " points . Rage energy builds up over time , and the player can use it to unleash powerful attacks on multiple foes . Dealing a large amount of damage to an opponent will stun them , during which time Fred can remove their head . Collected heads can be traded at " Head Shops " for a usable version . 
 There are several types of environmental puzzles that the player has to solve in order to progress through the game . Each one requires a specific head — the Bone head gives Fred sharp claws which allow him to climb on the sides of buildings , while the <unk> head decreases his size dramatically and lets him navigate platforming levels , such as a saw mill . There is also a mannequin head that Fred must use to socialize with the residents of Hope Falls , because they are terrified of his other heads . There are nine available heads , seven of which are suitable for combat . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Dead Head Fred takes place in Hope Falls , New Jersey , a once @-@ prosperous area based on American cities in the 1940s . The city has steadily fallen from grace since a business mogul named Ulysses Pitt began accumulating power . Pitt has a background of petty crime , and there are allegations that he was somehow responsible for the disappearance of Vinni Rossini , an influential Hope Falls businessman . Pitt 's new " Nukular Plant " has recently finished construction and has caused a high level of radiation in the city , leading to strange phenomena like mutated wildlife and undead monsters . 
 Hope Falls is composed of several areas . The first that Fred has access to is Dr. Steiner 's castle , the ancestral home of the Steiner family where Fred has been resurrected . Outside of the castle is a large cemetery that borders the forested area of Creepy Hollow . In Hope Falls proper are the urban areas of Downtown , Uptown , Old Hope Falls and <unk> . Downtown is the home of Pitt 's headquarters , and Fred 's office is found in Old Hope Falls . <unk> , as its name suggests , is overrun with zombies and most of its residents have fled the neighborhood or barricaded themselves in their homes . Two other rural areas border the city : Freak Farms , where Fred owns a small cabin , and the <unk> , a highly irradiated area where the Nukular Reactor has been built . Each area contains several teleporters in the form of sewer manholes , which Fred can use to quickly move from one area of Hope Falls to another . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 The protagonist of Dead Head Fred is Fred Neuman ( voiced by John C. McGinley ) , a private detective . Fred is the only playable character , but since each head gives him a different set of animations , he could be considered nine separate characters . As he does not have a proper face , Fred 's mood is portrayed by the tone of his voice and by face @-@ like expressions formed by his eyes and frontal lobes . Fred has a wisecracking , sarcastic personality and occasionally breaks the fourth wall , such as heckling the player when he dies . Ulysses Pitt ( Jon Polito ) , the game 's primary antagonist , is a small @-@ time hoodlum turned racketeer . Pitt employs many henchmen throughout Hope Falls , the most prominent of which is his lieutenant Lefty , whose right leg has been amputated and replaced with a tommygun . Fred makes several allies throughout the game , including Dr. Steiner , who resurrected him , his girlfriend Jeanne Rossini ( Kari Wahlgren ) , and his former partner Benny Salazar . Fred 's enemies are generally employees of Pitt , like the skeletal " bone thugs " , or creatures created by Hope Falls ' radiation , like zombies and animated scarecrows . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 The game begins with Fred waking up in the castle of a Dr. <unk> Steiner , an employee of Ulysses Pitt . Fred soon learns that he has been murdered and subsequently resurrected , and his head is missing . In its place is a liquid @-@ filled jar that contains his brain and eyes . Steiner explains that Fred is a private detective who had been investigating Pitt , but Pitt had discovered that Fred was on to him and had him murdered . Many of Fred 's memories are missing as a result of the trauma to his brain , and before Steiner can explain further , Pitt and several of his henchmen arrive . As Fred hides in Steiner 's lab , Pitt 's thugs apprehend Steiner and announce that he is to be taken to the Horseman , a minion of Pitt 's who resides in Creepy Hollow . 
 Fred leaves Steiner 's castle and meets a blue @-@ skinned hunchback in the cemetery outside . The hunchback introduces himself as Sam Spade , a gravedigger and " head merchant " who can help Fred by providing him with quality interchangeable heads . Fred continues to Creepy Hollow , where he defeats the Horseman and rescues Dr. Steiner . Steiner , however , has little information regarding Fred 's investigation and suggests that he question the residents of Hope Falls to learn more about his demise . Fred begins exploring Hope Falls , meeting many strange personalities along the way . He reconnects with his old girlfriend Jeanne , who is the daughter of a prominent Hope Falls citizen , Vinni Rossini . Fred learns that Mr. Rossini had been reported missing by Jeanne , and Jeanne had subsequently hired Fred to find him . Fred had eventually followed the trail to Pitt , who had bribed Fred 's partner , Benny Salazar , into betraying him . Fred was promptly caught by Pitt 's henchmen and shot to death by his right @-@ hand man , Lefty . 
 Armed with the knowledge of his death and the events leading up to it , Fred continues his investigation and recovers a videotape of Vinni Rossini 's murder that incriminates Pitt . Pitt learns that Fred is still " alive " and kidnaps Jeanne to use as leverage against him . Fred confronts the mobster at his headquarters after shutting down the centerpiece of the his criminal enterprise , the Pitt Nukular Plant , and defeating Lefty . Lefty , however , was exposed to nuclear waste during the fight and subsequently mutated into a huge beast who comes to Pitt 's aid in the game 's final battle . Fred ultimately defeats both Pitt and Lefty atop the Pitt Building . Pitt is killed during the battle , but Lefty manages to escape and retreats to the remains of the Nukular Plant . After the battle , Fred 's head , which , along with Jeanne , had been held hostage by Pitt , is shown tumbling into an open manhole near the Pitt Building , unbeknownst to Fred . The final scene of the game shows Fred and Jeanne having dinner at a restaurant to celebrate , with Fred lamenting the loss of his head . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Geo = = = 
 Dead Head Fred uses the Vicious Engine , a game engine created and maintained by game design company Vicious Cycle Software . Considered " middleware " in the video game industry , the engine was designed as a simple set of creation tools that could be used across multiple consoles . The game was originally conceived as a platform game based on the character " Geo . " Vicious Cycle 's president , Eric Peterson , and some of his staff developed a conceptual world called " Prime " where Geo lived . Geo had the ability to switch his head between several different shapes ( a cube , sphere , cylinder , and pyramid ) that would help him solve puzzles , fight , and move around Prime in his quest to stop the evil King <unk> , who was trying to destroy Prime . Each of Geo 's shaped heads had unique properties that gave him different abilities — the sphere head allowed him to roll around very quickly , for example . 
 The Geo concept was described by the development team as similar to other platform games like Rayman or Spyro , and skewed towards a younger audience . When the concept was complete , the development team presented it to several publishers , who stated that they liked the idea but its geometry @-@ based core too strongly resembled " edutainment " , and that they were interested in developing a more edgy , adult premise . The Nintendo GameCube had been an early choice for hosting the game before the PSP was chosen . 
 = = = Noir setting = = = 
 Vicious Cycle went back to the drawing board and produced a new concept that they felt was darker and better suited to an older audience . The " head @-@ switching " game mechanic had been praised by the potential publishers and was kept , but this time the cartoonish , childlike Geo was replaced by an angry , vengeful private detective named Fred Neuman . The world of Prime was replaced with the bleak , film noir @-@ esque city of Hope Falls , where Fred would seek revenge against those who had wronged him . Vicious Cycle presented the new project to Sony , who promptly approved the game for the PSP , despite it not having secured a publisher . Shortly afterwards , the project was picked up by D3Publisher . 
 Vicious Cycle then submitted the concept to art company Massive Black Studios to develop initial character sketches . Massive Black 's artists were allowed to use their imagination while developing Fred , but the one stipulation Vicious Cycle made from the beginning was Fred 's head — the developers wanted it to be a liquid @-@ filled jar with the detective 's brain and eyes floating around inside . Massive Black came up with several different versions of Fred , including some with guns , which lead designer Adam Cogan had already decided the game would not include . After receiving the sketches , Vicious Cycle chose several that portrayed Fred with a squat , childlike appearance that retained some of the youthful focus of the scrapped Geo project . The publisher , D3 , decided to present all of the concept art to a test group . To the developers ' surprise , the test group was much more interested in a darker , more intimidating portrayal of Fred than the cartoonish , playful look they had chosen . The developers decided to flesh out the concept and took the chosen sketches back to Massive Black . This time the art came back darker , with similarities to Dirty Harry and The Matrix and The Evil Dead , and a Norman Rockwell @-@ inspired look that would influence the game 's art style towards a more violent theme . 
 = = = Further testing = = = 
 D3 provided the development team with more focus groups , and as a result , the game slowly incorporated more combat and less platforming and puzzles . Fred 's combat capabilities were revamped to give him more attacks , counterattacks and combinations . D3 also gave Vicious Cycle more time to develop the game , with the hope of receiving better reviews and potentially turning Dead Head Fred into a franchise . The delay pushed back the game 's release from January to August 2007 . D3Publisher bought Vicious Cycle two months before the game 's release , but the company 's headquarters remained in North Carolina and the staff was retained . 
 = = Audio = = 
 = = = Soundtrack = = = 
 The music of Dead Head Fred was composed by Rod Abernethy and Jason Graves and recorded at Abernethy 's studio , <unk> Audio . Abernethy and Graves had worked on previous games by Vicious Cycle , like Curious George . The composers were interested in developing a sound for Dead Head Fred that was retro @-@ futuristic , and borrowed from other death @-@ themed pieces like Stubbs the Zombie and Beetlejuice . The development team did not have any substantial ideas for the game 's music beyond the theme and mood of Hope Falls , giving the composers free rein on the soundtrack 's direction . 
 = = = Voice work = = = 
 A crucial area of development was the formation of the game 's mood , theme , and story to give it a dark , yet humorous quality . Hiring a Hollywood screenwriter to create the script was proposed , but ultimately Vicious Cycle designer Dave Ellis was given the task of writing the game 's cutscenes and voiceover script , while Cogan focused on the in @-@ game dialog . Ellis referred to several noir films for inspiration , especially Miller 's Crossing and Who Framed Roger Rabbit During this time , Eric Peterson cast several voice actors , including John C. McGinley from the TV show Scrubs and Jon Polito from the aforementioned Miller 's Crossing . McGinley was cast as Fred because of his Scrubs character 's sarcasm and wit , while Polito was cast in the role of mob boss Ulysses Pitt , which was very similar to his role of Johnny Caspar in Miller 's Crossing . 
 The development team then set about recording the game 's dialog , which proved to be challenging because of Vicious Cycle 's location on the East Coast . All of the recordings were done over the phone at a studio in Hollywood . Despite this , and the fact that Fred alone had over 1000 lines of in @-@ game dialog , the recording went smoothly , with the exception of one unidentified actor who walked out in the middle of a session . The original script had only one instance of the word " fuck " , but several recording sessions with McGinley resulted in a great deal of colorful improvisation . The design team liked the recordings and the script was modified to permit McGinley and other actors to curse more . McGinley focused on portraying Fred as " pissed off " and " having a chip on his shoulder " because his head was missing . 
 " No , this guy was unique because , well … his head was gone ! With him , you could really just open up your imagination and roll out a cavalcade of eccentricities and see what makes sense to you . It was pretty much unlike anything I ’ ve ever done before . " 
 = = Promotion and release = = 
 Dead Head Fred was first announced at the Electronics Entertainment Expo ( E3 ) video game convention in May 2006 , where a trailer was shown to the public . Following this , little was heard about the game until Cogan started a developer diary on Vicious Cycle 's website in March 2007 . Three diary entries were written by Cogan and Ellis , which provided details about the game 's pre @-@ production conceptualization and voice work . In May 2007 , D3 announced that John C. McGinley would be voicing Fred , and the next month the company issued a press release stating that the game was finished and ready for mass production . However , the game was delayed , allowing D3 Publisher to show it at E3 2007 . It was eventually released on August 28 , 2007 in North America after nearly two years of development . It was released on October 26 in Europe , November 2 in Australia , and March 19 , 2008 in Japan . In December 2007 , D3 reduced the price of the game , and in October 2008 it was made available for download on Sony 's PlayStation Network . The soundtrack was released on iTunes by Lakeshore Records on September 18 , 2007 . 
 = = = Future = = = 
 Dead Head Fred was designed specifically for the PSP , and Vicious Cycle intended it to be their " flagship " title for the system . However , the game 's designers have hinted that the game could potentially be ported to the PlayStation Network or Xbox Live Arcade with a few months ' work . As of March 2009 , D3Publisher has announced a sequel , but the designers have stated that subsequent titles were discussed during the game 's development . John C. McGinley has expressed interest in reprising Fred . Namco Bandai Games ( the parent of D3 ) were impressed with the game and wanted to publish the sequel because they ' wanted ' to test out Vicious Cycle 's Gameplay on the PSP . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Dead Head Fred received generally favorable reviews from critics . The game 's writing and dialogue were considered the main strengths of the game , with GameSpy 's reviewer stating that " In the vast sea of PSP titles , Dead Head Fred stands ' head and shoulders ' above the rest . " IGN said " The tale of revenge in a dark world is twisted [ and ] unapologetically humorous " . Other publications were not as impressed , however , with one reviewer stating " ... the overused profanity just makes it feel like it 's been designed by teenagers desperately trying to be edgy . " The game 's supernatural themes elicited comparisons to The Darkness and Grim Fandango . GamesRadar included it in their list of the 100 most overlooked games of its generation . Editor Jason Fanelli felt that PSP games often lacked creativity and that Dead Head Fred was the exception . 
 Many reviewers were pleased with the game 's premise and setting , variously describing it as " weird " , " wacky " and " silly " . Hope Falls , especially the area of Creepy Hollow , was compared to the work of Tim Burton . Dead Head Fred 's graphics were warmly received , with GameSpy noting " The game looks simply phenomenal on the PSP screen . " Pocket Gamer UK said " graphically the game won 't blow your head off but it is undeniably stylish . " Pocket Gamer also felt that the game 's level design , with its emphasis on changing heads to solve environmental puzzles , made up for the " mediocre combat system " . The character design was praised ; GameSpy said " Fred is one of the most interesting and entertaining characters to ever hit gaming , " and GameZone said " Fred ’ s freakish form is like looking at a car crash … you really don ’ t want to stare but you just can ’ t help it . " 
 The voice acting , in particular John C. McGinley 's portrayal of Fred , was widely praised , as was the rest of the game 's audio . GameZone 's Natalie Romano said " There ’ s also some great music in the game and the sound effects are ... wonderfully detailed " . 
 " The sound for the title , however , is fantastic . The majority of it is centered around the voice acting , which is anchored by John C. McGinley of Scrubs and Office Space fame . McGinley expertly brings his dry , sarcastic delivery to Fred 's lines and consistently delivers humorous lines across the entire game . " 
 The focal point of reviewers ' criticism was Dead Head Fred 's gameplay , specifically the combat . It was generally considered tedious and repetitive . Australia 's PAL Gaming Network described the combat as " one of the poorest elements of the game " , and Game Informer called the combat mechanics " awful " . The performance of the camera was also criticized , with IGN noting " Considering that the camera will sometimes choose some horrible angles for you in battle or during puzzles , it 's annoying to have to fight it as well as mutants that want you dead . " GameZone said " I just wish the camera wouldn ’ t be such a hindrance sometimes . " Reviewers were also unhappy with Dead Head Fred 's loading times ; Eurogamer considered them " excessively high " , and IGN said " The only downside that crops up when it comes to the visuals are the continual loading times on just about every single area . " 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Dead Head Fred was nominated for several awards , including the Writers Guild of America 's first award for video game writing , which it won . During E3 2007 , the game was nominated for the Best of E3 2007 : Best Handheld Game award by the Game Critics Awards , a group of prominent media journalists . Dead Head Fred lost to The Legend of Zelda : Phantom Hourglass for the Nintendo DS , but was notable for being the only new intellectual property nominated in the handheld category . The audio was nominated for two awards at the Game Audio Network Guild 's 6th annual ceremony , Best Soundtrack of the Year and Best Handheld Audio . Dead Head Fred lost to BioShock and Syphon Filter : Logan 's Shadow , respectively . 
 = Al Wistert = 
 Albert Alexander " Ox " Wistert ( December 28 , 1920 – March 5 , 2016 ) was an All @-@ Pro American football tackle in the National Football League ( NFL ) for the Philadelphia Eagles . He played his entire nine @-@ year NFL career for the Eagles and became their team captain . He was named to play in the NFL 's first Pro Bowl as an Eagle . During most of Wistert 's career there were no football All @-@ star games , although he was named to the league All @-@ Pro team eight times . 
 Wistert played college football at the University of Michigan . He is one of the three brothers — along with Whitey and Alvin — who were named All @-@ American tackles at Michigan and later inducted into the College Football Hall of Fame . He was the first Michigan alumnus to be selected to the National Football League Pro Bowl . The Wistert brothers all wore jersey No. 11 at Michigan and are among the seven players who have had their numbers retired by the Michigan Wolverines football program . Their number will be put back into circulation starting on November 10 , 2012 before a Michigan home game against Northwestern as part of the Michigan Football Legend program . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Wistert , who was born in Chicago , Illinois , was from a Lithuanian family . His father , <unk> Wistert , was a Spanish – American War veteran who was later killed in the line of duty while working for the Chicago Police Department . The story of the Wistert brothers at Michigan began when Whitey 's Carl Schurz High School classmate John Kowalik was invited to visit the University of Michigan . At the time , Whitey Wistert had a factory job where he was involved with building Majestic radios . Kowalik took Whitey with him on his visit to Ann Arbor , and according to Alvin , " that 's how it started : the <unk> of Michigan . " 
 = = College football = = 
 After graduating from Foreman High School , Wistert became the second of the Wistert brothers to play for Michigan where he wore number 11 like his brothers and played from 1940 to 1942 . He was a consensus All @-@ American and team MVP in 1942 . He played in the 1943 East – West Shrine Game . He is well remembered , among other things , for his exploits in a 1942 game against the Notre Dame Fighting Irish football team , and he was inducted into the College Football Hall of Fame in 1968 , one year after his brother Francis . In 1981 , he was named to the University of Michigan Hall of Honor in the fourth class of inductees alongside his brothers . Only five Michigan football players earned this honor before him . 
 Michigan posted a 20 – 5 – 1 record during Wistert 's three years on the team . In 1940 , the team 's only loss in its eight @-@ game season was to the eventual national champion Minnesota Golden Gophers football . The Wolverines followed that season with 6 – 1 – 1 and 7 – 3 marks in the next two years . Wistert served as captain of the College All @-@ star team that beat the Sammy Baugh @-@ led National Football League champion Washington Redskins , 27 – 7 , in Chicago . He was the only one of the three brothers not to play on a national championship squad at Michigan . 
 = = Professional football = = 
 After being drafted in the fifth round by the Philadelphia Eagles and signing for $ 3800 ( $ 51 @,@ 965 today ) , he encountered animosity from veteran players for having signed such a large contract ( though they thought he signed for $ 4500 ) . He earned All @-@ Pro honors in eight ( five by consensus ) of his nine seasons . As a two @-@ way player , he played his entire nine @-@ year career for the Philadelphia Eagles ( who operated as a merged team with the Pittsburgh Steelers for one season during World War II . ) The National Football League had no All @-@ Star games between 1943 and 1950 . Thus , although Wistert was a perennial All @-@ Pro selection , it is difficult to compare him to more modern players who are often measured by Pro Bowl invitations . He served as Eagles captain for five consecutive seasons , from 1946 to 1950 , and was named All @-@ Pro in each season . In Wistert 's next to last season he was selected to the first Pro Bowl . In his final season , he recovered three fumbles . The Eagles won the 1948 and 1949 National Football League Championships with Wistert . These were the only consecutive National Football League champions to win by shutout . His number 70 was retired by the Eagles in 1952 . According to his College Football Hall of Fame biography , during his career he started every game the Eagles played except for the 1950 season opener against the Cleveland Browns . However , according to other statistical databases he only started about 2 / 3 of his career games . His is one of only seven retired Eagles Jerseys . Wistert lamented not having been enshrined in the Professional Football Hall of Fame and on Philadelphia Eagles Honor Roll : 
 Wistert was inducted into the Philadelphia Eagles Honor Roll on September 29 , 2009 along with Randall Cunningham . In 2003 , he was named to the Pro Football Researchers Association Hall of Very Good in the association 's inaugural HOVG class . 
 = = Later life and family = = 
 After football Wistert became a successful life insurance salesman . He sold insurance for 40 years . Among the places he has lived since retirement are California and Grants Pass , Oregon . He was married to his late wife Ellie for 61 years and has three daughters ( Pam , Dianna and Kathy ) and three grandchildren . At one point he was both coaching football at Riverside High School in Riverside Township , New Jersey and playing professionally . According to brother Alvin , their father " was born <unk> <unk> and he Anglicized it when he came to America to Wistert . " 
 Wistert died on March 5 , 2016 in Grants Pass , Oregon at the age of 95 . 
 = Si Una Vez = 
 " Si Una Vez " ( English : If I Once ) is a song recorded by American recording artist Selena for her fourth studio album , Amor Prohibido ( 1994 ) . It was written by Pete Astudillo and produced by Selena 's brother @-@ producer A.B. Quintanilla . " Si Una Vez " is a mariachi fusion song and draws influence from cumbia and Latin dance music . Lyrically , Selena questions why she ever fell in love with an abusive partner , saying she will never repeat her mistakes . The lyrics suggest unrequited love and female empowerment . 
 " Si Una Vez " received positive reviews from music critics who found the song to have showcase the singer 's vocal abilities . The Broadcast Music Inc. recognized it as the Single of the Year at the 1996 BMI Pop Awards . Many musicians have since recorded the song and released it on their respective albums including Mexican mariachi singer Alicia Villareal , American reggaeton performer Ivy Queen , American indie rock band Girl in a Coma , and American salsa singer Manny Manuel . The latter 's version peaked at number one on the United States Billboard Tropical Songs chart , and ended 1995 as the fourteenth most successful U.S. tropical song . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Si Una Vez " was written by Selena y Los Dinos backup dancer and vocalist Pete Astudillo . The song was co @-@ written by Selena 's brother @-@ producer A.B. Quintanilla who , along with Argentine musician Bebu Silvetti , served as producers . Keyboardist of the group , Ricky Vela retold in a 2002 interview how the band hired a professional <unk> to record parts of the song . " Si Una Vez " is a Spanish @-@ language mariachi fusion track with influences of cumbia and Latin dance music . Author Deborah Paredez called " Si Una Vez " as having punk music undertones . In 2002 , A.B. spoke on how Amor Prohibido was experimental music @-@ heavy and commented on how " Si Una Vez " was an example of his ideas of keeping the band 's image modern . The song makes use of the <unk> guitar under a cumbia beat . 
 " Si Una Vez " is written in the key of D minor and is played in a moderate groove of 84 beats per minute . It incorporates music from several musical instruments , including the piano and guitar . Lyrically , Selena reminiscences her failed relationship and wonders why she ever fell in love with an abusive partner who betrayed and left her , vowing to never allow a man like that back into her life . The lyrics suggest unrequited love and female empowerment . 
 = = Critical reception and legacy = = 
 " Si Una Vez " was named by the Latin Times as one of the top @-@ ten best karaoke songs sung in Spanish . Writing for the Latin Times , Maria Valdez called the song " fun " especially when running into your former partner at a karaoke party and found the track to showcases a singer 's vocal abilities . Texas Public Radio 's Nathan Cone , said " the song " resonates best " with South Texas " . Entertainment Weekly contributor David Browne , commented on Selena 's vocals as being " full @-@ throated , warbling " and that it " recalls Lydia Mendoza , conjunto 's leading lady . " A New University writer found the recording to have " showcase [ the singer 's ] passion with her vocals . " 
 Selena performed the song on her final performance on March 19 , 1995 during the Calle Ocho Festival in Miami , which attracted over 100 @,@ 000 fans . Selena was shot and killed by Yolanda Saldívar , her friend and former manager of the singer 's Selena Etc. clothing boutiques , on March 31 , 1995 . Selena 's performance of the song during her Houston Astrodome concert on February 26 , 1995 , was emulated by Jennifer Lopez as her role as the singer for the 1997 biopic film about Selena . " Si Una Vez " is considered by Billboard magazine to be one of Selena 's signature songs . Terra named " Si Una Vez " as one of Selena 's " most famous works " along with her other songs " El Chico del Apartamento 512 " , " Amor Prohibido " and " Fotos y Recuerdos " . The Broadcast Music , Inc . ( BMI ) recognized " Si Una Vez " at the BMI Pop Music Awards as Single of the Year in 1996 . 
 = = Covers = = 
 Mexican singer Mary <unk> recorded the song for the tribute album Mexico Recuerda a Selena ( 2005 ) . Mexican mariachi singer Alicia Villareal performed and recorded " Si Una Vez " for the live televised tribute concert Selena ¡ VIVE ! in April 2005 . American reggaeton singer Ivy Queen covered " Si Una Vez " for her fifth studio album Flashback ( 2005 ) . She said in an interview how she felt " honored to be able to cover one of Selena 's songs " . Ivy Queen chose to cover " Si Una Vez " finding it to be identifiable to her and because of the song 's message which the singer stood for . Jonathan Widran of AllMusic called her versions a " reggaetón @-@ ed up twist " . In 2010 , indie rock group Girl in a Coma recorded a punk cover of " Si Una Vez " . The group decided to record the song because it was their favorite recordings of Selena . Girl in a Coma performed the song live during the 2010 Tejano Music Awards as a homage to Selena . In April 2011 , A.B. ' s band Kumbia All @-@ Starz performed their version of the song during their tour for La Vida De Un Genio ( 2010 ) in Bolivia . Colombian singer Kali <unk> performed " Si Una Vez " at the 2015 SXSW festival . Vibe magazine found <unk> ' performance to have given them " shivers " . 
 = = = Manny Manuel version = = = 
 American merengue musician Manny Manuel covered the song on his debut album , El Rey de Corazones ( 1995 ) . Out of the five singles released from the album , " Si Una Vez " was Manuel 's most successful single off of the El Rey de Corazones album . The song debuted at number 29 on the United States Billboard Hot Latin Tracks and number three on the U.S. Tropical Songs chart . The following week , " Si Una Vez " rose to numbers 22 and two on the Hot Latin Songs and Tropical Songs chart , respectively . On October 14 , 1995 , the track climbed to number 21 on the Hot Latin Songs chart , while it fell to number four on the Tropical Songs chart . In its fourth week , " Si Una Vez " jumped to number 18 on the Hot Latin Songs chart , while over at the Tropical Songs chart the song rose to number three . Despite increased airplay spins , " Si Una Vez " fell to number 20 on the Hot Latin Songs chart . On November 11 , 1995 , " Si Una Vez " peaked at number one on the Tropical Songs chart for one week , <unk> airplay honors that week . 
 = = = = Chart performance = = = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 All credits were taken from the album 's liner notes . 
 = Sicklefin lemon shark = 
 The sicklefin lemon shark , or sharptooth lemon shark ( Negaprion acutidens ) , is a species of requiem shark belonging to the family Carcharhinidae , widely distributed in the tropical waters of the Indo @-@ Pacific . It is closely related to the better @-@ known lemon shark ( N. brevirostris ) of the Americas ; the two species are almost identical in appearance , both being stout @-@ bodied sharks with broad heads , two dorsal fins of nearly equal size , and a plain yellow @-@ tinged coloration . As its common name suggests , the sicklefin lemon shark differs from its American counterpart in having more falcate ( sickle @-@ shaped ) fins . This large species grows up to 3 @.@ 8 m ( 12 ft ) long . It generally inhabits water less than 92 m ( 302 ft ) deep in a variety of habitats , from mangrove estuaries to coral reefs . 
 A slow @-@ moving predator feeding mainly on bony fishes , the sicklefin lemon shark seldom travels long distances and many individuals can be found year @-@ round at certain locations . Like other members of its family , this species is viviparous , with females giving birth to no more than 13 pups every other year , following a gestation period of 10 – 11 months . Although they are potentially dangerous to humans and known to respond vigorously to any provocation , under normal circumstances , sicklefin lemon sharks are cautious and tend to retreat if approached . The IUCN has assessed this species as Vulnerable ; its low reproductive productivity and rate of movement limits the capacity of depleted stocks to recover . Off India and Southeast Asia , this species has been severely depleted or extirpated by unregulated exploitation for its meat , fins , and liver oil . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogeny = = 
 The sicklefin lemon shark was first described as Carcharias acutidens by German naturalist Eduard Rüppell , in the 1837 Fische des Rothen Meeres ( Fishes of the Red Sea ) . In 1940 , Australian ichthyologist Gilbert Percy Whitley moved this species to his newly formed genus Negaprion . The type specimen , designated in 1960 , is a 68 @-@ cm @-@ long individual caught in the Red Sea off Jeddah , Saudi Arabia . The specific epithet acutidens is derived from the Latin acutus meaning " sharp " , and dens meaning " teeth " . The sicklefin lemon shark may also be referred to as <unk> shark , Indian lemon shark , Indo @-@ Pacific lemon shark , or simply lemon shark . 
 Based on microsatellite DNA evidence , the sicklefin lemon shark is thought to have diverged from its sister species N. brevirostris 10 – 14 million years ago , when the closure of the Tethys Sea separated lemon sharks in the Indian Ocean from those in the Atlantic . The ancestral lemon shark species may have been N. <unk> , the fossilized teeth of which occur in both the United States and Pakistan . Morphological and molecular phylogenetic analyses suggest that Negaprion is grouped with the whitetip reef shark ( Triaenodon ) and the <unk> shark ( <unk> ) in occupying an intermediate position on the carcharhinid evolutionary tree , between the most basal genera ( Galeocerdo , Rhizoprionodon , and Scoliodon ) and the most derived ( Carcharhinus and Sphyrna ) . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The range of the sicklefin lemon shark extends from South Africa to the Red Sea ( including Mauritius , the Seychelles , and Madagascar ) , continuing eastward along the coast of the Indian subcontinent to Southeast Asia , extending as far north as Taiwan and the Philippines , and as far south as New Guinea and northern Australia . This species is also found around numerous Pacific islands , including New Caledonia , Palau , the Marshall Islands , the Solomon Islands , Fiji , Vanuatu , and French Polynesia . This species likely colonized the central Pacific by infrequently " hopping " from one island to the next . Significant levels of genetic differentiation between sicklefin lemon sharks in Australia and French Polynesia , 750 km ( 470 mi ) apart , suggest that little intermingling occurs between regional subpopulations . 
 An inhabitant of coastal continental and insular shelves , the sicklefin lemon shark occurs from the intertidal zone to a depth of 92 m ( 302 ft ) . This species favors still , murky waters and is most common in bays , estuaries , and lagoons , and over sandy flats and outer reefs . Sometimes , an individual may venture into open water ; one was filmed in the 1971 documentary Blue Water , White Death , in the vicinity of a sperm whale ( Physeter macrocephalus ) carcass . Juvenile sicklefin lemon sharks are often found on reef flats or around mangroves , in water so shallow that their dorsal fins are exposed . In Herald Bight off Western Australia , a known nursery , juvenile sicklefin lemon sharks frequent open areas and mangroves in water under 3 m ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) deep , but not areas covered by the seagrass Posidonia australis . 
 = = Description = = 
 The sicklefin lemon shark has a robust , stocky body and a short , broad head . The snout is rounded or almost wedge @-@ shaped , with small nostrils bearing triangular flaps of skin in front . The eyes are small , with no spiracles . Short furrows are present at the corners of the mouth . Thirteen to 16 ( usually 14 ) tooth rows occur on either side of both jaws , not including the tiny teeth at the symphysis ( the jaw midline ) . The upper teeth have a large cusp rising from a broad base , with a notch on each side ; these teeth become increasingly angled towards the corners of the mouth . The lower teeth resemble the upper teeth , but are narrower and more erect . The teeth of sharks over 1 @.@ 4 m ( 4 @.@ 6 ft ) long are finely serrated . 
 The fins ( especially the dorsal , pectoral , and <unk> ) of the sicklefin lemon shark are more falcate ( sickle @-@ shaped ) than those of the otherwise very similar American lemon shark . The first dorsal fin is positioned closer to the pelvic than the pectoral fins . The second dorsal fin , nearly equal to the first in size , is located over or slightly forward of the anal fin . No ridge is seen between the dorsal fins . The pectoral fins are long and broad , originating below the space between the third and fourth gill slits . The anal fin has a strong notch in the rear margin . The precaudal pit ( a cavity just forward of the caudal fin ) is oriented longitudinally . The large dermal denticles are overlapping and bear three to five horizontal ridges each . The coloration is a plain yellowish brown or gray above and lighter below , with more yellow on the fins . This species attains a maximum known length of 3 @.@ 8 m ( 12 ft ) , though it typically does not exceed 3 @.@ 1 m ( 10 ft ) . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 A sluggish species , the sicklefin lemon shark is usually seen cruising sedately just above the sea bottom or lying still on it , as unlike most requiem sharks , it is capable of actively pumping water over its gills . However , it will approach the surface in pursuit of food . This shark seldom undertakes long @-@ distance movements . A study at Aldabra Atoll in the Seychelles found , of the tagged sharks that were later recaptured , over 90 % were still within 2 km ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) of their initial tagging location . Another study at Moorea in French Polynesia found that some of the local sharks were year @-@ round residents of the island , while others were more transitory and visited only occasionally . 
 Over 90 % of the sicklefin lemon shark 's diet consists of <unk> and shore @-@ dwelling teleosts , including herring , mullets , mackerel , silversides , needlefish , smelt @-@ whitings , porgies , sea catfish , triggerfish , parrotfish , and porcupinefish . Occasionally , they may also take cephalopods and crustaceans , and older individuals have been known to consume stingrays and guitarfish . This species may be preyed upon by larger sharks . Known parasites include the tapeworms Paraorygmatobothrium <unk> , <unk> <unk> , Phoreiobothrium <unk> , and Platybothrium <unk> . Sicklefin lemon sharks have been documented resting on the bottom and eliciting cleanings by bluestreak cleaner wrasses ( Labroides dimidiatus ) , during which they may open their mouths and stop respiring for as long as 150 seconds to give the wrasses access to their mouths and gills . 
 As with other members of its family , the sicklefin lemon shark is viviparous ; the developing embryos are sustained by a placental connection formed from their depleted yolk sacs . Females give birth to one to 13 ( usually six to 12 ) pups every other year in shallow nursery areas , following a gestation period of 10 – 11 months . Unlike in the American lemon shark , cant evidence indicates this species is philopatric ( returns to the site of their birth to reproduce ) . Parturition occurs in October or November at Madagascar and Aldabra , and in January at French Polynesia ; ovulation and mating for nonpregnant females takes place at around the same time . The embryos develop a placenta after around four months of gestation , when they still possess vestiges of external gills . The young are born at a length of 45 – 80 cm ( 18 – 31 in ) . Juvenile sharks grow slowly , at a rate of 12 @.@ 5 – 15 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 9 – 6 @.@ 1 in ) per year . Both sexes attain sexual maturity at a length of 2 @.@ 2 – 2 @.@ 4 m ( 7 @.@ 2 – 7 @.@ 9 ft ) . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 Several apparently unprovoked attacks on humans have been attributed to the sicklefin lemon shark . Due to its formidable size and teeth , it is regarded as potentially dangerous , and certainly this species has been known to defend itself quickly and vigorously if touched , speared , or otherwise provoked or alarmed . Once agitated , this shark can be a persistent adversary ; in one case , a shark forced a swimmer to seek refuge atop a coral head , and circled for hours before giving up . However , observations by divers show that normally this shark is shy and hesitant to approach , even when presented with bait . Often , the shark will move away when a diver enters visual range . Young sharks are reportedly more aggressive and inquisitive than the adults . At Moorea , sicklefin lemon sharks are the main attraction of daily shark @-@ feeding ecotourism dives . This shark adapts well to captivity and is displayed in public aquariums . 
 The IUCN has assessed the sicklefin lemon shark globally as Vulnerable ; it is harvested using anchored and floating gillnets , beach nets , and longlines . The meat is sold fresh or dried and salted for human consumption , the fins used for shark fin soup , and the liver oil is processed for vitamins . The sicklefin lemon shark is highly susceptible to local overfishing , due to its slow reproductive rate and limited movements . Off Southeast Asia , this shark has become scarce under the pressure of expanding , unmonitored , and unregulated fisheries , and has been assessed there as Endangered by the IUCN . Widespread habitat degradation , including pollution and blast fishing on coral reefs and deforestation in mangroves , poses an additional threat to the survival of this species in the region . Already , the sicklefin lemon shark has been extirpated in parts of India and Thailand , and has not been reported from Indonesian markets in recent years despite being historically abundant there . Off Australia , the sicklefin lemon shark is taken in only small numbers intentionally and as bycatch , and has been listed under Least Concern . 
 = <unk> flycatcher = 
 The flammulated flycatcher ( Deltarhynchus <unk> ) is a species of bird in the Tyrannidae family and is the only species in the monotypic genus Deltarhynchus , although it is closely related to the birds of the genus Myiarchus . It is endemic to the dry deciduous forest , arid thorn forest , and scrubby woodland of Mexico ’ s Pacific coast . The flycatcher is an olive to gray @-@ brown bird with a streaked , pale gray chest , white throat , black bill , dark gray feet , and dark brown wings . It is a skulking bird that typically remains hidden in the underbrush . It feeds by gleaning insects off of leaves and twigs that it spots from an exposed perch . The female lays approximately three eggs in a nest made in a shallow tree cavity . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The species was first described in 1875 by ornithologist George Newbold Lawrence , who placed this species in the genus Myiarchus . However , in 1893 it was split from Myiarchus into the new , monotypic genus Deltarhynchus by Robert Ridgway because of its shorter and broader bill , more rounded wings , and partially streaked underparts . This change was upheld in 1901 by Richard Bowdler Sharpe and by subsequent authors . However , in 1977 ornithologist Melvin Alvah Traylor Jr . , while upholding its status as a monotypic genus , said that the species should be lumped back into Myiarchus if its nesting habits were similar to those of that genus . These doubts were put to rest by Wesley Lanyon 's research of the flycatcher in 1979 , which confirmed the bird 's placement in a monotypic genus . 
 Deltarhynchus is similar to the genus Myiarchus , but is distinguished from it by a broader and shorter bill , more rounded wings , a different face pattern , pale cinnamon wing and tail edgings , voice , streaking on the chest , and the bird 's skulking habits . The flammulated flycatcher 's generic name is derived from the Ancient Greek words delta , which means " delta @-@ shaped " or , in this case , " wedge " , and rhynchos , which means " beak " . Its specific epithet is derived from the Latin word <unk> , which means " little flame " . The flycatcher has no subspecies . 
 = = Description = = 
 The flammulated flycatcher is approximately 6 to 6 @.@ 5 inches ( 15 @-@ 16 @.@ 5 cm ) in length and has a chunky body . Adult males and females are similar in plumage , with each possessing olive to a worn gray @-@ brown upperparts and head . A whitish supraloral stripe and crescent are behind the bird 's eyes . It also has a dusky lore . The throat is whitish and the chest is a pale gray with inconspicuous dusky streaking , while the belly and undertail coverts are a pale yellow . Additionally , this species has dark brown , well @-@ rounded wings with pale cinnamon @-@ edged coverts and remiges . The wings are about 3 inches ( 76 mm ) long . The tail is also a dark brown edged with a narrow band of pale cinnamon . It is barely shorter than the wing and slightly rounded . The bird 's bill is black , broad , and triangular with a slightly paler base and about half the length of the its head . The legs are a dark gray and end with large , curved , and sharp claws . It has an orange mouth and a brown eye . The juvenile is similar to the adult , although the tail has a broad band of pale cinnamon . 
 = = = Vocalization = = = 
 The flammulated flycatcher mostly sings from April to August , which includes its breeding season , and tends to remain hidden while singing . The song of the flycatcher is a plaintive whistle followed by a short but quick roll . It can also give a plaintive and slurred chew call , which is often sung three to five times in a descending series , as well as a squeaky chatter . Calls are the same for males and females and are given throughout the day to give a location , identify an individual , sound an alarm , and mark the limits of a territory , among other functions . During the breeding season , males give what is known as a dawn song every morning , which includes the calls chee @-@ bee beet and churr @-@ r @-@ r @-@ bee bee in alternation . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 This flycatcher is endemic to the Pacific lowlands of Mexico 's western coast from Sinaloa to western Chiapas , while possibly extending into Guatemala , although this has not been confirmed . The total area that it lives in is estimated to be 66 @,@ 000 km2 ( 25 @,@ 482 @.@ 7 sq mi ) . Its range is discontinuous and it is found in low densities when present . It lives in dry deciduous forest , arid and semi @-@ arid thorn forest , and scrubby woodland at about 1000 – 1400 meters ( <unk> – <unk> ft ) above sea level . This species is non @-@ migratory . 
 = = = Status = = = 
 The flammulated flycatcher is listed as being of least concern on the IUCN Red List due to its large range and the belief that the total population numbers over 10 @,@ 000 individuals ; however , no precise estimate on the bird 's population exists . While the species is known to be uncommon in parts of its range , its population is not believed to be declining enough to pass the threshold of 30 % in ten years or three generations necessary to be listed as near threatened , although the exact population trends also have not been quantified . 
 = = Ecology and behavior = = 
 This flycatcher is a sluggish and skulking species that usually remains in the underbrush . When excited either by an intruder or when attempting to attract a mate , this species raises the feathers on its crown to form what appears to be a crest ; however , unlike the closely related genus Myiarchus , it does not bob its head while displaying the crest . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 The flammulated flycatcher forages by perching on an open branch and looking outward and downward for prey , which primarily consists of insects . Once it spots a potential meal , the flycatcher rapidly and directly flies at the insect , which is normally on the exposed upper surface of a leaf or twig . It hovers briefly before the insect before grabbing it in its beak and flying away to typically a new perch . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 The flycatcher breeds around June of each year . It nests in shallow tree cavities that are surprisingly close to the ground , at approximately 90 centimeters above it . The nest is shaped like a cup and is composed of fine vegetable fibers , dried leaves , and shredded bark . Unlike the similar Myiarchus flycatchers , it does not use snakeskin or other materials to build its nest . The female lays three eggs that are creamy to pinkish in color and are decorated with brown and gray splotches . 
 = Ontario Highway 89 = 
 King 's Highway 89 , commonly referred to as Highway 89 , is an east – west provincially maintained highway in the southwestern portion of the Canadian province of Ontario , stretching 107 kilometres ( 66 mi ) from the junction of Highway 9 and Highway 23 in Harriston in the west , to Highway 400 just east of Cookstown in the east . The principal urban centres along the highway include Alliston , Shelburne and Mount Forest . Outside of these towns , the highway travels through rural farmland across a large part of southwestern Ontario . 
 Highway 89 was established in 1937 as a result of the rerouting of Highway 9 between Orangeville and Highway 27 . In 1963 , the route was extended west to Palmerston and east to Highway 400 . Plans were conceived during the late 1970s to push the highway further east to Highway 12 via Ravenshoe Road , resulting in a brief extension to Highway 11 . However , environmental protest over the chosen route through the Holland Marsh resulted in the cancellation of plans in 1986 . In 1997 , the section between Highway 400 and Highway 11 was decommissioned . The most recent change to the route took place in 2003 , when the section of Highway 89 between Palmerston and Harriston was renumbered as part of Highway 23 , creating a shared terminus at a junction with Highway 9 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The route forms the main streets of several of the small towns that dot the highway east to west , namely Cookstown , Alliston and Shelburne . The highway also forms the backbone of many small villages and hamlets between the larger centres , such as Conn , <unk> , Primrose , Violet Hill , Rosemont and <unk> . 
 The highway formerly continued past its current eastern terminus at Highway 400 to Yonge Street , formerly Highway 11 , in the hamlet of Fennell . This section is now numbered as Simcoe County Route 3 and known locally as Shore Acres Drive . The highway also continued past its current western terminus in Harriston , taking the route to Palmerston that is now numbered as Highway 23 . 
 The highway mostly runs through farmland and small communities , although the route does pass by Earl Rowe Provincial Park and the Honda car manufacturing plant in the Alliston area . Other parks and natural areas that are close to the route are Boyne Valley Provincial Park and Mono Cliffs Provincial Park , both of which are located on the Niagara Escarpment . Further west is the Luther Marsh Conservation Area , a vast wilderness area that surrounds Luther Lake . 
 = = History = = 
 Highway 89 was created out of a highway rerouting in the late 1930s . Originally , it formed the routing of Highway 9 , which until then turned north at Orangeville , travelling concurrently with Highway 10 , then turning east to Cookstown . On February 10 , 1937 , Highway 9 was rerouted along its present course east of Orangeville . By 1938 , Highway 89 was designated along the former route of Highway 9 . 
 Highway 89 remained as @-@ is until the early 1960s , when it was extended west to Palmerston and east to Highway 400 . On April 1 , 1963 , the highway was assumed through the counties of Dufferin , Grey and Wellington . The section between Highway 27 and Highway 400 was assumed the following day . 
 During the mid @-@ 1970s , Highway 89 was extended east to Highway 11 at Fennell . This section was eventually returned to the jurisdiction of Simcoe County on April 1 , 1997 . During the spring of 2003 , the MTO renumbered several highways to improve route continuity . Among these was the renumbering of a section of Highway 89 between Harriston and Palmerston . The result of this renumbering was a shared terminus between Highway 89 and Highway 23 at an intersection with Highway 9 . 
 = = = Extension to Highway 12 = = = 
 During the late 1970s , plans arose to create a new highway link on the south side of Lake Simcoe to connect Highway 400 and Highway 12 . The route for this extension was announced on June 30 , 1978 . It was to follow 11th Line from Highway 400 east to the Holland Marsh , where it would cross towards the northeast onto the alignment of Ravenshoe Road ( York Road 32 ) . The extension would traverse the length of Ravenshoe Road to Lakeridge Road ( Durham Road 23 ) , where it would zig @-@ zag onto Concession Road 7 to end immediately north of Sunderland . However , heavy environmental protests ensued over the chosen route through the marsh . Consequently , then Transportation Minister Ed Fulton officially cancelled the extension on April 21 , 1986 . The proposal has since been reborn as the Bradford Bypass . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The following table lists the major junctions along Highway 89 , as noted by the Ministry of Transportation of Ontario . 
 = Luke Smith ( writer ) = 
 Luke Michael Smith is an American writer . He is a staff member at Bungie , a video game development company , and is a former video games journalist . Smith wrote for a college newspaper and weekly papers in Michigan before being hired as one of the first new freelance writers for Kotaku . At Kotaku , Smith developed his writing style but soon left the site for a staff position as 1UP.com 's news editor . Smith made a name for himself at 1UP , particularly through an article he wrote focusing on problems with the game Halo 2 . 
 Smith was known for his direct approach to game journalism and scathing criticism of the video game industry . During his time at 1UP the site developed a greater profile and stepped out of its sister publication 's shadow , but Smith grew frustrated with the contemporary state of gaming news and what he considered manipulation of journalists and readers into accepting promotional material as news . In April 2007 he left 1UP to become a Bungie writer and co @-@ host of the developer 's podcast . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Smith gradually entered into game journalism while working on an English Literature degree at the University of Michigan , writing about media in the college newspaper . After graduation , he worked for weekly papers in Dearborn and Detroit , Michigan , including Real Detroit Weekly . 
 Clive Thompson , a games writer with Slate , interacted with Smith over AOL Instant Messenger and the two began to bounce ideas off of each other for their respective writing projects ; when games blog Kotaku started to expand from one writer ( founder Brian Crecente ) , Thompson recommended Smith . Smith credits his time at Kotaku for helping him come into his own , develop his style and learn about attribution and citing sources , but he left after a short period of time . " At the time stories ( on Kotaku ) were unsigned . Kotaku was like the Brian Crecente vision . If I posted something or [ fellow writer Brian Ashcraft ] did people thought [ Crecente ] did . Also , there was no health insurance , it was just full @-@ time freelance . " 
 = = 1UP.com journalism = = 
 Smith served as the news editor for 1UP.com , the sister site to the now @-@ defunct magazine Electronic Gaming Monthly . During his tenure at 1UP , Smith wrote extensively about the Halo video game franchise , as was considered a leading fan voice ; in one article , he declared Halo was the only game series he cared about . Smith wrote a feature story for 1UP in 2005 called " Broken Halo " , in which he explained how developer Bungie could fix problems he perceived with the game ; Crecente said the article put Smith " on the map " . Smith also became one of the panelists of the 1UP Yours show , a weekly video games podcast featuring gaming editors and experts . In 2006 , Edge named him one of gaming 's top 50 journalists . 
 <unk> magazine credited Smith with inspiring gamers to learn more about the game industry and not accept company promotion , as well as turning 1UP from " the bastard child of EGM " to an important part of the Ziff Davis Internet company 's gaming network . His style has been described as a " robust , direct approach " to journalism and is known for his scathing attacks on the industry . Smith , however , felt disheartened by the state of game journalism . " Video game journalism is just weird . You have guys married to women in marketing for the games they cover . Video game journalism is still very young , very early , still trying to find out what it is , " he said . In an interview with Michael Zenke of The Escapist , Smith said he felt game journalists were treated by developers as another part of the PR plan , with developers sending out information and the journalists " regurgitating " it . Worse , Smith felt that gamers had become used to this sort of information ; " We have to be responsible for our actions and held accountable when we manipulate the expectations of gamers , " he told Zenke . 
 While he was becoming more frustrated with the field at 1UP , game developer Bungie contacted Smith about employment . After sending the company his resume , Smith stopped writing about Bungie and Microsoft to avoid a conflict of interest . Smith accepted a job offer a month later . 
 = = Bungie = = 
 In April 2007 , Smith announced on a 1UP podcast he was leaving the site to work for Bungie . Reaction to Smith 's announcement varied ; some were happy or sad to see him leave , while others felt he had " sold out . " Smith joined the ranks of other former game journalists who left to work for game companies , including 1UP expatriate Che Chou , who joined Microsoft Game Studios , and former GameSpot chief Greg Kasavin , who became an associate producer for Electronic Arts . 
 Bungie staff hinted in a weekly update that Smith might play a role in the developer 's podcast . Smith officially began work on May 7 , 2007 , as content editor , providing fans and the Bungie readership with information about Bungie 's game and staff . Smith believed that there was a special opportunity for game developers , " for someone to come in and tell the stories that people want to know [ ... ] Right now you have four bridges between developer and reader : Developer to PR , to journalist to reader . [ This position ] could get rid of those middle two bridges . " 
 While Bungie had historically been good at letting fans interact via forums and provided updates and artwork via their site , Bungie.net , the company 's releases had a " corporate and muted tone to it , " and made less effort and been less successful historically at providing access to the inner workings of the game studio . As part of a change to become more transparent , Bungie took steps repeated throughout the industry to allow fans more say and recruiting respected voices from the community — namely , Smith . Robertson credited Smith 's tenure as aiding Bungie 's greater focus on , " building , supporting and learning from the Halo 3 community . " He is credited as a writer on Halo 3 . 
 Smith also hosted Bungie 's podcast show along with co @-@ host Brian Jarrard ; in an interview with his former coworkers at 1UP , Smith said of the Bungie podcast , " we [ Bungie ] are focusing on getting our listeners and fans familiar with a bunch of the different faces at Bungie studios . " Brought back after close to a year @-@ long hiatus , the podcast now features Bungie news and interviews with staff members about their jobs and working at the studio . Smith had the title of " Bungie Community Manager " at Bungie , and has given interviews with the press about the company 's recent products , including Halo 3 : ODST . Smith was among other writers @-@ turned @-@ game developers who held a discussion on the topic at the 2009 Game Developers Conference . Smith worked on player investment for Halo : Reach . 
 He worked as design lead on Bungie 's 2014 video game Destiny . 
