 = Maynard James Keenan = 
 Maynard James Keenan ( born James Herbert Keenan ; April 17 , 1964 ) , often referred to by his initials <unk> , is an American musician , record producer , winemaker , and actor , best known as the vocalist for Grammy Award @-@ winning progressive metal band Tool . He is originally from Ohio , but spent his high school and college years in Michigan . After serving in the United States Army in the early 1980s , he attended Kendall College of Art and Design in Grand Rapids . He moved to Los Angeles , California in 1988 to pursue a career in interior design and set construction . Shortly thereafter , he formed the band Tool with Adam Jones . 
 Keenan is also the lead singer of A Perfect Circle . In 2003 , he created Puscifer as a side project and has subsequently released three studio albums . Since rising to fame , Keenan has been noted as being a recluse ; however , he does emerge to support charitable causes . 
 In addition to his music career , he has performed improvisational sketch comedy and ventured into acting . He currently owns Merkin Vineyards and the associated winery , Caduceus Cellars , and also partly owns Stronghold Vineyards , all of which are located in Arizona , where he lives . Among other business ventures , he is a partner in the Los Angeles restaurant Cobras & Matadors , and also owns an organic produce market in Cornville , Arizona , which features a food court and a tasting room for his wines . 
 = = Early life = = 
 James Keenan was born into a Southern Baptist family in Ravenna , Ohio , on April 17 , 1964 , the only child of Judith Marie ( née Dougherty ; November 22 , 1943 , Bedford , Ohio - June 18 , 2003 , Dover , Ohio ) and Michael Loren Keenan ( born March 4 , 1946 , Ohio ) . When his parents divorced in 1968 , his father , a high school wrestling coach , moved to Scottville , Michigan and Keenan would only see him about once a year for the next 12 years . His mother remarried , bringing Keenan into an " intolerant and unworldly household , " where his intelligence and creative expression would be stifled . His mother suffered a paralyzing cerebral aneurysm in 1976 , when Maynard was 11 , which would later serve as the inspiration for creative works such as Tool 's " Jimmy " and " Wings for Marie " as well as A Perfect Circle 's " Judith " . A few years later , she persuaded Keenan to live with his father in Michigan . Keenan considers this " the best move [ he ] ever made . " Maynard graduated in the class of 1982 at Mason County Central High School in Scottville , where he was a member of the wrestling team . His father was one of the coaches for the team and left coaching at the same time Maynard graduated in 1982 . 
 Inspired by Bill Murray 's performance in the 1981 comedy film Stripes , Keenan joined the United States Army , with the intention of having the G.I. Bill fund his dream of attending art school ( Kendall College of Art and Design in Grand Rapids , MI ) . By this point , he had lived in Ohio , Michigan , New Jersey , New York , Oklahoma , Kansas , and Texas . He initially served in the Army as a forward observer before studying at the United States Military Academy Preparatory School ( West Point Prep School ) from 1983 to 1984 . In addition to completing a rigorous math and English curriculum , he wrestled , ran on the cross country team and sang in the glee club . It was during his time in the military that he adopted the sobriquet " Maynard " on a whim . He was distinguished in basic and advanced training , but declined an appointment to West Point and instead chose to pursue a music career because of his disillusionment with his colleagues ' values and because he knew West Point would not tolerate his dissidence . 
 Upon completing his term of enlistment , he studied art at Kendall College of Art and Design in Grand Rapids , Michigan . In 1988 , he relocated to Los Angeles where his love of animals led him to practice interior design for pet stores , before he was quickly fired and began working in set construction . During the 1980s , Keenan played bass guitar for <unk> and sang for Children of the Anachronistic Dynasty , both independent bands . 
 = = Music career = = 
 = = = Early bands = = = 
 Before Tool , Keenan performed in Children of the Anachronistic Dynasty for a few years , during which he formed the foundation for the song " Sober . " He also ( with future Tool bandmate Danny Carey ) performed live and recorded with Green Jellÿ between 1990 and 1993 , performing backup vocals ( as the voice of the " 1st Pig " ) on the band 's hit song " The Three Little Pigs " on their debut album , and appearing in the music video for " Slave Boy " on the band 's follow up LP . 
 = = = Tool = = = 
 After moving to Los Angeles , Keenan met Adam Jones who had heard him singing on a demo in college . Impressed with Keenan 's vocals , Jones suggested that they form a band . Although reluctant at first , Keenan agreed and , in 1990 , Tool was formed . Fronted by Keenan , the eventual lineup included guitarist Jones ; his neighbor , drummer Danny Carey ; and bassist Paul D 'Amour , who would later be replaced by Justin Chancellor . 
 Tool signed to Zoo Entertainment in November 1991 and released the Opiate EP the following year . To support this release , the band toured with Fishbone and Rage Against the Machine . 
 Shortly thereafter , Tool released their 1993 debut album , Undertow , in the United States . It was certified gold after just eight months , and platinum less than a year later . In 1994 , the band released their single " Prison Sex " with a corresponding music video created and directed by Jones . The video was deemed " too graphic and offensive " , and was withdrawn by MTV after a few airings due to " a symbolic dealing with the sensitive subject of child abuse " . 
 In October 1996 , the band released their second studio album , Ænima . The album was certified gold in ten weeks , achieved double platinum in ten months , and won the Grammy Award for Best Metal Performance in 1998 . After the release of the album , Tool began a prolonged legal battle with their label , Volcano Records ( formerly Zoo Records ) , over contract violations . Following this legal battle , which resulted in a new three @-@ record deal , the members of Tool decided to take some time off . During the hiatus , Keenan went under the alias " Gaylord C. " while collaborating with Tim Alexander of Primus and Mike Bordin of Faith No More on " Choked " , a track on the 1997 drumming compilation Flyin ' Traps . 
 The band members were outspokenly critical of peer @-@ to @-@ peer file sharing networks , due to the negative financial impact on artists dependent on success in record sales . During an interview with NY Rock in 2000 , Keenan stated , " I think there are a lot of other industries out there that might deserve being destroyed . The ones who get hurt by MP3s are not so much companies or the business , but the artists , people who are trying to write songs . " 
 Five years after the release of Ænima , Tool announced a new album , Systema Encéphale , with a 12 @-@ song tracklist in January 2001 . A month later , the band revealed that the new album was actually titled Lateralus and that the previous announcement had been a ruse . The album was released in May 2001 to positive reviews . Known for his " dark , intelligent , compelling , and unexpected lyrical twists " , Keenan was acclaimed for his songwriting on the album , in which he " doesn 't cross the line from darkness to ugliness ... as often as he has in the past " . In an interview with NY Rock , Keenan explained , " Everything we release with Tool is inspired by our music . It doesn 't matter if it is a video or if its lyrics . The lyrics for " Schism " are nothing more than my interpretation of the music . " The album became a worldwide success , reaching No. 1 on the U.S. Billboard 200 albums chart in its debut week , and Tool received their second Grammy Award for the best metal performance of 2001 for " Schism " . In 2002 , Keenan recorded a song called " Fallen " with Thirty Seconds to Mars that was released on the band 's self @-@ titled debut album . 
 Fifteen years after the band 's formation , Tool had acquired what Dan Epstein of Revolver described as a devoted " cult " following , and in May 2006 the band released 10 @,@ 000 Days , an album in which Keenan sang about more personal issues in contrast to previous attempts to inspire change . His mother , who inspired the song " <unk> " on Ænima , also served as the inspiration for " Jambi " , and the two @-@ part song " Wings for Marie " and " 10 @,@ 000 Days ( Wings for Marie , Pt 2 ) " , which deals with her 2003 death after 27 years , or around 10 @,@ 000 days , of suffering . The album sold 564 @,@ 000 copies in its opening week in the U.S. and was No. 1 on the Billboard 200 charts . However , 10 @,@ 000 Days was received less favorably by critics than its predecessor Lateralus had been . 
 Following 10 @,@ 000 Days , Tool has one album remaining to fulfill the obligation of its record contract . Though there is little information available on plans for this album , the band is steadily working towards its fifth studio release . Tool has worked around Keenan and his side projects since 1999 , starting with the creation of A Perfect Circle , which has led to several years between projects . Regarding the future of Tool , Keenan stated in a 2007 interview with Spin , " We 'll make music together until one of us is dead . " 
 On March 24 , 2009 , a summer tour was announced on Tool 's website , and in a March 26 press release Tool was confirmed as a headliner for the second annual Mile High Music Festival in Commerce City , Colorado , with Widespread Panic and The Fray . Tool also headlined Lollapalooza 2009 in Chicago , Illinois . 
 On December 12 , 2012 , Tool 's webmaster posted on the band website : 
 Something that might be encouraging to some Tool enthusiasts is that while riding with Danny to Chili John 's yesterday , I heard a lot of new Tool music ( sans Maynard ) . This was the most new material that I 've heard so far , although a few of the riffs and arrangements were familiar . So , what did I think ? Dare I say that it sounded like ... Tool ( some of it reminiscent to earlier Tool stuff , with other parts pushing the envelope ) , and I assume that it will sound even more like Tool once the vocal melodies , etc. have been added . To answer your next question , I cannot say how far along in the writing process the band is . If I had to GUESS , I would say more than half way ( and keep in mind that in the past , at least , the writing went faster once the first few [ more complex ] songs were finished ) . 
 = = = A Perfect Circle = = = 
 During Tool 's post @-@ Ænima hiatus to deal with their legal issues , Keenan began working with Billy Howerdel , Tool 's guitar tech through the Ænima tour , on a different project . The supergroup they formed , A Perfect Circle , began performing in 1999 and released its first album Mer de Noms in 2000 . They released a successful follow @-@ up in 2003 titled Thirteenth Step , a reference to twelve @-@ step programs ( many of the songs were written from the perspective of recovery ) . Both albums were eventually certified platinum . Their subsequent 2004 album , eMOTIVe , was primarily composed of covers , except for the singles " Counting Bodies Like Sheep to the Rhythm of the War Drums " — a song inspired by " Pet " that was originally released on Thirteenth Step — and " Passive " . Keenan later characterized the record as a political album with which he " tested the waters " and was subsequently " crucified " for it because of the content . It was certified gold the month after its release . That same year they released the DVD and CD set entitled <unk> , which was certified platinum within a month of its release . 
 Howerdel reported in a May 2006 interview with MTV that the supergroup 's work was concluded for the time being . After more than two years since the band 's last release , Keenan was asked about the status of A Perfect Circle during an interview with Revolver . He stated : 
 The real problem with running Tool and A Perfect Circle at the same time was they both operate the same way . They 're both live touring bands with a label , still working under the old contract mentality . So I thought it was time to let A Perfect Circle go for now and let Billy explore himself . It 's tough for a guy who went from being a guitar tech [ for Tool ] to being in a band with a pretentious , famous singer and having to live in that shadow . It was important for Billy to go and do his own thing and really explore his own sound and let people hear what he has to say and how he would do it on his own , and then we 'll get back and do some A Perfect Circle stuff . 
 When asked , in an interview for Spin that same month , about the possibility of another A Perfect Circle album , Keenan stated , " Maybe , someday , a song on a soundtrack . But an album ? No . " A year later , on December 9 , 2008 , <unk> reported that Keenan had announced on The Pulse of Radio that he and Howerdel have been writing new music for A Perfect Circle . Keenan also said that the band has no plans to resume full @-@ scale touring , or even to write and record a new album . Instead , they will focus on " one or two songs at a time " , which will most likely be released via the Internet . 
 However , in November 2010 , the band returned from a nearly 6 1 ⁄ 2 @-@ year hiatus with a 14 @-@ show tour in the western US . Touring resumed in May 2011 with a North American tour across the US and Canada that wrapped up at the end of August . The band performed only once in 2012 with a December 29 show in Las Vegas , followed by a five @-@ show Australian tour and a three @-@ show South American tour in early 2013 . 
 = = = Puscifer = = = 
 In 2003 , Keenan surfaced under the name " Puscifer " for the song " REV 22 : 20 " on the Underworld film soundtrack . Puscifer was once advertised as a side project with Danny Lohner , who had formerly performed live with Nine Inch Nails , but has since been formed as a manifestation of Keenan 's " creative subconscious " — meaning that Keenan is now using the name as a pseudonym for his solo work . Keenan has stated that it is " a premiere improvisational hardcore band " , and his " catch @-@ all , stream of consciousness , anything goes , etc . " project . When comparing the project to Tool in an interview with Rolling Stone , Keenan described it as his " attempt to make music to inspire people . ... This is definitely not thinking man 's music , but groove @-@ oriented music that makes you feel good . " In a later interview with Artistdirect , Keenan said that he did not want the lyrics to be puzzles . He wanted the complexity to be in the music , stating " that 's the part that gets under your skin and makes you feel good . " 
 In 2006 , Puscifer contributed the song " The Undertaker ( <unk> Mix ) " to the soundtrack of Underworld : Evolution , where " <unk> " , a moniker for Danny Lohner created by the members of A Perfect Circle , is the reversal of " Re : D Lohner " . Keenan financed and released the first studio album , " V " Is for Vagina , in October 2007 . Created in a tour bus , in several hotel rooms , and in various studios around the country while Keenan toured with Tool , the album is a radical departure from Keenan 's contributions in Tool and A Perfect Circle . Tim Alexander , best known as the drummer for rock band Primus , was a guest musician on the album . He called Puscifer " <unk> and hypnotic " and a " total 180 from Tool " . The album was criticized as unfocused and lacking in the passion and intelligence present in Keenan 's previous work . 
 Puscifer is also a clothing line , with merchandise available for purchase on the band 's website . On September 16 , 2008 , Keenan updated the <unk> blog , revealing that the first ever Puscifer store would be opening " hopefully " by October 1 in Jerome , Arizona . Occupying a small space above a tattoo parlor , the store opened on October 3 , 2008 . In addition to the merchandise available on the band 's online store , Keenan has also made available locally roasted coffee , art , and limited edition collectibles . 
 On February 13 – 15 , 2009 , Keenan debuted Puscifer at the Pearl Concert Theater in Palms Casino Resort in Paradise , Nevada , with a cabaret @-@ style show so abstract it is not easily described . In an interview with the Los Angeles Times , Keenan stated " we didn 't really have any clue what to call it , so we just kind of called it cabaret . " Keenan — who has had previous experience with this type of entertainment , having fronted a similar show in Los Angeles before achieving fame with Tool — went on to add that " you just can 't really describe it , you just have to see it , then it makes sense . " Featuring an ever @-@ changing lineup of artists including Milla Jovovich and Primus drummer Tim Alexander , the show was originally said to have a long @-@ term residency at the Pearl ; however , Keenan later revealed that it was to be only a two @-@ show performance . 
 Puscifer continued to perform with a revolving lineup throughout 2009 at venues around the Southwest . However , in a November 2009 interview , Keenan stated : " Efforts to confine our beloved enigma to the Southwestern United States have been thwarted . We are compelled beyond all reason to bring the noise Eastward and share our special sauce . Although authorities suggest you be prepared for any and all possibilities , we simply suggest you arrive happy and hungry . " 
 On October 18 , 2011 , Keenan released Puscifer 's second album , Conditions of My Parole . The album received generally favorable reviews on Metacritic , a positive review from Allmusic 's Gregory Heaney , who described it as " a fine piece of cold weather headphone music . " Keenan followed with the February 19 , 2013 , release of Donkey Punch the Night . This EP includes covers of " Bohemian Rhapsody " by Queen and " Balls to the Wall " by Accept . It received mostly mixed reviews , resulting in a Metacritic rating of 62 % . 
 = = = Writing and performance style = = = 
 A primary purpose of Keenan 's lyrics for Tool involves a desire to connect with the listeners on a personal level ; to encourage them to look within themselves for self @-@ identity , understanding and reflection . Tool does not include lyrics with any releases as Keenan believes most people " don 't get it " and it is not a priority of the band that people do . However , after each release Keenan has eventually published his typed lyrics online via the semi @-@ official fansite , with the exception of " Lateralus " , which was published on the official Tool website . Despite Maynard 's aversion to promoting the lyrical content of Tool 's work to its audience , lyrical arrangements are often given special attention , such as in the lyrics to " Lateralus " , wherein the number of syllables per line correspond to an arrangement of the Fibonacci numbers , and " Jambi " , in which the metrical foot iamb is used . Keenan 's lyrics on Ænima and Lateralus focused on philosophy and spirituality — specific subjects range from evolution and Jungian psychology in " Forty @-@ Six & 2 " and transcendence in " Lateralus " . 
 In live performances with Tool , Keenan has often been known to be situated on a platform towards the rear of the stage , without a spotlight , facing the backdrop rather than the audience . Breckinridge Haggerty , the band 's live video director , says that the dark spaces on stage " are mostly for Maynard " . He explains , " a lot of the songs are a personal journey for him and he has a hard time with the glare of the lights when he 's trying to reproduce these emotions for the audience . He needs a bit of personal space , and he feels more comfortable in the shadows . " An exception , which surprised even devout Tool fans , occurred when a fan climbed on stage and attempted to hug Keenan during the band 's performance of " <unk> " . After dropping the fan to the ground with a gentle hip toss , Keenan , continuing to sing , wrapped himself around the man 's back into a rear naked choke . He held the man without actually constricting his neck , allowing him to raise his fist in celebration . Keenan eventually turned the man to his stomach and sat on his back , where he stayed for " an uncomfortably long period of time . " His appearance with Tool has included the Mohawk hairstyle , wigs , Kabuki masks , bras , tights , and his entire body in blue paint . This is contrasted with a variety of long haired wigs while performing with or promoting A Perfect Circle . 
 Describing Keenan 's contribution to Tool and A Perfect Circle , The New York Times wrote that " both groups rely on Mr. Keenan 's ability to dignify emotions like lust , anger and disgust , the honey in his voice adding a touch of profundity " . He ranked No. 21 in Hit Parader 's 2006 list of " Heavy Metal 's All @-@ Time Top 100 Vocalists " , and his unique style of singing has often been considered influential to artists such as Pete Loeffler of Chevelle and Jared Leto of Thirty Seconds to Mars . 
 = = Comedy and acting = = 
 Keenan is featured in several segments of Mr. Show , most notably in the Ronnie Dobbs sketch presented in the first season . In one scene , he is seen being arrested with Dobbs . Later in the sketch he is featured wearing a wig as the lead singer of the then @-@ fictitious band " Puscifer " . When asked about the arrest of Dobbs , Keenan replies " Guilty ? Yeah . I 'm sure he 's guilty but ... he knows it . I mean , you 're guilty , and you don 't know it . So ... who 's really in jail ? " He also appears in episode 2 @.@ 6 , " The <unk> Touch of a Dandy <unk> " , as one of the viewers of <unk> : The Movie , saying " Now is not the time " , waving the cameras off and slapping the microphone out of his face in disgust after walking out of the theater . Later , Keenan would sing on a track for the Mr. Show incarnation Run Ronnie Run , and appear in the " music video sex scene " on its DVD . Keenan appeared on the cover of the May / June 1999 issue of Pop Smear magazine , portraying Charles Manson as part of a photo essay , imitating a famous Life magazine portrait . He also appeared as Satan in the 2002 film Bikini Bandits and its 2004 sequel Bikini Bandits 2 : Golden Rod . When asked in an interview which role was more difficult , Keenan responded , " Oh , Manson . He 's a real person . People know what he looks like , how he talked . With Satan there 's so much gray area . " 
 In the mid @-@ 90s , responding to requests for Tool to perform in benefit shows , Keenan created " Free Frances Bean " tee @-@ shirts to represent his own platform . Frances ' mother , Courtney Love , had previously referred to Keenan as a " media whore " to which he responded , " Isn 't that great ? I have the distinction of being called a media whore by Courtney Love . " He said that after watching " the tornado that is her mother " , he thought " Oh my God , how is Frances Bean gonna survive this insanity ? " Although it was started as a simple joke , the T @-@ shirts were soon in high demand and Keenan was giving them away . 
 On April 1 , 2005 , the official Tool website announced , as an April Fools ' Day prank , that " Maynard has found Jesus " and would be abandoning the recording of the new album temporarily and possibly permanently . Kurt Loder of MTV contacted Keenan via email to ask for a confirmation and received a nonchalant confirmation . When Loder asked again , Keenan 's response was simply " heh heh " . On April 7 , the official site revealed that it was a hoax . During an interview Keenan later stated , " It was April Fools ' . If you fall for that on April Fools ' Day , there 's nothing I can do for you . " He has been part of other April Fools ' pranks related to Tool , including one in which he was said to be in critical condition after a tour bus accident . 
 Keenan made his major feature film debut in the April 17 , 2009 , release of Crank : High Voltage . Sharing a scene with the movie 's lead , Jason Statham , Keenan portrays a dog walker " who has an electrifying experience [ ... ] in a public park " . 
 In May 2015 , Keenan made a cameo in an episode of Comedy Bang ! Bang ! as fictional punk musician Barf Edwards . 
 = = Winemaking and other endeavors = = 
 In addition to a produce market in Cornville , Arizona ; Keenan , whose grandparents and great @-@ uncle made wine in Northern Italy , owns Merkin Vineyards and Caduceus Cellars , based in the unincorporated area of Page Springs / Cornville , Arizona , southwest of Sedona , where he resides . While the winery is named after an ancient symbol for commerce ( caduceus ) , the vineyard is named after a pubic wig ( <unk> ) . He is also a partner of Stronghold Vineyards , " an 80 @-@ acre site dedicated to producing affordable wines in the state " , located in the small , unincorporated area known as Kansas Settlement in Sulfur Springs Valley , Arizona . Keenan 's mother died in 2003 , at the age of 59 , due to complications from an aneurysm . Following her death , he scattered her ashes across one of his vineyards , and later named one of his wines after her , honoring her memory with his Cabernet Sauvignon " Nagual del Judith " . In a statement released in April 2009 , Keenan stated : 
 I am standing on a metaphorical plateau . The view from here suggests that I / we still have many mountains to negotiate . It has already been a long journey . But the successes and failures have been in balance . Which would suggest that I / we have chosen the correct path . I hold in my hands the evidence to support this statement . . . With tears in my eyes , I present to you the very first 100 percent Arizona Caduceus wine . Nagual del Judith , named after my late mother , Judith Marie . 
 His previous wines were named after relatives of the Chiricahua Apache chief Cochise who lived in the area where the vineyard is located , and were produced at Page Springs Cellars , owned by Keenan 's business partner . While those wines used some fruits imported from California , " Nagual del Judith " is the first made entirely from Keenan 's own vineyard . Keenan was also a part @-@ owner of Cobras & Matadors , an LA restaurant ran by Steven Arroyo until 2012 . 
 During the fall season of 2008 , Keenan began a small tour of sorts with his Stronghold Vineyards partner Eric Glomski , promoting his wine with signing sessions at Whole Foods Markets in California and Nevada . The tour continued in 2009 with sessions in Texas kicking off in March , and appearances scheduled during Tool 's 2009 summer tour in Florida , Massachusetts , and New Jersey . In July 2009 , Keenan opened an organic market which features a tasting room for his Arizona wines as well as a food court . 
 Keenan is featured in Blood Into Wine : The Arizona Stronghold , a documentary co @-@ produced by Moog filmmakers Ryan Page and Christopher <unk> that chronicles Keenan and Glomski 's embarkation into winemaking in the desert conditions of Arizona 's Verde Valley , and the success they 've seen in the decade since its inception . The film , which includes appearances from Tim & Eric , Patton Oswalt , and Milla Jovovich , was shown at the Noise Pop Festival on February 25 , 2010 , along with another documentary produced by <unk> , The Heart is a Drum Machine . It investigates why people create and listen to music , and features Keenan , Jason Schwartzman , Kurt Loder , Nic Harcourt , Juliette Lewis , and Elijah Wood . 
 In a January 2013 interview with Phoenix New Times , Keenan announced he is working on an autobiography . 
 I think there are a lot of misconceptions with some people that , all of a sudden , I was born when my first band came out , " Keenan says . " I actually had a life before that , and there were a lot of accomplishments . [ The book ] will kind of chronicle why it is I got to where I am , and why I got to where you knew about me . 
 In April 2016 it was announced that Maynard 's authorized biography would be called " A Perfect Union Of Contrary Things " and would be for sale November 8 , 2016 . 
 = = Philanthropy = = 
 Keenan has used his voice on numerous occasions to support charitable causes . He performed at a 1997 benefit concert for RAINN ( the Rape , Abuse & Incest National Network ) organized by Tori Amos ( who had often referred to Keenan as an unofficial brother ) . He is one of the notable performers for Axis of Justice , a non @-@ profit organization that brings musicians , fans of music , and grassroots political organizations together to fight for social justice . In 2004 , Axis of Justice released Concert Series Volume 1 . Included are two tracks featuring Keenan on vocals . The second track on the album , " ( What 's So Funny ' Bout ) Peace , Love , and Understanding " , was recorded live during Lollapalooza in Seattle , Washington on August 23 , 2003 . The first track , " Where the Streets Have No Name " , was recorded live during the Axis of Justice Concert Series at The Avalon in Hollywood on July 19 , 2004 . In February 2005 , Keenan appeared as a surprise vocalist at a Seattle benefit concert for victims of the 2004 earthquake and tsunami in southern Asia , performing with the partly reformed Alice in Chains , in place of the deceased vocalist Layne Staley , on the songs " Them Bones " , " Man in the Box " , and " Rooster " . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 He has a son named Devo H. Keenan ( born 1995 ) who sang backing vocals on A Perfect Circle 's Thirteenth Step , and later was credited as the cellist on Keep Telling Myself It 's Alright — the debut album of Ashes Divide , Billy Howerdel 's post @-@ A Perfect Circle project . He also gave a solo cello performance for Maynard 's 50th birthday <unk> concert , " <unk> " . 
 Two songs bear the name of Maynard 's mother , Judith Marie Keenan : the song " Wings for Marie ( Pt . 1 ) " by Tool and " Judith " by A Perfect Circle . 
 Keenan has a reputation for being reclusive , elliptical and controlling of his public image . He dislikes the manner in which rock stars are worshipped , and at one point carried business cards with the name " Jesus H. Christ " printed on them . When having to deal with stalkers , Keenan has apparently resorted to using a paintball gun to run off trespassers from his property . Brazilian Jiu @-@ Jitsu is one of Keenan 's pursuits , and he studied under Rickson Gracie . 
 It was announced in June 2010 that Keenan had proposed to girlfriend and Caduceus lab manager Lei Li . On September 10 , 2012 , Keenan wrote an article for the Phoenix New Times in which he made reference to his wife , and he has included in the position field of her Caduceus staff page , " Wife " and " My Better half , " and her interests as " Me . " On July 25 , 2014 , Keenan and his wife welcomed a baby daughter , Lei Li <unk> Maria . 
 = = Selected discography = = 
 With <unk> 
 Live at Sons and Daughters Hall ( 1986 ) 
 Never Again ( 1986 ) 
 With Children of the Anachronistic Dynasty 
 <unk> ( 1986 ) 
 <unk> ( 1987 ) 
 With Tool 
 Undertow ( 1993 ) 
 Ænima ( 1996 ) 
 Lateralus ( 2001 ) 
 10 @,@ 000 Days ( 2006 ) 
 With A Perfect Circle 
 Mer de Noms ( 2000 ) 
 Thirteenth Step ( 2003 ) 
 eMOTIVe ( 2004 ) 
 As Puscifer 
 " V " Is for Vagina ( 2007 ) 
 Conditions of My Parole ( 2011 ) 
 Money Shot ( 2015 ) 
 = Drew Carey = 
 Drew Allison Carey ( born May 23 , 1958 ) is an American actor , comedian , sports executive , and game show host . After serving in the U.S. Marine Corps and making a name for himself in stand @-@ up comedy , Carey eventually gained popularity starring in his own sitcom , The Drew Carey Show , and serving as host of the U.S. version of the improv comedy show Whose Line Is It Anyway ? , both of which aired on ABC . 
 Carey has appeared in several films , television series , music videos , a made @-@ for @-@ television film , and a computer game . He has hosted the game show The Price Is Right since 2007 on CBS . He is interested in a variety of sports , has worked as a photographer at U.S. National Team soccer games , is a minority owner of the Major League Soccer team Seattle Sounders FC . Carey has written an autobiography , Dirty Jokes and Beer : Stories of the Unrefined , detailing his early life and television career . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Carey is the youngest of Lewis and Beulah Carey 's three sons and raised in the Old Brooklyn neighborhood of Cleveland , Ohio . When Drew was eight years old , his father died from a brain tumor . He played the cornet and trumpet in the marching band of James Ford Rhodes High School , from which he graduated in 1975 . 
 He continued on to college at Kent State University ( KSU ) and was expelled twice for poor academic performance . He left KSU after three years . After leaving the university , Carey enlisted into the United States Marine Corps Reserve in 1980 and served for six years . He moved to Las Vegas for a few months in 1982 , and for a short time worked as a bank teller and a waiter at Denny 's . 
 = = Stand @-@ up career = = 
 In 1985 , he began his comedy career by following up on a suggestion by David Lawrence ( a disc jockey friend who had been paying Drew to write jokes for David 's radio show in Cleveland ) to go to the library and borrow books on how to write jokes . The following year , after winning an open @-@ microphone contest , he became Master of Ceremonies at the Cleveland Comedy Club . He performed at comedy clubs over the next few years in Cleveland and Los Angeles . He first came to the national eye as a comedian when he competed in the 1988 Star Search . Carey was working as a stand @-@ up comedian when he appeared on The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson in November 1991 . His performance that night impressed Carson , who invited Carey to the couch next to his desk ; this was considered a rare honor for any comedian . In that same year , Carey joined the 14th Annual Young Comedians Special on HBO and made his first appearance on Late Night with David Letterman . In 1994 , Carey wrote his own stand @-@ up comedy special , Drew Carey : Human Cartoon , which aired on Showtime and won a CableACE Award for Best Writing . 
 = = Acting career = = 
 = = = Early roles = = = 
 His early stand @-@ up career led to supporting roles on television shows , during which he developed the character of a hapless middle @-@ class bachelor . In 1993 , Carey had a small role in the film Coneheads as a taxi passenger . In 1994 , Carey co @-@ starred with John <unk> in The Good Life , a short @-@ lived sitcom on NBC . After the show was cancelled , Bruce Helford , a writer on the show , hired Carey as a consultant for the television show Someone Like Me . 
 = = = The Drew Carey Show = = = 
 After their stint on Someone Like Me , Carey and Helford developed and produced the storyline for The Drew Carey Show . The sitcom revolved around a fictionalized version of Carey , as he took on the stresses of life and work with his group of childhood friends . The show premiered on September 13 , 1995 on ABC . In his autobiography , Carey revealed his frustration with having to deal with censors and being unable to employ the off @-@ color humor common in his stand @-@ up routines . Carey initially earned $ 60 @,@ 000 per episode in the first seasons , then renegotiated for $ 300 @,@ 000 . By the final season , he was earning $ 750 @,@ 000 per episode . The show had high ratings for its first few seasons , but declining ratings and increasing production costs ( around $ 3 million per episode ) precipitated its cancellation . The program had a total of 233 episodes over its nine @-@ year run and Carey was one of four actors to appear in every episode . The show starred ( in order of episode appearances ) Carey , Diedrich Bader , Kathy Kinney , Ryan Stiles ( all in every episode ) ; Craig Ferguson ( starring role in seasons 2 – 8 and guest appearances in 9 ) ; Christa Miller ( seasons 1 – 7 ) ; and Ian Gomez ( semi @-@ regular from seasons 1 – 9 ) and John Carroll Lynch ( semi @-@ regular from seasons 3 / 4 – 9 ) . 
 = = = Improv television = = = 
 While still starring in The Drew Carey Show , in 1998 Carey began hosting the American version of the improvisational comedy show Whose Line Is It Anyway ? . He would announce the improv guests , direct the games , and then would usually involve himself in the final game of the episode . The show ran for a total of 220 episodes until the show 's cancellation in 2006 . In 1998 , the New York Friars ' Club made Carey the newest inductee of the group 's Comedy Central Roast . His friend Ryan Stiles ( who <unk> in The Drew Carey Show and Whose Line Is It Anyway ? ) served as the roastmaster . Carey 's income from Whose Line Is It Anyway ? and The Drew Carey Show led to his inclusion on the Forbes list of highest @-@ paid entertainers of 1998 , at 24th with $ 45 @.@ 5 million . 
 For the WB 's 2004 – 2005 prime time schedule , Carey co @-@ produced and starred in Drew Carey 's Green Screen Show , a spin @-@ off of Whose Line Is It Anyway ? . It was canceled by the WB , but picked up shortly afterward by Comedy Central . The show 's premise relied on the use of a green screen for all of the actors ' improv interactions . Animation on the screen was inserted during post @-@ production . 
 In April 2011 , Carey began hosting a new primetime improv show , called Drew Carey 's Improv @-@ A @-@ <unk> . It was filmed at the MGM Grand in Las Vegas , Nevada and first aired on April 11 . The show takes on the premise of Whose Line ? and Drew Carey 's Green Screen Show in that it features many of the same performers from both shows and they do improv based on audience @-@ provided suggestions . 
 = = = Improv All @-@ Stars = = = 
 Carey was one of the founders of the Improv All @-@ Stars , a group of eleven actors who perform in unscripted skits . The group joined Carey in all three of his improv shows , Whose Line Is It Anyway ? , Drew Carey 's Green Screen Show , and Drew Carey 's Improv @-@ a @-@ <unk> and some members had major roles or guest starred on The Drew Carey Show . The Improv All @-@ Stars travel on comedy tours , performing at comedy clubs throughout the United States . 
 = = Game show host = = 
 = = = Power of 10 = = = 
 Beginning in 2007 , Carey began hosting game shows , beginning with his April selection as host of the CBS game show pilot Power of 10 . The show ran from August 7 , 2007 to April 7 , 2008 and aired twice weekly during the late summer and early fall . Each game featured contestants predicting how a cross @-@ section of Americans responded to questions covering a wide variety of topics in polls conducted by CBS . 
 = = = The Price Is Right = = = 
 After taping the pilot episode for Power of 10 , Carey was contacted by CBS about replacing Bob Barker — who had earlier announced his own retirement — as host of The Price Is Right . After initially turning down the offer , Carey announced on Late Show with David Letterman that he would succeed Barker as host of the program beginning in the fall of 2007 . His first episode of The Price Is Right was taped on August 15 , and his shows began airing on October 15 . In response to replacing Barker as host of the game show , Carey stated " You can 't replace Bob Barker . I don 't compare myself to anybody ... It 's only about what you 're doing and supposed to do , and I feel like I 'm supposed to be doing this . " When Carey began hosting , the set , theme music , and show logo were updated . However , Carey kept the old closing line about spaying and neutering the pets that originated with Barker , although his version uses slightly different wording . During Carey 's second year as host , he began to write some of the sketches used during the Showcase , which sometimes features guest appearances by stars of other CBS programs . In the April Fools ' Day 2013 episode , Carey and announcer George Gray switched places with the models , letting the two men be the models for the episode . 
 = = Other roles and appearances = = 
 Carey began appearing in commercials for restaurants in the late 1990s in Canada with The Great Root Bear , but his two @-@ year contract with A & W Food Services of Canada was cut short in November 1998 after an episode of The Drew Carey Show featured McDonald 's . As a result of his dismissal , Carey sued A & W for compensation . 
 Disney 's Hollywood Studios ( then " Disney @-@ MGM Studios " ) , part of Walt Disney World Resort in Florida , debuted a 12 @-@ minute attraction in 1999 titled Sounds Dangerous ! . In the show , a camera follows Carey through a day as an undercover detective . When his video camera fails , the audience is left in complete darkness wearing earphones , following his adventure through sound cues . The attraction is now closed . 
 In 2000 , Carey was given a cameo appearance in the House Party expansion pack of the computer game The Sims . To make him appear , the characters in the game must throw a successful party , which causes Carey to arrive in a limo and join the festivities . Carey is a fan of The Sims series and during one April Fool 's episode of The Drew Carey Show , a scene takes place completely within The Sims . Carey made several other cameo appearances in music videos , including " Weird Al " Yankovic 's " It 's All About the Pentiums " and Fountains of Wayne 's 2004 video for " Mexican Wine " , giving an introduction to the video as if it were on a stage . 
 On January 21 , 2001 , Drew entered as Vince McMahon 's guest entrant in the Royal Rumble match . 
 Although primarily known for his television work , Carey has done limited film work , with his first appearance in 1993 's Coneheads . His next film was the 2000 television film , Geppetto that debuted on The Wonderful World of Disney . The film , an adaptation of Pinocchio , included actor Wayne Brady who had joined Carey on his improv shows . Carey took singing lessons to prepare for the role . In 2005 , Carey appeared in three films : the animated film Robots , where he provided a voice @-@ over for the character Crank ; The Aristocrats where he retold a dirty joke along with other celebrities ; and the documentary , Fuck , where he was interviewed . 
 Carey provided the entertainment for the 2002 Annual White House correspondents ' dinner . Once Carey completed his standup routine for the 1 @,@ 800 guests , President George W. Bush , noting Carey 's improv work , made a joke of his own : " Drew ? Got any interest in the Middle East ? " In 2003 , he joined Jamie Kennedy to host the WB 's live special Play for a Billion . In September 2003 , Carey led a group of comedians , including Blake Clark and The Drew Carey Show 's Kathy Kinney , on a comedy tour of Iraq . 
 On June 8 , 2006 , Drew Carey 's Sporting Adventures debuted on the Travel Channel . In this series , Carey traveled throughout Germany to photograph multiple FIFA World Cup soccer games while he immerses himself in the culture of the towns and states he visits . In early 2008 , Carey appeared in Matt Groening 's The Simpsons as part of the episode " All About Lisa " as a guest on the Krusty the Clown Show . He also surfaced in the second season of Community , playing a well liked former boss to Jeff Winger . 
 On March 4 , 2014 , it was announced on Good Morning America that Carey would compete on the season 18 of Dancing with the Stars . He was partnered with professional dancer Cheryl Burke . The couple was eliminated on the sixth week of competition , finishing in 8th place . 
 = = Writing = = 
 Carey has routinely written throughout his career , including developing his stand @-@ up comedy routines in his early stand @-@ up career , and then moving on to assist in writing sitcoms . In 1997 , Carey published his autobiography , Dirty Jokes and Beer : Stories of the Unrefined wherein he shared memories of his early childhood and of his father 's death when he was eight . He also revealed that he was once molested , had suffered bouts of depression , and had made two suicide attempts by swallowing a large amount of sleeping pills . The book discusses his college fraternity years while attending Kent State University , and his professional career up to that time . The book featured large amounts of profanity and , as the title suggests , includes multiple dirty jokes ( there is one at the start of each chapter ) and references to beer . The book was featured on The New York Times bestseller list for three months . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 He adopted his crew cut hair style while serving in the United States Marine Corps . Carey has had refractive surgery to correct his vision and therefore did not really require glasses ( any glasses he wore in public were merely props to help the audience recognize him ) . However , while this was true for several years , on the May 17 , 2006 episode of Jimmy Kimmel Live ! he revealed that when he turned 40 , he actually developed a need for <unk> . As of 2007 , Carey resides in Los Angeles and New York City . 
 Carey is a father figure to Nicole Jaracz 's son , Connor , from a previous relationship . They have no children together . Nicole and Connor have appeared alongside Carey on The Price Is Right several times . Although he proposed to Jaracz in 2007 , the pair never wed as the engagement was called off in January 2012 . 
 After suffering chest pains while filming The Drew Carey Show in August 2001 , Carey went to the hospital where he underwent a coronary angioplasty . Although his weight was a comedic topic throughout his sitcom and improv shows , in 2010 he began a diet and exercise plan , resulting in an extensive weight loss ( similar to former <unk> announcer Rod Roddy ) . He also claimed that he cured his Type 2 diabetes . 
 = = = Political views = = = 
 Carey is an outspoken libertarian . He has expressed his political philosophy in the following terms , " I believe the answers to all the problems we face as a society won 't come from Washington , it will come from us . So the way we decide to live our lives and our decisions about what we buy or don 't buy are much more important than who we vote for . " 
 Carey expressed his distaste for the Bush administration 's management of the Iraq War , specifically on the September 15 , 2007 , episode of Real Time with Bill Maher . He made donations to Ron Paul 's presidential campaign for the 2008 election . On the September 26 , 2008 , episode of The Late Late Show with Craig Ferguson , Carey defined " libertarian " to host Craig Ferguson as " a conservative who still gets high . " In 2016 , he supported Libertarian Party presidential candidate Gary Johnson in his run for office . 
 Carey has spoken about his various political beliefs in several interviews , and in 1998 he led a " smoke @-@ in " in defiance of California 's newly passed no @-@ smoking ordinance inside bars and restaurants . Carey has hosted a series of mini @-@ documentaries called The Drew Carey Project on <unk> , an online project of Reason Foundation , a libertarian @-@ oriented nonprofit think tank ( for which Carey sits as a member of the board of trustees ) . The first episode , " Gridlock " , addresses private highway ownership and was released on October 15 , 2007 . Other episodes discuss topics such as eminent domain , urban traffic congestion , and medical marijuana . 
 = = = Sports involvement = = = 
 Carey is a devoted fan of the U.S. National Soccer Team , Cleveland Browns , Cleveland Cavaliers , Cleveland Indians and the Columbus Blue Jackets . In 1999 , Carey was part of the pregame ceremonies at the first game of the return of the Cleveland Browns , televised on ESPN . Carey attended the 2006 FIFA World Cup in Germany and the 2010 FIFA World Cup in South Africa . Carey is a minority owner of the Seattle Sounders FC , who began play in Major League Soccer on March 19 , 2009 . Carey is a fan of FC Barcelona and of the Scottish team Rangers . In 2006 he was a season ticket holder for the Los Angeles Galaxy . 
 Carey has shown his support for the Indians by throwing the first pitch at an August 12 , 2006 , game against the Kansas City Royals . He was rewarded by the Cleveland Indians for being " the greatest Indians fan alive " with a personal bobblehead doll made in his likeness that was given to fans . Carey responded to his bobblehead likeness by saying " Bobblehead Day , for me , is as big as getting a star in the Hollywood Walk of Fame . " 
 In 2001 , Carey was the first television actor to enter World Wrestling Federation 's 30 @-@ man " Royal Rumble " match , which he did to promote an improv comedy pay @-@ per @-@ view at the time . He appeared in a few backstage segments before his brief participation in the match . Upon entering the ring , Carey stood unopposed for more than half a minute , but after the next entrant Kane refused a monetary bribe , Carey eliminated himself from the match by jumping over the top rope and retreated from ringside . On April 2 , 2011 , Carey was inducted into the WWE Hall of Fame by Kane . 
 Carey competed against five other celebrities in the first celebrity edition of the 2003 World Poker Tour . He placed fifth , only beating out actor Jack Black . Carey won $ 2 @,@ 000 for his charity . 
 On May 15 , 2011 , Carey completed the " Marine Corps Historic Half Marathon " in 1 : 57 : 02 , then on September 4 , 2011 , he improved to complete the Disneyland Half Marathon in 1 : 50 : 46 . And on October 30 , 2011 , he finished the Marine Corps Marathon with a chip time of 4 : 37 : 11 , placing <unk> out of <unk> . 
 = = = Philanthropy = = = 
 Carey is a supporter of libraries , crediting them for beginning his successful comedy career . On May 2 , 2000 , in a celebrity edition of Who Wants to Be a Millionaire , he selected the Ohio Library Foundation to receive his $ 500 @,@ 000 winnings . He later went on to win an additional $ 32 @,@ 000 on the second celebrity Millionaire , making him one of the biggest winning contestants on Millionaire who did not win the top prize . Carey also has played on the World Poker Tour in the Hollywood Home games for the Cleveland Public Library charity . In June 2007 , Carey offered to donate up to $ 100 @,@ 000 ( in $ 10 @,@ 000 increments ) to the Mooch <unk> Memorial Fund if anybody could beat him at the video game FIFA Soccer 07 for the Xbox 360 . He dared five players from both the U.S. Men 's and Women 's National Teams to compete against him . Carey ended up donating $ 100 @,@ 000 plus $ 60 @,@ 000 for losing two games out of the six games he played . 
 In October 2009 , Carey made a bid of $ 25 @,@ 000 in a charity auction for the @ drew Twitter account . He later increased his offer to $ 100 @,@ 000 if the number of followers of his account @ <unk> reached 100 @,@ 000 by the end of the auction . In an interview with CBS News , he said he would instead donate $ 1 million to the charity Livestrong Foundation if his follower count reached one million by December 31 , 2009 . 
 = = Photography = = 
 Carey can sometimes be seen on the sidelines of U.S. National Team soccer games as a press photographer . His images are sold via wire services under the pseudonym Brooks <unk> . He was at the 2006 FIFA World Cup in the summer of 2006 , for his television show Drew Carey 's Sporting Adventures . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 Carey has starred in only a few television shows and films , but also has numerous guest star appearances in a variety of sitcoms and comedy shows . 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 . 
 = = Awards and honors = = 
 = = = Individual = = = 
 1994 : Cable Ace Award for Best Writing – Drew Carey : Human Cartoon 
 1995 : TV Guide " 10 Hottest New Faces of 1995 " 
 1998 : Satellite Award for Best Actor – Musical / Comedy Series 
 2000 : Honorary DHL from Cleveland State University 
 2000 : People 's Choice Award for Favorite Male Television Performer 
 2003 : Star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame 
 2004 : Comedy Central 's 100 Greatest Stand @-@ Ups of All Time ( # 84 ) 
 2011 : WWE Hall of Fame inductee 
 2011 : Southern California Journalism " Best Advocacy Journalism " Award winner 
 = = = Collective = = = 
 2013 : Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Game / Audience Participation Show ( as host of The Price Is Right ) 
 2014 : Supporters ' Shield winner ( as part owner of the Seattle Sounders ) 
 Four @-@ time Lamar Hunt U.S. Open Cup winner ( as part owner of the Seattle Sounders - 2009 , 2010 , 2011 , 2014 ) 
 = Manchester Ship Canal = 
 The Manchester Ship Canal is a 36 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 58 km ) inland waterway in the North West of England linking Manchester to the Irish Sea . Starting at the Mersey Estuary near Liverpool , it generally follows the original routes of the rivers Mersey and Irwell through the historic counties of Cheshire and Lancashire . Several sets of locks lift vessels about 60 feet ( 18 m ) up to Manchester , where the canal 's terminus was built . Major landmarks along its route include the Barton Swing Aqueduct , the only swing aqueduct in the world , and Trafford Park , the world 's first planned industrial estate and still the largest in Europe . 
 The rivers Mersey and Irwell were first made navigable in the early 18th century . Goods were also transported on the Runcorn extension of the Bridgewater Canal ( from 1776 ) and the Liverpool and Manchester Railway ( from 1830 ) , but by the late 19th century the Mersey and Irwell Navigation had fallen into disrepair and was often unusable . In addition , Manchester 's business community viewed the charges imposed by Liverpool 's docks and the railway companies as excessive . A ship canal was therefore proposed as a way of giving ocean @-@ going vessels direct access to Manchester . The region was suffering from the effects of the Long Depression , and for the canal 's proponents , who argued that the scheme would boost competition and create jobs , the idea of a ship canal made sound economic sense . They initiated a public campaign to enlist support for the scheme , which was first presented to Parliament as a bill in 1882 . Faced with stiff opposition from Liverpool , the canal 's supporters were unable to gain the necessary Act of Parliament to allow the scheme to go ahead until 1885 . 
 Construction began in 1887 ; it took six years and cost £ 15 million ( equivalent to about £ 1 @.@ 65 billion in 2011 ) . When the ship canal opened in January 1894 it was the largest river navigation canal in the world , and enabled the newly created Port of Manchester to become Britain 's third busiest port despite the city being about 40 miles ( 64 km ) inland . Changes to shipping methods and the growth of containerisation during the 1970s and ' 80s meant that many ships were now too big to use the canal and traffic declined , resulting in the closure of the terminal docks at Salford . Although able to accommodate a range of vessels from coastal ships to inter @-@ continental cargo liners , the canal is not large enough for most modern vessels . By 2011 traffic had decreased from its peak in 1958 of 18 million long tons ( 20 million short tons ) of freight each year to about 7 million long tons ( 7 @.@ 8 million short tons ) . The canal is now privately owned by Peel Ports , whose plans include redevelopment , expansion , and an increase in shipping from 8 @,@ 000 containers a year to 100 @,@ 000 by 2030 , as part of their Atlantic Gateway project . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 The idea that the rivers Mersey and Irwell should be made navigable from the Mersey Estuary in the west to Manchester in the east was first proposed in 1660 , and revived in 1712 by the English civil engineer Thomas Steers . The necessary legislation was proposed in 1720 , and the Act of Parliament for the navigation passed into law in 1721 . Construction began in 1724 , undertaken by the Mersey & Irwell Navigation Company . By 1734 boats " of moderate size " were able to make the journey from quays near Water Street in Manchester to the Irish Sea , but the navigation was only suitable for small ships ; during periods of low rainfall or when strong easterly winds held back the tide in the estuary , there was not always sufficient depth of water for a fully laden boat . The completion in 1776 of the Runcorn extension of the Bridgewater Canal , followed in 1830 by the opening of the Liverpool and Manchester Railway , intensified competition for the carriage of goods . In 1825 an application had been made to Parliament for an Act to allow the construction of a ship canal between the mouth of the River Dee and Manchester at a cost of £ 1 million , but " the necessary forms not having been observed " , it did not become law . In 1844 ownership of the Mersey & Irwell Navigation was transferred to the Bridgewater Trustees , and in 1872 it was sold to The Bridgewater Navigation Company for £ 1 @.@ 112 million . The navigation had by then fallen into disrepair , its owners preferring instead to maintain the more profitable canal ; in 1882 the navigation was described as being " hopelessly choked with silt and filth " , and was closed to all but the smaller boats for 264 out of 311 working days . 
 Along with deteriorating economic conditions in the 1870s and the start of a period known as the Long Depression , the dues charged by the Port of Liverpool and the railway charges from there to Manchester were perceived to be excessive by Manchester 's business community ; it was often cheaper to import goods from Hull , on the opposite side of the country , than it was from Liverpool . A ship canal was proposed as a way to reduce carriage charges , avoid payment of dock and town dues at Liverpool , and by @-@ pass the Liverpool to Manchester railways by giving Manchester direct access to the sea for its imports and its exports of manufactured goods . Historian Ian Harford suggested that the canal may also have been conceived as an " imaginative response to [ the ] problems of depression and unemployment " that Manchester was experiencing during the early 1880s . Its proponents argued that reduced transport costs would make local industry more competitive , and that the scheme would help create new jobs . 
 The idea was championed by Manchester manufacturer Daniel Adamson , who arranged a meeting at his home , The Towers in Didsbury , on 27 June 1882 . He invited the representatives of several Lancashire towns , local businessmen and politicians , and two civil engineers : Hamilton Fulton and Edward Leader Williams . Fulton 's design was for a tidal canal , with no locks and a deepened channel into Manchester . With the city about 60 feet ( 18 m ) above sea level , the docks and quays would have been well below the surrounding surface . Williams ' plan was to dredge a channel between a set of retaining walls , and build a series of locks and sluices to lift incoming vessels up to Manchester . Both engineers were invited to submit their proposals , and Williams ' plans were selected to form the basis of a bill to be submitted to Parliament later that year . 
 = = = Public campaign = = = 
 To generate support for the scheme , the provisional committee initiated a public campaign led by Joseph Lawrence , who had worked for the Hull and Barnsley Railway . His task was to set up committees in every ward in Manchester and throughout Lancashire , to raise subscriptions and sell the idea to the local public . The first meeting was held on 4 October in Manchester 's Oxford Ward , followed by another on 17 October in the St. James Ward . Within a few weeks meetings had been held throughout Manchester and Salford , culminating in a conference on 3 November attended by the provisional committee and members of the various Ward Committees . A large meeting of the working classes , attended by several local notables including the general secretaries of several trade unions , was held on 13 November at the Free Trade Hall in Manchester . 
 Regular night @-@ time meetings were held across the region , headed by speakers from a range of professions . Harford suggests that the organisers ' choice of orators represents their " canny ability " to choose speakers who might move their audiences to support their cause . By adopting techniques used by the Anti @-@ Corn Law League , their strategy was ultimately successful : local offices were acquired , secretaries hired and further meetings organised . The weekly Ship Canal Gazette , priced at one penny , was by the end of the year being sold at newsagents in towns across Lancashire . The Gazette was part of a prolonged print campaign organised by the committee , to circulate leaflets and pamphlets , and write supportive letters to the local press , often signed with pseudonyms . One of the few surviving leaflets , " The Manchester Ship Canal . Reasons why it Should be Made " , argued against dock and railway rates , which were apparently levied " with the object of protecting the interests of Railway kings , [ so that ] trade is handicapped , and wages kept low " . By the end of 1882 the provisional committee comprised members from several of Manchester 's large industries , but notably few of the city 's wealthier inhabitants . The sympathetic Manchester City News reported that " the rich men of South and East Lancashire , with a few notable exceptions , have not rivalled the enthusiasm of the general public " . 
 = = = Bills = = = 
 The Mersey Docks Board opposed the committee 's first bill , presented late in 1882 , and it was rejected by Parliament in January 1883 for breaching Standing Orders . Within six weeks the committee organised hundreds of petitions from a range of bodies across the country : one representing Manchester was signed by almost 200 @,@ 000 people . The requirement for Standing Orders was dispensed with , and the represented bill allowed to proceed . Some witnesses against the scheme , worried that a canal would cause the entrance to the Mersey estuary to silt up , blocking traffic , cited the case of Chester harbour . This had silted up due to a man @-@ made cut through the Dee estuary . Faced with conflicting evidence , Parliament rejected the bill . Later mass meetings were held , including a large demonstration at Pomona Gardens on 24 June 1884 . Strong opposition from Liverpool led the House of Commons Committee to reject the committee 's second bill on 1 August 1884 . 
 The unresolved question of what would happen to the Mersey estuary if the canal was built had remained a sticking point . During questioning , an engineer for the Mersey Docks and Harbour Board was asked how he would avoid such a problem . His reply , " I should enter at Eastham and carry the canal along the shore until I reached Runcorn , and then I would strike inland " , prompted Williams to change his design to include this suggestion . Despite continued opposition , the committee 's third bill , presented in November 1884 , was passed by Parliament on 2 May 1885 , and received royal assent on 6 August , becoming the Manchester Ship Canal Act 1885 . Certain conditions were attached ; £ 5 million had to be raised , and the ship canal company was legally obliged to buy both the Bridgewater Canal and the Mersey & Irwell Navigation within two years . The estimated cost of construction was £ 5 @.@ 16 million , and the work was expected to take four years to complete . 
 = = = Financing = = = 
 The enabling Act of Parliament stipulated that the ship canal company 's £ 8 million share capital had to be issued within two years , otherwise the act would lapse . Adamson wanted to encourage the widest possible share ownership , and believed the funds should be raised largely from the working population . Richard Peacock , vice @-@ chairman of the Provisional Manchester Ship Canal Committee , said in 1882 : 
 No few individuals should be expected to subscribe and form a company for mere gain ; it should be taken on by the public ; and if it is not ... I for one should say drop the scheme ... unless I see the public coming forward in a hearty manner . 
 The act forbade the company from issuing shares below £ 10 so , to make them easier for ordinary people to buy , they issued shilling coupons in books of ten so they could be paid for in instalments . The construction costs and expected competition from the Port of Liverpool put off potential investors ; by May 1887 only £ 3 million had been raised . As a temporary solution Thomas Walker , the contractor selected to construct the canal , agreed to accept £ 500 @,@ 000 of the contract price in shares , but raising the remainder required another Act of Parliament to allow the company 's share capital to be restructured as £ 3 million of ordinary shares and £ 4 million of preference shares . Adamson was convinced that the money should be raised from members of the public and opposed the debt restructuring , resigning as chairman of the Ship Canal Committee on 1 February 1887 . <unk> and Rothschild jointly issued a prospectus for the sale of the preference shares on 15 July , and by 21 July the issue had been fully underwritten , allowing construction to begin . The first sod was cut on 11 November 1887 , by Lord Egerton of Tatton , who had taken over the chairmanship of the Manchester Ship Canal Company from Adamson . 
 The canal company exhausted its capital of £ 8 million in 4 years , when only half the construction work was completed . To avoid bankruptcy they appealed for funds to Manchester Corporation , which set up a Ship Canal Committee . On 9 March 1891 the corporation decided , on the committee 's recommendation , to lend the necessary £ 3 million , to preserve the city 's prestige . In return the corporation was allowed to appoint five of the fifteen members of the board of directors . The company subsequently raised its estimates of the cost of completion in September 1891 and again in June 1892 . An executive committee was appointed as an emergency measure in December 1891 , and on 14 October 1892 the Ship Canal Committee resolved to lend a further £ 1 @.@ 5 million on condition that Manchester Corporation had an absolute majority on the canal company 's board of directors and its various sub @-@ committees . The corporation subsequently appointed 11 of the 21 seats , nominated Alderman Sir John Harwood as deputy director of the company , and secured majorities on five of the board 's six sub @-@ committees . The cost to Manchester Corporation of financing the Ship Canal Company had a significant impact on local taxpayers . Manchester 's municipal debt rose by 67 per cent , resulting in a 26 per cent increase in rates between 1892 and 1895 . 
 However well this arrangement served the corporation , by the mid @-@ 1980s it had become " meaningless " . Most of the company 's shares were controlled by the property developer John Whittaker , and in 1986 the council agreed to give up all but one of its seats in return for a payment of £ 10 million . The deal extricated Manchester Council from a politically difficult conflict of interest , as Whittaker was proposing to develop a large out of town shopping centre on land owned by the Ship Canal Company at Dumplington , the present @-@ day Trafford Centre . The council opposed the scheme , believing that it would damage the city centre economy , but accepted that it was " obviously in the interests of the shareholders " . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 Thomas Walker was appointed as contractor , with Edward Leader Williams as chief engineer and designer and general manager . The 36 @-@ mile ( 58 km ) route was divided into eight sections , with one engineer responsible for each . The first reached from Eastham to Ellesmere Port . Mount <unk> , a large mound of earth on a narrow stretch between the canal and the Mersey northwest of Ellesmere Port , was constructed from soil taken from the excavations . It and the adjacent <unk> Cutting were named after the engineer in charge . The last section built was the passage from Weston Point through the Runcorn gap to Norton ; the existing docks at Runcorn and Weston had to be kept operational until they could be connected to the completed western sections of the ship canal . 
 For the first two years construction went according to plan , but Walker died on 25 November 1889 . While the work was continued by his executors , the project suffered a number of setbacks and was hampered by harsh weather and several serious floods . In January 1891 , when the project had been expected to have been completed , a severe winter added to the difficulties ; the Bridgewater Canal , the company 's only source of income , was closed after a fall of ice . The company decided to take over the contracting work and bought all the on site equipment for £ 400 @,@ 000 . Some railway companies , whose bridges had to be modified to cross the canal , demanded compensation . The London and North Western Railway and Great Western Railway refused to co @-@ operate , and between them demanded about £ 533 @,@ 000 for inconvenience . The Ship Canal Company was unable to demolish the older , low railway bridges until August 1893 , when the matter went to arbitration . The railway companies were awarded just over £ 100 @,@ 000 , a fraction of their combined claims . 
 By the end of 1891 , the ship canal was open to shipping as far as <unk> , the name given to wharves built at the entrance to the Weaver Navigation . The success of the new port was a source of consternation to merchants in Liverpool , who suddenly found themselves cut out of the trade in goods such as timber , and a source of encouragement to shipping companies , who began to realise the advantages an inland port would offer . <unk> was rendered useless when the ship canal was completely filled with water in November 1893 . The Manchester Ship Canal Police were formed the following month , and the canal opened to its first traffic on 1 January 1894 . On 21 May , Queen Victoria performed the official opening , the last of three royal visits she made to Manchester . During the ceremony she knighted the Mayor of Salford , William Henry Bailey , and the Lord Mayor of Manchester , Anthony Marshall ; Edward Leader Williams was knighted on 2 July by letters patent . 
 The ship canal took six years to complete at a cost of just over £ 15 million , equivalent to about £ 1 @.@ 65 billion in 2011 . It is still the longest river navigation canal and remains the world 's eighth @-@ longest ship canal , only slightly shorter than the Panama Canal in Central America . More than 54 million cubic yards ( 41 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 m ³ ) of material were excavated , about half as much as was removed during the building of the Suez Canal . An average of 12 @,@ 000 workers were employed during construction , peaking at 17 @,@ 000 . Regular navvies were paid 4 1 ⁄ 2d per hour for a 10 @-@ hour working day , equivalent to about £ 16 per day in 2010 . In terms of machinery , the project made use of more than 200 miles ( 320 km ) of temporary rail track , 180 locomotives , more than 6000 trucks and wagons , 124 steam @-@ powered cranes , 192 other steam engines , and 97 steam excavators . Major engineering landmarks of the scheme included the Barton Swing Aqueduct , the first swing aqueduct in the world , and a neighbouring swing bridge for road traffic at Barton , both of which are now Grade II * listed structures . In 1909 the canal 's depth was increased by 2 feet ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) to 28 feet ( 8 @.@ 5 m ) , equalling that of the Suez Canal . 
 = = = Operational history = = = 
 The Manchester Ship Canal enabled the newly created Port of Manchester to become Britain 's third @-@ busiest port , despite the city being about 40 miles ( 64 km ) inland . Since its opening in 1894 the canal has handled a wide range of ships and cargos , from coastal vessels to intra @-@ European shipping and inter @-@ continental cargo liners . The first vessel to unload its cargo on the opening day was the Pioneer , belonging to the Co @-@ operative Wholesale Society ( CWS ) , which was also the first vessel registered at Manchester ; the CWS operated a weekly service to Rouen . 
 Manchester Liners established regular sailings by large ocean @-@ going vessels . In late 1898 the Manchester City , at 7 @,@ 698 gross tons , became the largest vessel to reach the terminal docks . Carrying cattle and general cargo , it was met by the Lord Mayor of Manchester and a large welcoming crowd . In 1968 Manchester Liners converted its fleet to container vessels only . To service them it built two dedicated container terminals next to No. 9 Dock . The four container vessels commissioned that year , each of 11 @,@ 898 gross tons , were the largest ever to make regular use of the terminal docks at Salford . In 1974 the canal handled 2 @.@ 9 million long tons ( 3 @.@ 25 million short tons ) of dry cargo , 27 per cent of which was carried by Manchester Liners . The dry tonnage was , and is still , greatly supplemented by crude and refined oil products transported in large tanker ships to and from the Queen Elizabeth II Dock at Eastham and the Stanlow Refinery just east of Ellesmere Port , and also in smaller tankers to Runcorn . The limitations imposed by the canal on the maximum size of container vessel meant that by the mid @-@ 1970s Manchester Liners was becoming uncompetitive ; the company sold its last ship in 1985 . 
 The amount of freight carried by the canal peaked in 1958 at 18 million long tons ( 20 million short tons ) , but the increasing size of ocean @-@ going ships and the port 's failure to introduce modern freight @-@ handling methods resulted in that headline figure dropping steadily , and the closure of the docks in Salford in 1984 . Total freight movements on the ship canal were down to 7 @.@ 56 million long tons ( 8 @.@ 47 million short tons ) by 2000 , and further reduced to 6 @.@ 60 million long tons ( 7 @.@ 39 million short tons ) for the year ending September 2009 . 
 The maximum length of vessel currently accepted is 530 feet ( 161 @.@ 5 m ) with a beam of 63 @.@ 5 feet ( 19 @.@ 35 m ) and a maximum draft of 24 feet ( 7 @.@ 3 m ) . By contrast the similarly sized Panama Canal , completed a few years after the Manchester Ship Canal , is able to accept ships of up to 950 feet ( 289 @.@ 6 m ) in length with a beam of 106 feet ( 32 @.@ 31 m ) . Ships passing under the Runcorn Bridge have a height restriction of 70 feet ( 21 m ) above normal water levels . 
 = = Present day = = 
 The canal was completed just as the Long Depression was coming to an end , but it was never the commercial success its sponsors had hoped for . Many ship owners were reluctant to dispatch ocean @-@ going vessels along a " locked cul @-@ de @-@ sac " at a maximum speed of 6 knots ( 11 km / h ; 6 @.@ 9 mph ) . The Ship Canal Company found it difficult to attract a diversified export trade , which meant that ships not uncommonly had to return down the canal loaded with ballast rather than freight . The only staple imports attracted to the Port of Manchester were lamp oil and bananas , the latter from 1902 until 1911 . As the import trade in oil began to grow during the 20th century the balance of canal traffic switched to the west , from Salford to Stanlow , eventually culminating in the closure of the docks at Salford . Historian Thomas Stuart Willan has observed that " What may seem to require explanation is not the comparative failure of the Ship Canal but the unquenchable vitality of the myth of its success " . 
 Unlike most other British canals , the Manchester Ship Canal was never nationalised . In 1984 Salford City Council used a derelict land grant to purchase the docks at Salford from the Ship Canal Company , rebranding the area as Salford Quays . Principal developers Urban Waterside began redevelopment work the following year , by which time traffic on the canal 's upper reaches had declined to such an extent that its owners considered closing it above Runcorn . In 1993 the Ship Canal Company was acquired by Peel Holdings ; as of 2014 it is owned and operated by Peel Ports , which also owns the Port of Liverpool . The company announced a £ 50 billion Atlantic Gateway plan in 2011 to develop the Port of Liverpool and the Manchester Ship Canal as a way of combating increasing road congestion . Their scheme involves the construction of a large distribution centre to be named Port Salford and an additional six sites along the canal for the loading and unloading of freight . Peel Ports predict that the number of containers transported along the canal could increase from the 8 @,@ 000 carried in 2010 to 100 @,@ 000 by 2030 . 
 = = Route = = 
 = = = Geography = = = 
 From Eastham the canal runs parallel to , and along the south side of the Mersey estuary , past Ellesmere Port . Between Rixton east of the M6 motorway 's Thelwall Viaduct and Irlam , the canal joins the Mersey ; thereafter it roughly follows the route the river used to take . At the confluence of the Mersey and Irwell near Irlam , the canal follows the old course of the River Irwell into Manchester . 
 = = = Locks , sluices and weirs = = = 
 Vessels travelling to and from the terminal docks , which are 60 feet ( 18 m ) above sea level , must pass through several locks . Each set has a large lock for ocean @-@ going ships and a smaller , narrower lock for vessels such as tugs and coasters . The entrance locks at Eastham on the Wirral side of the Mersey , which seal off the tidal estuary , are the largest on the canal . The larger lock is 600 feet ( 180 m ) long by 80 feet ( 24 m ) wide ; the smaller lock is 350 feet ( 110 m ) by 50 feet ( 15 m ) . Four additional sets of locks lie further inland , 600 feet ( 180 m ) long and 65 feet ( 20 m ) wide and 350 feet ( 110 m ) by 45 feet ( 14 m ) for the smaller lock ; each has a rise of approximately 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) . The locks are at Eastham ; Latchford , near Warrington ; Irlam ; Barton near Eccles and Mode Wheel , Salford . 
 Five sets of sluices and two weirs are used to control the canal 's depth . The sluices , located at Mode Wheel Locks , Barton Locks , Irlam Locks , Latchford Locks and Weaver Sluices , are designed to allow water entering the canal to flow along its length in a controlled manner . Each consists of a set of mechanically driven vertical steel roller gates , supported by masonry piers . Originally , manually operated Stoney Sluices were used ; these were replaced in the 1950s by electrically driven units , with automation technology introduced from the late 1980s . The sluices are protected against damage from drifting vessels by large concrete barriers . Stop logs can be inserted by roving cranes , installed upstream of each sluice ; at Weaver Sluices , accessed by boat , this task is performed by a floating crane . 
 Woolston Siphon Weir , built in 1994 to replace an earlier structure and located on an extant section of the Mersey near Latchford , controls the amount of water in the Latchford Pond by emptying canal water into the Mersey . Howley Weir controls water levels downstream of Woolston Weir . Further upstream , Woolston Guard Weir enables maintenance to be carried out on both . 
 = = = Docks and wharfs = = = 
 Seven terminal docks were constructed for the opening of the canal . Four small docks were located on the south side of the canal near Cornbrook , within the Borough of Stretford : Pomona Docks No. 1 , No. 2 , No. 3 , and No. 4 . The three main docks , built primarily for large ocean @-@ going vessels , were in Salford , to the west of Trafford Road on the north bank of the canal , docks No. 6 , No. 7 , and No. 8 . In 1905 , No. 9 Dock was completed on the same site . Dock No. 5 , known as Ordsall Dock , was part of Pomona Docks , but was dug on the Salford side of the river ; it was never completed and was filled in around 1905 . 
 Pomona Docks have also been filled in except for the still intact No. 3 Dock , and are largely derelict . A lock at No. 3 Dock connects it to the nearby Bridgewater Canal at the point where the two canals run in parallel . The western four docks have been converted into the Salford Quays development ; ships using the Manchester Ship Canal now dock at various places along the canal side such as Mode Wheel ( Salford ) , Trafford Park , and Ellesmere Port . Most ships have to terminate at Salford Quays , although vessels capable of passing under Trafford Road swing bridge ( permanently closed in 1992 ) can continue up the River Irwell to Hunts Bank , near Manchester Cathedral . 
 In 1893 the Ship Canal Company sold a parcel of land just east of the Mode Wheel Locks to the newly established Manchester Dry Docks Company . The graving docks were constructed adjacent to the south bank of the canal , and a floating pontoon dock was built nearby . Each of the three graving docks could accommodate ocean @-@ going ships of up to 535 feet ( 163 @.@ 1 m ) in length and 64 feet ( 19 @.@ 5 m ) in beam , equivalent to vessels of 8 @,@ 000 gross tons . Manchester Liners acquired control of the company in 1974 , to ensure the availability of facilities for the repair of its fleet of ships . 
 = = = Trafford Park = = = 
 Two years after the opening of the ship canal , financier Ernest Terah Hooley bought the 1 @,@ 183 @-@ acre ( 4 @,@ 790 @,@ 000 m2 ) country estate belonging to Sir Humphrey Francis de Trafford for £ 360 @,@ 000 ( £ 37 @.@ 6 million in 2016 ) . Hooley intended to develop the site , which was close to Manchester and at the end of the canal , as an exclusive housing estate , screened by woods from industrial units constructed along the 1 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) frontage onto the canal . 
 With the predicted traffic for the canal slow to materialise , Hooley and Marshall Stevens ( the general manager of the Ship Canal Company ) came to see the benefits that the industrial development of Trafford Park could offer to both the ship canal and the estate . In January 1897 Stevens became the managing director of Trafford Park Estates , where he remained until 1930 , latterly as its joint chairman and managing director . 
 Within five years Trafford Park , Europe 's largest industrial estate , was home to forty firms . The earliest structures on the canal side were grain silos ; the grain was used for flour and as ballast for ships carrying raw cotton . The wooden silo built opposite No.9 Dock in 1898 ( destroyed in the Manchester Blitz in 1940 ) was Europe 's largest grain elevator . The CWS bought land on Trafford Wharf in 1903 , where it opened a bacon factory and a flour mill . In 1906 it bought the Sun Mill , which it extended in 1913 to create the UK 's largest flour mill , with its own wharf , elevators and silos . 
 Inland from the canal the British Westinghouse Electric Company bought 11 per cent of the estate . Westinghouse 's American architect Charles Heathcote was responsible for much of the planning and design of their factory , which built steam turbines and turbo generators . By 1899 Heathcote had also designed fifteen warehouses for the Manchester Ship Canal Company . 
 = = = Manchester Ship Canal Railway = = = 
 During construction , a year after the death of Walker , the directors of the canal company and Walker 's trustee 's came to an agreement for the canal company to take ownership of the construction assets . These included the more than 200 miles ( 320 km ) of temporary rail track , 180 locomotives and more than 6 @,@ 000 trucks and wagons . These formed the basis of the Manchester Ship Canal Railway , which became the largest private railway in the United Kingdom . 
 The construction railway followed the route of the former River Irwell . To bring in construction materials , the construction railway had a connection to the Cheshire Lines Committee ( CLC ) east of Irlam railway station . Every month this allowed more than 10 @,@ 000 tons of coal and 8 @,@ 000 tons of cement to be delivered to sites along the canal excavation . All existing railway companies with lines along the route had been given notice that their lines had to either be abandoned by a given date or raised to give a minimum of 75 feet ( 23 m ) clearance with all deviation construction costs to be paid by the MSC . The CLC Glazebrook to Woodley mainline passed over the River Mersey at Cadishead and so they decided to build a deviation . Construction of the Cadishead Viaduct began in 1892 , approached via earth banks , with two brick arches accessing a multi @-@ lattice iron girder centre span of 120 feet ( 37 m ) in length . It opened to freight on 27 February 1893 and to passenger traffic on 29 May 1893 . Following the withdrawal of passenger services in 1964 , the line became freight only . When expensive repairs to the viaduct were needed in the early 1980s British Rail opted to close it , together with the line to Glazebrook . 
 At the end of construction , the canal company left in place the original construction railway route , and eventually developed track along 33 miles ( 53 km ) of the canal 's length , mainly to its north bank . Built and operated mainly as a single track line , the busiest section from Weaste Junction through Barton and Irlam , to Partington was all double tracked . The railway 's access to Trafford Park was over the double @-@ tracked Detroit Swing Bridge , which after closure of the MSC Railway in 1988 was floated down the canal to be placed in Salford Quays . The only major deviation was to allow construction of the CWS Irlam soap works and the adjacent Partington Steel & Iron Co. works at Partington ( both of which had their own private railways and locomotives ) , with the MSC Railway 's deviation route pushed south to run alongside the canal 's north bank and under the Irlam viaduct . The canal company also developed large complexes of sidings along the route , built to service freight to and from the canal 's docks and nearby industrial estates , especially at : Salford Docks ; Trafford Park ; Partington North Coaling Basin ( both sides of the canal ) ; Glazebrook sidings ; and a small but busy marshalling yard east of Irlam locks . Unlike most other railway companies in the UK it was not nationalised in 1948 , and at its peak it had 790 employees , 75 locomotives , 2 @,@ 700 wagons and more than 230 miles ( 370 km ) of track . 
 The MSC Railway was able to receive and despatch goods trains to and from all the UK 's main line railway systems , using connecting junctions at three points in the terminal docks . Two were to the north of the canal , operated by the Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway and the London and North Western Railway . The third was to the south , operated by the Cheshire Lines Committee ( CLC ) , where by the MSC Railway had taken over the old and abandoned route of the CLC , giving them a monopoly on traffic to the new soap works and steel mill . 
 The MSC Railway 's steam locomotives were designed to negotiate the tight @-@ radius curves of the sidings and industrial tracks on which they ran . Originally only hence specifying 0 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 wheel arrangements , later 0 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 locomotives - purchased to cope with increasing traffic and loads - had <unk> centre axles , whilst the coupling rods had a hinged central section that permitted several inches of lateral play . A long term user of Hudswell Clarke , from their steam through to diesel locomotives , like many industrial railways later motive power was often provided by the purchase of refurbished former " big @-@ four " operated types , with the advantage that crew were hence readily available to operate these types . Post @-@ WWII purchases included several war surplus Hunslet ' Austerity ' 0 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 saddle tanks ; the last steam locomotive types purchased for the MSC Railway . A fleet of diesel locomotives was purchased between 1959 and 1966 , including 18 0 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 diesels from the Rolls @-@ Royce @-@ owned Sentinel Waggon Works from 1964 @-@ 66 . These enabled the MSC Railways to complete its conversion from steam on 6 July 1966 , more than three years before British Railways . 
 However , as transshipment costs increased , and unprocessed bulk cargos decreased in volume , the economics of road transport resulted in a gradual dwindling of traffic on the MSC Railway system , and hence contraction in the MSC Railway itself . Traffic reduction was added to by : the 1969 closure of the CWS Irlam soap works ; post nationalisation British Steel Corporation building their own line to Glazebrook to junction with BR ; and severe reductions in traffic of ICI 's soda ash trains , British Tar Products and reduced domestic coal consumption . With the remaining engines stationed at Ellesmere Port and Stanlow , maintenance on the line from Irlam through to Partington was halted in late summer 1977 , and all through traffic except engineering trains stopped on 21 December 1977 . The through line was officially closed to all traffic in 1978 , but many of the sidings complexes remained ; the last operational section of the MSC Railway , at Trafford Park , closed on 30 April 2009 . 
 = = = Other features on the banks = = = 
 At Ellesmere Port the canal is joined by the Shropshire Union Canal , at a site now occupied by the National Waterways Museum . The area formerly consisted of a 7 @-@ acre ( 2 @.@ 8 ha ) canal port linking the Shropshire Union Canal to the River Mersey . Designed by Thomas Telford , it remained operational until the 1950s . It was a " marvellously self @-@ contained world " with locks , docks , warehouses , a blacksmith 's forge , stables , and cottages for the workers . Its Island Warehouse was built in 1871 to store grain . A few miles from Ellesmere Port , at Weston , near Runcorn , the ship canal also connects with the Weaver Navigation . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 The quality of water in the ship canal remains adversely affected by several factors . The high population density of the Mersey Basin has , historically , placed heavy demands on sewage treatment and disposal . Industrial and agricultural discharges into the Irwell , Medlock , and Irk rivers are responsible for a number of industrial contaminants found in the canal . Matters have improved since 1990 , when the National Rivers Authority found the area between Trafford Road Bridge and Mode Wheel Locks to be " grossly polluted " . The water was depleted of dissolved oxygen , which in the latter half of the 20th century often resulted in toxic sediments normally present at the bottom of the turning basin in what is now Salford Quays rising to the surface during the summer months , giving the impression of solid ground . Previously , only roach and sticklebacks could be found in the canal 's upper levels , and then only during the colder parts of the year , but an oxygenation project implemented at Salford Quays from 2001 , together with the gradual reduction of industrial pollutants from the Mersey 's tributaries , has encouraged the migration into the canal of fish populations from further upstream . The canal 's water quality remains low , with mercury and cadmium in particular present at " extremely high levels " . Episodic pollution and a lack of habitat remain problems for wildlife , although in 2005 , for the first time in living memory , salmon were observed breeding in the River Goyt ( a part of the Mersey 's catchment ) . In 2010 the Environment Agency issued a report concluding that the canal " does not pose a significant barrier to salmon movement or impact on migratory behaviours " . 
 Despite the canal 's poor water quality there are several nature reserves along its banks . Wigg Island , a former brownfield site east of Runcorn , contains a network of public footpaths through newly planted woodlands and meadows . Among the wildlife species found there are butterflies , dragonflies , kestrels , swallows and house martins . Further upstream the 200 @-@ acre ( 81 ha ) Moore Nature Reserve , which is bisected by the de @-@ watered Runcorn to Latchford Canal , comprises lakes , woodland and meadows . The reserve is open to the public and contains a number of bird hides , from which native owls and woodpeckers may be viewed . Near Thelwall , Woolston Eyes ( a corruption of the Saxon Ees ) , is a Site of Special Scientific Interest . It is used as a deposit for canal <unk> and is a habitat for many species of bird , including black @-@ necked grebes , grasshopper warblers , blackcaps and common whitethroats . Great crested newts and adders are present , and local flora includes orchids and broad @-@ leaved <unk> . Diving ducks are regular visitors to Salford Quays , where species such as pochard and tufted ducks feed on winter nights . 
 = Cyclone Gonu = 
 Cyclone Gonu ( IMD designation : ARB 01 , JTWC designation : 02A , also known as Super Cyclonic Storm Gonu ) is the strongest tropical cyclone on record in the Arabian Sea , and is also the strongest named cyclone in the northern Indian Ocean . The second named tropical cyclone of the 2007 North Indian Ocean cyclone season , Gonu developed from a persistent area of convection in the eastern Arabian Sea on June 1 , 2007 . With a favorable upper @-@ level environment and warm sea surface temperatures , it rapidly intensified to attain peak winds of 240 km / h ( 150 mph ) on June 3 , according to the India Meteorological Department . Gonu weakened after encountering dry air and cooler waters , and early on June 6 , it made landfall on the easternmost tip of Oman , becoming the strongest tropical cyclone to hit the Arabian Peninsula . It then turned northward into the Gulf of Oman , and dissipated on June 7 after making landfall in southern Iran , the first landfall in the country since 1898 . 
 Intense tropical cyclones like Gonu are extremely rare over the Arabian Sea , since most storms in this area tend to be small and dissipate quickly . The cyclone caused 50 deaths and about $ 4 @.@ 2 billion in damage ( 2007 USD ) in Oman , where the cyclone was considered the nation 's worst natural disaster . Gonu dropped heavy rainfall near the eastern coastline , reaching up to 610 mm ( 24 inches ) , which caused flooding and heavy damage . In Iran , the cyclone caused 28 deaths and $ 216 million in damage ( 2007 USD ) . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Toward the end of May 2007 , the monsoon trough spawned a low pressure area in the eastern Arabian Sea . By May 31 , an organized tropical disturbance was located about 645 km ( 400 mi ) south of Mumbai , India , with cyclonic convection , or thunderstorm activity , and a well @-@ defined mid @-@ level circulation . The disturbance initially lacked a distinct low @-@ level circulation ; instead it consisted of strong divergence along the western end of a surface trough of low pressure . A favorable upper @-@ level environment allowed convection to improve , and by late on June 1 , the system developed to the extent that the India Meteorological Department ( IMD ) classified it as a depression . It tracked westward along the southwestern periphery of a mid @-@ level ridge over southern India . Convection continued to organize , and early on June 2 the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) classified it Tropical Cyclone 02A about 685 km ( 425 mi ) southwest of Mumbai . 
 Upon first forming , the system contended with the entrainment of dry air to the northwest of the storm , which was expected to limit intensification . The storm steadily intensified , and early on June 2 the IMD upgraded it to deep depression status . Later in the day the IMD classified the system as Cyclonic Storm Gonu about 760 km ( 470 mi ) southwest of Mumbai , India . As a mid @-@ latitude trough developed over Pakistan , Gonu turned to the north and northeast , though it resumed a westward track after ridging built to the north of the storm . With a solid area of intense convection , it rapidly intensified to attain severe cyclonic status early on June 3 , and with good outflow the JTWC upgraded it to the equivalent of a minimal hurricane . The dry air ultimately had a smaller impact on the intensification than previously estimated . A well @-@ defined eye developed in the center of convection , and after moving over a local increase in ocean heat content , Gonu rapidly deepened . 
 Late on June 3 , the IMD upgraded the storm to Very Severe Cyclonic Storm Gonu . With warm waters , low amounts of vertical wind shear , and favorable upper @-@ level outflow , Gonu strengthened further to attain peak 1 @-@ min sustained winds of 270 km / h ( 165 mph ) and gusts to 315 km / h ( 195 mph ) , about 285 km ( 175 mi ) east @-@ southeast of Masirah Island on the coast of Oman . The IMD upgraded it to Super Cyclonic Storm Gonu late on June 4 , with peak 3 @-@ min sustained winds reaching 240 km / h ( 150 mph ) and an estimated pressure of 920 mbar . This made it the first super cyclonic storm in the Arabian Sea on record . 
 After the storm maintained peak winds for about six hours , the IMD downgraded Gonu to very severe cyclonic storm status late on June 4 . Its eye became cloud @-@ filled and ragged , and the cyclone gradually weakened due to cooler water temperatures and drier air as it approached the Arabian Peninsula . Due to land interaction with Oman , the inner core of deep convection rapidly weakened , and over a period of 24 hours the intensity decreased by 95 km / h ( 60 mph ) . According to the IMD , Cyclone Gonu crossed the easternmost tip of Oman still as a very severe cyclonic storm early on June 6 . Although the winds continued to gradually decrease , overall organization increased slightly in the hours prior to landfall ; Gonu maintained a well @-@ defined low @-@ level structure with a weak eye . 
 After emerging into the Gulf of Oman , the cyclone briefly re @-@ intensified slightly , possibly due to the warm waters . However , increasing wind shear and entrainment of dry air from the Arabian Peninsula continued to remove deep convection from its eastern semicircle . On June 6 , the cyclone turned to the north @-@ northwest , and later that day the JTWC downgraded Gonu to tropical storm status . The IMD followed suit by downgrading Gonu to severe cyclonic storm status and later to cyclonic storm status early on June 7 . Gonu crossed the Makran coast in Iran six hours later and the IMD stopped issuing advisories on the cyclone . This made it the first tropical cyclone on record to hit the country since 1898 . After landfall , Gonu persisted as a remnant low over Iran through June 8 . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 The Oman Chairman of the National Committee for Civil Defence , General Malek Bin Sulaiman Al Ma <unk> , remarked the nation had already developed a contingency plan , which included the activation of army and police personnel after the storm 's passage . Significant damage was expected , especially in northeastern areas , along with up to 150 mm ( 6 in ) of rainfall and very strong winds . Officials recommended citizens evacuate from potentially affected areas , and about 7 @,@ 000 people were forced to leave Masirah Island due to the threat of high surf and strong winds . Overall , more than 20 @,@ 000 people evacuated to emergency shelters . A state of emergency was declared for the nation . The Omani national weather service warned that the cyclone was expected to be worse than the destructive cyclone that hit Masirah Island in 1977 . The Mina al <unk> oil terminal closed for over three days due to the threat of the storm . Omani officials closed government offices for two days and declared a five @-@ day @-@ long national holiday . Most businesses near the coastline were closed prior to the announcement . Authorities at the Muscat International Airport canceled of all flights after 2000 UTC on June 5 due to the cyclone . 
 In Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates , both members of OPEC , no official warnings had been issued due to Gonu . The storm was not expected to disrupt oil supplies from these two nations . However , oil prices rose early on June 5 because of concerns of disruptions caused by Gonu , as well as the threat of nationwide strikes in Nigeria , Africa 's biggest oil producer . Crude oil for July delivery rose $ 1 @.@ 13 , or 1 @.@ 7 percent , to $ 66 @.@ 21 Monday on the New York Mercantile Exchange , the highest close in 15 days . Futures reached $ 66 @.@ 48 , the highest <unk> price since April 30 . The contract was at $ 65 @.@ 95 a barrel , down 26 cents , in after @-@ hours electronic trading at 9 : 43 a.m. Tuesday in Singapore . Tom <unk> , chief oil analyst at the Oil Price Information Service , said he doubted the increase could be attributed to Gonu . " I don 't know if you can really attribute any of the gain to the cyclone , " he said . " It 's an excuse , as opposed to a reason , for the rise in prices . " 
 In Pakistan , officials recommended fishermen remain within 50 km ( 30 mi ) of the coastline , due to anticipated rough waves in the open ocean . Naval authorities in the United States warned ships to avoid the cyclone in the Arabian Sea . 
 The Iran Department of Meteorology declared storm warnings for the country 's southeastern coastline ; the agency anticipated moderate to severe precipitation and gusty winds . Prior to the arrival of the cyclone , about 40 @,@ 000 people , including around 4 @,@ 000 students at the International University of Chabahar , evacuated coastal areas of the country to at least 1 km ( 0 @.@ 6 mi ) inland . All flights in and out of the <unk> Airport were canceled during a 48 @-@ hour period . Additionally , all hospitals in Sistan and <unk> Province were put on red alert . The Iran chapter of the Red Cross advanced the delivery of necessary relief supplies . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Across its path , Cyclone Gonu caused heavy damage and many fatalities . About seven hours before passing near the northeastern Oman coastline , Cyclone Gonu began affecting the country with rough winds and heavy precipitation ; rainfall totals reached 610 mm ( 24 in ) near the coast . Gonu produced strong waves along much of the coastline , leaving many coastal roads flooded . There was a 5 @.@ 1 meter ( 17 foot ) storm surge and a 200 m ( 660 ft ) incursion of seawater inland at Ras al @-@ <unk> ; other areas along the coast had similar levels . 
 = = = Oman = = = 
 Strong winds knocked out power and telephone lines across the eastern region of the country , leaving thousands isolated until the lines were repaired hours later . The cyclone caused extensive damage along the coastline , including in the city of Sur and the village of Ras al <unk> at the easternmost point of the Omani mainland . In Muscat , winds reached 100 km / h ( 62 mph ) , leaving the capital city without power . Strong waves and heavy rainfall flooded streets and some buildings . Police workers in the city sent text messages to keep people away from flooded streets to prevent electrocutions . Little damage was reported to the oil fields of the nation . The liquefied natural gas terminal in Sur , which handles 10 million tonnes of gas each year , was badly hit by the storm and could not be operated . Overall , the cyclone killed 50 people in the country ; by the fourth day after it struck the country , 27 people had been reported missing . Around 20 @,@ 000 people were affected , and damage in the country was estimated at around $ 4 @.@ 2 billion ( 2007 USD ) . 
 = = = United Arab Emirates = = = 
 Fierce waves pushed large amounts of water to coastal areas in Fujairah of the United Arab Emirates , forcing roads to be closed and traffic diverted . Civil defence and police were on duty to manage the road closures , while municipal workers pumped the excess water off the roads . The road connecting <unk> and Fujairah was closed due to the road being submerged by water . The waves along the coastline were reported to be 10 m ( 32 ft ) high , which destroyed about a dozen fishing boats . About 300 boats were moved from the water or emptied of equipment , and overall damage to the port of Fujairah was reported as severe . A boat sank by the port , leaving its ten passengers missing . 
 = = = Iran = = = 
 Upon striking Iran , Gonu dropped moderate to heavy rainfall , including 74 mm ( 2 @.@ 91 in ) in the city of Chabahar . Winds reached 111 km / h ( 69 mph ) , which caused power outages and damaged some homes made of clay ; the power outage led to some fires across the city . The rainfall flooded at least 40 houses , and resulted in the temporary closure of several major roads . Cyclone Gonu produced a storm tide of 2 m ( 6 @.@ 5 ft ) in some locations , with many homes near the coastline receiving damage . In <unk> , heavy rainfall overflowed a river , killing three people in a vehicle caught in the water . Flooding from the rainfall also destroyed a dam in <unk> County . Throughout the country , the cyclone caused 28 deaths , including 20 from drowning ; damage in Iran was estimated at 2 billion ( 2007 IRR , $ 216 million 2007 USD ) . 
 = = = Pakistan = = = 
 Cyclone Gonu caused strong gusty winds and torrential rainfall along Pakistan 's Arabian Sea coast from Karachi to Gwadar . The cyclone was reported to have sunk a number of boats off the eastern coast of Gwadar . It was feared that fishing launches that had ventured into the open sea may have been stranded . At least three houses and one school were destroyed and 210 anchored fishing boats were badly damaged anchored in the coastal town of Sar Bandar in Baluchistan province 
 = = Aftermath and records = = 
 The Muscat International Airport reopened after three days while Fujairah reopened on June 7 after it was closed the day before . The cyclone caused little impact to oil facilities along its path ; after the initial price rises , oil dropped over <unk> per barrel as a result . Across the northern Arabian Sea , the passage of Gonu produced stronger winds and significant upwelling – an oceanographic phenomenon that involves the replacement of the nutrient @-@ depleted surface water with deeper nutrient @-@ rich water ; the passage caused a significant increase in phytoplankton . Additionally , the cyclone delayed the arrival of the Indian Ocean south @-@ west monsoon in the Western Ghats in India . 
 In Oman , production of desalinated water was interrupted , as both of Oman 's desalination plants failed . The first , <unk> , lost supplies of natural gas , halting production ; while the second , <unk> , sustained a damaged switchgear due to flooding . These plants provided water to Muscat 's 631 @,@ 000 residents and surrounding areas , triggering severe water shortages across eastern Oman . To rectify the situation , officials used water tanks . The water returned to near normal in five days , as the two plants returned to service . Additionally , electricians worked quickly to repair the power outages across the region . Five days after Gonu hit , utilities were restored to most of Muscat and the coastal provinces . The Omani army assisted residents in returning to their houses . Even though the Omani government did not request any international aid , the United States offered assistance through naval ships in the area ; this was eventually rejected . The country lost an estimated $ 200 million ( 2007 USD ) in oil exports . In the months after the storm , the government allocated funds for the removal of debris and trees , as well as restoration of roads in tourist areas . Additionally , the National Committee for Civil Defence set up 139 buildings to provide temporary housing for 8 @,@ 192 people . Services such as water and electricity were gradually restored , and people returned to their homes . By two weeks after the storm 's passage , most of those remaining in shelters were from <unk> , one of the most severely affected villages . 
 After the passage of the cyclone , the Iran chapter of the Red Cross and its volunteers worked in conjunction with the military to distribute relief supplies to villages using trucks and helicopters . The branch in Sistan and <unk> Province distributed over 10 @,@ 000 blankets , 1 @,@ 300 tents , 400 clothing items , 82 @,@ 000 loaves of bread , and 87 @,@ 000 bottles of water to affected citizens . In total , 61 @,@ 558 families received aid from the Red Cross in Iran . The Iranian government provided monetary relief to the affected people . Officials worked to restore roads , bridges , and power systems in the affected areas , although repairs were more difficult in some locations ; by a week after the storm , several villages remained surrounded by floodwaters . 
 Cyclone Gonu set several intensity records . When it became a very severe cyclonic storm on June 3 , Gonu became the strongest tropical cyclone on record in the Arabian Sea . Later , it became the only super cyclonic storm , which is a tropical cyclone with 3 @-@ minute sustained winds of at least 220 km / h ( 140 mph ) , in the region . The JTWC estimated peak winds of 270 km / h ( 165 mph ) . Based on their estimate , Gonu was tied with the 1991 Bangladesh Cyclone for the strongest tropical cyclone in the entire northern Indian Ocean , and had the highest windspeed of any cyclone in this basin . On June 6 , Gonu made landfall in extreme eastern Oman with winds of 150 km / h ( 90 mph ) , making it the strongest tropical cyclone on record to strike the Arabian Peninsula . With a damage total of $ 4 @.@ 2 billion ( 2007 USD ) and 50 deaths , Gonu became the worst natural disaster on record in Oman . Additionally , the storm was only the second cyclonic storm on record to strike Iran , the other doing so on June 4 , 1898 . 
 = Tron : Legacy = 
 Tron : Legacy ( stylized as TRON : Legacy ) is a 2010 American science fiction action film directed by Joseph Kosinski from a screenplay written by Adam Horowitz and Edward Kitsis , based on a story by Horowitz , Kitsis , Brian Klugman and Lee Sternthal . It is a sequel to the 1982 film Tron , whose director Steven Lisberger returned to produce . The cast includes Jeff Bridges and Bruce Boxleitner reprising their roles as Kevin Flynn and Alan Bradley , respectively , as well as Garrett Hedlund , Olivia Wilde , and Michael Sheen . The story follows Flynn 's son Sam , who responds to a message from his long @-@ lost father and is transported into a virtual reality called the Grid , where Sam , his father and the algorithm Quorra , stop the malevolent program CLU from invading the human world . 
 Interest in creating a sequel to Tron arose after the film garnered a cult following . After much speculation , Walt Disney Pictures began a concerted effort in 2005 to devise Tron : Legacy , with the hiring of Klugman and Sternthal as writers . Kosinski was recruited as director two years later . As he was not optimistic about Disney 's Matrix @-@ esque approach to the film , Kosinski filmed a high @-@ concept , which he used conceptualize the universe of Tron : Legacy and convince the studio to greenlight the film . Principal photography took place in Vancouver over 67 days , in and around the city 's central business district . Most sequences were shot in 3D and ten companies were involved with the extensive visual effects work . Chroma keying and other techniques were used to allow more freedom in creating effects . Daft Punk composed the musical score , incorporating orchestral sounds with their trademark electronic music . 
 Tron : Legacy was released in North America on December 17 , 2010 . Disney aggressively promoted the film across multiple media platforms , including merchandising , consumer products , theme parks , and advertising . The film received mixed reviews from film critics , who praised the visual effects , production design , and soundtrack , but criticized the character development and cast performance . The film grossed $ 400 million during its worldwide theatrical run . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 1989 , seven years after the events of the first film , Kevin Flynn , who has been recently promoted CEO of ENCOM International , disappears . Twenty years later , his son Sam , now ENCOM 's primary shareholder , takes little interest in the company beyond playing an annual prank on its board of directors . 
 Alan Bradley , an ENCOM executive and friend to Sam 's father , asks Sam to investigate a strange pager message originating from Flynn 's shuttered video arcade . Sam discovers a large computer in a hidden basement , which suddenly teleports him to the Grid , a virtual reality created by his father that exists within ENCOM ’ s computer mainframe . He is quickly captured and sent to " the Games " , where he is forced to fight a masked program named Rinzler . When Sam is injured and begins bleeding , Rinzler realizes that Sam is a human " User " and takes him before Clu , the Grid 's corrupt ruling program who resembles a younger Kevin Flynn . Clu nearly kills Sam in a Light Cycle match , but Sam is rescued by Quorra , an " apprentice " of Flynn , who conveys him to his father 's hideout outside Clu 's territory . 
 Flynn reveals to Sam that he had been working to create a " perfect " computer system and had appointed Clu and Tron ( a security program created by Bradley ) its co @-@ creators . During this construction , the trio discovered a species of naturally occurring " isomorphic algorithms " ( ISOs ) not conceived by Flynn , bearing the potential to resolve various mysteries in science , religion and medicine . Clu , considering them an aberration , betrayed Flynn , seemingly killed Tron , and destroyed the ISOs . Meanwhile , the " I / O portal " permitting travel between the two worlds had closed , leaving Flynn trapped in the system . Now that Clu has gained complete control , he sent the message to Alan in order to lure Sam onto the Grid and reopen the portal for a limited time . As Flynn 's " identity disc " is the master key to the Grid and the only way to traverse the portal , Clu expects Sam to bring Flynn to the portal so he can take Flynn 's disc , go through the portal himself , and impose his idea of perfection on the human world . 
 Against his father 's wishes , Sam returns to Clu 's territory on Quorra 's tip @-@ off to find Zuse , a program who can provide safe passage to the I / O portal . At the End of Line Club , its owner Castor reveals himself to be Zuse , then betrays Sam to Clu 's guards . In the resulting fight , Flynn rescues his son , but Quorra is injured and Zuse gains possession of Flynn 's disc . Zuse attempts to bargain with Clu for the disc , but Clu simply takes the disc and destroys the club along with Zuse . Flynn and Sam stow away aboard a " solar sailer " transport program , where Flynn restores Quorra and reveals her to be the last surviving ISO . 
 The transport is intercepted by Clu 's warship ; as a diversion , Quorra allows herself to be captured by Rinzler , whom Flynn recognizes as Tron , reprogrammed by Clu . Sam reclaims Flynn 's disc and rescues Quorra , while Flynn takes control of a Light Fighter on the flight deck . Clu , Rinzler , and several guards pursue the trio in Light Jets . Upon making eye contact with Flynn , Rinzler remembers his past and deliberately collides with Clu 's Light Jet , but Clu uses Tron 's spare baton to escape while Tron falls into the Sea of Simulation below . Clu confronts the others at the I / O portal , where Flynn <unk> with his digital duplicate , destroying Clu along with himself . Quorra , having switched discs with Flynn , gives Flynn 's disc to Sam and they escape together to the real world . In Flynn 's arcade , Sam backs up and deactivates the system . He then finds a waiting Bradley and tells him he plans to retake control of ENCOM , naming Bradley chairman of the board . He departs on his motorcycle with Quorra , and she witnesses her first real sunrise . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Jeff Bridges as Kevin Flynn , the former CEO of ENCOM International and creator of the popular arcade game Tron based on his own experiences in ENCOM 's virtual reality , who disappeared in 1989 while developing " a digital frontier that will reshape the human condition " . 
 Bridges also portrays Clu ( <unk> <unk> Utility ) , a more advanced incarnation of Flynn 's original computer @-@ hacking program , designed as an " exact duplicate of himself " within the Grid , via digital makeup and voiceover , while John Reardon portrays Clu physically . 
 Garrett Hedlund as Samuel " Sam " Flynn , a primary shareholder of ENCOM who , while investigating his father 's disappearance , is transported onto the Grid himself . Hedlund won a " Darwinian casting process " which tested hundreds of actors , being chosen for having the " unique combination of intelligence , wit , humor , look and physicality " that the producers were looking for in Flynn 's son . The actor trained hard to do his own stunts , which included jumping over cars and copious wire and harness work . Owen Best portrays the seven @-@ year @-@ old Sam Flynn . 
 Olivia Wilde as Quorra , an " isomorphic algorithm " , adept warrior , and confidante of Kevin Flynn in the Grid . Flynn refers to her as his " apprentice " and has imparted volumes of information to her regarding the world outside of the Grid , which she longs to experience . She is shown to have a love of human literature , particularly the writings of Jules Verne , and plays Go with Flynn . She comments that her ' aggressive style ' is usually foiled by Flynn 's patience . Wilde describes Quorra as akin to Joan of Arc . Her hairstyle was influenced by singer Karen O. Wilde added that although " [ Quorra ] could have just been another slinky , vampy temptress " , it was important for her to appeal to both men and women , and that character tried to avoid the typical female lead by having a naiveté and childlike innocence adequate for such an " evolving and learning organism " . Quorra 's action scenes led Wilde to work out and train in martial arts . 
 Bruce Boxleitner as Alan Bradley , an executive consultant for ENCOM , and close friend of Kevin Flynn who , after receiving a cryptic page from the office at the shuttered Flynn 's Arcade , encourages Sam to investigate its origin . 
 Boxleitner also portrays Tron / Rinzler , a security program originally developed by Bradley to monitor ENCOM 's Master Control Program and later reassigned by Flynn to defend the Grid , who was overpowered and re @-@ purposed by Clu as a masked command program wielding an identity disk that splits into two , in flashback sequences via the same treatment as Bridges ' younger self for Clu . Anis <unk> , a stunt actor , portrayed Rinzler , while Boxleitner provided the dialogue . Rinzler is named after author and Lucasfilm Executive Editor J.W. Rinzler . 
 Michael Sheen as Zuse / Castor , a flamboyant supermodel program who runs the End of Line Club at the top of the tallest tower in the system . Sheen describes his performance as containing elements of performers such as David Bowie , Joel Grey from Cabaret , and a bit of Frank @-@ N @-@ Furter from The Rocky Horror Show . 
 James Frain as Jarvis , an administration program who serves as Clu 's right @-@ hand man and chief intelligence officer . Frain had to shave his head , bleach his eyebrows white , and wear make @-@ up . The refraction on Jarvis ' helmet led Frain to walk in a " slightly <unk> , blind stagger " which the actor felt was helpful to get him into character . Frain described Jarvis as " a fun , comic character that ’ s a little off @-@ beat " , considering him " more human , in terms of being fallible and absurd " compared to the <unk> Castor . 
 Beau Garrett as Gem , one of four programs known as Sirens . The Sirens operate the Grid 's game armory , equipping combatants with the armor needed to compete in the games , while also reporting to Castor . 
 Daft Punk as disc jockey programs at Castor 's End of Line Club . 
 Steven Lisberger as <unk> , a bartender in the End of Line Club . 
 Jeffrey Nordling as Richard Mackey , the chairman of ENCOM 's executive board . 
 Cillian Murphy ( uncredited ) as Edward Dillinger , Jr . , the head of ENCOM 's software design team and the son of former ENCOM Senior Executive Ed Dillinger ( portrayed by David Warner in the original film ) . 
 <unk> Swan and Yaya DaCosta also appear as Sirens . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Tron : Legacy is imbued with several references to religious themes , particularly those relating to Christianity and Buddhism . Olivia Wilde 's character , Quorra , was informed by the historical Catholic figure Joan of Arc . Wilde sought inspiration from her six months before production of the film commenced . She , alongside Kosinski , collaborated with the writers on editing the characters so she would contain the characteristics of Joan of Arc . Wilde assessed the characteristics of the figure : " She 's this unlikely warrior , very strong but compassionate , and completely led by selflessness . Also , she thinks she 's in touch with some higher power and has one foot in another world . All of these were elements of Quorra . " Since she epitomizes the concept of androgyny , producers conceived Quorra from an androgynous perspective , notably giving her a short haircut . 
 Bridges opined that Tron : Legacy was evocative of a modern myth , adding that ideas alluding to technological advancement were prevalent throughout the film . To Cyriaque Lamar of io9 , the film 's approach to technology was reminiscent of a <unk> . " One of the things that brought me to this film , " affirmed Bridges , " was the idea of helping to create a modern @-@ day myth to help us navigate through these technological waters [ ... ] . I dig immediate gratification as much as anybody , but it happens so fast that if you make a decision like that , you can go far down the wrong path . Think about those plastic single @-@ use water bottles . Where did that come from ? Who decided that ? You can have a couple of <unk> of water [ ... ] and those bottles don 't disintegrate entirely . Microscopic animals eat the plastic , and the fish eat those , and we 're all connected . It 's a finite situation here . " 
 According to screenwriter Adam Horowitz , Kosinski stated that the film 's universal theme was " finding a human connection in a digital world . " They followed this by " approach [ ing ] the world from the perspective of character , using Kevin Flynn as an organizing principle , and focus on the emotional relationship from father and son and their reconciliation , which brings profound turns in their respective individual lives . ” 
 = = Pre @-@ production = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Steven Lisberger relocated to Boston , Massachusetts from Philadelphia , Pennsylvania in the 1970s to pursue a career in computer animation . Since the computer animation field was mainly concentrated in Los Angeles , Lisberger had very little competition operating on the East Coast : " Nobody back then did Hollywood stuff , so there was no competition and no one telling us that we couldn 't do it . " He later produced the American science fiction film Tron ( 1982 ) for Walt Disney Productions , the first computer animation @-@ based feature film . Although the film garnered some critical praise , it generated only modest sales at the box office — the cumulative North American gross was just $ 33 million . Producer Sean Bailey , who saw the film with his father and Lisberger , was captivated by the finished product . Although Tron performed below Disney studio 's expectations , it later developed a cult following , which fueled speculation of Pixar 's alleged interest in creating a sequel , in 1999 . Rumors of a Tron sequel were further ignited after the 2003 release of the first @-@ person shooter video game , Tron 2 @.@ 0 . Lisberger hinted that a third installment could be in the works , depending on the commercial success of the game . 
 = = = Conception = = = 
 Plans for creating Tron : Legacy began to materialize in 2005 , when Walt Disney Studios hired screenwriters Brian Klugman and Lee Sternthal as writers for the film . The two had recently finished writing the script for Warrior . According to Variety columnist Michael Fleming , Klugman and Sternthal felt " that the world has caught up to Lisberger 's original concept " . Klugman said of the precedent film : " It was remembered not only for story , but a visual style that nobody had ever used before . We are <unk> it , taking ideas that were ahead of the curve and applying them to the present , and we feel the film has a chance to resonate to a younger audience . " 
 In 2007 , Disney began to negotiate with Joseph Kosinski to direct Tron : Legacy . Kosinski admitted that at the time , he was not keen on the idea but it later grew on him as time progressed . Kosinski was involved in a meeting with Bailey , president of Walt Disney Pictures . " Disney owns the property , Tron , " Bailey stated . " Do you know it ? Are you interested ? What would your take be ? In a post @-@ Matrix world , how do you go back to the world of Tron ? " Kosinski wanted to embrace the general ambiance of the film , and wished to not use the internet as a model or use a formula <unk> of The Matrix film series . As neither individuals were in equal agreement on choosing a perspective to conceive the film , Kosinski asked Bailey to lend him money in order to create a conceptual prototype of the Tron : Legacy universe , which was eventually presented at the 2009 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International . " So , we went into Disney , " he recalled , " and I told them , ' We can talk about this all day , but in order to really get on the same page , I need to show you what this world looks and feels like . Give me some money and let me do a small test that will give you a hint for a couple minutes of it , and see what you think . ' " 
 A graduate of Columbia University 's architecture school , Kosinski 's knowledge of architecture was pivotal in conceptualizing the Tron : Legacy universe . His approach in cultivating a prototype was different from other film directors because , according to Kosinski , he came " from a design point of view " ; " Some of my favorite directors come from outside of the film business , so that made my approach different from other directors , but a design background makes sense for a movie like this because the whole world has to be made from scratch . " Lisberger would later state that he left the sequel to a different production team because " after thirty years I don ’ t want to compete with myself " , and to showcase how the next generation dealt with the themes contained in Tron - " If I brought my network in , it would be a little bit like one of those Clint Eastwood movies where all the old guys go to space . " Lisberger added that " I dig this role of being the Obi @-@ Wan or the Yoda on this film more than being the guy in the trenches " , stating that unlike Kosinski his age was a hindering factor - " I cannot work sixteen hours a day staring at twenty @-@ five monitors for most of that time . " 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Shortly after hiring Kosinski , Bailey approached screenwriting duo Adam Horowitz and Edward Kitsis , who accepted for being self @-@ described " obsessed about Tron " . Horowitz later claimed the challenge was to " homage the first movie , continue the story , expand it and take it to another place and open up space for new fans " , and Kitsis claimed that the film would start a whole new mythology " of which we 're only scratching the surface " . Horowitz and Kitsis first created a story outline , and developed and fine @-@ tuned the plot with Bailey and Kosinski across a period of two days in La Quinta . The writers also consulted Lisberger , to view Tron 's creator input on the story . Lisberger gave his blessing , particularly as he has a son the same age as Sam , which Kitsis stated that " was like we had tapped into something he was feeling without even realizing it . " The Pixar team contributed with rewrites for additional shooting after being shown a rough cut in March 2010 , which helped in particular to the development of Sam 's story line . 
 The writing staff cited The Wizard of Oz as a source of thematic influence for Tron : Legacy in writing the script , with Kitsis stating that " They both have very similar DNA , which is Tron really lives on , in a lot of ways , trying to get home . You 're put on this world and you want to go home and what is home ? That 's in a lot of way inspired us . " Kitsis also added that they had to include an " emotional spine to take us into the story or else it just becomes a bunch of moves or gags and stuff " , eventually deciding on adding a mysterious destiny to Flynn and giving him a legendary aura - " Kevin Flynn to us was Steve Jobs and Bill Gates all wrapped up into one and John Lennon " . The writers decided to create the character of Clu as an evil embodiment of " how you look back on your younger self , ( ... ) that guy [ that ] thought he knew everything , but he really knew nothing " . Bridges liked the idea of the dual perspectives , and contributed with the writers for the characterization of Flynn as a sanguine Zen master by suggesting them to get inspiration from various Buddhist texts . Part of the concepts emerged from a reunion the producers had with scientists from California Institute of Technology and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory to discuss concepts such as isomorphic algorithms and the digitizing of organic matter . 
 Horowitz revealed the film would contain many light cycles battles , and asserted that the script for the scenes were " incredibly detailed " , and involved an intricate collaborative process . For the disc game , Horowitz and Kitsis wrote a rough draft of the scene , and sent the script to Kosinski ; he summarized his perspective of the sequence 's visuals to them . " He described them as these underlying platforms , " said Horowitz , " that would then coalesce and then the way you would go from round to round in the game is you defeat someone , they kinda come together as you see in the movie . " After giving his intake , Kosinski sent various sketches of the scene to the writers and would often revise the script . Kitsis thought that illustrating the character 's stories to be the most difficult task in writing Tron : Legacy . The writers collaborated with the creative process throughout production , which was helpful especially considering the difficulties of describing in a tangible way a digital world that " in its very nature defies basic screenwriting conventions . " 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 At the 2008 San Diego Comic @-@ Con , a preliminary teaser trailer ( labeled as <unk> and directed by Joseph Kosinski ) was shown as a surprise to convention guests . It depicted a yellow Program engaged in a light cycle battle with a blue Program , and it prominently featured Jeff Bridges reprising his role as an aged Kevin Flynn ( from the first film ) . At the end of the trailer , the yellow Program showed his face , which appeared identical to Flynn 's earlier program Clu ( resembling the younger Flynn in Tron ) . 
 While the trailer did not confirm that a Tron sequel was in production , it showed that Disney was serious about a sequel . In an interview with Sci @-@ Fi Wire , Bridges revealed that the test footage was unlikely to appear in the finished film . On July 23 , 2009 , Disney revealed film 's title at their panel at Comic @-@ Con. Bridges explained that the title is in reference to the story 's theme : " It 's basically a story about a son 's search for his father . " They also showed a trailer similar to the one shown at Comic @-@ Con 2009 , with updated visuals . At the time , the film had just wrapped production and they had a year of post production ahead of them . Because none of the footage from inside the computer world was finished , they premiered concept images from the production . Art included the <unk> , which has been updated from the original film . Concept photos were also shown of Disc Wars , which has also been revised from the original film into a 16 @-@ game tournament . The arena is set up so that the game court organically changes , and all 16 games are going on at the same time . The boards also combine in real time until the last two Disc warriors are connected . 
 Light cycles make a return , with new designs by Daniel Simon . According to the press conference at Comic @-@ Con 2008 , a new vehicle appears called a " Light Runner , " a two @-@ seat version of the light cycle . It is said to be very fast , and has the unique ability to go off The Grid on its own power . We also get a glimpse at Kevin Flynn 's own cycle , a " Second Generation Light Cycle " designed in 1989 by Flynn and is " still the fastest thing on The Grid . " It incorporates some of the look of both films . 
 A life @-@ size model of the light cycle was put on display at a booth at Fan Expo 2009 in Toronto , Ontario from August 28 – 30 , 2009 , along with a special presentation of material from the production . The conceptual art shown at Comic @-@ Con was shown in the session , along with some test film of the martial artists who play a more athletic style of Disc Wars . A segment from the film showed Flynn 's son entering the now @-@ decrepit arcade , playing a Tron stand @-@ up arcade video game , noticing a passage in the wall behind the Tron game and entering it , the passage closing behind him . Flynn 's son makes the visit to the arcade after Alan Bradley receives a page from the disconnected phone number of the arcade . The footage was used later as part of the trailer released on March 5 , 2010 . 
 The character of Yori and her user , Dr. Lora Baines , do not appear in the sequel , even though the film refers to Alan Bradley being married to Lora . Fans have lobbied for actress Cindy Morgan to be in the film with active campaigns online , such as " Yori Lives " on Facebook , which is independent of Morgan herself . " All I know is what I 'm seeing online , " Morgan said . " I am so thrilled and touched and excited about the fan reaction and about people talking about the first one and how it relates to the second one . I can 't tell you how warm a feeling I get from that . It just means so much . " No one from Tron : Legacy had contacted Morgan , and she did not directly speak with anyone from the sequel 's cast and crew . As Dr. Lora Baines , Cindy Morgan had appeared with Bruce Boxleitner ( as Alan Bradley ) at the <unk> Press Conference in San Francisco , April 2 , 2010 . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography took place in Vancouver , British Columbia in April 2009 , and lasted for approximately 67 days . Many filming locations were established in Downtown Vancouver and its surroundings . Stage shooting for the film took place at the Canadian Motion Picture Park studio in Burnaby , a nearby suburb of the city . Kosinski devised and constructed twelve to fifteen of the film 's sets , including Kevin Flynn 's safe house , a creation he illustrated on a napkin for a visual effects test . " I wanted to build as much as possible . It was important to me that this world feel real , and anytime I could build something I did . So I hired guys that I went to architecture school with to work on the sets for this film , and hopefully people who watch the film feel like there ’ s a certain physicality to this world that hopefully they appreciate , knowing that real architects actually put this whole thing together . " The film was shot in dual camera 3D using Pace Fusion rigs like James Cameron 's Avatar , but unlike the Sony F950 cameras on that film , Tron used the <unk> . " The benefit of [ the <unk> ] , " according to director Kosinski , " is that it has a full 35mm sensor which gives you that beautiful cinematic shallow depth of field . " The film 's beginning portions were shot in 2D , while forty minutes of the film were vertically enhanced for IMAX . Digital Domain was contracted to work on the visual effects , while companies such as Prime Focus Group , DD Vancouver , and Mr. X were brought on to collaborate with producer on the post @-@ production junctures of Tron : Legacy . Post @-@ production wrapped on November 25 , 2010 . 
 The sequences on the Grid were wholly shot in 3D , utilizing cameras specifically designed for it , and employed a 3D technique that combined other special effects techniques . The real @-@ world sequences were filmed in 2D , and eventually altered using the three @-@ dimensional element . Bailey stated that it was a challenge shooting Tron : Legacy in 3D because the cameras were bigger and heavier , and variations needed to be taken into account . Despite these concerns , he opined that it was a " great reason to go to the movies because it 's an experience you just can 't recreate on an iPhone or a laptop " . In some sequences the image shows a fine mesh pattern and some blurring . That is not interference or a production fault , but indicates that that sequence is a flashback and to simulate an older form of video representation technology . Stunt work on the film was designed and coordinated by <unk> , who also designed and trained fight sequences for 300 and Watchmen . Olivia Wilde described it as an honor to train with them . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 In defining his method for creating Tron : Legacy , Kosinski declared that his main objective was to " make it feel real " , adding that he wanted the audience to feel like filming actually occurred in the fictional universe . For this , many physical sets were built , as Kosinski " wanted the materials to be real materials : glass , concrete , steel , so it had this kind of visceral quality . " Kosinski collaborated with people who specialized in fields outside of the film industry , such as architecture and automotive design . The looks for the Grid aimed for a more advanced version of the cyberspace visited by Flynn in Tron , which Lisberger described as " a virtual Galapagos , which has evolved on its own " . As Bailey put , the Grid would not have any influence from the internet as it had turned offline from the real world in the 1980s , and " grew on its own server into something powerful and unique " . Kosinski added that as the simulation became more realistic , it would try to become closer to the real world with environmental effects such as rain and wind , and production designer Darren Gilford stated that there would be a juxtaposition between the variety of texture and color of the real world introduction in contrast with the " clean surfaces and lines " of the Grid . As the design team considered the lights a major part of the Tron look , particularly for being set in a dark world — described by effects art director Ben Procter as " dark silhouetted objects dipped in an atmosphere with clouds in @-@ between , in a kind of Japanese landscape painting " where " the self @-@ lighting of the objects is the main light source " — lighting was spread through every prop on the set , including the floor in Flynn 's hideout . Lisberger also stated that while the original Tron " reflected the way cyberspace was " , the sequel was " going to be like a modern day , like contemporary plus , in terms of how much resolution , the texturing , the feel , the style " , adding that " it doesn ’ t have that Pong Land vibe to it anymore . " 
 The skintight suits worn by the actors were reminiscent of the outfits worn by the actors in the original film . Kosinski believed that the costumes could be made to be practical due to the computerized nature of the film , as physically illuminating each costume would be costly to the budget . Christine <unk> Clark worked with Michael Wilkinson in designing the lighted costumes , which used electroluminescent lamps derived from a flexible polymer film and featured hexagonal patterns . The lights passed through the suit via Light Tape , a substance composed of Honeywell lamination and Sylvania phosphors . To concoct a color , a transparent 3M Vinyl film was applied onto the phosphor prior to lamination . While most of the suits were made out of foam latex , others derived from spandex , which was sprayed with balloon rubber , ultimately giving the illusion of a lean shape . The actors had to be compressed to compromise for the bulk of the electronics . In addition , Clark and Wilkinson designed over 140 background costumes . The two sought influence from various fashion and shoe designers in building the costumes . On the back of the suit was an illuminated disc , which consisted of 134 LED lights . It was attached to the suit via a magnet , and was radio @-@ controlled . All the costumes had to be sewn in such a way that the stitches did not appear , as the design team figured that in a virtual environment the clothes would just materialize , with no need for buttons , zippers or enclosures . According to Neville Page , the lead designer for the helmets , " The art departments communicated very well with each other to realise Joe ’ s [ ... ] vision . We would look over each other ’ s shoulders to find inspiration from one another . The development of the costumes came from trying to develop the form language which came from within the film . " 
 The majority of the suits were designed using ZBrush . A scan of an actor 's body was taken , which was then encased to decipher the fabric , the location of the foam , amongst other concerns . With a computer numerical cutting of dense foam , a small scale output would be created to perfect fine details before initiating construction of the suit . Upon downloading the participant 's body scan , the illustrations were overlaid to provide an output manufacturing element . Describing the computer numerical cutting process , Chris Lavery of Clothes on Film noted that it had a tendency to elicit bubbles and striations . Clark stated : " The [ ... ] suit is all made of a hexagon mesh which we also printed and made the fabric from 3D files . This would go onto the hard form ; it would go inside the mould which was silicon matrix . We would put those together and then inject foam into the negative space . The wiring harness is embedded into the mould and you get a torso . We then paint it and that ’ s your finished suit . " 
 = = = Sound and visual effects = = = 
 Crowd effects for the gaming arena were recorded at the 2010 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International . During one of the Tron : Legacy panels , the crowd was given instruction via a large video screen while techs from Skywalker Sound recorded the performance . The audience performed chants and stomping effects similar to what is heard in modern sports arenas . 
 It took two years and ten companies to create the 1 @,@ 565 visual effects shots of Tron : Legacy . The majority of the effects were done by Digital Domain , who created 882 shots under supervisor Eric Barba . The production team blended several special effect techniques , such as chroma keying , to allow more freedom in creating effects . Similar to Tron , this approach was seen as pushing the boundaries of modern technology . " I was going more on instinct rather than experience , " Kosinski remarked . Although he had previously used the technology in producing advertisements , this was the first time Kosinski used it a large scale simultaneously . Darren Gilford was approached as the production designer , while David Levy was hired as a concept artist . Levy translated Kosinski 's ideas into drawings and other visual designs . " Joe 's vision evolved the visuals of the first film , " he stated . " He wanted the Grid to feel like reality , but with a twist . " An estimated twenty to twenty @-@ five artists from the art department developed concepts of the Tron : Legacy universe , which varied from real world locations to fully digital sets . Gilford suggested that there were between sixty and seventy settings in the film , split up into fifteen fully constructed sets with different levels of computer @-@ created landscapes . 
 Rather than utilizing makeup tactics , such as the ones used in A Beautiful Mind , to give Jeff Bridges a younger appearance , the character of Clu was completely computer generated . To show that this version of Clu was created some time after the events of the original film , the visual effects artists based his appearance on how Bridges looked in Against All Odds , released two years after Tron . The effects team hired makeup artist Rick Baker to construct a molded likeness of a younger Bridges head to serve as their basis for their CG work . But soon , they scrapped the mould because they wished for it to be more youthful . There was no time to make another mould , so the team reconstructed it digitally . On @-@ set , first Bridges would perform , being then followed by stunt double John Reardon who would mimic his actions . Reardon 's head was replaced on post @-@ production with the digital version of the young Bridges . Barba – who was involved in a similar experience for The Curious Case of Benjamin Button — stated that they used four <unk> with infrared sensors to capture all 134 dots on Bridges face that would be the basis of the facial movements , a similar process that was used in Avatar . It took over two years to not only create the likeness of Clu , but also the character 's movements ( such as muscle movement ) . Bridges called the experience surreal and said it was " Just like the first Tron , but for real ! " 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The French electronic group Daft Punk composed the film score of Tron : Legacy , which features over 30 tracks . The score was arranged and orchestrated by Joseph Trapanese . Jason Bentley served as the film 's music supervisor . An electronic music fan , Kosinski stated that to replicate the innovative electronic Tron score by Wendy Carlos " rather than going with a traditional film composer , I wanted to try something fresh and different " , adding that " there was a lot of interest from different electronic bands that I follow to work on the film " but he eventually picked Daft Punk . Kosinski added that he knew the band was " more than just dance music guys " for side projects such as their film Electroma . The duo were first contacted by producers in 2007 , when Tron : Legacy was still in the early stages of production . Since they were touring at the time , producers were unsuccessful in contacting the group . They were again approached by Kosinski , eventually agreeing to take part in the film a year later . Kosinski added that Daft Punk were huge Tron fans , and that his meeting with them " was almost like they were interviewing me to make sure that I was going to hold up to the Tron legacy " . 
 The soundtrack started being composed before production had even begun , and is a notable departure from the band 's previous works , as Daft Punk put more emphasis on orchestral elements rather than relying solely on synthesizers . " Synths are a very low level of artificial intelligence , " explained member Guy @-@ Manuel de Homem @-@ Christo , " whereas you have a Stradivarius that will live for a thousand years . We knew from the start that there was no way that we were going to do this film score with two synthesizers and a drum machine . " " Derezzed " was taken from the album and released as its sole single . The album was released on December 3 , 2010 , and sold 71 @,@ 000 copies in its first week in the United States . Peaking at number six on the Billboard 200 , it eventually acquired a gold certification by the Recording Industry Association of America , denoting shipments of 500 @,@ 000 copies . A remix album for the soundtrack , titled Tron : Legacy Reconfigured , became available on April 5 , 2011 to coincide with the film 's home media release . 
 = = Marketing = = 
 On July 21 , 2009 , several film @-@ related websites posted they had received via mail a pair of " Flynn 's Arcade " tokens along with a flash drive . Its content was an animated GIF that showed CSS code lines . Four of them were put together and part of the code was cracked , revealing the URL to <unk> , a fictitious site maintained by activists who believe Kevin Flynn is alive , even though he has been missing since 1989 . Clicking on a tiny spider in the lower section of the main page led to a countdown clock that hit zero on July 23 , 2009 , 9 : 30 pm PDT . Within the Terms of Use Section , an address was found . It lies in San Diego , California , USA near the city 's convention center where the Comic @-@ Con 2009 took place and some footage and information on the sequel was released . Flynn 's Arcade was re @-@ opened at that location , with several Space <unk> arcade machines and a variety of ' 80s video games . A full @-@ size light cycle from the new film was on display . 
 A ninth viral site , <unk> , was found . It portrays some of the history of Flynn 's Arcade as well as a fan memoir section . On December 19 , 2009 a new poster was revealed , along with the second still from the film . Banners promoting the film paved the way to the 2010 Comic @-@ Con convention center , making this a record third appearance for the film at the annual event . 
 Disney also partnered with both Coke Zero and <unk> on Tron : Legacy . Disney 's subsidiary Marvel Comics had special covers of their superheroes in Tron garb , and Nokia had trailers for the film preloaded on Nokia N8 phones while doing a promotion to attend the film 's London premiere . While Sam picks up a can of Coors in the film , it was not product placement , with the beer appearing because <unk> " just liked the color and thought it would look good on screen . " 
 = = = Theme parks and attractions = = = 
 At the Walt Disney World Resort in Florida , one monorail train was decorated with special artwork depicting <unk> with trailing beams of light , along with the film 's logo . This Tron @-@ themed monorail , formerly the " Coral " monorail , was renamed the " <unk> " and unveiled in March 2010 . At the Disneyland Resort in California , a nighttime dance party named " ElecTRONica " premiered on October 8 , 2010 and was set to close in May 2011 , but it was extended until April 2012 due to positive guest response , in Hollywood Land at Disney California Adventure Park . Winners of America 's Best Dance Crew , Poreotics , performed at ElecTRONica . As part of ElecTRONica , a sneak peek with scenes from the film is shown in 3D with additional in @-@ theater effects in the Muppet * Vision 3D theater . 
 On October 29 , 2010 , the nighttime show World of Color at Disney California Adventure Park began soft @-@ openings after its second show of a Tron : Legacy @-@ themed encore using a Daft Punk music piece titled " The Game Has Changed " from the film soundtrack , using new effects and projections on Paradise Pier attractions . The encore officially premiered on November 1 , 2010 . On December 12 , 2010 , the show Extreme Makeover : Home Edition as part of a house rebuild constructed a Tron : Legacy @-@ themed bedroom for one of the occupants ' young boys . The black painted room not only consisted of life sized Tron city graphics but glowing blue line graphics on the walls , floor and furniture , a desk with glowing red lit <unk> for the legs and a Tron suit inspired desk chair , a <unk> shaped chair with blue lighting accents , projection mural system that projects Tron imagery on a glass wall partition , laptop computer , flat panel television , several Tron Legacy action figures , a <unk> in black and shimmering dark blue and blue overhead lit panels . 
 Disney was involved with the Ice Hotel in <unk> , Sweden through association with designers Ian Douglas @-@ Jones at I @-@ N @-@ D @-@ J and Ben Rousseau to create " The Legacy of the River " , a high @-@ tech suite inspired by Tron : Legacy . The suite uses electroluminescent wire to capture the art style of the film . It consists of over 60 square meters of 100mm thick ice equating to approximately six tons . 160 linear meters of electroluminescent wire were routed out , sandwiched and then glued with powdered snow and water to create complex geometric forms . The Ice Hotel is expected to get 60 @,@ 000 visitors for the season which lasts December 2010 through April 2011 . On November 19 , 2010 , the Tron : Legacy Pop Up Shop opened at Royal @-@ T Cafe and Art Space in Culver City , California . The shop featured many of the collaborative products created as tie ins with the film from brands such as Oakley , Hurley and Adidas . The space was decorated in theme and the adjacent cafe had a tie in menu with Tron inspired dishes . The shop remained open until December 23 , 2010 . 
 Shanghai Disneyland , scheduled to open on June 16 , 2016 , will feature the TRON <unk> Power Run , a steel , indoor roller coaster located underneath a color @-@ shifting canopy in Tomorrowland . The attraction , unique to that Disney park , will take guests on a ride through the Grid from Tron : Legacy on their very own light cycle . 
 = = = Merchandising = = = 
 Electronics and toy lines inspired by the film were released during Fall 2010 . A line of Tron @-@ inspired jewelry , shoes and apparel was also released , and Disney even created a pop @-@ up store to sell them in Culver City . Custom Tron branded gaming controllers have been released for Xbox 360 , PlayStation 3 and Wii . 
 A tie @-@ in video game , entitled Tron : Evolution , was released on November 25 , 2010 . The story sits between the original Tron film and Tron : Legacy . Teaser trailers were released in November 2009 , while a longer trailer was shown during the Spike Video Game Awards on December 12 , 2009 . There were also two games released for the iOS devices ( iPhone , iPod , and iPad ) as a tie @-@ in to the film : Tron and Tron : Legacy . Disney commissioned N @-@ Space to develop a series of multiplayer games based on Tron : Legacy for the Wii console . IGN reviewed the PlayStation 3 version of the game but gave it only a " passable " 6 out of 10 . A tie @-@ in 128 @-@ page graphic novel Tron : Betrayal was released by Disney Press on November 16 , 2010 . It includes an 11 @-@ page retelling of the original Tron story in addition to a story fitting between the original film and Tron : Legacy . IGN reviewed the comic and gave it a " passable " score of 6 @.@ 5 out of 10 . 
 = = Release = = 
 On October 28 , 2010 , a 23 @-@ minute preview of the film was screened on many IMAX theaters all over the world , ( presented by ASUS ) . The tickets for this event were sold out within an hour on October 8 . Stand @-@ by tickets for the event were also sold shortly before the presentation started . Original merchandise from the film was also available for sale . Announced through the official Tron Facebook page , the red carpet premiere of the film was broadcast live on the internet . Tron Legacy was released in theaters on December 17 , 2010 , in the United States and United Kingdom . The film was originally set to be released in the UK on December 26 , 2010 , but was brought forward due to high demand . The film was presented in IMAX 3D and Disney Digital 3D . The film was also released with D @-@ BOX motion code in select theaters and released in 50 <unk> @-@ enhanced cinemas , creating " 3D sound " . 
 On December 10 , 2010 , in Toronto , Canada , a special premiere was hosted by George Stroumboulopoulos organized through Twitter , open to the first 100 people who showed up at the CN Tower . After the film ended the tower was lit up blue to mirror The Grid . On December 13 , 2010 , in select cities all over the United States , a free screening of the entire film in 3D was available to individuals on a first @-@ come , first @-@ served basis . Free " Flynn Lives " pins were handed out to the attendees . The announcement of the free screenings was made on the official Flynn Lives Facebook page . On January 21 , 2011 , the German designer Michael Michalsky hosted the German premiere of the film at his cultural event <unk> during Berlin Fashion Week . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Tron : Legacy was released by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment on Blu @-@ ray Disc , DVD , and digital download in North America on April 5 , 2011 . Legacy was available stand @-@ alone as a single @-@ disc DVD , a two @-@ disc DVD and Blu @-@ ray combo pack , and a four @-@ disc box set adding a Blu @-@ ray 3D and a digital copy . A five @-@ disk box set featuring both Tron films was also released , with one , entitled The Ultimate Tron Experience , having a collectible packaging resembling an identity disk . The digital download of Tron : Legacy was available in both high definition or standard definition , including versions with or without the digital extras . 
 A preview of the 10 @-@ part animated series Tron : Uprising is included in all versions of the home media release . Tron : Legacy was the second Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment release that included Disney Second Screen , a feature accessible via a computer or iPad app download that provides additional content as the user views the film . Forty minutes of the film were shot in 2 @.@ 35 : 1 and then vertically enhanced for IMAX . These scenes are presented in 1 @.@ 78 : 1 in a similar way to the Blu @-@ ray release of The Dark Knight . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported that 51 % of commentators gave the film a positive review , based on 226 reviews . Attaining a mean score of 5 @.@ 9 / 10 , the site 's consensus stated : " Tron : Legacy boasts dazzling visuals , but its human characters and story get lost amidst its state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art production design . " At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 based on reviews from mainstream critics , Tron : Legacy received a rating average of 49 , based on 40 reviews . 
 The visual effects were cited as the central highlight of the film . In his three @-@ star review , Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times felt that the environment was aesthetically pleasing , and added that its score displayed an " electronic force " that complemented the visuals . Rolling Stone columnist Peter Travers echoed these sentiments , concluding that the effects were of an " award @-@ caliber " . J. Hoberman of The Village Voice noted that while it was extensively enhanced , Tron : Legacy retained the streamlined visuals that were seen in its predecessor , while Variety 's Peter DeBarge affirmed that the visuals and the accompanied " cutting @-@ edge " score made for a " stunning virtual ride " . To Nick de Semlyen of Empire , " This is a movie of astonishing high @-@ end gloss , fused to a pounding Daft Punk soundtrack , populated with sleek sirens and chiselled hunks , boasting electroluminescent landscapes to make Blu @-@ ray players weep . " Some critics were not as impressed with the film 's special effects . Manohla Dargis of The New York Times avouched that despite its occasional notability , the film 's " vibrating kaleidoscopic colors that gave the first movie its visual punch have been replaced by a monotonous palette of glassy black and blue and <unk> of orange and yellow " . Though declaring that Tron : Legacy was " eye @-@ popping " , San Francisco Chronicle 's Amy Biancolli asserted that the special effects were " spectacular " — albeit cheesy . A columnist for The Wall Street Journal , Joe Morgenstern denounced the producers ' emphasis on technological advancements , which he felt could have been used for other means such as drama . To the New York Post 's Kyle Smith , there were many moments where he " shed [ his ] customary phlegmatic equilibrium and [ ... ] thought : Hey , this is really exciting ! " 
 The performances of various cast members was frequently mentioned in the critiques . Michael Sheen 's portrayal of Castor was particularly acclaimed by commentators , who — because of his flamboyance — drew parallels to the English singer @-@ songwriter David Bowie , as well as fictional characters such as A Clockwork Orange ( 1971 ) lead character Alex . Dargis , Debruge , Puig , and Carrie Rickey of The Philadelphia Inquirer were among the journalists to praise his acting : Dargis ascribed Sheen 's exceptional performance to a seemingly " uninteresting " cast . To Philadelphia Daily News film critic Gary Thompson , the film became humorous with the scenes involving Castor . Star Tribune critic Colin Covert believed that Sheen 's campy antics was the " too brief " highlight of Tron : Legacy . With other cast members — particularly Garrett Hedlund , Olivia Wilde , and Jeff Bridges — commentary reflected diverse attitudes . The film received " a little boost from " Wilde , according to Rickey . The Boston Globe 's Wesley Morris called Hedlund a " dud stud " ; " None of what he sees impresses , " he elaborated . " The feeling is mutual . At an alleged cost of $ 200 million , that ’ s some yawn . If he can ’ t be thrilled , why should we ? " To Salon commentator Andrew O 'Hehir , even Bridges — an individual he regarded as " one of America 's most beloved and distinctive " actors — was " weird and complicated " rather than being the " sentimental and alluring " portrayer in the original Tron . 
 Critics were divided with the character development and the storylines in Tron : Legacy . Writing for The New Yorker , Bruce Jones commented that the audience didn 't connect with the characters , as they were lacking emotion and substance . " Disney may be looking for a merchandising bonanza with this long @-@ gestating sequel to the groundbreaking 1982 film , " remarked Jones , " but someone in the corporate offices forgot to add any human interest to its action @-@ heavy script . " Likewise , USA Today journalist Claudia Puig found Tron : Legacy to resonate with " nonsensical " and " unimaginative , even obfuscating " dialogue , and that " most of the story just doesn 't scan " . As Dana Stevens from Slate summed up , " Tron : Legacy is the kind of sensory @-@ onslaught blockbuster that tends to put me to sleep , the way babies will nap to block out overwhelming stimuli . I confess I may have <unk> through one or two climactic battles only to be startled awake by an incoming neon Frisbee . " Although he proclaimed the plot of Tron : Legacy and its predecessor to be spotty , Ian <unk> of NPR was lenient of the latter film due to its youth @-@ friendly nature . In contrast to negative responses , Michelle Alexander of Eclipse adored the plot of Tron : Legacy , a reaction that was paralleled by Rossiter Drake from 7x7 , who wrote that it was " buoyed " by its " sometimes convoluted , yet hard to resist " story . Metro 's Larushka Ivan @-@ Zadeh complained about the underdeveloped plot , saying " In 2010 , issues surrounding the immersive nature of gaming and all @-@ consuming power of modern technology are more pertinent than ever , so it 's frustrating the script does nothing with them . " However , she conceded that " it 's the best 3D flick since Avatar and a super @-@ groovy soundtrack by Daft Punk nonetheless makes for an awesome watch " . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Leading up to the release , various commercial analysts predicted that Tron : Legacy would gross $ 40 – $ 50 million during its opening weekend , a figure that Los Angeles Times commentator Ben Fritz wrote would to be " solid but not spectacular " . Although the studio hoped to attract a broad audience , the film primarily appealed to men : " Women appear to be more hesitant about the science @-@ fiction sequel " , wrote Fritz . Jay Fernandez of The Hollywood Reporter felt that the disproportionate audience would be problematic for the films long term box office prospects . Writing for Box Office Mojo , Brandon Gray attributed pre @-@ release hype to “ unwarranted blockbuster expectations from fanboys ” , given the original Tron was considered a box office failure when it was released , and the film 's cult fandom " amounted to a niche " . 
 In North America , the film earned $ 43 @.@ 6 million during the course of its opening weekend . On its opening day , it grossed $ 17 @.@ 6 million , including $ 3 @.@ 6 million during midnight showings from 2 @,@ 000 theaters , 29 % of which were IMAX screenings , and went on to claim the top spot for the weekend , ahead of Yogi Bear and How Do You Know . Tron : Legacy grossed roughly $ 68 million during its first week , and surpassed $ 100 million on its 12th day in release . 
 In international markets , Tron : Legacy grossed $ 23 million on its opening weekend , averaging $ 6 @,@ 000 per theater . According to Disney , 65 % of foreign grosses originated from five key markets ; Japan , Australia , Brazil , United Kingdom , and Spain . The film performed the best in Japan , where it took $ <unk> from 350 theaters . Australia ( $ <unk> ) , the United Kingdom ( $ <unk> ) , Brazil ( $ 1.9M ) , and Spain ( $ 1.9M ) . By the following week , Tron : Legacy obtained $ 65 @.@ 5 million from foreign markets , bringing total grosses to $ 153 @.@ 8 million . At the end of its theatrical run , Tron : Legacy had grossed $ 400 @,@ 062 @,@ 763 ; $ 172 @,@ 062 @,@ 763 in North America , and $ 228 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in other countries . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Tron : Legacy received an award for " Best Original Score " from the Austin Film Critics Association . The film was also nominated for " Excellence in Production Design for a Fantasy Film " by the Art Directors Guild , and for " Sound Editing " by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences . The film made the final shortlist for the Academy Award for Best Visual Effects , although it did not receive a nomination . 
 = = Halted sequel and other media = = 
 = = = Halted sequel = = = 
 Steven Lisberger stated on October 28 , 2010 , before the film 's release , that a sequel was in planning and that Adam Horowitz and Edward Kitsis , screenwriters for Tron : Legacy , were in the early stages of producing a script for the new film . Perry Nemiroff of Cinema Blend speculated that Tron 3 could be the first installment in a new trilogy . On January 13 , 2011 , Ain 't It Cool News reported that the film was close to having its sequel announced as part of Disney 's plan for Tron 's future . On January 21 , 2011 , Tron @-@ Sector reported an unsourced rumor that a sequel to Tron : Legacy had been green @-@ lit and a teaser trailer would debut on the DVD and Blu @-@ ray Disc releases of Tron and Tron : Legacy . Harry Knowles reported on the teaser , calling it a " DVD Extra " and noting that it had been filmed before Thanksgiving ( i.e. before November 2010 ) . On April 8 , 2011 , director Joseph Kosinski talked about the sequel : " We 're working on the story right now . Once we get a script we 're all really happy with , we 'll take it to the powers that be and see if we can go back to the grid . I think we will pick up with where Tron : Legacy left off with Sam and Quorra in the real world and what does that mean and the possibilities it opens up for the next chapter . It 's that relationship between the two of them that 's the next step . " On March 31 , Kosinski said that the film 's script was expected to be finished in two weeks and its working title is <unk> . 
 On June 7 , 2011 , it was reported that screenwriter David <unk> ( Eight Below ) had been hired to draft a script for the sequel to Tron : Legacy . Legacy screenwriters Adam Horowitz and Edward Kitsis were initially slated to return , but were forced to drop out due to their ongoing work in developing the ABC television series Once Upon a Time . It is currently unspecified whether or not Legacy director Joseph Kosinski will return to direct the sequel . On March 8 , 2012 , Bruce Boxleitner suggested that a sequel to Tron : Legacy could begin filming as early as 2014 , after Kosinski finished his film Oblivion . On June 4 , 2012 , Horowitz and Kitsis confirmed they were developing a sequel , and the character of Quorra would be returning for the film , as well as a cameo in Tron : Uprising . On December 5 , 2012 , Jesse <unk> was hired to rewrite the script for the film . This was later followed by the confirmation that Bruce Boxleitner and Garrett Hedlund would return for the third film . 
 In September 2013 , Kosinski said : " The TRON sequel is still in early stages , it ’ s still in the script stage . So I can ’ t say if and when that would go into production but the fundamental idea of the movie is something I ’ m very excited about , it delivers on the ideas that we set up in Legacy , especially at the end in the last five minutes , so that one is a work in progress . " 
 On January 15 , 2014 , Bruce Boxleitner stated in an interview : " All I know is , they don ’ t tell me anything , but they want to do it I would say probably the end of this year , for 2015 maybe , " Boxleitner said . " They don ’ t have any dates but I ’ m thinking from the <unk> I ’ m hearing that ’ s it , but I don ’ t know anything for sure other than they do have a script they love , they 're still tweaking . " The film may also take place more in the real world than in the past according to the recent interview : " That ’ s what I ’ m told , but you didn ’ t hear me say that , " Boxleitner joked . " I think it ’ s going to be a lot about taking the company back because if you remember Sam Flynn says to Alan at the end , just before he rides his bike off into the sunrise with Quorra , says , ‘ We ’ re going to take the company back . ’ That ’ s not the end of the movie . That ’ s the beginning of the next one . That ’ s foreshadowing . And you don ’ t get Cillian Murphy to do an unscripted cameo " and " I got a feeling Eddie Dillinger Jr . ’ s going to be as bad as his dad was . " 
 In March 2015 , it was revealed that Disney has greenlit the third film with Hedlund reprising his role as Sam and Kosinski returning to direct the sequel . Wilde was revealed in April to be returning as Quorra . Filming was expected to start in Vancouver in October 2015 . However , in May 2015 , The Hollywood Reporter stated that Walt Disney Studios had chosen not to continue with a third installment , which was confirmed by Wilde the following month . In the end of July , Boxleitner stated he frequently heard about the pre @-@ production of Tron 3 while shooting Cedar Cove in Vancouver , and was disappointed to hear about the cancellation . While expressing the opinion that Disney decided to " play it safe " and explore other properties [ i.e. Star Wars ] , Boxleitner said that this broke his interest in continuing with the franchise , as " it 's been too up and down for me . I would rather not just keep going . I don ’ t want to repeat my career anymore . " However , in September 2015 , Hedlund stated that he was told that the third Tron film was not " totally dead " , but jokingly suggested that it could be released 30 years later , referencing the near 30 @-@ year gap between the first film and Legacy . 
 = = = Television = = = 
 Tron : Uprising , a spin @-@ off animated series , premiered June 7 , 2012 on the Disney XD network across the United States . Tron : Legacy 's writers Adam Horowitz and Eddie Kitsis revealed that the series tells the story of what happened in the Grid in between the films . Voice actors for the animation include Bruce Boxleitner as Tron , Elijah Wood , Lance Henriksen , Mandy Moore , Emmanuelle <unk> , Paul Reubens , Nate Corddry and Olivia Wilde , who reprises her role as Quorra . 
 = = = Manga = = = 
 A manga version of Tron : Legacy was released by Earth Star Entertainment in Japan on June 30 , 2011 . 
 = Hurricane Alex ( 2016 ) = 
 Hurricane Alex was the first Atlantic hurricane in January since Alice in 1955 , and the first to form in the month since 1938 . Alex originated as an extratropical cyclone near the Bahamas on January 7 , 2016 . The system initially traveled northeast , passing Bermuda on January 8 , before turning southeast . It subsequently deepened and acquired hurricane @-@ force winds by January 10 . Slight weakening took place thereafter , and the system eventually turned east and northeast as it acquired tropical characteristics . On January 13 , it developed into a subtropical cyclone well south of the Azores , becoming the first tropical or subtropical system during January in the North Atlantic since an unnamed storm in 1978 . As it turned north @-@ northeast , Alex transitioned into a full @-@ fledged tropical cyclone on January 14 and became a hurricane . The storm peaked as a Category 1 on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale with maximum sustained winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) and a barometric pressure of 981 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 97 inHg ) . After weakening slightly , Alex made landfall on Terceira Island as a tropical storm the next day . Concurrently , Alex began transitioning back into an extratropical cyclone ; it completed this cycle hours after moving away from the Azores . The system ultimately merged with another extratropical cyclone over the Labrador Sea on January 17 . 
 The hurricane prompted the issuance of hurricane and tropical storm warnings for the Azores and the closure of schools and businesses . Alex ultimately brought gusty winds and heavy rain to the archipelago , causing generally minor damage . One person died from a heart attack when the inclement weather prevented a helicopter from transporting them to a hospital . 
 = = Background = = 
 As currently defined , the Atlantic hurricane season lasts from June 1 to November 30 , the period in which tropical cyclones are most likely to develop across the basin . Occasionally , systems develop outside the season , most frequently in May or December . Activity in January is considered extremely rare , with only five other known instances since 1851 : an unnamed hurricane in 1938 , an unnamed tropical storm in 1951 , Hurricane Alice in 1954 – 55 , an unnamed storm in 1978 , and Tropical Storm Zeta in 2005 – 06 . Since Alice originated in December 1954 , Alex is only the second hurricane to develop solely within January , after the 1938 storm . When Alex made landfall on Terceira as a strong tropical storm this marked only the second time that an Atlantic tropical cyclone has made landfall in January , with the other being Hurricane Alice of 1955 which made landfall on Saint Martin and Saba . In addition to forming well outside of hurricane season , Alex developed unusually far north and east , becoming only the second hurricane to form north of 30 ° N and east of 30 ° W. 
 Unrelated to Alex , Hurricane Pali developed over the Central Pacific in early January , and persisted through the formation of Alex . This marked the first known occurrence of simultaneous January tropical cyclones between the two basins . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Hurricane Alex originated in a non @-@ tropical weather disturbance that developed over Cuba and the Bahamas on January 6 , 2016 . Moving northeast ahead of the subtropical jet stream , the system acquired a surface vortex the following day . Initial conditions , including strong wind shear , low sea surface temperatures , and dry air , inhibited formation of a tropical cyclone as the storm moved northeast toward Bermuda . The large system featured gale @-@ force winds , with maximum sustained winds of 60 – 65 mph ( 95 – 100 km / h ) . On January 8 , the system passed about 75 mi ( 120 km ) north of Bermuda , bringing strong winds and heavy rain to the islands . On January 9 , the system turned east and later southeast , entering a region slightly more favorable for subtropical development . Hurricane @-@ force winds developed around the core of the cyclone the following day , though convective activity near the center remained sparse . The storm 's separation from the jet stream , similar to a cut @-@ off low , allowed it to move southeast and gradually acquire tropical characteristics . Slight weakening took place on January 11 . Convection began increasing around the storm 's center on January 12 , by which time it was situated 1 @,@ 100 mi ( 1 @,@ 770 km ) southwest of the Azores . 
 Frontal features associated with the storm dissipated on January 13 and banding features around the defined low increased in coverage and depth . Though relatively shallow , owing to the seasonally low level of the tropopause , convection was deemed deep enough for the system to be classified a subtropical storm at 21 : 00 UTC . Accordingly , the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) assigned the name Alex to the storm . Upon its classification , Alex was situated 785 mi ( 1 @,@ 260 km ) south @-@ southwest of the Azores . Situated to the east of a shortwave trough , Alex traveled northeast and gradually turned more to the north , steered by broad cyclonic flow over the central Atlantic . An eye feature soon appeared , marking intensification , within a complex of several banding features . The 20 mi ( 25 km ) wide feature cleared out early on January 14 and was surrounded by a ring of − 75 ° F ( − 60 ° C ) cloud tops . The storm remained situated under a cold @-@ core low , though the development of upper @-@ level outflow indicated the system was becoming increasingly tropical . Despite moving over 68 ° F ( 20 ° C ) waters , Alex continued to deepen and transitioned into a full @-@ fledged tropical cyclone by 09 : 00 UTC . The transition was enabled by colder @-@ than @-@ average upper @-@ tropospheric temperatures which created greater instability than would otherwise be expected . 
 Upon transitioning into a tropical cyclone , satellite intensity estimates — using the Dvorak technique — indicated Alex achieved hurricane strength . Forecasters at the NHC estimated maximum winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) and a barometric pressure of 981 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 97 inHg ) ; this made it a Category 1 on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale and constituted the storm 's peak intensity . As Alex moved north toward the Azores , decreasing sea surface temperatures and increasing wind shear caused it to weaken late on January 14 and into January 15 . The hurricane 's eyewall opened up and its convective structure decayed , indicating the start of its transition back into an extratropical cyclone . Becoming increasingly tilted with height due to shear , Alex weakened to a tropical storm before making landfall over Terceira Island at 13 : 15 UTC with winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) . Hours later the system completed its transition into an extratropical cyclone , with its circulation becoming more elongated and the radius of maximum winds expanding significantly . Furthermore , the overall structure became more " comma shaped " , a feature of frontal systems . Consequently , the NHC issued its last advisory on Alex . Turning northwest , the system deepened slightly as it approached Greenland and re @-@ acquired hurricane @-@ force winds on January 17 . Alex soon merged with another extratropical cyclone over the Labrador Sea , marking its dissipation . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 = = = Bermuda = = = 
 The precursor to Alex brought gale @-@ force winds and heavy rain to Bermuda on January 8 . Gusts to 60 mph ( 97 km / h ) disrupted air travel , downed trees , and left sporadic power outages , while waves as high as 20 ft ( 6 m ) necessitated small craft advisories for the islands . Ferry services to and from <unk> Bay , Dockyard , Belmont , <unk> ’ s Ferry , and Lower Ferry were suspended . During the three days in which the system impacted the territory , 1 @.@ 33 in ( 34 mm ) of rain fell at Bermuda International Airport . 
 = = = Azores = = = 
 Upon Alex 's classification as a hurricane on January 14 , the Azores Meteorological Service issued a hurricane warning for the islands of Faial , Pico , São Jorge , Graciosa , and Terceira . They also issued a tropical storm warning for São Miguel and Santa Maria . A red alert — the highest stage for meteorological warnings — was declared for central and eastern islands . Homeowners protected doors and windows with plywood and sandbags in anticipation of damaging winds and flooding . Officials closed schools and administrative buildings for the duration of the hurricane on January 15 . SATA Air <unk> cancelled 33 domestic and international flights for the morning of January 15 , stranding more than 700 passengers . The hurricane and tropical storm warnings were discontinued after Alex 's passage on January 15 . 
 The first hurricane to impact the Azores since Hurricane Gordon in 2012 , Alex brought heavy rain and gusty winds to the archipelago . It is the only known hurricane to track within 230 mi ( 370 km ) of the Azores outside of August and September . Rainfall totals reached 4 @.@ 04 in ( 103 mm ) in Lagoa , São Miguel , and 3 @.@ 71 in ( 94 mm ) in Angra do Heroísmo , Terceira . Wind gusts exceeded 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) on Santa Maria Island and peaked at 57 mph ( 92 km / h ) in Ponta Delgada , São Miguel . The strong winds brought down trees , inflicted damage on some roofs , and triggered scattered power outages . Additionally , minor flooding was observed . Six homes in Ponta Delgada sustained flood damage and another had its roof destroyed . Landslides occurred across parts of the central islands , though they caused only limited damage . The overall effects of the storm were less than initially feared . The hurricane indirectly led to one death — the person suffered a heart attack unrelated to the storm — when an Island Health Unit helicopter was unable to take off due to turbulent conditions . 
 = Sunday , Cruddy Sunday = 
 " Sunday , Cruddy Sunday " is the twelfth episode of The Simpsons ' tenth season . It first aired on the Fox network in the United States on January 31 , 1999 , just after Super Bowl XXXIII and the premiere of Family Guy . In the episode , while buying new tires for his car , Homer meets a travel agent called Wally Kogen . After becoming friends , Kogen offers Homer a free bus ride to the Super Bowl , as long as he can find enough people to fill Kogen 's bus . Several people , including Bart , tag along what soon becomes a problematic trip . Meanwhile , Marge and Lisa set out to find the missing parts of " Vincent Price 's Egg Magic " , a celebrity @-@ endorsed craft kit . 
 " Sunday , Cruddy Sunday " was directed by Steven Dean Moore and written by George Meyer , Brian Scully , Mike Scully and Tom Martin , the first credit Martin received for the series . Mike Scully jokingly said that the episode was " thrown together [ ... ] without thought or structure " by the writers . For the subplot , the writers tried to come up with the " most boring thing " Lisa and Marge could do to pass time . The episode features several guest @-@ stars , including comedian Fred Willard , country singer Dolly Parton , Fox CEO Rupert Murdoch , sports commentators Pat Summerall and John Madden , and former American football players Troy Aikman , Rosey Grier and Dan Marino . All guest @-@ stars played themselves , except for Willard who portrayed Kogen . The episode pokes fun at folk singer Burl Ives , former United States president Bill Clinton as well as the series ' fans , among other things . 
 In its original broadcast , the episode was seen by approximately 11 @.@ 5 million viewers , making it the tenth most watched program of the week as well as the second most watched scripted program on the network the night it aired . The episode was released on home video for the first time in 2004 , and in 2007 , the episode was again released as part of the DVD set The Simpsons – The Complete Tenth Season . Following its broadcast , the episode received mostly positive reviews from critics . 
 After its original broadcast , however , a scene in the episode involving a fictitious , sexually suggestive Super Bowl commercial for the Catholic Church became a subject of controversy . The scene garnered scrutiny from the American Catholic anti @-@ defamation and civil rights organization The Catholic League , whose members sent hundreds of angry letters to the Fox network , demanding any mention of Catholicism in the episode be excised . In September the same year , when the episode was supposed to repeat , the Catholic League asked Fox if they could censor the scene , which the network agreed to . The network 's decision was criticized by journalists and staff members . The censored version of the episode is still in syndication . 
 = = Plot = = 
 When Bart , Lisa and the students of Springfield Elementary go on a field trip to the post office , Bart gets a coupon book as a souvenir , which he gives to Homer as a birthday present . Homer uses one of his coupons at a tire business on a free wheel balancing , and is told by the " customer care specialist " that his car will not take a balance , and that he will need four new tires because they cannot legally let customers drive off with faulty tires . Homer reluctantly accepts , and meets Wally Kogen , a travel agent . They go to Moe 's for a beer , watching a special on the Super Bowl . Wally says his travel agency has a charter bus going to the game and suggests to Homer that he can fill the bus and ride for free . They ask Moe to come to the Super Bowl and he agrees , as do other prominent men of Springfield . 
 Homer and Bart go to the Super Bowl with their posse at Miami 's Pro Player Stadium on the charter bus and arrive for pre @-@ game festivities . Expecting to get in the game , they are stopped when they are told that the <unk> Wally had bought were counterfeit . However , Bart notices a rack of costumes meant for the halftime show , and Homer use it to knock over security and rush inside . However , stadium security quickly catches them , and they are locked up in the stadium jail where the group vents their frustration by kicking Homer in the buttocks one @-@ by @-@ one . They are freed when Kogen 's friend Dolly Parton uses her extra @-@ strength makeup remover to dissolve the lock and release them . As they are freed , they run into a skybox suite and get a view of the game , until the skybox 's owner Rupert Murdoch arrives and confronts them . Homer 's posse flee to the field , chased by Murdoch 's security , until they get lost in the sea of victorious players . The group ends up in the locker room where they share the celebration , and everyone has a Super Bowl ring on one of their hands at game 's end . 
 Meanwhile , Marge and Lisa try to find their own activity at home . They use the crafting kit , " Vincent Price 's Egg Magic " , until they realize that the product was shoddy because the feet were not included . Despite the kit being from 1967 , Marge decides to call the help @-@ line number listed on the box . Surprisingly , she is greeted with the voice of Price — who assures her that his grandson Jody will bring the missing feet to them . Lisa expresses surprise , believing the actor to be dead . The episode ends with John Madden and Pat Summerall analyzing the events of the episode . Despite endorsing Kogen and the subplot , they are infuriated by a Super Bowl episode guest starring Parton that does not feature " any football or singing " . Madden declares the episode a slap to the show 's fanbase , who he says have taken " so much nonsense " from the franchise . They eventually leave on a bus driven by Price , which " doesn 't make a lick of sense " according to Madden . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Sunday , Cruddy Sunday " was directed by Steven Dean Moore and co @-@ written by former staff writers Tom Martin , George Meyer , Brian Scully and executive producer and former showrunner Mike Scully . It was first broadcast on the Fox network in the United States on January 31 , 1999 , right after Super Bowl XXXIII and the premiere of Family Guy . " Sunday , Cruddy Sunday " was the first episode that Martin received a writing credit for , and in the DVD audio commentary for the episode , he stated that he " loved " writing the episode . The writing process for the episode was " kind of unusual " , since the writers " threw it [ the episode ] together " without , Scully quipped , thinking of " things such as thought and structure " . A scene in the episode shows Homer buying new tires for his car . The scene was written by Brian Scully , who had been scammed by a Firestone Tire and Rubber Company dealer . The episode 's subplot was the result of the Simpsons writers trying to find activities for Marge and Lisa to participate in while Bart and Homer were at the Super Bowl . According to Martin , the writers were trying to come up with " the most boring thing " Marge and Lisa could do to pass time . After hearing cast member Dan Castellaneta 's impression of Vincent Price , the writer 's found the impression to be so funny that they based the subplot on the fictional crafts set " Vincent Price 's Egg Magic " . 
 In a scene in the episode , Homer and Kogen are in Moe 's tavern , discussing their favourite football teams with Moe . When Moe mentions that his favourite team is the Atlanta Falcons , he holds a glass in front of his mouth , obscuring his lip movements . He then passes the same glass to Homer , who does the same . Originally , the characters would be saying something else , however , because the staff wanted the episode to be " current " , new dialogue was recorded for the scene . Because there was no time to animate the scene from scratch , the staff simply made the characters hold a glass in front of their mouths while saying their lines . This technique was also used in reference to the ongoing impeachment scandal , as when the characters mention that the President and First Lady will be there , they cover their mouths when calling them by name . The song that plays during the bus trip to the Super Bowl was performed by NRBQ . The episode also features British rock band Blur 's " Song 2 " , which plays during the " race " to the stadium . 
 The episode features American comedian Fred Willard as Wally Kogen . Scully stated that , for many years , the Simpsons staff had wanted Willard to guest @-@ star in an episode , and that they had been looking for a character for Willard to portray . Scully also stated that Willard was " great fun " to have on the show . Wally Kogen 's name is taken from two former writers on The Simpsons ; the character 's first name , Wally , is taken from Wallace Wolodarsky , and the character 's last name , Kogen , is taken from Jay Kogen . The episode also features former football players Rosey Grier , Troy Aikman and Dan Marino as themselves . Scully stated that , when athletes guest @-@ star in television shows , their performances are " not always the greatest " , however , he asserted , Aikman , Grier and Marino were all " really funny " and " did a great job " . Country singer Dolly Parton guest @-@ starred as herself as well . Scully stated that he was " shocked " by how short Parton was , however he added that she was " very nice " and " thrilled " to be in the episode . Also featured in the episode is Rupert Murdoch , creator of the Fox Broadcasting Company . Originally , the writers wanted Murdoch to be portrayed by cast member Dan Castellaneta , the voice of Homer among other characters in the series . However , after a while , the writers decided to ask if Murdoch would guest @-@ star as himself . Scully comments that the writers were " impressed " that Murdoch would introduce himself as a " billionaire tyrant " in the episode . 
 The episode pokes fun at the dwindling popularity of Bill Clinton 's presidency at the time . In their list 15 Simpsons Moments That Perfectly Captured Their Eras , Genevieve Koski , Josh Modell , Noel Murray , Sean O 'Neal , Kyle Ryan , and Scott Tobias of The A.V. Club wrote " By the time this episode aired [ ... ] , the nation had endured more than a year of the Lewinsky scandal . The episode debuted a month after the House impeached Clinton , but less than two weeks before the Senate 's impeach / acquit vote , so an air of uncertainty lingered over an otherwise lightweight episode about Homer organizing a Super Bowl trip . " In a scene in the episode , Clinton calls to congratulate the Super Bowl victors from the Oval Office , but is distracted by Al Gore measuring a window . As Scully recalls , at the time , the Simpsons writers were confident Gore would win the 2000 presidential election , which eventually was marginally , and controversially , won by George W. Bush . 
 The episode also comments on the series ' fanbase . Near the end of the episode , Madden and Summerall provide the following analysis : 
 In his book Leaving Springfield , John Alberti writes about the exchange : " This conversation begins with conventional football game patter used to comment on the episode , but then takes an abrupt turn when Madden realizes , in spite of the humor , that the episode did not live up to expectations ( which he has not originally noticed ) . " 
 The episode title is a reference to the film Sunday Bloody Sunday ( 1971 ) , and perhaps the U2 song of the same name . The couch gag is a reference to James Cameron 's 1997 film Titanic . The beginning of the episode shows Bart 's grade visiting a post office . Their tour guide is modeled after American actor and folk singer Burl Ives , whom director Moore is a fan of . " Vincent Price 's Egg Magic " is a parody on celebrity @-@ endorsed craft kits which were popular during the 1960s and which , according to Meyer , do not exist anymore . The decision to have Price endorse an egg crafts product is based on Price 's role as Egghead in the 1960s ' series Batman . The sequence featuring a man called Rudy being refused entry to the group 's bus because he is " too small to go to the Super Bowl " is a reference to the 1993 film Rudy about football player Rudy Ruettiger . Dolly Parton says she will be joined by actor Rob Lowe and dance group Stomp for her performance during the Super Bowl halftime show , while the Super Bowl features a booth called " Take a Leak with NFL Greats " ; the players shown participating are Ricky Watters and Jim Plunkett . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 = = = Broadcast and re @-@ releases = = = 
 In its original American broadcast on January 31 , 1999 , " Sunday , Cruddy Sunday " received an 11 @.@ 6 rating , meaning it was seen by approximately 11 @.@ 5 million viewers . It finished in 10th place in the ratings for the week of January 25 – 31 , 1999 , making it the second most watched scripted program on Fox , after the premiere of Family Guy . On September 14 , 2004 , " Sunday , Cruddy Sunday " , along with the season 1 episode " Homer 's Night Out " , the season 11 episode " The Mansion Family " and the season 13 episode " Homer the Moe " , were released on a DVD set called The Simpsons – Gone Wild . On August 7 , 2007 , " Sunday , Cruddy Sunday " was again released as part of The Simpsons – The Complete Tenth Season DVD box set . Matt Groening , Mike Scully , George Meyer , Tom Martin , Matt Selman and Steven Dean Moore participated in the DVD 's audio commentary of the episode . 
 = = = Controversy = = = 
 = = = = Background = = = = 
 The beginning of the episode 's third act shows Marge and Lisa watching a Super Bowl commercial . In his book The gospel according to the Simpsons , Mark I. Pinsky described the commercial : 
 The scene was inspired by real @-@ life Super Bowl commercials in which , according to Scully , " you don 't know what the product is " because there is " so much going on " in Super Bowl commercials . It was also based on the music video for the American rock band ZZ Top 's 1983 song " Legs " . Although they had come up with the commercial 's premise , they were not sure of what its tagline would be . Eventually , Martin , one of the episode writers , suggested " The Catholic Church ... we 've made a few changes . " It got the biggest laugh from the other writers and was subsequently included in the episode . 
 The scene garnered scrutiny from members of The Catholic League , a self @-@ appointed organization that is not , despite its name , affiliated with the Catholic Church . The league had criticized The Simpsons ' depiction of Catholicism before , namely in the episode " Lisa Gets an " A " " , which aired the year before . The scene included an exchange between Bart and Marge that the League felt was hurtful to Catholics . William A. Donohue , the president of the league , wrote Fox a letter asking them to explain why the dialogue was in the show . After failing to receive an answer several times , Donohue was at last given a reply written by Thomas Chavez , manager for broadcast standards and practices . The league were not satisfied with Chavez ' answer . After " Sunday , Cruddy Sunday " aired , the Catholic League issued an article in their news magazine Catalyst . In it , they mentioned the scene in " Lisa Gets an " A " " , and wrote that The Simpsons had " struck again , big time " with the Super Bowl commercial in " Sunday , Cruddy Sunday " . They wrote that they had sent a complaint to Chavez regarding the scene , and encouraged others to do the same ; " We wrote to Mr. Chavez again , but we also told him that he ’ d be hearing from you , too . So don ’ t disappoint us . " 
 = = = = Censorship = = = = 
 Following the episode 's broadcast , the Fox network received several angry letters and emails from concerned Catholics , who were uneasy with the commercial scene . According to Scully , the letters were worded the same , and all started with " My family and I have always enjoyed The Simpsons , until last night ... " Nevertheless , the letters provoked a reaction from The Simpsons staff , and in an interview , Scully said , " We got a couple of hundred letters , and it was very obvious from reading a majority of them that [ the Catholic letter writers ] had not seen the show . Some of them were from third @-@ graders , all saying the same thing : ' Please don 't make fun of my religion . ' Which we all know third @-@ graders are very adamant about . " 
 Several months later , the Catholic League contacted Fox again , asking that the word " Catholic " be excised from the voice @-@ over when the episode repeated in September 1999 on the network , as well as in its subsequent syndicated airings . The network agreed , and Roland MacFarland , Fox 's vice president of broadcast standards , ordered Scully to cut the word from the episode or eliminate all reference to religion . Scully refused , and after a long argument , MacFarland offered to replace the protesting denomination with a Protestant substitute – Methodist , Presbyterians or Baptists . Scully then asked MacFarland " What would be the difference changing it to another religion , and wouldn 't that just be offending a different group of people ? " , to which MacFarland replied that Fox had already had trouble with the Catholics earlier that season . 
 Following the complaints , Fox removed any mention of Catholicism from the scene , resulting in the line " The church ... " Scully was reportedly furious with Fox 's actions . In an interview in Los Angeles Times , Scully said , " people can say hurtful things to each other about their weight , their race , their intelligence , their sexual preference , and that all seems up for grabs , but when you get into religion , some people get very nervous . " Marisa Guthrie of Boston Herald also criticized the network , describing it as " caving in " to the Catholic League 's protests . She wrote , " Hollywood has always been gun shy of controversy , but recent displays of self @-@ censorship on the part of entertainment industry executives make us cringe [ ... ] Granted Catholics , as a group have endured an ample amount of bashing , but The Simpsons is an equal opportunity offender . " Howard Rosenberg , a writer for the Los Angeles Times , criticized Fox 's actions as well . He argued that the network had a biased opinion towards Catholicism and that , had the scene mentioned a different religion , it would have been accepted . He also wrote , " Given its famous flaunting of sleaze and death @-@ defying motorcycle leaps , the big news here is that Fox has standards . Its latest production is Censors Who Kill Jokes . " 
 In an issue of Catalyst , the Catholic League responded to Rosenberg 's article . They argued that Rosenberg was biased against Catholics , in that he was content with the series lampooning Catholicism , but not other religions . They wrote , " all along we have been told by Fox that none of our complaints were valid because none of the material was truly offensive . But now we have a Fox executive producer disingenuously giving away his hand by protesting why it should be okay to offend another group of people with the same material he initially said wasn ’ t offensive to Catholics ! And isn ’ t it striking that Rosenberg is upset with the fact that the double standard — which now , for the first time works positively for Catholics — is a real problem . Never do we remember Rosenberg protesting the double standard that allows ' artists ' to dump on Catholics while protecting most other segments of society from their assaults . " The League also complimented the members ' participation , writing , " It only goes to prove what can be done when Catholics get actively involved . " 
 The controversy surrounding the scene has since been referenced in later episodes of the series . While the censored version of " Sunday , Cruddy Sunday " is still in syndication , it was left uncensored on its release on The Simpsons – The Complete Tenth Season DVD box set . 
 = = = Critical reviews = = = 
 Following its broadcast , " Sunday , Cruddy Sunday " received mostly positive reviews from critics . In his review of the The Simpsons – Gone Wild DVD set , David Packard of DVD Verdict wrote : " This episode has always been one of my favorites , and while the following episode [ " The Mansion Family " ] is a nice inclusion as well , this episode is the best on the disc . The hilarious gags come at a slam @-@ bang pace , and they 're occasionally edgy . " He especially liked the set @-@ piece in the post office , as well as the Super Bowl commercial . Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood of I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide called the episode " A thoroughly enjoyable romp through what happens when a bunch of lads go for a Sunday out at the ball game . " They enjoyed the guest @-@ stars , writing " both Dolly Parton and , bizarrely , Rupert Murdoch – spice things up nicely " , however they were most fond of Fred Willard as Wally Kogen . " A shame he doesn 't join our regulars " , they wrote . James Plath of DVD Town wrote that the episode is " funny , " and Ian Jane of DVD Talk found the episode " amusing " . The Orlando Sentinel 's Gregory Hardy named it the third best episode of the show with a sports theme . Phillip Stephenson of Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette called the episode " classic " , and Susan Dunne of The Hartford Courant described it as " debauched but hilarious " . The Cincinnati Post 's Greg Paeth noted that the episode is a critical favorite . 
 On the other hand , Colin Jacobson of DVD Movie Guide gave the episode a more mixed review . He wrote : " Like most guest star @-@ ridden episodes , this one gets a bit gimmicky to fit in all the cameos . " He found the self @-@ referential ending " fails to become clever and instead just seems silly . " However , he wrote that the episode " includes a few goods bits , especially the phone call in which Homer convinces Lenny to go to the game . " Jake McNeill of Digital Entertainment News wrote that the episode is " so jam @-@ packed with guest celebrity voices that they ran out of room for a plot . Or humor . " Chris Barsanti of Filmcritic.com gave a negative review as well , and wrote that the episode is " lost amid a flurry of celebrity walk @-@ ons and lazy jokes . " 
 = St. John 's , Newfoundland and Labrador = 
 St. John 's ( / <unk> / , local / <unk> / ) is the capital and largest city in Newfoundland and Labrador , Canada . St. John 's was incorporated as a city in 1888 , yet is considered by some to be the oldest English @-@ founded city in North America . It is located on the eastern tip of the Avalon Peninsula on the island of Newfoundland . With a population of 214 @,@ 285 as of July 1 , 2015 , the St. John 's Metropolitan Area is the second largest Census Metropolitan Area ( CMA ) in Atlantic Canada after Halifax and the 20th largest metropolitan area in Canada . It is one of the world 's top ten oceanside destinations , according to National Geographic Magazine . Its name has been attributed to the feast day of John the Baptist , when John Cabot was believed to have sailed into the harbour in 1497 , and also to a Basque fishing town with the same name . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 16th and 17th centuries = = = 
 St. John 's is one of the oldest settlements in North America , with year @-@ round settlement beginning sometime after 1630 and seasonal habitation long before that . It is not , however , the oldest surviving English settlement in North America or Canada , having been preceded by the Cuper 's Cove colony at Cupids , founded in 1610 , and the Bristol 's Hope colony at Harbour Grace , founded in 1618 . In fact , although English fishermen had begun setting up seasonal camps in Newfoundland in the 16th Century , they were expressly forbidden by the British government , at the urging of the West Country fishing industry , from establishing permanent settlements along the English controlled coast , hence the town of St. John 's was not established as a permanent community until after the 1630s at the earliest . Other permanent English settlements in the Americas that predate St. John 's include : St. George 's , Bermuda ( 1612 ) and Jamestown , Virginia ( 1607 ) . 
 Sebastian Cabot declares in a handwritten Latin text in his original 1545 map , that the St. John 's earned its name when he and his father , the Venetian explorer John Cabot became the first Europeans to sail into the harbour , in the morning of 24 June 1494 ( against British and French historians stating 1497 ) , the feast day of Saint John the Baptist . However , the exact locations of Cabot 's landfalls are disputed . A series of expeditions to St. John 's by Portuguese from the Azores took place in the early 16th century , and by 1540 French , Spanish and Portuguese ships crossed the Atlantic annually to fish the waters off the Avalon Peninsula . In the Basque Country , it is a common belief that the name of St. John 's was given by Basque fishermen because the bay of St. John 's is very similar to the Bay of <unk> in the Basque Country , where one of the fishing towns is also called St. John ( in Spanish , San Juan , and in Basque , <unk> ) . 
 The earliest record of the location appears as São João on a Portuguese map by Pedro <unk> in 1519 . When John Rut visited St. John 's in 1527 he found Norman , Breton and Portuguese ships in the harbour . On 3 August 1527 , Rut wrote a letter to King Henry on the findings of his voyage to North America ; this was the first known letter sent from North America . St. Jehan is shown on Nicholas <unk> ' world map of 1541 and San <unk> is found in João Freire 's Atlas of 1546 . It was during this time that Water Street was first developed , making it the oldest street in North America . 
 On 5 August 1583 , an English Sea Dog , Sir Humphrey Gilbert claimed the area as England 's first overseas colony under Royal Charter of Queen Elizabeth I. There was no permanent population , however , and Gilbert was lost at sea during his return voyage , thereby ending any immediate plans for settlement . The Newfoundland National War Memorial is located on the waterfront in St. John 's , at the purported site of Gilbert 's landing and proclamation . 
 By 1620 , the fishermen of England 's West Country controlled most of Newfoundland 's east coast . In 1627 , William Payne , called St. John 's " the principal prime and chief lot in all the whole country " . The population grew slowly in the 17th century and St. John 's was the largest settlement in Newfoundland when English naval officers began to take censuses around 1675 . The population would grow in the summers with the arrival of migratory fishermen . In 1680 , fishing ships ( mostly from South Devon ) set up fishing rooms at St. John 's , bringing hundreds of Irish men into the port to operate inshore fishing boats . 
 The town 's first significant defences were likely erected due to commercial interests , following the temporary seizure of St. John 's by the Dutch admiral Michiel de Ruyter in June 1665 . The inhabitants were able to fend off a second Dutch attack in 1673 , when this time it was defended by Christopher Martin , an English merchant captain . Martin landed six cannons from his vessel , the Elias Andrews , and constructed an earthen breastwork and battery near chain Rock commanding the Narrows leading into the harbour . With only twenty @-@ three men , the valiant Martin beat off an attack by three Dutch warships . The English government planned to expand these fortifications ( Fort William ) in around 1689 , but actual construction didn 't begin until after the French admiral Pierre Le Moyne d 'Iberville captured and destroyed the town in the Avalon Peninsula Campaign ( 1696 ) . When 1500 English reinforcements arrived in late 1697 they found nothing but rubble where the town and fortifications had stood . 
 = = = 18th and 19th centuries = = = 
 The French attacked St. John 's again in 1705 ( Siege of St. John 's ) , and captured it in 1708 ( Battle of St. John 's ) , devastating civilian structures with fire on each instance . 
 The harbour remained fortified through most of the 18th and 19th centuries . The final battle of the Seven Years ' War in North America ( the French and Indian War ) was fought in 1762 , in St. John 's . Following a surprise capture of the town by the French early in the year , the British responded , and at the Battle of Signal Hill , the French surrendered St. John 's to British forces under the command of Colonel William Amherst . 
 The 18th century saw major changes in Newfoundland : population growth , beginnings of government , establishment of churches , reinforcement of commercial ties with North America and development of the seal , salmon and Grand Banks fisheries . St. John 's population grew slowly , and although it was still primarily a fishing station , it was also a garrison , a centre of government and a commercial hub . St. John 's served as a naval base during both the American Revolutionary War and the War of 1812 . 
 The core of the city was destroyed by fire several times , the most famous of which was the Great Fire of 1892 . 
 = = = 20th and 21st centuries = = = 
 Guglielmo Marconi received the first transatlantic wireless signal in St. John 's on December 1901 from his wireless station in Poldhu , Cornwall . 
 St. John 's was the starting point for the first non @-@ stop transatlantic aircraft flight , by Alcock and Brown in a modified Vickers Vimy IV bomber , in June 1919 , departing from Lester 's Field in St. John 's and ending in a bog near Clifden , Connemara , Ireland . In July 2005 , the flight was duplicated by American aviator and adventurer Steve Fossett in a replica Vickers Vimy aircraft , with St. John 's International Airport substituting for Lester 's Field ( now an urban and residential part of the city ) . 
 During the Second World War , the harbour supported Royal Navy and Royal Canadian Navy ships that were engaged in anti @-@ submarine warfare . It was also the site of an American Army Air Force base , Fort Pepperrell , that was established as part of the " Lend @-@ Lease " agreement between the United Kingdom and United States . The base was transferred to Canadian control in 1960 and is now known as CFS St. John 's . The Knights of Columbus Hostel fire in December 1942 , saw 99 military and civilian lives lost . 
 St. John 's , and the province as a whole , was gravely affected in the 1990s by the collapse of the Northern cod fishery , which had been the driving force of the provincial economy for hundreds of years . After a decade of high unemployment rates and depopulation , the city 's proximity to the Hibernia , Terra Nova and White Rose oil fields has led to an economic boom that has spurred population growth and commercial development . As a result , the St. John 's area now accounts for about half of the province 's economic output . 
 As of 2012 , St. John 's contains 21 National Historic Sites of Canada . 
 St. John 's is serviced by one major airport , and has daily direct service to Toronto , Ottawa , Montreal , Gander , Deer Lake , Wabush , Goose Bay and Halifax ; and seasonal service direct to Calgary , Dublin and London . 
 = = Geography = = 
 St. John 's is located along the coast of the Atlantic Ocean , on the northeast of the Avalon Peninsula in southeast Newfoundland . The city covers an area of 446 @.@ 04 square kilometres ( 172 @.@ 22 sq mi ) and is the most easterly city in North America , excluding Greenland ; it is 475 kilometres ( 295 mi ) closer to London , England than it is to Edmonton , Alberta . The city of St. John 's is located at a distance by air of 3 @,@ 636 kilometres ( 2 @,@ 259 mi ) from Lorient , France which lies on a nearly precisely identical latitude across the Atlantic on the French western coast . The city is the largest in the province and the second largest in the Atlantic Provinces after Halifax , Nova Scotia . Its downtown area lies to the west and north of St. John 's Harbour , and the rest of the city expands from the downtown to the north , south , east and west . 
 <unk> trees such as black spruce , white spruce , and balsam fir dominate the native vegetation . The largest deciduous tree is white birch ; species of lesser stature include alder , cherry and mountain ash . Of introduced tree species , sycamore maple is most abundant and Norway maple is common . Blue spruce , common <unk> , European beech and <unk> linden are among the other non @-@ native species grown . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 St. John 's has a humid continental climate ( Köppen Dfb ) , with lower seasonal variation than normal for the latitude , which is due to Gulf Stream moderation . However , despite this maritime moderation , average January high temperatures are actually slightly colder in St. John 's than it is in Kelowna , British Columbia , which is an inland city that is near the more marine air of the Pacific , demonstrating the cold nature of Eastern Canada . Mean temperatures range from − 4 @.@ 9 ° C ( 23 @.@ 2 ° F ) in February to 16 @.@ 1 ° C ( 61 @.@ 0 ° F ) in August , showing somewhat of a seasonal lag in the climate . The city is also one of the areas of the country most prone to tropical cyclone activity , as it is bordered by the Atlantic Ocean to the east , where tropical storms ( and sometimes hurricanes ) travel from the United States . The city is one of the rainiest in Canada outside of coastal British Columbia . This is partly due to its propensity for tropical storm activity as well as moist , Atlantic air frequently blowing ashore and creating precipitation . 
 Of major Canadian cities , St. John 's is the foggiest ( 124 days ) , windiest ( 24 @.@ 3 km / h ( 15 @.@ 1 mph ) average speed ) , and cloudiest ( 1 @,@ 497 hours of sunshine ) . St. John 's experiences milder temperatures during the winter season in comparison to other Canadian cities , and has the mildest winter for any Canadian city outside of British Columbia . Precipitation is frequent and often heavy , falling year round . On average , summer is the driest season , with only occasional thunderstorm activity , and the wettest months are from October to January , with December the wettest single month , with nearly 165 millimetres of precipitation on average . This winter precipitation maximum is quite unusual for humid continental climates , which most commonly have a late spring or early summer precipitation maximum ( for example , most of the Midwestern U.S. ) . Most heavy precipitation events in St. John 's are the product of intense mid @-@ latitude storms migrating from the Northeastern U.S. and New England states , and these are most common and intense from October to March , bringing heavy precipitation ( commonly 4 to 8 centimetres of rainfall equivalent in a single storm ) , and strong winds . In winter , two or more types of precipitation ( rain , freezing rain , sleet and snow ) can fall from passage of a single storm . Snowfall is heavy , averaging nearly 335 centimetres per winter season . However , winter storms can bring changing precipitation types . Heavy snow can transition to heavy rain , melting the snow cover , and possibly back to snow or ice ( perhaps briefly ) all in the same storm , resulting in little or no net snow accumulation . Snow cover in St. John 's is variable , and especially early in the winter season , may be slow to develop , but can extend deeply into the spring months ( March , April ) . The St. John 's area is subject to freezing rain ( called " silver thaws " ) , the worst of which paralyzed the city over a three @-@ day period in April 1984 . 
 The highest temperature ever recorded in St. John 's was 33 @.@ 9 ° C ( 93 ° F ) on 14 August 1876 . The coldest temperature ever recorded was − 29 @.@ 4 ° C ( − 21 ° F ) on 16 February 1875 . 
 = = Cityscape = = 
 Downtown St. John 's 
 = = = Architecture = = = 
 The architecture of St. John 's has a distinct style from that of the rest of Canada , and its major buildings are remnants of its history as one of the first British colonial capitals . Buildings took a variety of styles according to the means available to build the structures . 
 Starting as a fishing outpost for European fishermen , St. John 's consisted mostly of the homes of fishermen , sheds , storage shacks , and wharves constructed out of wood . Like many other cities of the time , as the Industrial Revolution took hold and new methods and materials for construction were introduced , the landscape changed as the city grew in width and height . The Great Fire of 1892 destroyed most of the downtown core , and most residential and other wood @-@ frame buildings date from this period . 
 Often compared to San Francisco due to the hilly terrain and steep maze of residential streets , housing in St. John 's is typically painted in bright colours . The city council has implemented strict heritage regulations in the downtown area , including restrictions on the height of buildings . These regulations have caused much controversy over the years . With the city experiencing an economic boom a lack of hotel rooms and office space has seen proposals put forward that do not meet the current height regulations . Heritage advocates argue that the current regulations should be enforced while others believe the regulations should be relaxed to encourage economic development . 
 To meet the need for more office space downtown without compromising the city 's heritage , the city council amended heritage regulations , which originally restricted height to 15 metres in the area of land on Water Street between Bishop 's Cove and Steer 's Cove , to create the " Commercial Central Retail – West Zone " . The new zone will allow for buildings of greater height . A 47 @-@ metre , 12 @-@ storey office building , which includes retail space and a parking garage , was the first building to be approved in this area . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 As of the 2006 Census , there were 100 @,@ 646 inhabitants in St. John 's itself , 151 @,@ 322 in the urban area and 181 @,@ 113 in the St. John 's Census Metropolitan Area ( CMA ) . Thus , St. John 's is Newfoundland and Labrador 's largest city and Canada 's 20th largest CMA . Apart from St. John 's , the CMA includes 12 other communities : the city of Mount Pearl and the towns of Conception Bay South , Paradise , Portugal Cove @-@ St. Philip 's , Torbay , <unk> Bay @-@ Middle Cove @-@ Outer Cove , Pouch Cove , Flatrock , Bay Bulls , <unk> Bay , Petty Harbour @-@ Maddox Cove and <unk> . The population of the CMA was 192 @,@ 326 as of 1 July 2010 . 
 As of 2011 , there were 4 @,@ 205 members of visible minorities in the city . The largest visible minority group were South Asians ( 1 @.@ 2 % ) , followed by Chinese Canadian ( 1 @.@ 0 % ) , and Blacks ( 0 @.@ 9 % ) . There were 4 @,@ 305 Aboriginals in St. John 's , comprising 4 @.@ 1 % of the city 's population . First Nations people made up 2 @.@ 9 % of the city 's population , Inuit comprised 0 @.@ 8 % of St. John 's population , and 0 @.@ 6 % were Métis . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 The information below is from the 2001 Canadian <unk> and the National Household Survey 2011 
 Predominantly Christian , the population of St. John 's was once divided along sectarian ( Catholic / Protestant ) lines . In recent years , this sectarianism has declined significantly , and is no longer a commonly acknowledged facet of life in St. John 's . St. John 's is the seat of the Roman Catholic Archbishop of St. John 's , and the Anglican Bishop of Eastern Newfoundland and Labrador . All major Christian sects showed a decline from 2001 – 2011 with a large increase in those with no religion from 3 @.@ 9 % to 11 @.@ 1 % . 
 = = Economy = = 
 St. John 's economy is connected to both its role as the provincial capital of Newfoundland and Labrador and to the ocean . The civil service which is supported by the federal , provincial and municipal governments has been the key to the expansion of the city 's labour force and to the stability of its economy , which supports a sizable retail , service and business sector . The provincial government is the largest employer in the city , followed by Memorial University . With the collapse of the fishing industry in Newfoundland and Labrador in the 1990s , the role of the ocean is now tied to what lies beneath it – oil and gas – as opposed to what swims in or travels across it . The city is the centre of the oil and gas industry in Eastern Canada and is one of 19 World Energy Cities . ExxonMobil Canada is headquartered in St. John 's and companies such as Chevron , Husky Energy , Suncor Energy and Statoil have major regional operations in the city . Three major offshore oil developments , Hibernia , Terra Nova and White Rose , are in production off the coast of the city and a fourth development , Hebron , is expected to be producing oil by 2017 . 
 The economy has been growing quickly in recent years . In both 2010 and 2011 , the metro area 's gross domestic product ( GDP ) led 27 other metropolitan areas in the country , according to the Conference Board of Canada , recording growth of 6 @.@ 6 per cent and 5 @.@ 8 per cent respectively . At $ 52 @,@ 000 the city 's per capita GDP is the second highest out of all major Canadian cities . Economic forecasts suggest that the city will continue its strong economic growth in the coming years not only in the " oceanic " industries mentioned above , but also in tourism and new home construction as the population continues to grow . In May 2011 , the city 's unemployment rate fell to 5 @.@ 6 per cent , the second lowest unemployment rate for a major city in Canada . 
 St. John 's is also becoming known as an entrepreneurial city . In a 2009 report by the Canadian Federation of Independent Business ; Communities in Boom : Canada ’ s Top Entrepreneurial Cities , St. John 's was ranked the best major city in Atlantic Canada , and 19th overall in Canada for providing a good environment for small business development . 
 = = Arts and culture = = 
 The downtown area is the cultural hub of St. John 's and is a major tourist destination in Newfoundland and Labrador and Atlantic Canada . Water Street and Duckworth Street are known for their brightly coloured low rise heritage buildings , housing numerous tourist shops , clothing boutiques , and restaurants . 
 George Street , a downtown side @-@ street above the western end of Water Street , is the predominant home of the city 's nightlife . The street holds numerous annual festivals including the George Street Festival in August and the Mardi Gras Festival held in October . The street can be credited with kick starting the careers of many musical acts and is busy nearly every night of the week . 
 The city has a symphony orchestra , a string quartet , and several choirs . In addition the School of Music of Memorial University of Newfoundland has several ensembles , including a chamber orchestra . St. Johns also plays host to the <unk> Festival of chamber music , which has been held every August since 2001 . Opera on the Avalon puts on performances of opera , over several days , in the summer 
 The <unk> Hall is home to the Resource Centre for the Arts . The " Hall " hosts a vibrant and diverse arts community and is regarded as the backbone of artistic infrastructure and development in the downtown . The careers of many well @-@ known Newfoundland artists were launched there including Rick Mercer , Mary Walsh , Cathy Jones , Andy Jones and Greg <unk> . The St. John 's Arts and Culture Centre houses an art gallery , libraries and a 1000 @-@ seat theatre , which is the city 's major venue for entertainment productions . 
 The Nickel Film Festival and the St. John 's International Women 's Film Festival are two independent film festivals held annually in St. John 's . 
 = = Attractions = = 
 = = = Museums = = = 
 The Provincial Museum of Newfoundland and Labrador ( c . 1892 – 93 ) was located on Duckworth Street in a building designated as a heritage site by the City of St. John 's . In 2005 the museum , along with the Art Gallery of Newfoundland and Labrador and the Provincial Archives of Newfoundland and Labrador , moved into The Rooms . The Rooms is Newfoundland and Labrador 's cultural facility , and is located in the downtown area . 
 The Railway Coastal Museum is a transportation museum located in the 104 @-@ year @-@ old Newfoundland and Labrador train station building on Water Street . 
 The Johnson Geo Centre is a geological interpretation centre located on Signal Hill . The centre is designed to teach the public about the history of the earth through the unique and complex geological history of Newfoundland and Labrador . 
 The East Rider Motorcycle Museum showcases over 110 years of Newfoundland 's Motorcycle History , with two floors of bikes , memorabilia , and biker culture . Located downtown St. John 's ( above East Rider Motorcycle Gear Shop ) . 
 = = = Urban parks = = = 
 <unk> Park is an urban park located in the east end of the city ; with over 3 @,@ 400 acres ( 14 km2 ) of land , it is one of Canada 's largest urban parks . The park contains a range of recreational facilities including two golf courses , Newfoundland and Labrador 's largest serviced campground , walking and skiing trails as well as protected habitat for many plants and animals . <unk> Park is also home to the <unk> , an environmental education centre which offers a cross section view of Nagle 's Hill Brook . 
 Bowring Park , located in the Waterford Valley , is one of the most scenic parks in St. John 's . Entrance to the park is via Waterford Bridge Road , passing a sculptured duck pond and a statue of Peter Pan . The park land was donated to the city in 1911 by Sir Edgar Rennie Bowring on behalf of Bowring Brothers Ltd. on their 100th anniversary of commerce in Newfoundland . The park was officially opened by His Royal Highness , the Duke of Connaught on 15 July 1914 . 
 Bannerman Park is a Victorian @-@ style park located near the downtown . The park was officially opened in 1891 by Sir Alexander Bannerman , Governor of the Colony of Newfoundland who donated the land to create the park . Today the park contains a public swimming pool , playground , a baseball diamond and many large open grassy areas . Bannerman Park plays host to many festivals and sporting events , most notably the Newfoundland and Labrador Folk Festival and St. John 's Peace @-@ a @-@ chord . The park is also the finishing location for the annual <unk> 10 Mile Road Race . 
 = = = Murray Premises = = = 
 The Murray Premises is a National Historic Site located in downtown St. John 's . The buildings once served as a fishery premises , with facilities for drying and packaging fish and warehouses for fish , barrels and other items . The oldest of the buildings is the one facing on Beck 's Cove . It was built after the 1846 fire and for a time served as both shop and house . The Murray Premises was renovated in 1979 and now contains office suites , restaurants , retail stores and a boutique hotel . 
 = = = Signal Hill = = = 
 Signal Hill is a hill which overlooks the city of St. John 's . It is the location of Cabot Tower which was built in 1897 to commemorate the 400th anniversary of John Cabot 's discovery of Newfoundland , and Queen Victoria 's Diamond Jubilee . The first transatlantic wireless transmission was received here by Guglielmo Marconi on 12 December 1901 . Today , Signal Hill is a National Historic Site of Canada and remains incredibly popular amongst tourists and locals alike ; 97 % of all tourists to St. John 's visit Signal Hill . Amongst its popular attractions are the Signal Hill Tattoo , showcasing the Royal Newfoundland Regiment of foot , c . 1795 , and the North Head Trail which grants an impressive view of the Atlantic Ocean and the surrounding coast . 
 = = Sports = = 
 St. John 's has been home to several professional hockey franchises . Currently it is home to the St. John 's IceCaps the minor league affiliate of the Montreal Canadiens . 
 The St. John 's Maple Leafs were the city 's former American Hockey League ( AHL ) team . Placed in St. John 's in 1991 , the team was lost during the 2004 – 2005 season to Toronto , Ontario due to the desire of its parent team , the Toronto Maple Leafs , to reduce travel costs and to have a tenant for its Ricoh Coliseum . 
 Shortly after the Maple Leafs were replaced by the St. John 's Fog Devils of the Quebec Major Junior Hockey League ( QMJHL ) . The team left St. John 's in 2008 after just three seasons due to a poor lease arrangement with the city over the use of Mile One Centre and poor attendance . 
 The rugby union team The Rock is the Eastern Canadian entry in the Americas Rugby Championship . The Rock play their home games at <unk> Rugby Park , as did the Rugby Canada Super League champions for 2005 and 2006 , the Newfoundland Rock . The city hosted a Rugby World Cup qualifying match between Canada and the USA on 12 August 2006 , where the Canadians heavily defeated the USA 56 – 7 to qualify for the 2007 Rugby World Cup finals in France . The 2007 age @-@ grade Rugby Canada National Championship Festival was held in the city . 
 St. John 's is home to North America 's oldest annual sporting event , the Royal St. John 's Regatta , which dates back to at least 1816 . The event is important enough in the life of the city that the day of the Regatta ( the first Wednesday in August , weather permitting ) is a civic holiday – one of the few weather @-@ dependent holidays in the world . 
 The <unk> 10 is an annual 10 @-@ mile ( 16 km ) road race that starts in Paradise and finishes at Bannerman Park . The race draws in excess of 2 @,@ 500 runners . It began in 1922 , which makes it one of the oldest road races in Canada . 
 St. John 's was where the Canada men 's national soccer team qualified for their only FIFA World Cup on 14 September 1985 , when they defeated Honduras 2 – 1 , at King George V Park . 
 Curling has gained prominence in St. John 's over the years . The 2005 Scott Tournament of Hearts , the Canadian women 's curling championship , was held at Mile One Centre from 19 to 27 February 2005 . The 2006 Olympic gold medalist men 's curling team , skipped by Brad Gushue , is based in St. John 's . The city has two curling clubs , the St. John 's Curling Club and the Bally Haly Golf & Curling Club . 
 The St. John 's Avalon Harps are the local Hurling and Gaelic Football team , that compete in Canadian GAA events . 
 = = Law and government = = 
 St. John 's is governed by a mayor @-@ council system , and the structure of the municipal government is stipulated by the City of St. John 's Act . The St. John 's City Council is a unicameral legislative body composed of a mayor , deputy mayor and nine councillors . The mayor , deputy mayor and four of the councillors are elected at large while the five other councillors represent geographical wards throughout the city . The mayor and members of the city council serve four @-@ year terms without term limits . 
 Elections in St. John 's are held every four years on the last Tuesday in September . The current city council was elected in the municipal election held on 24 September 2013 . The Mayor of St. John 's is Dennis O 'Keefe , who has served in the position since 2008 . The St. John 's City Hall , located on New Gower Street , has housed municipal offices and Council Chambers since being officially opened in 1970 . 
 St. John 's served as the capital city of the Colony of Newfoundland and the Dominion of Newfoundland before Newfoundland became Canada 's tenth province in 1949 . The city now serves as the capital of Newfoundland and Labrador , therefore the provincial legislature is located in the city . The Confederation Building , located on Confederation Hill , is home to the House of Assembly along with the offices for the Members of the House of Assembly ( <unk> ) and Ministers . The city is represented by ten <unk> , four who are members of the governing Progressive Conservative Party , three that belong to the New Democratic Party ( NDP ) , and three that belong to the Liberal Party . Lorraine Michael , leader of the NDP since 2006 , represents the district of Signal Hill @-@ <unk> Vidi . 
 St. John 's is represented in the House of Commons by two members of Parliament , both from the Liberal Party . Nick Whalen represents St. John 's East and Ryan Cleary , elected 2011 , represents St. John 's South — Mount Pearl . 
 The Newfoundland and Labrador office for the regional federal minister is located in downtown St. John 's . Regional offices for federal government departments and agencies are also located throughout the city . 
 = = = Crime = = = 
 Policing services for the city are provided by the Royal Newfoundland Constabulary , which serves as the primary policing body of the metropolitan area . The B Division headquarters of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police is located in the Pleasantville neighbourhood but the RCMP primarily operate in the rest of Newfoundland and Labrador and not St. John 's . 
 St. John 's has traditionally been one of the safest cities in Canada to live ; however , in recent years crime in the city has steadily increased . While nationally crime decreased by 4 % in 2009 , the total crime rate in St. John 's saw an increase of 4 % . During this same time violent crime in the city decreased 6 % , compared to a 1 % decrease nationally . In 2010 the total crime severity index for the city was 101 @.@ 9 , an increase of 10 % from 2009 and 19 @.@ 2 % above the national average . The violent crime severity index was 90 @.@ 1 , an increase of 29 % from 2009 and 1 @.@ 2 % above the national average . St. John 's had the seventh @-@ highest metropolitan crime index and twelfth @-@ highest metropolitan violent crime index in the country in 2010 . 
 According to Statistics Canada 's <unk> reports ( 1993 – 2007 ) , the metropolitan area reports an average homicide rate of approximately 1 @.@ 15 per 100 @,@ 000 population ; an average of two homicides per year . An all @-@ time high rate of 2 @.@ 27 was reported in 1993 ( four homicides ) . This figure is far below the national average and ranks amongst the lowest rates for any metropolitan area in Canada . 
 = = Infrastructure = = 
 = = = Transportation = = = 
 St. John 's has a substantial harbour . Among other things , the harbour is the base for the following Canadian Coast Guard ( CCG ) ships : 
 CCGS Ann Harvey – icebreaker 
 CCGS George R. Pearkes – icebreaker 
 CCGS Henry Larsen – icebreaker 
 CCGS Louis S. St @-@ Laurent – icebreaker 
 CCGS Terry Fox – icebreaker 
 CCGS Cygnus – patrol vessel 
 CCGS Wilfred Templeman - offshore fishery science vessel * No longer a Canadian Coast Guard Vessel 
 CCGS Leonard J. Cowley – multi role 
 CCGS Sir Wilfred Grenfell – multi role 
 St. John 's is served by St. John 's International Airport ( <unk> ) , located 10 minutes northwest of the downtown core . In 2011 , roughly 1 @,@ 400 @,@ 000 passengers travelled through the airport making it the second busiest airport in Atlantic Canada in passenger volume . Regular destinations include Halifax , Montreal , Ottawa , Toronto , as well as destinations throughout the province . International locations include Dublin , London , New York City , Saint Pierre and Miquelon , Glasgow and Varadero . Scheduled service providers include Air Canada , Air Canada Jazz , Air Saint @-@ Pierre , Air Transat , United Airlines , Porter Airlines , Provincial Airlines , <unk> Airlines and Westjet . 
 St. John 's is the eastern terminus of the Trans @-@ Canada Highway , one of the longest national highways in the world . The divided highway , also known as " Outer Ring Road " in the city , runs just outside the main part of the city , with exits to Pitts Memorial Drive , Topsail Road , Team Gushue Highway , Thorburn Road , <unk> Road , Portugal Cove Road and Torbay Road , providing relatively easy access to neighbourhoods served by those streets . Pitts Memorial Drive runs from Conception Bay South , through the city of Mount Pearl and into downtown St. John 's , with interchanges for Goulds , Water Street and Hamilton Avenue @-@ New Gower Street . 
 The St. John 's Cycling Master Plan was officially launched in July 2009 . Its first phase will consist of 43 kilometres ( 27 mi ) of on @-@ road painted bike lanes , signs on an additional 73 kilometres ( 45 mi ) of roadway , the installation of 20 bicycle parking facilities and the addition of bike racks on the fleet of 53 Metrobuses . 
 Metrobus Transit is responsible for public transit in the region . Metrobus has a total of 19 routes , 53 buses and an annual ridership of 3 @,@ 014 @,@ 073 . Destinations include the Avalon Mall , The Village Shopping Centre , Memorial University , Academy Canada , the College of the North Atlantic , the Marine Institute , the Confederation Building , downtown , Stavanger Drive Business Park , Kelsey Drive , Goulds , Kilbride , Shea Heights , the four hospitals in the city as well as other important areas in St. John 's and Mount Pearl . 
 St. John 's was the eastern terminus of the Newfoundland Railway from 1898 until the abandonment and closure of the railway in September 1988 . 
 = = = Medical centres and hospitals = = = 
 St. John 's is served by Eastern Health , Newfoundland and Labrador 's largest health authority . 
 The city 's major hospitals include the Health Sciences Centre , St. Clare 's Mercy Hospital , Waterford Hospital and the Janeway Children 's Health and Rehabilitation Centre . 
 St. John 's Harbour 
 = = Education = = 
 St. John 's is served by the Eastern School District , the largest school district in Newfoundland and Labrador by student population . There are currently 36 primary , elementary and secondary schools in the city of St. John 's , including three private schools . St. John 's also includes one school that is part of the province @-@ wide Conseil Scolaire Francophone ( CSF ) , the Francophone public school district . It also contains two private schools , St. Bonaventure 's College and <unk> Independent . Atlantic Canada 's largest university , Memorial University of Newfoundland ( MUN ) , is located in St. John 's . MUN provides comprehensive education and grants degrees in several fields and its historical strengths in engineering , business , geology , and medicine , make MUN one of the top comprehensive universities in Canada . The Fisheries and Marine Institute of Memorial University of Newfoundland ( MI ) or simply Marine Institute , is a post @-@ secondary ocean and marine polytechnic located in St. John 's and is affiliated with Memorial University of Newfoundland . MUN also offers the lowest tuition in Canada ( $ 2 @,@ 644 , per Academic Year ) 
 The College of the North Atlantic ( CNA ) is the public college of the province and operates two main campuses within the city . CNA provides career , trade , and university @-@ transfer programs for St. John 's residents . The city also hosts a number of private colleges and post @-@ secondary schools ; Academy Canada , Eastern College , and <unk> College are the largest of these schools . 
 = = Local media = = 
 St. John 's has one daily newspaper , The Telegram . Other local papers include The Muse , The Gazette , Le <unk> , The Scope , The Business Post and The Current . St. John 's also receives the nationally distributed newspaper The Globe and Mail . 
 <unk> @-@ DT , known on air as " NTV " , is an independent station . The station <unk> entertainment programming from Global and news programming from CTV and Global , rather than purchasing primary broadcast rights . Rogers Cable has its provincial headquarters in St. John 's , and their community channel Rogers TV airs local shows such as Out of the Fog and One Chef One Critic . CBC has its Newfoundland and Labrador headquarters in the city and their television station <unk> @-@ DT broadcasts from University Avenue . 
 The city is home to 15 am and FM radio stations , two of which are French @-@ language stations . St. John 's is the only Canadian city served by radio stations whose call letters do not all begin with the letter C. The ITU prefix VO was assigned to the Dominion of Newfoundland before the province joined Canadian Confederation in 1949 , and three AM stations kept their existing call letters . However , other commercial radio stations in St. John 's which went to air after 1949 use the same range of prefixes ( CF – CK ) currently in use elsewhere in Canada , with the exception of <unk> @-@ FM , which was permitted to adopt the <unk> callsign because of its corporate association with the AM station that already bore that callsign . VO also remains in use in amateur radio . 
 <unk> is the city 's daily online newspaper , which focuses on business news from across the province . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 = = Sister cities = = 
 <unk> , Portugal 
 Waterford , Ireland 
 = United Kingdom Election Results = 
 United Kingdom Election Results is a website and e @-@ book written by David Boothroyd , published in 1994 . Boothroyd also wrote The History of British Political Parties , published in 2001 . The website includes material about elections in the United Kingdom , including election results , resources for further information and links to relevant websites . Boothroyd used a minimalist approach for the site 's design , avoiding " flashy graphics " and placing an emphasis on " authoritative unbiased information " . 
 Boothroyd 's website has been cited by several <unk> and authors , including the United Nations Development Programme and the Parliament of Australia . Boothroyd 's site is listed as a resource by the website of the Parliamentary Library of the Parliament of Australia , and the Gilbert + Tobin Centre of Public Law at The University of New South Wales . The Data & Information Services Center of the University of Wisconsin said that Boothroyd maintains " an emphasis on including the entire range of parties " , and The University of York library said that the " site maintained by David Boothroyd provides detailed results data for all UK Parliamentary Elections since 1983 " . 
 = = Contents = = 
 The site contains information and resources related to UK elections , including election results , lists of candidates and maps of election districts . It also contains resources such as links to relevant websites covering politics and those of political parties . In an introduction to the website , Boothroyd writes : " Unlike some other political sites , this site doesn ’ t go in for minimising the information to ‘ major parties ’ only , using flashy graphics that distract from the content , compromising its impartiality by accepting sponsorship , or including irrelevant party propaganda . On these pages you will find authoritative unbiased information and nothing else . " 
 Data on parliamentary elections in the UK since 1983 are on the website . It also includes results of the Labour Party National Executive Committee elections , European Parliamentary elections from 1994 onwards , a list of members expelled since the 1660 Restoration , and recent regional elections for the National Assembly for Wales , the Northern Ireland Assembly , and the Greater London Authority . The earliest snapshot of the website in the archival database Internet Archive is from 1996 . The website is located at <unk> 
 = = Reception = = 
 Several authors and organisations — including United Nations Development Programme ( 2004 ) , the Politics and Public Administration Group of the Parliament of Australia ( 2002 ) , and Scott L. Greer ( 2005 ) — have cited Boothroyd 's website in their works . <unk> Gay and Patricia Leopold used information about parliamentary expulsion from the site in their book Conduct <unk> : The Regulation of Parliamentary Behaviour ( 2004 ) ; they wrote , " As the author , David Boothroyd , makes clear , expulsion was no bar to further parliamentary career in the eighteenth century . " The Guardian referenced the site in a 2007 article about politics of education in the UK . 
 In their 2008 book The Politics of Electoral Systems , Michael Gallagher and Paul Mitchell wrote that Boothroyd 's site " Has detailed results of elections at all levels of government . " The website of the Parliamentary Library of the Parliament of Australia lists Boothroyd 's site as a resource , as does the Gilbert + Tobin Centre of Public Law at The University of New South Wales . The Data & Information Services Center of the University of Wisconsin said that Boothroyd maintains " an emphasis on including the entire range of parties " . <unk> ( Rhodes @-@ Blakeman Associates ) website maintained by Karen Blakeman describes Boothroyd 's resource as a " fast @-@ loading , no @-@ nonsense site " . The University of York library said that the " site maintained by David Boothroyd provides detailed results data for all UK Parliamentary Elections since 1983 " . " Scottish Politics " , the website of the Scottish Politics Research Institute , Alba Publishing said , " Those interested in election results and analysis from England & Wales are encouraged to consult David Boothroyd 's inspirational United Kingdom Election Results site . " 
 = CenturyLink Field = 
 CenturyLink Field is a multi @-@ purpose stadium in Seattle , Washington , United States . It serves as the home field for the Seattle Seahawks of the National Football League ( NFL ) and Seattle Sounders FC of Major League Soccer ( MLS ) . Originally called Seahawks Stadium it became Qwest Field on June 23 , 2004 , when telecommunications carrier Qwest acquired the naming rights . It received its current name in June 2011 after the acquisition of Qwest by CenturyLink . The complex also includes the Event Center with the WaMu Theater , a parking garage , and a public plaza . The venue hosts concerts , trade shows , and consumer shows along with sporting events . Located within a mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) of Seattle 's central business district , the venue is accessible by multiple freeways and forms of mass transit . 
 The stadium was built between 2000 and 2002 after voters approved funding for the construction in a statewide election held on June 17 , 1997 . This vote created the Washington State Public Stadium Authority to oversee public ownership of the venue . The owner of the Seahawks , Paul Allen , formed First & Goal Inc. to develop and operate the new facilities . Allen was closely involved in the design process and emphasized the importance of an open @-@ air venue with an intimate atmosphere . The stadium is a modern facility with views of the skyline of Downtown Seattle . The stadium can seat 69 @,@ 000 people . 
 The crowd at CenturyLink Field is notoriously loud during Seahawks games . On September 15 , 2013 , during a game against the San Francisco 49ers , the fans broke the Guinness World Record for loudest crowd roar at an outdoor stadium with 136 @.@ 6 decibels . The record was broken on October 13 , 2013 , at Kansas City 's Arrowhead Stadium , home of the NFL 's Kansas City Chiefs with a roar of 137 @.@ 5 dB , but fans reclaimed the title on December 2 , 2013 , during a Monday night game against the New Orleans Saints , with a roar of 137 @.@ 6 decibels . Arrowhead reclaimed the title on September 29 , 2014 reaching 142 @.@ 2 dB in a Monday Night Football game vs. the Patriots . The noise has contributed to the team 's home field advantage with an increase in false start ( movement by an offensive player prior to the play ) and delay of game ( failure of the offense to snap the ball prior to the play clock expiring ) penalties against visiting teams . The stadium was the first in the NFL to implement a FieldTurf artificial field . Numerous college and high school American football games have also been played at the stadium . 
 CenturyLink Field is also designed for soccer . The first sporting event held included a United Soccer Leagues ( USL ) Seattle Sounders match . The USL team began using the stadium regularly for home games in 2003 . The MLS expansion team Seattle Sounders FC , began its inaugural season in 2009 at the stadium . CenturyLink Field was the site of the MLS Cup in 2009 . The venue also hosted the 2010 and 2011 tournament finals for the U.S. Open Cup . Sounders FC won both times and new attendance records were set each year it was hosted at CenturyLink Field . On August 25 , 2013 , the Sounders broke a new home field attendance record when 67 @,@ 385 fans turned out to watch them play the Portland Timbers . 
 = = Funding = = 
 The Seahawks played their home games at the Kingdome from their 1976 inaugural season until 1999 . In 1995 a proposal was made to issue county bonds to fund a remodeling project of the facility . The proposal failed , and as a result , Seahawks ' owner Ken Behring threatened to sell or move the team . In 1997 local billionaire Paul Allen pledged to acquire the team if a new stadium could be built and said that the team could not be profitable until they left the Kingdome . He asked the state legislature to hold a special statewide referendum on a proposal to finance a new stadium . Allen also agreed to cover any cost overruns . With Allen agreeing to pay the $ 4 million cost , the legislature agreed . The vote was scheduled to be held in June 1997 but in May a Seattle resident filed a lawsuit that claimed the legislature did not have authority to call for such a vote , since it would be paid for by a private party who could gain from the result . The case was delayed until after the vote . The proposal was pitched to voters as providing both a new home for the Seahawks and a venue for top @-@ level soccer . It passed on June 17 , 1997 , with 820 @,@ 364 ( 51 @.@ 1 % ) in favor and 783 @,@ 584 against . The vote was close in Seattle , but it received 60 % approval in Seattle 's northern and eastern suburbs . The public funding was unpopular farther away in the eastern portion of the state . In October , a Thurston County Superior Court judge ruled that the legislature acted properly and in the public 's interest , and he dismissed the pending lawsuit . The Washington Supreme Court upheld the decision that December . 
 Voter approval of the referendum created a public – private partnership . The Washington State Public Stadium Authority was created to oversee public ownership of the stadium , exhibition center , and parking garage complex . Allen purchased the Seahawks and formed First & Goal Inc. to build and operate the facility . The budget for the project was $ 430 million . Of this cost , $ 44 million was allotted to build the Event Center , $ 26 million for the parking garage , and $ 360 million for the stadium . First & Goal was to cover cost overruns and pay up to $ 130 million of the project while the contribution from the public was capped at $ 300 million . The public funding package included new sports @-@ related state lottery games , taxes on the facility 's admissions and parking , sales tax credits and <unk> , and an eight @-@ year extension of the 2 % tax on hotel rooms in King County . The taxes on admissions and parking are set at 2 % to pay off the project 's tax @-@ exempt bonds . Those taxes will be kept below the authorized 10 % to preserve the tax @-@ exempt status , but the percentage will be increased to the full amount when the bonds are completely paid in 2021 . At such time , they will become dedicated funding sources for maintenance and modernization of the facilities . 
 In September 1998 First & Goal signed a 30 @-@ year stadium lease that includes options to extend for another 20 . Per the agreement , the Public Stadium Authority receives $ 850 @,@ 000 a year from First and Goal ( adjusted for inflation ) , and First & Goal keeps all revenue from the stadium and parking garage . The company receives 80 % of the revenue from the exhibition center while the other twenty percent is allotted to a state education fund . First & Goal is responsible for all operating and maintenance costs , expected to be $ 6 million a year , and must keep the facility in " first @-@ class " condition . Other details of the lease include the availability of affordable seats , a coordinated effort with neighboring Safeco Field to prevent gridlock , a provision for naming rights , the investment in public art at the stadium , and the giveaway of a luxury suite to a fan each Seahawks ' game . 
 = = Construction and layout = = 
 The architectural firm Ellerbe Becket , in association with <unk> Marquardt & <unk> Architects of Seattle , designed the 1 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 sq ft ( 140 @,@ 000 m2 ) project . Allen was closely involved during the design process . While growing up he attended games at the University of Washington 's outdoor Husky Stadium . His goal was to create a similar experience and atmosphere at the new venue . The exhibition center portion of the project was designed over a period of 14 months by <unk> Marquardt & <unk> Architects while First & Goal managed the construction . Town meetings were held to discuss the impact on the public , and the company created a $ 6 million mitigation fund for nearby neighborhoods . In accordance with a program established by the building team , contracts totaling $ 81 million were awarded to <unk> and women @-@ owned businesses . Union apprentices made up 19 % of the workforce through another program with local trade unions . 
 In September 1998 construction began on the new exhibition center and parking garage . By October 1999 the exhibition center was open and hosting events . On March 26 , 2000 , to make way for the stadium , the Kingdome was demolished in the world 's largest implosion of a single concrete structure . Almost all of the Kingdome rubble was recycled with roughly half used for the new stadium . The designers were challenged by the soft soil at the site since it was a tidal marsh until public works projects in the early 20th century adjusted the waterline of nearby Elliott Bay . The top layer is a soft fill taken from the grading projects that had leveled portions of Seattle 's hills . To account for the soft soil , the complex sits on over 2 @,@ 200 pilings driven 50 to 70 ft ( 15 to 21 m ) below the ground to form what is essentially a pier for the foundation . Eight individually connected sections were built to account for the soil concerns , temperature effects , and the potential for earthquakes . The adjoining exhibition center and parking garage are separate structures and are not part of the eight @-@ section stadium . 
 The site of CenturyLink Field is the smallest of those developed for new NFL stadiums . The upper levels were cantilevered over the lower sections to fit within the limited space . Along with the angle of seats and the placement of the lower sections closer to the field , this provided a better view of the field than typically seen throughout the country and allowed for a 67 @,@ 000 @-@ seat capacity . Space is available to increase the total capacity to 72 @,@ 000 for special events . Included in the capacity are 111 suites and over 7 @,@ 000 club seats . The stadium has 1 @,@ 400 seats for those with disabilities and their companions located in various sections . In 2009 CenturyLink Field ranked 21st out of the 31 stadiums in the NFL for total seating capacity . 
 The configuration of CenturyLink Field is a U @-@ shape with an open north end to provide views of downtown Seattle and the large north plaza . The large retractable roof of Safeco Field along with Mount Rainier to the southeast can be seen from the partially open south end . The stadium 's concourses were built to be wide , and they provide additional views of the surrounding area . A 13 @-@ story tower was erected at the north end of the stadium that visually complements the Seattle skyline . The tower features a vertically oriented scoreboard which is the first of its kind in the NFL . At the base is bleacher seating for 3 @,@ 000 called the " Hawks ' Nest " . Another addition not previously seen in the NFL are field @-@ level luxury suites located directly behind the north end zone . 
 Allen rejected plans for a retractable roof during the early stages of the stadium 's design . The lack of a retractable roof made it open to the elements , provided better views , and reduced the total cost of the project . The roof , at 200 @,@ 000 sq ft ( 19 @,@ 000 m2 ) , covers 70 % of the seats but leaves the field open . The roof spans 720 ft ( 220 m ) between concrete pylon supports at the north and south ends of the stadium . Its two expansive sections are held from below by trusses . From above , two arches with additional supports rise 200 ft ( 61 m ) over the field . Post @-@ tensioned cables were used to achieve its final shape and positioning . To minimize damage in the event of an earthquake , the roof has a friction pendulum damper system . This disconnects the roof from the support pylons so that it can move independently of the structure . The technology had never been applied to a large @-@ scale roof before CenturyLink Field . 
 The roof was originally painted white to aesthetically distinguish it from both Safeco Field and the nearby industrial area . The east side of the stadium has a large glass curtain wall that faces the nearby International District . The exterior of the stadium also consists of salmon @-@ colored concrete , and the west side of the structure is partially clad with red brick . The coloring and facade were designed so the stadium would blend with the older buildings in neighboring Pioneer Square . To reduce costs , the exterior was not completed with brick or ornate steel work . 
 A 6 @.@ 8 @-@ magnitude earthquake struck the Seattle area during construction . The structure responded as expected by the designers , and there was minimal damage . The project was completed on budget and a month ahead of schedule . 
 In 2015 the stadium was expanded with the addition of the Toyota Fan Deck including a new 12 Flag raising platform . This expansion was privately funded by the Seahawks and the 1 @,@ 000 additional seats were made available to purchase by current season ticket holders the Blue Pride waiting list for season tickets . The additional seating pushed the capacity of the stadium to 69 @,@ 000 @-@ plus . 
 = = Surface = = 
 In 2002 , CenturyLink Field became the first stadium in the NFL to install a FieldTurf artificial field . The surface is made of plastic fibers rooted in a mixture of ground rubber and sand . The field was replaced in the spring of 2008 after tests showed that compression of the sand and rubber increased the risk of player injuries . FieldTurf won the bid for the second installation over <unk> . For the replacement surface , a one @-@ inch ( two and one @-@ half centimeters ) poured rubber foundation was added to prevent the compression from reoccurring . Under the naming rights agreement , Qwest paid $ 500 @,@ 000 for the installation and First & Goal paid the remaining amount , which was undisclosed . By 2010 the FieldTurf 's quality had decreased with the blades becoming matted down . It also failed FIFA 's quality testing to be ranked 2 Star . A new FieldTurf surface was laid down in 2012 and it met the requirements of a 2 Star field after testing . 
 The 1997 state referendum stated that the stadium would feature a natural grass surface , but FieldTurf was not an option when the stadium was originally presented to voters according to the Public Stadium Authority . Seahawks management reconsidered surface after the Seahawks played on FieldTurf at Husky Stadium during the 2000 and 2001 seasons . Artificial turf was installed because it was easier to maintain than natural grass . The potential damage to a natural grass field caused by Seattle 's frequent rain also made the surface an appropriate option . In order to keep a grass surface robust under heavy football use during late fall and early winter rains , a $ 1 @.@ 8 million irrigation and heating system would have been required . The coach of the Seahawks at the time , Mike Holmgren , said FieldTurf installation was the right decision and stated that " the players love it , and I think this surface will offer a better product on the field for the fans . " 
 Local soccer fans were concerned that the lack of a natural grass field would hinder Seattle 's chances of receiving an MLS expansion franchise . They asserted that voters had approved the facility with the understanding that the new stadium was intended for soccer as well as football . In a compromise , First & Goal agreed to pay for grass to be installed for special events when needed . 
 There have been various opinions regarding both the artificial surface and temporary grass surfaces used for soccer matches . After the Brazilian national team defeated Canada 's side 3 – 2 in 2008 , Brazil 's coach commented that one reason for his team 's unexpectedly poor performance was the loosely installed grass field . The Grenada national team struggled to cope with the artificial surface during their loss at the 2009 CONCACAF Gold Cup . In July 2009 , the U.S. Soccer Federation chose D.C. United 's RFK Stadium over CenturyLink Field for the U.S. Open Cup . The general manager of D.C. United speculated that RFK 's grass field was one of the reasons his team had a stronger bid . The general manager of the Sounders , Adrian Hanauer , told The Seattle Times in 2010 that replacement of the surface was a continuing conversation between the Sounders and Allen 's Vulcan Inc . When the Los Angeles Galaxy traveled to Seattle in May 2012 , the FieldTurf was noted as one of the reasons David Beckham and Robbie Keane were left out of the line @-@ up . 
 Between August and November both the Seahawks and Sounders FC host games at CenturyLink Field . Each team has emphasized the importance of playing their games without the other team 's painted lines on the field . Around 2003 , at the Seahawks ' request , local company <unk> developed for the field a new kind of paint " designed to fail . " The new paint is relatively easy to remove with a power washer and a special chemical solution , a process that the company describes as environmentally friendly . With the new paint , converting the field between American football and soccer takes 14 hours in dry weather , though painting logos and other colors takes additional time . 
 A new turf field , using the FieldTurf Revolution 360 , was installed in February 2016 ahead of the 2016 Sounders season . 
 = = American football = = 
 = = = Seahawks = = = 
 Prior to the stadium opening in 2002 , Allen and Bob Whitsitt said that they hoped the new stadium would help turn the Seahawks into a Super Bowl contender and that Seattle would be considered to host the championship game . The seating is expandable to 72 @,@ 000 for the purpose of holding the game , but the NFL typically does not consider cities with outdoor stadiums where the average temperature in February is below 50 ° F ( 10 ° C ) . The number of season tickets available at Qwest was capped at 61 @,@ 000 following the Super Bowl appearance . The ensuing waiting list was the first for the Seahawks since the early 1990s . 
 The team 's first season at their new home was in 2002 . Their first game at the new facility was a 28 – 10 preseason loss to the Indianapolis Colts on August 11 , 2002 . They went on to end their first season at the new field with a 7 – 9 record . In the 2003 season , the team went undefeated at home and reached the playoffs . It was the first time the franchise had won 10 games in a single season in 17 years . The Seahawks again reached the postseason during the 2004 season and played their first playoff game at CenturyLink Field on January 8 , 2005 . In that game , they lost to the St. Louis Rams who had already defeated them twice that season . The following season , the Seahawks went undefeated at home for the second time in three years and won their first @-@ ever NFC Championship , but lost in Super Bowl XL . Between 2002 and 2005 , the Seahawks won 24 of their 32 regular season games at the stadium . 
 In 2006 the Seahawks had a 9 – 7 record and hosted the Dallas Cowboys in the wild card round of the playoffs . The Seahawks trailed 20 – 13 with less than 7 minutes remaining but came back to win 21 – 20 . In 2007 , the team won seven of their eight home games and clinched their fourth consecutive division title . CenturyLink Field was again the site for their wild card game , and they defeated the Washington Redskins 35 – 14 . In 2008 , the Seahawks went 4 – 12 and had only two home wins . Holmgren left the organization after the season . When he was interviewed about memorable moments and the fans , he said that CenturyLink Field was " a remarkable place to compete in and to play professional football . " He called a game at the stadium " an experience . " 
 In 2010 , the Seahawks were the first NFL team with a losing record ever to win a division title in a season not shortened by a strike . Seattle earned its fifth consecutive home playoff victory with a 41 – 36 win over the New Orleans Saints . " God bless the voters , " defensive tackle Craig Terrill said after the game in reference to the stadium 's importance to the franchise . 
 Under Pete Carroll , the Seahawks were undefeated at home during the 2012 season . Season tickets for 2013 sold @-@ out with a franchise @-@ record 98 % renewal rate . 
 CenturyLink Field often sells out for Seahawks games . Although the team struggled in 2008 and 2009 , the team maintained its base of season ticket holders . Before the 2008 season , the 14 @,@ 000 single game tickets not already allotted sold out less than 15 minutes after they became available . By the end of the 2009 season , the Seahawks had sold out 60 consecutive games . After going 9 – 23 over two seasons in 2008 and 2009 , the number of available season tickets was increased to 62 @,@ 000 . The largest crowd to attend a Seahawks game at CenturyLink Field was 69 @,@ 055 vs the Pittsburgh Steelers on November 29 , 2015 . 
 = = = = Home field advantage = = = = 
 CenturyLink Field has earned a reputation as one of the loudest stadiums in the NFL . It was , at one point in time , in the Guinness World Record books for being the loudest stadium in the world . The seating decks and partial roof , both trap and amplify exceptional amounts of noise and reflect it back onto the field . This noise possibly contributes to increased false start penalties since opposing offenses can miss audibles and the snap count , as well as delay of game penalties due to the reduced efficiency of communicating plays to the offense . From 2002 through 2012 , there have been 143 false @-@ start penalties on visiting teams in Seattle , second only to the Minnesota Vikings . During that same time period , the Seahawks have accumulated a home win record of 59 @-@ 29 , with a simultaneous road record of 33 @-@ 55 
 When Tod Leiweke was hired as the Seahawks ' new CEO in 2003 , he had a large flagpole installed in the south end to fly the 12th Man Flag as a tribute to the team 's 12th man . The organization had retired the number in 1984 to honor the 12th man . A local celebrity , sometimes a former Seahawk , raises the flag during the network television pre @-@ game events . The Seahawks currently refer to their fans as the 12s . 
 In 2005 , the stadium gained national attention when the visiting New York Giants committed 11 false start penalties . Seahawks head coach Mike Holmgren attributed the penalties to the enthusiasm and noise from the crowd . He dedicated the ball used to make the game @-@ winning field goal to the fans , and it is now displayed at the stadium . The Giants ' general manager , Ernie Accorsi , asked an NFL senior vice president whether the Seahawks had broadcast artificial crowd noise over the public address system during this game . The NFL sent a memorandum early in the 2006 season about such complaints and sent officials to monitor two games . Holmgren denied the allegations , and the crowd responded by being even louder than usual when the Giants returned to CenturyLink Field . Since 2005 the Seahawks have tracked the number of false starts committed by visiting teams and display the statistic on a scoreboard to motivate the crowd . As of 2013 , the stadium has had a league @-@ high number of false starts since . In preparation for 2005 – 06 NFC Championship Game at CenturyLink Field , the Carolina Panthers practiced with the recorded sounds of jet engines in the background to prepare for the volume of the crowd . 
 Kickers experience further disadvantages when attempting field goals at CenturyLink Field . Both the stadium 's proximity to Puget Sound and the open north end create winds that are challenging to gauge . Former Seahawks kicker Josh Brown adjusted to the winds , and he believed the moisture in the air caused trouble for others . 
 On September 15 , 2013 , Seattle Seahawks fans successfully broke the Guinness World Records for the loudest stadium in the world . The 131 @.@ 9 @-@ decibel record occurred during the sack of San Francisco 49er quarterback Colin Kaepernick in the first quarter . Fans then broke their new record during the third quarter of the same game when a level of 136 @.@ 6 decibels was achieved during a goal line stand by the Seahawks defense . The record was broken by the crowd at Arrowhead Stadium on October 13 , 2013 , with a sound pressure level of 137 @.@ 57 decibels . The record was later regained by the Seahawks fans on December 2 , 2013 with 137 @.@ 6 decibels against the New Orleans Saints , but lost once again to Arrowhead Stadium in a Monday Night Football game between the Kansas City Chiefs and New England Patriots on September 29 , 2014 , setting the record at 142 @.@ 2 decibels . 
 = = = College = = = 
 CenturyLink Field has hosted several college football games . The hometown Washington Huskies played their 2005 season opener against the Air Force Falcons at the stadium in Tyrone Willingham 's first game as head coach . In 2011 , the University of Washington began a $ 250 million renovation to Husky Stadium , so the Huskies and the Washington State Cougars played the 2011 Apple Cup at CenturyLink Field . The Huskies also played their entire 2012 home football schedule at CenturyLink Field . 
 Except for in 2010 , the stadium hosted a Washington State Cougars non @-@ conference home game each season between 2002 and 2014 . This included the 86th " Battle of the Palouse " against the Idaho Vandals in 2003 . The Cougars were and their crowds ranged from 30 @,@ 927 to 63 @,@ 588 . CenturyLink Field is about 300 miles ( 500 km ) from the university . The university 's athletic director said that 50 @,@ 000 need to attend to make it worth moving the game from Pullman . The Cougars went 6 – 6 in the annual game . The games generated additional revenue that was invested in facilities for the football program while also increasing exposure to the western side of the state . 
 In April 2009 , it was proposed that the annual Apple Cup between the Seattle @-@ based Huskies and the Pullman @-@ based Cougars be hosted at CenturyLink Field for six years beginning in 2010 . The two programs could not reach an agreement on how to divide tickets . Pullman 's business community had expressed concerns that playing the game away from the area would be detrimental to the local economy . 
 Qwest Field hosted the 2002 Seattle Bowl , in which Wake Forest beat Oregon 38 – 17 . The inaugural Seattle Bowl was played a year earlier at Safeco Field , but the game was discontinued when organizers could not secure financing before 2003 . Later attempts to revive the Seattle Bowl were unsuccessful . The Seattle Sports Commission is pushing for a proposal of a new bowl game . In 2008 a business plan was begun for a game in 2010 that would be a fundraiser for Seattle Children 's Hospital . 
 Lower division NCAA teams have played at the stadium throughout the years . From 2003 to 2008 , the Division II football teams from Western Washington University and Central Washington University met each year in a rivalry game called " The Battle in Seattle " . Central won all but the 2004 game , and each meeting attracted more than 11 @,@ 000 people . Western discontinued its football program after the 2008 season , but Central came to an agreement to continue the series with Western Oregon University for games in 2009 and 2010 . " Battle in Seattle VII " saw Central make a comeback to win 23 – 21 in front of 5 @,@ 374 . 
 On October 31 , 2009 , the Division I FCS Eastern Washington University Eagles played a home game in Seattle for the first time . Along with the goal of drawing alumni from the metropolitan area , the athletic directors from both Eastern Washington and Washington State had expressed the importance of connecting with alumni at receptions and other events on the western side of the state . Billed as the " Showdown on the Sound " , the game was a 47 – 10 victory over the Portland State Vikings . According to Eastern 's athletic director , Qwest Field 's rental was $ 50 @,@ 000 for the day . 
 = = = High school = = = 
 CenturyLink Field has been used for high school football . The Washington Interscholastic Activities Association puts on the annual Emerald City Kickoff Classic at the stadium . The event is a season @-@ opening series of games between some of the best teams in the state . 
 The stadium features a meeting between one of the best teams in Washington and one of the best from another state in the " Best of the West " game . On September 4 , 2004 , Washington 's Bellevue High School and California 's De La Salle High School played in front of over 25 @,@ 000 , a state high school event attendance record . Bellevue ended De La Salle 's national @-@ record 151 @-@ game winning streak in a 39 – 20 win . On September 16 , 2009 , Bellevue defeated another highly regarded California school at Qwest Field in a 30 – 16 victory over Long Beach Polytechnic . USA Today had recently rated both teams highly with Long Beach third and Bellevue at 16th in the nation . 
 After the organizer of the event announced a match @-@ up between Washington 's Skyline High School and Oregon 's Jesuit High School in 2009 , he said that he proposed the possibility of televising games to Fox Sports , but Fox did not televise the game . Skyline went on to shut out Jesuit 17 – 0 during that year 's Emerald City Classic . 
 Within CenturyLink Field , there is a large art piece called The State of Football that pays tribute to high school football in the state of Washington . The piece features a depiction of Washington and holds replica football helmets from every high school football team in the state . The art is part of the nearly $ 1 @.@ 75 million Stadium Art Program commissioned through First & Goal 's lease of the facility . 
 = = Soccer = = 
 CenturyLink Field is also designed for soccer . The stadium meets FIFA sight line requirements and provides separate locker rooms for soccer teams . Camera locations were chosen for optimal television coverage of the sport . Numerous exhibition games have taken place at CenturyLink Field , including high @-@ profile clubs such as Manchester United , Barcelona , Celtic , Real Madrid , Chelsea , Club América and Chivas de Guadalajara . These games have proved to be highly popular , and the first sell @-@ out of 66 @,@ 772 fans at CenturyLink Field was a soccer match between Manchester United and Celtic . National teams such as Brazil , Venezuela , Mexico , and China have played exhibition games at the stadium . The artificial turf has been temporarily overlaid with grass for international matches . 
 Seattle was the site of the 2005 CONCACAF Gold Cup Group B opening round between the national teams of the United States , Costa Rica , Canada , and Cuba . Two matches of the 2009 CONCACAF Gold Cup opening round were also played at the stadium on July 4 , 2009 . In the second match , the United States comfortably defeated Grenada , who were playing in their first major international competition , 4 – 0 . The Gold Cup returned in 2013 with Panama beating Martinique and Mexico defeating Canada in opening group play matches . 
 CenturyLink Field was among the 58 facilities in the United States being considered for World Cup matches had the country hosted the tournament in 2018 or 2022 . When discussing Seattle as a candidate , Sunil Gulati of the U.S. Soccer Federation called it " a world @-@ class facility . " Seattle finally hosted a qualifier in June 2013 — only the city 's second with the first being over 3 decades earlier . The United States topped Panama 2 — 0 in front of a raucous crowd . 
 On November 22 , 2009 , Seattle was the site of the 14th annual MLS Cup between Real Salt Lake and the Los Angeles Galaxy , where Salt Lake won the Cup on penalty kicks ( 5 – 4 ) in front of 46 @,@ 011 . The stadium was the eighth stadium to host the event . 
 = = = Sounders ( USL ) = = = 
 The first sporting event at the stadium was a double @-@ header on July 28 , 2002 , that included both the Sounders Select Women and the men 's Seattle Sounders of the USL team . The women defeated the Vancouver Breakers 4 – 3 , while the men beat the Vancouver Whitecaps 4 – 1 in front of 25 @,@ 515 people . The USL team began using the facility regularly as their home field in 2003 . Although team management was concerned with the high rent and the underused seating capacity , they were drawn by the sponsorship opportunities and location . The Sounders increased their average attendance from 2 @,@ 583 at Seattle 's Memorial Stadium in 2002 to 3 @,@ 452 at the new stadium in 2003 . In 2005 , the Sounders beat the Richmond Kickers 2 – 1 in a penalty shootout for the USL championship in front of 8 @,@ 011 . Scott Jenkins scored the final goal and announced his retirement after the game . 
 In 2008 , the MLS expansion franchise Sounders FC decided to develop the Starfire Sports Complex in nearby Tukwila , and the USL team played most of the season at that facility . At the time , team management thought that practicing and playing at Starfire could provide a better transition for those hoping to play for the new MLS team . The last match for the USL Sounders at Qwest Field was the 2008 season opener against the rival Portland Timbers . The game ended in a scoreless draw in front of 10 @,@ 184 . 
 = = = Sounders FC = = = 
 The potential to draw an MLS expansion team helped drive public support for building the stadium in 1997 . In 1996 , Seattle was considered for one of the 10 original MLS teams ; however , the region lacked an adequate outdoor stadium . In 2007 , it was announced that Seattle would be the home of an expansion team . The first Sounders FC regular season match was at the stadium on March 19 , 2009 . Fredy Montero scored the first goal in a 3 – 0 Seattle victory . 
 Before the opening of their first season , the Sounders already had the highest number of season ticket holders in the MLS after they sold all 22 @,@ 000 of the offered season ticket packages . The team created a web site that was used to identify seating arrangements for season ticket holders based on personal interests including preferred method for watching a game and foreign team preference . For the first half of the inaugural season , the upper and lower sections were <unk> off , limiting the seating capacity to 27 @,@ 700 . The club hoped to create an intimate environment as well as a supply @-@ and @-@ demand factor that would reward season ticket holders and encourage early purchase of seats . The stadium has continuously sold out league matches in the limited seating configuration . However , majority owner Joe Roth has said that he " won 't be happy " until the entire venue is open . 
 The stadium was designed to easily open seating sections in stages if needed . After repeated sellout crowds , additional sections were opened , increasing total capacity to 32 @,@ 400 . In the Sounders ' first year they set an MLS record with an average home attendance of 30 @,@ 943 people . Official capacity was increased to 35 @,@ 700 after the 2009 season . In 2011 , The Sounders continued to hold the highest average attendance in the league with 38 @,@ 496 . Official capacity was increased again to 38 @,@ 500 with the opening of the Hawk 's Nest for the 2012 season . The Sounders set the state 's single game soccer attendance record when they hosted Manchester United in front of 67 @,@ 052 in July 2011 . On October 15 , 2011 , additional seats were available for a record crowd of 64 @,@ 140 during the final regular season home match , a Sounders 2 – 1 win followed by ceremonies honoring retiring goalkeeper Kasey Keller . And on October 7 , 2012 , another attendance record was broken when 66 @,@ 452 fans were present for a 3 – 0 win over the Portland Timbers , following a ceremony awarding retired Forward Roger Levesque a Golden Scarf . 
 CenturyLink Field has hosted two U.S. Open Cup tournament finals . On October 5 , 2010 , the tournament 's 81 @-@ year @-@ old attendance record was broken when Sounders FC defeated the Columbus Crew 2 – 1 in front of 31 @,@ 311 . That record was broken one year later when CenturyLink Field again hosted the final on October 4 , 2011 as 36 @,@ 615 spectators watched Seattle defeat the Chicago Fire 2 – 0 . Like the Seahawks , the Sounders have received attention for sellout crowds and boisterous fans . The Seattle Times reported that a " new standard for attendance and game @-@ day atmosphere has been set " due to the loud sellout crowds . The passionate Emerald City Supporters have dubbed the general admission sections behind the south goal the " Brougham End " for the street that runs along the south edge of the complex . 
 = = Other events = = 
 The stadium became a yearly site for Supercross races in 2005 . Seattle had been left out of the circuit since the Kingdome hosted the race in 1999 . It takes more than 650 truckloads of dirt to build the course for the event that around 50 @,@ 000 spectators attend . 
 The Rolling Stones , U2 , Metallica , Taylor Swift and other large acts have performed at CenturyLink Field . The stadium hosts both trade and consumer shows . A stadium record for attendance was set in June 2011 when U2 played in front of more than 70 @,@ 000 . 
 The CenturyLink Field Event Center connects to the stadium 's west field plaza and consists of two exhibition halls , a conference room , and a concourse . The center hosts pre @-@ game events for the Seahawks and Mariners . According to the Public Stadium Authority 's website , the event center contributes more than half a billion dollars to the region 's economy . The center was renamed the CenturyLink Field Event Center in June 2011 , following the acquisition of Qwest Communications by CenturyLink and the renaming of the stadium . 
 The Event Center had previously been called " the worst venue in town " for concerts , but in 2006 , AEG Live and First & Goal formed a partnership to create a new theater within the Event Center space . Washington Mutual obtained the naming rights to the new theater , calling it the " WaMu Theater . " The theater space can be assembled on an as @-@ needed basis within the building and equipment , including the 104 @-@ foot ( 32 m ) wide stage , can be dismantled and stored in the stadium . The theater 's acoustics were improved by installing panels on the ceiling and a large curtain . Depending on the seating configuration , the capacity can be 3 @,@ 300 , 4 @,@ 000 , or 7 @,@ 000 . Seal performed the inaugural concert on November 6 , 2006 . Though the naming rights deal ended following the bankruptcy of Washington Mutual in the wake of the 2008 financial crisis , the space retained the WaMu Theater name , amending the abbreviation to now mean the " Washington Music Theater . " 
 The facilities have been used for public speaking engagements . For example , the 14th Dalai Lama of Tibet , Tenzin Gyatso , delivered a 28 @-@ minute speech to 50 @,@ 817 people on April 12 , 2008 . 
 = = Football stadium shaking experiments = = 
 During a Seattle football game on January 8 , 2011 , the Pacific Northwest Seismic Network ( PNSN ) recorded what was dubbed a " Beast Quake " , for Marshawn " Beast Mode " Lynch , a player whose performance excited the ( then @-@ named ) Qwest Field stadium crowd enough for the resultant shaking to be recorded on PNSN instruments . In 2014 and 2015 additional sensors were added in and around the stadium . Motivations for the experiment included conducting a quick @-@ reaction exercise for the seismometer network team to install sensors and interpret results , and to test the ability to handle increased web traffic from interested visitors from the general public . Shaking was detected at the stadium after a 90 @-@ yard touchdown run during a January 10 , 2015 playoff game , dubbed a " Kam Quake " for the player making the run , Kam Chancellor . The PNSN scientists say that the biggest event of all was the " Dance Quake " , which was caused by the all the jumping and dancing that followed Marshawn Lynch 's touchdown and 2 @-@ point conversion during 2014 – 15 NFC Championship Game on January 18 , 2015 . 
 = = Facility contracts and naming rights = = 
 The stadium was originally named Seahawks Stadium . The name was changed to Qwest Field in June 2004 after the telecommunications carrier bought the naming rights for $ 75 million for a period of 15 years . According to the agreement , the proceeds must be used for maintenance and upgrades . A portion of any profit then goes into a $ 10 million fund Allen guaranteed for youth playfields . Due to CenturyLink 's recent acquisition of Qwest , the stadium was officially renamed CenturyLink Field on June 23 , 2011 . There is speculation as to if there will be a new nickname for the venue . An informal reader poll conducted by The Seattle Times showed that " The Clink " was a popular suggestion . During Sounders FC matches , the field has been entitled " The Xbox Pitch at CenturyLink Field " as part of a sponsorship deal with Microsoft . 
 In addition to its 48 concession stands , restaurants and lounges are located throughout the stadium . Along with typical fare , local Pacific salmon sandwiches , Dungeness crab cakes , and <unk> are served . In 2006 , Levy Restaurants replaced Aramark in a five @-@ year deal to provide the food and beverage service for the stadium and exhibition center . As of 2013 , <unk> manages and operates all general concessions and premium dining in the stadium . 
 In May 2007 , Seattle @-@ based Jones Soda outbid Coca @-@ Cola to sign a five @-@ year contract for the pouring rights of non @-@ alcoholic beverages at the stadium , making it the only venue in the NFL that did not have a contract with either Coca @-@ Cola or Pepsi . Jones Soda , known for unusual and holiday @-@ themed soda flavors such as Blue Bubblegum and Turkey & Gravy , said it was working to develop football @-@ related soda flavors , such as " grass @-@ stain . " In June 2010 , the Seahawks and Jones Soda announced their mutual decision to end the Jones sponsorship , following which Coca @-@ Cola reclaimed the vending rights with a new five @-@ year agreement . 
 = = Transportation = = 
 CenturyLink Field is bordered by the Pioneer Square , International District , and Industrial District neighborhoods of Seattle . The stadium 's referendum approval required a transportation management program to coordinate transportation options . First & Goal 's facility lease agreement also included a provision to ease gridlock . A " Dual Event Agreement " with Safeco Field was established so that two events with a combined attendance of over 58 @,@ 000 would not occur within four hours of each other . The agreement was also implemented to coordinate mass transit to the stadiums on game days . Local and regional buses service the area with stops within three blocks of the stadium , and the county 's Metro bus service offers express routes from several area park and ride lots for games . Trains service the stadium through Seattle 's King Street Station and overflow tracks accommodate extra trains during events . Regional commuter trains operate on Sundays if the Seahawks have a home game . Trains also run for mid @-@ day Sounders FC games on Saturdays . In 2008 , the commuter trains carried 64 @,@ 000 event goers to the two nearby stadiums . Amtrak , primarily through the Pacific Northwest corridor 's Cascades route , also serves the station . On July 18 , 2009 , light rail service between SeaTac and downtown began in time for an exhibition match between the Sounders and Chelsea . The light rail connects to the baseball and football stadiums via the Stadium station . The International District / Chinatown station also offers convenient access . 
 CenturyLink Field is bordered by the junction of Interstates 5 and 90 to the east and State Route 99 to its west . The State Route 519 corridor connects I @-@ 90 to the neighborhood . Local governments compromised with both the Seahawks and Mariners on the location of new ramps over the train tracks that run along the east sides of CenturyLink and Safeco Fields . An overpass for S Royal Brougham Way , the road that borders the south edge of the CenturyLink Field complex , to improve access and safety was completed in May 2010 . The stadium has 2 @,@ 000 parking spaces in its parking garage and 8 @,@ 400 in the surrounding lots to accommodate automobile traffic . Beginning in December 2011 , construction of the Stadium Place mixed @-@ use development project replaced much of the north lot . The developer must replace the 500 lost parking spots and turn over parking revenue to the Public Stadium Authority per an agreement with King County . 
 = Dynasty Warriors 4 = 
 Dynasty Warriors 4 ( 真 ・ 三國無双3 , Shin <unk> 3 , Shin Sangokumusou 3 in Japan ) is a hack and slash video game and the fourth installment in the popular Dynasty Warriors series . Dynasty Warriors 4 was developed by Omega Force and published by Koei . The game is available on PlayStation 2 ( PS2 ) and Xbox and is based on a series of books called Romance of the Three Kingdoms , written by Luo Guanzhong . As the series has progressed , it has strayed further from the actual plot of Romance of the Three Kingdoms but instead has given the user more input on how the storyline progresses . When it was released in Japan as Shin Sangokumusou 3 , it topped the sales charts , sold over one million copies within nine days , and received an average of 78 out of 100 on <unk> reviews . 
 Originally released on the PS2 in March 2003 , it was later ported to the Xbox in September of the same year and , in 2005 , ported to the PC under the name Dynasty Warriors 4 Hyper . Two expansions were released for the PS2 version of the game , Xtreme Legends and Empires . Whereas Xtreme Legends requires the player to use the original Dynasty Warriors 4 disc to access all of its features , Empires is a stand @-@ alone game and can be played with all of its content without the use of the original disk . The game is the first in the Dynasty Warriors series to introduce an Empires expansion pack and the second to include an Xtreme Legends title . These expansions are not available for the Xbox version of the game . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Dynasty Warriors 4 expands on its predecessors by adding new characters , new modes of play and a completely new ' Edit Mode . ' Instead of having strict routines to follow during battle , officers , to some extent , will have a greater reaction to the events taking place on the battlefield in the game and may react to things more often . 
 The aim of most of the stages in Dynasty Warriors 4 is to defeat the enemy commander . The player must make their way through the stage , defeating enemy officers and troops while trying to keep their own commander alive . Some stages have secondary objectives for the player to complete to make the stage easier , unlock new features , or help in later stages . Each playable character has their own unique weapon and individual superhuman abilities . The scope of each stage allows for each side to have thousands of soldiers in the battlefield . The game uses a fairly simple combination system so that players can chain attacks together ; the highest possible attack combo being 10 . And new character designs and attack moves are also updated in this hit game , leaving more damage and raising your characters skill up more easily . 
 Playable starting officers include Liu Bei , Zhang Fei , and Guan Yu for the Shu Kingdom ; Xiahou Dun , Xiahou Yuan , and Cao Cao for the Wei Kingdom ; and Sun Shang Xiang , Huang Gai , and Sun Jian for the Wu Kingdom . It is possible to unlock new characters from other kingdoms as well as use a player created character in any of the campaigns . The new ' Edit Mode ' allows players to create an officer from sets of different features , motions , and weapons to use in ' <unk> Mode . ' The characters stance and motion are affected by their gender and the weapon the player has selected them to carry and use . The motions for the weapons are taken from pre @-@ existing officers as well as from two characters removed from Dynasty Warriors 4 that were in Dynasty Warriors 3 : Fu Xi and Nu Wa . Some characters are unlocked by fulfilling optional side @-@ goals ; most are unlocked by completing certain battles during gameplay . The maximum number of playable characters is 42 , 46 with created characters . 
 Each playable character in the game has the ability to equip items . Weapons in the game , unlike its predecessors , are gained in levels . Some items are only found in certain stages , but is only obtainable if completing a goal . Sometimes the goal may be very simple , but some may be not that easy to figure out how to obtain the certain item . By defeating generals and lieutenants , the player 's character is awarded experience scaled by the difficulty of each officer , and the amount of them defeated . This experience is allocated at the end of the level and allows the player to increase their attributes or obtain new forms . Each playable officer has 9 levels to achieve with their standard weapon , while a 10th level is accessible through special in @-@ game requirements , and on the " Hard " difficulty , which is found to be frustrating like most games , the harder the difficulty the more eager you gain . Items can have a number of effects on the player such as increasing attack power , defense , and movement speed . You can also retrieve your health level to avoid getting killed and having " Game Over " by obtaining " Chinese <unk> " that at first , look like onions like in any other game in the so far successful Dynasty Warriors franchise . You can also obtain item boost that increase a certain skill by 2 for limited time only . You can also get packs of wine and packs of Chinese <unk> in certain stages in certain locations during gameplay . As said above , special items can also be unlocked by completing objectives during gameplay . Special items can grant the player a statistics boost , a unique ability or skill , or even a ride @-@ able mount such as an Elephant or Horse . 
 <unk> Mode , ' the main campaign mode , has separate campaigns for each kingdom rather than a separate ' Musou Mode ' for each character , as was featured in Dynasty Warriors 3 , which made it more frustrating for the player to unlock their favorite characters . So , Dynasty Warriors 4 <unk> Modes are easier for the player to unlock their favorite characters . While the storyline is still linear , ' Musou Mode ' is rather open @-@ ended in the sense that depending on the user ’ s actions , different events will occur , such as unlocking new characters for use or new kingdoms . The unlockable kingdoms in the game include the Wu , Shu , and Wei Kingdoms , and unlockable characters include warlords who were defeated in the book that the game series is based on , Romance of the Three Kingdoms . 
 In @-@ game features include large battlefields , a large number of enemies and officers to defeat , and multiple outcomes for each stage . Certain levels make use of the siege engine ( A new feature to the series ) and introduce specialized siege equipment such as bridge layers , battering rams and catapults to the stage . Although it is not essential for the completion of stages , having a siege weapon will increase morale for the player 's forces , and help the player succeed . 
 The morale system in the game is similar to previous Dynasty Warrior games . Morale is increased and decreased by performing a number of positive actions for the player ’ s army . Action that produce this effect include defeating enemies in multiples of fifty , defeating enemy officers , and completing special events such as ambushes , siege attacks , and finding enemy strongholds . Morale in the game has a strong effect on the player 's forces , determining their strength and speed , as well as their ability to perform <unk> attacks . Morale will also affect how the CPU characters move along through battle . Example : Ally <unk> are winning . They are more likely to charge the enemy and destroy the enemies in the path . They may or may not stop if the charging armies morale drops to losing . More chances they 'll stop and stay where they are , or they 'll flee back to the ally side of the battlefield . 
 Occasionally , when the player confronts an enemy officer , the officer will challenge them to a one @-@ on @-@ one duel . If the player accepts , they will be transported to a small arena away from the main battlefield where a one @-@ on @-@ one fight with the officer will take place until either is victorious or time runs out . If the player declines , your morale will drop . If the player wins , their morale will rise and the enemy officer will be removed from the battlefield . If you accept the officers challenge they do become more difficult to beat in the duel . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Dynasty Warriors 4 is set in Ancient China during the time of the Three Kingdoms era . The game begins at the fall of the Han Dynasty , shortly before the death of Emperor Ling when the Yellow Turban Rebellion led by Zhang Jiao begun an uprising against the Empire . A number of elements in the game build on aspects of Chinese Mythology and there is a mix between fact and fiction as the game is built on the story of Romance of the Three Kingdoms . 
 Many of the locations , characters , and events in Dynasty Warriors 4 are reported to have happened in Chinese history although many have been exaggerated to make the game more appealing to the player . There are also some features that are historically inaccurate such as Zhou Tai 's weapon , a Japanese tachi , as there is no historical record of this kind of weapon being used in that era . The game features environments resembling that of ancient China and various items from the era . Common items throughout the game include Fairy Wine and Dim Sum ’ s . 
 = = = Stages = = = 
 Many of the stages are recreations of notable battles present historically or from the novel Romance of the Three Kingdoms , while original creations became more common with the newer installments . Of course , the battlefields are not exact reproductions of the original locations , as newer establishments , buildings and <unk> facilities have been built on top of them . For example , He Fei , a key site in both the game and in the historical context , has been developed and expanded into an urbanised area , making an exact replication impossible . Instead , levels are designed to be vaguely accurate , focusing more on expression of mood and effects ; these are not re @-@ used in every game , but are instead updated in every Dynasty Warriors game , save the games ' extension packages - in this case , Dynasty Warriors 4 : Xtreme Legends and Dynasty Warriors 4 : Empires 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 * Denotes new characters to the series 
 * Denotes new characters to the <unk> denotes default <unk> : Fu Xi and Nü Wa were removed in DW4 
 = = = Story = = = 
 Although Dynasty Warriors 4 does allow for some player input into how the story unfolds , the three main kingdoms ' ' Musou Modes ' follow the main events of the Romance of the Three Kingdoms story . 
 = = = = Han and Allied Forces Story = = = = 
 In 184 AD , with the corruption and poverty within the Han dynasty , Zhang Jiao and a religious sect known as the Way of Peace start a rebellion within China , attracting hundreds of thousands of followers . In response to this threat , Regent Marshal He Jin gathers generals from across the land to combat the " Yellow Turban Rebellion " . Among the volunteers for the Han Forces are Cao Cao of Chang 'an , Sun Jian of Jianye , and Liu Bei . The Han forces are able to destroy Zhang Liang , who is laying siege to Huangfu Song at Xiapi Castle . They proceed to drive Zhang Bao out of his fortress at He Nan Yin and the whole Han army triumphs over Zhang Jiao himself in Ji Province ( If Zhang Jiao withdraws from the battle , one of the forces , either Wei , Wu , or Shu , will defeat Zhang Jiao and Zhang Lu in Hanzhong ) . 
 With Zhang Jiao and his followers dead , it is Dong Zhuo who seizes power within the Imperial Court . Followed by Lu Bu and <unk> , he enslaves Emperor Xian and makes himself regent in place of the deceased He Jin . In 190 AD , the powerful nobleman Yuan Shao rallies an army of warriors from across the land , including Cao Cao , Sun Jian , Liu Bei , Gongsun Zan , and many fresh warriors . These forces defeat Li Jue and Hua Xiong at Si Shui Gate and , at Hulao Gate a year later , they defeat Dong Zhuo and Lu Bu ; Dong Zhuo survives , and burns down Luoyang . 
 = = = Shu Story = = = 
 After defeating Dong Zhuo , Liu Bei and his sworn brothers Zhang Fei and Guan Yu are forced to wander the land in search of a home . Since the people love Liu Bei , Cao Cao sets out to destroy him . In 200 AD , Guan Yu returns to Liu Bei after an escape ( " Tales " ) , making it through many gates to ships on the river . At Ru Nan ( " Tales " ) , Liu Bei is rejoined by Guan Yu and is now followed by Zhao Yun , who saves him from advancing infantry . Cao Cao is defeated , but Liu Bei must continue wandering . In 208 AD , Liu Bei finds talent in a strategist known as Zhuge Liang , who agreed to follow him after Liu Bei visited him three times . Zhuge Liang proves his worth by defeating Cao Cao 's army in a series of ambushes at the Battle of Bo Wan Po and Liu Bei successfully manages to flee to Sun Jian in Wu after the Battle of Changban , where Zhao Yun saved his son . Sun Jian agrees to assist Liu Bei in his goal of defeating Cao Cao , and Wu strategist Zhou Yu teams up with Zhuge Liang to execute a fire attack that destroyed Cao Cao 's fleet at the Battle of Chi Bi . 
 After Chi Bi , Liu Bei focused on building up his kingdom . He took over Luo Castle from his cousin Liu Zhang after the people pleaded for his guidance ( although he lost Pang Tong ) , and also unified Jing Province after defeating Han Xuan of Changsha , Liu Du of Lingling , Zhao Fan of Guiyang , and Jin Xuan of Wuling . He gained Huang Zhong and Wei Yan as officers after this battle , and his great army conquered the rest of Yi Province at Chengdu in 214 AD . Soon after , he assisted Ma Chao at the Battle of Tong Pass ( " Tales " ) against Cao Cao , and gained him as a general after Chengdu . 
 Liu Bei then attacks either Wei or Wu , depending on if the fire attack at Chi Bi succeeds or not . Either Wei or Wu will be the final battle where you attack their capital ; the battles are the same . 
 Liu Bei proceeds to campaign in the <unk> to get rid of Wu 's threat , as Wu had backed a Nanman rebellion by King Meng Huo . In <unk> , he systematically defeated Meng Huo for a total of seven times , as Zhuge Liang cleverly resisted the Nanman armor troops and also pacified the poison marshes . After taking down Meng Huo , Shu proceeded to capture Fan Castle from Wei 's Cao Ren , and also defeated Wu reinforcements under Lu Meng and traitors under Mi Fang and Fu <unk> . The final battle with Wu was at the Battle of Yi Ling , where Liu Bei braved a Wu fire attack and defeated ( if Wu falls first , kills ) Sun Jian and his officers . If Wei has been defeated before Wu , Liu Bei proceeds to attack Jianye , and sees through Sun Jian 's body double trickery and kills Sun Jian , Sun Ce , Sun Quan , and Sun <unk> . 
 He also attacks Wei in campaigns masterminded by Zhuge Liang . Zhuge Liang gains Jiang Wei as a general after isolating him and tricking Wei general Ma <unk> into thinking that he was betraying him , in a clever ploy at the Battle of Tianshui ( " Tales " ) . He proceeds to defeat the Wei after a failed prisoner exchange at the Battle of Mt . <unk> and saves Ma Su from defeat at the Battle of <unk> . His final battle with Wei is at the Battle of <unk> Plains , where he fakes his death , only to ambush the Wei forces and defeat Sima Yi . If Wu has fallen before Wei , Shu will attack Xuchang , the co @-@ capital of Wei , and take it , with Wei 's officers fighting to the death . 
 Having united the land , Liu Bei will ride on a victory march with his generals , and enter the capital in a glorious procession . 
 = = = Wei Story = = = 
 After Dong Zhuo 's defeat , Cao Cao focuses on uniting the land . He is surrounded by enemies : Dong Zhuo 's general Lu Bu has taken over all of Dong Zhuo 's troops and taken Xiapi Castle ; Zhang Xiu has rebelled in Wan Castle ; to the north , Yuan Shao threatened to swallow the north whole . Cao Cao defeated Zhang Xiu at Wan Castle , with his guard Dian Wei holding foes back in the burning castle . Cao Cao , having escaped , defeats Lu Bu in alliance with Liu Bei at Xiapi in 198 AD , exterminating his army and gaining several officers . Cao Cao 's final victory is at the Battle of Guandu in 200 AD , where he destroys Yuan Shao 's army before he even arrives . 
 After defeating Yuan Shao , Cao Cao proceeds to fight against Liu Bei , who is wandering the land in search of a master . Xiahou Dun pursues and defeats Guan Yu , Liu Bei 's brother , who is trying to escape to boats on the Huang He ( " Tales " ) . In 208 AD , Cao Cao wins victories over Zhuge Liang 's trickery at Bo Wan Po , defeats a fleeing Liu Bei at Changban , and stops a fire attack ploy by an allied fleet of Sun Jian and Liu Bei at Chi Bi . 
 Although his southern foes were still very alive , Cao Cao focused to the north to crush Ma Chao and his rebels at Tong Gate in 211 AD ( " Tales " ) . He also chooses to defend against Lu Bu , who is terrorizing Xiapi , and in a <unk> , he ends Lu Bu 's Offensive ( " Tales " ) . Cao Cao 's generals then destroy the army of the alive Dong Zhuo piecemeal at Ji Province ( " Tales " ) , and he eradicates all of his foes . Cao Cao then chooses to go after Shu or Wu , depending on the result of the Chibi fire attack . 
 Cao Cao defends against Shu 's attacks , with Xiahou Yuan defeating Huang Zhong at Mt . <unk> in 218 AD after a failed prisoner exchange . Zhuge Liang then makes a new attempt to go north , appointing Ma Su as a subordinate , but Ma Su is encircled at <unk> in 229 AD and his army is decimated by Sima Yi , Cao Cao 's strategist . Cao Cao and Sima Yi then defeat Zhuge Liang at the <unk> Plains in 234 AD , defeating ( or killing , depending on order of conquest ) Liu Bei . If Wu has fallen first , Cao Cao proceeds to attack the Shu capital of Chengdu . He gets Wei Yan to defect to his forces and the Wei army seizes both Luo Castle and Chengdu from the Shu forces , and Liu Bei and his peasant militias are killed . 
 Wei strikes back against Wu , who have attacked them at Fan Castle . Cao Ren successfully defends the fortifications against Lu Meng , who fails to lay siege layers against the walls . At <unk> in 228 AD , Cao Xiu narrowly survives a defection ploy by Zhou Fang , with aid from Sima Yi , who destroys Lu Xun 's army . The final battle is at He Fei Castle , where the Wei general Zhang Liao defeats Sun Jian in a series of ambushes . If Shu has been defeated first , Wei will attack the capital at Jianye and every member of the Sun family is killed as the Three Kingdoms come to an end . 
 Cao Cao and his generals will then make a victory march into the capital , waved at by local peasants . 
 = = = Wu Story = = = 
 Dong Zhuo 's defeat has left him holed up in Luoyang , so Sun Jian and his army attack and defeat him in the city , finding the Imperial Seal in the process ( " Tales " ) . Sun Jian then leads his army home , but finds out that Liu Biao has taken over Jing Province , Yan <unk> , Wang Lang , and Liu Yong have conquered the Wu Territory , and Liu Xun has allied with Yuan Shu . At Xiangyang in 192 AD , Sun Jian falls into a trap in the castle but survives and defeats the attackers . His generals also kill off many of Liu Biao 's generals and defeat Yuan Shao 's reinforcements , and Liu Biao is defeated after interrogating why he invaded Jing . His son Sun Ce continues his conquest , and proceeds to conquer the Wu Territory from the regional lords ; Zhou Yu plans his campaign for the lands . With Wu secure , the Sun Family continues on to Mt . <unk> , where they attack <unk> and defeat the armies of Liu Xun and Yuan Shu in 198 AD . If only Liu Xun has been defeated , Sun Jian and his family will participate in a unification of Jing Province , securing all of the cities from the forces of Liu Biao and the three Wu lords . 
 With their home base secured , Wu looked to external threats . Huang Zu , who had formerly supported Liu Biao , prepared a pirate fleet to attack . Nanman king Meng Huo had shown signs of revolt in the south . In the north , Cao Cao prepared an armada to invade the south . Sun Ce and Zhou Yu defeated Huang Zu with a naval fire attack at Xiakou and convinced Gan Ning to join them , and Zhou Yu inflicted a decisive defeat on Meng Huo 's elephant troops in Nanman . To fix the problem with Cao Cao , Sun Jian allied with Liu Bei and defeated Cao Cao 's fleet at Chi Bi . 
 After Chi Bi , Wu continued their conquests . Depending on the result of the fire attack , they will either attack Wei or Shu . Before either , the Wu defeat Dong Zhuo and Meng Huo 's combined forces at Chang Jiang ( " Tales " ) . 
 The Wu secured Xiangyang , the Nan Territory , Jiangling , and Jing Province from Wei before Shu 's Zhuge Liang could , and also defeated Meng Huo for a second ( or third ) time in the south . Their final battle against Shu is at Yiling , where they use a fire attack to force Liu Bei to retreat to Bai Di Castle , where he is then defeated ( or killed ) . If Wei has fallen first , Wu will defeat the Shu at Chengdu and occupy the lands of Shu Han , killing their officers . 
 Wu then faces off with Wei , taking Fan Castle with siege engines . Lu Xun , a new strategists , then defeats Wei at <unk> with a defection ploy involving Zhou Fang . Their final victory at He Fei Castle gives them control of the region . If Shu has fallen first , the Wu will proceed to Xuchang and take it after a siege . 
 With the land in their hands , the Wu have a victory march into the capital city . 
 = = = Yuan Shao Story = = = 
 Yuan Shao , having humbled the Yellow Turbans and the army of Dong Zhuo , proceeded to attack his rival Cao Cao . After defeating Cao Cao at Guan Du , Yuan Shao destroys Wei and kills all of their generals . With the tyrant dead , he focuses on defeating Liu Bei and Sun Jian . He fights two campaigns against them , defeating Sun Jian at Hefei and Liu Bei in Xiapi . The two heroes ' deaths let him take control of the whole land . 
 = = = Nanman Story = = = 
 The Nanman are absent from both the Yellow Turban Campaign and the War against Dong Zhuo . Instead , they are living peacefully in the south , but are defeated several times by Shu invaders . King Meng Huo is infuriated , but his wife Zhu Rong <unk> him to send them back to their lands and destroy them . After a single battle for <unk> , Meng Huo forces Zhuge Liang 's army out of his home . 
 Meng Huo 's army marches northwards to attack Liu Bei . However , his army is swept down the <unk> and end up in the Kingdom of Wu , ruled by Sun Jian . The Nanman resolve to take Jianye from Wu , and Meng Huo kills every member of the Sun family in rapid succession . With Jianye down , Meng Huo proceeds to attack into Wei . He captures Xuchang and kills every Wei officer , although Sima Yi 's efforts to launch an attack on the Nanman supply depot cause temporary chaos . 
 Meng Huo and his Nanman army then march on Chengdu , the Shu capital . The Nanman troops are held back from the bridges by Zhang Bao and Guan Suo , who hold the Nanman back to defend the legacy of their fathers ( Zhang Fei and Guan Yu , respectively ) . Meng Huo kills the last of Shu 's generals and conquers the land . 
