 = = = Lu Bu Story = = = 
 Lu Bu fights for Dong Zhuo at the Battle of Si Shui Gate , fighting off invaders that are supposed to depose him . Lu Bu then defeats the Coalition at Hu Lao Gate , but they are not done for yet . Also , he finds that Dong Zhuo is truly a monster , and starts a revolt in Wan Castle and cuts him down . Now in charge of Dong Zhuo 's army , he defeats Cao Cao , Liu Bei , and Sun Jian in several campaigns , and takes over the land . 
 = = = Dong Zhuo Story = = = 
 Dong Zhuo learns that the Coalition of Yuan Shao has finally started to attack , and he defeats them at Si Shui Gate and Hu Lao Gate . Afterwards , he defeats Lu Bu , who is trying to revolt against him , and defeats the rebels . His final act is to destroy Cao Cao , Liu Bei , and Sun Jian at Guandu , Xiapi , and Hefei . He rides into the capital on a victory march , taking over the land . 
 = = = Yellow Turban Story = = = 
 Zhang Jiao , leader of the Yellow Turban Rebellion , finds out that the Han army has moved at last , and they are preparing to attack him . He defeats Sun Jian , Liu Bei , and Cao Cao in a series of campaigns at Hefei , Xiapi , and Guandu , respectively . He then defeats the Han at Xiapi Castle , held by Huangfu Song , and then defeats Zhu Jun at He Nan Yin . Finally , he defeats the Coalition ( including Dong Zhuo and Lu Bu ) in Ji Province , and the Han fall to his feet . His men enter the capital , as the Way of Peace have taken over the land . 
 = = Development = = 
 Due to the success of Dynasty Warriors 3 , Omega Force began development on the sequel , Dynasty Warriors 4 , and its expansions . The fourth game in the series was the first to introduce an Empires expansion , but it wasn ’ t designed by the same person who designed Dynasty Warriors 4 , Tomohiko Sho . Although he was not the designer for all of the Dynasty Warriors games he was involved in the production for them , usually as the planner . Omega Force works under Koei as an internal development team and have mainly concentrated on the Dynasty Warriors series and the Samurai Warriors series . Similarities have been pointed out between the two series , such as the Xtreme Legends and Empires expansions , as well as a similar voice cast that has been used throughout a number of the games from each series . Repeated voices between games include Beau Billingslea , Steven Jay Blum and Richard Epcar . 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 The Dynasty Warriors series has never used the musical style commonly made in the era that the games are set in . Dynasty Warriors 4 is no different and features a similar style of music to Dynasty Warriors 3 , using a mix of rock , metal , and heavy metal with undertones of traditional Chinese music . However , this does not detract from the fact that there are a large number of varied tracks throughout the game . The ending song of the game , " Cross Colors , " is performed by Yuki Koyanagi and the music was composed by Kazuhiro Hara . The song was performed in both Japanese and English by the same singer and was released for the US and Japanese versions of the game . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Before its main release , Dynasty Warriors 4 was already looking promising after GameSpot UK ’ s preview two months before the game was released . Although still very similar to previous titles in the series , the graphics engine had been tweaked and the gameplay been expanded , featuring more characters and stages . 
 After its release , it had high sales rates in Japan , selling over one million copies a short time after release . Its release in the US did not create as much hype as in Japan mainly because the market for the Dynasty Warriors series is smaller there , but it still sold fairly well and together with the Japanese sales , Dynasty Warriors 4 entered into the Greatest Hits charts . In its time Dynasty Warriors 4 has managed to become IGN 's 5th best co @-@ operative game on the PS2 as well . The game is criticized for being very similar to older games in the series and retaining some of the features such as the fogging and repetitive gameplay . Even with these drawbacks , Koei went on to release two expansions for Dynasty Warriors 4 Xtreme Legends and Dynasty Warriors 4 Empires . It had also been ported to the Xbox and to the PC as a Hyper edition . Armchair Empire commented that when there is a lot happening on screen at once , the game tended to slow down 
 The English voice acting for the series , commonly criticized as being poor , has remained in DW4 . The English voice @-@ overs of Dynasty Warriors series uses straightforward English pronunciations for the romanized pinyin names of characters and locations . The results tend to leave errors in the dialogue , with incorrect English pronunciations of originally Chinese text . 
 = = Versions and expansions = = 
 Dynasty Warriors 4 has had two expansions and a re @-@ release . The first was Dynasty Warriors 4 Xtreme Legends and added new gameplay options and modes . The second was Dynasty Warriors 4 Empires , which added a strategy mode of gameplay to the original . It has also been re @-@ released as Dynasty Warriors 4 Hyper ( 真 ・ <unk> , Shin Sangokumusou 3 Hyper ) in Japan . Hyper is a port of Dynasty Warriors 4 to Windows 2000 / Windows XP . 
 = = = Dynasty Warriors 4 : Xtreme Legends = = = 
 Dynasty Warriors 4 : Xtreme Legends ( 真 ・ 三國無双3 <unk> , Shin Sangokumusou 3 <unk> ) is a PlayStation 2 Dynasty Warriors 4 expansion developed by Omega Force and published by Koei . This expansion was released in the United States on November 4 , 2003 . <unk> , as it is sometimes abbreviated to , has slightly improved weather effects and character reflections within the overall graphics . The original DW4 game disc is needed if the player wishes to play external modes such as ' Musou <unk> 
 The expansion adds new difficulty levels ( ' Beginner ' and ' Expert ' ) and new modes of play ( ' Arena Challenge ' and ' Legend ' modes ) . In ' Arena Challenge Mode , ' the player can engage one @-@ on @-@ one duels against various opponents , where they 'll be rewarded if they win . The new ' Legend Mode ' elaborates on the individual prowess of each individual warrior within Dynasty Warriors . Individual weapons are given the availability to have an 11th evolved state , increasing the weapon 's stats further . Due to the great emphasis in the duelling system in this expansion , it is at times seen as its own individual game - separate from the original Dynasty Warriors 4 . 
 = = = Dynasty Warriors 4 : Empires = = = 
 Dynasty Warriors 4 : Empires ( 真 ・ 三國無双3 Empires ( Shin Sangokumusou 3 Empires ) in Japan ) is the second expansion of Dynasty Warriors 4 , released exclusively for the PlayStation 2 on August 31 , 2004 in the United States . The game adds a new strategy mode called ' Empire Mode ' which is based on the Romance of the Three Kingdoms series . However , the gameplay during attacking or defending against opposing forces is exactly the same as the original Dynasty Warriors 4 . The main goal in Empire Mode is to conquer the land in order to beat the game , by invading and conquering all areas and territories of China . In addition , the Japanese voices were added into the PS2 version of Dynasty Warriors 4 Empires for the American version . 
 In ' Empire Mode , ' the player can choose a ruler for their forces , along with two main generals . Three minor lieutenants can also be chosen for support . In battle , the capture of enemy officers is possible by lowering their morale and defeating them . If , at the end of the battle , the player is victorious , it is possible to hire the captured officer or , alternatively , release them . Before every battle , the player is given the choice of using ' Political Tactics , ' such as increasing or decreasing time limit of battles or preventing enemy reinforcements from arriving during battles . The player can also secure alliances with other forces ; these alliances can change how the game progresses , such as requesting reinforcements from the allied forces against opposing forces . However , these alliances only last for a set time decided by the tactic used . There 's also an ' Archives Mode ' that shows the motions and voices of the officers . A gallery of character artworks and game movies is also presented within the Archives Mode . 
 = = = Dynasty Warriors 4 : Hyper = = = 
 The PC version of the game hosts several exclusive features , such as improved graphics , higher resolution options , more characters onscreen , improved draw distance , optional Japanese dialogue , and improved enemy AI . However , it does not contain the additional content from Dynasty Warriors 4 : Xtreme Legends . 
 = Eilley Bowers = 
 Alison " Eilley " Oram Bowers ( September 6 , 1826 – October 27 , 1903 ) was a Scottish American woman who was , in her time , one of the richest women in the United States , and owner of the Bowers Mansion , one of the largest houses in the western United States . A farmer 's daughter , Bowers married as a teenager , and her husband converted to Mormonism before the couple immigrated to the United States . After briefly living in Nauvoo , Illinois , she became an early Nevada pioneer , farmer and miner , and was made a millionaire by the Comstock Lode mining boom . Married and divorced two times , she married a third time and became a mother of three children but outlived them all . 
 Following the deaths of her first 2 children in infancy then her husband , with the third child dying a few short years after , and with the collapse of the Nevada mining economy , Eilley Bowers became bankrupt and destitute . Eilley reinvented herself as " The Famous Washoe <unk> " , a professional <unk> and fortune @-@ teller in Nevada and California . Worth over $ 4 million at the height of the Nevada mining boom , she died penniless in a care home in Oakland , California . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Alison Oram ( sometimes spelled " <unk> " ) , commonly called Eilley , was born on September 6 , 1826 , in Forfar , Scotland . Her only brother John was born in 1821 , and it appears that her father ’ s work forced them to move frequently . John was born in Dunfermline and at some point during their childhood , they moved eighty miles southwest of Forfar to Clackmannan . It was here that she married Stephen Hunter in the Church of Scotland at the age of fifteen . Stephen soon met some Mormon missionaries and became a believer . He was baptized into the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints and agreed to immigrate to America . Eilley never converted but traveled with her husband . They sailed for America on January 29 , 1849 . By the time the Hunters reached Salt Lake City , the strain on their marriage was evident . After eight years of marriage , Bowers and Stephen separated in early 1850 . 
 = = Remarriage and settlement in Nevada = = 
 In 1853 , Bowers married farmer Alexander Cowan . Two years later the couple joined a mission to Mormon Station , near the western edge of Utah Territory . They brought with them Alexander 's 12 @-@ year @-@ old nephew who had recently been orphaned by the death of Alexander 's sister . The following year , the mission relocated to Washoe Valley in a settlement they named <unk> . The Cowans purchased 320 acres ( 130 ha ) of land for $ 100 ( approximately $ 2500 today ) . The existing ranch contained a dwelling house and coral . They stayed for two seasons . 
 During the crisis of the Utah War in 1857 , Brigham Young recalled Mormon colonists from the western areas of the proposed State of Deseret to the core area of Mormon settlement south of the Great Salt Lake . Alexander heeded the call , leaving his wife and son in Western Utah . With Alexander gone , Bowers and Robert left the abandoned settlement of <unk> for a small mining camp called Johntown in Gold Canyon near present @-@ day Virginia City , Nevada . Bowers opened a boardinghouse and began taking care of the miners . When the threat of war passed , Alexander returned to Western Utah and settled in Johntown , but he did not wish to pursue the life of a Washoe miner . In the fall of 1858 he returned to Salt Lake City where he remained a prominent member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints . Bowers and Robert remained in Johntown . 
 = = = Gold Hill and the Comstock Lode = = = 
 As prospectors began entering the area in large numbers , they soon settled in a new town they named Gold Hill . Bowers opened a new boardinghouse , but she was also buying and selling mining claims . At this time she was also known to engage in fortune @-@ telling using a traditional Scottish " peep stone " she had brought from Forfar . Henry de Groot recorded that on his arrival in August 1859 : 
 Mrs Ellen Cowan was living at Gold Hill in a very rude and comfortless sort of abode . She did the washing for the miners , a business that paid well at that day , and had gathered not a little gear prior to her marriage with Sandy . 
 Lemuel Sanford ( Sandy ) Bowers was one of the town ’ s new arrivals . Sandy was a Missouri <unk> ( teamster ) , born in Madison County , Illinois on February 24 , 1833 . Sandy owned many mining claims , but his most productive was a ten @-@ foot strip being part of the Little Gold Hill Mines . James Rogers owned the adjoining ten @-@ foot strip which he sold to Bowers for $ 100 . 
 On August 9 , 1859 , Eilley and Sandy joined their mining claims and lives when they were married in Gold Hill . In order to settle the land in Washoe Valley , Bowers officially divorced Alexander Cowan on June 4 , 1860 . As a settlement , she received half of the 320 @-@ acre farm they had owned in the Washoe Valley . 
 As the area boomed following the discovery of the Comstock Lode , the Bowers claim proved to hold one of the richest seams of silver ore in what would become Nevada , and because their claim was close to the surface , it was easily extracted without initial capital investment . The Bowers Mining Company quickly made Eilley and Sandy very wealthy . 
 = = = European tour and the Bowers Mansion = = = 
 On June 28 , 1860 Eilley Bowers gave birth to a son , John Jasper Bowers , who died on August 27 , 1860 . On June 16 , 1861 she gave birth to a daughter , Theresa <unk> Bowers , who died on September 17 , 1861 . With money to be had , the couple began to plan a grand mansion on the old Cowan Ranch in Washoe Valley . While the house was being built , the couple traveled through Europe to explore the old county and purchase furniture for the new house . 
 Shortly before their departure , the couple hosted a banquet at the International Hotel in Virginia City , to which the entire town was invited , and which included free champagne . After traveling to California , the Bowers sailed from San Francisco for England on May 2 , 1862 , aboard the steamer Golden Gate . The couple visited Eilley 's family in Scotland and traveled through Europe while purchasing large quantities of furniture . 
 The couple returned to Nevada in March 1863 , accompanied by a baby girl , named Margaret Persia Bowers . The Bowers never divulged where they had acquired the child . Some contemporary sources claimed she was born on their European crossing to an unwed mother who died during childbirth . 
 The Bowers Mansion was one of the most expensive buildings built in the western United States at the time . Designed by J. Neely Johnson , the former Governor of California , The two @-@ story dressed granite stone mansion consisted of 16 rooms constructed with Jeffery Pine and Douglas fir . The main floor included a library , guest room , reception room , formal parlor and adjoining smoking room , dining room , and kitchen . Four hand @-@ crafted carrara marble fireplaces warmed the downstairs room . A plaster of Paris frieze border decorated the ceilings , moldings and medallions above the chandeliers . The main entrance hall opened to a turned mahogany handrail and balcony , which led to the upstairs where Eilley , Sandy , and Persia each had a suite of rooms including a bedroom and sitting room . Expensive toys and fancy dolls filled Persia 's playroom . The extra upstairs room housed a hand @-@ sculptured billiard table used for the enjoyment and entertainment of their guests . Kerosene lanterns and candles lighted the beautiful mansion that was truly unlike any other in the West . 
 = = Economic hardship = = 
 The rich silver of the Comstock Lode began to play out in 1863 resulting in a deepening depression throughout 1864 . Sandy moved back to Gold Hill to help save the mine . With health failing , he attempted to sell or lease most of the Bowers mining operation in the spring of 1868 . At the age of 35 , Sandy died of Lung Disease on April 21 , 1868 at his Gold Hill residence . He was buried on the hill behind his Mansion . 
 In 1873 , Virginia City recovered with a new strike bringing wealth back to the region . Eilley Bowers opened the Bowers Mansion to the public as a resort . The grounds were advertised as being beneficial to health , while dances and social events were held in the mansion . Bowers improved the mansion and grounds by adding a dance hall and offering the upstairs suits for family use . With the extension of the railroad which now connected Virginia City to the young town of Reno and the Trans Continental Railroad , Bowers Mansion became a prime destination for grand excursions . Eilley spent many weekends hosting extravagant picnics . The guests bathed in the fishponds , swung under the trees , waltzed on the dance floor and generally just had a fine old time . For the next few years , Bowers Mansion was filled with music and laughter . 
 Meanwhile , Persia Bowers was sent to live with friends in Reno allowing her to go to school and learn music . On July 14 , 1874 Persia died of what may have been a ruptured appendix . She was buried behind the mansion with her father . 
 The resort brought in some money , but Bowers was still in debt . The Bowers Mine was sold to pay off creditors , and she entered into negotiations with the newly created State of Nevada for the state to purchase the mansion as a psychiatric hospital . Unfortunately for Bowers , the deal fell through , and she was obliged to begin to sell her possessions to settle debts . 
 Bowers made one final attempt to save the mansion when she hired construction crews and began renovating the mansion . This time she changed the entire structure by adding a third floor . The $ 8 @,@ 000 expansion included 14 rooms including 10 over the main house and two over each wing . However , this only increased her debt . 
 In April 1876 , the District Court of Washoe County finally ruled against Bowers and in favor of her creditors in the sum of $ <unk> State Journal April 9 , 1876 ( 3 : 2 ) On May 3 , 1876 , at 1 : 00 p.m. the courts auctioned off the <unk> of her properties in front of the Washoe county Courthouse . Eight years after Sandy 's death , Eilley lost everything to the founder of Reno , Myron C. Lake for $ 10 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = <unk> of Washoe = = = 
 Bankrupt and with no remaining family in the United States , Bowers set herself up as a fortune @-@ teller using her peep stone , billing herself as " Mrs L. S. Bowers , The Famous Washoe <unk> " . She enjoyed some success with her predictions , successfully predicting , among other things , the fire which destroyed much of Virginia City in 1875 . Due to the continued economic decline in northern Nevada following the collapse of the mining industry , in the 1880s she moved to San Francisco , where she continued to practice as a <unk> . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 In the late 19th century , Bowers returned to Nevada . Her hearing had diminished significantly , and she was forced to give up the scrying business as she was unable to hear the requests of her clients . She launched a claim against the government asking for financial assistance in return for the $ 14 @,@ 000 she and Sandy Bowers had donated to support the Union cause in the Civil War and to finance the 1860 Paiute War , but was ignored . Destitute , she was placed in the Washoe County poorhouse , and became the subject of a protracted legal dispute between the governments of Nevada and California over who was to pay for her care . In August 1901 it was agreed that California would take responsibility for her welfare , and she was summarily put on a San Francisco @-@ bound train by Reno officials with $ 30 cash . For the last two years of her life she lived at the King 's Daughters Home in Oakland , dying on October 27 , 1903 . Her ashes were returned to Nevada and buried alongside Sandy and Margaret at the Bowers Mansion . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Eilley Bowers continues to be one of the most famous of 19th @-@ century female pioneers , and a major figure in the early history of Nevada . In one writer 's words , she " is one of the most researched , written and talked about women in Nevada history . " 
 Following its sale at auction following foreclosure , the Bowers Mansion was abandoned . Eventually purchased by Reno saloon owner Henry <unk> , it was renovated and reopened as a resort in 1903 . The hot springs were remodeled to feed warm swimming pools , and a spur was built from the Virginia and Truckee Railroad to serve the property . It continued to operate as a resort until 1946 . It is now considered the finest example of the mansion houses built by the millionaire beneficiaries of the Comstock boom , is listed on the National Register of Historic Places , and is administered by the Washoe County Parks Department . 
 = Dusky crag martin = 
 The dusky crag martin ( Ptyonoprogne concolor ) is a small passerine bird in the swallow family . It is about 13 cm ( 5 in ) long with a broad body and wings , and a short square tail that has small white patches near the tips of most of its feathers . This martin has sooty @-@ brown upperparts and slightly paler underparts . The two subspecies are resident breeding birds in South Asia from the Indian subcontinent to southwestern China and the northern parts of Thailand , Vietnam and Laos . 
 This martin nests under a cliff overhang or on a man @-@ made structure , building a neat half @-@ cup mud nest with a soft lining . Both adults incubate the two to four eggs and feed the chicks . This species does not form large breeding colonies , but it is more gregarious outside the breeding season . It feeds a wide variety of insects that are caught as the martin flies near to cliff faces . It may be hunted by large bats as well as birds of prey , but its extensive and expanding range and large population mean that there are no significant conservation concerns . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The dusky crag martin was formally described by in 1832 as Hirundo concolor by British soldier and ornithologist William Henry Sykes . It was moved to the new genus Ptyonoprogne by German ornithologist Heinrich Gustav Reichenbach in 1850 . Its nearest relatives are the three other members of the genus , the rock martin P. fuligula , the pale crag martin , P. obsoleta , and the Eurasian crag martin P. rupestris . The genus name is derived from the Greek ptuon ( φτυον ) , " a fan " , referring to the shape of the opened tail , and Procne ( Πρόκνη ) , a mythological girl who was turned into a swallow . The specific concolor is from Latin , con " together " , and color " colour " and refers to the bird 's uniform colouration . 
 The four Ptyonoprogne species are members of the swallow family of birds , and are classed as members of the Hirundininae subfamily which comprises all swallows and martins except the very distinctive river martins . DNA studies suggest that there are three major groupings within the Hirundininae , broadly correlating with the type of nest built . The groups are the " core martins " including burrowing species like the sand martin , the " nest @-@ adopters " , which are birds like the tree swallow that utilise natural cavities , and the " mud nest builders " . The Ptyonoprogne species construct an open mud nest and therefore belong to the latter group ; Hirundo species also build open nests , Delichon house martins have a closed nest , and the Cecropis and Petrochelidon swallows have retort @-@ like closed nests with an entrance tunnel . 
 The genus Ptyonoprogne is closely related to the larger swallow genus Hirundo into which it is often subsumed , but a DNA analysis showed that an enlarged Hirundo genus should contain all the mud @-@ builder genera , including the Delichon house martins , a practice which few authorities follow . Although the nests of the Ptyonoprogne crag martins resembles those of typical Hirundo species like the barn swallow , the research showed that if Delichon , Cecropis and Petrochelidon are split from Hirundo , Ptyonoprogne should be also considered as a separate genus . 
 In Pakistan , the breeding range of the dusky crag martin overlaps that of the subspecies P. f. <unk> of pale crag martin , but that species breeds much higher in the mountains . This altitudinal separation means that it is not known whether the two closely related martins could hybridise , which would cast doubts as to whether they were distinct species . Dusky crag martins from Burma and Thailand have been described as a separate darker subspecies , P. c. sintaungensis ( originally <unk> concolor sintaungensis , Baker , 1832 ) , but it is not clear that the difference is greater than that between individual martins of the nominate subspecies . 
 = = Description = = 
 The dusky crag martin is 13 cm ( 5 in ) long with a broad body , wings and tail . It has sooty @-@ brown upperparts and slightly paler underparts , with a streaked pale dull rufous chin , throat and foreneck . The tail is short and square , with small white patches near the tips of all but the central and outermost pairs of feathers . The underwing coverts are dark brown , the eyes are brown , the small bill is mainly black , and the legs are brownish @-@ pink . The sexes are alike , but juveniles have rufous grey tips to the plumage of the upperparts and wings . This species can be distinguished from the Eurasian crag martin and rock martin by its darker underparts , and its white tail spots are significantly smaller than those of the Eurasian crag martin . The under @-@ tail coverts are of the same shade as the underside of the abdomen but these are darker in the Eurasian crag martin . 
 This small martin 's flight is typically slow and leisurely , but it is capable of considerable speed when required . The calls are similar to those of the Eurasian crag martin and include a soft chi , chi contact call and a twittering song . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The nominate subspecies of the dusky crag martin breeds in much of the Indian subcontinent from the base of the Himalayas south to the Nilgiri mountains and east to West Bengal , and P. c. sintaungensis is found in southwestern China , and the northern parts of Thailand , Vietnam and Laos . The dusky crag martin is largely resident apart from local movements after breeding , but it has bred in Malaysia at least once , and occurred as a vagrant to Sri Lanka and probably Borneo . 
 The natural breeding habitat is hilly or mountainous country with cliffs , gorges and caves , with nesting typically up to an altitude of about 1 @,@ 800 m ( 5 @,@ 900 ft ) , although up to 2 @,@ 000 m ( 6 @,@ 600 ft ) in Thailand . This martin also breeds in lowland areas utilising man @-@ made structures as a substitute for natural precipices . Stone buildings such as old forts are particularly favoured , and the dusky crag martin can be found in urban areas including Mumbai . Nests on buildings can be 30 m ( 98 ft ) from the ground , and include unusual sites such as light fittings . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 Dusky crag martin pairs typically nest alone , although in suitable locations several pairs may be quite close to each other . The natural nesting habitat is under ledges on cliff faces or river banks , but man @-@ made structures are readily used . Stone buildings such as old hill forts , mosques and tombs are preferred , and other artificial sites include bridges , archways and culverts . Breeding has been reported in every month , but mainly in February and March , and again after the rains start in July and August ; usually two broods are raised . The nest , built by both adults , is an open half @-@ cup made of mud and lined with soft material such as feathers or dry grass . It is constructed under an overhang or in a crevice on a cliff or man @-@ made structure , and is re @-@ used for the second brood and in subsequent years . The clutch is two to four eggs , white with reddish brown blotches particularly at the wide end , and averaging 17 @.@ 7 mm × 13 @.@ 0 mm ( 0 @.@ 70 in × 0 @.@ 51 in ) with a weight of 1 @.@ 57 g ( 0 @.@ 055 oz ) . Both adults incubate the eggs and feed the chicks . Incubation and nestling periods are unknown but assumed to be similar to those of the Eurasian crag martin ( 13 – 17 day to hatching , and 24 – 27 days to fledge ) . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 The dusky crag martin feeds mainly on insects caught in flight . When nesting , birds often fly back and forth near to a rock face or building hunting for their prey . This martin is more gregarious outside the breeding season , and may form small flocks where food is abundant . Vertical surfaces are preferred for hunting , and a study of the Eurasian crag martin , which has a similar foraging technique , showed that cliff faces generate standing waves in the airflow which concentrate insects near vertical areas . The martin exploits the area close to the cliff when it hunts , relying on its high manoeuvrability and ability to perform tight turns . When feeding young , foraging is concentrated on the profitable patches in the immediate vicinity of the nest , since there is a negative correlation between foraging distance and feeding rate . 
 = = Predators and parasites = = 
 In addition to predation by birds of prey such as the peregrine falcon , this small martin has been recorded in the diet of the greater false vampire bat , <unk> lyra . 
 = = Status = = 
 The total population of the dusky crag martin has not been quantified , but it is suspected to be increasing owing to the availability of artificial nest sites . This martin is locally common in India , Thailand , and southern China , and there appear to be range extensions to the northeast into Guangxi , southwards into lowland Laos , and westwards to the hills and plains of Sindh . There is also a recent unconfirmed report from Cambodia . Its large range and presumed high numbers mean that the dusky crag martin is not considered to be threatened , and it is classed as Least Concern on the IUCN Red List . 
 = Help Is on the Way = 
 " Help Is on the Way " is a song by American rock band Rise Against , featured on their sixth studio album Endgame ( 2011 ) . Inspired by lead vocalist Tim McIlrath 's visit to New Orleans , the song is about the slow response time for aid to disaster stricken areas . It incorporates elements of punk rock and melodic hardcore , with lyrics that allude to Hurricane Katrina and the Deepwater Horizon oil spill . " Help Is on the Way " premiered on KROQ @-@ FM on January 17 , 2011 , and was later released as Endgame 's lead single on January 25 . 
 " Help Is on the Way " polarized critics , with some praising its lyrics and song structure , while others criticized it for being bland and repetitive . Despite the mixed reception , it remains one of the band 's highest charting singles to date , becoming their first song to chart within the Billboard Hot 100 , where it peaked at eighty @-@ nine , as well as number two on the Hot Rock Songs chart . The accompanying music video depicts an African @-@ American family , as they attempt to escape increasing floodwater levels that engulf their neighborhood . 
 = = Recording and inspiration = = 
 " Help Is on the Way " was written by American rock band Rise Against , with lyrics by lead vocalist Tim McIlrath , and produced by Bill Stevenson and Jason Livermore . Stevenson and Livermore engineered the song alongside Andrew Berlin , while Chris Lord @-@ Alge served as the mixer . It was recorded at The Blasting Room in Fort Collins , Colorado and was mastered by Ted Jensen . Rise Against unveiled the song on the California radio @-@ station KROQ @-@ FM on January 17 , 2011 , before releasing it as Endgame 's lead single on January 25 . 
 McIlrath was inspired to write the lyrics for the song following a trip he took to New Orleans . While he had initially gone to discuss with local musicians how to merge politics and music , he was able to visit several areas affected by Hurricane Katrina and the subsequent flood , such as the Lower Ninth Ward . As McIlrath had felt that news outlets were quick to move onto other stories following the disaster , he compiled his thoughts and wrote the song 's lyrics . McIlrath also noted that he was critical of the United States government for its handling of various disasters , calling Hurricane Katrina " as much a man @-@ made disaster as it was a natural disaster " , while citing the lack of legislation to prevent another oil spill following the Deepwater Horizon oil spill in 2010 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Help Is on the Way " is a rock song containing elements of punk rock and melodic hardcore , and has been described as " anthemic " . According to the song 's sheet music , the composition is written in the time signature of common time , with a moderate tempo of 108 beats per minute . It follows verse @-@ chorus form , and is composed in the key G ♯ minor , with a melody that spans a tonal range of D ♯ 4 to B ♭ 5 . 
 Lyrically , " Help Is on the Way " is about the slow response time for aid to disaster stricken areas . While Genevieve Koski of The A.V. Club found that the lyrics could pertain to any difficult situation , the song primarily focuses on Hurricane Katrina and the Deepwater Horizon oil spill , as well as their affects on the Gulf Coast of the United States and New Orleans . McIlrath maintains clean vocals throughout the majority of the song , but temporarily switches to screaming vocals during the bridge . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Critics were polarized in their opinions when reviewing " Help Is on the Way " . Tim <unk> of Rock Sound described the piece as " impressively structured and equally furious " , while Evan Lucy of Billboard.biz thought it was " understated enough to capture radio attention and plenty explosive to please Rise Against 's devoted fan base " . Rob Parker of NME felt that " Help Is on the Way " and fellow Endgame track " This Is Letting Go " were able to " strike the perfect balance between punk fury and melodic accessibility without losing any of frontman Tim McIlrath ’ s personality " . Chad Grischow of IGN complimented the music , saying that " as powerful as the lyrical content of the song is , the storm of guitars rolling over it like a gristly , foreboding cloud kick you in the chest just as hard " . 
 Koski and Steven Hyden of The A.V. Club were divided in their opinions , with Koski praising the powerful lyrics , while Hyden belittled the song as " run @-@ of @-@ the @-@ mill " . Thomas Nassiff of AbsolutePunk wrote that " Help Is on the Way " was one of the weaker moments from the album , criticizing the intro guitar riff , while comparing the lyrics to those of another Rise Against song , " Re @-@ Education ( Through Labor ) " . Johnny Firecloud of CraveOnline was heavily critical of the song , stating that it " suffers from a blandness so paralyzing and repetitive " , and ultimately summarized it as " totally flaccid " . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 Commercially , " Help Is on the Way " remains one of Rise Against 's most successful singles to date . In the United States , it remains the band 's only song to reach the Billboard Hot 100 , where it peaked at eighty @-@ nine , as well as number two on the Hot Rock Songs chart . The single also achieved international success , reaching number ten on the Australia Hitseekers chart , number forty @-@ five on the Canadian Hot 100 , number four on the Czech Republic Modern Rock chart , and number nineteen on the UK Rock & Metal chart . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The accompanying music video was directed by Alan Ferguson and filmed in New Orleans . It follows an African @-@ American family as they 're forced to move into their house 's attic , and eventually their rooftop to escape the increasing floodwater levels caused by Hurricane Katrina . The video follows the song 's lyric thread , while real footage of Hurricane Katrina and the survivors are shown throughout . It ends with a message encouraging donations , and a link to the band 's activism website . 
 The video was released on March 23 , 2011 . It does not feature any band members , who opted not to appear in it , as they felt their presence would be <unk> to the video 's message . This decision was commended by critics , with Katie Hasty of HitFix stating that band " went for an artifact of truth " . 
 = = Personnel and credits = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Endgame . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Cyclone Helen ( 2008 ) = 
 Tropical Cyclone Helen was the first tropical cyclone to bring gale @-@ force winds to Darwin , Australia since 1985 . The fourth named storm of the 2007 – 08 Australian region cyclone season , Helen developed out of a weak area of low pressure in late December over the Top End region of Australia . Generally tracking westward , the system eventually intensified into a tropical cyclone and was given the name Helen on 2 January . By this time , it was situated over the Joseph Bonaparte Gulf and was beginning to retrograde eastward . Late on 4 January , the storm made landfall near Channel Point with winds of 95 km / h ( 60 mph ) though rapidly weakened to a tropical low within 12 hours . Gradually accelerating , the remnants of Helen moved over the Gulf of Carpentaria before striking land again on 6 January . The system was last noted over the Cape York Peninsula on 7 January . 
 From late December through 6 January , Helen and its precursor low produced significant rainfall over the Northern Territory , generally amounting between 100 and 200 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 and 7 @.@ 9 in ) . One person drowned in the Victoria River after his car was swept away in a flood . As a tropical cyclone , Helen produced significant wind gusts across the Top End , peaking at 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) , downing thousands of trees . In Darwin , roughly 15 @,@ 000 people were without power due to the storm , more than 100 of which remained so four days after the storm . Overall losses from the storm reached A $ 1 @.@ 3 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 1 million ) with an additional A $ 1 million ( US $ 882 @,@ 000 ) in cleanup costs . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 As early as autumn 2007 , long @-@ rage forecast models indicated that a La Niña would develop by December of that year . In general , this event results in increased sea surface temperatures near Australia . Following this , a strong Madden – Julian oscillation phase took shape , leading to the development of Tropical Cyclone Melanie off the coast of Western Australia and an area of low pressure over the Top End by 28 December . Situated over land , the system initially embedded within a disorganised trough and to intensify as it slowly tracked eastward . By 30 December , it separated itself from the trough and travelled towards the west . The following day , the interaction between the two systems allowed the low to significantly deepen , attaining a barometric pressure of 993 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 32 inHg ) . This strengthening was short @-@ lived as wind shear over the low increased , displacing convection from its centre . 
 By 2 January , the weak low moved over the Joseph Bonaparte Gulf where it slowly developed over the following day . Once over water , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) designated the system as Tropical Depression 09S . As organisation improved , a mid @-@ level subtropical ridge over Western Australia pushed the system westward , away from the Kimberley coast . Steadily strengthening , the low attained gale @-@ force winds near its centre during the morning of 4 January and was subsequently named Helen by the Bureau of Meteorology . Shortly thereafter , a strong westerly monsoon flow to the north caused Helen to turn eastward , back towards land . Intensification continued up until landfall , by which time Helen had attained Category 2 status on the Australian tropical cyclone intensity scale . Maximum ten @-@ minute sustained winds reached 95 km / h ( 60 mph ) and the storm 's barometric pressure decreased to 975 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 79 inHg ) . The JTWC assessed Helen to have been slightly weaker , with peak winds estimated at 85 km / h ( 50 mph ) . 
 Around 10 : 00 pm local time on 4 January , the centre of Tropical Cyclone Helen made landfall near Channel Point . As it moved ashore , the storm developed an eye ; however , this feature began breaking apart once overland and the eyewall merged into the system 's feeder bands . Roughly 12 hours after landfall , Helen weakened to a tropical low before moving over the Gulf of Carpentaria late on 5 January . Due to an increase in forward motion , the system was unable to regenerate sufficient convection to be reclassified a tropical cyclone before making a second landfall along the Cape York Peninsula . Once overland again , the remnants of Helen abruptly slowed and were last noted on 7 January in the same region . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Starting in late December , widespread rains produced by the precursor to Helen prompted the issuance of flood warnings throughout the Top End region . Prior to the arrival of Cyclone Helen on 4 January , the Bureau of Meteorology issued cyclone warnings for areas between the Mitchell Plateau , in Western Australia , to Cape Hotham in the Northern Territory . According to local officials , flooding was the greatest concern from the storm rather than wind damage . The warning area was later condensed to encompass areas from <unk> to Cape Hotham , including Darwin and the Tiwi Islands . By 6 January , warnings were issued for the western coast of the Cape York Peninsula between Karumba and Weipa as the remnants of Helen were forecast to regain storm intensity . 
 In light of Helen 's approach in the Top End region , the Compass Resources mining company suspended construction of a new mine in Batchelor . Mining at the Ranger Uranium Mine maintained by Energy Resources of Australia was also suspended until the storm passed . The George Brown Darwin Botanic Gardens and Territory Wildlife Park were also closed for the duration of the storm . Residents in the Aboriginal community of <unk> were strongly advised to take precautions for the storm . Following the issuance of a cyclone warning in Darwin , local shelters were opened to the public . At the Darwin International Airport , all incoming and outgoing flights through Jetstar Airways were cancelled while Tiger Airways rescheduled their flights and no changes were made by Qantas . Darwin Harbour was mostly shut down as seas became too rough to sail in . Schools and day cares within a 50 km ( 31 mi ) radius of the city were closed on 4 January . 
 = = Impact and aftermath = = 
 Throughout the Top End region , the precursor to Helen resulted in a prolonged period of moderate rains over a relatively large area . These rains caused the Victoria River to swell over its banks and flood nearby areas . On 4 January , a car with three people was swept away by the river ; two of the passengers managed to escape and swim to shore , but the third person remained trapped . Aerial searches were made later that day for him , though he was later declared dead . After becoming a tropical cyclone , the storm produced additional moderate to heavy rainfall , generally totaling between 100 and 200 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 and 7 @.@ 9 in ) . Between 1 and 6 January , a total of 174 @.@ 6 mm ( 6 @.@ 87 in ) of rain fell in Darwin . These rains affected two additional major rivers in the area : the Adelaide and Katherine rivers . Near where the storm made landfall , wind gusts up to 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) were recorded ; Darwin recorded a maximum wind gust of 102 km / h ( 63 mph ) as Helen moved by the city . 
 Near Channel Point , the cyclone brought a storm surge of 2 to 3 m ( 6 @.@ 6 to 9 @.@ 8 ft ) , barely surpassing the highest astronomical tide in a few areas . In some cases , waves over topped sand dunes but no damage took place . Roughly 10 @-@ 15 % of trees in open areas were snapped or uprooted by high winds . Only two structures sustained direct wind damage while several others were struck by downed trees . Damage was more widespread in Darwin where roughly 15 @,@ 000 homes , 60 % of the city 's residences , were left without power . Approximately 1 @,@ 500 trees were downed in the city , falling on roads , homes and power lines . In the days following the storm 's passage , the Adelaide and Katherine rivers continued to rise , of which the former exceeded minor flood levels . In the harbour , seven vessels washed ashore , each sustaining minor damage . Losses caused by the storm was placed at A $ 1 @.@ 3 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 1 million ) . 
 The day after Helen passed through , cleanup efforts began as power crews had to remove downed trees before fixing power lines . The main power lines in the city were restored within 24 hours and rural areas were stated to have their power back within a day or two . Two days after the storm , 500 homes remained without electricity and frustrated residents were further angered after discovering that the Power and Water agency was in control of tree removal and not emergency services . With the power company in charge of clearing downed trees , they stated that their crews would only be dealing with cases involved power lines . Residents with trees in their yards or even on their homes were told to contact private contractors to remove them . By 9 January , more than 100 homes were still without power in northern Darwin , resulting in angry outcries from those still left in the dark . Cleanup efforts dragged on for more than two months as debris was still present in Darwin in March . Removal of tree stumps took through at least mid @-@ April as the cost to remove downed trees exceeded A $ 1 million ( US $ 882 @,@ 000 ) . Due to the damage wrought by Helen , its name was retired following its usage . However , it was not replaced by any particular name as a new naming scheme was implemented the following season . 
 = Landscape painting in Scotland = 
 Landscape painting in Scotland includes all forms of painting of landscapes in Scotland since its origins in the sixteenth century to the present day . The earliest examples of Scottish landscape painting are in the tradition of Scottish house decoration that arose in the sixteenth century . Often said to be the earliest surviving painted landscape created in Scotland is a depiction by the Flemish artist Alexander <unk> undertaken for Charles I. 
 The capriccios of Italian and Dutch landscapes undertaken as house decoration by James Norie and his sons in the eighteenth century brought the influence of French artists such as Claude Lorrain and Nicolas Poussin . Students of the Nories included Jacob More whose produced Claudian @-@ inspired landscapes . This period saw a shift in attitudes to the Highlands and mountain landscapes to interpreting them as aesthetically pleasing exemplars of nature . Watercolours were pioneered in Scotland by Paul Sandby and Alexander Runciman . Alexander Nasmyth has been described as " the founder of the Scottish landscape tradition " , and produced both urban landscapes and rural scenes that combine Claudian principles of an ideal landscape with the reality of Scottish topography . His students included major landscape painters of the early nineteenth century such as Andrew Wilson , the watercolourist Hugh William Williams , John Thompson of Duddingston and probably the artists that would be most directly influenced by Nasmyth , John Knox . In the Victorian era , the tradition of Highland landscape painting was continued by figures such as Horatio McCulloch , Joseph Farquharson and William McTaggart , described as the " Scottish Impressionist " . The fashion for coastal painting in the later nineteenth century led to the establishment of artist colonies in places such as Pittenweem and Crail . 
 The first significant group of Scottish artists to emerge in the twentieth century were the Scottish Colourists in the 1920s . They were John Duncan Fergusson , Francis Cadell , Samuel Peploe and Leslie Hunter , who placed an emphasis on colour above form . The group of artists connected with Edinburgh , most of whom had studied at Edinburgh College of Art during or soon after the First World War , became known as the Edinburgh School . They were influenced by French painters and the St. Ives School and their art was characterised by use of vivid and often non @-@ naturalistic colour and the use of bold technique above form . Members included William Gillies , John Maxwell , William Crozier and William MacTaggart . William Johnstone was one of the artists most closely associated with the Scottish Renaissance , an attempt to introduce modernism into art and to create a distinctive national art . Stanley Cursiter was influenced by the Celtic revival , post @-@ impressionism and Futurism . Later in his career he became a major painter of the coastline of this native Orkney . Other artists strongly influenced by modernism included James McIntosh Patrick and Edward Baird , both of whom were influenced by surrealism and the work of Bruegel . 
 In the post @-@ war period the English @-@ born Joan Eardley explored the landscapes of the Kincardineshire coast and created depictions of Glasgow tenements and children in the streets . Scottish artists that continued the tradition of landscape painting and joined the new generation of modernist artists of the highly influential St Ives School were Wilhelmina Barns @-@ Graham and Margaret Mellis . Husband and wife Tom MacDonald and Bet Low with William Senior formed the Clyde Group , aimed at promoting political art and producing industrial landscapes . John Bellany focused on the coastal communities of his birth . The coastal theme would also be pursued by artists such as Elizabeth Ogilvy , Joyce W. Cairns and Ian Stephen . 
 = = Origins to the eighteenth century = = 
 The earliest examples of Scottish landscape painting are in the tradition of Scottish house decoration for burgesses , lairds and lords , that arose after the Reformation in the sixteenth century , partly as a response to the loss of religious patronage . Most were of heraldry , classical myths and allegory , but there were a number of painted landscape scenes . These included the landscapes of four seasons in the <unk> Aisle ( 1638 ) in the memorial chapel of the Montgomery family in Largs undertaken by James Stalker ( fl . 1632 – 38 ) . They indicate an awareness of contemporaneous Dutch landscape painting . The Flemish artist Alexander <unk> ( 1600 – 52 ) was active in England and Scotland where he undertook commissions for Charles I , mainly of royal castles in Northern England and Scotland . These included one showing Seton House ( 1636 – 37 ) in its landscape , which is often said to be the earliest surviving painted landscape created in Scotland . The theme of house decoration with landscapes was taken up in the eighteenth century by James Norie ( 1684 – 1757 ) , who worked beside the architect William Adam ( 1689 – 1748 ) . Norie , with his sons James ( 1711 – 36 ) and Robert ( d . 1766 ) , painted the houses of the peerage with capriccios or pastiches of Italian and Dutch landscapes , bringing to Scotland the influence of French artists such as Claude Lorrain and Nicolas Poussin . The Nories were also important figures in professionalisation of Scottish art and the development of art education . 
 Probably a student of the Nories was Charles Steuart ( fl . 1762 – 90 ) , who produced a series of Perthshire landscapes for the Duke of Atholl at Blair Castle , including The Black Lynn , Fall on the Brann ( 1766 ) . Also among the students of the Nories was Jacob More , who moved to Italy from 1773 and is chiefly known as a landscape painter who created Claudian @-@ style , classically inspired landscapes . More 's series of four paintings " Falls of Clyde " ( 1771 – 73 ) , produced before his departure to Italy , have been described by art historian Duncan Macmillan as treating the waterfalls as " a kind of natural national monument " and has been seen as an early work in developing a romantic sensibility to the Scottish landscape . This period saw a shift in attitudes to the Highlands and mountain landscapes in general , from viewing them as hostile , empty regions occupied by a backwards and marginal people , to interpreting them as aesthetically pleasing exemplars of nature , occupied by rugged primitives , which were now depicted in a dramatic fashion . Highly influential in this process was the Scottish philosopher Archibald Alison 's Nature and Principles of Taste ( 1790 ) , which widened the forms of landscape seen as appropriate for painting , placing an emphasis on their historical significance and emotional impact on the painter . 
 Paul Sandby ( 1731 – 1809 ) , often considered the " father of British watercolour painting " , visited Scotland as part of the military survey that followed the 1745 Jacobite rebellion and undertook a number of studies of Scottish scenes . His abandonment of traditional pen and ink drawing , using washes of colour in order to paint directly in watercolours without pen outlines , opened the way for the creation of powerful Romantic landscapes . Alexander Runciman ( 1736 – 1785 ) was probably the first artist to paint Scottish landscapes in watercolours in the more romantic style that was emerging towards the end of the eighteenth century . 
 Alexander Nasmyth ( 1758 – 1840 ) trained in the Trustees Academy in Edinburgh under Runciman . He visited Italy , where he met with More , and worked in London , but returned to his native Edinburgh for most of his career . He produced work in a large range of forms , including his portrait of Romantic poet Robert Burns , which depicts him against a dramatic Scottish background , but he is chiefly remembered for his landscapes and is described in the Oxford Dictionary of Art as " the founder of the Scottish landscape tradition " . He produced both urban landscapes , like Edinburgh from Caton Hill ( 1825 ) , which put Edinburgh its geological context , and rural scenes such as Castle Huntly and The Tay ( c . 1800 ) . His works combined Claudian principles of an ideal landscape with the reality of Scottish topography . 
 = = Nineteenth century = = 
 Nasmyth was also a highly influential teacher at the Trustee 's Academy in Edinburgh . Among his students were painters who took the landscape tradition into the nineteenth century . They included Andrew Wilson ( 1780 – 1840 ) , who would become Master of the Academy in 1818 , the watercolourist Hugh William Williams ( 1773 – 1829 ) , clergyman and artist John Thompson of Duddingston ( 1778 – 1840 ) and probably the artist that would be most directly influenced by Nasmyth , John Knox ( 1778 – 1845 ) . Williams ' most famous work are interpretive versions of Greek landscapes , based on sketches taken on his travels there , among them The Temple of Poseidon , Cape Sunium ( 1828 ) . His close friend John Thompson focused on a dark dramatic version of Scottish landscape , as in his most famous work Fast Castle from Below ( 1824 ) . Knox directly linked Nasmyth 's style with the Romantic literature of Walter Scott . Knox 's Landscape with Tourists at Lock Katrine ( c . 1820 ) , was a commentary on the tourist trade that grew up in the Trossachs in the aftermath of the publication of Scott 's poem The Lady of the Lake in 1810 . He was also among the first artists to take a major interest in depicting the urban landscape of Glasgow . Towards the end of his career he undertook panoramic works of the views from the top of Ben Lomond , which played a part in opening up the Highlands as a spectacle that would be taken up by artists in the second half of the century . 
 In the Victorian era , the tradition of Highland landscape painting was continued by figures such as Horatio McCulloch ( 1806 – 67 ) , Joseph Farquharson ( 1846 – 1935 ) and William McTaggart ( 1835 – 1910 ) . McCulloch was a student of Knox . His images of places including Glen Coe , Loch Lomond and the Trossachs , became parlour room panoramas that defined popular images of Scotland . This was helped by the Queen 's declared affection for Scotland , signified by her adoption of Balmoral as a royal retreat . The wildlife around Balmoral was immortalised by English painter Edwin Landseer ( 1802 – 73 ) in the much copied Monarch of the Glen ( 1851 ) . In this period a Scottish " grand tour " developed with large number of English artists , including Turner , flocking to the Highlands to paint and draw . From the 1870s Farquharson was a major figure in interpreting Scottish landscapes , specialising in snowscapes and sheep , and using a mobile heated studio in order to capture the conditions from life . In the same period McTaggart emerged as the leading Scottish landscape painter . He has been compared with John Constable and described as the " Scottish Impressionist " , with free brushwork often depicting stormy seas and moving clouds . The fashion for coastal painting in the later nineteenth century led to the establishment of artist colonies in places such as Pittenweem and Crail in Fife , <unk> in the Borders , Cambuskenneth near Stirling on the River Forth and Kirkudbright in Dumfries and Galloway . The Glasgow Boys emerged in the 1880s , rejecting much of the sentimentality of Scottish landscape painting and introducing elements of impressionism . Key figures included W. Y. Macgregor ( 1855 – 1923 ) , James Guthrie ( 1859 – 1930 ) , John Lavery ( 1856 – 1941 ) , George Henry ( 1858 – 1943 ) and E. A. Walton ( 1860 – 1922 ) . 
 = = Twentieth century to today = = 
 The first significant group of Scottish artists to emerge in the twentieth century were the Scottish Colourists in the 1920s . The name was later given to four artists who knew each other and exhibited together , but did not form a cohesive group . All had spent time in France between 1900 and 1914 and all looked for inspiration to Paris , particularly to the Fauvists , such as Monet , Matisse and Cézanne , whose techniques they combined with the painting traditions of Scotland . They were John Duncan Fergusson ( 1874 – 1961 ) , Francis Cadell ( 1883 – 1937 ) , Samuel Peploe ( 1871 – 1935 ) and Leslie Hunter ( 1877 – 1931 ) . They have been described as the first Scottish modern artists and were the major mechanism by which post @-@ impressionism reached Scotland . From 1912 Cadell visited Iona annually to paint and he was joined there by Peploe from 1920 . They produced a number of works using the west @-@ coast light and Iona landscape , particularly views of Ben More , which both painted several times . John Duncan , the arts and crafts artist , was still active in the early twentieth century and painted several landscapes similar in style to those of Cadell and Peploe . Hunter used a vibrant palette to create notable paintings of the landscape around Balloch on Loch Lomond . Leading architect Charles Rennie Mackintosh ( 1868 – 1928 ) abandoned architecture for painting after World War I and created a number of landscapes , particularly of southern France . He became associated with Fergusson , who pursued also experimental landscape in the inter @-@ war years , many of which were around his home in the Highlands , like that at <unk> ( c . 1925 ) . The work of Mackintosh and Fergusson has similarities to that of David Young Cameron ( 1865 – 1945 ) who pursued the systematic painting of the Highlands in his later years . 
 The group of artists connected with Edinburgh , most of whom had studied at Edinburgh College of Art during or soon after the First World War , became known as the Edinburgh School . They were influenced by French painters and the St. Ives School and their art was characterised by use of vivid and often non @-@ naturalistic colour and the use of bold technique above form . Members included William Gillies ( 1898 – 1973 ) , who worked in both watercolours and oils around Ardnamurchan and Morar in the 1930s , John Maxwell ( 1905 – 62 ) whose landscapes were influenced by mythological themes , William Crozier ( 1893 – 1930 ) , whose landscapes were created with glowing colours and William MacTaggart ( 1903 – 81 ) , grandson of the nineteenth @-@ century artist , noted for his landscapes of East Lothian , France and Norway . His Celebration of Earth , Air , Fire and Water ( 1978 ) utilised the Borders ' landscape in abstract form . 
 William Johnstone ( 1897 – 1981 ) was one of the artists most closely associated with the Scottish Renaissance , an attempt to introduce modernism into art and to create a distinctive national art . He studied cubism , surrealism and was introduced to new American art by his wife the sculptor Flora Macdonald . He moved towards abstraction , attempting to utilise aspects of landscape , poetry and Celtic art . His most significant work , A Point in Time ( 1929 – 38 ) , has been described by art historian Duncan Macmillan as " one of the most important Scottish pictures of the century and one of the most remarkable pictures by any British painter in the period " . Stanley Cursiter ( 1887 – 1976 ) was influenced by the Celtic revival , post @-@ impressionism and Futurism . Later in his career he became a major painter of the coastline of this native Orkney . Other artists strongly influenced by modernism included James McIntosh Patrick ( 1907 – 98 ) and Edward Baird ( 1904 – 49 ) . Both trained in Glasgow , but spent most of their careers in and around their respective native cities of Dundee and Montrose . Both were influenced by surrealism and the work of Bruegel and focused on landscape , as can be seen in McIntosh Patrick 's Traquair House ( 1938 ) and more overtly in Baird 's The Birth of Venus ( 1934 ) . 
 In the post @-@ war period the English @-@ born Joan Eardley ( 1921 – 63 ) moved to Glasgow , where she was a graduate of the Glasgow School of Art and explored the landscapes of the Kincardineshire coast and created depictions of Glasgow tenements and children in the streets . Scottish artists that continued the tradition of landscape painting and joined the new generation of modernist artists of the highly influential St Ives School were Wilhelmina Barns @-@ Graham ( 1912 – 2004 ) and Margaret Mellis ( 1914 – 2009 ) . Polish realist Josef Herman ( 1911 – 2000 ) was resident in Glasgow between 1940 and 1943 where he influenced husband and wife Tom MacDonald ( 1914 – 1985 ) and Bet Low ( born 1924 ) , who with painter William Senior ( born 1927 ) formed the Clyde Group , aimed at promoting political art . Their work included industrial and urban landscapes such as MacDonald 's Transport Depot ( 1944 – 45 ) and Bet Low 's <unk> Steelworks ( c . 1946 ) . John Bellany ( born 1942 ) , mainly focusing on the coastal communities of his birth , labelled " Scottish realism " , was among the leading Scottish intellectuals from the 1960s . Landscape has remained a major form in Scottish painting in the work of artists such as James Morrison ( born 1932 ) , Ian MacKenzie Smith ( born 1935 ) , Duncan Shanks ( born 1937 ) and Barbara Rae ( born 1943 ) . The coastal theme would also be pursued by artists such as Elizabeth Ogilvy ( born 1946 ) , Joyce W. Cairns ( born 1947 ) and Ian Stephen ( born 1955 ) . 
 = 70th Infantry Division ( United Kingdom ) = 
 The 70th Infantry Division was an infantry division of the British Army that fought during the Western Desert Campaign of the Second World War . What would become the 70th Division originated with the 7th Infantry Division , which was formed in 1938 to serve in the British Mandate of Palestine during the Arab Revolt . This division then transferred to Egypt on the outbreak of the Second World War and soon became the 6th Infantry Division , which went on to take part in the Battle of Crete and the Syria – Lebanon Campaign . On 10 October 1941 , the 6th Division was re @-@ created as the 70th Infantry Division , in an attempt to deceive Axis intelligence concerning the strength of the British military in the Middle East . 
 The Royal Navy transported the division to Tobruk from 19 September to 25 October , in a politically controversial move to relieve the mainly Australian garrison which had been defending the port for almost seven months , since the beginning of the Siege of Tobruk . Under daily aerial and artillery attacks , the division defended the port and conducted nightly offensive patrols against German and Italian positions . On 18 November , the British Eighth Army launched Operation Crusader . The division was tasked with breaking out of Tobruk , following the destruction of the Axis armoured forces . Following unexpected early success , the division began its attacks on 21 November , before the armoured formations of Germans and Italians had been defeated . Heavy fighting soon followed as the division captured several well @-@ defended and dug @-@ in German and Italian strong points . The looming threat of the Axis tanks ended the break @-@ out offensive the following day . Renewed fighting on 26 November saw the division link up with the approaching New Zealand Division , cutting the Axis lines of communication . In response , the Germans launched several counter @-@ attacks to throw back the 70th Division from the territory they had gained . The failure of these attacks had a lasting strategic impact on Operation Crusader ; the Axis forces began their retreat and lifted the siege of Tobruk . Two men — from units attached to the division — were awarded the Victoria Cross for their actions during Operation Crusader . 
 Following the fighting at Tobruk , the division was withdrawn from the front and placed in reserve . When Japan entered the war , the division was transferred to India . It was considered the most experienced and best trained British formation available in Asia . In India , the division formed a reserve to counter possible Japanese landings while it trained in jungle warfare . It also served as a police force , protecting railways and being used to suppress civil disobedience caused by the Quit India Movement . While it was requested that the division be sent to the front line in Burma , it was instead transferred to Special Force , commonly known as the Chindits . Such a move was opposed by the highest military commanders in India and Burma , and proved controversial with the troops themselves . Despite their pleas , the division was broken up and officially ceased to exist on 24 November 1943 . Historian Woodburn Kirby and Lieutenant @-@ General William Slim ( who led the British troops in Burma ) believed that the division could have had a greater impact against the Japanese had it been retained as a single formation . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Arab Revolt in Palestine = = = 
 During 1936 , the Arab Revolt broke out in the British Mandate of Palestine . British troops were dispatched , ending the first phase of the war by the close of the year . Fighting soon resumed and reached its zenith during the summer of 1938 . With rising tensions in Europe , the British began to withdraw troops from Palestine for use elsewhere . The conclusion of the Munich Agreement — on 30 September 1938 — calmed the rising tensions in Europe and averted war , allowing the British to resume their military build @-@ up in Palestine . 
 The 7th Infantry Division was formed the following month and placed under the command of Major @-@ General Richard O 'Connor . The division was deployed to Palestine on internal security duties as part of a build @-@ up of 18 @,@ 500 men in the region . This force then began to suppress the revolt . Meanwhile , Palestinian guerrillas had overrun the Old City of Jerusalem . O 'Connor 's men proceeded to sweep the area , declaring the Old City free of militants on 19 October . The same day , the division seized Acre and by the end of the month were clearing Jaffa of rebels . Many Palestinians were detained and rebel activity significantly dropped off in the area . In the north , the 8th Infantry Division , under Major @-@ General Bernard Montgomery , and Special Night Squads engaged in counter @-@ terror operations , with O 'Connor writing that one brigadier " always encouraged his men to be brutal " . General Officer Commanding British Forces in Palestine and Trans @-@ Jordan Robert Haining wrote in late 1938 that " unnecessary violence , vindictiveness ... , [ and ] killing in cold blood " had to be curbed . O 'Connor was likewise opposed to the measures in the north , and wrote " harshness and unnecessary violence on the part of our soldiers " had to be curbed . During the operation in Jerusalem , only four to nineteen guerrillas were killed . In early 1939 , the revolt finally came to an end . 
 = = = Second World War = = = 
 On 1 September 1939 , the Second World War began with the German Invasion of Poland , and two days later the United Kingdom declared war on Germany . On 31 August , the headquarters of the 7th Infantry Division gave up command of its troops . O 'Connor and the divisional staff then left Jerusalem bound for Cairo , Egypt . From Cairo , the men moved forward to Mersa Matruh arriving on 7 September . The headquarters was then assigned all troops based there , with the exception of the 7th Armoured Division . The British Official Historian , I. S. O. Playfair , comments that this decision was undertaken to relieve the burden on Lieutenant @-@ General Henry Maitland Wilson , GOC British Troops Egypt , of " direct control of operations which had been his in addition to the command of all troops in Egypt " . Due to the logistical problems in maintaining substantial forces across the Western Desert and on the Libya – Egypt border , Mersa Matruh was the forward British base of operations and supplied by rail . Positioned 200 miles ( 320 km ) west of Alexandria and 120 miles ( 190 km ) from the border , the location had been chosen to shield forward Royal Air Force ( RAF ) landing strips behind it and to defend the Nile Delta . Mersa Matruh also offered the British the strategy of drawing Italian or other forces forward to them , to allow a counter @-@ attack after they ran into supply difficulties . 
 On 3 November , the division was renamed the 6th Infantry Division . The division initially commanded rear area personnel and the 22nd Infantry Brigade . Over the coming months , the 14th and 16th Infantry Brigades were assigned to the division as they arrived in Egypt from Palestine . On 10 June 1940 , Italy declared war upon Britain and her allies . Seven days later , the 6th Infantry Division was dissolved and its headquarters transformed into the command staff of a corps known as the Western Desert Force ( WDF ) . In early September 1940 , Italian forces based in Libya invaded Egypt . Three months later , the WDF began a limited raid , Operation Compass . The raid succeeded and was expanded ; in two months the WDF advanced 500 miles ( 800 km ) , occupied the Italian province of Cyrenaica and destroyed the Italian 10th Army . The operation was halted in February 1941 to give priority to the Battle of Greece . 
 On 17 February 1941 , the 6th Infantry Division was reformed in Egypt . It was initially made up of the 16th and the 22nd Guards Brigade , who were based in Egypt , but lacked artillery or other supporting arms . The 22nd Guards Brigade was soon withdrawn , and the division was assigned the 14th and 23rd Infantry Brigade . Here , the division trained for amphibious operations in the Dodecanese . The deteriorating situation in North Africa , which saw General Erwin Rommel 's Afrika Korps retake the territory lost by the Italians during Operation Compass , resulted in the 6th Infantry Division being reassigned to defend Egypt . The division had been earmarked to deploy to Crete , where the 14th Brigade had been based since November , but instead took up defensive positions at Mersa Matruh . The 14th Brigade later defended the airfield at Heraklion during the Battle of Crete when 2 @,@ 000 German paratroopers landed in the area on 20 May . The Germans were able to penetrate into Heraklion , before Anglo @-@ Greek forces cleared the town following heavy fighting . Despite many losses , the paratroopers were able to dig @-@ in on ridges around the brigade 's positions . Due to the deteriorating situation on Crete , the 14th Brigade was evacuated by Royal Navy ships on 29 May . En route to Egypt , they were repeatedly bombed by the Luftwaffe , suffering 800 casualties . 
 By late April , British attention had shifted to the Middle East due to the Anglo @-@ Iraqi War , although the situation was resolved by the end of May . A greater concern was that German and Italian forces had intervened in Iraq , using bases in Vichy Syria . With Germans and Italians threatening to gain full control of the French territory , thus jeopardising the British position in the Middle East , the Allies invaded Syria ( Operation Exporter ) on 8 June . In the face of stiff resistance from the Vichy French , the British realised that reinforcements were needed . On 13 June , the 6th Infantry Division ( with two infantry brigades ) was ordered to reinforce the effort . The leading elements of the 16th Infantry Brigade arrived on 17 June and captured Kuneitra . The 23rd Infantry Brigade arrived on 28 June . The division then took part in the Battle of Damascus . The campaign ended on 14 July and the division remained in Syria . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 = = = Tobruk = = = 
 Operation Sonnenblume , the counter @-@ attack launched by Italian troops and the Afrika Korps across Cyrenaica , had forced the British and Commonwealth forces into retreat during March and April . Richard O 'Connor — now General Officer Commanding British Troops Egypt — had been captured . The Australian 9th Infantry Division fell back to the fortress port of Tobruk and the remaining British and Commonwealth forces withdrew a further 100 miles ( 160 km ) east to Sollum on the Libyan – Egyptian border . 
 These moves initiated the Siege of Tobruk . Although isolated by land , the garrison was supplied by the Royal Navy and the first Axis attacks failed to take the port . This failure was significant ; Erwin Rommel 's front line positions at Sollum were at the end of an extended supply chain that stretched back to Tripoli and was threatened by the Tobruk garrison . <unk> Tobruk also required a substantial commitment of troops and prevented Rommel from making further advances into Egypt . By maintaining possession of Tobruk , the Allies regained the initiative . 
 Australian policy for the use of the Second Australian Imperial Force ( 2AIF ) was to have all forces concentrated in an Australian Corps , under Australian command . By June , Australian troops were dispersed throughout the Middle East , Cyprus and North Africa . The subject had been of concern to the Australian Government since 18 April . The issue came to a head on 18 July , when Lieutenant @-@ General Thomas Blamey ( commander of the 2AIF , and deputy commander Middle East Command ) wrote a letter to General Claude Auchinleck , the new commander of all forces in North Africa and the Middle East , stating " the agreed policy for the employment of Australian troops between the British and Australian Governments is that the ... troops should operate as a single force . " Blamey also highlighted that the troops in Tobruk were showing a decline in health due to the siege and that the attrition rate they were suffering would result in " considerable " casualties , if they were not replaced by fresh troops . This caused a diplomatic row between Winston Churchill and the Australian Government that continued after the war , and turned what Graham Freudenberg called a " reasonable request in July " into " a risky one in October " . 
 The relief of the garrison and replacement with fresh troops were finally agreed . The first stage saw the 1st Polish Carpathian Brigade replace the 18th Australian Infantry Brigade . Next came the 6th Infantry Division 's 16th Infantry Brigade , during late September , with elements of the 32nd Army Tank Brigade , in lieu of the 24th Australian Infantry Brigade . On 10 October , for security reasons and in an attempt to confuse Axis intelligence as to when the division was fully redeployed , the 6th Infantry Division was renamed the 70th Infantry Division . Major @-@ General Ronald Scobie was given command . 
 The final stage of the relief effort took place between 12 and 25 October . The remaining elements of the 70th Division were transported into Tobruk and the remaining Australian garrison ( save the 2 / 13th Battalion and elements of the 2 / 15th Battalion ) were shipped out . In total , the relief effort evacuated 47 @,@ 280 men ( including prisoners ) and brought in 34 @,@ 113 men ; it also brought the garrison 's armour strength to 126 tanks . On 22 October , the 32nd Army Tank Brigade was attached to the 70th Division . With the relief effort over , command of the garrison was given to Scobie . Investing Tobruk were some German infantry and the Italian 27th Infantry Division Brescia , 25th Infantry Division Bologna , 17th Infantry Division Pavia , and 102nd Motorised Division Trento . 
 Prior to their withdrawal , the Australians briefed the incoming British troops . The men of the division then took over from the Australians and settled into their task of defending Tobruk , with what the Black Watch Regiment described as a sense that it was " the main post of honour open to the British fighting man . " The soldiers ' lives were uncomfortable : fresh water was scarce , washing was a luxury and done in sea @-@ water , razor blades were in short supply , meals were basic and sand storms were common . The troops were engaged in a dull routine : daily artillery bombardments by both sides , Axis air raids every night on Tobruk harbour , and for the infantry , nightly patrols . These patrols , described by the Black Watch as " pure 1914 – 18 warfare " , varied from reconnaissance missions — to identify what was located at a certain position — to capturing enemy soldiers and large scale trench raids on enemy positions . Auchinleck and Rommel had planned offensive operations simultaneously . The latter sought to capture Tobruk , aiming to launch an assault during the period of 20 November – 4 December , whereas Auchinleck planned to relieve Tobruk with a slightly earlier start date . 
 = = = Operation Crusader = = = 
 Auchinleck planned for XXX Corps ( under Lieutenant @-@ General Willoughby Norrie ) , containing the British armour , to advance around the undefended southern Axis flank , south of Sidi Omar , before moving towards Tobruk and engaging the German and Italian armoured units in battle . Once the Axis armour was defeated , the British force would attack towards Tobruk aiming to capture Sidi Rezegh , while the garrison broke out aiming to capture Ed Duda , cutting the enemy lines of communication . On 18 November , the Eighth Army began the offensive . Rommel , believing the attack was an attempt to hinder his own plans to assault Tobruk , did little to counter the British offensive . This led to the capture of Sidi Rezegh and the suggestion that the 70th Division should begin its attack on 21 November , before the Axis armour had been defeated . The plan to break out of Tobruk had been well rehearsed ; the 2nd Battalion , York and Lancaster Regiment , 2nd Black Watch , 2nd King 's Own Royal Regiment ( Lancaster ) and 2nd Queen 's Royal Regiment ( West Surrey ) would lead the attack with tanks of the 32nd Army Tank Brigade in close support . 
 Under cover of dark the men moved forward , creating gaps in the barbed wire and minefields in front of their positions and bridging Tobruk 's anti @-@ tank ditch . At 06 : 30 , on 21 November , the division began its attack on the positions of the Bologna Division and the German 90th Light Division ( although the latter had not been expected ) . The Axis positions were well dug @-@ in , behind mines and barbed wire , supported by machine guns and artillery . The first position , codenamed " Butch " , was captured by 09 : 00 , shortly followed by " Jill " , but two attempts to capture " Tugun " were repulsed by the Italian defenders . The mix of Italian and German troops holding " Tiger " offered up the most resistance of the day . The supporting Matilda tanks ran into undetected minefields and were engaged periodically by Axis anti @-@ tank guns . The Black Watch , under flanking fire from other Axis strong points and being fired upon directly by the defenders of " Tiger " , led a bayonet charge to the sound of bagpipes and captured the position , in conjunction with elements of the 1st Royal Tank Regiment ( 1 RTR ) and the 4th Royal Tank Regiment ( 4 RTR ) . The Black Watch suffered 75 per cent casualties , being reduced to 165 men . 
 Despite the losses , the Black Watch launched another attack to capture " Jack " . Major <unk> , the commanding officer of the German sector under attack , was positioned there and reported nine more British tanks lost to mines . Minutes after his report , at 10 : 30 , the Black Watch overran the strong point . 1 RTR proceeded to overwhelm " Wolf " , but were repulsed by anti @-@ tank fire when they attempted to attack " Freddie " . During the afternoon , a further attack was launched that captured half of " Tugun " , but further progress was impeded by Italian artillery fire . The planned final thrust , to seize Ed Duda , was called off , due to the changing situation to the south . By the end of the day , a salient 4 @,@ 000 yards ( 3 @,@ 700 m ) deep and wide had been created , 550 German and 527 Italian soldiers had been captured , and 59 tanks of the 32nd Army Tank Brigade had been lost , of which half were repaired . The war diary of the German 90th Light Division described the day 's actions as " very serious " concluding " that the next day ' would probably bring a crisis ' " . 
 The following day the division improved its position . Strong point " Lion " , to the south west of " Tiger " , was captured , but an attempt to capture the remaining sections of " Tugun " was repelled . As a result of the fighting , the division began to face a shortage of ammunition for its artillery . Due to the tank battle raging to the south , Scobie was ordered not to make a further advance . The author of the Official History of New Zealand in the Second World War 1939 – 45 , W. E. Murphy , highlights that the fighting by the British armour and 70th Division had created much " confusion in the enemy camp " and that , had the 32nd Army Tank Brigade attempted , it " could certainly have got to Ed Duda " and in doing so would have thwarted the German plans , greatly aiding the beleaguered 7th Armoured Division . 
 To the south , having temporarily defeated the British armour , Rommel launched the Afrika Korps and the Italian mobile divisions towards Egypt in the " Dash to the Wire " . He sought to relieve the besieged Italian garrisons along the border , cut the British supply lines and inflict an overwhelming defeat upon the Eighth Army . Despite causing panic amongst rear echelon troops , the attack was weak and ran into difficulties against prepared positions . The 2nd New Zealand Division had advanced around the Italian border defences and on 24 November began an advance towards Tobruk . By the next day , the division had reached Zaafran and retaken the much @-@ contested Sidi Rezegh airfield . 
 From these positions , the New Zealanders were ordered to capture Belhamed , Sidi Rezegh proper and Ed Duda . This was to precede a renewed break @-@ out offensive by the 70th Division . Scobie had informed Lieutenant @-@ General Alfred Godwin @-@ Austen , the XIII Corps commander , responsible for all operations near Tobruk , that the positions between him and Ed Duda were strongly defended . Godwin @-@ Austen assured Scobie that he was under no obligation to attack until the New Zealand Division had taken Ed Duda . Undertaking a night assault , the New Zealand infantry captured Belhamed despite strong resistance , but their attacks to take their other objectives were repulsed . 
 Aware that Ed Duda was still in Axis hands and that the New Zealand Division had bogged down attempting to advance upon the feature and was caught up in heavy fighting , Scobie ordered his men to capture Ed Duda . The 1st Essex Regiment , with machine gun support from the Royal Northumberland Fusiliers and the 32nd Army Tank Brigade , began their attack just after midday on 26 November . Axis artillery fire damaged two tanks before they crossed the start line but the remaining 4 @.@ 5 miles ( 7 @.@ 2 km ) was covered without incident . The 4 RTR were able to silence several Axis gun positions , and were joined by Z Company of the Royal Northumberland Fusiliers , who helped eliminate a further position . Following the fighting , the Essex were ordered to join the tanks . 
 The 1st Essex now advanced on Ed Duda , which was not a fortified position as previously faced by the division . An artillery bombardment and the approaching British troops persuaded the defending Italian platoon to surrender . By 15 : 00 , Ed Duda was in British hands and the Essex began digging in to consolidate their position . Following the capture of the position , several Axis counterattacks were launched . Three German tanks inflicted heavy casualties upon a British detachment in front of the main Essex position , before being driven off . Two infantry companies advanced towards the Essex and " were badly shot up in their lorries at a range of some 200 yards . " In following engagements , the Essex took upwards of 110 prisoners . By the end of the day , the position was secure for the loss of only 65 casualties . That evening , the New Zealanders renewed their attacks and succeeded in linking with the 70th Division and cutting the Axis lines of communication . 
 On 27 November , Rommel abandoned his attack and ordered the Afrika Korps and accompanying Italians to return to the Tobruk area . It was not until 29 November that the Axis armour launched its attack upon the 70th and New Zealand divisions . Around 50 tanks of the 15th Panzer Division advanced on the 1st Essex and were engaged by anti @-@ tank guns and a handful of British infantry tanks . Several British tanks were hit and the rest retired . The anti @-@ tank guns of the Essex were silenced , and 300 German soldiers from II Battalion , Infantry Regiment 115 advanced . Two companies of the Essex were overrun , with 150 men captured . As darkness fell , British and German tanks again clashed before the former withdrew . Under the cover of night , the Australian 2 / 13th Battalion was ordered to counter @-@ attack along with the remnants of 4 RTR ( eleven tanks in total ) . Elements of the Essex battalion spontaneously joined the assault , retaking the lost ground and capturing 167 prisoners for the loss of around 25 men . Less than 60 German troops were able to retreat to friendly units . 
 Axis attention now concentrated upon the New Zealand Division ; after the recent fighting , the division , less 4 @,@ 500 men who joined the 70th Division , withdrew towards the frontier in need of rest , refitting and re @-@ organization ; the 70th Division was again cut off . On 1 December , Godwin @-@ Austen was concerned about the exposed British position at Ed Duda , as were the staff of 70th Division , who believed the area had become untenable . Infantry had reinforced the captured ground , the 14th Infantry Brigade holding a line from Ed Duda to roughly 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) to the north @-@ east . The Essex were still dug in at Ed Duda , with the 19th New Zealand Battalion to their north @-@ east , then the 4th Border Regiment , the 18th New Zealand Battalion to their east and the 1st Bedfordshire and Hertfordshire Regiment to their north at Bir ( Magen ) Belhamed and the captured Axis strong point known as " Leopard " . The commanding officer of the 1st Essex reported that the position was well prepared and he was confident of repelling any assault . Scobie sent word stating " Well done , I admire your spirit " . 
 For several days , the 70th Division was bombarded , and on 1 December an uncoordinated attack by the German 90th Division was repulsed by the 18th New Zealand Battalion . The following day , a larger attack was launched upon the 1st Bedfordshire and Hertfordshire Regiment . This attack was also repulsed inflicting heavy losses on one of the German battalions . On 4 December , elements of the 21st Panzer Division , supported by an ad hoc formation of 500 German infantry and Italian engineers and artillery support from the 90th Light Division , launched an assault on Ed Duda . This attack was met by the Essex , 4th Borders , 18th New Zealanders and elements of the 32nd Army Tank Brigade . The German attack was defeated and the 4th Borders , supported by tanks , counter @-@ attacked taking 1 @,@ 000 yards ( 910 m ) of ground , for the loss of fifteen tanks . 
 The 70th Division had been planning another attack to capture El Adem but the battle made these plans redundant . The inability of the Germans and Italians to defeat the 70th Division and push the unit back inside Tobruk had strategic consequences . Rommel had come to the conclusion that his troops could not maintain the siege due to being overstretched , and decided to withdraw all of the troops he could to the east of Tobruk . The 70th Division initially joined other Eighth Army formations in advancing west in pursuit , but by 12 December it had returned to Tobruk . Over the course of December , Operation Crusader continued and the Axis forces retreated to El Agheila before fighting ceased . The 70th Division was withdrawn to Egypt for rest and refitting . Due to a lack of transport , the move took until mid @-@ January . By the end of the month , the division had returned to Syria to camp near Damascus . 
 = = = India and disbandment = = = 
 During the night of 7 / 8 December 1941 , one hour prior to the Attack on Pearl Harbor , the Empire of Japan entered the war with the Japanese invasion of Malaya . Four hours following the strike on Pearl Harbor , the Battle of Hong Kong was launched ; the city surrendered on Christmas Day . On 15 January 1942 , the Japanese attack was expanded as their troops invaded Burma . Then , on 15 February , Singapore fell . During February , the 70th Division began moving back to Egypt . On 17 February the order was given for the division to be transferred to India . The next day , Major @-@ General George Symes was given command of the division . They boarded ships at Suez , and had completely departed Egypt by 28 February . The division , without the 16th Brigade , reached Bombay on 10 March . With a Japanese invasion of British Ceylon expected , the 16th Brigade was sent in as reinforcements , arriving on 15 March . It remained until 1943 , when it rejoined the division . In June 1942 , the 70th Division was located near Ranchi ; along with the 50th Indian Armoured Brigade , it formed part of the Eastern Army reserve . The division was seen as a well @-@ trained formation and along with the 23rd Indian Infantry Division formed a mobile reserve against a Japanese landing or advance through Arakan in Burma . At Ranchi , the division also engaged in jungle warfare training . 
 In August 1942 , Mahatma Gandhi 's Quit India Movement resulted in civil disobedience spreading across Bihar , Orissa and Bengal . The division was deployed throughout these areas , suppressing the disturbances and protecting the railways of Bihar . After civil power was restored in the affected areas , the 70th Division was concentrated again at Ranchi and resumed training as part of XV Indian Corps . The corps commander , Lieutenant @-@ General William Slim , wrote in his memoirs that the 70th Division " was one of the best British formations I have met , with a magnificent battle hardened spirit gained in the Middle East " . 
 A member of the division , writing in May 1943 , commented that it would not be 
 ... enough for us to rest on our Middle East laurels [ despite them being ] " well deserved " ... those days should only be regarded as a starting point in efficiency for only 100 % trained <unk> ... will defeat the Japanese in Arakan or in any other theatre of operations . 
 In April 1943 , Slim requested that the 70th Division be released from Eastern Army reserve to relieve other units on the Arakan front , but elements of the division were only slowly redeployed . The 23rd Infantry Brigade arrived in the Arakan area in May . As of June , the remainder of the division was still part of the army reserve . 
 On 14 February 1943 , Brigadier Orde Wingate launched Operation <unk> . This operation saw the 77th Indian Infantry Brigade operate behind the Japanese lines , supplied via air drops , ambushing Japanese troops and destroying rail lines . The force returned to Allied lines during April , having lost nearly a third of its troops ; most of the remainder , as described by historian Christopher Chant , were " crippled by exhaustion , malnutrition , dysentery , and malaria . " Despite this , the operation was deemed a success . In August 1943 , Wingate ( now a major @-@ general ) was sent to attend the Quebec Conference . Churchill and the Americans were so impressed by Wingate that Special Force , commonly known as the Chindits , were ordered to be expanded . Under this expansion , the 70th Division would be broken up and its units transferred to Special Force . 
 Auchinleck , now Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , India , strongly opposed such a move preferring to retain the division as an entity . Instead , he proposed that the newly arrived 81st ( West Africa ) Division could be used in its place . Despite his arguments and the end of the division 's availability for operations against the Japanese @-@ occupied Ramree Island , he was over @-@ ruled by Churchill 's backing of Wingate . On 6 September , the division began reorganising for long @-@ range penetration . It had been estimated that 10 percent of the men would be unsuitable but this had been based on an erroneous report given in London ( believed to be from Wingate ) that the division was not first class , even though the standard of its infantry was high . 
 On 25 October , the division was broken up and all troops were transferred to Special Force . Symes , despite his seniority , became Wingate 's second @-@ in @-@ command and tried to prevent the further break @-@ up of the divisional units to retain the traditions , histories and esprit de corps of the British Army 's regimental structure , which reconciled his men and helped to ensure a smooth transition to Special Force . Having ceased to exist , the 70th Division was officially disbanded on 24 November . 
 The British Official Historian , Stanley Kirby , wrote that the best @-@ trained and most @-@ experienced British division had been broken up to reinforce Special Force , which eventually absorbed one @-@ sixth of the infantry in South East Asia Command . He judged that had the division been retained , it could have reinforced the Fourteenth Army , making the defence of Imphal and Kohima in 1944 easier . Historian F. W. Perry wrote , " it is difficult to avoid the conclusion that the results achieved by the force did not represent an adequate return for the resources invested " . He further argued that the force was too lightly armed to capture strongly held positions or to hold one if captured , and concluded that Special Force " inflicted more damage and disruption on the British Army than it ever did on the Japanese . " Similarly , Slim argued in his memoirs that it had been a mistake to break up the 70th Division as it was the only British division which had been trained in jungle warfare , and that it would have been twice as effective as an experienced conventional formation than it proved to be as part of Special Force . 
 = = General officer commanding = = 
 Commanders included : 
 = = Order of Battle = = 
 = Rhode Island Route 403 = 
 Route 403 , also known as the Quonset Freeway , is a numbered state highway located in Washington County and Kent County , Rhode Island , United States . The route is a nominally east – west limited @-@ access freeway for its entire length . A spur of Rhode Island Route 4 , Route 403 serves Davisville and the Quonset Business Park , providing freeway access to Interstate 95 and the northern Providence metropolitan area from the industrial zone . The western terminus of the freeway is at a trumpet interchange with Route 4 in East Greenwich . The route has three unnumbered interchanges along its 4 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 7 @.@ 2 km ) length , including a junction with U.S. Route 1 in North Kingstown , before terminating at an at @-@ grade intersection with Roger Williams Way and Commerce Park Road in Quonset . Route 403 is the highest numbered route in Rhode Island . 
 Prior to 2006 , Route 403 was a narrow , two @-@ lane road through Davisville . The western terminus of the route was at an interchange with Route 4 and Rhode Island Route 402 in East Greenwich , and the eastern terminus was at U.S. Route 1 in North Kingstown . In order to accommodate increasingly heavy commercial and commuter traffic to and from the Quonset Business Park , the Rhode Island Department of Transportation constructed the Quonset Freeway as an upgraded Route 403 . The relocation of the route began in 2000 and was constructed in two phases ; Phase 1 , a freeway from Quonset to Davisville , opened in June 2006 . Phase 2 of the relocation project , which connected the freeway with Route 4 , was completed one year ahead of schedule in December 2008 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Original Route 403 = = = 
 Prior to 2006 , Route 403 was a narrow , two @-@ lane road running for 2 @.@ 4 miles ( 3 @.@ 9 km ) through Davisville , Rhode Island . The road , a spur route of Route 4 , connected to Rhode Island Route 402 and Route 4 at its western terminus , and was accessible only from Route 4 southbound . Its eastern terminus was at a grade @-@ separated interchange with U.S. 1 . The nominally east – west route followed a northwestern – southeastern route for most of its length . Route 403 was signed on two local roads , Davisville Road and Devil 's Foot Road , in the towns of East Greenwich and North Kingstown . 
 Route 403 's original western terminus was at a complex interchange with Routes 4 and 402 in East Greenwich . Both Routes 402 and 403 were accessible from Exit 7 on Route 4 southbound ; there was no access to either route from the northbound lanes of Route 4 . After the Exit 7 ramp , Route 403 eastbound crossed over Route 4 and began to head in southeastern direction along Davisville Road . Shortly after its western terminus , Route 403 crossed the Hunt River into Washington County and Davisville , a village in the town of North Kingstown . After intersecting Old Baptist Road , a local route that connects to Route 102 , Route 403 began to follow Devil 's Foot Road , continuing on its southeastern trajectory . The route crossed Amtrak 's Northeast Corridor rail line before turning to head in an almost due east direction , entering the Quonset Business Park . Shortly after passing Devil 's Foot Rock , a <unk> attributed to the Devil in colonial times , Route 403 passed under U.S. Route 1 ( Post Road ) and intersected two US 1 access ramps , Davisville Road , and Quonset Road ; the latter two roads headed into the business park toward Quonset State Airport and the Quonset container port . Although the mainline of the road continued eastbound as Quonset Road ( now Roger Williams Way ) , Route 403 officially terminated at the intersection with the US 1 access ramps . 
 Since the completion of the Quonset Freeway in 2008 and the full relocation of Route 403 , the old route on Davisville Road and Devil 's Foot Road has been unnumbered . Some portions of the road are signed " To RI 403 , " but there is no indication that RIDOT plans to designate the old route as Rhode Island Route <unk> . Route 403 's previous alignment was largely unchanged during the construction of the Quonset Freeway ; only the interchanges with Routes 4 and 402 in East Greenwich and with US 1 in North Kingstown were altered significantly . 
 = = = Quonset Freeway = = = 
 The Quonset Freeway begins in East Greenwich at Exit 7 of Route 4 ; southbound , the exit is numbered 7B , as Exit 7A serves Route 402 . Unlike Route 402 , which is accessible only via Route 4 southbound , Route 403 is accessible from the northbound lanes of Route 4 via the newly constructed Exit 7 . Like the original Route 403 , the nominally east – west freeway follows a northeastern – southwestern route for much of its length . Shortly after beginning at Route 4 , Route 403 crosses over Route 402 and the Hunt River on a single @-@ span bridge , entering the town of North Kingstown . The relocation of Route 403 removed access to Route 402 ; the freeway now travels over Frenchtown Road without an interchange . While there is no direct link between the two routes , motorists traveling westbound on Route 403 can take the exit for Route 4 south and then access Route 402 from Exit 7A off Route 4 . 
 Route 403 continues in a southeastern direction before crossing over Amtrak 's Northeast Corridor rail line . The freeway begins to closely parallel the railroad before crossing under Devil 's Foot Road , the original Route 403 , and entering the village of Davisville . Shortly after the overpass , Route 403 turns to head almost due east . The freeway has its first interchange with West Davisville Road ; the exit is accessible only from eastbound Route 403 , and serves the villages of Davisville and <unk> . Closely paralleling Devil 's Foot Road , Route 403 continues eastward before interchanging with U.S. Route 1 ( Post Road ) and Davisville Road ; the two roads are served via a single exit . Westbound Route 403 has no direct interchange with either US 1 or Davisville Road ; the route 's first westbound exit in Quonset is signed as " To US 1 , " and connects to Post Road via Gate Road , a commercial outlet in Quonset . 
 Shortly after the interchange with US 1 , Route 403 begins to head in a southwestern direction . After 4 @.@ 5 miles ( 7 @.@ 2 km ) miles , Route 403 terminates at a traffic signal with Commerce Park Road , a commercial route that heads north into the business park . The mainline of Route 403 continues eastward as Roger Williams Way ( formerly Quonset Road ) , a four @-@ lane , undivided road that leads to Quonset State Airport . 
 = = History = = 
 The original Route 403 that existed prior to 2006 was numbered in 1973 as a spur route of the newly constructed Route 4 . The two @-@ lane , undivided state highway was the main access road to Davisville and Quonset Point from Route 4 . Quonset was home to Naval Air Station Quonset Point , a major U.S. naval base , until 1974 . After the closure of the base , the Quonset Point region of North Kingstown was converted into an industrial zone and commercial district by the state of Rhode Island ; a container port and the Quonset State Airport were also opened for commercial use . 
 By the 1980s , more than 12 @,@ 000 cars were using Route 403 daily to access the business park ; the Rhode Island Department of Transportation ( RIDOT ) estimated that this vehicle volume would exceed 25 @,@ 000 by 2005 . This high vehicle capacity would be dangerous because of Route 403 's sharp curves and low speed limit in Davisville . The narrow route through a densely populated region was particularly unsuitable for the high volume of commercial trucks that used it to access Route 4 from the Quonset Business Park and container port . RIDOT began studies on improving the route in 1987 , exploring both the widening of the existing route to a four @-@ lane , undivided highway and the construction of a freeway as options . The proposal to widen the existing road was ultimately dropped , as it would less effective at relieving congestion in the region and would require significant demolition of existing structures in Davisville . A freeway alternative to be constructed north of the existing route with more direct access to Route 4 and an eastward expansion beyond US 1 into the Quonset Business Park was selected instead . 
 = = = Construction of the Quonset Freeway = = = 
 Construction of " Phase 1 " of the four @-@ lane , limited @-@ access Quonset Freeway began in 2000 with excavation of the route and right @-@ of @-@ way acquisition ; the project required the demolition of 13 structures , five commercial and eight residential . Phase 1 included an extension of the highway into the Quonset Business Park and the construction of several overpasses in Quonset , an exit ramp to Gate Road , a full interchange with U.S. Route 1 in North Kingstown , and a partial diamond interchange with West Davisville Road in Davisville . During Phase 1 's construction , traffic was maintained on the existing Route 403 ( Devil 's Foot Road ) ; the only major alteration to the route was the setting of a new eastern terminus of the road at US 1 , as the previous terminus was demolished to allow for the construction of the freeway . Phase 1 cost $ 70 million to complete and was opened to traffic on June 22 , 2006 . The new freeway was posted with a speed limit of 45 miles per hour ( 72 km / h ) . 
 From 2006 until 2008 , while Phase 2 of the relocated Route 403 was constructed , traffic on the newly completed freeway from Quonset to Davisville was <unk> onto Davisville Road ( the original route alignment ) , which continued on to the existing terminus at Routes 4 and 402 . Traffic was diverted onto the original route alignment after the West Davisville Road interchange , passing over the Amtrak rail tracks via the existing Devil 's Foot Road overpass bridge . 
 Construction of the $ 100 million @-@ Phase 2 of the Quonset Freeway began in 2004 and continued until 2008 . The project included the construction of new bridges over the Northeast Corridor rail line , Route 402 , and Route 4 . The existing Route 403 bridge over Route 4 was also demolished as a part of Phase 2 . The freeway and ramps from Route 403 west to Route 4 north and from Route 4 south to Route 403 east opened on October 23 , 2008 . The route was posted with a speed limit of 50 miles per hour ( 80 km / h ) . The final portion of Phase 2 , ramps from Route 403 west to Route 4 south and from Route 4 north to Route 403 east , opened in December 2008 . As part of the construction of a trumpet interchange with Route 4 in East Greenwich , a new northbound Exit 7 on Route 4 was completed ; the original Route 403 was accessible only from Route 4 southbound . All major construction on the freeway was completed in December 2008 , one year ahead of schedule ; minor projects continued on the relocated route until early 2009 . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 All exits are unnumbered . 
 = Sega Meganet = 
 Sega Meganet , also known as the Net Work System , was an online service for the Mega Drive in Japan and later Brazil . Utilizing dial @-@ up Internet access , Meganet was Sega 's first online multiplayer gaming service , and functioned on a pay to play basis . The system functioned through the use of a peripheral called the Mega Modem and offered several unique titles that could be downloaded , and a few could be played competitively with friends . In addition , it shared technology and equipment with more serious services such as the Mega Anser , used for banking purposes . Though the system was announced for North America under the rebranded name " Tele @-@ Genesis " , it was never released for that region . Ultimately , the Meganet service would be short @-@ lived , lasting approximately a year before it was discontinued , but would serve as a precursor to the Sega Channel and XBAND services , as well as a predecessor to online gaming services for video game consoles . Retrospective feedback praises the attempt by Sega to introduce online gaming , but criticizes the service for its logistical issues and lack of titles . 
 = = History = = 
 Sega 's 16 @-@ bit console , the Sega Genesis ( known as Mega Drive in most areas outside of North America ) was released in Japan on October 29 , 1988 , though the launch was overshadowed by Nintendo 's release of Super Mario Bros. 3 a week earlier . Positive coverage from magazines Famitsu and Beep ! helped to establish a following , but Sega only managed to ship 400 @,@ 000 units in the first year . In order to draw a larger audience , Sega began work on an Internet service , similar to what Nintendo had attempted with the Famicom Tsushin for the NES . 
 Released in Japan on November 3 , 1990 , at a cost of JP ¥ 12 @,@ 800 ( approximately US $ 100 ) for the equipment , as well as an additional ¥ 800 monthly , access began to the Meganet service by way of the Mega Modem , a peripheral which attaches to the rear EXT 9 @-@ pin port on the rear of the console . From the modem , a cable runs to a dual @-@ port connector , which connects into a telephone line . The Mega Modem also came packaged with a cartridge which allowed for access to the Meganet game library , and approximately six titles were available at launch . It was capable of connection speeds of up to <unk> / s . Though the service had also been advertised in North America under the name " Tele @-@ Genesis " in publications such as Electronic Gaming Monthly , it was never released for the region . 
 As another way of attempting to expand the audience for the Mega Drive in Japan , Sega introduced the Mega Anser , a system designed for use with Nagoya Bank in Japan , in 1990 . Packaged as an all @-@ in @-@ one system including a Mega Drive , Mega Modem , Mega Anser cartridge and keypad , the system allowed for transactions such as balance inquiries , transfers , and loan information . It initially retailed at a cost of JP ¥ 34 @,@ 000 including the home console , and a version with an additional printer retailed for ¥ 72 @,@ 800 . 
 Due to the system 's low number of titles , prohibitively high price , and the Mega Drive 's lack of success in Japan , the Meganet system proved to be a commercial failure . By 1992 , the Mega Modem peripheral could be found in bargain bins at a reduced price , and a remodeled version of the Mega Drive released in 1993 removed the EXT 9 @-@ pin port altogether , preventing the newer model from being connected to the Meganet service . 
 In 1995 , the Meganet internet service launched in Brazil . Its main focus in the region was e @-@ mail , although by 1996 the service was capable of online multiplayer , along with chat features . Similar to the Mega Anser , a home banking product was also released for the region . Meganet hardware and services were provided through Sega 's distributor in the region , Tectoy . 
 = = Game library = = 
 The Meganet service utilized its own library of titles , independent of the Genesis library . Most of these games never received a cartridge release ; however , Columns , Flicky , Fatal Labyrinth , and Teddy Boy Blues each later saw cartridge versions . Several Meganet games would also later appear in Game no <unk> vol . 2 , released for the Mega @-@ CD exclusively in Japan . Most games for the service were small , at around <unk> per game , due to the limits of Internet connection speeds at the time . Downloads were estimated to take about five to eight minutes to complete . 
 All of the Meganet games were available through the Sega Game Library , accessed through the Meganet modem . Due to issues with long @-@ distance charges through the use of telephone lines , as well as seconds of lag time between commands , only two games featured competitive play : Tel @-@ Tel Stadium and Tel @-@ Tel Mahjong , with the remainder of the games available for single players via download . Due to Sega 's reluctance to commit to releasing the service in North America , third @-@ party developers in that region were unwilling to invest in developing games specifically for Meganet . This resulted in a low number of titles created for the service . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Retrospective feedback on the Sega Meganet service is mixed , praising the early initiative to develop online gaming for video consoles , but criticizing its implementation via use of telephone lines and issues with Sega 's lack of developers for the service . Adam Redsell of IGN commented on the basic features of the service , and despite noting that Meganet received only a few games , stated " [ T ] hat 's pretty damn impressive for 1990 " . He also notes the influence of Sega in the development of online gaming , with the Meganet service as their first attempt , and credits the Meganet 's successor , Sega Channel , with helping to spread broadband Internet . 
 However , the telephone line network which the Meganet ran on has been criticized for its logistical issues in online gaming . According to Electronic Gaming Monthly , " Even though the <unk> modem has been announced , it has yet to appear and the real usefulness of a device that is used only to play games with friends over the phone lines remains questionable ( both have to have the modem , the phone lines must be clear , the phone bills will be a problem if it ’ s a long @-@ distance call , etc . ) " The same issues that plagued the Meganet over the use of phone lines for Internet connectivity would later resurface when Catapult Entertainment launched the XBAND service in 1994 . 
 Ken Horowitz of Sega @-@ 16 took note of Sega 's reluctance to commit to releasing the service in North America as part of the reason for its lack of titles , noting , " Companies were most likely waiting for confirmation of the modem ’ s release before they began to commit themselves , and as time has attested , few were waiting to go ahead with development in light of Sega 's ' wait and see ' attitude . " Horowitz went on to criticize this issue as a problem Sega would have again with the Sega 32X in 1994 , stating , " History would repeat itself in the harshest of manners only five years later . Sega 's expectations of third party support for something it showed little enthusiasm for were entirely unrealistic and ultimately meant that no games would be in the pipeline . " 
 = Innherredsferja = 
 Innherredsferja AS ( " The Innherred Ferry " ) was a Norwegian ferry operator in the Trondheimsfjord in Nord @-@ Trøndelag county . It operated the Levanger – Hokstad Ferry between the town of Levanger and the island of <unk> , and the Vangshylla – Kjerringvik Ferry between Inderøy and Mosvik . The company operated seven ferries through its history , and had up to three operating at any time , including one in reserve . Innherredsferja was based in Levanger . 
 The company was founded in 1957 , and started a service between Venneshamn , Kjerringvik , Vangshylla , Hokstad , and Levanger . The initial owners of the company were a mixture of municipalities , the county , and private individuals and companies . In 1964 , the company 's operations were split into two services , each with a single crossing . Following the opening of the Skarnsund Bridge in 1991 , the Vangshylla – Kjerringvik Ferry was terminated . In 2005 , the company was taken over by Fosen Trafikklag , after the state decided that the route would be subject to public service obligation . The company lost the bid to Nor @-@ Ferjer , and operation ceased at the end of 2006 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Establishment = = = 
 The initiative for a cross @-@ fjord ferry services was taken by Arthur Selvig , leader of the merchants ' association in Levanger . In January 1955 , he invited members of the municipal councils on both sides of the fjord to establish a company . The meeting was held in Levanger , and the representatives from Mosvik took two days to get to the meeting . An interim committee was appointed , which was to cooperate with <unk> <unk> Dampskibsselskab to persuade them not purchase a new ship , and also to consider purchase of a combined <unk> and cargo @-@ ferry , or alternatively a conventional vessel . At the time , National Road 755 between Mosvik and Leksvik was being constructed and would be competed by the end of the decade ; however , it would take longer before Mosvik would be connected to Venneshamn . The committee suggested the route Venneshamn – Kjerringvik – Vangshylla – Ytterøy – Levanger be established . The municipal council of Ytterøy voted to place the ferry quay at Hokstad , which was serving as the municipal center . 
 State funding of NOK 105 @,@ 000 was granted to build ferry quays at Hokstad , Levanger and Venneshamn . The committee decided that they wanted a ferry similar to one delivered by Moen & Sønns <unk> which was at the time stationed in Trondheim , costing NOK 450 @,@ 000 . To finance this , state guarantees for the load and deficits needed to be granted . The Ministry of Transport and Communications promised to grant partial guarantees if local guarantees were also issued . Sale of shares started in 1957 , and the municipalities of Inderøy , Mosvik , Verran and Levanger bought shares , as well as guaranteeing 20 % of the deficits . Nord @-@ Trøndelag County Municipality bought shares , but did not want to issue guarantees . Innherredsferja was established with a share capital of NOK 144 @,@ 000 , split between 288 shares . The county bought 100 and became the largest owner , while seven municipalities bought 90 between them . The remaining shares were owned by private individuals and local companies . The company was incorporated on 10 May 1957 . 
 NOK 400 @,@ 000 was borrowed and NOK 510 @,@ 000 invested in a ferry from Moen & Sønns . It arrived at Levanger on 31 December 1957 and was named Innherredsferja . Initial plans were to have a crew of three on the ferry , but this was quickly expanded to five . The single @-@ direction vessel had space for 75 passengers plus vehicles . During the test @-@ run it became clear that the quay at Vangshylla was 75 centimetres ( 30 in ) too narrow to allow the ferry to dock . The first ferry service had ten different route combinations in each direction , and the fees were based on three different zones . Trips within Mosvik , Verran and Inderøy were in Zone 1 , trips to and from Ytterøy were in Zone 2 , while trips from Levanger to Mosvik and Inderøy were within Zone 3 . The initial prices were NOK 1 for one person in Zone 1 , NOK 2 @.@ 50 in Zone 2 and NOK 3 @.@ 5 in Zone 3 . For cars , the prices were NOK 5 , 10 and 14 , respectively . On workdays , the ferry made two round trips to Ytterøy and Levanger , three round trips to Venneshamn and five round trips to Vangshylla and Kjerringvik . At Levanger , both ferries corresponded with north- and southbound trains on the Nordland Line at Levanger Station , which is within walking distance of the quay . At Vangshylla , there were buses operated by <unk> i Nord @-@ Trøndelag to Steinkjer and Røra Station . 
 Operations commenced on 1 February 1958 . After five days , the service had to stop because of technical problems with the engine , and it took a week before it resumed . The quay at Levanger was not suitable , because the ferry could not dock at low tide . This caused the ferry to dock at the main dock to disembark passengers , whilst unloading the vehicles had to wait until high tide . In the first twelve months of operation , the ferry transported 9 @,@ 411 vehicles , of which 4 @,@ 000 were cars , and 40 @,@ 000 passengers . By 1961 , the number of cars had increased to 9 @,@ 374 . During 1958 , the company employed ticket sellers at the quays . A new ferry , Innherredsferja II , was ordered from Ulstein Mekaniske Verksted , and entered service on 1 August 1962 . The 27 metres ( 89 ft ) long vessel cost NOK 1 @,@ 062 @,@ 000 . It had a capacity for sixteen cars or six trucks . Part of the rationale for purchasing the new ferry was the increased traffic across Skarnsund following the completion of National Road 755 from Mosvik to Leksvik , which made the ferry the fastest link for people from Leksvik traveling to Levanger . 
 = = = Two routes = = = 
 Discussion about splitting the route into two started in the early in 1960s . The Public Roads Administration felt that it was unnecessary to have a cross @-@ fjord service , as at the time there was a road from Vangshylla to Levanger which sufficed . The administration was also in the process of building a road from Kjerringvik to Venneshamn , which would allow the ferry to drop that service . On 1 June 1964 , the service was split in two : Vangshylla – Kjerringvik and Hokstad – Levanger . At the same time , the service was upgraded to a national road connection , and the full responsibility for funding was transferred to the ministry . The Vangshylla – Kjerringvik service was taken over by Innherredsferja , while the Hokstad – Levanger service was taken over by Innherredsferja II . In 1968 , the state granted sufficient guarantees to allow a new ferry to be purchased . In the same year , the road from <unk> via Venneshamn to Kjerringvik was opened . The new ferry was similar to Innherredsferja II ; it was built in Kristiansund for NOK 1 @,@ 555 @,@ 000 and originally named Skarnsund . Innherredsferja was sold to an operator in Agder for NOK 50 @,@ 000 . At the same time , <unk> and Venneshamn were transferred from the municipality of Verran to Mosvik , while Ytterøy , Skogn and <unk> merged with Levanger . 
 In 1970 , the ferries were equipped with televisions . The following year , the company had a deficit of NOK 1 @.@ 1 million . It transported 195 @,@ 000 passengers , of which 120 @,@ 000 took the Vangshylla – Kjerringvik service . Mobile telephones came into use in January 1972 . In 1973 , the service was reduced as a result of the oil crisis , which lasted until 1 March 1974 . Smoking indoors was banned from 1975 , and a new quay was built in Levanger and opened on 1 July 1976 . Local disagreement about the location of a new quay on Ytterøy delayed construction , and it did not open until 1981 . In 1974 , planning for a new ferry on the Ytterøy service started , although the order was not placed until June 1979 . The new ferry , Ytterøy , cost NOK 10 @.@ 5 million , had space for 30 cars and was bi @-@ directional . It was put into service in February 1981 . Innherredsferja II was kept as a reserve . 
 The need for a larger ferry on the Skarnsund service was also pressing . Cars often had to wait , and if the ferry sailed with full capacity , there was no room for passengers to leave their vehicles . Work to procure a new ferry to replace Skarnsund started in 1981 . This resulted in the acquisition of the second @-@ hand ferry Mosvik from Bergen , with a capacity of 24 cars , which entered service starting 9 December 1982 . Skarnsund was leased to Namsos Trafikkselskap . In 1982 , tickets for a single trip on the Skarnsund Ferry were NOK 5 for an adult and NOK 14 for a car with driver . On the Ytterøy service , it was NOK 7 and 25 , respectively . Discounts were available , up to 33 % for cars and 50 % for trucks and buses . 
 = = = New times at Skarnsund = = = 
 Mosvik proved to be too small , with 3 @,@ 000 cars being left at the quays at Vangshylla and Kjerringvik in 1986 . An additional 47 were not catered for on the Ytterøy service in the same year . The order for Skarnsund II , costing NOK 27 million , was signed in December 1987 , and put into service in 1988 . Skarnsund was sold to Namsos Trafikkselskap for NOK 1 , as was Mosvik for NOK 1 million . The following year , Verran Municipality sold its shares in the company . In 1990 , the subsidy system was changed , and the company received a fixed subsidy instead of the state covering the deficit . This allowed the company to make a profit , if it managed to rationalize operations . 
 The first meeting of local commercial and political interests to establish a bridge across Skarnsund was held in 1972 . By 1983 , it was formalized by the establishment of the company AS <unk> to finance construction . The Parliament of Norway passed the plans in 1986 , and construction started two years later . The bridge cost NOK 200 million , and was opened by King Harald V on 19 December 1991 , after he had taken the last ferry across the fjord . 
 In 1991 , Fosen Trafikklag purchased Inderøy Municipality 's shares in <unk> , while Verran Sparebank bought those previously owned by Mosvik Municipality . In its last year of operation , the Skarnsund service carried 267 @,@ 894 people , 108 @,@ 482 cars , 13 @,@ 878 trucks , 840 buses and 312 motorcycles . Skarnsund II was sold to Namsos Trafikkselskap for NOK 23 @,@ 357 @,@ 778 . In 1992 , the annual meeting had to be postponed due to a ferry strike , which prevented the shareholders from Ytterøy attending . Levanger Municipality and Nord @-@ Trøndelag County Municipality were the only remaining public shareholders , and in 1992 Levanger announced that they intended to sell the Trondheim @-@ based ferry operator Fosen Trafikklag . However , the politicians changed their mind , and the municipality remained as a shareholder . In 1994 , both ferries were out of service and a small passenger ferry was used for a few days . In 1996 , the company was again hit by a strike . Normally the service was not chosen to be subject to strikes due to the high regularity needed by the chicken manufacturer <unk> , who would otherwise have to proceed with unnecessary slaughtering of animals . In 1997 , a cooperation with Fosen Trafikklag started , including the two using a shared reserve ferry , Austråt . 
 = = = Cooperation and competition = = = 
 In 2000 , Innherredsferja started to work on proposals to purchase a new ferry . The following year , it chose to buy Torghatten for NOK 19 @.@ 2 million from Torghatten Trafikkselskap , and renamed it Ytterøy II . It was taken into service on 9 November 2002 , <unk> II was sold . At the same time , Innherredsferja and Fosen Trafikklag amended their agreement , whereby Ytterøy , stationed at Levanger , became the shared reserve ferry . This meant that if a reserve vessel was needed for the Flakk – Rørvik Ferry , Ytterøy II would be sent there , and Ytterøy used for the Levanger – Hokstad service . From 1 January 2003 , the Levanger – Hokstad Ferry was one of six services which were part of a national test project where the fees for cars were increased , while passengers traveled free . The project included larger discounts for large users . The scheme was terminated in 2006 . A new ferry quay at Levanger was opened in 2003 , with a larger waiting area and ramp . The ramp also had separate sections for walk @-@ on passengers and cars . A terminal building was built with a waiting room and toilets , as well as offices for Innherredsferja . The terminal was 160 square metres ( 1 @,@ 700 sq ft ) in two stories and cost NOK 1 @.@ 8 million . From the ground , the building was built to symbolize a lighthouse , while from above it appears shaped like a fish . 
 In 2004 , Bondevik 's Second Cabinet and Liberal Minister of Transport Torild Skogsholm decided that all ferry services in Norway would become subject to public service obligation ( PSO ) . Innherredsferja held a concession until the end of 2006 , but would have to bid for the service from 1 January 2007 . The company would need expertise in both bidding and increased share capital to succeed in the bidding . By then , Fosen Trafikklag had bought 25 % of the company , and the county and the municipality sold their shares to Fosen . Following this , a meeting was held on Ytterøy , where Fosen succeeded in securing a sufficient number of shares from the private owners to purchase the entire company . This valued the company at NOK 23 @.@ 1 million . Private owners were given the option to be paid in Fosen shares . From 1 July 2005 , Innherredsferja was made a subsidiary of Fosen , but the company remained a separate limited company with its own board . 
 The Ytterøy service was packaged with the Brekstad – <unk> Ferry — located further out in the fjord than the Flakk – Rørvik Ferry . In the initial contract proposal from the Public Roads Administration , it was considered acceptable that Ytterøy could be without a ferry service for up to 24 hours , should there be technical difficulties with the vessel . After massive local protests — arguing that Brekstad residents had the option to take the Flakk – Rørvik Ferry — the Ytterøy this delay was reduced to 2 hours and it was specified that the reserve ferry had to be stationed at Levanger . In 2005 , the Public Roads Administration declared that Nor @-@ Ferjer , a joint venture between <unk> and Hardanger <unk> <unk> had won the bid . Innherredsferja continued to operate until their concession ran out , after which Ytterøy II and the terminal in Levanger were sold . All but three of the employees received jobs with Nor @-@ Ferjer . Until 2008 , Innherredsferja remained a paper company until the sale of Ytterøy was completed and liquidation completed . The company never had any serious accidents during its history . 
 = = Services = = 
 = = = Cross @-@ fjord = = = 
 The cross @-@ fjord route was in service from 1958 to 1964 . It connected the three sea @-@ locked communities of Venneshamn , Mosvik and Ytterøy to the mainland at Inderøy and Levanger . On workdays , the ferry made two round trips to Ytterøy and Levanger , three round trips to Venneshamn and five round trips to Vangshylla and Kjerringvik . 
 = = = Skarnsund = = = 
 The Vangshylla – Kjerringvik Ferry connected the municipalities of Inderøy and Mosvik across the sound Skarnsund , at the narrowest point of the Trondheimsfjord . The route operated from 1 June 1964 to 19 December 1991 , when it was replaced by the Skarnsund Bridge . It was part of Norwegian National Road 755 . The ferry had hourly services in each direction through most of the day , and the crossing took seven minutes . 
 = = = Ytterøy = = = 
 The Levanger – Hokstad Ferry connects the mainland at Levanger with the island of <unk> at Hokstad . The service has operated since 1 June 1964 , as part of Norwegian National Road 774 . The ferry has up to eleven daily round trips , with the crossing taking 30 minutes on the 9 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 6 mi ) stretch . Since 2007 , the service has been operated by Nor @-@ Ferjer ( which later merged to become part of Tide <unk> ) . 
 = = Fleet = = 
 MF Innherredsferja was the company 's first vessel . She was a single @-@ direction vessel built at Moen & Sønns <unk> in Risør . She arrived at Levanger on 31 December 1957 and cost NOK 510 @,@ 000 , and was not equipped with radar . She was initially used for the cross @-@ fjord route ; from 1962 she was used as a reserve until put into service on the Skarnsund route in 1964 . The ferry was sold for NOK 50 @,@ 000 in 1968 to Agder , and later became a restaurant at Aker Brygge in Oslo . 
 MF Innherredsferja II was ordered in 1960 and put into service on 1 August 1962 . She was 27 metres ( 89 ft ) long and 8 @.@ 4 metres ( 28 ft ) wide and cost NOK 1 @,@ 062 @,@ 000 . She was built by Ulstein Mekaniske Verksted and had a larger saloon and place for sixteen cars or six trucks . The bridge covered the full width of the vessel and had radar and other contemporary equipment . From 1964 , the ferry was put into service on the Levanger – Hokstad route . In 1981 , she was made a reserve ferry , and sold in 2002 . 
 MF Skarnsund was the same size as Innherredsferja II and was put into service on the Skarnsund route in 1969 . She had capacity for sixteen cars and was built in Kristiansund for NOK 1 @,@ 555 @,@ 000 . In 1982 , she was replaced by Mosvik and was leased to Namsos Trafikkselskap . She was sold for NOK 1 in 1988 . 
 MF Ytterøy cost NOK 10 @.@ 5 million , had places for 30 cars and was bi @-@ directional . Ytterøy weighed 300 tonnes and was 45 metres ( 148 ft ) long . She was put into service on the Levanger – Hokstad route in February 1981 . She became the reserve ferry following the purchase of Ytterøy II in 2002 . 
 MF Mosvik was bought in 1982 . She dated from 1969 and had been in service near Bergen . Capacity was 24 cars and she was sold for NOK 1 million to Namsos Trafikkselskap in 1988 . 
 MF Skarnsund II was the same size as Ytterøy , had placed for 30 cars and was bi @-@ directional . She cost NOK 27 million and was in service from 1987 to 1991 , when she was sold to Namsos Trafikkselskap for NOK 23 million . The 330 tonne vessel was built by <unk> . 
 MF Ytterøy II was bought used from Torghatten Trafikkselskap , where she had been named Torghatten . She was built in 1987 and cost Innherredsferja NOK 19 @.@ 2 million . She was 56 metres ( 184 ft ) long , had three saloons and place for 40 cars . She was sold in 2007 , following the loss of the PSO bid . 
 = Russian battleship Imperator Nikolai I = 
 Imperator Nikolai I ( Russian : Император Николай I ) was a Russian Imperator Aleksandr II @-@ class battleship built for the Baltic Fleet in the late 1880s . She participated in the celebration of the 400th anniversary of the discovery of America in New York City in 1892 . She assigned to the Mediterranean Squadron and visited Toulon in October 1893 . She sailed for the Pacific Ocean during the First Sino @-@ Japanese War and remained in the Pacific until late 1896 , when she returned to the Mediterranean Squadron and supported Russian interests during the Cretan Revolt . She returned to the Baltic in April 1898 and had a lengthy refit , which replaced all of her machinery , before returning to the Mediterranean in 1901 . 
 Returning to the Baltic during the Russo @-@ Japanese War Imperator Nikolai I was refitted in late 1904 to serve as the flagship of the Third Pacific Squadron under Rear Admiral Nikolai Nebogatov . She was slightly damaged during the Battle of Tsushima and was surrendered , along with most of the Third Pacific Squadron , by Admiral Nebogatov to the Japanese the following day . She was taken into the Imperial Japanese Navy under the new name of Iki ( <unk> ) and she served as a gunnery training ship until 1910 and then became a first @-@ class coast defense ship and training vessel . She was sunk as a target ship in October 1915 . 
 = = Development = = 
 Imperator Nikolai I was originally intended as a smaller ship than her half @-@ sister Imperator Aleksandr II along the lines of the Brazilian battleship Riachuelo , but armed with 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) guns . A contract was signed on 6 November 1885 with the Baltic Works for a 7 @,@ 572 @-@ long @-@ ton ( 7 @,@ 694 t ) ship armed with two 12 @-@ inch guns in a forward barbette . However , this was quickly cancelled and a contract was quickly let with the Franco @-@ Russian Works for a repeat of Imperator Aleksandr II even though the earlier ship had been built by the Baltic Works . The Franco @-@ Russian Works had difficulties getting the drawings and was forced to redraft some of them . They took the opportunity to change the design in a number of relatively minor ways while doing so . However , the substitution of a gun turret for Imperator Aleksandr II 's barbette mount was made in 1887 , well after the start of construction and proved problematic . The design of the turret was not finalized until April 1889 and work on the forward part of the hull had to cease for more than six months because the dimensions of the turret were not yet known . The turret proved to be 44 @.@ 9 long tons ( 46 t ) heavier than the older ship 's barbette and made Imperator Nikolai I slightly bow @-@ heavy despite a reduction in the height of the belt armor in compensation . 
 = = Description = = 
 Imperator Nikolai I was 333 feet 6 inches ( 101 @.@ 65 m ) long at the waterline and 346 feet 6 inches ( 106 m ) long overall . She had a beam of 66 feet 11 inches ( 20 m ) and a draft of 24 feet 3 inches ( 7 @.@ 4 m ) , 1 foot 3 inches ( 0 @.@ 4 m ) more than designed . She displaced 9 @,@ 594 long tons ( 9 @,@ 748 t ) at load , over 1 @,@ 000 long tons ( 1 @,@ 016 t ) more than her designed displacement of 8 @,@ 440 long tons ( 8 @,@ 575 t ) . 
 Imperator Nikolai I had two triple @-@ cylinder vertical compound steam engines , each driving a single propeller . Twelve cylindrical boilers provided non @-@ superheated steam to the engines . They were built by Baltic Works and had a total designed output of 8 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 5 @,@ 966 kW ) . On trials , the powerplant produced a total of 7 @,@ 842 indicated horsepower ( 5 @,@ 848 kW ) , and a top speed of 14 knots ( 26 km / h ; 16 mph ) . She carried 847 long tons ( 861 t ) of coal that gave her a range of 2 @,@ 630 nautical miles ( 4 @,@ 870 km ; 3 @,@ 030 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 The main armament of the Imperator Aleksandr II @-@ class ships was a pair of 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) Obukhov Model 1877 30 @-@ caliber guns . Imperator Nikolai I carried hers in a twin @-@ gun turret forward . The four 9 @-@ inch ( 229 mm ) Obukhov Model 1877 35 @-@ caliber guns were on center @-@ pivot mounts in casemates at the corners of the citadel , the hull given a pronounced tumblehome to increase their arcs of fire ahead and behind . The eight 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) Model 1877 35 @-@ caliber guns were mounted on broadside pivot mounts . Four were fitted between the 9 @-@ inch guns and could traverse a total of 100 ° . The others were mounted at each end of the ship where they could fire directly ahead or astern . The ten 47 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) Hotchkiss revolving cannon were mounted in hull embrasures of the ship , between the nine and six @-@ inch guns to defend against torpedo boats . Four 37 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) Hotchkiss revolving cannon were mounted in each fighting top . Imperator Nikolai I carried six above @-@ water 15 @-@ inch ( 381 mm ) torpedo tubes . One was in the bow , two tubes were on each broadside and a tube was in the stern . 
 Most of Imperator Nikolai I 's armor was imported from the United Kingdom and some deliveries were delayed which caused problems during construction . The height of the waterline armor belt was reduced 6 inches ( 152 mm ) in comparison to that of her half @-@ sister , being 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) tall , of which 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 9 m ) was above the designed waterline and 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) below . Most of the rest of the protection matched that of Imperator Aleksandr II other than the waterline belt forward which only reduced to a minimum of six inches rather than the 3 @.@ 9 inches ( 99 mm ) of the older ship and the walls of the conning tower were only six inches thick , 2 inches ( 51 mm ) less than her half @-@ sister . 
 = = History = = 
 Imperator Nikolai I was named after the Emperor Nicholas I of Russia . She was built by the Franco @-@ Russian Works at Saint Petersburg . She was laid down on 4 August 1886 , launched on 1 June 1889 , and completed in July 1891 , although her trials lasted until the spring of 1892 . She sailed in June 1892 for New York City to participate in the celebration honoring the 400th anniversary of the discovery of America . Upon her departure she was assigned to the Mediterranean Squadron and visited Toulon in October 1893 with the Russian Squadron to reinforce the Franco @-@ Russian Alliance . She was then commanded by Captain Richard Dicker . She sailed for the Pacific Ocean during the First Sino @-@ Japanese War and arrived at Nagasaki , Japan on 28 April 1895 , before sailing for Chefoo in China . She remained in the Pacific until late 1896 , when she returned to the Mediterranean Squadron and supported Russian interests during the Cretan Revolt . She returned to the Baltic in April 1898 for an extensive , multi @-@ year , refit . Her machinery was replaced with Belleville water @-@ tube boilers and vertical triple expansion steam engines . Her after superstructure was cut down one deck abaft the mainmast and most of her 47 mm and 37 mm revolving cannon were removed . Only two 37 mm revolvers were retained and she received sixteen 47 mm and two 37 mm single @-@ barreled guns in their place . 
 She returned to the Mediterranean in September 1901 and remained there until the Russo @-@ Japanese War when she was transferred to the Baltic to be refitted in late 1904 to serve as the flagship of the Third Pacific Squadron under Rear Admiral Nikolai Nebogatov . The squadron departed Liepāja on 15 January 1905 for the Pacific . She was slightly damaged during the Battle of Tsushima , receiving one hit from a twelve @-@ inch gun , two from eight @-@ inch guns and two from six @-@ inch guns , and suffered only 5 killed and 35 men wounded . She was surrendered , along with most of the Third Pacific Squadron , by Admiral Nebogatov the following day . On 6 June 1905 , she was taken into the Imperial Japanese Navy and renamed Iki , after Iki Island in the Sea of Japan , near site of the Battle of Tsushima . She served as a gunnery training ship until 12 December 1910 when she was redesignated as a first @-@ class coast defense ship and a training vessel . Some of her 6 @-@ inch guns were removed in 1910 and replaced by six 120 @-@ millimeter ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) 45 @-@ caliber guns and some 76 @.@ 2 @-@ millimeter ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) 12 @-@ pounder guns were also added . She was stricken 1 May 1915 and sunk as a target by the battlecruisers Kongō and Hiei , although Watts and Gordon say that she was scrapped in 1922 . 
 = 2009 – 10 Duquesne Dukes men 's basketball team = 
 The 2009 – 10 Duquesne Dukes men 's basketball team represented Duquesne University in National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) Division I ( D @-@ I ) college basketball during the 2009 – 10 season . 
 Duquesne hoped to build on the success of the 2008 – 09 season and began the new year with five straight victories . Soon , however , a string of setbacks hit the team , including the loss of two players , one due to injury and the other to suspension . Duquesne lost its final non @-@ conference game and slipped into a five @-@ game losing streak . The team did manage to break the streak , but had trouble gaining any momentum . In mid @-@ February the Dukes finally seemed to break free with a solid 21 point victory over La Salle , followed by a crucial road upset of the University of Charlotte , which was ranked first in the Atlantic 10 Conference at the time , and finally another upset of the University of Dayton Flyers in front of a sellout Pittsburgh crowd . However , Duquesne then lost its final two road games of the season . 
 Despite its lackluster season 's end , Duquesne won an invitation to the College Basketball Invitational postseason tournament . The team lost to the Princeton Tigers , and the Dukes were eliminated in the first round , ending the 2009 season . 
 = = Duquesne University = = 
 Duquesne University , also called Duquesne University of the Holy Spirit , is a private Catholic university in Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania , United States . The University 's Duquesne Dukes compete in NCAA Division I ( D @-@ I ) . D @-@ I schools are generally the major collegiate athletic powers , with larger budgets , more elaborate facilities , and higher numbers of athletic scholarships in comparison to Division II and III . This level was once called the University Division of the NCAA , and the Division II and III levels , the College Division ; this terminology was replaced with the current numeric ( I , II , III ) divisions in 1973 . 
 The Dukes have played twice in national championship games in the 1950s and won the National Invitation Tournament championship in 1955 , when the NIT was the premier collegiate basketball tournament in the country . The men 's basketball Dukes annually play its cross @-@ town rival , the University of Pittsburgh Panthers , in Pittsburgh 's highly anticipated and well @-@ attended City Game . The current head coach is Ron Everhart , who has a two @-@ year record of 27 – 32 ( 13 – 19 in the Atlantic 10 Conference ) . Well @-@ known Duquesne players of the past include All @-@ Americans Chuck Cooper , <unk> Green , Dick Ricketts and Willie Somerset , and Norm Nixon , who won the Most Outstanding Player in Duquesne 's 57 – 54 victory over the Villanova Wildcats in the 1977 Atlantic 10 Men 's Basketball Tournament . 
 = = Preseason = = 
 Duquesne lost only one starter , Aaron Jackson , from the 2008 – 09 team which ended with a record of 21 – 13 , the first time since 1981 that the school had 20 or more wins in a season . Picked to finish 12th in the Atlantic 10 , Duquesne went on to finish second , losing to Temple by only five points in the conference championship game . This earned Duquesne a bid into the National Invitation Tournament , its first postseason appearance since 1994 . The team was eliminated in a double @-@ overtime first round loss to Virginia Tech , but the Dukes ' unlikely success inspired the hope of a return to the NIT , or perhaps even the NCAA tournament . 
 On May 12 , 2009 the school announced that two freshman forwards , <unk> Patterson and Aleksandar <unk> , had been released from their scholarships and cleared to transfer to other schools . Both saw limited action in the 2008 season . <unk> Patterson transferred to Pensacola Junior College , and Aleksandar <unk> transferred to the University of Hawaii . 
 Andre Marhold , a small forward and the first of two incoming freshmen , signed with Duquesne on April 16 . Marhold , a native of Pittsburgh who moved to North Carolina for High School , averaged 17 @.@ 0 points and 10 @.@ 0 rebounds per game his senior year , in which his team was the regular season champion . He was ranked 188 in the top 1000 high school seniors by Hoop Scoop . Marhold turned down scholarship offers from Clemson , Charlotte , and Purdue . 
 Several weeks later on May 13 , guard Sean Johnson of Queens , New York also signed with the team . He attended Christ the King high school , whose basketball team finished his senior year ranked fourth in the state and eleventh in the nation by ESPN . He averaged 22 @.@ 4 points per game and was named New York City Catholic High School Athletic Association Most Valuable Player . Johnson also received scholarship offers from Nebraska , Manhattan , and Quinnipiac . 
 Prior to the start of the season , ESPN picked Duquesne to finish fifth in the Atlantic 10 conference , noting the loss of star Aaron Jackson but looking with optimism at the addition of 7 ft ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) center <unk> Williams and the continued development of other stars . Sophomore Melquan Bolding was also highlighted by ESPN as a key player in the Atlantic 10 . 
 = = = Incoming recruits = = = 
 = = = Roster = = = 
 Source 
 = = = Coaching staff = = = 
 Ron Everhart returned for his fourth season as head coach . After the departure of previous coach Danny Nee , Everhart steadily improved the team 's record year after year , taking the team from 3 – 24 the year before he arrived to the 21 – 13 record of 2008 – 09 . Everhart attended Virginia Tech , from which he graduated in 1985 . He served as an assistant coach at Georgia Tech , Virginia Military Institute , and Tulane University . In 1995 he took his first head coaching job at McNeese State University , and also coached at Northeastern University before moving to Duquesne in 2006 . 
 Bill Barton returned for his third season as Associate Head Coach . Steve Hall and Scott <unk> both served as Assistant Coaches for their second year . Jason Byrd was the Director of Basketball Operations . 
 = = Regular season = = 
 = = = Exhibition , Nicholls State , and Iowa = = = 
 The Dukes played their first game of the season on November 7 in an exhibition match against Division III La Roche . Duquesne scored a 47 @-@ point victory in which Damian Saunders led in scoring with 17 points . Despite the solid win , Duquesne made only 47 @.@ 6 % from the free throw line , a trend which haunted the team the rest of the season . 
 The regular season home @-@ opener was another victory for the team , as they defeated Nicholls State 85 – 62 on November 13 . Early in the game , Melquan Bolding hit the floor on a hard foul during a breakaway . After a few minutes , he recovered and went on to lead the team with 25 points . Saunders scored 17 points with 19 rebounds , his first of a long streak of double @-@ doubles . This game was also the second and final game of B.J. Monteiro 's 2 @-@ game suspension following allegations of participating in a robbery . Three days later , it was announced that Bolding had fractured his wrist when he was fouled , and would be unable to play for 4 – 6 weeks . 
 Despite the loss of Bolding , the team went on the road to face Iowa on November 17 , with newly returned B.J. Monteiro starting in place of Melquan Bolding . When down 49 – 50 with 11 @.@ 7 seconds left , Bill Clark took an off @-@ balance 3 @-@ point shot which spun in , putting the team up 52 – 50 and sealing their second victory of the regular season . This was Duquesne 's first ever victory at a Big Ten arena , and its first victory against a Big Ten school since a win over Illinois in 1973 . 
 = = = The CBE Classic = = = 
 The team then traveled to <unk> , North Carolina for three games as part of the O 'Reilly Auto Parts CBE Classic . Duquesne defeated Binghamton 70 – 52 to extend its record to 3 – 0 , with Saunders leading the way with 24 points . The next day the team improved to 4 – 0 with an overtime 75 – 72 victory against Division II Arkansas @-@ Monticello . On the third day of play , Duquesne finally lost to Western Carolina , 77 – 83 . 
 = = = The City Game and Chuck Cooper Classic = = = 
 The Dukes then returned home , where they faced Radford on November 29 . B.J. Monteiro continued to perform well as a starter in replacing Melquan Bolding , leading the team with 21 points . Next up for the team was the annual City Game match @-@ up between Duquesne and its crosstown rival Pitt . In front of 12 @,@ 336 fans at the Mellon Arena , Duquesne sprang out to a 16 @-@ point lead before slipping and losing 58 – 67 in double overtime . Bill Clark led all players with 23 points but the team hit foul trouble , with Saunders , Monteiro , and <unk> all fouling out in the final minutes . 
 On December 5 , Duquesne hosted the Chuck Cooper Classic , in which it defeated the Savannah State Tigers by a score of 58 – 44 . Eric Evans led with 17 points and Damian Saunders contributed 15 . 
 = = = West Virginia , Robert Morris , and Canisius = = = 
 Four days later , the Dukes were blown out 39 – 68 by # 7 West Virginia . Saunders led the team with only 12 points . One analyst attributed this loss to the skill of the Mountaineers , an abysmal night by star Bill Clark , as well as the continued absence of Melquan Bolding and now senior captain Jason Duty , who missed the game with a sprained ankle . 
 On December 12 the Dukes faced off against another local rival , Robert Morris . In a 59 – 54 win , B.J. Monteiro again led the team with 17 points . Monteiro 's continued high level of play prompted some analysts , as well as fans , to wonder whether the approaching return of Melquan Bolding would send Monteiro back to the bench , or if someone else would lose their starting position . Four days later the Dukes held off the Canisius Golden Griffins in a double overtime 86 – 77 victory at home . Bill Clark and Damian Saunders both contributed double doubles while B.J. Monteiro scored a career high 27 points . 
 = = = The end of non @-@ conference play = = = 
 The team then traveled to Indianapolis , where they lost to IUPUI 64 – 73 , despite a career high 20 points from Eric Evans . In their final game before a short Christmas break , Duquesne defeated the Saint Francis Red Flash 86 – 56 . Damian Saunders scored his tenth double @-@ double , making him the national leader in that statistic , as well as second in rebounds . Following the break , Duquesne lost its final non @-@ conference game to the Old Dominion Monarchs by a score of 54 – 63 , the first of a five @-@ game losing streak . Saunders still managed to post his eleventh double @-@ double , coming just one block short of what would have been only the second triple @-@ double in school history . 
 = = = Early conference play = = = 
 Duquesne opened conference play on January 6 in a match against the Richmond Spiders , a team which the Dukes had not defeated since the Spiders joined the Atlantic 10 in 2001 . This game marked the return of Melquan Bolding , though he did not start and scored only three points in fourteen minutes of playing time . Richmond managed to extend their streak , defeating the Dukes 86 – 80 , while Saunders maintained his nation @-@ leading position and now placed eighth in both blocks and steals . Duquesne then traveled to Dayton , Ohio where they lost to the Dayton Flyers 72 – 78 in overtime in front of a crowd of 13 @,@ 435 , the largest crowd the team would see all season . Senior Jason Duty was fouled on a 3 @-@ point attempt at the end of the game when his team was down by one , but made only one of three foul shots , sending the game into overtime . Melquan Bolding scored 13 points in 36 minutes , though he did not start , and Saunders came into the game now leading the nation in rebounds . 
 Duquesne found itself in overtime once again as they dropped another game against the St. Louis Billikens in double overtime , 75 – 79 . Melquan Bolding suffered another setback as he sat out most of the game , playing only five minutes due to strep throat . The team then went back out on the road to face the Rhode Island Rams , where they again lost with a final score of 67 – 75 , dropping their conference record to 0 – 4 . Bill Clark missed a game for the first time in his college career due to a suspension on suspicion of a " secondary NCAA rules violation . " Melquan Bolding started the game for the first time since his injury , but only scored 6 points . 
 = = = First conference win , Xavier , and Saint Joseph 's = = = 
 Two days later , Clark was reinstated . With Clark back in the lineup for a home game against St. Bonaventure Bonnies , Ron Everhart tried a new starting lineup : one that included Bolding and Monteiro , but left Senior Jason Duty on the bench . The Dukes took a 15 point lead at half time , but the Bonnies came back . With less than thirty seconds left , Bill Clark drew a charging penalty which gave his team the ball , down by two . One quick possession by each team left it 67 – 69 in favor of the Bonnies . On the final play , Damian Saunders drove towards the basket before passing it out to Melquan Bolding , who hit a 3 @-@ point shot to put the Dukes up by one with 3 @.@ 5 seconds remaining . Duquesne won 70 – 69 , giving them their first win since December 22 . 
 The winning feeling was short @-@ lived , however , as the Dukes were shut down by the Xavier Musketeers on January 28 , losing 86 – 50 . Melquan Bolding led the team with 14 points , Damian Saunders scored only 6 , and Bill Clark only 4 . On January 31 the team pulled out a 74 – 71 win against the Saint Joseph 's Hawks at home , with Melquan Bolding leading the team with 24 points . 
 = = = Temple , George Washington , and Massachusetts = = = 
 Once again , though , the Dukes were unable to build momentum as they lost 60 – 76 to # 19 ranked Temple . Bill Clark and Eric Evans led the team with just 12 points each . On February 6 , the Dukes braved a blizzard for a game against the George Washington Colonials in Washington , D.C .. Saunders led the way to a 70 – 63 win with a career @-@ high 27 points . Returning home on February 11 to face the Massachusetts Minutemen , the Dukes were unable to win two consecutive games for the third straight time , losing 80 – 84 . Damian Saunders scored 15 points , but was injured and left the game for a while ; when he returned , he did not score in the remainder of his playing time . He did , however , become Duquesne 's 33rd player to pass the 1 @,@ 000 career points mark . 
 = = = Introducing the 10 – 40 , Charlotte , and a rematch with Dayton = = = 
 Duquesne enjoyed another game at home on February 14 against the La Salle Explorers . Ron Everhart sought a new strategy for his team , which was struggling in conference play . In this game , La Salle was missing three players , leaving them with an active roster of only eight players . Duquesne ran a 10 – 40 pattern , in which two squads of five players execute short , intense bursts before being switched out for the other squad . At first , Duquesne fell behind by 14 points , but the strategy paid off as La Salle 's players tired . With La Salle fatigued , Duquesne switched back to a normal rotation and went on to win 103 – 82 . Bill Clark scored a career high 34 points , and also surpassed the 1 @,@ 000 point mark . 
 As underdogs on the road against the Charlotte 49ers , the Dukes ' new 10 – 40 strategy led them to an 83 – 77 upset victory . This was the first time of the season the team had managed to win two consecutive conference games . On February 21 , Duquesne again returned home for a nationally @-@ televised game against the Dayton Flyers . Senior Jason Duty was honored in a pre @-@ game ceremony , and the game 's attendance of 5 @,@ 144 was only 214 short of the A.J. Palumbo Center 's capacity . A late layup drive by Damian Saunders put the Dukes up by one , and they went on to win 73 – 71 . 
 = = = Ending the regular season = = = 
 Duquesne was unable to extend its streak on the road against St. Louis , as they lost 59 – 69 . Bill Clark led the team with 17 points and Saunders grabbed four steals , enough to raise his per @-@ game average to 2 @.@ 9 , a nation @-@ leading figure . With this , Saunders had at one point led the nation in double @-@ doubles , rebounds , and steals . The Dukes lost again , 80 – 92 , in their final road game against Saint Bonaventure . The loss put a damper on Duquesne 's hopes for a home game in the first round of the Atlantic 10 tournament , as they fell into a tie for the ninth seed position . 
 Duquesne closed its season against Fordham , who had yet to win a conference game and had only won two games all season . Fordham was hungry for a win , and a lack of effective defense on both sides led to a high scoring 111 – 100 victory for Duquesne . Melquan Bolding and Eric Evans both posted career high scores of 32 and 23 , respectively . 
 = = Postseason = = 
 After Duquesne lost to Saint Bonaventure , the Bonnies also lost their final regular season game to Xavier , which left the two teams in a tie for the eighth seed and the home tournament game that went with it . The two teams had played each other twice during the season , with each team taking one victory , so the second tiebreaker came down to who had scored the best victory . Duquesne 's best win came against Charlotte , while Saint Bonaventure 's was against Rhode Island . Unfortunately , those two teams were also in a tie . So for Duquesne to get their home game , Charlotte had to win their final home game , and Rhode Island had to lose . Both teams lost , so the tie remained and Rhode Island won out due to their head @-@ to @-@ head records . Thus Duquesne would head back out on the road against the Bonnies . 
 The game was played on March 9 and was close until the Bonnies went on a 14 – 0 run halfway into the second half , going on to win 71 – 83 . Despite Damian Saunders posting his 20th and final double @-@ double of the year , Duquesne 's 5 for 21 performance from beyond the 3 @-@ point arc combined with St. Bonaventure 's 75 % 3 @-@ point shooting and two players scoring in the upper twenties put the game out of the Dukes ' reach . The loss dashed Duquesne 's last hopes at a bid to the NIT . However , an invitation to either the College Basketball Invitational ( CBI ) or CollegeInsider.com Postseason Tournament was still possible . 
 Early on March 15 , hours after the NCAA and NIT fields were announced , Duquesne accepted a bid into the CBI . This would be Duquesne 's 23rd postseason appearance and first in the CBI , which started in 2008 . This also marked the first time since 1981 that the Dukes made two consecutive postseason appearances . It was announced that the Dukes would face off against the Princeton Tigers at Jadwin Gymnasium on March 17 . 
 On Tuesday , March 16 , it was announced that Junior Bill Clark had been suspended indefinitely from the team due to " conduct " issues . Clark had not attended practice the day before and would not travel to Princeton with the team for the CBI opening game on Wednesday . This would be only the second game that Bill Clark has missed in his college career . 
 Duquesne suffered its final disappointment of the season on March 17 as it fell to the Princeton Tigers . Bill Clark remained suspended and Damian Saunders led the team with only 14 points . Duquesne dominated the game early on , taking a 20 – 11 lead before Princeton came back , eventually leading 28 – 23 at the half . The Dukes were unable to turn the momentum and continued to fall behind , eventually losing 51 – 65 . The absence of Bill Clark showed on defense , as the Dukes were out @-@ rebounded heavily . The Dukes also failed to improve on their issues from the regular season , going only 8 for 18 from the free throw line and 3 for 15 from 3 @-@ point range . This loss ended the 2009 season , and all Duquesne could do was look ahead to the next year . 
 = = Schedule = = 
 = = Statistics = = 
 Duquesne was plagued by a few issues during the 2009 season . Most notable were the poor free @-@ throw and 3 @-@ point shooting percentages . Duquesne was last in the Atlantic 10 in both of these categories at 60 @.@ 8 % and 26 @.@ 3 % respectively . Despite their poor performance shooting from beyond the 3 @-@ point line , Duquesne still shot the fourth most three @-@ pointers of all teams in the Atlantic 10 . The following chart displays player per @-@ game average statistics for the regular season and Atlantic 10 tournament . 
 Source 
 = = = Awards and controversies = = = 
 Duquesne players received a few accolades in the 2009 – 10 season . Junior Damian Saunders 's outstanding play earned him a spot on the Atlantic 10 All @-@ Conference First Team . He was also named the Atlantic 10 Defensive Player of the Year . Earlier in the season , Jason Duty was nominated as a finalist for the Lowe 's Senior CLASS award , an award which recognizes college seniors who demonstrate exemplary outstanding performance both on the court and in the classroom . Duty , who held a 3 @.@ 72 GPA as an accounting major and had already accepted a job with PricewaterhouseCoopers , was named to the Atlantic 10 All @-@ Academic Team . 
 Early in the season , Damian Saunders was named Atlantic 10 ( A @-@ 10 ) player of the week for two consecutive weeks , sharing the honors with Chris Wright of Dayton and Jordan Crawford of Xavier , respectively . Following his 34 @-@ point performance against La Salle , Bill Clark earned his first career A @-@ 10 Player of the Week award , with Richmond 's Kevin Anderson . 
 The season was also marred by a few controversies . Prior to the beginning of play , B.J. Monteiro was arrested on October 3 in Middletown , Connecticut . He turned himself into police on suspicion of participating in the theft of a laptop , iPod , and cash from a house during a party in early August . He was charged with third @-@ degree larceny and , on October 6 , he was suspended indefinitely from the team . Following his court appearance on October 13 , all charges were dropped and Monteiro was reinstated to the team . 
 In late January , Junior Bill Clark was benched for the game against Rhode Island as the NCAA investigated a potential secondary rules violation . The specific details of the incident were not released by Duquesne , even after Clark 's return to the team the next day . A secondary rules violation is defined as " one that is isolated or inadvertent in nature , provides or is intended to provide only a minimal recruiting , competitive or other advantage . " 
 In the postseason , Bill Clark was again suspended , this time by coach Everhart for a conduct issue . The day before the CBI game against Princeton , Everhart announced that Clark would not travel to the game or participate in any practices or team activities until he felt the student ready to return . Clark was reinstated two weeks later , and , as before , no details were revealed . 
 = Paul Nobuo Tatsuguchi = 
 Paul Nobuo Tatsuguchi ( <unk> <unk> , Tatsuguchi Nobuo ) , sometimes mistakenly referred to as <unk> Tatsuguchi ( August 31 , 1911 – May 30 , 1943 ) , was a surgeon in the Imperial Japanese Army ( IJA ) during World War II . He was killed during the Battle of Attu on Attu Island , Alaska on May 30 , 1943 . 
 A devout Seventh @-@ day Adventist , Tatsuguchi studied medicine and was licensed as a physician in the United States ( US ) . He returned to his native Japan to practice medicine at the Tokyo Adventist Sanitarium , where he received further medical training . In 1941 , he was ordered to cease his medical practice and conscripted into the IJA as an acting medical officer , although he was given an enlisted rather than officer rank because of his American connections . In late 1942 or early 1943 , Tatsuguchi was sent to Attu , which had been occupied by Japanese forces in October 1942 . The United States Army landed on the island on May 11 , 1943 , intending to retake the island from the Japanese . 
 Throughout the ensuing battle , Tatsuguchi kept a diary in which he recorded its events and his struggle to care for the wounded in his field hospital . He was killed on the battle 's final day after the remaining Japanese conducted one last , suicidal charge against the American forces . 
 Tatsuguchi 's diary was recovered by American forces and translated into English . Copies of the translation were widely disseminated and publicized in the US after the battle . The American public was intrigued by a Christian , American @-@ trained doctor serving with Japanese forces on the island and by his apparent participation in assisting with the deaths of wounded Japanese soldiers in his field hospital during the battle 's final days . Translated excerpts from Tatsuguchi 's diary have been widely quoted in Western historical accounts of the battle , especially his final entry in which he recorded a farewell message to his family . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Tatsuguchi 's father , Suichi Tatsuguchi , was born and raised in Hiroshima , Japan , before leaving for the US in 1895 to " explore the new world " . He attended Healdsburg College , later renamed Pacific Union College , in Angwin , California . While attending the college , he was baptized into the Seventh @-@ day Adventist Church . In 1907 , after completing a course of study in dentistry at the College of Physicians and Surgeons in San Francisco , Suichi Tatsuguchi returned to Hiroshima with plans to serve as a medical missionary . 
 In Hiroshima , Tatsuguchi established a prosperous dental practice and promoted the establishment of the Hiroshima Adventist church . He married Sadako Shibata who was also familiar with the US and spoke fluent English . Suichi and Sadako had three sons and three daughters . All three sons would eventually attend school in the US . The middle son , born on August 31 , 1911 , was given the English name of Paul and the Japanese name of Nobuo , although he was called " Joseph " at home . 
 = = Schooling and marriage = = 
 Paul Nobuo Tatsuguchi graduated from middle school in Hiroshima on March 16 , 1919 . On March 2 , 1923 , he graduated from <unk> English Academy . Paul traveled to California and entered Pacific Union College in 1926 and graduated in May 1932 . When his parents both died unexpectedly in 1932 , Paul returned to Japan to help settle the family affairs . He returned to California in 1933 and entered the College of Medical Evangelists at Loma Linda University , completing the course of study in June 1937 . Paul Tatsuguchi then accepted a year 's internship at White Memorial Hospital in Los Angeles . While studying in America , Tatsuguchi was regarded by his classmates , who called him " <unk> " or Paul , as a serious student , friendly but not gregarious . Classmate J. Mudry , a year behind Tatsuguchi at Loma Linda University , later said , " I know him well . I always thought Tatsuguchi — we called him Paul — was quite an American . " 
 On September 8 , 1938 , Tatsuguchi graduated as a Doctor of Medicine and was awarded a California medical license . That same year , he accepted a position at the Tokyo Adventist Sanitarium , an institution founded in part by his father in 1928 . As he would be working with tuberculosis patients in Tokyo , Tatsuguchi spent several more months undergoing postgraduate medical studies in California . Also in 1938 , Tatsuguchi married a childhood friend , Taeko Miyake . Taeko 's parents were serving as Adventist missionaries in Honolulu , Hawaii , while Taeko pursued studies in California . Paul and Taeko departed the U.S. for Japan in 1939 . 
 = = Early military service = = 
 In Tokyo , Tatsuguchi was aware of the rising tensions between Japan and the United States . Although he was strongly loyal to his native country , he also shared with Taeko a love of the US , to which they hoped to return to live someday . Tatsuguchi concentrated on his work at the sanitorium , and , with Taeko , supported activities for the Adventist church , of which they were devout members . In 1940 their first daughter , Joy Misako , was born . 
 Early the next year , the IJA – the conscription authority in Japan – ordered Tatsuguchi to leave his medical practice and report to the First Imperial Guard Regiment ( <unk> ) in Tokyo , where he was inducted with the rank of private on January 10 , 1941 . As he was stationed in Tokyo , Tatsuguchi was occasionally able to visit Taeko and Misako when his duties allowed . Misako said of this time that , " I only have one memory of my father , and that was playing hide and seek with him . " 
 In September 1941 , Tatsuguchi entered the IJA 's medical school . He graduated in October and was promoted to sergeant major , rejoining the <unk> in January 1942 . In the meantime , in December 1941 the Japanese attacked the US Navy base at Pearl Harbor and declared war on the US and its allies . Suspicious of Tatsuguchi 's American background , the IJA never gave him officer status , instead designating him as a non @-@ commissioned acting medical officer . 
 Over the next several months , Tatsuguchi was deployed to the South Pacific in support of IJA units in the Dutch East Indies . During his service , Tatsuguchi kept a diary , recording his first @-@ hand observations of military service as well as his thoughts and feelings about the events in which he was involved . In September 1942 , after learning that he would be reassigned to a combat area in Rabaul , New Britain , he noted in his diary , " I feel very happy and I am determined to do my best " , adding that he was " determined to destroy the enemy force to the very last soldier " . 
 Tatsuguchi reached Rabaul on October 4 , 1942 . His stay there was probably short , for his wife recorded that he joined her in Tokyo that same month prior to being redeployed . Tatsuguchi was unable to tell his wife , now pregnant with their second child , where he would be assigned , but she noticed that he studied maps of the North Pacific area . At one point , he remarked to Taeko that he was going to an area where he might meet some of his former classmates from California . 
 A few weeks after Tatsuguchi left for his new assignment , the IJA delivered a lock of his hair to Taeko . The IJA did this whenever soldiers were sent to a high @-@ risk combat area in case the soldier was killed and it proved impossible to repatriate the remains for proper funeral rites . 
 = = Attu = = 
 = = = Arrival = = = 
 Japanese forces had first occupied Attu and Kiska in the Aleutian Islands on June 7 , 1942 during the Battle of Midway . They abandoned Attu in September 1942 , but then decided to reoccupy it . A regiment of IJA soldiers from the Northern Sea Detachment ( <unk> , Hokkai <unk> ) , a detachment of Imperial Japanese Navy Special Naval Landing Force troops , and support personnel began arriving on Attu in October 1942 . The total number of Japanese on the island would eventually be between 2 @,@ 500 and 2 @,@ 900 men . Exactly when Tatsuguchi arrived on Attu is unclear , because he was forbidden from specifying dates in the letters he wrote to Taeko , but it was probably between November 1942 and January 1943 . He was assigned to the Northern <unk> Detachment North Sea Defense Hospital . 
 With an American naval blockade in place , mail between Attu and Japan was infrequent and unscheduled . Tatsuguchi received several small packages from Taeko containing cookies and ointment for his skin , which was chafed by Attu 's severe winter winds . Four letters and several postcards from Tatsuguchi reached Taeko . As he was forbidden from discussing his unit 's exact location or mission , Tatsuguchi wrote about the weather , the beauty of the snowy and mountainous landscape around him , and his success in catching fish . He was cheered by the news from Taeko that their second daughter , Laura <unk> , was born in February . Tatsuguchi reminded Taeko in his letters to play classical music for their daughters . Whether he kept his diary during this time is unclear , for the only known diary entries by Tatsuguchi began in May , after the American landings to retake the island . 
 = = = Battle of Attu = = = 
 On May 11 , 1943 , the American Seventh Infantry Division began landing on Attu to retake the island from the Japanese . The Japanese commander on Attu , <unk> Yamasaki , positioned his troops – who were outnumbered five to one – in the mountains from where they temporarily delayed the Americans ' advance inland . Tatsuguchi 's diary entry on May 12 records the Japanese move into the mountains after the American landings , stating simply " evacuated to the summit . Air raids carried out frequently . Heard loud noise , it is naval gunfire . Prepared battle equipment . " 
 On May 14 , American artillery fired phosphorus smoke shells to mark Japanese positions in the mountains . Many Japanese and many Americans believed these were poison gas shells . Tatsuguchi noted in his diary that , " In the enemy the U.S. Forces used gas but no damage was done on account of strong wind . " 
 Tatsuguchi recorded in his diary that he was forced to move his field hospital into a cave to escape American naval and aerial bombardment . He relocated the hospital and patients several times as the Japanese forces were pushed back by the Americans . His May 17 entry describes one of the moves : 
 At night about 11 : 30 o 'clock under cover of darkness I left the cave . Walked over muddy roads and steep hills of no @-@ man 's land . No matter how far or how much we went we did not get over the pass . Sat down after 30 – 40 steps would sleep dream and wake up , same thing over again . We had few wounded and had to carry them on stretchers . They got frost @-@ bitten feet , did not move after all the effort . After struggling all the time , had expended nine hours , for all this without leaving any patients . 
 Tatsuguchi refers again and again in his diary to the constant , intense attacks by American aircraft and artillery on his comrades ' positions . On May 21 , he noted that he " was strafed when amputating a patient 's arm " and on May 23 that " by naval gun fire a hit was scored on the pillar pole of tents for patients and the tents gave in and killed two instantly . No food for two days . " On May 26 , Tatsuguchi recorded that " there was a ceremony of granting of the Imperial Edict . The last line of <unk> [ Japanese defensive position ] was broken through . No hope for reinforcements . We will die for cause of Imperial Edict . " 
 = = = Final attack and death = = = 
 By May 28 about a thousand Japanese remained , compressed into a small pocket . Yamasaki , apparently realizing that help from Japan was not forthcoming , decided on one last , desperate measure to try to save his command from destruction . On May 29 , Yamasaki organized a surprise attack on American positions . Yamasaki hoped to break through the enemy 's front lines and seize the American artillery batteries , which would then be turned on the rest of the American forces and their ships offshore . Tatsuguchi 's last diary entry records Yamasaki 's order , the disposition of the wounded in his hospital , and a farewell message to his family : 
 Today at 2 o 'clock we assembled at Headquarters , the field hospital took also part . The last assault is to be carried out . All the patients in the hospital were made to commit suicide . I am only 33 years old and I am to die . Have no regrets . Banzai to the Emperor . I am grateful that I have kept the peace in my soul which <unk> [ believed to mean either Christ or the Edict ] bestowed on me at 8 o 'clock . I took care of all patients with a grenade . Goodbye <unk> [ Taeko ] , my beloved wife , who loved me to the last . Until we meet again grant you God @-@ speed Misaka [ Misako ] , who just became four years old , will grow up unhindered . If I feel sorry for you <unk> [ <unk> ] born February this year and gone before without seeing your father . Well goodbye <unk> , Brothers <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , goodbye . The number participating in this attack is a little over a thousand . Will try to take enemy artillery position . It seems the enemy will probably make an all @-@ out attack tomorrow . 
 Yamasaki launched his attack early in the morning on May 30 . Although the attack succeeded in penetrating the enemy lines , American rear @-@ area personnel rallied and killed Yamasaki and the majority of his attacking troops . Most of the remaining Japanese then committed suicide ; only 27 were taken prisoner . 
 Two versions exist of how Tatsuguchi died . One version is that he did not participate in the attack . Later in the day on May 30 , two American soldiers , Charles W. Laird and John Hirn , who were searching for remaining Japanese forces following the defeat of Yamasaki 's attack , approached the cave containing Tatsuguchi 's field hospital . Tatsuguchi emerged from the cave , waving his Bible in the direction of the Americans and yelling in English , " Don 't shoot ! I am a Christian ! " Laird heard and understood what Tatsuguchi was saying and withheld fire . Hirn , however , shot and killed Tatsuguchi . Hirn later stated that he could not hear what Tatsuguchi was saying over the wind and noise of battle and that he thought that the Bible Tatsuguchi was holding was a weapon . 
 The other version was told to Taeko and Laura by Charles Laird in 1984 . Laird , a former US Army sergeant who served on Attu , stated that he was sleeping in a tent the morning of May 30 when Yamasaki 's troops broke through the American front lines . A man ran into Laird 's tent and Laird shot and killed him , only to discover that the man was American . Then he saw eight Japanese soldiers approaching through the fog , so he shot and killed them too . One of them was Tatsuguchi . Laird said that he found Tatsuguchi 's diary and an address book in which he was shocked to see American names and addresses . 
 J. Mudry and another of Tatsuguchi 's Loma Linda classmates , J. L. Whitaker , were medical officers with the US Seventh Division on Attu during the battle . Whitaker was in the path of Yamasaki 's final attack , but survived without injury . Whitaker and Mudry were stunned to later learn that their former classmate was on the island with Japanese forces and was killed nearby . 
 = = Diary = = 
 After Tatsuguchi 's death his Japanese diary , as well as his Bible , a copy of Gray 's Anatomy and an address book , were forwarded to the division intelligence section . There , an American Nisei serviceman named Yasuo Sam Umetani drafted the first translation of the diary . 
 Word of the diary 's contents spread quickly through divisional headquarters to the other American troops on Attu . Americans were intrigued by the news that an American @-@ trained doctor had been with the Japanese forces on the island and that Tatsuguchi had described the battle from a Japanese perspective . Unauthorized copies of both Umetani 's version and subsequent translations , some of which contained variations , were passed around among the American troops on Attu and to military installations on other Aleutian islands . Civilian crews of transport ships in the area who obtained copies of the diary translation took their copies with them back to the continental US , where it drew the attention of the press and gained wide public exposure . 
 Simon Bolivar Buckner , Jr. the US commander of the Alaska Defense Command ( ADC ) , on learning that the diary claimed that the Americans had used poison gas in the Attu battle , was sufficiently troubled to order that all copies of the translations be confiscated . In transit to Buckner 's headquarters , the diary original itself vanished without trace , and its whereabouts are unknown to this day . Japanese versions are translated from the English translation . In early September 1943 , the ADC 's intelligence section reported that efforts to control the distribution of translated copies of the diary had failed . 
 Several American newspapers published excerpts from the diary , and most highlighted the possibility that Tatsuguchi , a professed Christian , might have been involved in the killing of wounded patients . The Chicago Tribune on September 9 , 1943 published an article headlined " Japs Slew Own Patients on Attu , Diary <unk> " . In contrast , the Loma Linda School of Medicine Alumni Journal defended Tatsuguchi as a gentle and caring doctor who was trapped in a situation beyond his control , where his actions violated neither his religious beliefs nor his oaths as a doctor . Most Western historical accounts of the Battle of Attu mention Tatsuguchi and quote from his diary , especially the final entry . 
 = = Family legacy = = 
 The Japanese government notified Taeko of her husband 's death in August 1943 . Taeko and her two daughters survived the remainder of the war on a small widow 's pension and with help from relatives . Taeko hoped that her husband was still alive and would return . Just after the war ended , B. P. Hoffman , one of Tatsuguchi 's former college instructors and a friend of Taeko 's , visited her in Osaka where she was living . Hoffman told her that a US Federal Bureau of Investigation agent had visited him during the war because Hoffman 's name was in Tatsuguchi 's address book found on Attu . The agent told the story of Tatsuguchi 's death to Hoffman , who related it to Taeko . Taeko accepted that her husband would not be coming back . 
 After the war , Taeko worked for the American occupation forces as a secretary and teacher . In 1954 , she and her two daughters , Joy and Laura , left Japan and joined Taeko 's parents in Hawaii . All three became naturalized citizens of the US . Joy and Laura both attended Pacific Union College and became nurses . Joy later married a Japanese man and returned to Japan to live . Laura married an American and moved to the Los Angeles area , where Taeko later joined her . In 2005 , Taeko told Kyodo News of her husband , " He was a faithful Christian doctor and a gentleman who devoted himself to God and communities . " 
 In May 1993 , Laura traveled to Attu and spoke at a 50th anniversary commemorative event of the Battle of Attu . In her speech at the event , Laura stated " How ironic that my father was killed in combat against his beloved America while in loyal service to his Japanese homeland ... Like my father , I too have a great love for Japan and America . " 
 = = = Books = = = 
 <unk> , John Haile ( 1990 ) . The Aleutian Warriors : A History of the 11th Air Force and Fleet Air Wing 4 . Missoula , Montana : Pictorial Histories Publishing Co. and Anchorage Chapter – Air Force Association . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 35 @-@ 8 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Garfield , Brian ( 1995 ) [ 1969 ] . The Thousand @-@ Mile War : World War II in Alaska and the Aleutians . Fairbanks : University of Alaska Press . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 83 @-@ 8 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Hays , Otis ( 2004 ) . Alaska 's Hidden Wars : Secret Campaigns on the North Pacific Rim . University of Alaska Press . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 64 @-@ X. 
 = = = Web = = = 
 Beauchamp , Edward R. ( November 22 , 2001 ) . " Imperial Navy doctor 's wartime diary opens a window to the nation 's past " . Japan Times . Retrieved 2008 @-@ 05 @-@ 04 . 
 McDaniel , Sandi ( July 16 , 1993 ) . " Searching for a Father on Attu for Daughter of WWII Japanese Medic , Island is Link to a Parent She Never Knew " . Anchorage Daily News . Archived from the original on 2008 @-@ 04 @-@ 22 . Retrieved 2008 @-@ 05 @-@ 04 . 
 Ōmura , Tomoyuki ( Japanese : <unk> <unk> ) . " An honorable death of Attu : Nobuo Tatsuguchi ' s diary " ( in Japanese ) . Retrieved 2008 @-@ 05 @-@ 04 . 
 Tominaga , Takaki ( August 15 , 2005 ) . " <unk> : Japanese widow remembers husband killed in Battle of Attu " . Asian Political News . Kyodo News . Retrieved 2008 @-@ 05 @-@ 04 . 
 = Pine Middle School shooting = 
 The Pine Middle School shooting was a school shooting that occurred in Reno , Nevada , United States , on March 14 , 2006 . The shooting was perpetrated by then fourteen @-@ year @-@ old student James Scott Newman who shot and injured two 14 @-@ year @-@ old eighth grade classmates with a .38 @-@ caliber revolver that had belonged to his parents . Newman was arrested and charged as an adult on charges of attempted murder , use of a deadly weapon and use of a firearm by a minor but later plead guilty to different charges of two counts of battery with a deadly weapon , in which he had received sentencing as a juvenile . James Newman was sentenced to house arrest until he completed 200 hours of community service . 
 On March 25 , 2008 , athletics teacher Jencie Fagan , who was hailed a hero for her confrontation with the shooter , was selected as one of the three national winners for the Above & Beyond Citizen Honor from the Congressional Medal of Honor Society at a ceremony in Washington , D.C. 
 = = The shooting = = 
 On the day of the shooting , the start of school had been delayed by snow and not all students had arrived when the shooting began . Just before 9 : 00 a.m. ( UTC @-@ 8 ) , fourteen @-@ year @-@ old student James Scott Newman brought his mother 's .38 @-@ caliber revolver to the school in his backpack . He removed the concealed pistol from his coat pocket and loaded it with three .38 caliber rounds while in the bathroom . He chose his target , student Alexander Rueda , 14 , at random in a hallway outside the cafeteria . Before he started firing , a friend of Newman yelled at him to put the gun away , but Newman told him to run . He pulled the trigger twice but the gun did not fire because those chambers were empty . He then fired three times at Rueda . One bullet hit Rueda in the arm and torso , and another ricocheted and hit student Kenzie McKeon , 14 , in the leg from the shrapnel . The two injured students had no prior relationship or arguments with Newman . Several students and teachers heard the shots and the physical education teacher , Jencie Fagan , approached Newman and challenged him . Fagan managed to convince Newman to drop his gun and then restrained him until more staff arrived to help . 
 Alexander Rueda was treated at Washoe Medical Center for his wounds and released the same day , while Kenzie McKeon only needed to be treated at the scene for superficial wounds . The school was placed on lockdown for an hour and then classes were canceled for the remainder of the day . The shooting was the second firearm @-@ related incident on Pine Middle School grounds in two weeks , with the previous incident being a man brandishing a gun towards the campus . On this occasion school administrators sent students home as a precaution . 
 = = = Motive = = = 
 After the shooting , Newman was interviewed by the police and remained determined that he did not want his parents to be present during questioning , however Newman 's father had arrived sometime after to ask for the questioning to stop until a lawyer would be consulted . During questioning Newman stated that he wanted to use the attack as a way to end abuse from his father , brother , and others . He said he was tired of being called " stupid " by them . He researched the Columbine High School massacre on the Internet and planned the attack about a week in advance . He conclusively decided against using a knife because " he did not want to be up close when blood came out of any of the victims . " The night before the attack , Newman 's father had given him a collection of ammunition which included three live .38 caliber rounds . When his parents left the house to eat , he took his mother 's handgun from a small safe in his father 's closet and hid it in his backpack . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Following the shooting , police arrested James Newman and booked him as an adult on charges of suspicion of attempted murder , use of a deadly weapon and use of a firearm by a minor in Washoe County Jail with a bail of $ 150 @,@ 000 . However , his trial was put on hold as prosecutors discussed whether he should be tried as an adult or juvenile . Washoe District Attorney Richard <unk> had announced on March 17 that the evidence given did not support Newman being charged as an adult . By May 2006 , Newman was tried as a juvenile by the Jan Evans Juvenile Justice Center for the charges of two counts of battery with a deadly weapon , instead of the initial charges and was put under house arrest until he completed 200 hours of community service . 
 On March 25 , 2008 , Jencie Fagan was selected as one of three national winners and the Nevada finalist for an Above & Beyond Citizen Honor from the Congressional Medal of Honor Society in the Washington , D.C. ceremony , being recognized for her role in prevention of any further incident in the shooting . 
 = Kilgour – Matas report = 
 The Kilgour – Matas report is a 2006 / 2007 investigative report into allegations of live organ harvesting in China conducted by Canadian MP David Kilgour and human rights lawyer David Matas . The report was requested by the Coalition to Investigate the Persecution of Falun Gong ( <unk> ) after allegations emerged that Falun Gong practitioners were secretly having their organs removed against their will at Sujiatun Thrombosis Hospital . The report , based on circumstantial evidence , concluded that " there has been , and continues today to be , large @-@ scale organ seizures from unwilling Falun Gong practitioners . " China has consistently denied the allegations . 
 The initial report received a mixed reception . In the US , a Congressional Research Service report by Dr. Thomas Lum stated that the Kilgour – Matas report relied largely on logical inference , without bringing forth new or independently obtained testimony ; the credibility of much of the key evidence was said to be questionable . The initial 6 July 2006 report found that , " the source of 41 @,@ 500 transplants for the six year period 2000 to 2005 is unexplained " and concluded that " there has been and continues today to be large scale organ seizures from unwilling Falun Gong practitioners . " U.N. special rapporteur Manfred Nowak said in March 2007 that the chain of evidence Kilgour and Matas were documenting showed a " coherent picture that causes concern " , which the United Nations Committee Against Torture followed up in November 2008 with a request for " a full explanation of the source of organ transplants " , to investigate the claims of organ harvesting , and to take measures to prosecute those committing abuses . Other investigators , such as Ethan Gutmann , followed the Kilgour – Matas report ; Gutmann estimating that between 450 @,@ 000 and 1 million Falun Gong members were detained at any given time , and estimated that tens of thousands may have been targeted for organ harvesting . 
 Upon release of the initial report on 6 July 2006 , Chinese officials declared that China abides by World Health Organization principles that prohibit the sale of human organs without written consent from donors . They denounced the report as smears " based on rumours and false allegations " , and said the Chinese government had already investigated the claims and found them without any merit . The report is banned in Russia and China . Among international concerns , the US National Kidney Foundation expressed that it was " deeply concerned " about the allegations . 
 In 2009 , the authors published an updated version of the report as a book , titled Bloody Harvest , The killing of Falun Gong for their organs , and in the same year received an award from the International Society for Human Rights . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Falun Gong = = = 
 Falun Gong is a spiritual discipline that combines meditation and exercises with a moral philosophy , emerged in China in the 1990s ; by 1999 the number of practitioners was estimated in the tens of millions . 
 In July 1999 , following a large @-@ scale demonstration to request official recognition , Chinese authorities initiated a nationwide campaign to suppress the group , and created the 610 Office to oversee and coordinate the elimination of Falun Gong . The suppression that followed was accompanied by what Amnesty International called a " massive propaganda campaign , " , as well as the detention and imprisonment of tens of thousands of Falun Gong adherents . Former detainees reported that in some labour camps , Falun Gong practitioners comprised the majority population , and were singled out for abuse . Under order from Beijing , practitioners are subject to coercive “ reeducation ” and torture , sometimes resulting in deaths . Due to limited access to victims and labour camp facilities , however , many specific reports of abuses are difficult to independently corroborate . 
 = = = Organ transplantation in China = = = 
 China has had an organ transplantation programme since the 1960s . It is one of the largest organ transplant programmes in the world , peaking at over 13 @,@ 000 transplants a year in 2004 . Involuntary organ harvesting is illegal under Chinese law , although under a 1984 regulation it became legal to remove organs from executed criminals with the prior consent of the criminal or permission of relatives . By the 1990s , growing concerns about possible ethical abuses arising from coerced consent and corruption led medical groups and human rights organizations to start condemning the practice . These concerns resurfaced in 2001 , when The Washington Post reported claims by a Chinese asylum @-@ seeking doctor that he had taken part in organ extraction operations . 
 By 2005 the World Medical Association had specifically demanded that China cease using prisoners as organ donors . In December of that year , China 's Deputy Health Minister acknowledged that the practice of removing organs from executed prisoners for transplant was widespread – as many as 95 % of all organ transplants in China derived from executions , and he promised steps to prevent abuse . 
 = = = Sujiatun = = = 
 The first allegations of systematic organ harvesting from Falun Gong practitioners were made in March 2006 by two individuals claiming to possess knowledge of involuntary organ extractions at the Sujiatun Thrombosis Hospital in Shenyang , Liaoning province . The allegations were publicized by the Epoch Times , a newspaper group founded by Falun Gong practitioners . Within one month of the press coverage , third party investigators , including representatives of the US Department of State , said that there was insufficient evidence to prove the allegations . In 2006 and 2008 , United Nations Special Rapporteurs raised questions about the sources of organs , the short waiting times for finding perfectly matched organs , and the correlation between the sudden increase in organ transplants in China and the beginning of the persecution of Falun Gong practitioners . These requests were not satisfactorily addressed by the Chinese authorities . [ 69 ] In November 2008 the United Nations Committee Against Torture noted its concern at the allegations and called for China to " immediately conduct or commission an independent investigation of the claims " , and take measures " to ensure that those responsible for such abuses are prosecuted and punished " . [ 7 ] Chinese dissident Harry Wu , who exposed organ harvesting from prison inmates at laogai ( hard labour camps ) , questioned the credibility of the Sujiatun whistle @-@ blowers . But Harry Wu 's July 2006 article showed his views in his March 21 letter were formed before completing his investigation , so Harry Wu 's views were not based on his full investigation . Further , Harry Wu characterized the volume of organ harvesting Annie described as " technically impossible " , but in fact it is technically possible , according to medical expert . On April 14 , 2006 , the US state department wrote that " U.S. representatives have found no evidence to support allegations that a site in northeast China has been used as a concentration camp to jail Falun Gong practitioners and harvest their organs " , adding " independent of these specific allegations , the United States remains concerned over China ’ s repression of Falun Gong practitioners and by reports of organ harvesting . " 
 Soon thereafter , in May 2006 , The Coalition to Investigate the Persecution of Falun Gong asked David Kilgour as well as Canadian human rights lawyer David Matas to investigate the broader allegations of organ harvesting from Falun Gong adherents in China . Kilgour and Matas agreed to investigate . 
 = = The report = = 
 = = = First report = = = 
 On 20 July 2006 , Kilgour and Matas presented the findings of their two @-@ month investigation as Report into Allegations of Organ Harvesting of Falun Gong Practitioners in China . The report presented 33 strands of circumstantial evidence that Kilgour and Matas felt , in the absence of any disproof , cumulatively allowed the conclusion that " the government of China and its agencies in numerous parts of the country , in particular hospitals but also detention centres and ' people 's courts ' , since 1999 have put to death a large but unknown number of Falun Gong prisoners of conscience . Their vital organs , including kidneys , livers , corneas and hearts , were seized involuntarily for sale at high prices , sometimes to foreigners , who normally face long waits for voluntary donations of such organs in their home countries . ” . The report called attention to the extremely short wait times for organs in China — one to two weeks for a liver compared with 32 @.@ 5 months in Canada — noting that this was indicative of organs being procured on demand . It also tracked a significant increase in the number of annual organ transplants in China beginning in 1999 , corresponding with the onset of the persecution of Falun Gong . Despite very low levels of voluntary organ donation , China performs the second @-@ highest number of transplants per year . Kilgour and Matas also presented material from Chinese transplant center web sites advertising the immediate availability of organs from living donors , and transcripts of telephone interviews in which hospitals told prospective transplant recipients that they could obtain Falun Gong organs . The authors qualified their findings by noting the difficulties in verifying the alleged crimes , such as : independent bodies were not allowed to investigate conditions in China , eyewitness evidence was difficult to obtain , official information about organ transplantation was often withheld , and Kilgour and Matas themselves were denied visas to go to China to investigate . 
 = = = Second report = = = 
 In a January 2007 revision , Bloody Harvest : Revised Report into Allegations of Organ Harvesting of Falun Gong Practitioners in China , Kilgour and Matas felt that the Government of China had reinforced the basis of the first report by responding to it in an unpersuasive way , mostly as attacks on Falun Gong . For Kilgour and Matas , such attacks made possible the violation of the basic human rights of Falun Gong practitioners . China identified two factual errors in the first version of the report — one in an appendix , in a caption heading , where Kilgour and Matas placed two Chinese cities in the wrong provinces ; the authors dismissed those errors as have nothing to do with the analysis or conclusions of their report . In the absence of evidence that would invalidate the organ harvesting allegations — such as a Chinese government registry showing the identity of every organ donor and donation — Kilgour and Matas concluded that the allegations of China 's harvesting organs from live Falun Gong practitioners were true and the practice was ongoing . They called for a ban on Canadian citizens traveling to China for transplant operations . 
 As of November 2014 the report has been translated into 21 languages . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 In 2009 , Kilgour and Matas published an updated version of the report as a book , titled Bloody Harvest , The killing of Falun Gong for their organs . It contains new material and interviews , and is in two parts . The first section sets out the evidence ; the second section details the reactions the final report received and the advocacy Matas and Kilgour undertook to end the abuse that they conclusively identified . That year , Kilgour and Matas also received the 2009 Human Rights Award by the German @-@ based International Society for Human Rights ; and were nominated for the 2010 Nobel Peace Prize . 
 In 2012 , State Organs : Transplant Abuse in China , edited by David Matas and Torsten Trey was published with contributions from a dozen specialists . 
 = = Response = = 
 The report 's allegations of involuntary organ removal from Falun Gong adherents received considerable media coverage , particularly in Canada , Europe , and Australia . Several governments tightened transplant tourism practices and requested more information from the Chinese government . Chinese officials repeatedly and angrily denied the report 's organ harvesting allegations . Upon release of the initial report , China declared they abided by World Health Organization principles that prohibit the sale of human organs without written consent from donors and denounced the report . 
 Amnesty International in 2006 said it was “ continuing to analyze sources of information ” about the allegations . David Ownby , a professor of history at of the University of Montreal and expert on Falun Gong , wrote in Falun Gong and the Future of China that Falun Gong practitioners were probable candidates for organ harvesting in Chinese prisons . However , he felt that Falun Gong spokespersons " overplayed their hand " with the concentration camp allegations , potentially losing credibility in the eyes of neutral observers , despite the real persecution they were suffering . A Congressional Research Service report by Thomas Lum said that the report relies on logical inferences and telephone call transcripts which , he suggested , may not be credible . Glen McGregor of the Ottawa Citizen was skeptical about the logistical plausibility of the allegations after visiting Sujiatun at the invitation of the Chinese Medical Association . He said that , depending on who you believe , " the Kilgour – Matas report is either compelling evidence that proves the claims about Falun Gong ... or a collection of conjecture and inductive reasoning that fails to support its own conclusions " . 
 Some observers found the report and its figures plausible . Tom Treasure of Guy 's Hospital , London , said the Kilgour – Matas report was " plausible from a medical standpoint " based on the numerical gap in the number of transplants and the short waiting times in China compared with other countries . He noted the existence of blood tests of imprisoned Falun Gong followers , which is not useful for the victims but is critical to organ donation , and said the allegations were “ credible . ” Non @-@ fiction writer Scott Carney included the allegations in his book The Red Market , writing " No one is saying the Chinese government went after the Falun Gong specifically for their organs … but it seems to have been a remarkably convenient and profitable way to dispose of them . Dangerous political dissidents were executed while their organs created a comfortable revenue stream for hospitals and surgeons , and presumably many important Chinese officials received organs . " Using different research methods to Kilgour and Matas , Ethan Gutmann , adjunct fellow at the Foundation for Defense of Democracies , found that his estimate of the number of Falun Gong practitioners killed for organs of approximately 65 @,@ 000 was close to the estimate of 62 @,@ 250 by Kilgour and Matas . In September 2014 he published his findings in The Slaughter : Mass Killings , Organ Harvesting , and China ’ s Secret Solution to Its Dissident Problem . Kirk C. Allison , Associate Director of the Program in Human Rights and Medicine in the University of Minnesota , wrote that the " short time frame of an on @-@ demand system [ as in China ] requires a large pool of donors pre @-@ typed for blood group and HLA matching , " and would be consistent with the Falun Gong allegations about the systematic tissue typing of practitioners held prisoner . He wrote that the time constraints involved " cannot be assured on a random @-@ death basis " , and that physicians he queried about the matter indicated that they were selecting live prisoners to ensure quality and compatibility . 
 The US National Kidney Foundation said they were " deeply concerned about recent allegations regarding the procurement of organs and tissues through coercive or exploitative practices " and that " any act which calls the ethical practice of donation and transplantation into question should be condemned by the worldwide transplantation community . " A 2008 petition signed by 140 Canadian physicians urged the Canadian Government to " issue travel advisories warning Canadians that organ transplants in China are sourced almost entirely from non @-@ consenting people , whether prisoners sentenced to death or Falun Gong practitioners " . Canadian Member of Parliament Borys <unk> , based on the findings of the Kilgour – Matas report , introduced a 2008 bill that would make it illegal for Canadians to get an organ transplant abroad if the organ was taken from an unwilling victim . In 2013 , Doctors Against forced Organ Harvesting ( <unk> ) presented a petition of nearly 1 @.@ 5 million signatures including over 300 @,@ 000 from Europe to the Office of UN High Commissioner on Human Rights in Geneva . 
 While Russia , along with China , banned the report ; Taiwan condemned , " in the strongest possible terms " , China 's harvesting of human organs from executed Falun Gong practitioners . Taiwan 's Department of Health , urged Taiwanese doctors to not encourage patients to get commercial organ transplants in mainland China . Rabbi Yosef Shalom Eliashiv prohibited Jews from deriving any benefit from Chinese organ harvesting , " even in life @-@ threatening situations " ; other rabbis opposed the use of Chinese organs for transplants . 
 In 2006 and 2008 , United Nations Special Rapporteurs raised questions about the sources of organs , the short waiting times for finding perfectly matched organs , and the correlation between the sudden increase in organ transplants in China and the beginning of the persecution of Falun Gong practitioners . These requests were not satisfactorily addressed by the Chinese authorities . In November 2008 the United Nations Committee Against Torture noted its concern at the allegations and called for China to " immediately conduct or commission an independent investigation of the claims " , and take measures " to ensure that those responsible for such abuses are prosecuted and punished " . 
 In 2010 , though the Chinese Medical Society had stated that organ transplants from executed prisoners must cease , and changes in Chinese regulations prohibited transplant tourism , a meeting of the Transplantation Society received over 30 papers containing data from several hundred transplants , where the donor source was likely executed prisoners . 
 During the U.N. Human Rights Council meeting held on March 12 , 2014 , Anne @-@ Tamara Lorre , the Canadian representative on human rights to the United Nations , raised the issue of organ harvesting in China . " We remain concerned that Falun Gong practitioners and other religious worshippers in China face persecution , and reports that organ transplants take place without free and informed consent of the donor are troubling . " 
 = Ficus rubiginosa = 
 Ficus rubiginosa , commonly known as the <unk> or Port Jackson fig ( <unk> in the Dharug language ) is a species of flowering plant native to eastern Australia in the genus Ficus . Beginning as a seedling that grows on other plants ( hemiepiphyte ) or rocks ( lithophyte ) , F. rubiginosa matures into a tree 30 m ( 100 ft ) high and nearly as wide with a yellow @-@ brown buttressed trunk . The leaves are oval and glossy green and measure from 4 to 19 @.@ 3 cm ( 1 1 ⁄ 2 – 7 1 ⁄ 2 in ) long and 1 @.@ 25 to 13 @.@ 2 cm ( 1 ⁄ 2 – 5 1 ⁄ 4 in ) wide . 
 The fruits are small , round and yellow , and can ripen and turn red at any time of year , peaking in spring and summer . The fruit is known as a syconium , an inverted inflorescence with the flowers lining an internal cavity . F. rubiginosa is exclusively pollinated by the fig wasp species Pleistodontes imperialis , which may in fact comprise four <unk> . The syconia are also home to another fourteen species of wasp , some of which induce galls while others parasitise the pollinator wasps , and at least two species of nematode . Many species of bird , including pigeons , parrots and various passerines , eat the fruit . Ranging along the Australian east coast from Queensland to Bega in southern New South Wales , F. rubiginosa grows in rainforest margins and rocky <unk> it is used as a shade tree in parks and public spaces , and when potted is well @-@ suited for use as an indoor plant or in bonsai . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Ficus rubiginosa was described by French botanist René Louiche Desfontaines in 1804 , from a type specimen whose locality is documented as " New Holland " . In searching for the type specimen , Australian botanist Dale Dixon found one from the herbarium of Desfontaines at Florence Herbarium and one from the herbarium of Étienne Pierre Ventenat at Geneva . As Ventenat had used Desfontaines ' name , Dixon selected the Florence specimen to be the type in 2001 . The specific epithet rubiginosa related to the rusty coloration of the undersides of the leaves . Indeed , rusty fig is an alternate common name ; others include Illawarra fig and Port Jackson fig . It was known as <unk> ( pron . " tam @-@ <unk> " ) to the Eora and Darug inhabitants of the Sydney basin . 
 In 1806 , German botanist Carl Ludwig Willdenow gave it the botanical name Ficus australis in Species Plantarum , but this is a nomen <unk> as the species already had a validly published name . Italian botanist Guglielmo <unk> broke up the genus Ficus in 1844 , placing the species in the genus Urostigma as U. <unk> . In 1862 , Dutch botanist Friedrich Anton Wilhelm Miquel described Urostigma leichhardtii from material collected from Cape Cleveland , Queensland , noting it had affinities to F. rubiginosa . In 1867 , he placed Urostigma as a subgenus in the reunited Ficus , which resulted in the taxon becoming Ficus leichhardtii . Miquel also described Ficus leichhardtii variety angustata from Whitsunday Island , later classified as F. <unk> by Czech botanist Karel Domin . Queensland state botanist Frederick Manson Bailey described Ficus macrophylla variety pubescens in 1911 from Queensland , Domin later renaming it Ficus <unk> . All these taxa were found to be indistinguishable from ( and hence reclassified as ) F. rubiginosa by Dixon in 2001 . 
 In a study published in 2008 , Nina Rønsted and colleagues analysed the DNA sequences from the nuclear ribosomal internal and external transcribed spacers , and the glyceraldehyde @-@ 3 @-@ phosphate dehydrogenase region , in the first molecular analysis of the section Malvanthera . They found F. rubiginosa to be most closely related to the rainforest species F. <unk> and two rock @-@ growing ( lithophytic ) species of arid northern Australia ( F. <unk> and F. brachypoda ) . They classified these species in a new series <unk> in the subsection <unk> . Relationships are unclear and it is uncertain into which direction the group radiated ( into rainforest or into arid Australia ) . 
 Joseph Maiden described variety lucida in 1902 , and Bailey described variety glabrescens in 1913 . Both had diagnosed their varieties on the basis of their hairlessness . Maiden described a taxon totally devoid of hair , while Bailey described his as nearly glabrous ( hairless ) . As Bailey 's description more closely matched Dixon 's findings ( that these variants were only partly and not completely hairless ) , Dixon retained Bailey 's name and reclassified it as Ficus rubiginosa forma glabrescens in 2001 as it differed only in the lack of hairs on new growth from the nominate form . 
 = = Description = = 
 A spreading , densely @-@ shading tree when mature , F. rubiginosa may reach 30 m ( 100 ft ) or more in height , although it rarely exceeds 10 m ( 30 ft ) in the Sydney region . The trunk is buttressed and can reach 1 @.@ 5 m ( 4 ft 11 in ) in diameter . The bark is yellow @-@ brown . It can also grow as on other plants as a hemiepiphyte , or 1 – 5 m ( 3 – 16 ft ) high lithophyte . Alternately arranged on the stems , the ovate ( egg @-@ shaped ) , obovate ( reverse egg @-@ shaped ) or oval @-@ shaped leaves are anywhere from 4 – 19 @.@ 3 cm ( 1 5 ⁄ 8 – 7 5 ⁄ 8 in ) long and 1 @.@ 25 – 13 @.@ 2 cm ( 1 ⁄ 2 – 5 1 ⁄ 4 in ) wide , on 7 – 8 @.@ 2 cm ( 2 3 ⁄ 4 – 3 1 ⁄ 4 in ) -long petioles ( stalks that join the leaves to stems ) . They are smooth or bear tiny rusty hairs . There are 16 to 62 pairs of lateral veins that run off the midvein at an angle of 41 @.@ 5 – 84 @.@ 0 ° , while distinct basal veins run off the midvein at an angle of 18 @.@ 5 – 78 @.@ 9 ° . As with all figs , the fruit ( fig ) is actually an inverted inflorescence ( compound flower ) known as a syconium , with tiny flowers arising from the fig 's inner surface into a hollow cavity . F. rubiginosa is monoecious — both male and female flowers are found on the same plant , and in fact in the same fruit , although they mature at different times . Often growing in pairs , the figs are yellow initially and measure 4 – 10 mm ( 1 ⁄ 8 – 3 ⁄ 8 in ) across . <unk> to red in colour , they are tipped with a small nipple and on a 2 – 5 mm ( 1 ⁄ 8 – 1 ⁄ 4 in ) stalk . Fruits ripen throughout the year , although more so in spring and summer . Some trees have ripe and unripe fruit at the same time . 
 It closely resembles its relative , the Moreton Bay fig ( F. macrophylla ) . Having similar ranges in the wild , they are often confused . The smaller leaves , shorter fruit stalks , and rusty colour of the undersides of the leaves of F. rubiginosa are the easiest distinguishing features . It is also confused with the small @-@ leaved fig ( F. obliqua ) , the syconia of which are smaller , measuring 4 – 12 mm long and 4 – 11 mm in diameter , compared with 7 – 17 mm long and 8 – 17 mm diameter for F. rubiginosa . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Ficus rubiginosa occurs from the top of the Cape York Peninsula in north Queensland southwards along the eastern coastline of Australia to the vicinity of Bega on the south coast of New South Wales . The range extends westwards to Porcupine Gorge National Park in Queensland and the far western plains in New South Wales . F. rubiginosa f. rubiginosa and F. rubiginosa f. glabrescens are found over most of the range , though the latter does not occur south past the New South Wales @-@ Queensland border region . <unk> , <unk> and tree forms can be found together in local populations of plants . 
 F. rubiginosa is found in rainforest , rainforest margins , gullies , riverbank habitat , vine thickets , and rocky hillsides . It is found on limestone outcrops in Kanangra @-@ Boyd National Park . Fig seedlings often grow from cracks in stone where seeds have been lodged , in locations such as cliffs and rock faces in natural environments , or in brickwork on buildings and elsewhere in the urban environment . The soils it grows on are often well @-@ drained and low in nutrients . They are derived from sandstone , quartzite and basalt . In the Sydney region , F. rubiginosa grows from sea level to 1000 m ( 3500 ft ) altitude , in areas with an average yearly rainfall of 600 – 1 @,@ 400 mm ( 24 – 55 in ) . F. rubiginosa is largely sympatric with F. obliqua , though its range extends further west into dryer regions than the latter species . 
 Outside its native range , F. rubiginosa has naturalised to some degree in urban Melbourne and Adelaide in Australia , as well as New Zealand , Hawaii and California , and Mediterranean Europe . F. rubiginosa has been planted widely in Malta since the early 1990s but has not been observed to fruit . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 The fruit is consumed by many bird species including the rose @-@ crowned fruit @-@ dove ( Ptilinopus regina ) , <unk> fruit @-@ dove ( P. magnificus ) , wonga pigeon ( <unk> melanoleuca ) , topknot pigeon ( <unk> antarcticus ) , Pacific koel ( <unk> orientalis ) , Australasian swamphen ( Porphyrio melanotus ) , Australian king parrot ( <unk> <unk> ) , Australasian <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) , green catbird ( <unk> crassirostris ) , regent bowerbird ( <unk> <unk> ) , satin bowerbird ( <unk> violaceus ) and pied currawong ( Strepera graculina ) , as well as the mammalian grey @-@ headed flying fox ( Pteropus poliocephalus ) , and spectacled flying fox ( Pteropus <unk> ) . It is one of several plant species used as food by the endangered Coxen 's fig parrot . Many fruits drop onto the ground around the tree , though others are dispersed by animals that eat them . 
 The thrips species <unk> australis feeds on the underside of new leaves of F. rubiginosa , as well as F. obliqua and F. macrophylla . As plant cells die , nearby cells are induced into forming meristem tissue and a gall results , and the leaves become distorted and curl over . The thrips begin feeding when the tree has flushes of new growth , and live for around six weeks . At other times , thrips reside on old leaves without feeding . The species pupates sheltered in the bark . The thrips remain in the galls at night , wander about in the daytime and return in the evening , possibly to different galls about the tree . <unk> have almost defoliated trees in the Royal Botanic Gardens in Sydney in spring . 
 = = = Reproduction and life span = = = 
 F. rubiginosa is exclusively pollinated in a symbiotic relationship with Pleistodontes imperialis , a species of fig wasp . Biologist Eleanor Haine and colleagues analysed the DNA of the wasp across the fig 's range and determined four cryptic lineages forming what they term the P. imperialis species complex . They diverge to a greater degree than some distinct wasp species , yet form a monophyletic group ; this indicates that the wasp lineages have split without a change of host . 
 Fertilised female wasps enter the receptive ' fig ' ( the syconium ) through a tiny hole at the crown ( the ostiole ) . They crawl around the <unk> interior of the fig , pollinating some of the female flowers , before laying eggs inside some of the flowers and dying . After several weeks ' development in their galls , the male wasps emerge before the females . They chew holes in the galls containing females and fertilise them through the hole they have just chewed . Males return later to mated females , and enlarge the mating holes to enable the females to emerge . Some males then chew their way through the syconium wall , which allows the females to disperse after collecting pollen from the now fully developed male flowers . Females then have a short time ( < 48 hours ) to find a tree with receptive syconia to successfully reproduce and disperse pollen . 
 A field study in Brisbane found that F. rubiginosa trees often bore both male and female phase syconia at the same time , which could be beneficial for reproduction in isolated populations . The same study found that male phase syconia development persisted through the winter , showing that its wasp pollinator tolerated cooler weather than those of more tropical fig species . F. rubiginosa itself can endure cooler climates than other members of the genus . 
 P. imperialis crossed the waters between Australia and New Zealand some time between 1960 and 1972 , and seedlings of the previously infertile trees of F. rubiginosa began appearing in brick and stone walls , and on other trees , particularly in parks and gardens around Auckland . They have been recorded as far south as Napier . P. imperialis has been transported to Hawaii , California and Israel , where it has been observed to pollinate its host . 
 Trees can live to 100 years or more . They have been known to resprout after bushfire , bearing fruit within three years . 
 = = = Other life in the syconia = = = 
 As with many other Ficus species , the community of wasps inside the figs of F. rubiginosa is made up mostly of pollinator wasps . These develop deep inside the syconium , presumably protected there from parasites . Also present are much smaller numbers of other wasp species , which do not pollinate the fig . At least fourteen species have been recorded , of which four — two each belonging to the genera Sycoscapter and Philotrypesis — are common while others are rare . Investigation of F. rubiginosa syconia found that the fig seeds and parasitic wasps develop closer to the wall of the syconium . The wasps of the genera Sycoscapter and Philotrypesis are parasitic and are around the same size as the pollinator species . Their larvae are thought to feed on the larvae of the pollinator wasp . Male Sycoscapter and Philotrypesis wasps fight other males of the same species when they encounter each other in a F. rubiginosa fig . Several genera of uncommon larger wasp species enter the immature figs before other wasps and induce galls , which may impact on numbers of pollinator wasps in the fig later . An example of this is <unk> <unk> , a metallic green wasp species . 
 Nematodes of the genus <unk> are found in the syconia ( and the pollinator wasps ) of many species of fig , with F. rubiginosa hosting two species . They appear to be less species @-@ specific than wasps . S. <unk> is generally associated with F. rubiginosa though it has been recorded on several other fig species . 
 = = Cultivation = = 
 Ficus rubiginosa was first cultivated in the United Kingdom in 1789 , where it is grown in glasshouses . It is commonly used as a large ornamental tree in eastern Australia , in the North Island of New Zealand , and also in Hawaii and California , where it is also listed as an invasive species in some areas . It is useful as a shade tree in public parks and on golf courses . Not as prodigious as other figs , F. rubiginosa is suited to slightly more confined areas , such as lining car parks or suburban streets . However , surface roots can be large and intrusive and the thin bark readily damaged when struck . Tolerant of acid or alkaline soils , it is hardy to US Hardiness Zones 10B and 11 , reaching 10 m ( 35 ft ) high in 30 years . Planting trees 8 – 12 m ( 30 – 40 ft ) apart will eventually result in a continuous canopy . The trees are of great value in providing fruit for birds and mammals , though drop large quantities of fruit and leaves , leaving a mess underfoot . 
 In a brief description , William Guilfoyle recorded a variegated fig from New South Wales " 12 – 15 ft high " in 1911 as F. rubiginosa variety variegata . A variegated form is in cultivation on Australia 's east coast , and in the United States . It is a chimera lacking in chlorophyll in the second layer of the leaf meristem . The leaves have an irregular central green patch along the midvein with irregular yellow and green elsewhere . Leaves that grow in winter generally have larger green patches than those that do in summer . The chimera is unstable , and branches of all @-@ green growth appear sporadically . 
 Despite the relatively large size of the leaves , it is popular for bonsai work as it is highly forgiving to work with and hard to kill ; the leaves reduce readily by leaf @-@ pruning in early summer . Described as the best tree for a beginner to work with , it is one of the most frequently used native species in Australia . Its bark remains smooth , and does not attain a rugged , aged appearance . Known as " Little Ruby " , a narrow @-@ leaved form with its origins somewhere north of Sydney is also seen in cultivation . 
 F. rubiginosa is also suited for use as a houseplant in low , medium or brightly @-@ lit spaces , although a variegated form requires brighter light . It has gained the Royal Horticultural Society 's Award of Garden Merit . It is easily propagated by cuttings or aerial layering . 
 The light @-@ coloured wood is soft and brittle . Lightweight , it has some value in the making of such items as toys and small boxes . 
 = Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart = 
 The Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart ( spelled " Quick @-@ E @-@ Mart " in " Bart the General " ) is a fictional convenience store in the animated television series The Simpsons . It is a parody of American convenience stores , such as 7 @-@ Eleven and Wawa Inc . , and depicts many of the stereotypes about them . It is notorious for its high prices and the poor quality of its merchandise . The operator of the Springfield store is an Indian @-@ American named Apu Nahasapeemapetilon . It was first seen in the episode " The Telltale Head " and has since become a common setting in The Simpsons . 
 In July 2007 , eleven 7 @-@ Eleven locations in the United States and one in Canada were transformed into Kwik @-@ E @-@ Marts as part of a special promotion for The Simpsons Movie . Also in 2007 , gift shops modeled after the " Kwik @-@ E @-@ Marts " were opened in Universal Studios Florida and Universal Studios Hollywood , where they are a companion to " The Simpsons Ride " . 
 = = Role in The Simpsons = = 
 The Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart is a convenience store that sells the usual fare at extraordinarily high prices , including the always popular Squishee . The Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart chain was started somewhere in the Himalayas . 
 Springfield 's Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart is owned and operated by an Indian American named Apu Nahasapeemapetilon , who mans the store with his brother Sanjay and is a caricature of the stereotypical " foreign born " convenience store clerk . Apu is an extremely devoted convenience store clerk / owner , rarely closing his store and occasionally working 96 @-@ hour shifts . Apu proudly gouges customers and sells tainted merchandise , such as rotten meat or expired milk . Springfield 's Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart is quite often the target of robbers , leading to Apu having been shot on several occasions . It is a favorite target of local criminal Snake Jailbird , who has held up the Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart several times . 
 = = Real @-@ world versions = = 
 = = = 7 @-@ Eleven promotion = = = 
 In July 2007 , convenience store chain 7 @-@ Eleven converted 11 of its stores in the United States and one in Canada ( Coquitlam ) into Kwik @-@ E @-@ Marts to promote The Simpsons Movie . The concept was first visualized in 2006 by Fox 's advertising agency , and the approximately 10 million dollar ( US ) cost of the promotion was borne by 7 @-@ Eleven . Another part of the promotion was a contest where customers who purchased a <unk> or sandwich also received a coded game piece that could be entered into a website . The grand prize of the contest was to be animated into an episode of The Simpsons . Prior to July , the promotion had long been known but the locations were kept a secret until the morning of July 1 , when the 12 stores were made over with industrial foam , vinyl and Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart signs . 
 These 12 locations , as well as the majority of other North American 7 @-@ <unk> , sold products found in The Simpsons , such as " Buzz Cola " , " Krusty @-@ O 's " , " Squishees " , pink frosted " <unk> doughnuts " and other Simpsons @-@ themed merchandise . The Squishees were Slurpees that are sold in special collector cups and the Krusty @-@ O 's were made by Malt @-@ O @-@ Meal . Several other 7 @-@ Eleven items , such as sandwiches , were sold in Simpsons @-@ themed packaging . It was decided that Duff Beer would not be sold due to the movie being rated PG @-@ 13 , and the promoters wanted to have " good , responsible fun , " though it was noted that it was a tough decision . However , a Duff Energy Drink was released in place of the Duff Beer . 
 The promotion resulted in a 30 % increase in profits for the changed 7 @-@ Eleven stores . Many of the stores sold out of their special Simpsons products within a few days of the start of the promotion . The conversions lasted through early August , when the stores were converted back to 7 @-@ <unk> . 
 There was a mild controversy when the promotion offended members of the Indian @-@ American community who felt that Apu is a caricature that plays on too many negative stereotypes . Despite this , 7 @-@ Eleven reported that many of its Indian employees have reacted positively to the idea , although it was noted that it was " not a 100 percent endorsement . " 
 = = = Universal Studios = = = 
 On October 17 , 2007 , a gift shop that was modeled after a Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart was opened at Universal Studios Florida . One also opened at Universal Studios Hollywood at a later time . They replaced the old Back to the Future gift shop and supplement The Simpsons Ride , which opened in Spring 2008 . The stores sell Simpsons @-@ related merchandise like Flaming Moe 's Energy Drinks and Squishees . 
 = Henry Wilson = 
 Henry Wilson ( born Jeremiah Jones Colbath ; February 16 , 1812 – November 22 , 1875 ) was the 18th Vice President of the United States ( 1873 – 75 ) and a Senator from Massachusetts ( 1855 – 73 ) . Before and during the American Civil War , he was a leading Republican , and a strong opponent of slavery . He devoted his energies to the destruction of the " Slave Power " – the faction of slave owners and their political allies which anti @-@ slavery Americans saw as dominating the country . 
 Originally a Whig , Wilson was a founder of the Free Soil Party in 1848 . He served as the party chairman before and during the 1852 presidential election . He worked diligently to build an anti @-@ slavery coalition , which came to include the Free Soil Party , anti @-@ slavery Democrats , New York Barnburners , the Liberty Party , anti @-@ slavery members of the Native American Party ( Know Nothings ) , and anti @-@ slavery Whigs ( called Conscience Whigs ) . When the Free Soil party dissolved in the mid @-@ 1850s , Wilson joined the Republican Party , which he helped found , and which was organized largely in line with the anti @-@ slavery coalition he had nurtured in the 1840s and 1850s . 
 While a Senator during the American Civil War Wilson was considered a " Radical Republican " , and his experience as a militia general , organizer and commander of a Union Army regiment , and chairman of the Senate military committees enabled him to assist the Abraham Lincoln administration in the organization and oversight of the Union Army and Union Navy . 
 After the Civil War , he supported the Radical Republican program for Reconstruction . In 1872 , he was elected Vice President as the running mate of Ulysses S. Grant , the incumbent President of the United States , who was running for a second term . The Grant and Wilson ticket was successful , and Wilson served as Vice President from March 4 , 1873 until his death on November 22 , 1875 . Wilson 's effectiveness as Vice President was limited after he suffered a debilitating stroke in May 1873 , and his health continued to decline until he was the victim of a fatal stroke while working in the United States Capitol in late 1875 . 
 Throughout his career , Wilson was known for championing causes that were at times unpopular , including the abolition of slavery and workers ' rights for both blacks and whites . Massachusetts politician George F. Hoar , who served in the United States House of Representatives while Wilson was a Senator , and later served in the Senate himself , believed Wilson to be the most skilled political organizer in the country . However , Wilson 's reputation for personal integrity and principled politics was somewhat damaged late in his Senate career by his involvement in the Crédit Mobilier scandal . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Henry Wilson was born in Farmington , New Hampshire on February 16 , 1812 , one of several children born to Winthrop and Abigail ( Witham ) Colbath . His father named him Jeremiah Jones Colbath after a wealthy neighbor who was a childless bachelor , vainly hoping that this gesture might result in an inheritance . Winthrop Colbath was a militia veteran of the War of 1812 who worked as a day laborer and hired himself out to local farms and businesses , in addition to occasionally running a sawmill . 
 The Colbath family was impoverished and , after a brief elementary education , at the age of 10 Wilson was indentured to a neighboring farmer , where he worked as a laborer for the next 10 years . During this time two neighbors gave him books and Wilson enhanced his meager education by reading extensively on English and American history and biography . At the end of his service he was given " six sheep and a yoke [ two ] of oxen . " Wilson immediately sold his animals for $ 85 , which was the first money he had earned during his indenture . 
 Wilson apparently did not like his birth name , though the reasons given vary . Some sources indicate that he was not close to his family , or disliked his name because of his father 's supposed intemperance and modest financial circumstances . Others indicate that he was called " Jed " and " Jerry " , and disliked the nicknames so much that he resolved to change his name . Whatever the reason , when he turned 21 he successfully petitioned the New Hampshire General Court to legally change it . He chose the name Henry Wilson , inspired either by a biography of a Philadelphia teacher or a portrait from a book on English clergymen . 
 ( The ideas that his name change resulted from disrespect of his father or lack of closeness with his family seem to be belied by the fact that some of his relatives followed him after he relocated to Natick , Massachusetts , including brother George A. Colbath . In addition , Winthrop and Abigail Colbath moved to Natick in 1848 . Winthrop died in Natick in 1860 , and Abigail died there in 1866 . ) 
 = = Career = = 
 After trying and failing to find work in New Hampshire , in 1833 Wilson walked more than one hundred miles to Natick , Massachusetts seeking employment or a trade . Having met William P. <unk> , a shoemaker who was willing to train him , Wilson hired himself out for five months to learn to make leather shoes called <unk> . Wilson learned the trade in a few weeks , bought out his employment contract for $ 15 , and opened his own shop , intending to save enough money to study law . Wilson had success as a shoemaker , and was able to save several hundred dollars in a relatively short time . This success gave rise to legends about Wilson 's skill ; according to one story that grew with retelling , he once attempted to make one hundred pairs of shoes without sleeping , and fell asleep with the one hundredth pair in his hand . Wilson 's shoe making experience led to the creation of the political nicknames his supporters later used to highlight his working class roots — the " Natick Cobbler " and the " Natick Shoemaker " . 
 During this time Wilson read extensively and joined the Natick Debating Society , where he developed into an accomplished speaker . Wilson 's health suffered as the result of the long hours he worked making shoes , and he traveled to Virginia to recuperate . During a stop in Washington , D.C. he heard Congressional debates on slavery and abolitionism , and observed African American families being separated as they were bought and sold in the Washington slave trade . Wilson resolved to dedicate himself " to the cause of emancipation in America " , and after regaining his health returned to New England , where he furthered his education by attending several New Hampshire academies including schools in Strafford , Wolfeboro , and Concord . 
 Having spent part of his savings on his traveling and schooling , and having lost some as the result of a loan that was not repaid , Wilson worked as a schoolteacher to get out of debt and begin saving money again , intending to start a business of his own . Beginning with an investment of only twelve dollars , Wilson started a shoe manufacturing company . This venture proved successful , and Wilson eventually employed over 100 workers . 
 = = Political career = = 
 Wilson became active politically as a Whig , and campaigned for William Henry Harrison in 1840 . He had joined the Whigs out of disappointment with the fiscal policies of Andrew Jackson and Martin Van Buren , and like most Whigs blamed Democrats Jackson and Van Buren for the Panic of 1837 . In 1840 he was also elected to the Massachusetts House of Representatives , and served from 1841 to 1842 . 
 Wilson was a member of the Massachusetts State Senate from 1844 to 1846 and 1850 to 1852 . From 1851 to 1852 he was the Senate 's President . 
 As early as 1845 , Wilson had started to become disenchanted with the Whigs as the party attempted to compromise on the slavery issue , and as a Conscience Whig he took steps including the organization of a convention in Concord opposed to the annexation of Texas because it would expand slavery . As a result of this effort , in late 1845 Wilson and abolitionist John Greenleaf Whittier were chosen to submit in person a petition to Congress containing the signatures of 65 @,@ 000 Massachusetts residents opposed to Texas annexation . 
 Wilson was a delegate to the 1848 Whig National Convention , but left the party after it nominated slave owner Zachary Taylor for president and took no position on the Wilmot Proviso , which would have prohibited slavery in territory acquired from Mexico in the Mexican @-@ American War . Wilson and Charles Allen , another Massachusetts delegate , withdrew from the convention , and called for a new meeting of anti @-@ slavery advocates in Buffalo , which launched the Free Soil Party . 
 Having left the Whig Party , Wilson worked to build coalitions with others opposed to slavery , including Free Soilers , anti @-@ slavery Democrats , Barnburners from New York 's Democratic Party , the Liberty Party , the anti @-@ slavery elements of the Whig Party , and anti @-@ slavery members of the Know Nothing or Native American Party . Although Wilson 's new political coalition was castigated by " straight party " adherents of the mainstream Democratic and Whig parties , in April 1851 it elected Free Soil candidate Charles Sumner to the U.S. Senate . 
 From 1848 to 1851 Wilson was the owner and editor of the Boston Republican , which from 1841 to 1848 was a Whig outlet , and from 1848 to 1851 was the main Free Soil Party newspaper . 
 During his service in the Massachusetts legislature , Wilson took note that participation in the state militia had declined , and that it was not in a state of readiness . In addition to undertaking legislative efforts to provide uniforms and other equipment , in 1843 Wilson joined the militia himself , becoming a Major in the 1st Artillery Regiment , which he later commanded with the rank of colonel . In 1846 Wilson was promoted to brigadier general as commander of the Massachusetts Militia 's 3rd Brigade , a position he held until 1852 . 
 = = = Offices = = = 
 In 1852 , Wilson was chairman of the Free Soil Party 's national convention in Pittsburgh , which nominated John P. Hale for president and George Washington Julian for vice president . Later that year he was a Free Soil candidate for U.S. Representative , and lost to Whig Tappan Wentworth . He was a delegate to the state constitutional convention in 1853 , which proposed a series of political and governmental reforms that were defeated by voters in a post @-@ convention popular referendum . He ran unsuccessfully for Governor of Massachusetts as a Free Soil candidate in 1853 and 1854 , but declined to be a candidate again in 1855 because he had his sights set on the U.S. Senate . 
 = = = U.S. Senator ( 1855 – 1873 ) = = = 
 In 1855 Wilson was elected to the United States Senate by a coalition of Free @-@ Soilers , Know Nothings , and anti @-@ slavery Democrats , filling the vacancy caused by the resignation of Edward Everett . He had briefly joined the Know @-@ Nothings in an attempt to strengthen their anti @-@ slavery efforts , but aligned himself with the Republican Party at its creation , formed largely along the lines of the anti @-@ slavery coalition Wilson had helped develop and nurture . Wilson was reelected as a Republican in 1859 , 1865 and 1871 , and served from January 31 , 1855 to March 3 , 1873 , when he resigned in order to begin his vice presidential term on March 4 . 
 In his first Senate speech in 1855 , Wilson continued to align himself with the abolitionists , who wanted to immediately end slavery in the United States and its territories . In his speech , Wilson said he wanted to abolish slavery " wherever we are morally and legally responsible for its existence " including Washington D.C. Wilson also demanded repeal of the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850 , believing the federal government should have no responsibility for enforcing slavery , and that once the act was repealed tensions between slavery proponents and opponents would abate , enabling those Southerners who opposed slavery to help end it in their own time . 
 On May 22 , 1856 Preston Brooks brutally assaulted Senator Charles Sumner on the Senate floor , leaving Sumner bloody and unconscious . Brooks had been upset over Sumner 's Crimes Against Kansas speech that denounced the Kansas @-@ Nebraska Act . After the beating , Sumner received medical treatment at the Capitol , following which Wilson and Nathaniel P. Banks , the Speaker of the House , aided Sumner to travel by carriage to his lodgings , where he received further medical attention . Wilson called the beating by Brooks " brutal , murderous , and cowardly " . Brooks immediately challenged Wilson to a duel . Wilson declined , saying that he could not legally or by personal conviction participate . In reference to a rumor that Brooks might attack Wilson in the Senate as he had attacked Sumner , Wilson told the press " I have sought no controversy , and I seek none , but I shall go where duty requires , uninfluenced by threats of any kind . " The rumors proved unfounded , and Wilson continued his Senate duties without incident . 
 The attack on Sumner took place just one day after pro @-@ slavery Missourians killed one person in the burning and sacking of Lawrence , Kansas . The attack on Sumner and the sacking of Lawrence were later viewed as two of the incidents which symbolized the " breakdown of reasoned discourse . " This phrase came to describe the period when activists and politicians moved past the debate of anti @-@ slavery and pro @-@ slavery speeches and non @-@ violent actions , and into the realm of physical violence , which in part hastened the onset of the American Civil War . 
 In June 1858 Wilson made a Senate speech in which he suggested corruption in the government of California and inferred complicity on the part of Senator William M. Gwin , a pro @-@ slavery Democrat who had served as a member of Congress from Mississippi before moving to California . Gwin accused Wilson of demagoguery , and Wilson responded by saying he 'd rather be thought a demagogue than a thief . Gwin then challenged Wilson to a duel , but in fact neither Gwin nor Wilson wanted to follow through . After several attempts to find a face @-@ saving compromise , Gwin and Wilson agreed to refer their dispute to three senators who would serve as mediators . William H. Seward , John J. Crittenden and Jefferson Davis were chosen , and produced an acceptable solution . At their instigation , Wilson stated to the Senate that he had not meant to impugn Gwin 's honor , and Gwin replied by saying that he had not meant to question Wilson 's motives . In addition , the mediators caused to be removed from the Senate record both Gwin 's remarks about demagoguery and Wilson 's suggestion that Gwin was a thief . 
 = = Civil War = = 
 During the American Civil War , Wilson was Chairman of the Committee on Military Affairs and the Militia , and later the Committee on Military Affairs . In that capacity , he oversaw action on over 15 @,@ 000 War and Navy Department nominations that Abraham Lincoln submitted during the course of the war , and worked closely with him on legislation affecting the Army and Navy . 
 In the summer of 1861 , after the congressional session ended , Wilson returned to Massachusetts and recruited and equipped nearly 2 @,@ 300 men in forty days . They were mustered in as the 22nd Massachusetts Volunteer Infantry , which he commanded from September 27 to October 29 , an honor sometimes accorded to the individual responsible for raising and equipping a regiment . After the war he became an early member of the Military Order of the Loyal Legion of the United States . 
 Wilson 's experience in the militia , service with the 22nd Massachusetts , and chairmanship of the Military Affairs Committee provided him with more practical military knowledge and training than any other Senator . He made use of this experience throughout the war to frame , explain , defend and advocate for legislation on military matters , including enlistment of soldiers and sailors , and organizing and supplying the rapidly expanding Union Army and Union Navy . 
 Winfield Scott , the Commanding General of the United States Army since 1841 , said that during the session of Congress that ended in the Spring of 1861 Wilson had done more work " then all the chairmen of the military committees had done for the last 20 years . " On January 27 , 1862 Simon Cameron , the recently resigned Secretary of War echoed Scott 's sentiments when he said that " no man , in my opinion , in the whole country , has done more to aid the war department in preparing the mighty [ Union ] army now under arms than yourself [ Wilson ] . " 
 = = = Greenhow controversy = = = 
 In July 1861 Wilson was present for the Civil War 's first major battle at Bull Run Creek in Manassas , Virginia , an event which many senators , representatives , newspaper reporters , and Washington society elite traveled from the city to observe in anticipation of a quick Union victory . Riding out in a carriage in the early morning , Wilson brought a picnic hamper of sandwiches to feed Union troops . However , the battle turned into a Confederate rout , forcing Union troops to make a panicky retreat . Caught up in the chaos , Wilson was almost captured by the Confederates , while his carriage was crushed , and he had to make an embarrassing return to Washington on foot . The result of this battle had a sobering effect on many in the North , causing widespread realization that Union victory would not be won without a prolonged struggle . 
 In seeking to place blame for the Union defeat , some in Washington spread rumors that Wilson had revealed plans for the Union invasion of Virginia to Washington society figure and southern spy Rose O 'Neal Greenhow . According to the story , although he was married , Wilson had seen a great deal of Mrs. Greenhow , and may have told her about the plans of Major General Irvin McDowell , which Mrs. Greenhow then conveyed to Confederate forces under Major General Pierre Beauregard . One Wilson biography suggests someone else — Wilson 's Senate clerk Horace White — was also friendly with Mrs. Greenhow and could have leaked the invasion plan , although it is also possible that neither Wilson nor White did so . 
 = = = Equal rights activism = = = 
 On December 16 , 1861 Wilson introduced a bill to abolish slavery in Washington D.C. something he had desired to do since his visit to the nation 's capital 25 years earlier . At this time fugitive slaves from the war were being held in prisons of Washington D.C. and faced the possibility of return to their owners . Wilson said of his bill that it would " blot out slavery forever from the nation 's capital " . The measure met bitter opposition from the Democrats who remained in the Senate after those from the southern states vacated their seats to join the Confederacy , but it passed . After passage in the House , President Lincoln signed Wilson 's bill into law on April 16 , 1862 . 
 On July 8 , 1862 Wilson drafted a measure that authorized the President to enlist African Americans who had been held in slavery and were deemed competent for military service , and employ them to construct fortifications and carry out other military @-@ related manual labor , the first step towards allowing African Americans to serve as soldiers . President Lincoln signed the amendment into law on July 17 . Wilson 's law paid African Americans in the military $ 10 monthly , which was effectively $ 7 a month after deductions for food and clothing , while white soldiers were paid effectively $ 14 monthly . 
 On January 1 , 1863 Lincoln 's Emancipation Proclamation freed all slaves held in bondage in the Southern states or territories then in rebellion against the federal government . On February 2 , 1863 Congress built on Wilson 's 1862 law by passing a bill authored by Pennsylvania Congressman Thaddeus Stevens , which authorized the enlistment of 150 @,@ 000 African Americans into the Union Army for service as uniformed soldiers . 
 On February 17 , 1863 Wilson introduced a bill that would federally fund elementary education for African American youth in Washington D.C. President Lincoln signed the bill into law on March 3 , 1863 . 
 Wilson added an amendment to the 1864 Enrollment Act which provided that formerly enslaved African Americans from slave holding states remaining in the Union who enlisted in the Union Army would be considered permanently free by action of the federal government , rather than through individual emancipation by the states or their owners , thus preventing the possibility of their re @-@ enslavement . President Lincoln signed this measure into law on February 24 , 1864 , freeing more than 20 @,@ 000 slaves in Kentucky alone . 
 Wilson supported the right of black men to join the uniformed services . Once African Americans were permitted to serve in the military , Wilson advocated in the Senate for them to receive equal pay and other benefits . A Vermont newspaper portrayed Wilson 's position and enhanced his nationwide reputation as an abolitionist by editorializing " Henry Wilson of Massachusetts , in a speech in the U.S. Senate on Friday , said he thought our treatment of the negro soldiers almost as bad as that of the rebels at Fort Pillow . This is hardly an exaggeration . " 
 On June 15 , 1864 , Wilson succeeded in adding a provision to an appropriations bill which addressed the pay disparity between whites and blacks in the military by authorizing equal salaries and benefits for African American soldiers . Wilson 's provision stated that " all persons of color who had been or might be mustered into the military service should receive the same uniform , clothing , rations , medical and hospital attendance , and pay " as white soldiers , to date from January 1864 . 
 Wilson introduced a bill in Congress which would free in the Union 's slave holding states the still @-@ enslaved families of former slaves serving in the Union Army . In advocating for passage , Wilson argued that allowing the family members of soldiers to remain in slavery was a " burning shame to this country ... Let us hasten the enactment ... that , on the forehead of the soldier 's wife and the soldier 's child , no man can write " Slave " . President Lincoln signed the measure into law on March 3 , 1865 , and an estimated 75 @,@ 000 African American women and children were freed in Kentucky alone . 
 = = Reconstruction and Civil Rights = = 
 When Andrew Johnson assumed the presidency after President Lincoln 's assassination in April 1865 , Senators Sumner and Wilson both hoped Johnson would support the policies of the Republican Party , since Johnson , a Democrat , had been elected with Lincoln on a pro @-@ Union ticket . After the Civil War ended with a Union Victory in May 1865 , the defeated former Confederacy was ruined . It had been devastated economically , politically , and much of its infrastructure had been destroyed during the war . The opportunity was ripe for Congress and Johnson to work together on terms for Southern restoration and reconstruction . Instead , Johnson launched his own reconstruction policy , which was seen as more lenient to former Confederates , and excluded African American citizenship . When Congress opened the session which began in December 1865 , Johnson 's policy included a demand for admission of Southern Senators and Representatives , nearly all Democrats , including many former Confederates . Congress , still in Republican hands , responded by refusing to allow the Southern Senators and Representatives to take their seats , beginning a rift between Republicans in Congress and the President . Wilson favored allowing only persons who had been loyal to the United States to serve in positions of political power in the former Confederacy , and believed that Congress , not the President , had the power to reconstruct the southern states . As a result , Wilson joined forces with the Congressmen and Senators known as Radical Republicans , those most strongly opposed to Johnson . 
 On December 21 , 1865 , two days after the announcement that the States had ratified the Thirteenth Amendment , which abolished slavery , Wilson introduced a bill to protect the civil rights of African Americans . Although Wilson 's bill failed to pass Congress it was effectively the same bill as the Civil Rights Act of 1866 that passed Congress over Johnson 's veto on April 9 , 1866 . 
 The rift between the Radicals , including Wilson , and President Johnson grew as Johnson attempted to implement his more lenient Reconstruction policies . Johnson vetoed the bill to establish the Freedmen 's Bureau , as well as other Radical measures to protect African American civil rights — measures which Wilson supported . Wilson supported the Senate effort to impeach Johnson , saying that Johnson was " unworthy , if not criminal " in resisting Congressional Reconstruction measures , many of which were passed over Johnson 's vetos . At the 1868 Senate trial Wilson voted for Johnson 's impeachment , but Republicans fell one vote short of the two @-@ thirds majority needed to remove Johnson from office . ( With 36 " guilty " votes needed for removal , the Senate results were 35 to 19 on all three post @-@ trial ballots . ) 
 On May 27 , 1868 Wilson spoke before the Senate to forcefully advocate the readmission of Arkansas . Taking the lead on this issue , Wilson urged immediate action , saying that the new state government was constitutional , and was composed of loyal Southerners , African Americans who were formerly enslaved , and Northerners who had moved south . Wilson said he would not agree to Congressional adjournment until all Southern states with reconstructed governments loyal to the United States that adopted new constitutions were readmitted . The New York Tribune called Wilson 's speech " strong " and said that Wilson steered the Senate away from " legal hair @-@ splitting " . Within a month the Senate had acted , and Arkansas was readmitted on June 22 , 1868 . 
 In 1870 Hiram Revels was elected to the U.S. Senate by the reconstructed Mississippi Legislature . Revels was the first African American elected to the Senate , and Senate Democrats attempted to prevent him from being seated . Wilson defended Revels 's election , and presented as evidence of its validity signatures from the clerks of the Mississippi House of Representatives and Mississippi State Senate , as well as that of Adelbert Ames , the military Governor of Mississippi . Wilson argued that Revels 's skin color was not a bar to Senate service , and connected the role of the Senate to Christianity 's Golden Rule of doing to others as one would have done to oneself . The Senate voted to seat Revels , and after he took the oath of office Wilson personally escorted him to his desk as journalists recorded the historic event . 
 = = Vice Presidential campaign , 1868 = = 
 Prior to the presidential election of 1868 , Wilson toured the South giving political speeches . Many in the press believed Wilson was promoting himself to be the Republican presidential candidate . Wilson , however , supported the Civil War hero General Ulysses S. Grant . During Reconstruction Grant supported Republican Congressional initiatives rather than President Johnson 's , and during the dispute over the Tenure of Office Act which led to Johnson 's impeachment , Grant served as temporary Secretary of War , but then returned the Department to Radical ally Edwin M. Stanton 's control over Johnson 's strong objection , making Grant a favorite to many Radicals . 
 Wilson actually desired to be Vice President . During his speech making tour , he advocated a biracial society in the South , urging African Americans and their white supporters to take a conciliatory and peaceful approach with Southern whites who had favored the Confederacy . Radicals , including Benjamin Wade , were stunned by Wilson 's remarks , believing blacks should not be subject to their former white owners . At the Republican Convention , Wilson , Wade and others competed for the Vice Presidential nomination , and Wilson had support among Southern delegates , but he failed to win after five ballots . Wade was also unable to win the convention vote , and Wilson 's delegates eventually switched their votes to Speaker of the House Schuyler Colfax , who won the nomination and went on to win the general election with Grant at the head of the ticket . After Grant and Colfax won the 1868 election Wilson declined to serve as Secretary of War in Grant 's cabinet due to his desire to spend more time with Mrs. Wilson during her lengthy final illness . 
 = = Vice Presidential campaign , 1872 = = 
 In 1872 Wilson had a strong reputation among Republicans as a principled but practical reformer who supported African American civil rights , voting rights for women , federal education aid , regulation of businesses , and prohibition of liquor . In 1870 , incumbent Vice President Schuyler Colfax , said he would not run for another term , creating the possibility of a contested nomination . In addition , some Republicans , including Grant , desired another vice presidential nominee because they believed Colfax had presidential aspirations and might endanger Grant 's reelection by bolting to the Liberal Republican Party , which had formed because of opposition to charges of corruption in the Grant administration and Grant 's attempted Santo Domingo annexation . 
 At the Republican Convention held in Philadelphia in June 1872 , Wilson won enough votes to defeat Colfax , who by then had become an active candidate , renouncing his 1870 pledge and informing his supporters that he would accept renomination if it was offered . The Republicans believed Wilson 's nomination , as a politician of integrity coming from the anti @-@ slavery movement , would outflank the anti @-@ corruption argument of the Liberal Republicans , who counted Sumner among their members . Both the renominated Grant and his new running mate Wilson were idealized by Republican posters , which depicted Grant " the Galena Tanner " and Wilson " the Natick Shoemaker " carrying tools and wearing workmen 's aprons . ( Grant 's father operated a tanning and leather goods manufacturing business , and before the Civil War Grant had clerked in his father 's Galena , Illinois store . ) Wilson 's nomination for Vice President had been intended to strengthen the 1872 Republican ticket , and was seen as a success , with Grant and Wilson easily defeating Liberal Republican candidates Horace Greeley and B. Gratz Brown , who were also endorsed by the Democrats . 
 = = = Crédit Mobilier scandal = = = 
 During the 1872 campaign , Wilson 's reputation for honesty was marred by a September New York Sun article which indicated that he was involved in the Crédit Mobilier scandal . Wilson was one of several Representatives and Senators ( mostly Republicans ) , including Colfax , who were offered ( and possibly took ) bribes of cash and discounted shares in the Union Pacific Railroad 's Crédit Mobilier subsidiary from Congressman Oakes Ames during the late 1860s in exchange for votes favorable to the Union Pacific during the building of the First Transcontinental Railroad . 
 After denying to a reporter just a month before the election that he had a Crédit Mobilier connection , Wilson admitted involvement when he gave testimony before a Senate committee on February 13 , 1873 . Wilson told members of the investigating committee that in December 1867 he had agreed to purchase $ 2 @,@ 000 in Crédit Mobilier stock ( 20 shares ) using Mrs. Wilson 's money and in her name . According to Wilson , his wife and he later had concerns about the propriety of the transaction and had never taken possession of the actual stock certificates , so Wilson asked Ames to cancel the transaction and Ames refunded the $ 2 @,@ 000 purchase price to Wilson . Wilson said he then returned $ 814 to Ames – $ 748 in dividends and $ 66 in interest that Mrs. Wilson had supposedly earned as profits , even though she had not taken physical possession of her shares . Wilson further claimed that because Mrs. Wilson had refused to take these proceeds from Ames , Wilson took it upon himself to pay her $ 814 from his own funds to compensate her for the profit she would have made if she had kept the stock , which he said he felt obligated to do because his wife had originally agreed to purchase the stock on his recommendation , and had lost money by following his later recommendation to cancel the transaction . 
 Mrs. Wilson had died in 1870 , so Senators had to rely on Wilson 's word and that of Ames , who corroborated Wilson . The Senate accepted Wilson 's explanation , and took no action against him , but his reputation for integrity was somewhat damaged because of his initial denial and later admission , though not sufficiently enough to prevent him from becoming Vice President the following month . 
 = = Vice President = = 
 Wilson served as Vice President from March 4 , 1873 until his death . As Vice President , Wilson 's years of Senate experience enabled him to perform as a " highly efficient and acceptable " presiding officer . 
 = = Illness and death = = 
 Wilson 's ceremonial duties and work on History of the Rise and Fall of the Slave Power in America kept him extremely busy , working late hours with little time to rest . In early May , 1873 , Wilson attended funeral services for Salmon P. Chase in New York City . On May 19 , 1873 he suffered a stroke which caused paralysis in his face , general weakness , and impaired speech . His doctor ordered him to rest , but Wilson allowed reporters to see him . The public first took notice that Wilson was in ill health when he made an appearance in Boston on May 30 , and reporters were informed that Wilson was unable to work or handle his correspondence . His health somewhat improved during September and October , and on November 25 Wilson returned to Washington for the opening of Congress . He was able to preside over the Senate from December 1 through December 9 , 1873 , but was unable to speak in public , including when he attended a Boston commemoration of the one hundredth anniversary of the Boston Tea Party . 
 Wilson remained in occasional ill health into 1874 , but was able to attend funeral services for Charles Sumner in March . Throughout his remaining tenure , Wilson 's Senate attendance was irregular due to his continued poor health . During periods when he was not ill , Wilson was also able to resume some of his ceremonial duties , including participating in a White House party for the King of Hawaii , David Kalākaua , in December 1874 . When Free Soil and abolitionist colleague Gerrit Smith died in New York City on December 28 , 1874 , Wilson traveled there to view the body and take part in funeral services . 
 Wilson continued to go through bouts of ill health in 1875 . While working at the United States Capitol on November 10 , 1875 , he suffered what was believed to be a minor stroke , and was taken to the Vice President 's Room to recuperate . Over the next several days , his health appeared to improve and his friends thought he was nearly recovered . However , on November 22 at 7 : 20 AM , Wilson suffered a fatal stroke while working at the Capitol . His remains were accorded the honor of lying in state in the Capitol rotunda . 
 The subsequent funeral arrangements included military escorts as Wilson 's remains were transferred from one train station to another en route from Washington to Natick , as well as nights lying in state . The route included processions in Baltimore , Philadelphia , New York City , and Boston , and nights lying in state at Baltimore City Hall and Independence Hall in Philadelphia . He was interred at Old Dell Park Cemetery in Natick , Massachusetts . 
 Two other former Vice Presidents died in the same year as Wilson – John C. Breckinridge and Andrew Johnson . 
 Wilson was the fourth Vice President to die in office , following : George Clinton , who served under both Thomas Jefferson and James Madison ; Elbridge Gerry , who served under James Madison ; and William R. King who served under Franklin Pierce . 
 = = Historical reputation = = 
 According to historian George H. Haynes , during his nearly thirty years of public service Wilson practiced principled politics by championing unpopular causes , sometimes at the expense of his personal ambition . The causes Wilson supported included abolition of slavery , and the rights of workers , both black and white . 
 Wilson was not hesitant to sever ties with old guard politicians and form new coalitions in order to accomplish his objectives , even though this gave him the reputation among opponents of being a " shifty " politician . On the other hand , he was admired by fellow abolitionists for his lifelong dedication to the cause , and workingmen found inspiration in his career , since he had himself risen from a manual laborer 's background . 
 Wilson supported free public schools and libraries . In Massachusetts he supported tax exemptions for the purchase and maintenance of worker 's tools and furniture , and the removal of property qualifications for voting rights . 
 U.S. Senator George F. Hoar , a Massachusetts political contemporary , said Wilson was a " skilful , adroit , and practiced and constant political manager " and " the most skilled political organizer in the country " during his career . 
 Wilson is also recognized for being a political pioneer in techniques for determining public opinion while he held office . In the 20th century , the straw poll and scientific public opinion polls by companies including Gallup became standard parts of political campaigns and media coverage of elections . During his Senate career , Wilson pioneered straw polling by sampling the views of Massachusetts voters through in person conversations and unscientific written surveys before making his own views known . These efforts were credited with helping Wilson build coalitions , win elections , make political allies , and determine the best time to act in the Senate on issues of importance . 
 In 1891 , the Henry Wilson school , a facility for black students , opened on what was then Central Street in the Washington County portion of the District of Columbia ( now 17th Street in the Adams Morgan neighborhood ) . It was named for him in honor of his role emancipating the district 's slaves . The school was closed in 1956 due to its small size , and shortly thereafter converted to the Morgan Annex , a satellite location of the adjacent Thomas P. Morgan School . The Morgan Annex was later closed ; it was sold in 1989 , and then reopened as the Morgan Annex Lofts condominiums . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 On October 28 , 1840 Wilson married Harriet Malvina Howe ( 1824 – 1870 ) . They were the parents of a son , Henry Hamilton Wilson ( 1846 – 1866 ) , who attended the Highland Military Academy in Worcester , Massachusetts . 
 During the Civil War , the younger Wilson attended the United States Naval Academy , but left before graduating in order to accept a commission in the Union Army . He attained success in the 31st and 104th Regiments of United States Colored Troops , and was promoted to lieutenant colonel and second @-@ in @-@ command of the 104th in July 1865 . After the war he accepted a commission as a second lieutenant in the regular Army 's 6th Cavalry Regiment , and served until his death in 1866 . 
 In 1869 Henry and Harriet Wilson also became the de facto adoptive parents of a girl , Evangelina , who was born between 1864 and 1866 , and took the name Eva Wilson . In a complicated series of events , in 1869 a woman named Caroline Vreeland met Wilson 's sister in law Nancy Colbath , wife of his brother Samuel . Vreeland allowed Nancy Colbath to adopt the child , with the understanding that she would be raised by Henry Wilson and his wife . The child lived with the Wilsons until shortly before Mrs. Wilson 's death . Nancy Colbath then kept the child , and received monthly payments from Henry Wilson for her support . Details later emerged which indicated the likelihood that Vreeland had obtained a baby girl from an unknown parent or parents in Boston in 1866 so that her sister could use the baby in an attempt to extort a man with whom she had had an affair . Vreeland went to prison for a stabbing in the early 1870s . The child continued to live with Wilson , and by 1874 he had asked Nancy Colbath to again be responsible for her . Wilson agreed to provide them a suitable home and financial support , but had not followed through by the time of his death . 
 Wilson requested that the executor of his will , nephew William L. Coolidge , use most of Wilson 's estate to ensure that Wilson 's mother in law was cared for , and that Eva receive an education and financial support . Wilson had given Coolidge verbal instructions and letters in addition to his will , and the situation became complicated because Wilson 's death occurred before he had incorporated these additional instructions into his will . Coolidge acted as a trustee for Eva , and by 1889 , when she was more than 21 years old , she claimed she was entitled to the remainder of Wilson 's estate . Other Wilson family members disagreed ; because of the complexity of the details , Coolidge petitioned the Massachusetts courts for guidance . The courts found in favor of Eva , by then married and known as Eva Carpenter , and she received the bulk of the residue of the estate . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Abbott , Richard H. ( 1965 ) . Cobbler in Congress : Life of Henry Wilson , 1812 – 1875 1 . Madison , WI : University of Wisconsin — <unk> p . 8 . 
 Abbott , Richard H. ( 1972 ) . Cobbler in Congress : The Life of Henry Wilson , 1812 – 1875 . Lexington , KY : University Press of <unk> p . 6 . 
 Blue , Frederick J. ( 1987 ) . Salmon P. Chase : A Life in Politics . Kent , OH : Kent University Press. p . 319 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 340 @-@ 0 . 
 Giddings , Edward J. ( 1889 ) . American Christian Rulers : Or , Religion and Men of Government . New York , NY : Bromfield & Co. p . 551 . 
 Hatfield , Mark O. ; Senate Historical Office ( 1997 ) . Vice Presidents of the United States , 1789 – 1993 Henry Wilson ( 1873 – 1875 ) ( PDF ) . Washington D.C. : U.S. Government Printing Office. pp. 233 – 239 . 
 Haynes , George H. ( 1936 ) . Dumas Malone , ed . Dictionary of American Biography Henry Wilson . New York : Charles Scribner 's Sons. pp. 322 – 325 . 
 Heitman , Francis Bernard ( 1903 ) . Historical Register and Dictionary of the United States Army 1 . Washington , DC : U.S. Government Printing Office. p . 1046 . 
 " The Natick Cobbler " . Hide & Leather : The International Weekly ; Shoe Factories – <unk> – Allied Industries ( Chicago , IL : Hide and Leather Publishing Co . ) : 36 . June 21 , 1919 . 
 McKay , Ernest A. ( 1971 ) . Henry Wilson : Practical Radical ; A Portrait of a Politician . Port Washington , NY : <unk> Press. pp. 11 , 16 . 233 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9010 @-@ 2 . 
 McFeely , William S. ( 1974 ) . Woodward , C. Vann , ed . Responses of the Presidents to Charges of Misconduct . New York , New York : Delacorte Press. pp. 133 – 162 . ISBN 0 @-@ 440 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . 
 Myers , John L. ( 2009 ) . Henry Wilson and the Era of Reconstruction . Lanham , Maryland : University Press of America , Inc . ISBN 0 @-@ 7618 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 Myers , John L. ( 2005 ) . Henry Wilson and the Coming of the Civil War . Lanham , MD : University Press of America. p . 8 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 7618 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 Myers , John L. " The Writing of History of the Rise and Fall of the Slave Power in America , " Civil War History , June 1985 , Vol . 31 Issue 2 , pp 144 – 162 
 Nason , Elias ; Russell , Thomas ( 1876 ) . The Life and Public Services of Henry Wilson . Boston : B.B. Russell . 
 New Hampshire Adjutant General ( 1868 ) . Annual Report . Manchester , NH : John B. <unk> p . 203 . 
 <unk> , Stephen ( 2011 ) . A City So Grand : The Rise of an American Metropolis : Boston 1850 – 1900 . Boston , MA : Beacon Press. p . Chapter 9 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 8070 @-@ 0149 @-@ 3 . 
 Shelden , Rachel A. ( 2013 ) . Washington Brotherhood : Politics , Social Life , and the Coming of the Civil War . Chapel Hill , NC : University of North Carolina Press. pp. 31 – 32 . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1085 @-@ 6 . 
 The National Cyclopedia of American Biography IV . New York , NY : James T. White & Company . 1895 @.@ p . 14 . 
 United States Congressional Serial Set . Washington , DC : U.S. Government Printing Office . 1913 @.@ p . 1125 . 
 Henry Wilson , History of the Rise and Fall of the Slave Power in America , 2 vols . ( Boston : J. R. Osgood and Co . , 1873 – 77 ) 
 Winks , William Edward ( 1883 ) . Lives of Illustrious Shoemakers . London , England : Sampson Lowe , Marston , Searle & <unk> p . 362 . 
 = = = New York Times = = = 
 " Brooks and Senator Wilson " . New York Times . June 7 , 1856 . 
 " Credit Mobilier Senator Wilson " . New York Times . February 14 , 1873 . 
 = Mockingjay = 
 Mockingjay is a 2010 science fiction novel by American author Suzanne Collins . It is the last installment of The Hunger Games , following 2008 's The Hunger Games and 2009 's Catching Fire . The book continues the story of Katniss Everdeen , who agrees to unify the districts of Panem in a rebellion against the tyrannical Capitol . The hardcover and audiobook editions of Mockingjay were published by Scholastic on August 24 , 2010 , six days after the ebook edition went on sale . The book sold 450 @,@ 000 copies in the first week of release , exceeding the publisher 's expectations . It received a generally positive reaction from critics . 
 The novel was adapted into two films , with The Hunger Games : Mockingjay – Part 1 released in November 2014 and The Hunger Games : Mockingjay – Part 2 released a year later . 
 = = Inspiration and development = = 
 Collins has said that the main inspiration for The Hunger Games trilogy came from the classical account of Theseus and the Minotaur . In Greek mythology , as a punishment for the killing of King Minos 's son Androgeos , Athens was forced to sacrifice seven youths and seven maidens to Crete , who were then put in the Labyrinth and killed by the Minotaur . After a while , Theseus , the son of the Athenian king , decided to put an end to the Minotaur and Minos 's terror , so he volunteered to join the third group of victims , ultimately killing the Minotaur and leading his companions out of the monster 's Labyrinth . 
 Collins has said that there are also many parallels between the Roman Empire and the fictional nation of Panem . She describes the Hunger Games as " an updated version of the Roman gladiator games , which entails a ruthless government forcing people to fight to the death as popular entertainment . " Collins also explains that the name " Panem " came from the Latin phrase " Panem et Circenses " , which means " Bread and Circuses " and refers to the strategy used by Roman emperors to appease the masses by providing them with food and entertainment . 
 As with the previous books in the trilogy , Mockingjay contains 27 chapters , with nine chapters in each of the three parts . This structure , which Collins had previously used in her series The Underland Chronicles , came from Collins 's playwriting background . This " three @-@ act " structure is also apparent in the trilogy as a whole ; Collins stated that she " knew from the beginning " that she was going to write a trilogy . 
 The cover and title information was revealed by Scholastic on February 11 , 2010 . The cover continues the previous books ' theme on the symbol of peace . The novel 's title comes from the hybrid birds of the same name that feature in the novels ' storyline . As Publishers Weekly has stated , " the hybrid birds that are an important symbol — of hope and rebellion — throughout the books " . Collins likens Katniss to a Mockingjay because both " should never have existed " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Katniss , her sister Prim , and her friends Finnick and Gale all reluctantly adjust to a highly structured life in the underground District 13 , which has been spearheading the rebellion in Panem . Feeling manipulated , Katniss eventually agrees to act as " the Mockingjay " — a poster child for the rebellion — but only on the condition that District 13 's President Alma Coin vows to grant immunity to all of the past Hunger Games tributes , including Katniss 's friend Peeta Mellark and Finnick 's lover Annie Cresta , and to reserve for Katniss the right to personally murder Panem 's President Snow once he is captured . 
 Katniss and the rebels learn that Peeta is alive and is being tortured at the Capitol in an attempt to demoralize and control Katniss . When a rescue team succeeds in extracting him , they discover that Peeta has been " hijacked " — a brutal form of brainwashing involving the use of Tracker <unk> venom that induces extreme fear . Peeta has been programmed to hate and fear Katniss . After he attempts to kill her , he is kept restrained under heavy guard at all times as the rebel medics seek a way to restore him to sanity . 
 A controversial strategy proposed by Gale wins a decisive victory at District 2 , readying the rebels to launch a final campaign against the Capitol itself . Katniss and her <unk> team ( a film crew recording her squad for rebel propaganda ) are deployed on a trivial assignment to the Capitol . President Coin has sent Peeta along on the mission even though he is still dangerous and unpredictable . Katniss believes Coin wants her dead because she is impossible to control . 
 While filming in a purportedly safe Capitol neighborhood , the team 's commander , Boggs , is killed . Subsequently , during intense violence and urban warfare that involves Hunger Games @-@ like monsters , most of Katniss ' team mates , including Finnick , are killed . Katniss presses on alone towards President Snow 's mansion . As Katniss reaches the mansion , a <unk> drops parachutes carrying bombs that explode among a group of trapped children . The rebel medics ( including Katniss ' sister Prim ) rush in to help the injured children but , in a deliberately inhumane strategy , a second wave of firebombs explodes , taking out the medics . Prim is killed and Katniss sustains severe burns , but the rebels succeed in taking the Capitol . 
 During her recuperation , Katniss is deeply depressed over her sister 's death and confronts President Snow . Snow claims that Coin orchestrated the bombing that resulted in Prim 's death , persuasively arguing that Coin made it appear to be Snow 's work to turn his supporters against him and that , if he had a hovercraft at his disposal , he would have escaped , rather than bomb the Capitol . Knowing this to be true , and acknowledging the previous agreement not to lie to one another , Katniss realizes in horror that the strategy used to kill the medics had been developed earlier by Gale . When Katniss confronts Gale about his possible involvement , he merely expresses uncertainty . Katniss becomes convinced that , rather than establishing a republic governed by representatives from each of the Districts , Coin intends to assume Snow 's power and maintain the status quo . 
 On the day Snow is to be executed , President Coin asks the remaining Hunger Games victors to vote on punishing the Capitol just as the Capitol punished the Districts : by holding a final Hunger Games that will target the children of the Capitol 's leaders . Katniss silently reflects that this is exactly the same evil the Capitol committed when the last rebellion failed . Then , she votes " yes — for Prim . " Haymitch is the only one who understands her hidden meaning . They proceed to the execution , where Katniss is to shoot Snow . As she readies her bow , Snow flashes her one last smile , reminding her of his promise to always be truthful to her . Katniss silently agrees and , making her decision , she raises her bow and shoots Coin instead , killing her . Katniss immediately attempts suicide , but Peeta stops her , and she is arrested during the ensuing riot . After the riot , Snow is found dead . Katniss is acquitted of Coin 's murder by reason of insanity , and she is relocated to the ruins of her home in District 12 . 
 Months later , Peeta and some other District 12 natives also return there . Peeta has gradually recovered the memories of his love for Katniss . Katniss embraces her love for Peeta , recognizing her need for his hope and strength . Together , they write a book to preserve the memory of those who died . Peeta still suffers flashbacks from being hijacked , and Katniss still wakes up screaming from nightmares . By helping to overthrow Snow and assassinating Coin , Katniss has preserved the possibility that Panem will transition to a representative form of government , but at a tremendous personal cost . 
 In the epilogue set 20 years later , Katniss and Peeta have two children . The Hunger Games are over for good , and the children represent hope that future generations will benefit from the sacrifices of their parents . Katniss dreads the day her children learn about their parents ' involvement in both the Games and the war . When she feels distressed , Katniss plays a comforting but repetitive game : reminding herself of every good thing she has ever seen someone do . The series ends with Katniss ' somber reflection that " There are much worse games to play . " 
 = = Themes = = 
 Reviews have noted many themes in the previous books that are also explored in " Mockingjay " . A review from The Baltimore Sun noted that " the themes of the series , including physical hardships , loyalty in extreme circumstances and traversing morally ambiguous terrain , are continued at an even larger scale . " In the book , Katniss must deal with betrayal and violence against people . At the same time , while she was symbolically touching thousands of lives , she must also lead those people into war . Finally , Katniss realizes she cannot even trust President Coin , leader of District 13 . 
 In an interview with Collins , it was noted that the series " tackles issues like severe poverty , starvation , oppression , and the effects of war . " Collins replied that this inspiration was from her father , who , when going to war in Vietnam , made sure that his children understood the consequences and effects of war . Yvonne Zipp of The Christian Science Monitor noted that it was " the most brutal of the trilogy " and that " Collins doesn 't take war lightly – her characters debate the morality involved in tactics used to try to overthrow the rotting , immoral government , and they pay a high cost for those tactics . " Katie <unk> of The New York Times wrote that " it is the perfect teenage story with its exquisitely refined rage against the cruel and arbitrary power of the adult world . " In a review for USA Today , Bob Minzesheimer pointed out that the novel contained optimism : " Hope emerges from despair . Even in a dystopian future , there 's a better future . " 
 Minzesheimer also noted a central question of " Real or not real ? " which was asked throughout the novel by Peeta . Susan Carpenter of the Los Angeles Times also pointed this out , writing , " Mockingjay takes readers into new territories and an even more brutal and confusing world : one where it 's unclear what sides the characters are on , one where presumed loyalties are repeatedly stood on their head " . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 Mockingjay was first released in the US and Canada on August 24 , 2010 . The UK , New Zealand and Australia received the book one day later , on August 25 , 2010 . The audiobook was released simultaneously on August 24 , 2010 by Scholastic Audio . 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 The book had a 1 @.@ 2 million @-@ copy first printing that was bumped up from 750 @,@ 000 . In its first week of release , the book sold over 450 @,@ 000 copies . Following this , Scholastic printed an additional 400 @,@ 000 copies , bringing the initial print run up to 1 @.@ 6 million . Scholastic Trade president Ellie Berger said that sales " have exceeded all expectations " . The book has also been released in e @-@ book format and topped sales in the week ending with August 29 , 2010 , beating out The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo , which had held the top spot since April . The other Hunger Games books have also made it in the top ten , with the first book at fifth and the second book taking eighth . As of March 2012 , the book has sold over 9 million copies . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Promotion = = = 
 To promote the release of Mockingjay , many bookstores held midnight release parties . The official event in New York City was attended by Collins , and included many activities such as a tarot card reader , a magician , jugglers and face @-@ painters . Prizes such as signed copies of Catching Fire and Hunger Games @-@ themed cups were raffled . Once Collins arrived , she read the first chapter of the novel , explaining that she would read with an accent since Katniss , the narrator , is from Appalachia . By midnight , copies were being sold with a signature stamp since Collins had a hand injury and was unable to sign . 
 Before the release , Scholastic also released a trailer for the book , launched a Facebook page that gained over 22 @,@ 000 fans in 10 days , and held a contest for booksellers to win a visit from Collins and an online countdown clock to the release date . There were also advertisements for the book on websites such as Entertainment Weekly and Romantic Times . National Entertainment Collectibles Association also sold other goods such as T @-@ shirts , posters , games and bracelets . Collins also held a " 13 @-@ District Blog Tour " where 13 winners received a free copy of Mockingjay on August 24 , 2010 . A tour was also scheduled , starting at Books of Wonder in New York where the official party took place . The tour ended on November 6 , 2010 , in the Third Place Books store in Lake Forest Park , Washington . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Mockingjay has received generally positive reviews from critics . Some noted that there was a suspense drop between Catching Fire and the start of Mockingjay . Nicole Sperling of Entertainment Weekly gave the book a B + and said , " Collins has kicked the brutal violence up a notch in an edge @-@ of @-@ your @-@ seat plot " . Publishers Weekly gave the book a starred review , calling it " the best yet , a beautifully orchestrated and intelligent novel that succeeds on every level " . The review went on to praise the " sharp social commentary and the nifty world building " . Kirkus Reviews gave Mockingjay a starred review , saying that the book is exactly what its fans are looking for and that " it will grab them and not let go " . Susan Carpenter of the Los Angeles Times compared the battlefield to Iraq and said that the book is every bit as original as the first in the series , ending the review with " Wow " . 
 The Baltimore Sun 's Nancy Knight commented that the book " ends on an ostensibly happy note , but the heartbreaking effects of war and loss aren 't sugar @-@ coated " and that it will have readers thinking about the effects of war on society . Katie <unk> of The New York Times said it is " the perfect teenage story with its exquisitely refined rage against the cruel and arbitrary power of the adult world " . However , she criticized that it was not as " impeccably plotted " as The Hunger Games . Bob Minzesheimer of USA Today gave the book three out of four stars . The Christian Science Monitor reviewer Yvonne Zipp described it as " an entirely gripping read " . 
 While a review from The Sacramento Bee praised the action scenes and the battle in the Capitol , the reviewer also criticized Collins for not giving enough time to finish all the loose ends , writing that " the disappointment with Mockingjay hits primarily as Collins starts her home stretch . It 's almost as if she didn 't allocate enough time or chapters to handle all her threads " . 
 = = Film adaptation = = 
 The Hunger Games trilogy was adapted into a series of films , with the stars of the 2012 film The Hunger Games signed on for all four movies . Mockingjay was split into two parts ; Part 1 was released on November 21 , 2014 , and Part 2 was released on November 20 , 2015 . Francis Lawrence , director of The Hunger Games : Catching Fire , returned to direct the two final movies in the series . Julianne Moore played President Coin . 
 = Michael Pineda = 
 Michael Francisco Pineda Paulino ( born January 18 , 1989 ) is a Dominican professional baseball starting pitcher for the New York Yankees of Major League Baseball ( MLB ) . He signed as an international free agent with the Seattle Mariners in 2005 , and made his MLB debut for the Mariners in 2011 . In his rookie season , Pineda was named an All @-@ Star and finished fifth in balloting for American League Rookie of the Year . After his rookie season , he was traded to the Yankees . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Minor leagues = = = 
 Pineda signed with the Seattle Mariners of Major League Baseball ( MLB ) at age 16 on December 12 , 2005 . He made his professional debut with the Mariners of the Rookie @-@ level Dominican Summer League ( DSL ) in 2006 , pitching to a 2 – 1 win – loss record with a 0 @.@ 44 earned run average ( ERA ) , allowing only one earned run all season . In 2007 , he had a 6 – 1 record with a 2 @.@ 29 ERA in regular action for the DSL Mariners . Pineda pitched for the Wisconsin Timber Rattlers of the Class @-@ A Midwest League in 2008 and had an 8 – 6 record with a 1 @.@ 95 ERA . Opponents had a batting average of .216 against Pineda . He led the Seattle farm system in ERA , opponent average and strikeouts ( 128 ) . Baseball America rated Pineda as the Mariners ' tenth best prospect while the Mariners organization named him their Minor League Pitcher of the Year . Wisconsin pitching coach Jaime Navarro became Pineda 's mentor . 
 Pineda battled injuries during the 2009 season , missing most of the year due to elbow strain . He was 4 – 2 with a 2 @.@ 84 ERA for the High Desert Mavericks of the Class A @-@ Advanced California League while healthy and threw three shutout innings for the Mariners of the Rookie @-@ level Arizona League . He struck out 52 in 47 1 ⁄ 3 innings pitched ( IP ) for the year . 
 Before the 2010 season , Baseball America ranked Pineda as the Mariners ' sixth best prospect . Back in good health in 2010 , Pineda was 8 – 1 with a 2 @.@ 22 ERA for the West Tenn Diamond Jaxx of the Class @-@ AA Southern League with 78 strikeouts and 17 walks in 77 IP and 3 – 3 with a 4 @.@ 76 ERA for the Tacoma Rainiers of the Class @-@ AAA Pacific Coast League with 76 strikeouts and 17 walks in 62 1 ⁄ 3 IP . The Mariners front office ended his season when he reached 140 IP as a precaution against injury . The Mariners again named Pineda their Minor League Pitcher of the Year in 2010 , and he was a finalist for the USA Today Minor League Player of the Year . 
 Baseball America rated Pineda as the second best prospect in the Mariners ' system before the 2011 season . Baseball America also rated him the sixteenth best prospect in all of baseball . 
 = = = Seattle Mariners ( 2011 ) = = = 
 Pineda made the Mariners ' starting rotation out of spring training 2011 as the number five starter , the third youngest player on a 2011 American League opening day roster after Chris Sale and Tim Collins . He made his MLB debut on April 5 , giving up three runs in six innings in a loss . Pineda pitched 7 1 ⁄ 3 innings , allowed two runs , struck out seven batters , and earned his first MLB win on April 12 , 2011 . Pineda struck out a career high nine batters against the Detroit Tigers on April 28 , including the first four batters he faced . He ended his first month in the majors with a 4 – 1 record and a 2 @.@ 01 ERA . He was named American League Rookie of the Month for April 2011 , pitching at least six innings in his first five starts , giving up only 22 hits and 12 walks over 31 1 ⁄ 3 innings , while striking out 30 opposing batters . 
 Pineda was selected to the All @-@ Star Game on July 10 as a replacement for Justin Verlander , who was ineligible to pitch in the All @-@ Star Game due to having pitched the day before the All @-@ Star break . He was 8 – 6 at that point , but with a 3 @.@ 03 ERA and 113 strikeouts in 113 innings , against only 36 walks . In the All @-@ Star Game , Pineda pitched one perfect inning , striking out Scott Rolen and Rickie Weeks . 
 Pineda finished the 2011 season with a 9 – 10 record and a 3 @.@ 74 ERA . He recorded no wins in his final seven starts over the last two months of the year , and the Mariners cut back on his work load as a precaution against an arm injury . In 28 starts , he struck out 173 hitters while walking just 55 over 171 innings . Pineda struck out 24 @.@ 9 % of all batters faced , which was the third highest strikeout percentage in MLB . He also finished fifth in voting for American League Rookie of the Year Award , behind Jeremy Hellickson , Mark Trumbo , Eric Hosmer , and Iván Nova , and ahead of teammate Dustin Ackley , who finished sixth . After the season , Keith Law ranked Pineda as the 20th best player under the age of 25 . 
 = = = New York Yankees ( 2012 – present ) = = = 
