 The Mariners traded Pineda to the New York Yankees with José Campos , for Jesús Montero and Héctor <unk> on January 13 , 2012 . The Yankees needed a top @-@ tier starting pitcher to pair with CC Sabathia , and the Mariners felt they could afford to part with Pineda because of their depth of top @-@ tier pitching prospects , including Danny <unk> , James Paxton , and <unk> Walker . 
 Pineda was placed on the 15 @-@ day disabled list with tendinitis in his right shoulder at the culmination of spring training , causing him to miss the start of the 2012 season . During his rehabilitation , he suffered an anterior labral tear in his right shoulder . He underwent arthroscopic surgery on May 1 , 2012 , and was ruled out for the 2012 season . Pineda began the 2013 season on the 60 @-@ day DL as he was still recovering from the shoulder surgery . He was activated from the disabled list on July 8 , 2013 , and optioned to the minor leagues , where he pitched for the Scranton / Wilkes @-@ Barre RailRiders of the Class AAA International League . In six games pitched for the RailRiders , Pineda had a 1 – 1 record and a 3 @.@ 86 ERA . 
 Pineda competed for a spot in the Yankees ' starting rotation during spring training in 2014 . He was named the Yankees ' fifth starter towards the end of spring training . He made his first start for the Yankees on April 5 , 2014 . On April 10 , 2014 , during a start against the Boston Red Sox , Boston broadcasters noticed a substance that appeared to be pine tar on the palm of Pineda 's pitching hand in the early innings of the game . Midway through Pineda 's outing , the substance was wiped from his hand only to be added to his wrist . The umpires of the game were never notified and no action was taken against Pineda , who told reporters after the game that the substance on his hand was dirt . On April 23 , 2014 , during Pineda 's next game against the Red Sox , Red Sox manager John Farrell notified the umpires about pine tar on Pineda 's neck , and he was ejected from the game in the second inning . Pineda was suspended for 10 games for the incident . He had a 1 @.@ 83 ERA in 19 2 ⁄ 3 innings pitched across his first four starts . 
 While pitching in a simulated game during the suspension , Pineda developed a strain in his teres major muscle , which was expected to require three to four weeks to heal . Following inflammation experienced in late May , Pineda 's return was pushed back to August . The Yankees activated Pineda to start on August 13 . Pineda finished the season with a 5 – 5 record and a 1 @.@ 89 ERA in 76 1 ⁄ 3 innings . 
 On May 10 , 2015 , in a win against the Baltimore Orioles , Pineda struck out a career @-@ high 16 batters over seven innings while also walking none , shattering his previous career @-@ high of 10 strikeouts in a single game . He also became the first pitcher since Johan Santana in 2007 with 16 strikeouts and no walks in a single game . Pineda went on the disabled list on July 30 due to a strained flexor muscle in his right forearm . He finished the season with a 12 – 10 record and a 4 @.@ 37 ERA in 160 2 ⁄ 3 innings across 27 games started . 
 = = Scouting profile = = 
 Pineda is listed at 6 feet 7 inches ( 2 @.@ 01 m ) and 265 pounds ( 120 kg ) . Baseball America rated Pineda as having the best fastball and control in the Mariners ' system in 2010 , while rating him as having the best fastball and slider in the Mariners season in 2011 . Pineda 's fastball in 2011 averaged 94 @.@ 7 miles per hour ( 152 @.@ 4 km / h ) , the highest among MLB rookies with at least 100 innings pitched , ranking fourth in the American League behind Alexi Ogando , Justin Verlander , and David Price . Pineda also throws a changeup . Since his shoulder surgery , his fastball is in the 92 @-@ 93 mph range , topping out around 96 @-@ 97 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Pineda 's family lives in the Dominican Republic . While pitching for the Mariners in 2011 , he roomed with Navarro , who had become the Mariners ' bullpen coach . He makes an effort to conduct his interviews in English , without the use of a translator , though he still receives some assistance from Yankees ' teammate <unk> Betances . 
 On August 20 , 2012 , Pineda was charged with driving under the influence ( DUI ) of alcohol while on injury rehab in Tampa , Florida . On February 20 , 2013 . Pineda pleaded no contest to driving under the influence and must serve 50 hours community service , up to one year of probation , attend DUI school and pay a $ 500 fine . 
 = Blind Ambition ( Family Guy ) = 
 " Blind Ambition " is the third episode of season four of Family Guy , which was first broadcast on Fox on May 15 , 2005 . In the episode , Peter swallows an excessive number of nickels , causing him to become blind . He later becomes a hero after unwittingly saving Horace the bartender from a fire at his bar , The Drunken Clam , and then retains his sight . Meanwhile , Quagmire is forced to refrain from perverse sexual behavior or risk being driven out of the neighborhood following his arrest for spying on Lois in a ladies ' lavatory . 
 = = Plot = = 
 At the bowling alley , Mort Goldman bowls a perfect game and becomes an overnight celebrity . Lois arrives to pick Peter up from the bowling alley , but discovers Quagmire spying on her from the ceiling of the ladies ' toilet . Quagmire is beaten up then arrested , but released shortly after by Joe . On his return , Lois , Bonnie and Loretta reveal that they 're petitioning the city of Quahog to have Quagmire removed from their neighborhood . As Peter and the other guys are defending Quagmire , Ernie the Giant Chicken attacks Peter and starts a fight that causes huge casualties inside and outside of Quahog . After the fight , Peter returns to the neighborhood to return to the conversation and tells the women that , " Quagmire 's a good guy , he 's just a little mixed up , that 's all ! " Eventually , the women agree to let Quagmire stay in the neighborhood so long as he manages to control his perverse behavior . Quagmire 's taught self @-@ control through operant conditioning by Peter and his friends , and is eventually allowed out in public . Soon , however , he is distracted by women playing in a fountain in the shopping mall and panics , running into a CCTV camera operation room monitoring women 's changing rooms . Discovering that a lady in a fitting room is having a heart attack , he appears to rush to her aid , performing CPR and saving her life . Quagmire is congratulated for his heroism , but his intention had been to molest the woman while she was unconscious ( which he reveals by asking " What the hell is CPR ? " ) . 
 This upsets Peter , who is jealous of his friends ' success . In the hope of becoming famous , Peter attempts to set a world record for eating the largest number of nickels , but develops nickel poisoning and loses his vision . Attempting to drown his sorrows , Peter visits his local bar , The Drunken Clam , with his guide dog , unaware that the bar is on fire ( caused by God trying to impress a woman ) . Discovering the bartender Horace trapped under debris , Peter saves his life and is proclaimed a hero by local newsman Tom Tucker . When told that he saved Horace from a burning building , Peter replied with disbelief , " That freakin ' place was on fire ? ! " For his inadvertent bravery , Peter is awarded a medal by the mayor and receives an eye transplant , the replacement eyes coming from a homeless man dragged to death when Peter accidentally tied his guide dog around the man 's neck thinking it was a parking meter . The end of this episode is an unconnected parody of the closing throne room scene from Star Wars Episode IV : A New Hope . 
 = = Production = = 
 During Family Guy 's third season , the show was cancelled by its network . In preparation in case the show was revived and began broadcasting again , five short scripts were written in 2001 for future episodes . Blind Ambition was developed from one of those scripts . A number of scenes in the episode were removed before broadcast and one , the reappearance of Ernie the Giant Chicken , had originally been set to broadcast in " The Cleveland – Loretta Quagmire " . The scene was moved to this episode because " The Cleveland @-@ Loretta Quagmire " already contained a lengthy fight sequence and overran its time allowance . Several of the removed scenes focused on gags showing Peter and his friends attempting to rehabilitate Quagmire , one of which saw Brian Griffin transporting a fork @-@ lift truck load of porn magazines away from Quagmire 's house . Since the episode aired , a selection of action figures have been created of Peter acting as Gary , The No Trash Cougar . 
 Show producer David Goodman received many telephone calls complaining about the scene where Peter attempts to seduce his son Chris , mistakenly believing him to be his wife , Lois . The scene was believed by some viewers to be encouraging child molestation . The show also received at least one letter of complaint regarding the scene where Quagmire watches Lois going to the toilet ; screenwriter Chris Sheridan comments on the DVD commentary that the number of complaints about this scene exceeded one . It is prohibited on Fox to use the term ' Jesus Christ ' without actually referring to the person himself , and so in the scene in which God vaporises a person and exclaims " Jesus Christ " , it was necessary for Jesus to physically appear before the two run away in order for the scene to be suitable for television airing . 
 In addition to the regular cast , actor Gary Cole , actress Gina Gershon , actor Judd Hirsch , voice actress Rachael MacFarlane and actress Lisa Wilhoit guest starred in the episode . Recurring guest voice actors Lori Alan , actor John G. Brennan , writer Danny Smith , and actress Jennifer Tilly made minor appearances . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Stewie discovers the Keebler Elves after crashing into the tree , who plan to kill their competition : Snap , Crackle and Pop , with the help of Judd Hirsch 's nuclear weapon , which Peter views while peeking through a ball return at the bowling alley . Later on in the bar , Crackle and Pop are seen discussing an attack by the Keebler Elves which apparently resulted in Snap 's death . 
 Beforehand , a ship crashes through Quahog buildings , a reference to Speed 2 : Cruise Control . 
 In one cutaway scene , W. Frederick Gerhardt 's <unk> crashing is parodied . 
 Peter discusses Scrubs with Horace in the bar , a show for which both Neil Goldman and Garrett Donovan have written . 
 The entire scene in which Peter receives his award from Mayor West is a reenactment of the ending of the original 1977 Star Wars film , A New Hope ; Lucasfilm permitted the reproduction of the characters , music and sounds . 
 The airplane that defeats Ernie the Giant Chicken in the fight is a mirror reference to the climatic scene in Raiders of the Lost Ark . 
 Stewie being launched into a tree is a reference to The Brady Bunch . 
 = = Reception = = 
 PopMatters ' Kevin Wong gave the episode a positive review , feeling it was better than the two previous episodes of the season . He commented on the fight scene between Peter and Ernie the Giant Chicken as " a cartoon action sequence to end all cartoon action sequences : vehicles explode and limbs flail as Peter and the chicken beat each other senseless . " " Blind Ambition " was criticized by Mike Drucker of IGN , who found that " the long fight with the chicken in Blind Ambition was funny once before , but borderline tiring here " . However , Drucker also noted that the Star Wars ending was " one of my favorite jokes in the series " . 
 = Sweeney Todd : The Demon Barber of Fleet Street ( 2007 film ) = 
 Sweeney Todd : The Demon Barber of Fleet Street is a 2007 British @-@ American musical horror comedy film directed by Tim Burton . It is an adaptation of Stephen Sondheim and Hugh Wheeler 's Tony Award @-@ winning 1979 musical of the same name and re @-@ tells the Victorian melodramatic tale of Sweeney Todd , an English barber and serial killer who murders his customers with a straight razor and , with the help of his accomplice , Mrs. Lovett , processes their corpses into meat pies . 
 Having been struck by the cinematic qualities of Sondheim 's musical while still a student , Burton had entertained the notion of a film version since the early 1980s . However , it was not until 2006 that he had the opportunity to realize this ambition , when DreamWorks announced his appointment as replacement for director Sam Mendes , who had been working on such an adaptation . Sondheim , although not directly involved , was extensively consulted during the film 's production . 
 The film stars Johnny Depp as Benjamin Barker / Sweeney Todd and Helena Bonham Carter as Mrs. Lovett . Depp , not known for his singing , took lessons in preparation for his role , which producer Richard D. Zanuck acknowledged was something of a gamble . However , Depp 's vocal performance , despite being criticized as lacking certain musical qualities , was generally thought by critics to suit the part ( see Music section below ) . 
 Sweeney Todd : The Demon Barber of Fleet Street was released in the United States on December 21 , 2007 , and in the United Kingdom on January 25 , 2008 , to largely enthusiastic reviews . The film won a number of awards , including the Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Musical or Comedy , the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy and the Academy Award for Best Art Direction . Helena Bonham Carter was nominated for a Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy , and Johnny Depp was also nominated for an Academy Award for Best Actor . Although not an outstanding financial success in the U.S. , it performed well worldwide , and has spawned a soundtrack album and various DVD releases . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 1846 , Benjamin Barker , a barber , arrives in London , accompanied by sailor Anthony Hope . Fifteen years earlier , he was falsely convicted and sentenced to penal transportation by the corrupt Judge Turpin , who lusted after Barker 's wife Lucy . Barker adopts the alias " Sweeney Todd " and returns to his old Fleet Street shop , situated above Mrs. Nellie Lovett 's meat pie shop . He learns that Turpin raped Lucy , who then poisoned herself with arsenic . The couple 's daughter , Johanna , is now Turpin 's ward , and is the object of Turpin 's lust . Todd vows revenge , and re @-@ opens his barber shop after Mrs. Lovett returns his straight razors to him . Anthony becomes enamored with Johanna , but is caught by Turpin and driven away by his corrupt associate , Beadle Bamford . 
 Todd denounces faux @-@ Italian barber Adolfo Pirelli 's hair tonic as a fraudulent mix and humiliates him in a public shaving contest . A few days later , Pirelli arrives at Todd 's shop , with his boy assistant Tobias <unk> . Mrs. Lovett keeps Toby occupied while Pirelli identifies himself as Todd 's former assistant , Davy Collins , and threatens to reveal Todd 's secret unless Todd gives him half his earnings . Todd kills Collins to protect his secret , and hides his body in a trunk . 
 After receiving advice from Bamford , Turpin , intending marriage to Johanna , visits Todd 's shop for grooming . Todd shaves Turpin , preparing to slit his throat ; they are interrupted by Anthony , who reveals his plan to elope with Johanna before noticing Turpin . Turpin leaves enraged and Todd vents his rage by killing customers while waiting for another chance to kill Turpin , and Mrs. Lovett bakes the victims into pies . Todd rigs his barber 's chair with a pedal @-@ operated mechanism that deposits his victims through a trap door into Mrs. Lovett 's basement bake @-@ house . Anthony searches for Johanna , whom Turpin has sent to an insane asylum upon discovering her plans to elope with Anthony . 
 The barbering and pie @-@ making businesses prosper , and Mrs. Lovett takes Toby as her assistant . Mrs. Lovett tells an uninterested Todd of her plans to marry him and move to the seaside . Anthony discovers Johanna 's whereabouts and poses as a wig @-@ maker 's apprentice to rescue her . Todd has Toby deliver a letter to Turpin , telling him where Johanna will be brought when Anthony frees her . Toby has become wary of Todd and tells Mrs. Lovett of his suspicion . 
 Bamford arrives at the pie shop , informing Mrs. Lovett that neighbors have been complaining of the stink from her chimney . He is distracted by Todd 's offer of a free grooming and is murdered by Todd . Mrs. Lovett informs Todd of Toby 's suspicions , and the pair search for Toby , whom Mrs. Lovett has locked in the bake @-@ house . He has hidden himself in the sewers after seeing Bamford 's body drop into the room from the trap door above , as well as finding a human toe in a pie . Anthony brings Johanna , disguised as a sailor , to the shop , and has her wait there while he leaves to find a coach . 
 A beggar woman enters the shop in search of Bamford . She recognizes Todd , but upon hearing Turpin 's voice , Todd kills her and sends her through the trap door . As Turpin enters , Todd explains that Johanna had repented and offers a free shave ; when Turpin finally recognizes Todd as Benjamin Barker , Todd stabs him several times before cutting his throat . Upon seeing Johanna , Todd prepares to slit her throat as well , not recognizing her as his daughter . Hearing Mrs. Lovett scream in horror as a dying Turpin grabs her dress , Todd instead spares Johanna 's life . 
 Todd discovers that the beggar woman was his wife Lucy , whom he believed to be dead , and that Mrs. Lovett misled him about her death . Todd pretends to forgive her and dances with her before hurling her into the bake @-@ house oven , then cradles his wife 's dead body in his arms . Toby climbs from the sewers and Todd allows Toby to slit his throat with his own razor . He leaves the basement as Todd bleeds to death over his dead wife . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Johnny Depp as Benjamin Barker / Sweeney Todd 
 Helena Bonham Carter as Mrs. Lovett 
 Alan Rickman as Judge Turpin 
 Timothy Spall as Beadle Bamford 
 Jayne <unk> as Johanna Barker 
 Sacha Baron Cohen as Adolfo Pirelli 
 Laura Michelle Kelly as Lucy Barker / Beggar Woman 
 Jamie Campbell Bower as Anthony Hope 
 Ed Sanders as Tobias <unk> 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Tim Burton first saw Stephen Sondheim 's 1979 stage musical , Sweeney Todd : The Demon Barber of Fleet Street , as a CalArts student in London in 1980 . Burton recalled his experience of seeing the show , saying , " I was still a student , I didn 't know if I would be making movies or working in a restaurant , I had no idea what I would be doing . I just wandered into the theatre and it just blew me away because I 'd never really seen anything that had the mixture of all those elements . I actually went three nights in a row because I loved it so much . " Although not a fan of the musical genre , Burton was struck by how cinematic the musical was , and repeatedly attended subsequent performances . He described it as a silent film with music , and was " dazzled both by the music and its sense of the macabre . " When his directing career took off in the late 1980s , Burton approached Sondheim with a view to making a cinematic adaptation , but nothing came of it . In Sondheim 's words , " [ Burton ] went off and did other things . " 
 Meanwhile , director Sam Mendes had been working on a film version of the story for several years , and in June 2003 Sondheim was approached to write the script . Although he turned down the offer , Mendes and producer Walter F. Parkes obtained his approval to use writer John Logan instead . Logan had previously collaborated with Parkes on Gladiator , and claimed his biggest challenge in adapting the Sondheim stage play " was taking a sprawling , magnificent Broadway musical and making it cinematic , and an emotionally honest film . Onstage , you can have a chorus sing as the people of London , but I think that would be alienating in a movie . " Mendes left to direct the 2005 film Jarhead , and Burton leaped at taking over the direction after his project , Ripley 's Believe It or Not ! , fell apart due to its excessive budget . 
 On Burton 's hiring , he and Logan reworked the screenplay ; Logan felt they agreed over the film 's tone due to " share [ d ] stunted childhoods watching Amicus movies " . Turning a three @-@ hour stage musical into a two @-@ hour film required some changes . Some songs were shortened , while others were completely removed . Burton said " In terms of the show , it was three hours long , but we weren 't out to film the Broadway show , we were out to make a movie , so we tried to keep the pace like those old melodramas . Sondheim himself is not a real big fan of movie musicals , so he was really open to honing it down to a more pacey shape . " " Burton and Logan also reduced the prominence of other secondary elements , such as the romance between Todd 's daughter Johanna and Anthony , to allow them to focus on the triangular relationship between Todd , Mrs. Lovett , and Toby . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 DreamWorks announced Burton 's appointment in August 2006 , and Johnny Depp was cast as Todd . Christopher Lee , Peter Bowles , Anthony Head , and five other actors were set to play the ghost narrators , but their roles were cut ( Head does appear in an uncredited cameo as a gentleman who congratulates Depp after the shaving contest ) . According to Lee , these deletions were due to time constraints caused by a break in filming during March 2007 , while Depp 's daughter recovered from an illness . Burton 's domestic partner Helena Bonham Carter was cast in October 2006 , as well as Sacha Baron Cohen . In December of 2006 , Alan Rickman was cast . In January of 2007 , Laura Michelle Kelly was cast as Lucy Barker . Timothy Spall was added to the cast , and said he was urged to audition by his daughter , who wanted him to work with Depp . He recalled , " I really wanted this one – I knew Tim was directing and that Johnny Depp was going to be in it . My daughter , my youngest daughter , really wanted me to do it for that reason – Johnny Depp was in it . ( She came on set to meet Depp ) and he was really delightful to her , she had a great time . Then , I took her to the junket – and ( Depp ) greeted her like an old pal when he saw her . I 've got plenty of brownie points at the moment . " 
 Three members of the cast had never been in a film before : Ed Sanders was cast as Toby , Jayne <unk> as Johanna , and Jamie Campbell Bower , who auditioned , and after four days got the part of Anthony said " I think I weed myself . I was out shopping at the time and I got this call on my mobile . I was just like , ' OH MY GOD ! ' Honestly , I was like a little girl running around this shop like oh @-@ my @-@ god @-@ oh @-@ my @-@ god @-@ oh @-@ my @-@ god . " 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Filming began on February 5 , 2007 at Pinewood Studios , and was completed by May 11 , despite a brief interruption when Depp 's daughter was taken seriously ill . Burton opted to film in London , where he had felt " very much at home " since his work on Batman in 1989 . Production designer Dante Ferretti created a darker , more sinister London by adapting Fleet Street and its surrounding area . Burton initially planned to use minimal sets and film in front of a green screen , but decided against it , stating that physical sets helped actors get into a musical frame of mind : " Just having people singing in front of a green screen seemed more disconnected " . 
 Depp created his own image of Todd . Heavy purple and brown make @-@ up was applied around his eyes to suggest fatigue and rage , as if " he 's never slept " . Burton said of the character Sweeney Todd , " We always saw him as a sad character , not a tragic villain or anything . He 's basically a dead person when you meet him ; the only thing that 's keeping him going is the one single minded thing which is tragic . You don 't see anything else around him . " Depp said of the character , " He makes Sid Vicious look like the innocent paper boy . He 's beyond dark . He 's already dead . He 's been dead for years . " Depp also commented on the streak of white in Todd 's hair , saying , " The idea was that he 'd had this hideous trauma , from being sent away , locked away . That streak of white hair became the shock of that rage . It represented his rage over what had happened . It 's certainly not the first time anyone 's used it . But it 's effective . It tells a story all by itself . My brother had a white spot growing up , and his son has this kind of shock of white in his hair . " 
 Burton insisted that the film be bloody , as he felt stage versions of the play which cut back on the bloodshed robbed it of its power . For him , " Everything is so internal with Sweeney that [ the blood ] is like his emotional release . It 's more about catharsis than it is a literal thing . " Producer Richard D. Zanuck said that " [ Burton ] had a very clear plan that he wanted to lift that up into a surreal , almost Kill Bill kind of stylization . We had done tests and experiments with the neck slashing , with the blood popping out . I remember saying to Tim , ' My God , do we dare do this ? ' " On set , the fake blood was colored orange to render correctly on the desaturated color film used , and crew members wore bin liners to avoid getting stained while filming . This macabre tone made some studios nervous , and it was not until Warner Bros. , DreamWorks and Paramount had signed up for the project that the film 's $ 50 million budget was covered . Burton said " the studio was cool about it and they accepted it because they knew what the show was . Any movie is a risk , but it is nice to be able to do something like that that doesn 't fit into the musical or slasher movie categories . " 
 After the filming , Burton said of the cast , " All I can say is this is one of the best casts I 've ever worked with . These people are not professional singers , so to do a musical like this which I think is one of the most difficult musicals , they all went for it . Every day on the set was a very , very special thing for me . Hearing all these guys sing , I don 't know if I can ever have an experience like that again . " " Burton said of the singing , " You can 't just lip synch , you 'd see the throat and the breath , every take they all had to belt it out . It was very enjoyable for me to see , with music on the set everybody just moved differently . I 'd seen Johnny ( Depp ) act in a way I 'd never seen before , walking across the room or sitting in the chair , picking up a razor or making a pie , whatever . They all did it in a way that you could sense . " 
 Depp said of working with Baron Cohen , when asked what he was like in real life ( meaning , not doing one of his trademark characters ) , " He 's not what I expected . I didn 't look at those characters and think , ' This will be the sweetest guy in the world ' . He 's incredibly nice . A real gentleman , kind of elegant . I was impressed with him . He 's kind of today 's equivalent of Peter Sellers . " 
 = = Music = = 
 Burton wanted to avoid the traditional approach of patches of dialogue interrupted by song , " We didn 't want it to be what I 'd say was a traditional musical with a lot of dialogue and then singing . That 's why we cut out a lot of choruses and extras singing and dancing down the street . Each of the characters , because a lot of them are repressed and have their emotions inside , the music was a way to let them express their feelings . " 
 He cut the show 's famous opening number , " The Ballad of Sweeney Todd " , explaining , " Why have a chorus singing about ' attending the tale of Sweeney Todd ' when you could just go ahead and attend it ? " Sondheim acknowledged that , in adapting a musical to film , the plot has to be kept moving , and was sent MP3 files of his shortened songs by Mike Higham , the film 's music producer , for approval . Several other songs were also cut , and Sondheim noted that there were " many changes , additions and deletions ... [ though ] ... if you just go along with it , I think you 'll have a spectacular time . " To create a larger , more cinematic feel , the score was re @-@ orchestrated by the stage musical 's original orchestrator , Jonathan Tunick , who increased the orchestra from 27 musicians to 78 . 
 The Deluxe Complete Edition soundtrack was released on December 18 , 2007 . Depp 's singing was described by a New York Times reviewer as " harsh and thin , but amazingly forceful " . Another critic adds that , though Depp 's voice " does not have much heft or power " , " his ear is obviously excellent , because his pitch is dead @-@ on accurate ... Beyond his good pitch and phrasing , the expressive colorings of his singing are crucial to the portrayal . Beneath this Sweeney ’ s vacant , sullen exterior is a man consumed with a murderous rage that threatens to burst forth every time he slowly takes a breath and is poised to speak . Yet when he sings , his voice crackles and breaks with sadness . " 
 = = Marketing = = 
 The film 's marketing has been criticized for not advertising it as a musical . Michael Halberstam of the Writers ' Theatre said , " By de @-@ emphasizing the score to the extent they did in the trailer , it is possible the producers were condescending to us – a tactic which cannot ultimately end in anything but tears . " In the UK , a number of audience members walked out of the film on realizing it was a musical , and complaints that advertisements for the film were deliberately misleading were made to both the Advertising Standards Authority and Trading Standards agency . The studios involved opted for a low @-@ key approach to their marketing . Producer Walter Parkes stated , " All these things that could be described as difficulties could also be the movie 's greatest strengths . " Warner Bros. felt it should take a similar approach to marketing as with The Departed , with little early exposure and discouraging talk of awards . 
 = = Release = = 
 Sweeney Todd : The Demon Barber of Fleet Street officially opened at the United States box office on December 21 , 2007 in 1 @,@ 249 theatres , and took $ 9 @,@ 300 @,@ 805 in its opening weekend . Worldwide releases followed during January and February 2008 , with the film performing well in the United Kingdom and Japan . The film grossed $ 52 @,@ 898 @,@ 073 in the United States and Canada , and $ 99 @,@ 625 @,@ 091 in other markets , accumulating a worldwide total of $ 152 @,@ 523 @,@ 164 . In the United States , the Marcus Theaters Corporation was not initially planning to screen the film following its premiere , because it was unable to reach a pricing agreement with Paramount . However , the dispute was resolved in time for the official release . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Although Sondheim was cautious of a cinematic adaptation of his musical , he was largely impressed by the results . The film received critical acclaim , with Depp 's performance receiving critical praise from critics — the review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reports that 86 % of critics gave the film positive reviews , based on 221 reviews , and Metacritic gave the film an average score of 83 out of 100 , based on 39 reviews . Sweeney Todd appeared on many critics ' top ten lists of the best films of 2007 . 
 Of the reviewers , Time rated it an A @-@ minus and added , " Burton and Depp infuse the brilliant cold steel of Stephen Sondheim 's score with a burning passion . Helena Bonham Carter and a superb supporting cast bring focused fury to this musical nightmare . It 's bloody great . " Time 's Richard Corliss named the film one of its top ten movies of 2007 , placing it fifth . Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times gave it four stars out of four , lauding Burton 's visual style . In his review in Variety , Todd McCarthy called it " both sharp and fleet " and " a satisfying screen version of Stephen Sondheim 's landmark 1979 theatrical musical ... things have turned out uniformly right thanks to highly focused direction by Tim Burton , expert screw @-@ tightening by scenarist John Logan , and haunted and musically adept lead performances from Johnny Depp and Helena Bonham Carter . Assembled artistic combo assures the film will reap by far the biggest audience to see a pure Sondheim musical , although just how big depends on the upscale crowd ’ s tolerance for buckets of blood , and the degree to which the masses stay away due to the whiff of the highbrow . " Lisa Schwarzbaum of Entertainment Weekly gave the film a B @-@ plus in its Movie Reviews section and stated , " To stage a proper Sweeney Todd , necks must be slit , human flesh must be squished into pastries , and blood ought to spurt in fountains and rivers of death . Enter Tim Burton , who ... has tenderly art @-@ directed soup @-@ thick , tomato @-@ red , fake @-@ gore blood with the zest of a Hollywood @-@ funded Jackson Pollock . " She went on to refer to the piece as " opulent , attentive ... so finely minced a mixture of Sondheim 's original melodrama and Burton 's signature spicing that it 's difficult to think of any other filmmaker so naturally suited for the job . " 
 In its DVD Reviews section , EW 's Chris Nashawaty gave the film an A @-@ minus , stating , " Depp 's soaring voice makes you wonder what other tricks he 's been hiding ... Watching Depp 's barber wield his razors ... it 's hard not to be reminded of Edward Scissorhands frantically shaping hedges into animal <unk> 18 years ago ... and all of the twisted beauty we would 've missed out on had [ Burton and Depp ] never met . " In Rolling Stone , Peter Travers awarded it 3 ½ out of 4 stars and added , " Sweeney Todd is a thriller @-@ <unk> from start to finish : scary , monstrously funny and melodically thrilling ... [ the film ] is a bloody wonder , intimate and epic , horrific and heart @-@ rending as it flies on the wings of Sondheim 's most thunderously exciting score . " As with Time , the critic ranked it fifth on his list of the best movies of 2007 . Kirk Honeycutt of The Hollywood Reporter said , " The blood juxtaposed to the music is highly unsettling . It runs contrary to expectations . Burton pushes this gore into his audiences ' faces so as to feel the madness and the destructive fury of Sweeney 's obsession . Teaming with Depp , his long @-@ time alter ego , Burton makes Sweeney a smoldering dark pit of fury and hate that consumes itself . With his sturdy acting and surprisingly good voice , Depp is a Sweeney Todd for the ages . " Harry Knowles gave the film a highly positive review , calling it Burton 's best film since Ed Wood , his favorite Burton film , and said it was possibly superior . He praised all of the cast and the cinematography , but noted it would probably not appeal to non @-@ musical fans due to the dominance of music in the film . 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 Sweeney Todd : The Demon Barber of Fleet Street received four Golden Globe nominations for the January 2008 65th Golden Globe Awards , winning two . The film received the award for Best Motion Picture in the Musical or Comedy genre , and Depp for his performance as Sweeney Todd . Burton was nominated for Best Director , and Helena Bonham Carter was nominated for her performance as Mrs. Lovett . The film was included in the National Board of Review of Motion Pictures 's top ten films of 2007 , and Burton was presented with their award for Best Director . The film was also nominated for two BAFTA awards , in the categories of Costume Design and Make Up and Hair . Sweeney Todd further received three Oscar nominations at the 80th Academy Awards : Best Actor in a Leading Role for Depp ; Best Achievement in Costume Design ; and Best Achievement in Art Direction , which it won . Depp won the award for Best Villain at the 2008 MTV Movie Awards . He thanked his fans for " sticking with me on this very obtuse and strange road . " He also won the Choice Movie Villain award at the Teen Choice Awards ; and at Spike TV 's 2008 Scream Awards ( filmed on October 18 , 2008 , and aired three days later ) , the film won two awards : Best Horror Movie , and Best Actor in a Horror Movie or TV Show ( Depp ) . 
 It was listed as number 490 on Empire 's 500 Greatest films of all time . 
 = = Home release = = 
 Sweeney Todd : The Demon Barber of Fleet Street was released on DVD in North America on April 1 , 2008 , and the UK on May 19 . A Blu @-@ ray was released on October 21 , 2008 . An HD DVD release was announced for the same date , but due to the discontinuation of the format , Paramount canceled this version in preference for international distribution of the Blu @-@ ray release . 
 The DVD was released on April 1 , 2008 and has thus far sold approximately 1 @,@ 892 @,@ 489 copies , bringing in more than $ 38 million in revenue . 
 Sweeney Todd officially premiered on television on BBC America in October 2010 . An edited version of the film appeared as part of " <unk> " , a Halloween themed month event for This TV network in October 2013 . 
 The film premiered on British television on Channel 4 on 27 November 2010 . 
 = Three Sisters Tavern = 
 Three Sisters Tavern , sometimes abridged as Three Sisters and nicknamed " Six Tits " , was a gay bar and strip club in Portland , Oregon , United States . The bar was founded in 1964 and began catering to Portland 's gay community in 1997 following the deaths of the original owners . The business evolved into a strip club featuring an all @-@ male revue . Also frequented by women , sometimes for bachelorette parties , Three Sisters was considered a hub of Portland 's nightlife before closing in 2004 . 
 = = Description and history = = 
 Three Sisters Tavern opened in 1964 as a family business . John P. <unk> and his wife Georgia owned and operated the business until his death four months later ( 1964 ) and her death in 1997 . The couple were survived by their three daughters , one of whom , <unk> " Sandra " <unk> , along with her husband Athanasios " Saki " <unk> , acquired ownership and began catering to Portland 's gay community , eventually turning Three Sisters into a gay bar and strip club . 
 The bar was located at 1125 Southwest Stark Street and featured an all @-@ male nude revue , a dance floor , and shows . The Portland Mercury described it as an " institution of stiff drinks and stiffer male dancers " , where " hot men perform theatrical and acrobatic stripteases on stage , then get naked and wag their penises in your face " . Dancers often were costumed as angels , businessmen , construction workers , cowboys , police officers , or United Parcel Service ( UPS ) delivery men . After Three Sisters closed in 2004 , some of the featured dancers began performing at other Portland venues , including Jefferson Theatre . 
 Three Sisters catered both to gay men and to women , who sometimes attended as part of bachelorette parties . The Oregonian described the " bachelorette bunnies " who used to frequent this bar as well as two others : Silverado and the Viewpoint . The paper 's Lee Williams wrote : 
 <unk> @-@ <unk> they go – these fuzzy , suburban @-@ soft little critters jump all over Stark Street and the Viewpoint running wild to celebrate one last night of ' Sex in the City ' <unk> . They crowd downtown 's male strip @-@ club stages holding dollar bills up to get a glimpse of a few last carrots before hopping down that wedding @-@ trail home . They are particularly agile small mammals , able to hold a drink and a friend 's hair while she 's throwing up . 
 Rufus Wainwright recalled accompanying Thomas Lauderdale , the musician known for his work with the Portland @-@ based band Pink Martini , to the club . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In their book Secret Portland , Oregon : The Unique Guidebook to Portland 's Hidden Sites , Sounds and Tastes ( 2003 ) , Ann Carroll Burgess and Linda <unk> called Three Sisters " the hub of Portland 's gay bar nightlife " , offering a " great " dance floor and " impressive " entertainment . The Portland Mercury 's Katie Shimer called the bar " one million percent fun " and said , " Whatever your fetish , the strippers deliver ... Make sure you stuff your pockets with singles , ' cause you 'll be spending at least a good hour at the rack . " Similarly , the Seattle alternative weekly The Stranger said the venue was " perhaps the funnest place in all the world ... especially when the fellers trot on stage in a vast array of hilarious costumes " . The paper 's Wm . Steven Humphrey wrote , " These nudie cuties were born to entertain , and prove it by leaping from stage to tabletop , hanging naked upside down ( by the tops of their FEET ! ! ) , and if you 're extremely lucky , gingerly lifting a dollar bill off your forehead with their ass cheeks . Now that 's talent ! " Byron Beck of Willamette Week said the dancers at Three Sisters " [ turned ] a quaint queer tavern into the most mouthwatering of watering holes in P @-@ town " . The paper also called the club " the best place to view wiener @-@ wiggling " . 
 = Kameo = 
 Kameo : Elements of Power is a 2005 action @-@ adventure video game by Rare and Microsoft Studios released for the Xbox 360 . The player controls the title character , an elf , who journeys to recover her elemental powers and captive family from her evil sister and the troll king . Kameo 's ten elemental powers let her transform into creatures and use their varied abilities to solve combat @-@ oriented puzzles and progress through the game 's levels . 
 Kameo is known for its prolonged development cycle , which spanned four Nintendo and Microsoft consoles . It was conceived as a Pokémon @-@ style game of capturing and nurturing monsters , but traded its lighthearted Nintendo overtones for darker themes more befitting of Xbox audiences when Microsoft acquired the developer . In this process , Kameo was repurposed from a fairy to an elf — a transition the game 's director later concluded was unsuccessful . While nearly finished for the original Xbox console , the title was delayed to become an exclusive launch title for the upcoming Xbox 360 . Rare used the extra time to improve the game 's audiovisuals , including Rare 's first orchestra soundtrack , and add a local cooperative multiplayer mode . Kameo released alongside the Xbox 360 launches : November 2005 in North America and several weeks later in Europe . 
 The game received generally favorable reviews and sales estimates ranged from subpar to par . Reviewers praised Kameo 's graphics as setting standards for the new console , and noted its vivid color palette . Their criticism focused on the gameplay , in particular its repetition , awkward controls , easy combat , disorganized introduction , and overbearing tutorial . Reviewers found the story and Kameo 's character lackluster , but largely liked the other characters and the core morphing concept . They had high praise for the orchestral score and other technical features , apart from the game 's camera . Rare released several cosmetic downloadable content packs , and a free online cooperative mode upgrade . 
 Retrospective reviews remembered the game for its bright and impressive graphics . Kameo was included in Rare Replay , an August 2015 compilation of 30 Rare titles for the Xbox One , alongside documentary @-@ style videos about the game 's development and its planned sequel . The latter was canceled after a few months of production due to both poor sales of the original and Microsoft 's new focus on games for its Kinect peripheral . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 In the third @-@ person action @-@ adventure game Kameo ( pronounced " cameo " ) , the player controls the title character , an elf , who journeys to recover her ten elemental powers and captive family from her evil sister and the troll king . Kameo uses elemental powers to transform into creatures with different abilities , which she switches between to solve puzzles and advance through the in @-@ game world . The player controls the player @-@ character with the left analog stick , the game 's camera view with the right thumbstick , and the character attacks and abilities with the controller 's triggers . The Xbox 360 controller 's face buttons swap between three active , elemental powers . 
 These ten " elemental warriors " include a fire @-@ breathing creature who lights torches , a gorilla who climbs walls and throws foes , and a plant who punches opponents . There are two each of five element types ( fire , ice , plant , rock , water ) . Some enemies have specific weaknesses and can only be affected by specific elemental powers or hazards in the environment . The game is structured such that new character abilities unlock just as their benefits are needed to solve a puzzle . Thus the game 's puzzles depend on combat more than logic . Each of the elemental forms has several ability upgrades , which the player can redeem by collecting and delivering fruit to a sacred tome called the <unk> book . The Kameo character , herself , can move faster than the elemental warriors but has no special ability apart from breaking crates . 
 The game begins as Kameo advances through a castle — with the help of three elemental powers — to rescue her family . As the tutorial prologue ends , Kameo loses her elemental powers and is ejected from the castle into the Enchanted Kingdom to grow stronger and try again . Kameo travels through four themed worlds ( water , ice , fire , and swamp ) at the outskirts of the Badlands , the overworld that connects the areas . Each of the worlds are interspersed with townsfolk and combat @-@ oriented puzzles . Kameo can either travel to the worlds through the Badlands , where the elves and trolls skirmish , or warp from the Enchanted Kingdom . A help system built into the game provides hints or direct solutions for struggling players . Throughout the kingdom , Kameo finds and defeats the ten shadow creatures each guarding one of her elemental powers . 
 The player can slow time by landing successive hits and kills on enemies to fill an on @-@ screen meter . The player can return to levels to attempt a higher score . The game 's action sequences , more than half of the game , require the player to defeat groups of enemies before proceeding to the next room , and ultimately leading to a boss battle . Kameo has a two @-@ player , split @-@ screen cooperative gameplay mode in which players can fight alongside each other during the action scenes . Rare added support for online cooperative play ( via Xbox Live or System Link ) as a downloadable patch following the game 's release . 
 = = Development = = 
 Rare 's protracted development of Kameo spanned four consoles : Nintendo 's Nintendo 64 and GameCube , Microsoft 's Xbox , and ultimately , the Xbox 360 . The game became known for its long development cycle — IGN wrote that the game had received more IGN editor coverage during its development than " almost any other single game " . Shortly after Rare finished work on Donkey Kong 64 , Kameo began as a game in which the player catches and evolves creatures . In lead designer George Andreas 's concept , the creatures would follow the player and act of their own volition . This version had a " Nintendo feel " and Pokémon @-@ like conceit : the player nursed little monsters into adults . Kameo spent several years in development for the GameCube and Rare shared an early version of the game at Electronic Entertainment Expo , an annual video game conference . In the meantime , Microsoft acquired Rare in 2002 for a record price of $ 377 million . Kameo lost many of its Pokémon elements when development transferred to the Microsoft 's Xbox . Rare 's Phil Tossell liked the Pokémon @-@ style concept but ultimately felt that the platform change was a positive move for the game . 
 The team distilled the original concept into the core gameplay mechanics that players preferred , namely the abilities to morph into characters and to fight . In what became the core gameplay , the player would use a combination of Kameo 's elemental warriors to progress through levels . Rare later expanded the conceit to that of an adventure game , though its story was secondary to the gameplay . Kameo was designed for fluidity — the team tried to minimize player chores and player waiting times . The team simplified the set of characters from a hundred to a dozen , and expanded the skill sets of those remaining . Tossell designed these characters , and started with a boulder @-@ like animal . These creature designs later became Kameo 's morphing forms . As the game transitioned and Rare attempted to distance itself from its mawkish reputation for " cute characters with big eyes " , the team struggled to repurpose Kameo into an elf from the fairy of the original concept . Tossell felt that this task was impossible , as Microsoft simultaneously wanted to widen its base while it did not give Rare the room to grow out of its cutesy design . The Kameo character transitioned through a " tribal " look before becoming an elf , and her own attacks were ultimately repurposed into the elemental warriors ' . Kameo became an Xbox 360 launch title ( alongside Rare 's Perfect Dark Zero ) and received a graphics upgrade in the process . The game had been about 80 % complete for the original Xbox , but the transition freed the game 's vision from technical constraints . 
 With their timeframe extended , the development team added extra attacks for the ten characters , day – night transition interactions , in @-@ game scores and leaderboards , a cooperative multiplayer splitscreen mode , and a post @-@ release update that extends the cooperative mode over online and local network . The team revisited level ideas that did not fit on the previous console , and transitioned from synthesized music and a text @-@ based story to an orchestral soundtrack and voice acting . The cooperative mode was also added retroactively , which challenged the already finalized level design . The most pronounced improvements were in the game 's graphics and upgrades . Levels on the Xbox 360 could hold thousands of characters on @-@ screen at once . The team playtested the feel of each elemental warrior and spent extra time refining the gradual difficulty increase in the opening level . In reflection , the project 's biggest influences were ultimately Nintendo , Pokémon , and Resident Evil . 
 Around the time of Kameo 's release , lead designer George Andreas felt that the original Kameo concept of finding and using monsters had evolved and carried through to the final product . He said that there were enough ideas for a sequel within the new intellectual property if players were interested . Years later , Andreas reappraised and said that the game should never have been released and remains a sore subject for him to discuss . Since the project was nearly finished , they had opted for launch title release instead of starting over . Andreas felt that the effort to conceal the fairy Kameo as an elf was unsuccessful and that the character did not match the Xbox 's first @-@ person shooter demographic . 
 Rare and Microsoft Studios released Kameo alongside the Xbox 360 console as a launch title : on November 15 , 2005 , in North America , and December 2 in Europe . The game was available for purchase in retail stores ahead of the console 's launch date . At release , it was sold at a lower price than other Xbox 360 games . In advance of its February 2 , 2006 , Japanese release , Microsoft Japan held a Kameo promotional press event with celebrities Yoshinari Tsuji and Kaori Manabe in late January 2006 . 1UP.com reported the event as " subdued " but appropriate for Japanese games journalists to test Kameo , as the Xbox 360 had been selling poorly in the region . 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 Steve Burke served as the audio lead on the Kameo project , his first at Rare , for which he composed its soundtrack and contributed to its sound effects and voiceovers . As the game was originally planned for the GameCube , the first few months of development appeared to have no support for audio above the MIDI sample @-@ style compositions characteristic of Nintendo 's previous console , the Nintendo 64 . The game 's first demo at the 2001 Electronic Entertainment Expo used this type of audio . Of the first pieces he wrote for this project in the early months of 2001 , some were scrapped . Others were re @-@ recorded as streaming audio , which plays pre @-@ recorded audio files , when the developers added support . It became Rare 's first orchestral soundtrack . Other Rare staff members contributed their talents to the recording process , such as trumpet and voice recordings . 
 Burke experimented with a variety of musical styles throughout the game 's development . Burke 's original compositions were lighthearted as befitting for a Nintendo game , but became darker along with other parts of the game to match the Xbox audience when Microsoft acquired Rare . The composer thought that this transition was reflected in the soundtrack , with some Nintendo @-@ style music juxtaposed against the roaring orchestral tracks . Burke estimates that he had written four hours of audio for the project and ultimately recorded 80 minutes with an orchestra and choir over four days in Prague . The team recorded the orchestra and choir separately . Sumthing Else Music Works published the soundtrack on compact disc and for download via the iTunes Store and Amazon . It was nominated for the Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences Outstanding Achievement in Original Music Composition award . 
 = = Reception = = 
 A year prior to Kameo 's release , GamesRadar wrote that while they highly anticipated the title and expected it to be of high quality , they thought the game 's continual delays would likely hurt the final product . Closer to release , Tom Bramwell ( Eurogamer ) added that he had expected the game to be the best among the Xbox 360 launch titles . Kameo 's core gameplay concept brought his anticipation to par with that customary for The Legend of Zelda titles , and he thought the game would reap the benefits of its long development through refined audiovisuals . Xbox executive Peter Moore announced Kameo as his favorite launch title in anticipation of the Xbox 360 's launch . 
 The game received " generally favorable " reviews , according to video game review score aggregator Metacritic . Market research company NPD Group reported that Kameo sold 300 @,@ 000 copies while Retro Gamer reported that the game sold over 700 @,@ 000 copies . GameSpot described the NPD Group figures as significantly below expectations and the sales of Rare 's other Xbox 360 launch title , Perfect Dark Zero . Retro Gamer described its figures as " respectable ... for a new franchise " . Rare senior software engineer Nick Burton said that while Kameo and Perfect Dark Zero had reputations for poor sales , the two games " sold phenomenally well " for launch titles . Kameo continued to sell three years after its release . 
 Reviewers praised the game 's graphics as setting standards for the new console . Clayman ( IGN ) saw Kameo as a good demonstration of the Xbox 360 's graphical possibilities , and Bramwell ( Eurogamer ) considered the degree of detail , even at long distances and in processor @-@ intensive scenes , " unprecedented in a console game " . Though he had few points of reference for the new console , Clayman ( IGN ) wrote that the extremely detailed high @-@ definition graphics appeared worthy of the Xbox 360 's " next generation " moniker . When paired with surround sound , the experience was " almost overwhelming " . Reviewers also noted the game 's vivid color palette . Kasavin ( GameSpot ) wrote that the developers balanced the visual elements to appeal to children and adults alike . Andrew Pfister ( 1UP.com ) wrote that the game looked marvelous but was sometimes distracted by too much occurring onscreen . 
 Critics praised the core morphing concept but criticized its repetitive gameplay , awkward controls , easy combat , disorganized introduction , and overemphasis on tutorial . Bramwell ( Eurogamer ) wrote that though the fundamental idea was good , the repetitious combinations of elemental attacks were rarely novel and often laborious . The excitement of realizing a puzzle 's solution , Bramwell said , was often ruined by the player 's struggle to perform the task correctly . He wrote that the game 's design constrained players and " bred apathy " . For example , tutorials followed the scenes in which they would have been useful , cutscenes left no puzzle solution to imagination , puzzle solutions were rarely revisited after their first use , and character dialogue overstated the importance of simple puzzles . Bramwell was " desperate " for the freedom to experiment without forced guidance . " The game " , he wrote , " hardly ever stops telling you what to do . " Clayman ( IGN ) agreed that there was too much help but alternatively appreciated the continual challenge and activity density of Kameo 's level design , with townspeople interspersed within the level 's action . He also liked to experiment in the Badlands as a break from the puzzles . Clayman found the game 's combat easy but fun . He especially enjoyed the slowed time combat . Bramwell ( Eurogamer ) said that the " relative pleasure " of Kameo 's combat was ultimately worth little , as the player could use basic attacks and avoid most major upgrades throughout the whole game . Phil Theobald ( GameSpy ) added that character upgrades were required for maintaining interest in the gameplay , but that the game does not incentivize finding such combinations . Pfister ( 1UP.com ) too found the gameplay balance and puzzle design insipid . 
 Reviewers found the story and Kameo 's character lackluster , but largely liked the other characters . Andrew Reiner ( Game Informer ) said that the story tracked through every imaginable video game cliché and failed to build emotional attachment . Clayman ( IGN ) noted that he spent little time as Kameo , the character . He found the elemental warriors more useful , interesting , and original , and felt that the ten powers were balanced so as to make each worth playing . Dave Halverson agreed that the multiple character options represent a rare breadth of player choice , while Pfister ( 1UP.com ) wrote that only a few of the characters had abilities worth regularly using and called the " terrible " character design typical for the developer . Clayman ( IGN ) thought that Kameo 's character was comparatively less interesting than that of the rest of the cast . Kasavin ( GameSpot ) agreed that Kameo visually appeared " generic " while other characters and environments had exceptional and inspired style . Alternatively , Halverson ( Play ) thought of the " breathtaking female lead " as the " quintessential fantasy icon " . 
 Reviewers made positive remarks about the game 's orchestral score and voice acting . Kasavin ( GameSpot ) wrote that added choral tracks during intense in @-@ game moments gave the game epic overtones , though Clayman ( IGN ) thought the score made the game environments feel <unk> majestic . Bramwell ( Eurogamer ) found little joy in the verbose dialogue , which he often skipped even during important scenes , but Kasavin ( GameSpot ) considered the voice acting amusing , with good quality . He also praised the level of nuance in the sound effects , such as those made as characters walked . 
 Clayman ( IGN ) reported that the game had no major technical issues , which was a major concern in the protracted run @-@ up to the game 's release . He also found that most of its levels did not appear to leverage the Xbox 360 's advances in areas apart from graphics . Bramwell ( Eurogamer ) , on the other hand , fought the controls and camera throughout the game . He lamented a particular issue in which the camera would spin 180 degrees when Kameo was hit , which made the path of retreat harder to see . Theobald ( GameSpy ) also lamented the camera . Kasavin ( GameSpot ) found Kameo to be technically outstanding , and praised its automatic game save features , short loading times , steady frame rates , and detailed display on both standard- and high @-@ definition televisions . Pfister ( 1UP.com ) wrote that Kameo was technically impressive to the point of overwhelming the gameplay . 
 Critics noted the game 's length as shorter than expected , with about ten hours of content . Clayman ( IGN ) had little desire to replay the solved puzzles and Bramwell ( Eurogamer ) was even eager for the game to end . Halverson ( Play ) planned to return to the game but wrote that he would have preferred five more hours of the single @-@ player over the Xbox Live features . Reviewers were largely unimpressed with the extra Xbox Live cooperative play and score attack features . Halverson ( Play ) had hopes for Kameo and Psychonauts to rekindle developer interest in the 3D platforming genre , but concluded that such games were likely not to return . Clayman ( IGN ) did not find the game to live up to its publicity as a competitor against The Legend of Zelda series , though Theobald ( GameSpy ) thought Kameo 's boss battles were comparable . Pfister ( 1UP.com ) noted several traditional Rare flourishes — lots of color and graphics effects , puns for character names — but ultimately wrote that Kameo was proof that Microsoft had received " exactly what they paid for " in its acquisition of Rare . Theobald ( GameSpy ) said that Rare had avoided its usual tropes of making players collect lots of items and poor character design , and made a " worthy " launch title . Nigel Kendall ( The Times ) wrote that the game was " more cerebral " than the console 's other games , which were stereotypically about driving , football , or shooting . Kasavin ( GameSpot ) noted that Kameo was the most accessible launch title to players of all ages . In summary , he thought the game was a suitable fit for players ' first experiences on the new Xbox 360 . 
 = = Downloadable content = = 
 The game released without online support for co @-@ operative play , but Rare promised to add the feature as a free patch and did so in April 2006 . The patch let two players play the story simultaneously when their consoles were connected through Xbox Live or System Link . It also added new achievements . For a fee , players could download a series of costume packs that change the visual appearance of the game 's characters . In September 2006 , Rare released the Kameo " Power Pack " , which added leaderboards , a costume pack , new achievements , and three new modes of gameplay : Expert , Time Attack , and Rune Battle . Expert Mode remasters six of the game 's levels with added difficulty . Time Attack Mode lets two co @-@ op players ( local or online ) attempt to finish levels as fast as possible . Rune Battle Mode pits two co @-@ op players against each other to collect the most rune items . Ben Kuchera of Ars Technica wrote that Rare " did a good job " of supporting Kameo with post @-@ release content . He liked the idea of the time @-@ based mode and thought that the Expert mode would allay criticism of the game 's easiness . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In retrospect , Kotaku wrote that Kameo would be remembered as " that pretty Xbox 360 launch game " , which IGN confirmed a year after its release . While some games journalists reported unfavorable views towards Kameo , they also reported its fanbase to be dedicated . Other games journalists described the game as underrated . Kameo was among the first batch of games to be sold digitally with the Xbox 360 's Games on Demand service in August 2009 . 
 Kameo was later included in Rare Replay , a compilation of 30 Rare titles , released for the Xbox One in August 2015 . The game runs through the Xbox One 's backward compatibility , which emulates select Xbox 360 titles on the newer console . Kameo was among the first batch of games to be supported for the feature . The Rare Replay emulated release includes all original downloadable content for free and lets players migrate their Xbox 360 cloud saves to their Xbox One . Kameo 's performance in the Xbox One 's emulator slightly improves upon its technical performance on the Xbox 360 itself . Stephen Totilo ( Kotaku ) was surprised at his positive response to replaying Kameo on Rare Replay , having found the introductory stage off @-@ putting when he sampled it at the Xbox 360 's launch . He planned to return to the title . Chris Carter ( Destructoid ) wrote that while Kameo was not worth full price at its release , it was a welcome addition worth playing in the compilation . 
 A sequel to Kameo was in production but was ultimately canceled . George Andreas began work on the sequel after finishing the first game . Kameo 2 was designed to be a darker take on the original . Rare redesigned Kameo to have smaller eyes and matured the other creatures . For instance , the trolls were given steampunk designs . The sequel put a heavier emphasis on the open world , as the team was influenced by Assassin 's Creed ( 2007 ) . Rare began to use Havok physics software for smoother inverse kinematics animations , and planned to incorporate assets from an unreleased game , Black Widow , which featured a giant , mechanical spider . For creature upgrades , the team planned to let Kameo fly as an eagle so the player could experience the grandeur of a bird 's @-@ eye view . Kameo composer Steve Burke said that he worked on the sequel for a year . He wrote several new audio tracks in a Celtic style and recorded voiceovers , which together were used in a concept demo pitched to Microsoft . The project was canceled after about three months of production as Rare re @-@ focused on Microsoft 's Kinect effort . At the time , Microsoft redirected its internal studios to support the project . The original 's lackluster sales also contributed to the cancelation . The public had heard reports of its cancelation during the 2009 restructure and had seen an artwork leak in 2011 , but the cancelation was not confirmed until Microsoft Studios vice president Phil Spencer did so in 2013 . 1UP.com questioned whether Kameo needed a sequel at all . Rare released a retrospective documentary of the unreleased game as part of its August 2015 Rare Replay collection . A Kameo 2 concept artist narrated the documentary , which focuses on art that would have been included in the game apart from a brief video clip . Rare later released a follow @-@ up making @-@ of Kameo video in March 2016 . The sequel 's video did not elaborate on why Microsoft canceled the project . 
 = 1991 Perfect Storm = 
 The 1991 Perfect Storm , also known as the The No @-@ Name Storm ( especially in the years immediately after it took place ) , was a nor 'easter that absorbed Hurricane Grace and ultimately evolved back into a small unnamed hurricane late in its life cycle . The initial area of low pressure developed off Atlantic Canada on October 29 . Forced southward by a ridge to its north , it reached its peak intensity as a large and powerful cyclone . The storm lashed the east coast of the United States with high waves and coastal flooding before turning to the southwest and weakening . Moving over warmer waters , the system transitioned into a subtropical cyclone before becoming a tropical storm . It executed a loop off the Mid @-@ Atlantic states and turned toward the northeast . On November 1 the system evolved into a full @-@ fledged hurricane with peak winds of 75 miles per hour ( 120 km / h ) , although the National Hurricane Center left it unnamed to avoid confusion amid media interest in the predecessor extratropical storm . It later received the name " the Perfect Storm " ( playing off the common expression ) after a conversation between Boston National Weather Service forecaster Robert Case and author Sebastian Junger . The system was the fourth hurricane and final tropical cyclone in the 1991 Atlantic hurricane season . The tropical system weakened , striking Nova Scotia as a tropical storm before dissipating . 
 Damage from the storm totaled over $ 200 million ( 1991 USD ) and the death toll was thirteen . Most of the damage occurred while the storm was extratropical , after waves up to 30 feet ( 10 m ) struck the coastline from Canada to Florida and southeastward to Puerto Rico . In Massachusetts , where damage was heaviest , over 100 homes were destroyed or severely damaged . To the north , more than 100 homes were affected in Maine , including the vacation home of then @-@ President George H. W. Bush . More than 38 @,@ 000 people were left without power , and along the coast high waves inundated roads and buildings . In portions of New England , the damage was worse than that caused by Hurricane Bob two months earlier . 
 Aside from tidal flooding along rivers , the storm 's effects were primarily concentrated along the coast . A buoy off the coast of Nova Scotia reported a wave height of 100 @.@ 7 feet ( 30 @.@ 7 m ) , the highest ever recorded in the province 's offshore waters . In the middle of the storm , Andrea Gail sank , killing her crew of six and inspiring the book , and later movie , The Perfect Storm . Off the shore of New York 's Long Island , an Air National Guard helicopter ran out of fuel and crashed ; four members of its crew were rescued , and one was killed . Two people died after their boat sank off Staten Island . High waves swept two people to their deaths , one in Rhode Island and one in Puerto Rico , and another person was blown off a bridge to his death . The tropical cyclone that formed late in the storm 's duration caused little impact , limited to power outages and slick roads ; one person was killed in Newfoundland from a traffic accident related to the storm . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The Perfect Storm originated from a cold front that exited the east coast of the United States . On October 28 , the front spawned an extratropical low to the east of Nova Scotia . Around that time , a ridge extended from the Appalachian Mountains northeastward to Greenland , with a strong high pressure center over eastern Canada . The blocking ridge forced the extratropical low to track toward the southeast and later to the west . Hurricane Grace was swept aloft by its cold front into the warm conveyor belt circulation of the deep cyclone on October 29 . The cyclone significantly strengthened as a result of the temperature contrast between the cold air to the northwest and the warmth and humidity from the remnants of Hurricane Grace . The low pressure system continued deepening as it drifted toward the United States . It had an unusual retrograde motion for a nor 'easter , beginning a set of meteorological circumstances that occur only once every 50 to 100 years . Most nor 'easters affect New England from the southwest . 
 While situated about 390 miles ( 630 km ) south of Halifax , Nova Scotia , the storm attained its peak intensity with winds of up to 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) . The nor 'easter reached peak intensity at approximately 12 : 00 UTC on October 30 with its lowest pressure of 972 millibars . The interaction between the extratropical storm and the high pressure system to its north created a significant pressure gradient , which created large waves and strong winds . Between the southern New England coast and the storm 's center , the gradient was 70 mbar ( 2 @.@ 1 inHg ) . A buoy located 264 miles ( 425 km ) south of Halifax reported a wave height of 100 @.@ 7 feet ( 30 @.@ 7 m ) on October 30 . This became the highest recorded wave height on the Scotian Shelf , which is the oceanic shelf off the coast of Nova Scotia . East of Cape Cod , a NOAA buoy located at 41 @.@ 1 ° N 66 @.@ 6 ° W ﻿ / 41 @.@ 1 ; <unk> reported maximum sustained winds of 56 mph ( 90 km / h ) with gusts to 75 mph ( 121 km / h ) , and a significant wave height ( average height of the highest one @-@ third of all waves ) of 39 feet ( 12 m ) around 15 : 00 UTC on October 30 . Another buoy , located at 40 @.@ 5 ° N 69 @.@ 5 ° W ﻿ / 40 @.@ 5 ; <unk> , reported maximum sustained winds of 61 mph ( 98 km / h ) with gusts to 72 mph ( 116 km / h ) and a significant wave height of 31 feet ( 9 @.@ 4 m ) near 00 : 00 UTC on October 31 . 
 Upon peaking in intensity , the nor 'easter turned southward and gradually weakened ; by November 1 , its pressure had risen to 998 millibars ( 29 @.@ 5 inHg ) . The low moved over warm waters of the Gulf Stream , where bands of convection around the center began to organize . Around this time , the system attained subtropical characteristics . On November 1 , while the storm was moving in a counter @-@ clockwise loop , a tropical cyclone had been identified at the center of the larger low . ( Although these conditions are rare , Hurricane Karl during 1980 formed within a larger non @-@ tropical weather system . ) 
 By around 14 : 00 UTC on November 1 , an eye feature was forming , and the tropical cyclone reached its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 75 mph ( 121 km / h ) ; these estimates , combined with reports from an Air Force Reserve Unit flight into the storm and confirmation that a warm @-@ core center was present , indicated that the system had become a Category 1 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale . The hurricane accelerated toward the northeast and quickly weakened back into a tropical storm . It made landfall near Halifax , Nova Scotia , at 14 : 00 UTC on November 2 with sustained winds of 45 mph ( 72 km / h ) . While the storm was approaching the coast , weather radars depicted curved rainbands on the western side of the system . After crossing over Prince Edward Island , The storm fully dissipated late on November 2 . 
 = = Preparations and naming = = 
 For several days , weather models forecast the development of a significant storm off New England . However , the models were inadequate in forecasting coastal conditions , which in one instance failed to provide adequate warning . In addition , a post @-@ storm assessment found an insufficient number of observation sites along the coast . On October 27 , the Ocean Prediction Center noted that a " dangerous storm " would form within 36 hours , with its wording emphasizing the unusual nature of the storm . The National Weather Service likewise issued warnings for the potential storm , providing information to emergency service offices as well as the media . The public however was skeptical and did not recognize the threat . The timely warnings ultimately lowered the death toll ; whereas the Perfect Storm caused 13 deaths , the blizzard of 1978 killed 99 people , and the 1938 New England hurricane killed 564 people . 
 From Massachusetts to Maine , thousands of people evacuated their homes and sought shelter . A state of emergency was declared for nine counties in Massachusetts , including Suffolk County , as well as two in Maine . In North Carolina , the National Weather Service offices in Hatteras and Raleigh first issued a heavy surf advisory on October 27 , more than eight hours before the first reports of high waves . That same day , a coastal flood watch and later a warning was issued , along with a gale warning . The Hatteras NWS office ultimately released 19 coastal flood statements , as well as media reports explaining the threat from the wind and waves , and a state of emergency was declared for Dare County , North Carolina . The warnings and lead times in the region were described as " very good " . 
 In Canada , the threat from the storm prompted the cancellation of ferry service from Bar Harbor , Maine , to Yarmouth , Nova Scotia , as well as from Nova Scotia to Prince Edward Island and between Nova Scotia and Newfoundland . 
 In its tropical cyclone report on the hurricane , the National Hurricane Center only referred to the system as " Unnamed Hurricane " . The Natural Disaster Survey Report called the storm " The Halloween Nor 'easter of 1991 " . The " perfect storm " moniker was coined by author and journalist Sebastian Junger after a conversation with NWS Boston Deputy Meteorologist Robert Case in which Case described the convergence of weather conditions as being " perfect " for the formation of such a storm . Other National Weather Service offices were tasked with issuing warnings for this storm in lieu of the typical NHC advisories . The OPC posted warnings on the unnamed hurricane in its High Seas Forecasts . The National Weather Service State Forecast Office in Boston issued Offshore Marine Forecasts for the storm . Local NWS offices along the East coast covered the storm in their Coastal Waters Forecasts . 
 Beginning in 1950 , the National Hurricane Center named officially recognized tropical storms and hurricanes . The unnamed hurricane was reported to have met all the criteria for a tropical cyclone , but it was purposefully left unnamed . This was done to avoid confusion among the media and the public , who were focusing on the damage from the initial nor 'easter , as the hurricane itself was not expected to pose a major threat to land . It was the eighth nameable storm of the 1991 Atlantic hurricane season . 
 = = Impact = = 
 The Halloween Storm of 1991 left significant damage along the east coast of the United States , primarily in Massachusetts and southern New Jersey . Across seven states , damage totaled over $ 200 million ( 1991 USD ) . Over a three @-@ day period , the storm lashed the northeastern United States with high waves , causing damage to beachfront properties from North Carolina to Maine . The coastal flooding damaged or destroyed hundreds of homes and businesses and closed roads and airports . In addition , high winds left about 38 @,@ 000 people without power . The total without power was much less than for Hurricane Bob two months prior , and was fairly low due to little rainfall and the general lack of leaves on trees . Overall there were thirteen confirmed deaths , including six on board Andrea Gail , a <unk> boat . The vessel departed Gloucester , Massachusetts , for the waters off Nova Scotia . After encountering high seas in the middle of the storm , the vessel made its last radio contact late on October 28 about 180 miles ( 290 km ) northeast of Sable Island . Andrea Gail sank while returning to Gloucester , her debris washing ashore over the subsequent weeks . The crew of six was presumed killed after a Coast Guard search was unable to find them . The storm and the boat 's sinking became the center @-@ piece for Sebastian Junger 's best @-@ selling non @-@ fiction book The Perfect Storm ( 1997 ) , which was adapted to a major Hollywood film in 2000 as The Perfect Storm starring George Clooney . 
 Despite the storm 's severity , it was neither the costliest nor the strongest to affect the northeastern United States . It was weakening as it made its closest approach to land , and the highest tides occurred during the neap tide , which is the time when tide ranges are minimal . The worst of the storm effects stayed offshore . A buoy 650 miles ( 1 @,@ 050 km ) northeast of Nantucket , which was 60 miles ( 97 km ) west of Andrea Gail 's last known position , recorded a 73 ft ( 22 m ) rise in wave height in 10 hours while the extratropical storm was still rapidly intensifying . Two buoys near the Massachusetts coast observed record wave heights , and one observed a record wind report . The United States Coast Guard rescued 25 people at sea at the height of the storm , including 13 people from Long Island Sound . A New York Air National Guard helicopter of the 106th Air Rescue Wing ditched during the storm , 90 miles ( 140 km ) south of Montauk , New York , after it was unable to refuel in flight and ran out of fuel . After the helicopter had attempted a rescue in the midst of the storm , an 84 @-@ person crew on the Coast Guard Cutter Tamaroa arrived and rescued four members of the crew of five after six hours in hypothermic waters . The survivors were pilots Dave <unk> and Graham <unk> , flight engineer Jim <unk> , and pararescue jumper John Spillane . The fifth member , pararescue jumper Rick Smith , was never found . They were all featured on the show I Shouldn 't be Alive . 
 Following the storm 's damage , President George Bush declared five counties in Maine , seven counties in Massachusetts , and Rockingham County , New Hampshire to be disaster areas . The declaration allowed for the affected residents to apply for low @-@ interest repair loans . New Jersey governor Jim Florio requested a declaration for portions of the coastline , but the request was denied because of the funding needs of other disasters , such as Hurricane Hugo , Hurricane Bob , and the 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake . The American Red Cross opened service centers in four locations in Massachusetts to assist the storm victims by providing food , clothing , medicine , and shelter . The agency deployed five vehicles carrying cleanup units and food , and allocated $ 1 @.@ 4 million to provide assistance to 3 @,@ 000 families . 
 = = = New England and Atlantic Canada = = = 
 Along the Massachusetts coastline , the storm produced 25 ft ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) wave heights on top of a 4 ft ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) high tide . In Boston , the highest tide was 14 @.@ 3 ft ( 4 @.@ 4 m ) , which was only 1 ft ( 30 cm ) lower than the record from the blizzard of 1978 . High waves on top of the storm tide reached about 30 ft ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) . The storm produced heavy rainfall in southeastern Massachusetts , peaking at 5 @.@ 5 inches ( 140 mm ) . Coastal floods closed several roads , forcing hundreds of people to evacuate . In addition to the high tides , the storm produced strong winds ; Chatham recorded a gust of 78 mph ( 126 km / h ) . Damage was worst from Cape Ann in northeastern Massachusetts to Nantucket , with over 100 homes destroyed or severely damaged at Marshfield , North Beach , and Brant Point . There were two injuries in the state , although there were no fatalities . Across Massachusetts , damage totaled in the hundreds of millions of dollars . 
 Elsewhere in New England , waves up to 30 ft ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) reached as far north as Maine , along with tides that were 3 ft ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) above normal . Significant flooding was reported in that state , along with high winds that left areas without power . A total of 49 houses were severely damaged , 2 were destroyed , and overall more than 100 were affected . In Kennebunkport , the storm blew out windows and flooded the vacation home of then @-@ President George H. W. Bush . The home sustained significant damage to its first floor . In Portland , tides were 3 ft ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) above normal , among the ten highest tides since record @-@ keeping began in 1914 . Along the coast , damage was worse than that caused by Hurricane Bob two months prior . Across Maine , the storm left $ 7 @.@ 9 million ( 1991 USD ) in damage , mostly in York County . More than half of the damage total was from property damage , with the remainder to transportation , seawalls , and public facilities . Although there were no deaths , there were two injuries in the state . In neighboring New Hampshire , coastal flooding affected several towns , destroying two homes . The storm destroyed three boats and damaged a lighthouse . High waves destroyed or swept away over 50 @,@ 000 lobster traps , representing $ 2 million in losses ( 1991 USD ) . Damage was estimated at $ 5 @.@ 6 million ( 1991 USD ) . Further west , high winds and coastal flooding lashed the Rhode Island and Connecticut coasts , killing a man in Narragansett , Rhode Island . Winds reached 63 miles per hour ( 101 km / h ) in Newport , Rhode Island , causing power outages . 
 Off the coast of Atlantic Canada , the storm produced very high waves , flooding a ship near Sable Island and stranding another ship . Along the coast , the waves wrecked three small boats near Tiverton , Nova Scotia , as well as nine boats in Torbay , Newfoundland and Labrador . In Nova Scotia , where the storm made landfall , precipitation reached 1 @.@ 18 in ( 30 mm ) , and 20 @,@ 000 people in Pictou County were left without power . The storm also caused widespread power outages in Newfoundland from its high winds , which reached 68 mph ( 110 km / h ) near St. Lawrence . There were at least 35 traffic accidents , one fatal , in Grand Falls @-@ Windsor due to slick roads . Prior to the storm 's formation , there was a record 4 @.@ 4 in ( 116 mm ) of snowfall across Newfoundland . The storm caused no significant damage in Canada , other than these traffic accidents . 
 = = = Mid @-@ Atlantic states = = = 
 In New York and northern New Jersey , the storm system left the most coastal damage since the 1944 Great Atlantic hurricane . Numerous boats were damaged or destroyed , killing two people off Staten Island . High winds swept a man off a bridge , killing him . High waves flooded the beach at Coney Island . In Sea Bright , New Jersey , waves washed over a seawall , forcing 200 people to evacuate . Further inland , the Hudson , Passaic , and Hackensack rivers experienced tidal flooding . Outside Massachusetts , damage was heaviest in southern New Jersey , where the cost was estimated at $ 75 million ( 1991 USD ) . Across the area , tide heights reached their highest since the 1944 hurricane , leaving severe coastal and back bay flooding and closing many roads . The storm caused significant beach erosion , with 500 @,@ 000 cubic yards ( 382 @,@ 000 cubic meters ) lost in Avalon , as well as $ 10 million damage to the beach in Cape May . The presence of a dune system mitigated the erosion in some areas . There was damage to the Atlantic City Boardwalk . Fire Island National Seashore was affected , washing away an entire row of waterfront houses in towns like Fair Harbor . Following the storm , there was a moratorium on clamming in the state 's bays , due to contaminated waters . Along the Delmarva Peninsula , there was widespread water damage to homes , including ten affected houses in Sandbridge Beach , Virginia . Tides in Ocean City , Maryland , reached a record height of 7 @.@ 8 ft ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) , while elsewhere the tides were similar to the Ash Wednesday Storm of 1962 . 
 = = = Farther south = = = 
 In North Carolina along the Outer Banks , high waves were initially caused by Hurricane Grace and later its interaction with a high pressure system . This produced gale @-@ force winds and 12 ft ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) waves in the town of Duck . Later , the extratropical predecessor to the unnamed hurricane produced additional high waves , causing oceanfront flooding from Cape Hatteras through the northern portions of Currituck County . Flooding was first reported on October 28 , when the ocean covered a portion of North Carolina Highway 12 north of Rodanthe ; the route is the primary thoroughfare in the Outer Banks . Nags Head , Kitty Hawk , and Kill Devil Hills had large portions covered with water for several blocks away from the beach . The resultant flooding damaged 525 houses and 28 businesses and destroyed two motels and a few homes . Damage was estimated at $ 6 @.@ 7 million ( 1991 USD ) . Farther south , the storm left 14 people injured in Florida . There was minor beach erosion and flooding , which damaged two houses and destroyed the pier at Lake Worth . In some locations , beaches gained additional sand from the wave action . Two people went missing off Daytona Beach after their boat lost power . High waves destroyed a portion of State Road A1A . Damage in the state was estimated at $ 3 million ( 1991 USD ) . High waves also affected Bermuda , the Bahamas , and the Dominican Republic . In Puerto Rico , waves of 15 ft ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) affected the island 's north coast , which prompted 32 people to seek shelter . The waves swept a person off a large rock to their death . 
 = Siri Nilsen = 
 Siri Anne Nilsen ( born 12 April 1985 , Oslo , Norway ) is a Norwegian singer @-@ songwriter and voice actress . " As the daughter of two folksingers , Lillebjørn and Shari Nilsen , she grew up surrounded by music . " Nilsen is noted for the sincerity of her song writing and the clarity and range of her voice , characterized as " unique " and " beautiful " . During her first two albums she often accompanied her singing with a ukulele , which she plays in a fingerpicking style . 
 Nilsen made her stage debut in 2007 , and she was nominated for a Norwegian Grammy in the category of Best Female Artist in December , 2011 . Nilsen has had a career for several years as a voice actress , dubbing character roles into Norwegian for several feature films and television , mostly animation . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Siri Nilsen was born in Oslo , Norway where she grew up in the borough of Sagene . As a child she appeared in two Norwegian films , one of which , Maja <unk> ( 1996 ) , she co @-@ starred in . 
 Before deciding to devote herself to music as a career at around the age of twenty , Nilsen was a ballet dancer . At that time she turned to a " secret notebook full of songs that she had been compiling since her early teens " to express herself as an artist . Nilsen first performed publicly at Den <unk> <unk> ( The Good Cafe ) in Oslo , April 2007 . 
 In October 2008 , Nilsen won a competition among new artists sponsored by the Norwegian record label , Grappa . In awarding Nilsen the prize for best debut artist , the jury described her as having " the courage to write simple , personal and intimate lyrics in Norwegian " . As part of the award , Nilsen received a record contract which produced 2009 's Vi som ser i mørket ( We Who See in the Dark ) . 
 As a voice actress in Norwegian @-@ version feature films and television , Nilsen played Carmen Cortez in <unk> 2 ( Spy Kids 2 : The Island of Lost Dreams ) , Lisa Simpson in The Simpsons Movie , Haru in <unk> ( <unk> Neko no <unk> / The Cat Returns ) , among others . 
 = = = Vi som ser i mørket ( We Who See in the Dark ) = = = 
 Released on 5 October 2009 , Nilsen 's first record , Vi som ser i mørket ( We Who See in the Dark ) , features songs written mostly in Norwegian , but also in English ( Nilsen has mentioned that her American mother found it difficult to not want to proofread her English lyrics ) . The album was produced by musician Jan Martin <unk> . Music critics were similar in their appraisal of Nilsen 's voice and lyrics . Norway 's largest newspaper , Aftenposten described Nilsen as " an artist who had already found her own voice . " It described her music as ranging from " sensitive melancholy moods to light and playful tones " , and " imparting joy and peace of mind .. " Nilsen 's lyrics are often described as " personal " . Remarking on this Nilsen has said that her songs are not completely just about herself but can also be about things that she 's observed or heard from others : 
 Each song is like a small movie , a little history ... Part of me is going to be in there for it to be interesting to sing about . As a person I am a little mysterious , a little direct , and so is my music too . 
 = = = Alle snakker sant ( They All Speak the Truth ) = = = 
 Siri Nilsen 's second album , Alle snakker sant ( They All Speak the Truth ) , was released 11 November 2011 . To produce , Nilsen collaborated with musicians Jens Carelius ( a solo artist also part of the group " Blues Run the Game , " with Siri Nilsen ) and Øyvind <unk> Gundersen ( of the groups Rumble in <unk> , Hanne <unk> ) both of whom play on the record . Nilsen plays piano , Rhodes piano , guitar , percussion , ukulele and mini @-@ ukulele on the tracks . The album has been described as having a " distinctly modern tone " . Nilsen explained that the title ( of the album and single ) " They All Speak the Truth " refers to reconciling one ’ s gut feeling with the other messages received from the head and heart ; concluding that all three speak the truth . 
 Nilsen wrote the songs in the dead of winter . She said that at the time the words were meant to comfort her , but by early summer when she recorded them she was already in a different mindset ( The tracks were recorded at a rehearsal room next to where she lives ) . 
 Aftenposten characterized the album 's lyrics as " well written and honest " . Nilsen was described by one album reviewer as being " remarkably adept at combining bright colors with subtle hints of darkness , " adding , " this usually prevents this light , nimble music from becoming overly cute . " 
 Similar to the previous album , many reviewers focused on Nilsen 's voice . The single , " Alle snakker sant " , received praise in the pages of The Guardian and among Norwegian music critics . The album was released in the UK on 9 April 2012 . 
 = = = <unk> ( Shadow Boxer ) = = = 
 Released in the fall of 2014 , the album 's title " refers to recurring themes in her work : the dichotomy of not feeling entirely present in your own life , and the feeling of having to fight against different aspects of yourself , while at the same time being drawn to what is fragile and raw . " Nilsen describes these songs as " more mature , darker " , and the ukulele is almost completely absent . 
 = = = Other work = = = 
 Nilsen released Siri Nilsen : Live fra Rockefeller Music Hall ( Siri Nilsen : Live from Rockefeller Music Hall ) in August 2012 . The tracks were recorded during her concert at the Rockefeller in Oslo the previous March , and features 12 tracks . 
 Siri Nilsen appears on the Susanna single , " Death Hanging " , along with Susanne Sundfør . It was released worldwide on 24 May 2013 . 
 = = Performer = = 
 In addition to her solo career , Nilsen is part of the Oslo @-@ based musician and poet community , " Blues Run The Game , " together with musicians Arild <unk> and Jens Carelius , among others . 
 Nilsen sometimes incorporates effects pedals as part of her singing . The pedals enable her to sample elements of her singing which she then loops as a backing track while singing lead . 
 On 15 December 2011 it was announced that Siri Nilsen had been nominated for a Spellemannprisen ( Norwegian Grammy ) in the category of Best Female Artist for her album , Alle snakker sant – with the award ceremony being conducted at the National Theatre in Oslo on 14 January 2012 . 
 Nilsen performed at the annual Øyafestivalen ( Island festival ) on 10 August 2012 . The music festival is held at <unk> ( Medieval park ) in Nilsen 's hometown of Oslo , Norway . Nilsen had previously performed there as a backing singer for Jens Carelius . The festival features four stages , and during Nilsen 's opening song , " Ta <unk> med " ( Take me with you ) , it was possible to hear the soundcheck of the black metal band , <unk> , but Nilsen seemed unaffected . Among concert reviews , Nilsen was described by one writer as " a fascinating hybrid of melancholy , vulnerable sweetness and inner strength ... " This was Nilsen 's first concert since the Rockefeller in March 2012 , and since giving birth to a daughter two months previous . Commenting on the most recent phase of her life , Nilsen said , " Now I 've also got a million new things to write about , there 's so much I want to say . " 
 Nilsen is described as having a " strong artistic presence " and a voice which has a " large register " , which is " comfortably clear " with a " steady top and powerful down . " Concert reviews of Nilsen 's live performances note the clear softness of her voice juxtaposed against her vocal power ; and that she can convey more dimensionality with her voice live than what comes across on digitized recordings . 
 Nilsen performed at the SPOT music festival in Århus , Denmark on 3 May 2013 backed by an orchestra of 30 – 40 musicians performing some of Nilsen 's music such as " <unk> " and " <unk> , <unk> <unk> . " 
 = = Personal life = = 
 As the daughter of folksingers , Nilsen grew up around music . Her father is Lillebjørn Nilsen ( born 1950 Oslo , Norway ) who first came to prominence in Norway in the early 1970s after the release of his first albums , and her mother is Shari Nilsen , who is American . Siri Nilsen first wrote a song when she was six years old , but grew up sheltered from the different aspects of the music industry . Lillebjørn tells an anecdote illustrating this point : one day Siri and her sister came home from school and sang a song to their father that they had learned that day , never realizing that it was he who had written it . ( Lillebjørn Nilsen wrote a popular song / guitar book that has been in print for decades ) . 
 In November 2011 , Nilsen performed with her father on the Norwegian late @-@ night talk show , <unk> med Thomas og Harald ( Late Night with Thomas and Harald ) . She sang the single Alle snakker sant and played the ukulele while Lillebjørn accompanied on ukulele . 
 In June 2012 , Siri Nilsen gave birth to a daughter with Norwegian actor and comedian Anders Bye , with whom she has been in a relationship for several years . 
 = = Honors = = 
 2014 : Spellemannprisen in the class best lyricist , for the album <unk> 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Albums = = = 
 Live albums 
 2012 : Siri Nilsen : Live fra Rockefeller Music Hall 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 Featured in 
 2013 : " Death Hanging " ( Susanna feat . Siri Nilsen & Susanne Sundfør ) 
 = = Voice acting roles = = 
 live acting role in feature film * 
 = Tropical Storm Arthur ( 1996 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Arthur caused minimal flooding in the Carolinas in mid @-@ June 1996 . The first tropical cyclone and named storm of the annual Atlantic hurricane season , Arthur originated from an area of increased convection east of the Bahamas on June 16 . Gradually , the system increased in organization , and was designated as a tropical depression on June 17 . The depression tracked north @-@ northwest and became Tropical Storm Arthur while just offshore the Southeastern United States on June 19 . Later that day , Arthur peaked with maximum sustained winds of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) , but weakened slightly before making landfall in North Carolina early the following day . After striking North Carolina , Arthur tracked out to sea and weakened further to a tropical depression . By June 21 , Arthur transitioned into an extratropical cyclone . Overall , impact from Arthur was minimal , limited to light rainfall and moderate surf in North and South Carolina , as well as a tornado in Florida . Total damage amounted to $ 1 million ( 1996 USD ) , but no fatalities were reported . Oddly enough , 18 years later in 2014 , around the same time , another tropical cyclone with the same name impacted areas very similar to where this tropical storm impacted . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On June 16 , satellite imagery revealed an area of increased convection east of the Bahamas , which was believed to have been associated with a tropical wave . On June 17 , the convection increased in organization at the lower levels of the atmosphere . By 1800 UTC , the system had organized sufficiently to be designated as a tropical depression , making it the first of the season . Initially , the depression tracked north @-@ northwest under the steering currents of the low @-@ level flow around the western periphery of the Atlantic subtropical ridge . Strong wind shear due to fast upper @-@ level winds associated with a cold @-@ core low over the eastern Gulf of Mexico hindered further intensification for a time , but on June 18 , an area of deep convection developed north of the center of circulation . Based on analysis of reconnaissance data , the tropical depression was upgraded to Tropical Storm Arthur at 1900 UTC on June 19 . 
 Further strengthening occurred , as the storm attained peak winds of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) . With time , Arthur gradually turned northeast and made landfall near Cape Lookout , North Carolina early on June 20 . The center moved over the Pamlico Sound and the Cape Hatteras National Seashore and exited into the Atlantic . Although the storm contained minimal deep convection , satellite imagery indicated that Arthur had a well @-@ defined low @-@ level center . The tropical storm weakened to a tropical depression about 100 mi ( 160 km ) northeast of Cape Hatteras , and accelerated towards the northeast when westerly steering currents increased . Deep convection increased once again on June 21 , although the lack of symmetry indicated that the remnants of Arthur were losing tropical characteristics . Forward speed increased to 40 mph ( 64 km / h ) and the storm subsequently lost all tropical characteristics at 1200 UTC on June 21 , while centered about 350 mi ( 560 km ) north @-@ northeast of Bermuda . The extratropical remnants tracked northeastward for 36 hours , and were last identified about midway between Newfoundland and the Azores , where it was absorbed by a much larger extratropical cyclone over the North Atlantic . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 On June 18 , a tropical storm warning was issued for coastal locations from Edisto Beach , South Carolina to Cape Lookout , North Carolina . Shortly thereafter , a tropical storm watch was issued north of Cape Lookout to the North Carolina / Virginia border , including Pamlico and Albemarle Sounds . The tropical storm watch was later extended from the North Carolina / Virginia border to Cape Charles , Virginia , including Virginia Beach . By late on June 19 , all advisories were discontinued . 
 One tornado touched down in Florida , causing no known fatalities or injuries . As the center of Arthur passed 75 mi ( 121 km ) east of Cape Romain , South Carolina , minor increases in surf were reported . In North Carolina , swells ranged as high as 7 ft ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) . Rainfall peaked at 5 @.@ 85 inches ( 149 mm ) in Georgetown , South Carolina , though because it fell gradually , no significant flooding was reported , other than minor ponding of water on roads . In addition , Arthur also brought precipitation to Georgia and Virginia , though the amounts of rainfall recorded rarely exceeded 3 inches ( 76 mm ) . Sustained winds of 46 mph ( 74 km / h ) were reported , and offshore , the Atlantic Huron reported a sustained wind of 48 mph ( 77 km / h ) at 1500 UTC on June 19 , while located 35 mi ( 56 km ) southeast of Arthur 's center . In addition , a C @-@ Man station located about 34 @.@ 5 mi ( 55 @.@ 5 km ) southeast of Cape Fear , North Carolina reported sustained winds of 39 mph ( 64 km / h ) and gusts up to 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) . Overall , damage caused by Arthur was minimal , totaling only $ 1 million ( 1996 USD ) . 
 = 2012 phenomenon = 
 The 2012 phenomenon was a range of eschatological beliefs that cataclysmic or otherwise transformative events would occur on or around 21 December 2012 . This date was regarded as the end @-@ date of a 5 @,@ 126 @-@ year @-@ long cycle in the Mesoamerican Long Count calendar , and as such , festivities to commemorate the date took place on 21 December 2012 in the countries that were part of the Maya civilization ( Mexico , Guatemala , Honduras , and El Salvador ) , with main events at Chichén Itzá in Mexico , and Tikal in Guatemala . 
 Various astronomical alignments and numerological formulae were proposed as pertaining to this date . A New Age interpretation held that the date marked the start of a period during which Earth and its inhabitants would undergo a positive physical or spiritual transformation , and that 21 December 2012 would mark the beginning of a new era . Others suggested that the date marked the end of the world or a similar catastrophe . Scenarios suggested for the end of the world included the arrival of the next solar maximum , an interaction between Earth and the black hole at the center of the galaxy , or Earth 's collision with a planet called Nibiru . 
 Scholars from various disciplines quickly dismissed predictions of concomitant cataclysmic events as they arose . Professional Mayanist scholars stated that no extant classic Maya accounts forecast impending doom , and that the idea that the Long Count calendar ends in 2012 misrepresented Maya history and culture , while astronomers rejected the various proposed doomsday scenarios as pseudoscience , easily refuted by elementary astronomical observations . 
 = = Mesoamerican Long Count calendar = = 
 December 2012 marked the conclusion of a b 'ak 'tun — a time period in the Mesoamerican Long Count calendar , used in Central America prior to the arrival of Europeans . Although the Long Count was most likely invented by the Olmec , it has become closely associated with the Maya civilization , whose classic period lasted from 250 to 900 AD . The writing system of the classic Maya has been substantially deciphered , meaning that a corpus of their written and inscribed material has survived from before the European conquest . 
 Unlike the 260 @-@ day tzolk 'in still used today among the Maya , the Long Count was linear rather than cyclical , and kept time roughly in units of 20 : 20 days made a <unk> , 18 <unk> ( 360 days ) made a tun , 20 tuns made a k 'atun , and 20 k 'atuns ( 144 @,@ 000 days or roughly 394 years ) made up a b 'ak 'tun . Thus , the Maya date of 8 @.@ 3 @.@ 2 @.@ 10 @.@ 15 represents 8 b 'ak 'tuns , 3 k 'atuns , 2 tuns , 10 <unk> and 15 days . 
 = = = Apocalypse = = = 
 There is a strong tradition of " world ages " in Maya literature , but the record has been distorted , leaving several possibilities open to interpretation . According to the Popol Vuh , a compilation of the creation accounts of the K 'iche ' Maya of the Colonial @-@ era highlands , we are living in the fourth world . The Popol Vuh describes the gods first creating three failed worlds , followed by a successful fourth world in which humanity was placed . In the Maya Long Count , the previous world ended after 13 b 'ak 'tuns , or roughly 5 @,@ 125 years . The Long Count 's " zero date " was set at a point in the past marking the end of the third world and the beginning of the current one , which corresponds to 11 August 3114 BC in the proleptic Gregorian calendar . This means that the fourth world reached the end of its 13th b 'ak 'tun , or Maya date 13 @.@ 0 @.@ 0 @.@ 0 @.@ 0 , on 21 December 2012 . In 1957 , Mayanist and astronomer Maud Worcester <unk> wrote that " the completion of a Great Period of 13 b 'ak 'tuns would have been of the utmost significance to the Maya . " In 1966 , Michael D. Coe wrote in The Maya that " there is a suggestion ... that Armageddon would overtake the degenerate peoples of the world and all creation on the final day of the 13th [ b 'ak 'tun ] . Thus ... our present universe [ would ] be annihilated ... when the Great Cycle of the Long Count reaches completion . " 
 = = = Objections = = = 
 Coe 's interpretation was repeated by other scholars through the early 1990s . In contrast , later researchers said that , while the end of the 13th b 'ak 'tun would perhaps be a cause for celebration , it did not mark the end of the calendar . " There is nothing in the Maya or Aztec or ancient Mesoamerican prophecy to suggest that they prophesied a sudden or major change of any sort in 2012 , " said Mayanist scholar Mark Van Stone . " The notion of a ' Great Cycle ' coming to an end is completely a modern invention . " In 1990 , Mayanist scholars Linda Schele and David <unk> argued that the Maya " did not conceive this to be the end of creation , as many have suggested . " Susan <unk> , curator of Latin American Art and Archaeology at the Florida Museum of Natural History , stated that , " We have no record or knowledge that [ the Maya ] would think the world would come to an end " in 2012 . Sandra Noble , executive director of the Foundation for the Advancement of Mesoamerican Studies , said , " For the ancient Maya , it was a huge celebration to make it to the end of a whole cycle , " and , " The 2012 phenomenon is a complete fabrication and a chance for a lot of people to cash in . " " There will be another cycle , " said E. Wyllys Andrews V , director of the Tulane University Middle American Research Institute . " We know the Maya thought there was one before this , and that implies they were comfortable with the idea of another one after this . " Commenting on the new calendar found at <unk> , one archaeologist said " The ancient Maya predicted the world would continue – that 7 @,@ 000 years from now , things would be exactly like this . We keep looking for endings . The Maya were looking for a guarantee that nothing would change . It 's an entirely different mindset . " 
 Several prominent individuals representing Maya of Guatemala decried the suggestion that the world would end with the 13th b 'ak 'tun . Ricardo <unk> , president of the <unk> de <unk> Indígenas de Guatemala , said the date did not represent an end of humanity but that the new cycle " supposes changes in human consciousness . " Martín <unk> , of the office of the <unk> de los Derechos Humanos ( Guatemala 's Human Rights Ombudsman , PDH ) , said that the end of the calendar has nothing to do with the end of the world or the year 2012 . 
 = = = Prior associations = = = 
 The European association of the Maya with eschatology dates back to the time of Christopher Columbus , who was compiling a work called Libro de las <unk> during the voyage in 1502 when he first heard about the " Maia " on Guanaja , an island off the north coast of Honduras . Influenced by the writings of Bishop Pierre d 'Ailly , Columbus believed that his discovery of " most distant " lands ( and , by extension , the Maya themselves ) was prophesied and would bring about the Apocalypse . End @-@ times fears were widespread during the early years of the Spanish Conquest as the result of popular astrological predictions in Europe of a second Great Flood for the year 1524 . 
 In the early 1900s , German scholar Ernst <unk> interpreted the last page of the Dresden Codex as a representation of the end of the world in a cataclysmic flood . He made reference to the destruction of the world and an apocalypse , though he made no reference to the 13th b 'ak 'tun or 2012 and it was not clear that he was referring to a future event . His ideas were repeated by archaeologist Sylvanus Morley , who directly paraphrased <unk> and added his own embellishments , writing , " Finally , on the last page of the manuscript , is depicted the Destruction of the World ... Here , indeed , is portrayed with a graphic touch the final all @-@ engulfing cataclysm " in the form of a great flood . These comments were later repeated in Morley 's book , The Ancient Maya , the first edition of which was published in 1946 . 
 = = Maya references to b 'ak 'tun 13 = = 
 It is not certain what significance the classic Maya gave to the 13th b 'ak 'tun . Most classic Maya inscriptions are strictly historical and do not make any prophetic declarations . Two items in the Maya classical corpus , however , do mention the end of the 13th b 'ak 'tun : Tortuguero Monument 6 and La Corona Hieroglyphic Stairway 12 . 
 = = = Tortuguero = = = 
 The Tortuguero site , which lies in southernmost Tabasco , Mexico , dates from the 7th century AD and consists of a series of inscriptions mostly in honor of the contemporary ruler <unk> Ajaw . One inscription , known as Tortuguero Monument 6 , is the only inscription known to refer to b 'ak 'tun 13 in any detail . It has been partially defaced ; Sven <unk> and Barbara MacLeod have given this translation : 
 Very little is known about the god B 'olon Yokte ' . According to an article by Mayanists Markus Eberl and Christian Prager in British Anthropological Reports , his name is composed of the elements " nine " , ' OK @-@ te ' ( the meaning of which is unknown ) , and " god " . Confusion in classical period inscriptions suggests that the name was already ancient and unfamiliar to contemporary scribes . He also appears in inscriptions from Palenque , Usumacinta , and La Mar as a god of war , conflict , and the underworld . In one stele he is portrayed with a rope tied around his neck , and in another with an incense bag , together signifying a sacrifice to end a cycle of years . 
 Based on observations of modern Maya rituals , <unk> and MacLeod claim that the stela refers to a celebration in which a person portraying Bolon Yokte ' K 'uh was wrapped in ceremonial garments and paraded around the site . They note that the association of Bolon Yokte ' K 'uh with b 'ak 'tun 13 appears to be so important on this inscription that it supersedes more typical celebrations such as " erection of stelae , scattering of incense " and so forth . Furthermore , they assert that this event was indeed planned for 2012 and not the 7th century . Mayanist scholar Stephen Houston contests this view by arguing that future dates on Maya inscriptions were simply meant to draw parallels with contemporary events , and that the words on the stela describe a contemporary rather than a future scene . 
 = = = La Corona = = = 
 In April – May 2012 , a team of archaeologists unearthed a previously unknown inscription on a stairway at the La Corona site in Guatemala . The inscription , on what is known as Hieroglyphic Stairway 12 , describes the establishment of a royal court in Calakmul in 635 AD , and compares the then @-@ recent completion of 13 k 'atuns with the future completion of the 13th b 'ak 'tun . It contains no speculation or prophecy as to what the scribes believed would happen at that time . 
 = = = Dates beyond b 'ak 'tun 13 = = = 
 Maya inscriptions occasionally mention predicted future events or commemorations that would occur on dates far beyond the completion of the 13th b 'ak 'tun . Most of these are in the form of " distance dates " ; Long Count dates together with an additional number , known as a Distance Number , which when added to them makes a future date . On the west panel at the Temple of Inscriptions in Palenque , a section of text projects forward to the 80th 52 @-@ year Calendar Round from the coronation of the ruler K 'inich Janaab ' Pakal . Pakal 's accession occurred on 9 @.@ 9 @.@ 2 @.@ 4 @.@ 8 , equivalent to 27 July 615 AD in the proleptic Gregorian calendar . The inscription begins with Pakal 's birthdate of 9 @.@ 8 @.@ 9 @.@ 13 @.@ 0 ( 24 March , 603 AD Gregorian ) and then adds the Distance Number 10 @.@ 11 @.@ 10 @.@ 5 @.@ 8 to it , arriving at a date of 21 October <unk> AD , more than 4 @,@ 000 years after Pakal 's time . 
 Another example is Stela 1 at Coba which marks the date of creation as 13 @.@ 13 @.@ 13 @.@ 13 @.@ 13 @.@ 13 @.@ 13 @.@ 13 @.@ 13 @.@ 13 @.@ 13 @.@ 13 @.@ 13 @.@ 13 @.@ 13 @.@ 13 @.@ 13 @.@ 13 @.@ 13 @.@ 13 @.@ 0 @.@ 0 @.@ 0 @.@ 0 , or nineteen units above the b 'ak 'tun . According to Linda Schele , these 13s represent " the starting point of a huge odometer of time " , with each acting as a zero and resetting to 1 as the numbers increase . Thus this inscription anticipates the current universe lasting at least 2021 × 13 × 360 days , or roughly 2 @.@ 687 × 1028 years ; a time span equal to 2 quintillion times the age of the universe as determined by cosmologists . Others have suggested , however , that this date marks creation as having occurred after that time span . 
 In 2012 , researchers announced the discovery of a series of Maya astronomical tables in <unk> , Guatemala which plot the movements of the Moon and other astronomical bodies over the course of 17 b 'ak 'tuns . 
 = = New Age beliefs = = 
 Many assertions about the year 2012 form part of <unk> , a non @-@ codified collection of New Age beliefs about ancient Maya wisdom and spirituality . The term is distinct from " Mayanist , " used to refer to an academic scholar of the Maya . <unk> Anthony Aveni says that while the idea of " balancing the cosmos " was prominent in ancient Maya literature , the 2012 phenomenon did not draw from those traditions . Instead , it was bound up with American concepts such as the New Age movement , millenarianism , and the belief in secret knowledge from distant times and places . Themes found in 2012 literature included " suspicion towards mainstream Western culture , " the idea of spiritual evolution , and the possibility of leading the world into the New Age by individual example or by a group 's joined consciousness . The general intent of this literature was not to warn of impending doom but " to foster counter @-@ cultural sympathies and eventually socio @-@ political and ' spiritual ' activism . " Aveni , who has studied New Age and search for extraterrestrial intelligence ( SETI ) communities , describes 2012 narratives as the product of a " disconnected " society : " Unable to find spiritual answers to life 's big questions within ourselves , we turn outward to imagined entities that lie far off in space or time — entities that just might be in possession of superior knowledge . " 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 In 1975 , the ending of b 'ak 'tun 13 became the subject of speculation by several New Age authors , who asserted it would correspond with a global " transformation of consciousness . " In Mexico Mystique : The Coming Sixth Age of Consciousness , Frank Waters tied Coe 's original date of 24 December 2011 to astrology and the prophecies of the Hopi , while both José Argüelles ( in The Transformative Vision ) and Terence McKenna ( in The Invisible Landscape ) discussed the significance of the year 2012 without mentioning a specific day . 
 In 1983 , with the publication of Robert J. Sharer 's revised table of date correlations in the 4th edition of Morley 's The Ancient Maya , each became convinced that 21 December 2012 had significant meaning . By 1987 , the year in which he organized the Harmonic Convergence event , Arguelles was using the date 21 December 2012 in The Mayan Factor : Path Beyond Technology . He claimed that on 13 August <unk> BC the Earth began a passage through a " galactic synchronization beam " that emanated from the center of our galaxy , that it would pass through this beam during a period of 5200 tuns ( Maya cycles of 360 days each ) , and that this beam would result in " total synchronization " and " galactic entrainment " of individuals " plugged into the Earth 's electromagnetic battery " by 13 @.@ 0 @.@ 0 @.@ 0 @.@ 0 ( 21 December 2012 ) . He believed that the Maya aligned their calendar to correspond to this phenomenon . Anthony Aveni has dismissed all of these ideas . 
 In 2006 , author Daniel Pinchbeck popularized New Age concepts about this date in his book 2012 : The Return of Quetzalcoatl , linking b 'ak 'tun 13 to beliefs in crop circles , alien abduction , and personal revelations based on the use of hallucinogenic drugs and mediumship . Pinchbeck claims to discern a " growing realization that materialism and the rational , empirical worldview that comes with it has reached its expiration date ... [ w ] e 're on the verge of transitioning to a dispensation of consciousness that 's more intuitive , mystical and shamanic . " 
 = = = Galactic alignment = = = 
 There is no significant astronomical event tied to the Long Count 's start date . However , its supposed end date was tied to astronomical phenomena by esoteric , fringe , and New Age literature that placed great significance on astrology , especially astrological interpretations associated with the phenomenon of axial precession . Chief among these ideas is the astrological concept of a " galactic alignment . " 
 = = = = Precession = = = = 
 In the Solar System , the planets and the Sun lie roughly within the same flat plane , known as the plane of the ecliptic . From our perspective on Earth , the ecliptic is the path taken by the Sun across the sky over the course of the year . The twelve constellations that line the ecliptic are known as the zodiacal constellations and , annually , the Sun passes through all of them in turn . Additionally , over time , the Sun 's annual cycle appears to recede very slowly backward by one degree every 72 years , or by one constellation approximately every 2 @,@ 160 years . This backward movement , called " precession , " is due to a slight wobble in the Earth 's axis as it spins , and can be compared to the way a spinning top wobbles as it slows down . Over the course of 25 @,@ 800 years , a period often called a Great Year , the Sun 's path completes a full , 360 @-@ degree backward rotation through the zodiac . In Western astrological traditions , precession is measured from the March equinox , one of the two annual points at which the Sun is exactly halfway between its lowest and highest points in the sky . At the end of the 20th century and beginning of the 21st , the Sun 's March equinox position was in the constellation Pisces moving back into Aquarius . This signaled the end of one astrological age ( the Age of Pisces ) and the beginning of another ( the Age of Aquarius ) . 
 Similarly , the Sun 's December solstice position ( in the northern hemisphere , the lowest point on its annual path ; in the southern hemisphere , the highest ) was in the constellation of Sagittarius , one of two constellations in which the zodiac intersects with the Milky Way . Every year , on the December solstice , the Sun and the Milky Way , appeared ( from the surface of the Earth ) to come into alignment , and every year precession caused a slight shift in the Sun 's position in the Milky Way . Given that the Milky Way is between 10 ° and 20 ° wide , it takes between 700 and 1 @,@ 400 years for the Sun 's December solstice position to precess through it . In 2012 it was about halfway through the Milky Way , crossing the galactic equator . In 2012 , the Sun 's December solstice fell on 21 December . 
 = = = = Mysticism = = = = 
 Mystical speculations about the precession of the equinoxes and the Sun 's proximity to the center of the Milky Way appeared in Hamlet 's Mill ( 1969 ) by Giorgio de Santillana and Hertha von <unk> . These were quoted and expanded upon by Terence and Dennis McKenna in The Invisible Landscape ( 1975 ) . The significance of a future " galactic alignment " was noted in 1991 by astrologer Raymond <unk> , who asserted that the winter solstice would align with the galactic plane in 1998 / 1999 . He wrote that this event " only occurs once each 26 @,@ 000 @-@ year cycle and would be most definitely of utmost significance to the top flight ancient astrologers . " Astrologer Bruce Scofield noted , " The Milky Way crossing of the winter solstice is something that has been neglected by Western astrologers , with a few exceptions . Charles Jayne made a very early reference to it , and in the 1970s Rob Hand mentioned it in his talks on precession but didn 't elaborate on it . Ray <unk> later made a point of it , and after that John [ Major ] Jenkins , myself , and Daniel <unk> began to talk about it . " 
 Adherents to the idea , following a theory first proposed by Munro Edmonson , alleged that the Maya based their calendar on observations of the Great Rift or Dark Rift , a band of dark dust clouds in the Milky Way , which , according to some scholars , the Maya called the Xibalba be or " Black Road . " John Major Jenkins claims that the Maya were aware of where the ecliptic intersected the Black Road and gave this position in the sky a special significance in their cosmology . Jenkins said that precession would align the Sun precisely with the galactic equator at the 2012 winter solstice . Jenkins claimed that the classical Maya anticipated this conjunction and celebrated it as the harbinger of a profound spiritual transition for mankind . New Age proponents of the galactic alignment hypothesis argued that , just as astrology uses the positions of stars and planets to make claims of future events , the Maya plotted their calendars with the objective of preparing for significant world events . Jenkins attributed the insights of ancient Maya shamans about the galactic center to their use of psilocybin mushrooms , psychoactive toads , and other psychedelics . Jenkins also associated the Xibalba be with a " world tree , " drawing on studies of contemporary ( not ancient ) Maya cosmology . 
 = = = = Criticism = = = = 
 Astronomers such as David Morrison argue that the galactic equator is an entirely arbitrary line and can never be precisely drawn , because it is impossible to determine the Milky Way 's exact boundaries , which vary depending on clarity of view . Jenkins claimed he drew his conclusions about the location of the galactic equator from observations taken at above 11 @,@ 000 feet ( 3 @,@ 400 m ) , an altitude that gives a clearer image of the Milky Way than the Maya had access to . Furthermore , since the Sun is half a degree wide , its solstice position takes 36 years to precess its full width . Jenkins himself noted that even given his determined location for the line of the galactic equator , its most precise convergence with the center of the Sun already occurred in 1998 , and so asserts that , rather than 2012 , the galactic alignment instead focuses on a multi @-@ year period centered in 1998 . 
 There is no clear evidence that the classic Maya were aware of precession . Some Maya scholars , such as Barbara MacLeod , Michael <unk> , Eva Hunt , Gordon Brotherston , and Anthony Aveni , have suggested that some Mayan holy dates were timed to <unk> cycles , but scholarly opinion on the subject remains divided . There is also little evidence , archaeological or historical , that the Maya placed any importance on solstices or equinoxes . It is possible that only the earliest among Mesoamericans observed solstices , but this is also a disputed issue among Mayanists . There is also no evidence that the classic Maya attached any importance to the Milky Way ; there is no glyph in their writing system to represent it , and no astronomical or chronological table tied to it . 
 = = = <unk> zero and the I Ching = = = 
 " <unk> zero " is a numerological formula that purports to calculate the ebb and flow of " novelty , " defined as increase over time in the universe 's interconnectedness , or organized complexity . Terence McKenna claimed that the universe has a teleological attractor at the end of time that increases interconnectedness . He believed this which would eventually reach a singularity of infinite complexity in 2012 , at which point anything and everything imaginable would occur simultaneously . He conceived this idea over several years in the early to mid @-@ 1970s whilst using psilocybin mushrooms and DMT . The scientific community considers novelty theory to be pseudoscience . 
 McKenna expressed " novelty " in a computer program which produces a waveform known as " <unk> zero " or the " <unk> . " Based on McKenna 's interpretation of the King Wen sequence of the I Ching , an ancient Chinese book on divination , the graph purports to show great periods of novelty corresponding with major shifts in humanity 's biological and sociocultural evolution . He believed that the events of any given time are resonantly related to the events of other times , and chose the atomic bombing of Hiroshima as the basis for calculating his end date of November 2012 . When he later discovered this date 's proximity to the end of the 13th b 'ak 'tun of the Maya calendar , he revised his hypothesis so that the two dates matched . 
 The 1975 first edition of The Invisible Landscape referred to 2012 ( but no specific day during the year ) only twice . In the 1993 second edition , McKenna employed Sharer 's date of 21 December 2012 throughout . 
 Novelty theory has been criticized for " rejecting countless ideas presumed as factual by the scientific community , " depending " solely on numerous controversial deductions that contradict empirical logic , " and encompassing " no suitable indication of truth , " with the conclusion that novelty theory is a pseudoscience . 
 = = Doomsday theories = = 
 The idea that the year 2012 presaged a world cataclysm , the end of the world , or the end of human civilization , became a subject of popular media speculation as the date of 21 December 2012 approached . This idea was promulgated by many pages on the Internet , particularly on YouTube . The Discovery Channel was criticized for its " quasi @-@ documentaries " about the subject that " sacrifice [ d ] accuracy for entertainment . " 
 = = = Other alignments = = = 
 Some people interpreted the galactic alignment <unk> , claiming that its occurrence would somehow create a combined gravitational effect between the Sun and the supermassive black hole at the center of our galaxy ( known as Sagittarius A * ) , creating havoc on Earth . Apart from the " galactic alignment " already having happened in 1998 , the Sun 's apparent path through the zodiac as seen from Earth did not take it near the true galactic center , but rather several degrees above it . Even were this not the case , Sagittarius A * is 30 @,@ 000 light years from Earth ; it would have to have been more than 6 million times closer to cause any gravitational disruption to Earth 's Solar System . This reading of the alignment was included on the History Channel documentary Decoding the Past . John Major Jenkins complained that a science fiction writer co @-@ authored the documentary , and he went on to characterize it as " 45 minutes of unabashed doomsday hype and the worst kind of inane sensationalism " . 
 Some believers in a 2012 doomsday used the term " galactic alignment " to describe a different phenomenon proposed by some scientists to explain a pattern in mass extinctions supposedly observed in the fossil record . According to the Shiva Hypothesis , mass extinctions are not random , but recur every 26 million years . To account for this , it was suggested that vertical oscillations made by the Sun on its 250 @-@ million @-@ year orbit of the galactic center cause it to regularly pass through the galactic plane . When the Sun 's orbit takes it outside the galactic plane which bisects the galactic disc , the influence of the galactic tide is weaker . However , when re @-@ entering the galactic disc — as it does every 20 – 25 million years — it comes under the influence of the far stronger " disc tides " , which , according to mathematical models , increase the flux of Oort cloud comets into the inner Solar System by a factor of 4 , thus leading to a massive increase in the likelihood of a devastating comet impact . However , this " alignment " takes place over tens of millions of years , and could never be timed to an exact date . Evidence shows that the Sun passed through the plane bisecting the galactic disc three million years ago and in 2012 was moving farther above it . 
 A third suggested alignment was some sort of planetary conjunction occurring on 21 December 2012 ; however , conventional astronomy did not predict a conjunction on that date . Multi @-@ planet alignments did occur in both 2000 and 2010 , each with no ill result for the Earth . Jupiter is the largest planet in the Solar System ; larger than all other planets combined . When Jupiter is near opposition , the difference in gravitational force that the Earth experiences is less than 1 % of the force that the Earth feels daily from the Moon . 
 = = = <unk> reversal = = = 
 Another idea tied to 2012 involved a geomagnetic reversal ( often incorrectly referred to as a pole shift by proponents ) , possibly triggered by a massive solar flare , that would release an energy equal to 100 billion atomic bombs . This belief was supposedly supported by observations that the Earth 's magnetic field was weakening , which could precede a reversal of the north and south magnetic poles , and the arrival of the next solar maximum , which was expected sometime around 2012 . 
 Most scientific estimates , however , say that geomagnetic reversals take between 1 @,@ 000 and 10 @,@ 000 years to complete , and do not start on any particular date . Furthermore , the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration predicted that the solar maximum would peak in late 2013 or 2014 , and that it would be fairly weak , with a below @-@ average number of sunspots . In any case , there was no scientific evidence linking a solar maximum to a geomagnetic reversal , which is driven by forces entirely within the Earth . Instead , a solar maximum would be mostly notable for its effects on satellite and cellular phone communications . David Morrison attributed the rise of the solar storm idea to physicist and science popularizer Michio Kaku , who claimed in an interview with Fox News that a solar peak in 2012 could be disastrous for orbiting satellites , and to NASA 's headlining a 2006 webpage as " Solar Storm Warning " , a term later repeated on several doomsday pages . 
 = = = Planet X / Nibiru = = = 
 Some believers in a 2012 doomsday claimed that a planet called Planet X , or Nibiru , would collide with or pass by the Earth . This idea , which appeared in various forms since 1995 , initially predicted Doomsday in May 2003 , but proponents abandoned that date after it passed without incident . The idea originated from claims of channeling alien beings and is widely ridiculed . Astronomers calculated that such an object so close to Earth would be visible to anyone looking up at the night sky . 
 = = = Other catastrophes = = = 
 Author Graham Hancock , in his book Fingerprints of the Gods , interpreted Coe 's remarks in Breaking the Maya Code as evidence for the prophecy of a global cataclysm . Filmmaker Roland Emmerich later credited the book with inspiring his 2009 disaster film 2012 . 
 Other speculations regarding doomsday in 2012 included predictions by the Web Bot project , a computer program that purports to predict the future by analyzing Internet chatter . However , commentators have rejected claims that the bot is able to predict natural disasters , as opposed to human @-@ caused disasters like stock market crashes . 
 The 2012 date was also loosely tied to the long @-@ running concept of the Photon Belt , which predicted a form of interaction between Earth and Alcyone , the largest star of the Pleiades cluster . Critics argued that photons cannot form belts , that the Pleiades , located more than 400 light years away , could have no effect on Earth , and that the Solar System , rather than getting closer to the Pleiades , was in fact moving farther away from it . 
 Some media outlets tied the fact that the red supergiant star Betelgeuse would undergo a supernova at some point in the future to the 2012 phenomenon . However , while Betelgeuse was certainly in the final stages of its life , and would die as a supernova , there was no way to predict the timing of the event to within 100 @,@ 000 years . To be a threat to Earth , a supernova would need to be no further than 25 light years from the Solar System . Betelgeuse is roughly 600 light years away , and so its supernova would not affect Earth . In December 2011 , NASA 's Francis Reddy issued a press release debunking the possibility of a supernova occurring in 2012 . 
 Another claim involved alien invasion . In December 2010 , an article , first published in <unk> and later referenced in the English @-@ language edition of Pravda claimed , citing a Second Digitized Sky Survey photograph as evidence , that SETI had detected three large spacecraft due to arrive at Earth in 2012 . Astronomer and <unk> Phil Plait noted that by using the small @-@ angle formula , one could determine that if the object in the photo were as large as claimed , it would have had to be closer to Earth than the Moon , which would mean it would already have arrived . In January 2011 , Seth Shostak , chief astronomer of SETI , issued a press release debunking the claims . 
 = = Public reaction = = 
 The phenomenon spread widely after coming to public notice , particularly on the Internet . Hundreds of thousands of websites were posted on the subject . " Ask an <unk> " , a NASA public outreach website , received over 5 @,@ 000 questions from the public on the subject from 2007 , some asking whether they should kill themselves , their children or their pets . In May 2012 , an Ipsos poll of 16 @,@ 000 adults in 21 countries found that 8 percent had experienced fear or anxiety over the possibility of the world ending in December 2012 , while an average of 10 percent agreed with the statement " the Mayan calendar , which some say ' ends ' in 2012 , marks the end of the world " , with responses as high as 20 percent in China , 13 percent in Russia , Turkey , Japan and Korea , and 12 percent in the United States . At least one suicide was directly linked to fear of a 2012 apocalypse , with others anecdotally reported . Jared Lee Loughner , the perpetrator of the 2011 Tucson shooting , followed 2012 @-@ related predictions . A panel of scientists questioned on the topic at a plenary session at the Astronomical Society of the Pacific contended that the Internet played a substantial role in allowing this doomsday date to gain more traction than previous similar panics . 
 = = = Europe = = = 
 Beginning in 2000 , the small French village of Bugarach , population 189 , began receiving visits from " <unk> " — mystic believers who had concluded that the local mountain , Pic de Bugarach , was the ideal location to weather the transformative events of 2012 . In 2011 , the local mayor , Jean @-@ Pierre Delord , began voicing fears to the international press that the small town would be overwhelmed by an influx of thousands of visitors in 2012 , even suggesting he might call in the army . " We 've seen a huge rise in visitors " , Delord told The Independent in March 2012 . " Already this year more than 20 @,@ 000 people have climbed right to the top , and last year we had 10 @,@ 000 hikers , which was a significant rise on the previous 12 months . They think Pic de Bugarach is ' un garage à <unk> ' [ a garage for UFOs ] . The villagers are exasperated : the exaggerated importance of something which they see as completely removed from reality is bewildering . After 21 December , this will surely return to normal . " In December 2012 , the French government placed 100 police and firefighters around both Bugarach and Pic de Bugarach , limiting access to potential visitors . Ultimately , only about 1 @,@ 000 visitors appeared at the height of the " event " . Two raves were foiled , 12 people had to be turned away from the peak , and 5 people were arrested for carrying weapons . Jean @-@ Pierre Delord was criticised by members of the community for failing to take advantage of the media attention and promote the region . 
 The Turkish village of <unk> , near Ephesus , expected to receive over 60 @,@ 000 visitors on 21 December 2012 , as New Age mystics believed its " positive energy " would aid in weathering the catastrophe . Only a fraction of that number actually arrived , with a substantial component being police and journalists , and the expected windfall failed to materialise . 
 Similarly , the pyramid @-@ like mountain of <unk> , in the Serbian Carpathians , attracted much apocalyptic attention , as many believed an artificial pyramid structure buried within it would emit a powerful force shield on the day , protecting those within it . Hotels around the base received up to 500 bookings a piece for rooms . 
 In Russia , inmates of a women 's prison experienced " a collective mass psychosis " in the weeks leading up to the supposed doomsday , while residents of a factory town near Moscow reportedly emptied a supermarket of matches , candles , food and other supplies . The Minister of Emergency Situations declared in response that according to " methods of monitoring what is occurring on the planet Earth , " there would be no apocalypse in December . When asked when the world would end in a press conference , Russian President Vladimir Putin said , " In about 4 @.@ 5 billion years . " 
 In December 2012 , Vatican astronomer Rev José Funes wrote in the Vatican newspaper L 'Osservatore Romano that apocalyptic theories around 2012 were " not even worth discussing " . 
 = = = Asia = = = 
 In China , up to one thousand members of the Christian cult Almighty God were arrested after claiming that the end of b 'ak 'tun 13 marked the end of the world , and that it was time to overthrow Communism . Shoppers were reported to be hoarding supplies of candles in anticipation of coming darkness , while online retailer Taobao sold tickets to board Noah 's Ark to customers . Bookings for wedding ceremonies on 21 December 2012 were saturated in several cities . On 14 December 2012 , a man in Henan province attacked and wounded twenty @-@ three children with a knife . Authorities suspected the man had been " influenced " by the prediction of the upcoming apocalypse . Academics in China attributed the widespread belief in the 2012 doomsday in their country to a lack of scientific literacy and a mistrust of the government @-@ controlled media . 
 On 6 December 2012 , Australian Prime Minister Julia Gillard delivered a hoax speech for the radio station triple J in which she declared " My dear remaining fellow Australians ; the end of the world is coming . Whether the final blow comes from flesh @-@ eating zombies , demonic hell @-@ beasts or from the total triumph of K @-@ Pop , if you know one thing about me it is this - I will always fight for you to the very end . " Radio announcer Neil Mitchell described the hoax as " immature " and pondered whether it demeaned her office . 
 = = = Mexico and Central America = = = 
 Those Mesoamerican countries that once formed part of the Maya civilization , Mexico , Guatemala , Honduras , and El Salvador , all organized festivities to commemorate the end of b 'ak 'tun 13 at the largest Maya sites . On 21 December 2011 , the Maya town of Tapachula in Chiapas activated an eight @-@ foot digital clock counting down the days until the end of b 'ak 'tun 13 . On 21 December 2012 , major events took place at Chichén Itzá in Mexico and Tikal in Guatemala . In El Salvador , the largest event was held at <unk> , and in Honduras , at Copán . In all of these archaeological sites , Maya rituals were held at dawn led by shamans and Maya priests . 
 On the final day of b 'ak 'tun 13 , residents of Yucatán and other regions formerly dominated by the ancient Maya celebrated what they saw as the dawn of a new , better era . According to official figures from Mexico 's National Institute of Anthropology and History ( INAH ) , about 50 @,@ 000 people visited Mexican archaeological sites on 21 December 2012 . Of those , 10 @,@ 000 visited Chichén Itzá in Yucatán , 9 @,@ 900 visited Tulum in Quintana Roo , and 8 @,@ 000 visited Palenque in Chiapas . An additional 10 @,@ 000 people visited Teotihuacan near Mexico City , which is not a Maya site . The main ceremony in Chichén Itzá was held at dawn in the plaza of the Temple of <unk> , one of the principal symbols of Maya culture . The archaeological site was opened two hours early to receive thousands of tourists , mostly foreigners who came to participate in events scheduled for the end of b 'ak 'tun 13 . 
 The fire ceremony at Tikal was held at dawn in the main plaza of the Temple of the Great Jaguar . The ceremony was led by Guatemalan and foreign priests . The President of Guatemala , Otto Pérez , and of Costa Rica , Laura Chinchilla , participated in the event as special guests . During the ceremony the priests asked for unity , peace and the end of discrimination and racism , with the hope that the start of a new cycle will be a " new dawn " . About 3 @,@ 000 people participated in the event . 
 Most of these events were organized by agencies of the Mexican and Central American governments , and their respective tourism industries expected to attract thousands of visitors . Mexico is visited by about 22 million foreigners in a typical year . However , in 2012 , the national tourism agency expected to attract 52 million visitors just to the regions of Chiapas , Yucatán , Quintana Roo , Tabasco and Campeche . A Maya activist group in Guatemala , <unk> <unk> , objected to the commercialization of the date . A spokesman from the Conference of Maya Ministers commented that for them the Tikal ceremony is not a show for tourists but something spiritual and personal . The secretary of the Great Council of Ancestral Authorities commented that living Maya felt they were excluded from the activities in Tikal . This group held a parallel ceremony , and complained that the date has been used for commercial gain . In addition , before the main Tikal ceremony , about 200 Maya protested the celebration because they felt excluded . Most modern Maya were indifferent to the ceremonies , and the small number of people still practising ancient rites held solemn , more private ceremonies . 
 Osvaldo Gomez , a technical advisor to the Tikal site , complained that many visitors during the celebration had illegally climbed the stairs of the Temple of the Masks , causing " irreparable " damage . 
 = = = South America = = = 
 In Brazil , Décio Colla , the Mayor of the City of São Francisco de Paula , Rio Grande do Sul , mobilized the population to prepare for the end of the world by stocking up on food and supplies . In the city of <unk> , in the Mato Grosso do Sul , a colony was built for survivors of the expected tragedy . In Alto Paraíso de Goiás , the hotels also made specific reservations for prophetic dates . On 11 October 2012 , in the Brazilian city of Teresina , police interrupted what was believed to have been an attempted mass suicide by up to one hundred members of a cult headed by self @-@ proclaimed prophet Luis Pereira dos Santos , who predicted the end of the world on the feast day of Our Lady of <unk> . Santos was subsequently arrested . 
 In Bolivia , President Evo Morales participated in Quechua and Aymara rituals , organized with government support , to commemorate the Southern solstice that took place in Isla del Sol , in the southern part of Lake Titicaca . During the event , Morales proclaimed the beginning of " <unk> " , meaning the world 's wake up to a culture of life and the beginning of the end to wild capitalism , and he proposed to dismantle the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank . 
 On 21 December 2012 , the <unk> in Córdoba , Argentina was closed , as a mass suicide there had been proposed on Facebook . 
 = = = North America = = = 
 In the United States , sales of private underground blast shelters increased noticeably after 2009 , with many construction companies ' advertisements calling attention to the 2012 apocalypse . In Michigan , schools were closed for the Christmas holidays two days early , in part because rumours of the 2012 apocalypse were raising fears of repeat shootings similar to that at Sandy Hook . American reality TV stars Heidi Montag and Spencer Pratt revealed that they had spent most of their $ 10 million of accumulated earnings by 2010 because they believed the world would end in 2012 . 
 = = Cultural influence = = 
 The 2012 phenomenon was discussed or referenced in several media . Several TV documentaries , as well as some contemporary fictional references to the year 2012 , referred to 21 December as the day of a cataclysmic event . 
 The UFO conspiracy TV series The X @-@ Files cited 22 December 2012 as the date for an alien colonization of the Earth and mentioned the Mayan calendar " stopping " on this date . The History Channel aired a handful of special series on doomsday that included analysis of 2012 theories , such as Decoding the Past ( 2005 – 2007 ) , 2012 , End of Days ( 2006 ) , Last Days on Earth ( 2006 ) , Seven Signs of the Apocalypse ( 2009 ) , and Nostradamus 2012 ( 2008 ) . The Discovery Channel also aired 2012 Apocalypse in 2009 , suggesting that massive solar storms , magnetic pole reversal , earthquakes , <unk> , and other drastic natural events could occur in 2012 . In 2012 , the National Geographic Channel launched a show called Doomsday <unk> , a documentary series about survivalists preparing for various cataclysms , including the 2012 doomsday . 
 Hundreds of books were published on the topic . The bestselling book of 2009 , Dan Brown 's The Lost Symbol , featured a coded mock email number ( <unk> @.@ 5 ) that decoded to the Julian date for 21 December 2012 . 
 In cinema , the 2009 disaster film 2012 was inspired by the phenomenon , and advance promotion prior to its release included a stealth marketing campaign in which TV spots and websites from the fictional " Institute for Human Continuity " called on people to prepare for the end of the world . As these promotions did not mention the film itself , many viewers believed them to be real and contacted astronomers in panic . Although the campaign was heavily criticized , the film became one of the most successful of its year , grossing nearly $ 770 million worldwide . An article in The Daily Telegraph attributed the widespread fear of the 2012 phenomenon in China to the film , which was a smash hit in that country because it depicted the Chinese building " survival arks " . Lars von Trier 's 2011 film Melancholia featured a plot in which a planet emerges from behind the Sun on a collision course with Earth . Announcing his company 's purchase of the film , the head of Magnolia Pictures said in a press release , " As the 2012 apocalypse is upon us , it is time to prepare for a cinematic last supper " . 
 The phenomenon also inspired several rock and pop music hits . As early as 1997 , " A Certain Shade of Green " by Incubus referred to the mystical belief that a shift in perception would arrive in 2012 ( " Are you gonna stand around till 2012 A.D. ? / What are you waiting for , a certain shade of green ? " ) . More recent hits include " 2012 ( It Ain 't the End ) " ( 2010 ) performed by Jay Sean and " Till the World Ends " ( 2011 ) performed by Britney Spears . Towards mid @-@ December 2012 , an internet hoax related to South Korean singer Psy being one of the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse was widely circulated around social media platforms . The hoax purported that once Psy 's " Gangnam Style " YouTube video amassed a billion views , the world would end . Indian composer A. R. Rahman , known for Slumdog Millionaire , released his single " Infinite Love " to " instill faith and optimism in people " prior to the predicted doomsday . 
 A number of brands ran commercials tied to the 2012 apocalypse in the months and days leading to the date . In February 2012 , American automotive company GM aired an advertisement during the annual Super Bowl football game in which a group of friends drove Chevrolet <unk> through the ruins of human civilization following the 2012 apocalypse , while on 17 December 2012 , Jell @-@ O ran an ad saying that offering Jell @-@ O to the Mayan gods would appease them into sparing the world . John <unk> , Professor of Advertising at Boston University , questioned the utility of tying large sums of money to such a unique and short @-@ term event . 
 = Mission House ( Stockbridge , Massachusetts ) = 
 The Mission House is an historic house located at 19 Main Street , Stockbridge , Massachusetts . It was built between 1739 and 1742 by a Christian missionary to the local Mahicans . It is a National Historic Landmark , designated in 1968 as a rare surviving example of a colonial mission house . It is now owned and operated as a nonprofit museum by the Trustees of Reservations . 
 The town of Stockbridge was established in the late 1730s as a mission community to the Mahicans . John Sergeant was the first missionary , formally beginning his service in 1735 . His first house , built in the valley where the Indians lived , has not survived ; this house was built in the white community on the hill above the town following his marriage in 1739 . It remained in the Sergeant family until the 1870s , and survived Gilded Age developments of the late 19th century . 
 In the 1920s the house was purchased by Mabel Choate , owner of the nearby Naumkeag estate , and moved down into the valley . She and landscape designer Fletcher Steele restored the building , furnished it with 18th century pieces , and designed gardens to Steele 's vision of what a colonial landscape might have been . Choate opened the house as a museum in 1930 , and donated it ( and eventually Naumkeag as well ) to the Trustees of Reservations , who operate both properties as museums . 
 = = Background = = 
 Before the arrival of British colonists , the area that is now southern Berkshire County , Massachusetts was inhabited by communities of the Mahican tribal confederation . The population of these communities changed over the 17th century as war ( sometimes with European settlers and sometimes with the neighboring Iroquois ) , disease , and migration made them smaller and more diverse . By the 1720s they had sold off most of their tribal lands , and lived in relative peace in two remaining tracts of land on the Housatonic River . 
 Beginning in the late 1720s the Mahicans became a point of interest to British missionary organizations , because they were seen as potential conversion targets and to counter the possibility of influence on them from Roman Catholic New France . This effort was managed in New England by a commission headed by the governor of the Province of Massachusetts Bay , Jonathan Belcher . Belcher suggested in 1730 that the province lay out a town in the Mahican lands , and that London missionary groups pay for a mission there . Funds were allocated for this effort in 1733 . 
 In 1734 Massachusetts residents in the Northampton area met to organize the mission . John Sergeant , a recent graduate of Yale College , agreed to take on the task , and spent some time that fall among the Mahicans . After negotiations involving Governor Belcher and Mahican leaders , it was agreed in 1735 that a mission would be established , and Sergeant was ordained to serve as a minister among them . He immediately moved to the Mahican lands and began preaching to and baptizing them . 
 In 1736 a township of six square miles ( 16 km2 ) was formally granted to the Mahicans by the Province of Massachusetts Bay , which would be incorporated in 1739 as Stockbridge . Included in the grant were provisions that the minister and schoolteacher receive land grants , and that four English families settle the area , in part to set an example of Christian living for the natives . John Sergeant built a modest frontier house in the township , and the Indian village grew around this area , which included a meeting house used as a church and school . 
 = = House history = = 
 In 1739 Sergeant married Abigail Williams , the seventeen @-@ year @-@ old daughter of one of Stockbridge 's English settlers . She wanted to live outside the village , so Sergeant had a new house , the subject of this article , built on Prospect Hill , overlooking the village . The date of its construction is uncertain : Sergeant received the land in 1739 after Stockbridge 's incorporation , and the house is known to have been built by 1742 . 
 The Sergeants lived there until his death in 1749 . Abigail remarried and eventually moved out of the house , but it remained in the family . She returned to it after her second husband 's death , living with her son 's family until her own death in 1791 . Jonathan Edwards , a minister who rose to fame during the First Great Awakening , succeeded Sergeant as missionary to the Mahicans ( who also became known as " Stockbridge Indians " and " Mohicans " ) , but occupied the first house Sergeant built . That house has not survived , but its site is now marked by a sundial near 23 Main Street . 
 Sergeant 's second house remained in the family until 1879 , when the property was sold to David Dudley Field , Jr . , a New York lawyer . Field amassed an estate of some 115 acres ( 47 ha ) , on which he built a large summer house ; the mission house he rented out for several summers to friends . It subsequently fell into disrepair , and was rescued in the 1920s by Mabel Choate , the daughter of New York lawyer Joseph Hodges Choate and owner of the nearby Naumkeag estate , who sought to establish it as a museum in memory of her parents . 
 Sometime around 1926 , Choate purchased the mission house . The house was then disassembled , and its pieces carefully numbered . In 1927 she purchased the lot at 19 Main Street where the house now stands , formerly the site of the Stockbridge Casino ; the casino building she sold for $ 1 , and it was moved to its present location east of town , where it serves as the home of the Berkshire Theatre Festival . In 1928 the house was reconstructed at its present location under the guidance of landscape designer Fletcher Steele . The property on which it originally stood is now the site of the Roman Catholic National Shrine of The Divine Mercy . 
 The house 's gardens were created between 1928 – 1932 by Steele ( who was also responsible for significant work on Naumkeag 's gardens ) . The house was furnished under Choate 's guidance with pieces appropriate to the Sergeant period , and opened as a museum in 1930 . She donated the house and surrounding property to the Trustees of Reservations in 1948 , and bequeathed it part of her collection . 
 Included in Choate 's bequest to the museum was a two @-@ volume Bible that had been given to the Mahicans in 1745 by Francis Ayscough . Choate had in the 1930s convinced the elders of the Stockbridge @-@ Munsee tribe ( successors to the Mahicans ) to sell her the Bible for display in the museum . Tribe members objected to the sale after it took place , but no action was taken , and the Bible 's location was lost to the tribe until it was spotted by tribal members in the museum in 1975 . Following negotiations , the Trustees of Reservations returned the Bible to the tribe in 1991 . 
 = = House and gardens = = 
 The mission house now stands on a lot approximately 0 @.@ 4 acres ( 0 @.@ 16 ha ) in size . The layout of the house is a standard Georgian center @-@ hall plan , with <unk> rooms ( a parlor to the left , and kitchen to the right ) on either side of a central hall , which has a stairway to the second floor . Behind the parlor is an office space where Sergeant would have met with Indians . A diversion from the typical Georgian plan is the presence of a second entrance on the right side of the house , and a narrow hallway running from that entrance to the office . This made it possible for Sergeant 's Indian visitors to reach his office without passing through the front of the house . The front door is adorned with a remarkably well @-@ preserved specimen of a Connecticut River valley front door pediment . 
 The property features several outbuildings , generally dating from the time of the restoration . A small one @-@ room frame building in the southwest corner serves as a visitor center . Behind the house is a long one @-@ story building that houses museum exhibits , as well as a storage and utility area . It is connected to the house itself by a 25 @-@ foot ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) grape arbor . Northeast of the house is a large barn @-@ like building housing function facilities and a caretaker 's apartment . 
 The gardens and outbuildings of the property were designed to Fletcher Steele 's vision of what colonial garden should be . He drew on ideas seen in the gardens of George Washington 's estate at Mount Vernon to design a property where " a hundred forms of industry were carried on " . Rows of vegetables , fruit trees , and bushes , were lined with flowers for aesthetic appeal , and spaces for carved out that he envisioned would have been used for performing outdoor work such as chopping wood , churning butter , and preparing preserves . Echoing statements made in his Design of a Little Garden , published just a few years earlier , Steele laid out the outbuildings in such a way to provide the homeowners a private retreat . 
 The house was declared a National Historic Landmark in 1968 , and listed on the National Register of Historic Places . It contains a collection of eighteenth @-@ century American furniture and decorative arts . It is open to the public on summer weekends or by appointment . 
 = Donner Party = 
 The Donner Party ( sometimes called the Donner @-@ Reed Party ) was a group of American pioneers led by George Donner and James F. Reed who set out for California in a wagon train in May 1846 . They were delayed by a series of mishaps and mistakes , and spent the winter of 1846 – 47 snowbound in the Sierra Nevada . Some of the pioneers resorted to cannibalism to survive . 
 The journey west usually took between four and six months , but the Donner Party was slowed by following a new route called Hastings Cutoff , which crossed Utah 's Wasatch Mountains and Great Salt Lake Desert . The rugged terrain and difficulties encountered while traveling along the Humboldt River in present @-@ day Nevada resulted in the loss of many cattle and wagons and splits within the group . 
 By the beginning of November 1846 , the settlers had reached the Sierra Nevada where they became trapped by an early , heavy snowfall near Truckee ( now Donner ) Lake , high in the mountains . Their food supplies ran extremely low and , in mid @-@ December , some of the group set out on foot to obtain help . Rescuers from California attempted to reach the settlers , but the first relief party did not arrive until the middle of February 1847 , almost four months after the wagon train became trapped . Of the 87 members of the party , 48 survived to reach California , many of them having eaten the dead for survival . 
 Historians have described the episode as one of the most bizarre and spectacular tragedies in Californian history and western @-@ US migration . 
 = = Background = = 
 During the 1840s , the United States saw a dramatic increase in pioneers , people who left their homes in the east to settle in Oregon and California . Some , such as Patrick Breen , saw California as a place where they would be free to live in a fully Catholic culture , but many were inspired by the idea of Manifest Destiny , a philosophy which asserted that the land between the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans belonged to Americans and they should settle it . Most wagon trains followed the Oregon Trail route from Independence , Missouri to the Continental Divide , traveling at about 15 miles ( 24 km ) a day on a journey that usually took between four and six months . The trail generally followed rivers to South Pass , a mountain pass in Wyoming , which was relatively easy for wagons to negotiate . From there , wagon trains had a choice of routes to their destination . 
 Lansford W. Hastings , an early immigrant , went to California in 1842 and saw the promise of the undeveloped country . To encourage settlers , he published The Emigrants ' Guide to Oregon and California . He described a direct route across the Great Basin which would bring emigrants through the Wasatch Mountains and across the Great Salt Lake Desert . Hastings had not traveled any part of his proposed shortcut until early 1846 on a trip from California to Fort Bridger . The fort was a scant supply station run by Jim Bridger and his partner Pierre Louis Vasquez in Blacks Fork , Wyoming . Hastings stayed at the fort to persuade travelers to turn south on his route . As of 1846 , Hastings was the second of two men documented to have crossed the southern part of the Great Salt Lake Desert and neither had been accompanied by wagons . 
 The most difficult part of the journey to California was the last 100 miles ( 160 km ) across the Sierra Nevada . This mountain range contains 500 distinct peaks over 12 @,@ 000 feet ( 3 @,@ 700 m ) high , and because of their height and proximity to the Pacific Ocean they receive more snow than most other ranges in North America . The eastern side of the range is also extremely steep . After leaving Missouri to cross the vast wilderness to Oregon or California , timing was crucial to ensure that wagon trains would not be bogged down by mud created by spring rains , nor by massive snowdrifts in the mountains from September onwards , and also that their horses and oxen would have enough spring grass to eat . 
 = = Families = = 
 In the spring of 1846 , almost 500 wagons headed west from Independence . At the rear of the train , a group of nine wagons containing 32 members of the Reed and Donner families and their employees left on May 12 . George Donner , born in North Carolina , had gradually moved west to Kentucky , Indiana , and Illinois , with a one @-@ year sojourn to Texas . In early 1846 , he was about 60 years old . With him were his 44 @-@ year @-@ old wife Tamsen and their three daughters Frances ( 6 ) , Georgia ( 4 ) , and Eliza ( 3 ) , and George 's daughters from a previous marriage : <unk> ( 14 ) and <unk> ( 12 ) . George 's younger brother Jacob ( aged 56 ) also joined the party with his wife Elizabeth ( 45 ) , teenaged stepsons Solomon Hook ( 14 ) and William Hook ( 12 ) , and five children : George ( 9 ) , Mary ( 7 ) , Isaac ( 6 ) , Lewis ( 4 ) , and Samuel ( 1 ) . Also traveling with the Donner brothers were teamsters Hiram O. Miller ( 29 ) , Samuel Shoemaker ( 25 ) , Noah James ( 16 ) , Charles Burger ( 30 ) , John Denton ( 28 ) , and Augustus Spitzer ( 30 ) . 
 James F. Reed , a 45 @-@ year @-@ old native of present @-@ day Northern Ireland , had settled in Illinois in 1831 . He was accompanied by his wife Margret ( 32 ) , step @-@ daughter Virginia ( 13 ) , daughter Martha Jane " Patty " ( 8 ) , sons James and Thomas ( 5 and 3 ) , and Sarah Keyes , Margret Reed 's 70 @-@ year @-@ old mother , who was in the advanced stages of consumption and died on May 28 ; she was buried by the side of the trail . In addition to leaving financial worries behind , Reed hoped that California 's climate would help Margret , who had long suffered from ill health . The Reeds hired three men to drive the ox teams : Milford ( Milt ) Elliot ( 28 ) , James Smith ( 25 ) , and Walter Herron ( 25 ) . Baylis Williams ( 24 ) went along as handyman and his sister Eliza ( 25 ) as the family 's cook . 
 Within a week of leaving Independence , the Reeds and Donners joined up with a group of 50 wagons nominally led by William H. Russell . By June 16 , the company had traveled 450 miles ( 720 km ) , with 200 miles ( 320 km ) to go before Fort Laramie , Wyoming . They had been delayed by rain and a rising river , but Tamsen Donner wrote to a friend in Springfield , " indeed , if I do not experience something far worse than I have yet done , I shall say the trouble is all in getting started . " Young Virginia Reed recalled years later that , during the first part of the trip , she was " perfectly happy . " 
 Several other families joined the wagon train along the way . Levinah Murphy ( 37 ) , a widow from Tennessee , headed a family of thirteen . Her five youngest children were John Landrum ( 16 ) , Meriam ( " Mary , " 14 ) , Lemuel ( 12 ) , William ( 10 ) , and Simon ( 8 ) . Levinah 's two married daughters and their families also came along : Sarah Murphy Foster ( 19 ) , her husband William M. ( 30 ) and son Jeremiah George ( 1 ) ; Harriet Murphy Pike ( 18 ) , her husband William M. ( 32 ) and their daughters Naomi ( 3 ) and Catherine ( 1 ) . William Eddy ( 28 ) , a carriage maker from Illinois , brought his wife Eleanor ( 25 ) and their two children James ( 3 ) and Margaret ( 1 ) . The Breen family consisted of Patrick Breen ( 51 ) , a farmer from Iowa , his wife Margaret ( " Peggy " , 40 ) and seven children : John ( 14 ) , Edward ( 13 ) , Patrick , Jr . ( 9 ) , Simon ( 8 ) , James ( 5 ) , Peter ( 3 ) , and 11 @-@ month @-@ old Isabelle . Their neighbor traveled with them , 40 @-@ year @-@ old bachelor Patrick Dolan . German immigrant Lewis Keseberg ( 32 ) joined with his wife Elisabeth Philippine ( 22 ) and daughter Ada ( 2 ) ; son Lewis Jr. was born on the trail . Two young single men named Spitzer and Reinhardt traveled with another German couple , the <unk> , who also had hired driver " Dutch Charley " Burger . An older man named Hardkoop rode with them . Luke Halloran was passed from family to family , a young man who seemed to get sicker with tuberculosis every day , as none could spare the time or resources to care for him . 
 = = Hastings Cutoff = = 
 To promote his new route , Hastings sent riders to deliver letters to traveling emigrants . On July 12 , the Reeds and Donners were given one of these letters . Hastings warned the emigrants that they could expect opposition from the Mexican authorities in California , and advised them therefore to band together in large groups . He also claimed to have " worked out a new and better road to California " , and said that he would be waiting at Fort Bridger to guide the emigrants along the new cutoff . 
 J. Quinn Thornton traveled part of the way with Donner and Reed , and in his book From Oregon and California in 1848 declared Hastings the " Baron Munchausen of travelers in these countries " . Tamsen Donner , according to Thornton , was " gloomy , sad , and dispirited " at the thought of turning off the main trail on the advice of Hastings , whom she considered " a selfish adventurer " . 
 On July 20 at the Little Sandy River , most of the wagon train opted to follow the established trail via Fort Hall . A smaller group opted to head for Fort Bridger and needed a leader . Most of the younger males in the group were European immigrants and not considered to be ideal leaders . James Reed had been living in the U.S. for a considerable time , was older , and had military experience , but his autocratic attitude had rubbed many in the party the wrong way , and they saw him as aristocratic , imperious , and ostentatious . By comparison , the mature , experienced , American @-@ born Donner 's peaceful and charitable nature made him the group 's first choice . The members of the party were comfortably well off by contemporaneous standards . Although they are called pioneers , all but a few lacked specific skills and experience for traveling through mountains and arid land , and had little knowledge about how to deal with Native Americans . 
 Journalist Edwin Bryant reached Blacks Fork a week ahead of the Donner Party . He saw the first part of the trail , and was concerned that it would be difficult for the wagons in the Donner group , especially with so many women and children . He returned to Blacks Fork to leave letters warning several members of the group not to take the shortcut . By the time the Donner Party reached Blacks Fork on July 27 , Hastings had already left , leading the forty wagons of the Harlan @-@ Young group . Jim Bridger 's trading post would fare substantially better if people used the Hastings Cutoff , and he told the party that the shortcut was a smooth trip , devoid of rugged country and hostile Native Americans , and would therefore shorten their journey by 350 miles ( 560 km ) . Water would be easy to find along the way , although a couple of days crossing a 30 – 40 @-@ mile ( 48 – 64 km ) dry lake bed would be necessary . 
 Reed was very impressed with this information , and advocated for the Hastings Cutoff . None of the party received Bryant 's letters warning them to avoid Hastings ' route at all costs ; in his diary account , Bryant states his conviction that Bridger deliberately concealed the letters , a view shared by Reed in his later testimony . 
 On July 31 , 1846 , the party left Blacks Fork after four days of rest and wagon repairs , eleven days behind the leading Harlan @-@ Young group . Donner hired a replacement driver , and the company was joined by the McCutcheon family , consisting of 30 @-@ year @-@ old William , his 24 @-@ year @-@ old wife Amanda , two @-@ year @-@ old daughter Harriet , and a 16 @-@ year @-@ old named Jean Baptiste Trudeau from New Mexico , who claimed to have knowledge of the Native Americans and terrain on the way to California . 
 = = = Wasatch Mountains = = = 
 The party turned south to follow the Hastings Cutoff . Within days , they found the terrain to be much more difficult than described , and the drivers were forced to lock the wheels of their wagons to prevent them from rolling down steep inclines . Several years of migrant traffic on the main Oregon Trail had left an easy and obvious path , whereas the Cutoff was more difficult to find . Hastings wrote directions and left letters stuck to trees . On August 6 , the party found a letter from Hastings advising them to stop until he could show them an alternative route to that taken by the Harlan @-@ Young Party . Reed , Charles Stanton , and William Pike rode ahead to get Hastings . They encountered exceedingly difficult canyons where boulders had to be moved and walls cut off precariously to a river below , a route likely to break wagons . Hastings had offered in his letter to guide the Donner Party around the more difficult areas , but he rode back only part way , indicating the general direction to follow . 
 Stanton and Pike stopped to rest , and Reed returned alone to the group , arriving four days after the party 's departure . Without the guide they had been promised , the group had to decide whether to turn back and rejoin the traditional trail , follow the tracks left by the Harlan @-@ Young Party through the difficult terrain of Weber Canyon , or forge their own trail in the direction that Hastings had recommended . At Reed 's urging , the group chose the new Hastings route . Their progress slowed to about a mile and a half ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) a day , and all the able @-@ bodied men were required to clear brush , fell trees , and heave rocks to make room for the wagons . 
 As the Donner Party made its way across the Wasatch Mountains , they were caught up by the Graves family , who had set off to find them . The Graves family consisted of 57 @-@ year @-@ old Franklin Graves , his 47 @-@ year @-@ old wife Elizabeth , their children Mary ( 20 ) , William ( 18 ) , Eleanor ( 15 ) , <unk> ( 13 ) , Nancy ( 9 ) , Jonathan ( 7 ) , Franklin , Jr . ( 5 ) , Elizabeth ( 1 ) , and married daughter Sarah ( 22 ) , plus son @-@ in @-@ law Jay Fosdick ( 23 ) , and a 25 @-@ year @-@ old teamster named John Snyder , traveling together in three wagons . Their arrival brought the Donner Party to 87 members in 60 – 80 wagons . The Graves family had been part of the last group to leave Missouri , confirming that the Donner Party was at the back of the year 's western exodus . 
 It was August 20 by the time that they reached a point in the mountains where they could look down and see the Great Salt Lake . It took almost another two weeks to travel out of the Wasatch Mountains . The men began to argue , and doubts were expressed about the wisdom of those who had chosen this route , in particular James Reed . Food and supplies began to run out for some of the less affluent families . Stanton and Pike had ridden out with Reed but had become lost on their way back ; by the time that the party found them , they were a day away from eating their horses . 
 = = = Great Salt Lake Desert = = = 
 Luke Halloran died of tuberculosis on August 25 . A few days later , the party came across a torn and tattered letter from Hastings . The pieces indicated that there were two days and nights of difficult travel ahead without grass or water . The party rested their oxen and prepared for the trip . After 36 hours they set off to traverse a 1 @,@ 000 @-@ foot ( 300 m ) mountain that lay in their path . From its peak , they saw ahead of them a dry , barren plain , perfectly flat and covered with white salt , larger than the one which they had just crossed , and " one of the most inhospitable places on earth " according to Rarick . Their oxen were already fatigued and their water was nearly gone . 
 The party pressed onward on August 30 , having no alternative . In the heat of the day , the moisture underneath the salt crust rose to the surface and turned the soil to a gummy mass . The wheels of their wagons sank into it , in some cases up to the hubs . The days were blisteringly hot and the nights frigid . Several of the group saw visions of lakes and wagon trains , and believed that they had finally overtaken Hastings . After three days , the water was gone , and some of the party removed their oxen from the wagons to press ahead to find more . Some of the animals were so weakened they were left yoked to the wagons and abandoned . Nine of Reed 's ten oxen broke free , crazed with thirst , and bolted off into the desert . Many other families ' cattle and horses had also gone missing . The rigors of the journey resulted in irreparable damage to some of the wagons , but no human lives had been lost . Instead of the promised two days journey over 40 miles , the journey across the 80 miles of Great Salt Lake Desert had taken six . 
 None of the party had any remaining faith in the Hastings Cutoff as they recovered at the springs on the other side of the desert . They spent several days trying to recover cattle , retrieve the wagons left in the desert , and transfer their food and supplies to other wagons . Reed 's family incurred the heaviest losses , and Reed became more assertive , asking all the families to submit an inventory of their goods and food to him . He suggested that two men should go to Sutter 's Fort in California ; he had heard that John Sutter was exceedingly generous to wayward pioneers , and could assist them with extra provisions . Charles Stanton and William McCutchen volunteered to undertake the dangerous trip . The remaining serviceable wagons were pulled by mongrel teams of cows , oxen , and mules . It was the middle of September , and two young men who went in search of missing oxen reported that another 40 @-@ mile ( 64 km ) long stretch of desert lay ahead . 
 Their cattle and oxen were now exhausted and lean , but the Donner Party crossed the next stretch of desert relatively unscathed , and the journey seemed to get easier , particularly through the valley next to the Ruby Mountains . Despite their near hatred of Hastings , they had no choice but to follow his tracks , which were weeks old . On September 26 , two months after embarking on the cutoff , the Donner Party rejoined the traditional trail along a stream that became known as the Humboldt River . The shortcut had probably delayed them by a month . 
 = = Rejoining the Trail = = 
 = = = Reed banished = = = 
 Along the Humboldt , the group met Paiute Native Americans , who joined them for a couple of days but stole or shot several oxen and horses . By now , it was well into October , and the Donner families split off to make better time . Two wagons in the remaining group became tangled , and John Snyder angrily beat the ox of Reed 's hired teamster Milt Elliott . When Reed intervened , Snyder turned the whip on him . Reed retaliated by fatally plunging a knife under Snyder 's collarbone . 
 That evening , the witnesses gathered to discuss what was to be done . United States laws were not applicable west of the Continental Divide ( in what was then Mexican territory ) and wagon trains often dispensed their own justice . But George Donner , the party 's leader , was a full day ahead of the main wagon train with his family . Snyder had been seen to hit James Reed , and some claimed that he had also hit Margret Reed , but Snyder had been popular and Reed was not . Keseberg suggested that Reed should be hanged , but an eventual compromise allowed Reed to leave the camp without his family , who were to be taken care of by the others . Reed departed alone the next morning , unarmed , but his daughter Virginia rode ahead and secretly provided him with a rifle and food . 
 = = = Disintegration = = = 
 The trials that the Donner Party had so far endured resulted in splintered groups , each looking out for themselves and distrustful of the others . Grass was becoming scarce , and the animals were steadily weakening . To relieve the load of the animals , everyone was expected to walk . Keseberg ejected Hardkoop from his wagon , telling the elderly man that he had to walk or die . A few days later , Hardkoop sat next to a stream , his feet so swollen that they split open , and he was not seen again . William Eddy pleaded with the others to find Hardkoop , but they all refused , swearing that they would waste no more resources on a man who was almost 70 years old . 
 Meanwhile , Reed caught up with the Donners and went on with one of his teamsters , Walter Herron . The two shared a horse , and they were able to cover 25 – 40 miles ( 40 – 64 km ) per day . The rest of the party rejoined the Donners , but their bad luck continued . Native Americans chased away all of Graves ' horses , and another wagon was left behind . With grass in short supply , the cattle spread out more , which allowed the Paiutes to steal 18 more during one evening ; and several mornings later , the Paiutes shot another 21 . So far , the company had lost nearly 100 oxen and cattle , and their rations were almost completely depleted . One more stretch of desert lay ahead . The Eddys ' oxen had been killed by Native Americans and they were forced to abandon their wagon . The family had eaten all their stores , but the other families refused to assist their children . The Eddys were forced to walk , carrying their children and miserable with thirst . Margret Reed and her children were also now without a wagon . But the desert soon came to an end , and the party found the Truckee River in beautiful lush country . 
 They had little time to rest , and the company pressed on to cross the mountains before the snows came . Stanton found the company ( one of the two @-@ man party who had left a month earlier to seek assistance in California ) , and he brought mules , food , and two Miwok Native Americans named Luis and Salvador . He also brought news that Reed and Herron , although haggard and starving , had succeeded in reaching Sutter 's Fort in California . By this point , according to Rarick , " To the bedraggled , half @-@ starved members of the Donner Party , it must have seemed that the worst of their problems had passed . They had already endured more than many emigrants ever did . " 
 = = <unk> = = 
 = = = Donner Pass = = = 
 Faced with one last push over mountains that were described as much worse than the Wasatch , the ragtag company had to decide whether to forge ahead or rest their cattle . It was October 20 and they had been told that the pass would not be snowed in until the middle of November . William Pike was killed when a gun being loaded by William Foster was discharged negligently , an event that seemed to make the decision for them ; family by family , they resumed their journey , first the Breens , then Kesebergs , Stanton with the Reeds , Graveses , and Murphys . The Donners waited and traveled last . After a few miles of rough terrain , an axle broke on one of the Donners ' wagons . Jacob and George went into the woods to fashion a replacement . George Donner sliced his hand open while chiseling the wood , but it seemed a superficial wound . 
 Snow began to fall . The Breens made it up the " massive , nearly vertical slope " 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 300 m ) to Truckee Lake , 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) from the summit , and camped near a cabin that had been built two years earlier by another group of pioneers . The Eddys and Kesebergs joined the Breens , attempting to make it over the pass , but they found 5 – 10 @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 5 – 3 @.@ 0 m ) drifts of snow , and were unable to find the trail . They turned back for Truckee Lake and , within a day , all the families were camped there except for the Donners , who were 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) below them — half a day 's journey . Over the next few days , several more attempts were made to breach the pass with their wagons and animals , but all efforts failed . 
 = = = Winter camp = = = 
 Sixty members and associates of the Breen , Graves , Reed , Murphy , Keseberg , and Eddy families set up for the winter at Truckee Lake . Three widely separated cabins of pine logs served as their homes , with dirt floors and poorly constructed flat roofs that leaked when it rained . The Breens occupied one cabin , the Eddys and Murphys another , and Reeds and Graveses the third . Keseberg built a lean @-@ to for his family against the side of the Breen cabin . The families used canvas or oxhide to patch the faulty roofs . The cabins had no windows or doors , only large holes to allow entry . Of the 60 at Truckee Lake , 19 were men over 18 , 12 were women , and 29 were children , 6 of whom were toddlers or younger . Farther down the trail , close to Alder Creek , the Donner families hastily constructed tents to house 21 people , including Mrs. Wolfinger , her child , and the Donners ' drivers : 6 men , 3 women , and 12 children in all . It began to snow again on the evening of November 4 — the beginning of a storm that lasted 8 days . 
 By the time the party made camp , very little food remained from the supplies that Stanton had brought back from Sutter 's Fort . The oxen began to die and their carcasses were frozen and stacked . Truckee Lake was not yet frozen , but the pioneers were unfamiliar with catching lake trout . Eddy , the most experienced hunter , killed a bear , but had little luck after that . The Reed and Eddy families had lost almost everything and Margret Reed promised to pay double when they got to California for the use of three oxen from the Graves and Breen families . Graves charged Eddy $ 25 — normally the cost of two healthy oxen — for the carcass of an ox that had starved to death . 
 Desperation grew in camp and some reasoned that individuals might succeed in navigating the pass where the wagons could not . On November 12 , the storm abated and a small party tried to reach the summit on foot , but found the trek through the soft , deep powder too difficult , and returned that same evening . Over the next week , two more attempts were made by other small parties , but both quickly failed . On November 21 , a large party of about 22 persons made an attempt and successfully reached the peak . The party traveled about 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) west of the summit , but this trip too was aborted , and they returned to the lake on November 23 . 
 Patrick Breen began keeping a diary on November 20 . He primarily concerned himself with the weather , marking the storms and how much snow had fallen , but gradually began to include references to God and religion in his entries . Life at Truckee Lake was miserable . The cabins were cramped and filthy , and it snowed so much that people were unable to go outdoors for days . Diets soon consisted of oxhide , strips of which were boiled to make a " disagreeable " glue @-@ like jelly . Ox and horse bones were boiled repeatedly to make soup , and they became so brittle that they would crumble upon chewing . Sometimes they were softened by being charred and eaten . Bit by bit , the Murphy children picked apart the oxhide rug that lay in front of their fireplace , roasted it in the fire , and ate it . After the departure of the snowshoe party , two @-@ thirds of the emigrants at Truckee Lake were children . Mrs. Graves was in charge of eight , and Levinah Murphy and Eleanor Eddy together took care of nine . Emigrants caught and ate mice that strayed into their cabins . Many of the people at Truckee Lake were soon weakened and spent most of their time in bed . Occasionally one would be able to make the full @-@ day trek to see the Donners . News came that Jacob Donner and three hired men had died . One of them , Joseph Reinhardt , confessed on his deathbed that he had murdered Wolfinger . George Donner 's hand had become infected , which left four men to work at the Donner camp . 
 Margret Reed had managed to save enough food for a Christmas pot of soup , to the delight of her children , but by January they were facing starvation and considered eating the <unk> that served as their roof . Margret Reed , Virginia , Milt Elliott , and the servant girl Eliza Williams attempted to walk out , reasoning that it would be better to try to bring food back than sit and watch the children starve . They were gone for four days in the snow before they had to turn back . Their cabin was now uninhabitable ; the oxhide @-@ roof served as their food supply , and the family moved in with the Breens . The servants went to live with other families . One day , the Graveses came by to collect on the debt owed by the Reeds and took the <unk> , all that the family had to eat . 
 = = = " The Forlorn Hope " = = = 
 The mountain party at Truckee Lake began to fail . Spitzer died , then Baylis Williams ( a driver for the Reeds ) , more from malnutrition than starvation . Franklin Graves fashioned 14 pairs of snowshoes out of <unk> and hide . A party of 17 men , women , and children set out on foot in an attempt to cross the mountain pass . As evidence of how grim their choices were , four of the men were fathers , and three of the women mothers who gave their young children to other women . They packed lightly , taking what had become six days ' rations , a rifle , a blanket each , a hatchet , and some pistols , hoping to make their way to Bear Valley . Historian Charles McGlashan later called this snowshoe party the " Forlorn Hope " . Two of those without snowshoes , Charles Burger and 10 @-@ year @-@ old William Murphy , turned back early on . Other members of the party fashioned a pair of snowshoes for Lemuel on the first evening from one of the <unk> that they were carrying . 
 The snowshoes proved to be awkward but effective on the arduous climb . The members of the party were neither well @-@ nourished nor accustomed to camping in snow 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) deep and , by the third day , most were snowblind . On the sixth day , Eddy discovered that his wife had hidden a half @-@ pound of bear meat in his pack . The group set out again the morning of December 21 ; Stanton had been straggling for several days , and he remained behind , saying that he would follow shortly . His remains were found in that location the following year . 
 The group became lost and confused . After two more days without food , Patrick Dolan proposed that one of them should volunteer to die in order to feed the others . Some suggested a duel , while another account describes an attempt to create a lottery to choose a member to sacrifice . Eddy suggested that they keep moving until someone simply fell , but a blizzard forced the group to halt . Antonio the animal handler was the first to die ; Franklin Graves was the next casualty . 
 As the blizzard progressed , Patrick Dolan began to rant deliriously , stripped off his clothes , and ran into the woods . He returned shortly afterwards and died a few hours later . Not long after , possibly because 12 @-@ year @-@ old Lemuel Murphy was near death , some of the group began to eat flesh from Dolan 's body . Lemuel 's sister tried to feed some to her brother , but he died shortly afterwards . Eddy , Salvador , and Luis refused to eat . The next morning , the group stripped the muscle and organs from the bodies of Antonio , Dolan , Graves , and Murphy and dried it to store for the days ahead , taking care to ensure that nobody would have to eat his or her relatives . 
 After three days ' rest , they set off again , searching for the trail . Eddy eventually succumbed to his hunger and ate human flesh , but that was soon gone . They began to take apart their snowshoes to eat the oxhide webbing and discussed killing Luis and Salvador for food , before Eddy warned the two men and they quietly left . Jay Fosdick died during the night , leaving only seven members of the party . Eddy and Mary Graves left to hunt , but when they returned with deer meat , Fosdick 's body had already been cut apart for food . After several more days — 25 since they had left Truckee Lake — they came across Salvador and Luis , who had not eaten for about nine days and were close to death . William Foster shot the pair , believing that the flesh of the Native Americans was the group 's last hope of avoiding imminent death from starvation . 
 On January 12 , the group stumbled into a Miwok camp looking so deteriorated that the Native Americans initially fled . The Miwoks gave them what they had to eat : acorns , grass , and pine nuts . After a few days , Eddy continued on with the help of a Miwok to a ranch in a small farming community at the edge of the Sacramento Valley . A hurriedly assembled rescue party found the other six survivors on January 17 . Their journey from Truckee Lake had taken 33 days . 
 = = Rescue = = 
 = = = Reed attempts a rescue = = = 
 James Reed made it out of the Sierra Nevada to Rancho Johnson in late October . He was safe and recovering at Sutter 's Fort , but each day he became more concerned for the fate of his family and friends . He pleaded with Colonel John C. Frémont to gather a team of men to cross the pass and help the company , in return for which Reed promised that he would join Frémont 's forces and fight in the Mexican @-@ American War . Reed was joined by McCutchen , who had been unable to return with Stanton , as well as some members of the Harlan @-@ Young party . The Harlan @-@ Young wagon train had arrived at Sutter 's Fort on October 8 , the last to make it over the Sierra Nevada that season . The party of roughly 30 horses and a dozen men carried food supplies , and expected to find the Donner Party on the western side of the mountain , along the Bear River below the steep approach to Emigrant Gap , perhaps starving but alive . When they arrived in the river valley , they found only a pioneer couple , immigrants who had been separated from their company and were near starvation . 
 Two guides deserted Reed and McCutchen with some of their horses , but they pressed on farther up the valley to Yuba Bottoms , walking the last mile on foot . Reed and McCutchen stood looking up at Emigrant Gap , only 12 miles ( 19 km ) from the top , blocked by snow , possibly on the same day that the Breens attempted to lead one last effort to crest the pass from the east . Despondent , they turned back to Sutter 's Fort . 
 = = = First relief = = = 
 Much of the military in California were engaged in the Mexican @-@ American War , and with them the able @-@ bodied men . For example , Colonel Frémont 's personnel were occupied at that precise time in capturing Santa Barbara . Throughout the region , roads were blocked , communications compromised , and supplies unavailable . Only three men responded to a call for volunteers to rescue the Donner Party . Reed was laid over in San Jose until February because of regional uprisings and general confusion . He spent that time speaking with other pioneers and acquaintances , and the people of San Jose responded by creating a petition to appeal to the U.S. Navy to assist the people at Truckee Lake . Two local newspapers reported that members of the snowshoe party had resorted to cannibalism , which helped to foster sympathy for those who were still trapped . Residents of Yerba Buena , many recent emigrants , raised $ 1 @,@ 300 ( $ 33 @,@ 000 as of 2015 ) and organized relief efforts to build two camps to supply a rescue party for the refugees . 
 A rescue party including William Eddy started on February 4 from the Sacramento Valley . Rain and a swollen river forced several delays . Eddy stationed himself at Bear Valley , while the others made steady progress through the snow and storms to cross the pass to Truckee Lake , caching their food at stations along the way so that they did not have to carry it all . Three of the rescue party turned back , but seven forged on . 
 On February 18 , the seven @-@ man rescue party scaled Frémont Pass ( now Donner Pass ) ; as they neared where Eddy told them the cabins would be , they began to shout . Mrs. Murphy appeared from a hole in the snow , stared at them and asked , " Are you men from California , or do you come from heaven ? " The relief party doled out food in small portions , concerned that it might kill them if the emaciated immigrants <unk> . All the cabins were buried in snow . <unk> oxhide roofs had begun to rot and the smell was overpowering . Thirteen people at the camps were dead , and their bodies had been loosely buried in snow near the cabin roofs . Some of the emigrants seemed emotionally unstable . Three of the rescue party trekked to the Donners and brought back four gaunt children and three adults . <unk> Donner had particular difficulty walking up the steep incline from Alder Creek to Truckee Lake , later writing " such pain and misery as I endured that day is beyond description . " George Donner 's arm was so gangrenous that he could not move . Twenty @-@ three people were chosen to go with the rescue party , leaving twenty @-@ one in the cabins at Truckee Lake and twelve at Alder Creek . 
 The rescuers concealed the fate of the snowshoe party , informing the rescued immigrants only that they did not return because they were frostbitten . Patty and Tommy Reed were soon too weak to cross the snowdrifts , and no one was strong enough to carry them . Margret Reed faced the agonizing predicament of accompanying her two older children to Bear Valley and watching her two <unk> be taken back to Truckee Lake without a parent . She made rescuer Aquilla Glover swear on his honor as a Mason that he would return for her children . Patty Reed told her , " Well , mother , if you never see me again , do the best you can . " Upon their return to the lake , the Breens flatly refused them entry to their cabin but , after Glover left more food , the children were grudgingly admitted . The rescue party was dismayed to find that the first cache station had been broken into by animals , leaving them without food for four days . After struggling on the walk over the pass , John Denton slipped into a coma and died . Ada Keseberg died soon afterwards ; her mother was inconsolable , refusing to let the child 's body go . After several days ' more travel through difficult country , the rescuers grew very concerned that the children would not survive . Some of them ate the buckskin fringe from one of the rescuer 's pants , and the shoelaces of another , to the relief party 's surprise . On their way down from the mountains , they met the next rescue party , which included James Reed . Upon hearing his voice , Margret sank into the snow , overwhelmed . 
 After these rescued emigrants made it safely into Bear Valley , William Hook , Jacob Donner 's stepson , broke into food stores and fatally gorged himself . The others continued on to Sutter 's Fort , where Virginia Reed wrote " I really thought I had stepped over into paradise " . She was amused to note that one of the young men asked her to marry him , although she was only 12 years old and recovering from starvation , but she turned him down . 
 = = = Second relief = = = 
 On March 1 , a second relief party arrived at Truckee Lake . These rescuers were mostly experienced mountaineers who accompanied the return of Reed and McCutchen . Reed was reunited with his daughter Patty and his weakened son Tommy . An inspection of the Breen cabin found its occupants relatively well , but the Murphy cabin , according to author George Stewart , " passed the limits of description and almost of imagination " . Levinah Murphy was caring for her eight @-@ year @-@ old son Simon and the two young children of William Eddy and Foster . She had deteriorated mentally and was nearly blind . The children were listless and had not been cleaned in days . Lewis Keseberg had moved into the cabin and could barely move due to an injured leg . 
 No one at Truckee Lake had died during the interim between the departure of the first relief party and the arrival of the second relief party . Patrick Breen documented a disturbing visit in the last week of February from Mrs. Murphy , who said that her family was considering eating Milt Elliott . Reed and McCutchen found Elliott 's mutilated body . The Alder Creek camp fared no better . The first two members of the relief party to reach it saw Trudeau carrying a human leg . When they made their presence known , he threw it into a hole in the snow that contained the mostly dismembered body of Jacob Donner . Inside the tent , Elizabeth Donner refused to eat , although her children were being nourished by the organs of their father . The rescuers discovered that three other bodies had already been consumed . In the other tent , Tamsen Donner was well , but George was very ill because the infection had reached his shoulder . 
 The second relief evacuated 17 emigrants from Truckee Lake , only three of whom were adults . Both the Breen and Graves families prepared to go . Only five people remained at Truckee Lake : Keseberg , Mrs. Murphy and her son Simon , and the young Eddy and Foster children . Tamsen Donner elected to stay with her ailing husband after Reed informed her that a third relief party would arrive soon . Mrs. Donner kept her daughters Eliza , Georgia , and Frances with her . 
 The walk back to Bear Valley was very slow ; at one point , Reed sent ahead two of the men to retrieve the first cache of food , expecting the third relief to come at any moment , a small party led by Selim E. Woodworth . A violent blizzard arose after they scaled the pass . Five @-@ year @-@ old Isaac Donner froze to death , and Reed nearly died . Mary Donner 's feet were badly burned because they were so frostbitten that she did not realize she was sleeping with them in the fire . When the storm passed , the Breen and Graves families were too apathetic and exhausted to get up and move , not having eaten for days . The relief party had no choice but to leave without them . 
 Three members of the relief party stayed , one at Truckee Lake and two at Alder Creek . When one , Nicholas Clark , went hunting , the other two , Charles Cady and Charles Stone , made plans to return to California . Tamsen Donner arranged for them to carry three of her children to California , perhaps for $ 500 cash , according to Stewart . Cady and Stone took the children to Truckee Lake but then left alone , overtaking Reed and the others within days . Several days later , Clark and Trudeau agreed to leave together . When they discovered the Donner girls at Truckee Lake , they returned to Alder Creek to inform Tamsen Donner . 
 William Foster and William Eddy , both survivors of the snowshoe party , started from Bear Valley to intercept Reed , taking with them a man named John Stark . After one day , they met Reed helping his children , all frostbitten and bleeding but alive . Desperate to rescue their own children , Foster and Eddy persuaded four men , with pleading and money , to return to Truckee Lake with them . Halfway there they found the crudely mutilated and eaten remains of two children and Mrs. Graves , with one @-@ year @-@ old Elizabeth Graves crying beside her mother 's body . Eleven survivors were huddled around a fire that had sunk into a pit . The relief party split , with Foster , Eddy , and two others headed toward Truckee Lake . Two rescuers , hoping to save the healthiest , each took a child and left . John Stark refused to leave the others . Stark picked up two children and all the provisions , and assisted the nine remaining Breens and Graveses to Bear Valley . 
 = = = Third relief = = = 
 Foster and Eddy finally arrived at Truckee Lake on March 14 , where they found their children dead . Keseberg told Eddy that he had eaten the remains of Eddy 's son , and Eddy swore to murder Keseberg if they ever met in California . George Donner and one of Jacob Donner 's children were still alive at Alder Creek . Tamsen Donner had just arrived at the Murphy cabin , and she could have walked out alone but chose to return to her husband , even though she was informed that no other relief party was likely to be coming soon . Foster and Eddy and the rest of the third relief left with four children , Trudeau , and Clark . 
 Two more relief parties were mustered to evacuate any adults who might still be alive . Both turned back before getting to Bear Valley , and no further attempts were made . On April 10 , almost a month since the third relief had left Truckee Lake , the alcalde near Sutter 's Fort organized a salvage party to recover what they could of the Donners ' belongings . The belongings would be sold , with part of the proceeds used to support the orphaned Donner children . The salvage party found the Alder Creek tents empty except for the body of George Donner , who had died only days earlier . On their way back to Truckee Lake , they found Lewis Keseberg alive . According to him , Mrs. Murphy had died a week after the departure of the third relief . Some weeks later , Tamsen Donner had arrived at his cabin on her way over the pass , soaked and visibly upset . Keseberg said that he put a blanket around her and told her to start out in the morning , but she died during the night . 
 The salvage party were suspicious of Keseberg 's story , and found a pot full of human flesh in the cabin along with George Donner 's pistols , jewelry , and $ 250 in gold . They threatened to lynch Keseberg , who confessed that he had cached $ 273 of the Donners ' money at Tamsen 's suggestion , so that it could one day benefit her children . On April 29 , 1847 , Keseberg was the last member of the Donner Party to arrive at Sutter 's Fort . 
 = = = Response = = = 
 News of the Donner Party 's fate was spread eastward by Samuel Brannan , an elder of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints and journalist , who ran into the salvage party as they came down from the pass with Keseberg . Accounts of the ordeal first reached New York City in July 1847 . Reporting on the event across the U.S. was heavily influenced by the national enthusiasm for westward migration . In some papers , news of the tragedy was buried in small paragraphs despite the contemporary tendency to sensationalize stories . Several newspapers , including those in California , wrote about the cannibalism in graphic exaggerated detail . In some print accounts , the members of the Donner Party were depicted as heroes , and California a paradise worthy of significant sacrifices . 
 Emigration to the west decreased over the following years , but it is likely that the drop in numbers was caused more by fears over the outcome of the ongoing Mexican @-@ American War than by the cautionary tale of the Donner Party . In 1846 , an estimated 1 @,@ 500 people migrated to California . In 1847 , the number dropped to 450 and to 400 in 1848 . The California Gold Rush spurred a sharp increase , however , and 25 @,@ 000 people went west in 1849 . Most of the overland migration followed the Carson River , but a few forty @-@ niners used the same route as the Donner Party and recorded descriptions about the site . 
 In late June 1847 , members of the Mormon Battalion under General Steven Kearny buried the human remains , and partially burned two of the cabins . The few who ventured over the pass in the next few years found bones , other artifacts , and the cabin used by the Reed and Graves families . In 1891 , a cache of money was found buried by the lake . It had probably been stored by Mrs. Graves , who hastily hid it when she left with the second relief so that she could return for it later . 
 Lansford Hastings received death threats . An emigrant who crossed before the Donner Party confronted Hastings about the difficulties they had encountered , reporting : " Of course he could say nothing but that he was very sorry , and that he meant well " . 
 = = = Survivors = = = 
 Of the 87 people who entered the Wasatch Mountains , 48 survived . Only the Reed and Breen families remained intact . The children of Jacob Donner , George Donner , and Franklin Graves were orphaned . William Eddy was alone and most of the Murphy family had died . Only three mules reached California ; the remaining animals perished . Most of the Donner Party members ' possessions were discarded . 
 A few of the widowed women remarried within months ; brides were scarce in California . The Reeds settled in San Jose and two of the Donner children lived with them . Reed fared well in the California Gold Rush and became prosperous . Virginia wrote an extensive letter to her cousin in Illinois about " our <unk> getting to <unk> " , with editorial oversight from her father . Journalist Edwin Bryant carried it back in June 1847 , and it was printed in its entirety in the Illinois Journal on December 16 , 1847 , with some editorial alterations . 
 Virginia converted to Catholicism in fulfillment of a promise which she had made to herself while observing Patrick Breen pray in his cabin . The Murphy survivors lived in Marysville . The Breens made their way to San Juan Bautista where they operated an inn and became the anonymous subjects of J. Ross Browne 's story about his severe discomfort upon learning that he was staying with alleged cannibals , printed in Harper 's Magazine in 1862 . Many of the survivors encountered similar reactions . 
 George and Tamsen Donner 's children were taken in by an older couple near Sutter 's Fort . Eliza was three years old during the winter of 1846 – 1847 , the youngest of the Donner children . She published an account of the Donner Party in 1911 , based on printed accounts and those of her sisters . The Breens ' youngest daughter Isabella was one year old during the winter of 1846 – 1847 , and was the last survivor of the Donner Party . She died in 1935 . 
 The Graves children lived varied lives . Mary Graves married early , but her first husband was murdered . She cooked his killer 's food while he was in prison to ensure that the condemned man did not starve before his hanging . One of Mary 's grandchildren noted that she was very serious ; Graves once said , " I wish I could cry but I cannot . If I could forget the tragedy , perhaps I would know how to cry again . " Mary 's brother William did not settle down for any significant time . 
 Nancy Graves was nine years old during the winter of 1846 – 1847 . She refused to acknowledge her involvement even when contacted by historians interested in recording the most accurate versions of the episode . Nancy reportedly was unable to recover from her role in the cannibalism of her brother and mother . 
 Eddy remarried and started a family in California . He attempted to follow through on his promise to murder Lewis Keseberg , but was dissuaded by James Reed and Edwin Bryant . A year later , Eddy recollected his experiences to J. Quinn Thornton , who wrote the earliest comprehensive documentation of the episode , also using Reed 's memories of his experiences . Eddy died in 1859 . 
 Keseberg brought a defamation suit against several members of the relief party who accused him of murdering Tamsen Donner . The court awarded him $ 1 in damages , but also made him pay court costs . An 1847 story printed in the California Star described Keseberg 's actions in ghoulish terms and his near @-@ lynching by the salvage party , reporting that he preferred eating human flesh over the cattle and horses that had become exposed in the spring thaw . Historian Charles McGlashan amassed enough material to indict Keseberg for the murder of Tamsen Donner , but after interviewing Keseberg he concluded that no murder occurred . Eliza Donner Houghton also believed Keseberg to be innocent . 
 As Keseberg grew older , he did not venture outside , for he had become a pariah and was often threatened . He told McGlashan , " I often think that the Almighty has singled me out , among all the men on the face of the earth , in order to see how much hardship , suffering , and misery a human being can bear ! " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The Donner Party episode was insignificant in comparison with the hundreds of thousands of emigrants to Oregon and California , but it has served as the basis for numerous works of history , fiction , drama , poetry , and film . The attention directed at the Donner Party is made possible by reliable accounts of what occurred , according to Stewart , and the fact that " the cannibalism , although it might almost be called a minor episode , has become in the popular mind the chief fact to be remembered about the Donner Party . For a taboo always <unk> with as great strength as it repels " . The appeal is that the events focused on families and ordinary people , according to Johnson , writing in 1996 , instead of on rare individuals , and that the events are " a dreadful irony that hopes of prosperity , health , and a new life in California 's fertile valleys led many only to misery , hunger , and death on her stony threshold " . 
 The site of the cabins became a tourist attraction as early as 1854 . In the 1880s , Charles McGlashan began promoting the idea of a monument to mark the site of the Donner Party episode . He helped to acquire the land for a monument and , in June 1918 , the statue of a pioneer family was placed on the spot where the Breen @-@ Keseberg cabin was thought to have been , dedicated to the Donner Party . It was made a California Historical Landmark in 1934 . 
 The State of California created the Donner Memorial State Park in 1927 . It originally consisted of 11 acres ( 0 @.@ 045 km2 ) surrounding the monument . Twenty years later , the site of the Murphy cabin was purchased and added to the park . In 1962 , the Emigrant Trail Museum was added to tell the history of westward migration into California . The Murphy cabin and Donner monument were established as a National Historic Landmark in 1963 . A large rock served as the back end of the fireplace of the Murphy cabin , and a bronze plaque has been affixed to the rock listing the members of the Donner Party , indicating who survived and who did not . The State of California justifies memorializing the site because the episode was " an isolated and tragic incident of American history that has been transformed into a major folk epic " . As of 2003 , the park is estimated to receive 200 @,@ 000 visitors a year . 
 = = = Mortality = = = 
 Most historians count 87 members of the party , although Stephen McCurdy in the Western Journal of Medicine includes Sarah Keyes — Margret Reed 's mother — and Luis and Salvador , bringing the number to 90 . Five people had already died before the party reached Truckee Lake : one from tuberculosis ( Halloran ) , three from trauma ( Snyder , Wolfinger , and Pike ) , and one from exposure ( Hardkoop ) . A further 34 died between December 1846 and April 1847 : twenty @-@ five males and nine females . Several historians and other authorities have studied the mortalities to determine what factors may affect survival in nutritionally deprived individuals . Of the fifteen members of the snowshoe party , eight of the ten men who set out died ( Stanton , Dolan , Graves , Murphy , Antonio , Fosdick , Luis , and Salvador ) , but all five of the women survived . A professor at the University of Washington stated that the Donner Party episode is a " case study of demographically @-@ mediated natural selection in action " . 
 The deaths at Truckee Lake , Alder Creek , and in the snowshoe party were probably caused by a combination of extended malnutrition , overwork , and exposure to cold . Several members became more susceptible to infection due to starvation , such as George Donner , but the three most significant factors in survival were age , sex , and the size of family group that each member traveled with . The survivors were on average 7 @.@ 5 years younger than those who died ; children aged between 6 and 14 had a much higher survival rate than infants and children under the age of 6 , of whom 62 @.@ 5 percent died , including the son born to the Kesebergs on the trail , or adults over the age of 35 . No adults over the age of 49 survived . Deaths were " extremely high " among males aged between 20 and 39 , at more than 66 percent . Men have been found to metabolize protein faster , and women do not require as high a caloric intake . Women also store more body fat , which delays the effects of physical degradation caused by starvation and overwork . Men also tend to take on more dangerous tasks and , in this particular instance , the men were required to clear brush and engage in heavy labor before reaching Truckee Lake , adding to their physical debilitation . Those traveling with family members had a higher survival rate than bachelor males , possibly because family members more readily shared food with each other . 
 = = = Claims of cannibalism = = = 
 Although some survivors disputed the accounts of cannibalism , Charles McGlashan , who corresponded with many of the survivors over a 40 @-@ year period , documented many recollections that it occurred . Some correspondents were not forthcoming , approaching their participation with shame , but others eventually spoke about it freely . McGlashan in his 1879 book History of the Donner Party declined to include some of the more morbid details – such as the suffering of the children and infants before death , or how Mrs. Murphy , according to Georgia Donner , gave up , lay down on her bed and faced the wall when the last of the children left in the third relief . He also neglected to mention any cannibalism at Alder Creek . The same year McGlashan 's book was published , Georgia Donner wrote to him to clarify some points , saying that human flesh was prepared for people in both tents at Alder Creek , but to her recollection ( she was four years old during the winter of 1846 – 1847 ) it was given only to the youngest children : " Father was crying and did not look at us the entire time , and we little ones felt we could not help it . There was nothing else . " She also remembered that Elizabeth Donner , Jacob 's wife , announced one morning that she had cooked the arm of Samuel Shoemaker , a 25 @-@ year @-@ old teamster . Eliza Donner Houghton , in her 1911 account of the ordeal , did not mention any cannibalism at Alder Creek . 
 Archaeological findings at the Alder Creek camp proved inconclusive for evidence of cannibalism . None of the bones tested at the Alder Creek cooking hearth could be conclusively identified as human . According to Rarick , only cooked bones would be preserved , and it is unlikely that the Donner Party members would have needed to cook human bones . 
 Eliza Farnham 's 1856 account of the Donner Party was based largely on an interview with Margaret Breen . Her version details the ordeals of the Graves and Breen families after James Reed and the second relief left them in the snow pit . According to Farnham , seven @-@ year @-@ old Mary Donner suggested to the others that they should eat Isaac Donner , Franklin Graves , Jr . , and Elizabeth Graves , because the Donners had already begun eating the others at Alder Creek , including Mary 's father Jacob . Margaret Breen insisted that she and her family did not cannibalize the dead , but Kristin Johnson , Ethan Rarick , and Joseph King – whose account is sympathetic to the Breen family – do not consider it credible that the Breens , who had been without food for nine days , would have been able to survive without eating human flesh . King suggests Farnham included this into her account independently of Margaret Breen . 
 According to an account published by H. A. Wise in 1847 , Jean Baptiste Trudeau boasted of his own heroism , but also spoke in lurid detail of eating Jacob Donner , and claimed he had eaten a baby raw . Many years later , Trudeau met Eliza Donner Houghton and denied cannibalizing anyone , which he reiterated in an interview with a St. Louis newspaper in 1891 , when he was 60 years old . Houghton and the other Donner children were fond of Trudeau , and he of them , in spite of their circumstances and the fact that he eventually left Tamsen Donner alone . Author George Stewart considers Trudeau 's accounting to Wise more accurate than what he told Houghton in 1884 , and asserted that he deserted the Donners . Kristin Johnson , on the other hand , attributes Trudeau 's interview with Wise to be a result of " common adolescent desires to be the center of attention and to shock one 's elders " ; when older , he reconsidered his story , so as not to upset Houghton . Historians Joseph King and Jack Steed call Stewart 's characterization of Trudeau 's actions as desertion " extravagant moralism " , particularly because all members of the party were forced to make difficult choices . Ethan Rarick echoed this by writing , " ... more than the gleaming heroism or sullied villainy , the Donner Party is a story of hard decisions that were neither heroic nor villainous " . 
 = Passenger pigeon = 
 The passenger pigeon or wild pigeon ( Ectopistes migratorius ) is an extinct species of pigeon that was endemic to North America . Its common name is derived from the French word <unk> , meaning " passing by " , due to the migratory habits of the species . The scientific name also refers to its migratory characteristics . The morphologically similar mourning dove ( Zenaida macroura ) was long thought to be its closest relative , and the two were at times confused , but genetic analysis has shown that the genus Patagioenas is more closely related to it than the Zenaida doves . 
 The passenger pigeon was sexually dimorphic in size and coloration . The male was 39 to 41 cm ( 15 @.@ 4 to 16 @.@ 1 in ) in length , mainly gray on the upperparts , lighter on the underparts , with iridescent bronze feathers on the neck , and black spots on the wings . The female was 38 to 40 cm ( 15 @.@ 0 to 15 @.@ 7 in ) , and was duller and browner than the male overall . The juvenile was similar to the female , but without iridescence . It mainly inhabited the deciduous forests of eastern North America and was also recorded elsewhere , but bred primarily around the Great Lakes . The pigeon migrated in enormous flocks , constantly searching for food , shelter , and breeding grounds , and was once the most abundant bird in North America , numbering around 3 to 5 billion at the height of its population . It was not always as abundant , and the population size fluctuated rapidly over time . A very fast flyer , it could reach 100 km / h ( 62 mph ) . The bird fed mainly on mast , as well as fruits and invertebrates . It practiced communal roosting and communal breeding , and its extreme gregariousness may be linked with searching for food and predator satiation . 
 Passenger pigeons were hunted by Native Americans , but hunting intensified after the arrival of Europeans , particularly in the 19th century . Pigeon meat was commercialized as cheap food , resulting in hunting on a massive scale for many decades . There were several other factors contributing to the decline and subsequent extinction of the species , including shrinking of the large breeding populations necessary for preservation of the species and widespread deforestation which destroyed its habitat . A slow decline between about 1800 and 1870 was followed by a rapid decline between 1870 and 1890 . The last confirmed wild bird is thought to have been shot in 1900 . The last captive birds were divided in three groups around the turn of the 20th century , some of which were photographed alive . Martha , thought to be the last passenger pigeon , died on September 1 , 1914 , at the Cincinnati Zoo . Eradication of the species has been described as one of the greatest and most senseless extinctions induced by humans . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Swedish naturalist Carl Linnaeus coined the binomial name Columba macroura for both the mourning dove and the passenger pigeon in the 1758 edition of his work Systema Naturae ( the starting point of biological nomenclature ) , wherein he appears to have considered the two identical . This composite description cited accounts of these birds in two pre @-@ Linnean books . One of these was Mark Catesby 's description of the passenger pigeon , which was published in his 1731 – 1743 work Natural History of Carolina , Florida and the Bahama Islands , which referred to this bird as <unk> migratorius , and was accompanied by the earliest published illustration of the species . Catesby 's description was combined with the 1743 description of the mourning dove by George Edwards , who used the name C. macroura for that bird . There is nothing to suggest Linnaeus ever saw specimens of these birds himself , and his description is thought to be fully derivative of these earlier accounts and their illustrations . In his 1766 edition of Systema Naturae , Linnaeus dropped the name C. macroura , and instead used the name C. migratoria for the passenger pigeon , and C. carolinensis for the mourning dove . In the same edition , Linnaeus also named C. canadensis , based on <unk> canadensis , as used by Mathurin Jacques Brisson in 1760 . Brisson 's description was later shown to have been based on a female passenger pigeon . 
 In 1827 William John Swainson moved the passenger pigeon from the genus Columba to the new monotypic genus Ectopistes , due in part to the length of the wings and the wedge shape of the tail . In 1906 Outram Bangs suggested that because Linnaeus had wholly copied Catesby 's text when coining C. macroura , this name should apply to the passenger pigeon , as E. macroura . In 1918 Harry C. Oberholser suggested that C. canadensis should take precedence over C. migratoria ( as E. canadensis ) , as it appeared on an earlier page in Linnaeus ' book . In 1952 Francis Hemming proposed that the International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature ( ICZN ) secure the specific name macroura for the mourning dove , and the name migratorius for the passenger pigeon , since this was the intended use by the authors on whose work Linnaeus had based his description . This was accepted by the ICZN , which used its plenary powers to designate the species for the respective names in 1955 . 
 = = = Evolution = = = 
 The passenger pigeon was a member of the pigeon and dove family , Columbidae . Its closest living relatives were long thought to be the Zenaida doves , based on morphological grounds , particularly the physically similar mourning dove ( now Z. macroura ) . It was even suggested that the mourning dove belonged to the genus Ectopistes and was listed as E. carolinensis by some authors , including Thomas Mayo Brewer . The passenger pigeon was supposedly descended from Zenaida pigeons that had adapted to the woodlands on the plains of central North America . The passenger pigeon differed from the species in the genus Zenaida in being larger , lacking a facial stripe , being sexually dimorphic , and having iridescent neck feathers and a smaller clutch . In a 2002 study by American geneticist Beth Shapiro et al . , museum specimens of the passenger pigeon were included in an ancient DNA analysis for the first time ( in a paper focusing mainly on the dodo ) , and it was found to be the sister taxon of the cuckoo @-@ dove genus Macropygia . The Zenaida doves were instead shown to be related to the quail @-@ doves of the genus <unk> and the <unk> doves . 
 A more extensive 2010 study instead showed that the passenger pigeon was most closely related to the New World Patagioenas pigeons , including the band @-@ tailed pigeon ( P. fasciata ) of western North America , which are related to the Southeast Asian species in the genera <unk> , Macropygia and <unk> . This clade is also related to the Columba and Streptopelia doves of the Old World ( collectively termed the " typical pigeons and doves " ) . The authors of the study suggested that the ancestors of the passenger pigeon may have colonized the New World from South East Asia by flying across the Pacific Ocean , or perhaps across Beringia in the north . In a 2012 study , the nuclear DNA of the passenger pigeon was analyzed for the first time , and its relationship with the Patagioenas pigeons was confirmed . In contrast to the 2010 study , these authors suggested that their results could indicate that the ancestors of the passenger pigeon and its Old World relatives may have originated in the Neotropical region of the New World . 
 The cladogram below follows the 2012 DNA study showing the position of the passenger pigeon among its closest relatives : 
 DNA in old museum specimens is often degraded and fragmentary , and passenger pigeon specimens have been used in various studies to discover improved methods of analyzing and assembling genomes from such material . DNA samples are often taken from the toe pads of bird skins in museums , as this can be done without causing significant damage to valuable specimens . The passenger pigeon had no known subspecies . Hybridization occurred between the passenger pigeon and the Barbary dove ( Streptopelia <unk> ) in the aviary of Charles Otis Whitman ( who owned many of the last captive birds around the turn of the 20th century , and kept them with other pigeon species ) but the offspring were infertile . 
 = = = Etymology = = = 
 The genus name , Ectopistes , translates as " moving about " or " wandering " , while the specific name , migratorius , indicates its migratory habits . The full binomial can thus be translated as " migratory wanderer " . The English common name " passenger pigeon " derives from the French word <unk> , which means " to pass by " in a fleeting manner . While the pigeon was extant , the name passenger pigeon was used interchangeably with " wild pigeon " . The bird also gained some less @-@ frequently used names , including blue pigeon , <unk> <unk> pigeon , wandering long @-@ tailed dove , and wood pigeon . In the 18th century , the passenger pigeon was known as tourte in New France ( in modern Canada ) , but to the French in Europe it was known as <unk> . In modern French , the bird is known as tourte <unk> or pigeon <unk> , among other names . In the Native American Algonquian languages , the pigeon was called <unk> by the Lenape , <unk> by the Ojibwe , and <unk> by the Kaskaskia Illinois . Other names in indigenous American languages include ori 'te in Mohawk , and <unk> <unk> , or " lost dove " , in Choctaw . The Seneca people called the pigeon <unk> , meaning " big bread " , as it was a source of food for their tribes . Chief Simon Pokagon of the Potawatomi stated that his people called the pigeon O @-@ me @-@ me @-@ <unk> , and that the Europeans did not adopt native names for the bird , as it reminded them of their domesticated pigeons , instead calling them " wild " pigeons , as they called the native peoples " wild " men . 
 = = Description = = 
 The passenger pigeon was sexually dimorphic in size and coloration . It weighed between 260 and 340 g ( 9 and 12 oz ) . The adult male was about 39 to 41 cm ( 15 @.@ 4 to 16 @.@ 1 in ) in length . It had a bluish @-@ gray head , nape , and hindneck . On the sides of the neck and the upper mantle were iridescent display feathers that have variously been described as being a bright bronze , violet or golden @-@ green , depending on the angle of the light . The upper back and wings were a pale or slate gray tinged with olive brown , that turned into grayish @-@ brown on the lower wings . The lower back and rump were a dark blue @-@ gray that became grayish @-@ brown on the upper tail @-@ covert feathers . The greater and median wing @-@ covert feathers were pale gray , with a small number of irregular black spots near the end . The primary and secondary feathers of the wing were a blackish @-@ brown with a narrow white edge on the outer side of the secondaries . The two central tail feathers were brownish gray , and the rest were white . The tail pattern was distinctive as it had white outer edges with blackish spots that were prominently displayed in flight . The lower throat and breast were richly pinkish @-@ rufous , grading into a paler pink further down , and into white on the abdomen and undertail covert feathers . The undertail coverts also had a few black spots . The bill was black , while the feet and legs were a bright coral red . It had a carmine @-@ red iris surrounded by a narrow purplish @-@ red eye @-@ ring . The wing of the male measured 196 – 215 mm ( 7 @.@ 7 – 8 @.@ 5 in ) , the tail 175 – 210 mm ( 6 @.@ 9 – 8 @.@ 3 in ) , the bill 15 – 18 mm ( 0 @.@ 59 – 0 @.@ 71 in ) , and the tarsus was 26 – 28 mm ( 1 @.@ 0 – 1 @.@ 1 in ) . 
 The adult female passenger pigeon was slightly smaller than the male at 38 to 40 cm ( 15 @.@ 0 to 15 @.@ 7 in ) in length . It was duller than the male overall , and was a grayish @-@ brown on the forehead , crown , and nape down to the scapulars , and the feathers on the sides of the neck had less iridescence than those of the male . The lower throat and breast were a buff @-@ gray that developed into white on the belly and undertail @-@ coverts . It was browner on the upperparts and paler buff brown and less rufous on the underparts than the male . The wings , back , and tail were similar in appearance to those of the male except that the outer edges of the primary feathers were edged in buff or rufous buff . The wings had more spotting than those of the male . The tail was shorter than that of the male , and the legs and feet were a paler red . The iris was orange red , with a grayish blue , naked orbital ring . The wing of the female was 180 – 210 mm ( 7 @.@ 1 – 8 @.@ 3 in ) , the tail 150 – 200 mm ( 5 @.@ 9 – 7 @.@ 9 in ) , the bill 15 – 18 mm ( 0 @.@ 59 – 0 @.@ 71 in ) , and the tarsus was 25 – 28 mm ( 0 @.@ 98 – 1 @.@ 10 in ) . 
 The juvenile passenger pigeon was similar in plumage to the adult female , but lacked the spotting on the wings , and was a darker brownish @-@ gray on the head , neck , and breast . The feathers on the wings had pale gray fringes ( also described as white tips ) , giving it a scaled look . The secondaries were brownish @-@ black with pale edges , and the tertial feathers had a rufous wash . The primaries were also edged with a rufous @-@ brown color . The neck feathers had no iridescence . The legs and feet were dull red , and the iris was brownish , and surrounded by a narrow carmine ring . The plumage of the sexes was similar during their first year . 
 Of the hundreds of surviving skins , only one appears to be aberrant in color — an adult female from the collection of Walter Rothschild , Natural History Museum at Tring . It is a washed brown on the upper parts , wing covert , secondary feathers , and tail ( where it would otherwise have been gray ) , and white on the primary feathers and underparts . The normally black spots are brown , and it is pale gray on the head , lower back , and upper @-@ tail covert feathers , yet the iridescence is unaffected . The brown mutation is a result of a reduction in eumelanin , due to incomplete synthesis ( oxidation ) of this pigment . This sex @-@ linked mutation is common in female wild birds , but it is thought the white feathers of this specimen are instead the result of bleaching due to exposure to sunlight . 
 The passenger pigeon was physically adapted for speed , endurance , and maneuverability in flight , and has been described as having a streamlined version of the typical pigeon shape , such as that of the generalized rock dove ( Columba livia ) . The wings were very long and pointed , and measured 220 mm ( 8 @.@ 7 in ) from the wing @-@ chord to the primary feathers , and 120 mm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) to the secondaries . The tail , which accounted for much of its overall length , was long and wedge @-@ shaped ( or graduated ) , with two central feathers longer than the rest . The body was slender and narrow , and the head and neck were small . 
 The internal anatomy of the passenger pigeon has rarely been described . Robert W. Shufeldt found little to differentiate the bird 's osteology from that of other pigeons when examining a male skeleton in 1914 , but Julian P. Hume noted several distinct features in a more detailed 2015 description . The pigeon had particularly large breast muscles that indicate powerful flight ( musculus pectoralis major for downstroke and the smaller musculus supracoracoideus for upstroke ) . The coracoid bone ( which connects the scapula , furcula , and sternum ) was large relative to the size of the bird , 33 @.@ 4 mm ( 1 @.@ 31 in ) , with straighter shafts and more robust articular ends than in other pigeons . The furcula had a sharper V @-@ shape and was more robust , with expanded articular ends . The scapula was long , straight , and robust , and its distal end was enlarged . The sternum was very large and robust compared to that of other pigeons ; its keel was 25 mm ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) deep . The overlapping uncinate processes , which stiffen the ribcage , were very well developed . The wing bones ( humerus , radius , ulna , carpometacarpus ) were short but robust compared to other pigeons . The leg bones were similar to those of other pigeons . 
 = = = Vocalizations = = = 
 The noise produced by flocks of passenger pigeons was described as deafening , audible for miles away , and the bird 's voice as loud , harsh , and unmusical . It was also described by some as clucks , twittering and cooing , and as a series of low notes instead of actual song . The birds apparently made croaking noises when building nests , and bell @-@ like sounds when mating . During feeding , some individuals would give alarm calls when facing a threat , and the rest of the flock would join the sound while taking off . 
 In 1911 American behavioral scientist Wallace Craig published an account of the gestures and sounds of this species as a series of descriptions and musical notations , based on observation of C. O. Whitman 's captive passenger pigeons in 1903 . Craig compiled these records to assist in identifying potential survivors in the wild ( as the physically similar mourning doves could otherwise be mistaken for passenger pigeons ) , while noting this " meager information " was likely all that would be left on the subject . According to Craig , one call was a simple harsh " keck " that could be given twice in succession with a pause in between . This was said to be used to attract the attention of another pigeon . Another call was a more frequent and variable scolding . This sound was described as " kee @-@ kee @-@ kee @-@ kee " or " tete ! tete ! tete ! " , and was used to call either to its mate or towards other creatures it considered to be enemies . One variant of this call , described as a long , drawn @-@ out " tweet " , could be used to call down a flock of passenger pigeons passing overhead , which would then land in a nearby tree . " <unk> " was a soft cooing that , while followed by louder " keck " notes or scolding , was directed at the bird 's mate . A nesting passenger pigeon would also give off a stream of at least eight mixed notes that were both high and low in tone and ended with " <unk> " . Overall , female passenger pigeons were quieter and called infrequently . Craig suggested that the loud , strident voice and " degenerated " musicality was the result of living in populous colonies where only the loudest sounds could be heard . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The passenger pigeon was found across most of North America east of the Rocky Mountains , from the Great Plains to the Atlantic coast in the east , to the south of Canada in the north , and the north of Mississippi in the southern United States , coinciding with its primary habitat , the eastern deciduous forests . Within this range , it constantly migrated in search of food and shelter . It is unclear if the birds favored particular trees and terrain , but they were possibly not restricted to one type , as long as their numbers could be supported . It originally bred from the southern parts of eastern and central Canada south to eastern Kansas , Oklahoma , Mississippi , and Georgia in the United States , but the primary breeding range was in southern Ontario and the Great Lakes states south through states north of the Appalachian Mountains . Though the western forests were ecologically similar to those in the east , these were occupied by band @-@ tailed pigeons , which may have kept out the passenger pigeons through competitive exclusion . 
 The passenger pigeon wintered from Arkansas , Tennessee , and North Carolina south to Texas , the Gulf Coast , and northern Florida , though flocks occasionally wintered as far north as southern Pennsylvania and Connecticut . It preferred to winter in large swamps , particularly those with alder trees ; if swamps were not available , forested areas , particularly with pine trees , were favored roosting sites . There were also sightings of passenger pigeons outside of its normal range , including in several Western states , Bermuda , Cuba , and Mexico , particularly during severe winters . It has been suggested that some of these <unk> records may be considered as such more on the basis of the paucity of observers in what was then unsettled country than on the actual extent of wandering passenger pigeons , and that the bird may have appeared anywhere on the continent except for the far west . There were also records of stragglers in Scotland , Ireland , and France , although these birds may have been escaped captives , or the records simply incorrect . 
 More than 130 passenger pigeon fossils have been found scattered across 25 states and provinces of the United States , including in the La Brea Tar Pits of California . These records date as far back as 100 @,@ 000 years ago in the Pleistocene era , during which the pigeon 's range extended to several western states that were not a part of its modern range . The abundance of the species in these regions and during this time is unknown . 
 = = Ecology and behavior = = 
 The passenger pigeon was nomadic , constantly migrating in search of food , shelter , or nesting grounds . In his 1831 Ornithological Biography , American naturalist and artist John James Audubon described a migration he observed in 1813 as follows : 
 I dismounted , seated myself on an eminence , and began to mark with my pencil , making a dot for every flock that passed . In a short time finding the task which I had undertaken impracticable , as the birds poured in in countless multitudes , I rose and , counting the dots then put down , found that 163 had been made in twenty @-@ one minutes . I traveled on , and still met more the farther I proceeded . The air was literally filled with Pigeons ; the light of noon @-@ day was obscured as by an eclipse ; the dung fell in spots , not unlike melting flakes of snow , and the continued buzz of wings had a tendency to lull my senses to repose ... I cannot describe to you the extreme beauty of their aerial evolutions , when a hawk chanced to press upon the rear of the flock . At once , like a torrent , and with a noise like thunder , they rushed into a compact mass , pressing upon each other towards the center . In these almost solid masses , they darted forward in undulating and angular lines , descended and swept close over the earth with inconceivable velocity , mounted perpendicularly so as to resemble a vast column , and , when high , were seen wheeling and twisting within their continued lines , which then resembled the coils of a gigantic serpent ... Before sunset I reached Louisville , distant from <unk> fifty @-@ five miles . The Pigeons were still passing in undiminished numbers and continued to do so for three days in succession . 
 These flocks were frequently described as being so dense that they blackened the sky and as having no sign of subdivisions . The flocks ranged from only 1 @.@ 0 m ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) above the ground in windy conditions to as high as 400 m ( 1 @,@ 300 ft ) . These migrating flocks were typically in narrow columns that twisted and undulated , and they were reported as being in nearly every conceivable shape . A skilled flyer , the passenger pigeon is estimated to have averaged 100 km / h ( 62 mph ) during migration . It flew with quick , repeated flaps that increased the bird 's velocity the closer the wings got to the body . It was equally as adept and quick at flying through a forest as through open space . A flock was also adept at following the lead of the pigeon in front of it , and flocks swerved together to avoid a predator . When landing , the pigeon flapped its wings repeatedly before raising them at the moment of landing . The pigeon was awkward when on the ground , and moved around with jerky , alert steps . 
 The passenger pigeon was one of the most social of all land birds . Estimated to have numbered three to five billion at the height of its population , it may have been the most numerous bird on Earth ; researcher Arlie W. <unk> believed that it accounted for between 25 and 40 percent of the total land bird population in the United States . The passenger pigeon 's historic population is roughly the equivalent of the number of birds that overwinter in the United States every year in the early 21st century . One flock in 1866 in southern Ontario was described as being 1 @.@ 5 km ( 1 mi ) wide and 500 km ( 300 mi ) long , took 14 hours to pass , and held in excess of 3 @.@ 5 billion birds . Such a number would likely represent a large fraction of the entire population at the time , or perhaps all of it . Most estimations of numbers were based on single migrating colonies , and it is unknown how many of these existed at a given time . American writer Christopher <unk> has suggested that if the birds flew single file , they would have stretched around the earth 22 times . A 2014 genetic study ( based on <unk> theory ) suggested that the passenger pigeon population fluctuated rapidly across the last million years , due to their dependence on availability of mast ( which itself fluctuates ) . The study suggested the bird was not always abundant , mainly persisting at around 1 / 10 @,@ 000 the amount of the several billions estimated in the 1800s . Some early accounts also suggest that the appearance of flocks in great numbers was an irregular occurrence . 
 A communally roosting species , the passenger pigeon chose roosting sites that could provide shelter and enough food to sustain their large numbers for an indefinite period . The time spent at one roosting site may have depended on the extent of human persecution , weather conditions , or other , unknown factors . <unk> ranged in size and extent , from a few acres to 260 km2 ( 100 square miles ) or greater . Some roosting areas would be reused for subsequent years , others would only be used once . The passenger pigeon roosted in such numbers that even thick branches on a tree would break under the strain . The birds frequently piled on top of each other 's backs to roost . They rested in a slumped position that hid their feet . They slept with their bills concealed by the feathers in the middle of the breast while holding their tail at a 45 @-@ degree angle . Dung could accumulate under a roosting site to a depth of over 0 @.@ 3 m ( 1 @.@ 0 ft ) . 
 If the pigeon became alert , it would often stretch out its head and neck in line with its body and tail , then nod its head in a circular pattern . When aggravated by another pigeon , it raised it wings threateningly , but passenger pigeons almost never actually fought . The pigeon bathed in shallow water , and afterwards lay on each side in turn and raised the opposite wing to dry it . The passenger pigeon drank at least once a day , typically at dawn , by fully inserting its bill into lakes , small ponds , and streams . Pigeons were seen perching on top of each other to access water , and if necessary , the species could alight on open water to drink . One of the primary causes of natural mortality was the weather , and every spring many individuals froze to death after migrating north too early . In captivity , a passenger pigeon was capable of living at least 15 years ; Martha , the last known living passenger pigeon , was at least 17 and possibly as old as 29 when she died . It is undocumented how long a wild pigeon lived . 
 The bird is believed to have played a significant ecological role in the composition of <unk> forests of eastern North America . For instance , while the passenger pigeon was extant , forests were dominated by white oaks . This species germinated in the fall , therefore producing acorns during the spring to be devoured and spread by the pigeons . The absence of the passenger pigeon 's seed dispersal may have led to the modern dominance of red oaks . At roosting sites , few plants grew for years after the pigeons left . Also , the immense amount of dung present at these sites increased both the frequency and intensity of forest fires . With the large numbers in the flocks , the excrement they produced was enough to destroy surface @-@ level vegetation , and along with the breaking of <unk> under their collective weight , the passenger pigeons could do significant damage to forests . Due to these influences , some ecologists have considered the passenger pigeon a keystone species . The American chestnut trees that provided much of the mast on which the passenger pigeon fed was itself almost driven to extinction by an imported Asian fungus ( chestnut blight ) around 1905 . As many as thirty billion trees are thought to have died as a result in the following decades , but this did not affect the passenger pigeon , which was already extinct in the wild at the time . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 Beeches and oaks produced the mast needed to support nesting and roosting flocks . The passenger pigeon changed its diet depending on the season . In the fall , winter , and spring , it mainly ate <unk> , acorns , and chestnuts . During the summer , berries and softer fruits , such as blueberries , grapes , cherries , mulberries , <unk> , and <unk> , became the main objects of its consumption . It also ate worms , caterpillars , snails , and other invertebrates , particularly while breeding . Additionally , the passenger pigeon took advantage of cultivated grains , particularly buckwheat , when it found them . The species was especially fond of salt , which it ingested either from brackish springs or salty soil . Mast occurs in large quantities in different places at different times , and rarely in consecutive years , which is one of the reasons why the large flocks were constantly on the move . As mast is produced during autumn , there would have to be a large amount of it left by the summer , when the young were reared . It is unknown how they located this fluctuating food source , but their eyesight and flight powers aided them in surveying large areas for places that could provide food enough for a temporary stay . 
 The passenger pigeon foraged in flocks of tens or hundreds of thousands of individuals that overturned leaves , dirt , and snow with their bills in a frantic search for large quantities of food . One observer described the motion of such a flock in search of mast as having a rolling appearance , as birds in the back of the flock flew overhead to the front of the flock , dropping leaves and grass in flight . The flocks had wide leading edges to better scan the landscape for food sources . When nuts on a tree loosened from their caps , a pigeon would land on a branch and , while flapping vigorously to stay balanced , grab the nut , pull it loose from its cap , and swallow it whole . Collectively , a foraging flock was capable of removing nearly all fruits and nuts from their path . Birds in the back of the flock flew to the front in order to pick over <unk> ground ; however , birds never ventured far from the flock and hurried back if they became isolated . It is believed that the pigeons used social cues in order to identify abundant sources of food , and a flock of pigeons that saw others feeding on the ground often joined them . During the day , the birds left the roosting forest to forage on more open land . They regularly flew 100 to 130 km ( 62 to 81 mi ) away from their roost daily in search of food , and some pigeons reportedly traveled as far as 160 km ( 99 mi ) , leaving the roosting area early and returning at night . 
 The passenger pigeon had a very elastic mouth and throat , allowing for increased capacity , and a joint in the lower bill enabled it to swallow acorns whole . The bird was also able to store large quantities of food in its crop , which was capable of expanding to about the size of an orange , causing the neck to bulge . This allowed a bird to quickly grab any food it discovered in the highly competitive flock . The crop was described as being capable of holding at least 17 acorns or 28 <unk> , 11 grains of corn , 100 maple seeds , plus other material ; it was estimated that a passenger pigeon needed to eat about 61 cm3 ( 3 @.@ 7 in3 ) of food a day in order to survive . If shot , a pigeon with a crop full of nuts would fall to the ground with a sound described as like the rattle of a bag of marbles . After feeding , the pigeons perched on branches and digested the food stored in their crop overnight . The pigeon could eat and digest 0 @.@ 100 kg ( 0 @.@ 22 lb ) of acorns per day . At the historic population of three billion passenger pigeons , this amounted to 210 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 L ( 55 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 US gal ) of food a day . The pigeon was also able to regurgitate food from its crop when more desirable food became available . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 Other than finding roosting sites , the migrations of the passenger pigeon were connected with finding places appropriate for this communally breeding bird to nest and raise its young . It is not certain how many times a year the birds bred ; once seems most likely , but some accounts suggest more . The nesting period lasted around four to six weeks . The flock arrived at a nesting ground around March in southern latitudes , and some time later in more northern areas . The pigeon had no site fidelity , often choosing to nest in a different location each year . The formation of a nesting colony did not necessarily take place until several months after the pigeons arrived on their breeding grounds , typically during late March , April , or May . 
 The colonies , which were known as " cities " , were immense , ranging from 49 ha ( 120 acres ) to thousands of hectares in size , and were often long and narrow in shape ( L @-@ shaped ) , with a few areas untouched for unknown reasons . Due to the topography , they were rarely continuous . Since no accurate data were recorded , it is not possible to give more than estimates on the size and population of these nesting areas , but most accounts mention colonies containing millions of birds . The largest nesting area ever recorded was in central Wisconsin in 1871 ; it was reported as covering 2 @,@ 200 km2 ( 850 sq mi ) , with the number of birds nesting there estimated to be around 136 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . As well as these " cities " , there were regular reports of much smaller flocks or even individual pairs setting up a nesting site . The birds do not seem to have formed as vast breeding colonies at the periphery of their range . 
 Courtship took place at the nesting colony . Unlike other pigeons , courtship took place on a branch or perch . The male , with a flourish of the wings , made a " keck " call while near a female . The male then gripped tightly to the branch and vigorously flapped his wings up and down . When the male was close to the female , he then pressed against her on the perch with his head held high and pointing at her . If receptive , the female pressed back against the male . When ready to mate , the pair <unk> each other . This was followed by the birds billing , in which the female inserted its bill into and clasped the male 's bill , shook for a second , and separated quickly while standing next to each other . The male then scrambled onto the female 's back and copulated , which was then followed by soft clucking and occasionally more preening . John James Audubon described the courtship of the passenger pigeon as follows : 
 Thither the countless myriads resort , and prepare to fulfill one of the great laws of nature . At this period the note of the Pigeon is a soft coo @-@ coo @-@ coo @-@ coo much shorter than that of the domestic species . The common notes resemble the monosyllables kee @-@ kee @-@ kee @-@ kee , the first being the loudest , the others gradually diminishing In power . The male assumes a pompous demeanor , and follows the female , whether on the ground or on the branches , with spread tail and drooping wings , which it rubs against the part over which it is moving . The body is elevated , the throat swells , the eyes sparkle . He continues his notes , and now and then rises on the wing , and flies a few yards to approach the fugitive and <unk> female . Like the domestic Pigeon and other species , they caress each other by billing , in which action , the bill of the one is introduced transversely into that of the other , and both parties alternately disgorge the contents of their crop by repeated efforts . 
 After observing captive birds , Wallace Craig found that this species did less charging and strutting than other pigeons ( as it was awkward on the ground ) , and thought it probable that no food was transferred during their brief billing ( unlike in other pigeons ) , and he therefore considered Audubon 's description partially based on analogy with other pigeons as well as imagination . 
 Nests were built immediately after pair formation and took two to four days to construct ; this process was highly synchronized within a colony . The female chose the nesting site by sitting on it and flicking its wings . The male then carefully selected nesting materials , typically twigs , and handed them to the female over her back . The male then went in search of more nesting material while the female constructed the nest beneath herself . Nests were built between 2 @.@ 0 and 20 @.@ 1 m ( 6 @.@ 6 and 65 @.@ 9 ft ) above the ground , though typically above 4 @.@ 0 m ( 13 @.@ 1 ft ) , and were made of 70 to 110 twigs woven together to create a loose , shallow bowl through which the egg could easily be seen . This bowl was then typically lined with finer twigs . The nests were about 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) wide , 6 @.@ 1 cm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) high , and 1 @.@ 9 cm ( 0 @.@ 75 in ) deep . Though the nest has been described as crude and flimsy compared to those of many other birds , remains of nests could be found at sites where nesting had taken place several years prior . Nearly every tree capable of supporting nests had them , often more than 50 per tree ; one hemlock was recorded as holding 317 nests . The nests were placed on strong branches close to the tree trunks . Some accounts state that ground under the nesting area looked as if it had been swept clean , due to all the twigs being collected at the same time , yet this area would also have been covered in dung . As both sexes took care of the nest , the pairs were monogamous for the duration of the nesting . 
 Generally , the eggs were laid during the first two weeks of April across the pigeon 's range . Each female laid its egg immediately or almost immediately after the nest was completed ; sometimes the pigeon was forced to lay it on the ground if the nest was not complete . The normal clutch size appears to have been a single egg , but there is some uncertainty about this , as two have also been reported from the same nests . Occasionally , a second female laid its egg in another female 's nest , resulting in two eggs being present . The egg was white and oval shaped and averaged 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) by 34 mm ( 1 @.@ 3 in ) in size . If the egg was lost , it was possible for the pigeon to lay a replacement egg within a week . A whole colony was known to re @-@ nest after a snowstorm forced them to abandon their original colony . The egg was incubated by both parents for 12 to 14 days , with the male incubating it from midmorning to midafternoon and the female incubating it for the rest of the time . 
 Upon hatching , the nestling ( or squab ) was blind and sparsely covered with yellow , hairlike down . The nestling developed quickly and within 14 days weighed as much as its parents . During this brooding period both parents took care of the nestling , with the male attending in the middle of the day and the female at other times . The nestlings were fed crop milk ( a substance similar to curd , produced in the crops of the parent birds ) exclusively for the first days after hatching . Adult food was gradually introduced after three to six days . After 13 to 15 days , the parents fed the nestling for a last time and then abandoned it , leaving the nesting area en masse . The nestling begged in the nest for a day or two , before climbing from the nest and fluttering to the ground , whereafter it moved around , avoided obstacles , and begged for food from nearby adults . It was another three or four days before it fledged . The entire nesting cycle lasted about 30 days . It is unknown whether colonies re @-@ nested after a successful nesting . The passenger pigeon sexually matured during its first year and bred the following spring . 
 = = = Predators and parasites = = = 
 Nesting colonies attracted large numbers of predators , including American minks , American weasels , American martens , and raccoons that preyed on eggs and nestlings , birds of prey , such as owls , hawks , and eagles that preyed on nestlings and adults , and wolves , foxes , bobcats , bears , and mountain lions that preyed on injured adults and fallen nestlings . Hawks of the genus Accipiter and falcons pursued and preyed upon pigeons in flight , which in turn executed complex aerial maneuvers to avoid them ; Cooper 's hawk was known as the " great pigeon hawk " due to its successes , and these hawks allegedly followed migrating passenger pigeons . While many predators were drawn to the flocks , individual pigeons were largely protected due to the sheer size of the flock , and overall little damage could be inflicted on the flock by predation . Despite the number of predators , nesting colonies were so large that they were estimated to have a 90 % success rate if not disturbed . After being abandoned and leaving the nest , the very fat juveniles were vulnerable to predators until they were able to fly . The sheer number of juveniles on the ground meant that only a small percentage of them were killed ; predator satiation may therefore be one of the reasons for the extremely social habits and communal breeding of the species . 
 Two parasites have been recorded on passenger pigeons . One species of <unk> louse , <unk> extinctus , was originally thought to have lived on just passenger pigeons and to have become <unk> with them . This was proven inaccurate in 1999 when C. extinctus was rediscovered living on band @-@ tailed pigeons . This , and the fact that the related louse C. angustus is mainly found on cuckoo @-@ doves , further supports the relation between these pigeons , as the phylogeny of lice broadly mirrors that of their hosts . Another louse , <unk> <unk> , was thought to have been unique to the passenger pigeon , but is now believed to have been a case of a contaminated specimen , as the species is considered to be the still @-@ extant <unk> flavus of Australia . There is no record of a wild pigeon dying of either disease or parasites . 
 = = Relationship with humans = = 
 The passenger pigeon played a religious role for some northern Native American tribes . The Wyandot people ( or Huron ) believed that every twelve years during the Feast of the Dead , the souls of the deceased changed into passenger pigeons , which were then hunted and eaten . Before hunting the juvenile pigeons , the Seneca people made an offering of wampum and brooches to the old passenger pigeons , these were placed in a small kettle or other receptacle by a smoky fire . The Ho @-@ Chunk people considered the passenger pigeon to be the bird of the chief , as they were served whenever the chieftain gave a feast . The Seneca people believed that a white pigeon was the chief of the passenger pigeon colony , and that a Council of Birds had decided that the pigeons had to give their bodies to the Seneca because they were the only birds that nested in colonies . The Seneca developed a pigeon dance as a way of showing their gratitude . 
 French explorer Jacques Cartier was the first European to report on passenger pigeons , during his voyage in 1534 . The bird was subsequently observed and noted by historical figures such as Samuel de Champlain and Cotton Mather . Most early accounts dwell on the vast number of pigeons , the resulting darkened skies , and the enormous amount of hunted birds ( 50 @,@ 000 birds were reportedly sold at a Boston market in 1771 ) . The early colonists thought that large flights of pigeons would be followed by ill fortune or sickness . When the pigeons wintered outside of their normal range , some believed that they would have " a sickly summer and autumn . " In the 18th and 19th centuries , various parts of the pigeon were thought to have medicinal properties . The blood was supposed to be good for eye disorders , the powdered stomach lining was used to treat dysentery , and the dung was used to treat a variety of ailments , including headaches , stomach pains , and lethargy . Though they did not last as long as the feathers of a goose , the feathers of the passenger pigeon were frequently used for bedding . Pigeon feather beds were so popular that for a time in Saint @-@ Jérôme , Quebec , every dowry included a bed and pillows made of pigeon feathers . In 1822 , one family in Chautauqua County , New York , killed 4 @,@ 000 pigeons in a day solely for this purpose . 
 The passenger pigeon was featured in the writings of many significant early naturalists , as well as accompanying illustrations . Mark Catesby 's 1731 illustration , the first published depiction of this bird , is somewhat crude , according to some later commentators . The original watercolor that the engraving is based on was bought by the British royal family in 1768 , along with the rest of Catesby 's watercolors . The naturalists Alexander Wilson and John James Audubon both witnessed large pigeon migrations first hand , and published detailed accounts wherein both attempted to deduce the total number of birds involved . The most famous and often reproduced depiction of the passenger pigeon is Audubon 's illustration ( <unk> aquatint ) in his book The Birds of America , published between 1827 and 1838 . Audubon 's image has been praised for its artistic qualities , but criticized for its supposed scientific inaccuracies . As Wallace Craig and R. W. Shufeldt ( among others ) pointed out , the birds are shown perched and billing one above the other , whereas they would instead have done this side by side , the male would be the one passing food to the female , and the male 's tail would not be spread . Craig and Shufeldt instead cited illustrations by American artist Louis Agassiz Fuertes and Japanese artist K. Hayashi as more accurate depictions of the bird . Illustrations of the passenger pigeon were often drawn after stuffed birds , and Charles R. Knight is the only " serious " artist known to have drawn the species from life . He did so on at least two occasions ; in 1903 he drew a bird possibly in one of the three aviaries with surviving birds , and some time before 1914 , he drew Martha , the last individual , in Cincinnati Zoo . The bird has been written about ( including in poems , songs , and fiction ) and illustrated by many notable writers and artists , and is depicted in art to this day , for example in Walton Ford 's 2002 painting Falling Bough , and National Medal of Arts winner John A. Ruthven 's 2014 mural in Cincinnati , which commemorates the 100th anniversary of Martha 's death . The passenger pigeon mural on the wall of a six @-@ story building in Cincinnati which can be seen in the 2014 documentary From Billions To None by David Mrazek and Joel Greenberg . 
 = = = Hunting = = = 
 The passenger pigeon was an important source of food for the people of North America . The indigenous peoples ate pigeons , and tribes near nesting colonies would sometimes move to live closer to them and eat the juveniles , killing them at night with long poles . Many Native Americans were careful not to disturb the adult pigeons , and instead ate only the juveniles as they were afraid that the adults might desert their nesting grounds ; in some tribes , disturbing the adult pigeons was considered a crime . Away from the nests , large nets were used to capture adult pigeons , sometimes up to 800 at a time . Low @-@ flying pigeons could be killed by throwing sticks or stones . At one site in Oklahoma , the pigeons leaving their roost every morning flew low enough that the Cherokee could throw clubs into their midst , which caused the lead pigeons to try to turn aside and in the process created a blockade that resulted in a large mass of flying , easily hit pigeons . Among the game birds , passenger pigeons were second only to the wild turkey ( Meleagris gallopavo ) in terms of importance for the Native Americans living in the southeastern United States . The bird 's fat was stored , often in large quantities , and used as butter . Archaeological evidence supports the idea that Native Americans ate the pigeons frequently prior to colonization . 
 After European colonization , the passenger pigeon was hunted more intensely and with more sophisticated methods than the more sustainable methods practiced by the natives . Yet it has also been suggested that the species was rare prior to 1492 , and that the subsequent increase in their numbers may be due to the decrease in the Native American population ( who , as well as hunting the birds , competed with them for mast ) caused by European immigration , and the supplementary food ( agricultural crops ) the immigrants provided . It was of particular value on the frontier , and some settlements counted on the pigeon to support their population . The flavor of the flesh of passenger pigeons varied depending on how they were prepared . In general , juveniles were thought to taste the best , followed by birds fattened in captivity and birds caught in September and October . It was common practice to fatten trapped pigeons before eating them or storing their bodies for winter . Dead pigeons were commonly stored by salting or pickling the bodies ; other times , only the breasts of the pigeons were kept , in which case they were typically smoked . In the early 19th century , commercial hunters began netting and shooting the birds to sell as food in city markets , and even as pig fodder . Once pigeon meat became popular , commercial hunting started on a prodigious scale . 
 Passenger pigeons were shot with such ease that many did not consider them to be a game bird , as an amateur hunter could easily bring down six with one shotgun blast ; a particularly good shot with both barrels of a shotgun at a roost could kill 61 birds . The birds were frequently shot either in flight during migration or immediately after , when they commonly perched in dead , exposed trees . Hunters only had to shoot toward the sky without aiming , and many pigeons would be brought down . The pigeons proved difficult to shoot head @-@ on , so hunters typically waited for the flocks to pass overhead before shooting them . Trenches were sometimes dug and filled with grain so that a hunter could shoot the pigeons along this trench . Hunters largely outnumbered trappers , and hunting passenger pigeons was a popular sport for young boys . In 1871 , a single seller of ammunition provided three tons of powder and 16 tons ( 32 @,@ 000 lb ) of shot during a nesting . In the latter half of the 19th century , thousands of passenger pigeons were captured for use in the sports shooting industry . The pigeons were used as living targets in shooting tournaments , such as " trap @-@ shooting " , the controlled release of birds from special traps . Competitions could also consist of people standing regularly spaced while trying to shoot down as many birds as possible in a passing flock . The pigeon was considered so numerous that 30 @,@ 000 birds had to be killed to claim the prize in one competition . 
 There were a wide variety of other methods used to capture and kill passenger pigeons . Nets were propped up to allow passenger pigeons entry , then closed by knocking loose the stick that supported the opening , trapping twenty or more pigeons inside . Tunnel nets were also used to great effect , and one particularly large net was capable of catching 3 @,@ 500 pigeons at a time . These nets were used by many farmers on their own property as well as by professional trappers . Food would be placed on the ground near the nets to attract the pigeons . Decoy or " <unk> pigeons " ( sometimes blinded by having their eyelids sewn together ) were tied to a stool . When a flock of pigeons passed by , a chord would be pulled that made the stool pigeon flutter to the ground , making it seem as if it had found food , and the flock would be lured into the trap . Salt was also frequently used as bait , and many trappers set up near salt springs . At least one trapper used alcohol @-@ soaked grain as bait to intoxicate the birds and make them easier to kill . Another method of capture was to hunt at a nesting colony , particularly during the period of a few days after the adult pigeons abandoned their nestlings , but before the nestlings could fly . Some hunters used sticks to poke the nestlings out of the nest , while others shot the bottom of a nest with a blunt arrow to dislodge the pigeon . Others cut down a nesting tree in such a way that when it fell , it would also hit a second nesting tree and dislodge the pigeons within . In one case , 6 km2 ( 1 @,@ 500 acres ) of large trees were speedily cut down to get birds , and such methods were common . An extreme method , practiced only by particularly unscrupulous hunters , was to set fire to the base of a tree nested with pigeons ; the adults would flee and the juveniles would fall to the ground . Sulfur was sometimes burned beneath the nesting tree to suffocate the birds , which fell out of the tree in a weakened state . 
 By the mid @-@ 1800s , railroads had opened new opportunities for pigeon hunters . While previously it had proved too difficult to ship masses of pigeons to eastern cities , the access provided by the railroad permitted pigeon hunting to become commercialized . An extensive telegraph system was introduced in the 1860s , which improved communication across the United States , making it easier to spread information about the whereabouts of pigeon flocks . After being opened up to the railroads , the town of Plattsburg , New York is estimated to have shipped 1 @.@ 8 million pigeons to larger cities in 1851 alone at a price of 31 to 56 cents a dozen . By the late 1800s , the trade of passenger pigeons had become commercialized . Large commission houses employed trappers ( known as " <unk> " ) to follow the flocks of pigeons year @-@ round . A single hunter is reported to have sent three million birds to eastern cities during his career . In 1874 , at least 600 people were employed as pigeon trappers , a number which grew to 1 @,@ 200 by 1881 . Pigeons were caught in such numbers that by 1876 , shipments of dead pigeons were unable to recoup the costs of the barrels and ice needed to ship them . The price of a barrel full of pigeons dropped to below fifty cents , due to overstocked markets . Passenger pigeons were instead kept alive so their meat would be fresh when the birds were killed , and sold once their market value had increased again . Thousands of birds were kept in large pens , though the bad conditions led many to die from lack of food and water , and by fretting ( gnawing ) themselves ; many rotted away before they could be sold . 
 Hunting of passenger pigeons was documented and depicted in contemporaneous newspapers , wherein various trapping methods and uses were featured . The most often reproduced of these illustrations was captioned " Winter sports in northern Louisiana : shooting wild pigeons " , and published in 1875 . Passenger pigeons were also seen as agricultural pests , since entire crops could be destroyed by feeding flocks . The bird was described as a " perfect scourge " by some farming communities , and hunters were employed to " wage warfare " on the birds to save grain , as shown in another newspaper illustration from 1867 captioned as " Shooting wild pigeons in Iowa " . When comparing these " pests " to the bison of the Great Plains , it is possible to infer that the valuable resource needed was not the species of animals but the agriculture which was consumed by said animal . The crops that were eaten were seen as marketable calories , proteins , and nutrients all grown for the wrong species . 
 = = = Decline and conservation attempts = = = 
 The notion that the species could be driven to extinction was alien to the early colonists , both because the number of birds did not appear to diminish , but also because the concept of extinction itself was yet to be defined . The bird seems to have been slowly pushed westwards since the arrival of Europeans , becoming scarce or absent in the east , though there were still millions of birds in the 1850s . The population must have been decreasing in numbers for many years , though this went unnoticed due to the apparent vast number of birds , which clouded their decline . In 1856 Bénédict Henry <unk> may have been one of the first writers to voice concern about the fate of the passenger pigeon , after witnessing a hunt in 1847 : 
 Everything leads to the belief that the pigeons , which cannot endure isolation and are forced to flee or to change their way of living according to the rate at which North America is populated by the European inflow , will simply end by disappearing from this continent , and , if the world does not end this before a century , I will wager ... that the amateur of ornithology will find no more wild pigeons , except those in the Museums of Natural History . 
 By the 1870s , the decrease in birds was noticeable , especially after the last large scale nestings and subsequent slaughters of millions of birds in 1874 and 1878 . By this time , large nestings only took place in the north , around the Great Lakes . The last large nesting was in Petoskey , Michigan , in 1878 ( following one in Pennsylvania a few days earlier ) , where 50 @,@ 000 birds were killed each day for nearly five months . The surviving adults attempted a second nesting at new sites , but were killed by professional hunters before they had a chance to raise any young . Scattered nestings are reported into the 1880s , but the birds were now wary , and commonly abandoned their nests if persecuted . 
 By the time of these last nestings , laws had already been enacted to protect the passenger pigeon , but these proved ineffective , as they were <unk> framed and hard to enforce . H. B. Roney , who had witnessed the Petoskey slaughter , led campaigns to protect the pigeon , but was met with resistance , and accusations that he was exaggerating the severity of the situation . Few offenders were prosecuted , mainly some poor trappers , but the large enterprises were not affected . In 1857 , a bill was brought forth to the Ohio State Legislature seeking protection for the passenger pigeon , yet a Select Committee of the Senate filed a report stating that the bird did not need protection , being " wonderfully prolific " , and dismissing the suggestion that the species could be destroyed . Public protests against trap @-@ shooting erupted in the 1870s , as the birds were badly treated before and after such contests . Conservationists were ineffective in stopping the slaughter . A bill was passed in the Michigan legislature making it illegal to net pigeons within 3 km ( 2 miles ) of a nesting area . In 1897 , a bill was introduced in the Michigan legislature asking for a 10 @-@ year closed season on passenger pigeons . Similar legal measures were passed and then disregarded in Pennsylvania . The gestures proved futile , and by the mid @-@ 1890s , the passenger pigeon had almost completely disappeared , and was probably extinct as a breeding bird in the wild . Small flocks are known to have existed at this point , since large numbers of birds were still being sold at markets . Thereafter , only small groups or individual birds were reported , many of which were shot on sight . 
 = = = Last survivors = = = 
 The last recorded nest and egg in the wild were collected in 1895 near Minneapolis . The last wild individual in Louisiana was discovered among a flock of mourning doves in 1896 , and subsequently shot . Many late sightings are thought to be false or due to confusion with mourning doves . The last fully authenticated record of a wild passenger pigeon was near <unk> , Pike County , Ohio , on March 22 or 24 , 1900 , when a female bird was killed by a boy named Press Clay Southworth with a BB gun . The boy had not recognized the bird as a passenger pigeon , but his parents identified it , and sent it to a taxidermist . The specimen , nicknamed " buttons " due to the buttons used instead of glass eyes , was donated to the Ohio Historical Society by the family in 1915 . Though this is the most often cited last wild specimen , in 2014 , writer Joel Greenberg pointed out two later records , one of which involves a male shot in 1902 in Indiana , that was stuffed but later destroyed . The reliability of later accounts are in question . US President Theodore Roosevelt claimed to have seen a bird in Michigan in 1907 . Ornithologist Alexander Wetmore claimed that he saw a pair flying near Independence , Kansas , in April 1905 . In 1910 , the American Ornithologists ' Union offered a reward of $ 3 @,@ 000 for discovering a nest – the equivalent of $ 76 @,@ 990 @.@ 05 in 2015 . 
 Most captive passenger pigeons were kept for exploitative purposes , but some were housed in zoos and aviaries . Audubon alone claimed to have brought 350 birds to England in 1830 , distributing them among various noblemen , and the species is also known to have been kept at London Zoo . Being common birds , these attracted little interest , until the species became rare in the 1890s . By the turn of the 20th century , the last known captive passenger pigeons were divided in three groups ; one in Milwaukee , one in Chicago , and one in Cincinnati . There are claims of a few further individuals having been kept in various places , but these accounts are not considered reliable today . The Milwaukee group was kept by David Whittaker , who began his collection in 1888 , and possessed fifteen birds some years later , all descended from a single pair . 
 The Chicago group was kept by Professor Charles Otis Whitman , whose collection began with passenger pigeons bought from Whittaker beginning in 1896 . He had an interest in studying pigeons , and kept his passenger pigeons with other pigeon species . Whitman brought his pigeons with him from Chicago to Massachusetts by railcar each summer . By 1897 , Whitman had bought all of Whittaker 's birds , and upon reaching a maximum of 19 individuals , he gave seven back to Whittaker in 1898 . Around this time , a series of photographs were taken of these birds ; 24 of the photos survive to this day . Some of these images have been reproduced in various media , copies of which are now kept at the Wisconsin Historical Society . It is unclear exactly where , when , and by whom these photos were taken , but some appear to have been taken in Chicago in 1896 , others in Massachusetts in 1898 , the latter by a J. G. Hubbard . By 1902 , Whitman owned sixteen birds . Many eggs were laid by his pigeons , but few hatched , and many hatchlings died . A newspaper inquiry was published that requested " fresh blood " to the flock which had now ceased breeding . By 1907 , he was down to two female passenger pigeons that died that winter , and was left with two infertile male hybrids , whose subsequent fate is unknown . By this time , only four ( all males ) of the birds Whitman had returned to Whittaker were alive , and these died between November 1908 and February 1909 . 
 The Cincinnati Zoo , one of the oldest zoos in the US , kept passenger pigeons from its beginning in 1875 . The zoo kept more than twenty individuals , in a ten @-@ by @-@ twelve @-@ foot cage . Passenger pigeons do not appear to have been kept at the zoo due to their rarity , but to enable guests to have a closer look at a native species . Recognizing the decline of the wild populations , Whitman and the Cincinnati Zoo consistently strove to breed the surviving birds , including attempts at making a rock dove foster passenger pigeon eggs . In 1902 , Whitman gave a female passenger pigeon to the zoo ; this was possibly the individual later known as Martha , which would become the last living member of the species . Other sources argue that Martha was hatched at the Cincinnati Zoo , had lived there for 25 years , and was the descendant of three pairs of passenger pigeons purchased by the zoo in 1877 . It is thought this individual was named Martha because her last cage mate was named George , thereby honoring George Washington and his wife Martha , though it has also been claimed she was named after the mother of a zookeeper 's friends . 
 In 1909 , Martha and her two male companions at the Cincinnati Zoo became the only known surviving passenger pigeons . One of these males died around April that year , followed by George , the remaining male , on July 10 , 1910 . It is unknown whether the remains of George were preserved . Martha soon became a celebrity due to her status as an <unk> , and offers of a $ 1 @,@ 000 reward for finding a mate for her brought even more visitors to see her . During her last four years in solitude ( her cage was 5 @.@ 4 by 6 m ( 18 by 20 ft ) ) , Martha became steadily slower and more immobile ; visitors would throw sand at her to make her move , and her cage was roped off in response . Martha died of old age on September 1 , 1914 , and was found lifeless on the floor of her cage . It was claimed that she died at 1 p.m. , but other sources suggest she died some hours later . Depending on the source , Martha was between 17 and 29 years old at the time of her death , although 29 is the generally accepted figure . At the time , it was suggested that Martha might have died from an apoplectic stroke , as she had suffered one a few weeks before dying . Her body was frozen into a block of ice and sent to the Smithsonian Institution in Washington , where it was skinned , dissected , photographed , and mounted . As she was molting when she died , she proved difficult to stuff , and previously shed feathers were added to the skin . Martha was on display for many years , but after a period in the museum vaults , she was put back on display at the Smithsonian 's National Museum of Natural History in 2015 . A memorial statue of Martha stands on the grounds of the Cincinnati Zoo , in front of the " Passenger Pigeon Memorial Hut , " formerly the aviary wherein Martha lived , now a National Historic Landmark . Incidentally , the last specimen of the extinct Carolina parakeet , named " <unk> , " died in Martha 's cage in 1918 ; the stuffed remains of that bird are exhibited in the " Memorial Hut . " 
 = = = Extinction causes = = = 
 The main reasons for the extinction of the passenger pigeon were the massive scale of hunting , the rapid loss of habitat , and the extremely social lifestyle of the bird , which made it highly vulnerable to the former factors . Deforestation was driven by the need to free land for agriculture and expanding towns , but also due to the demand for lumber and fuel . About 728 @.@ 000 km2 ( 180 million acres ) were cleared for farming between 1850 and 1910 . Though there are still large woodland areas in eastern North America , which support a variety of wildlife , it was not enough to support the vast number of passenger pigeons needed to sustain the population . In contrast , very small populations of nearly extinct birds , such as the kakapo ( <unk> habroptilus ) and the <unk> ( Porphyrio <unk> ) , have been enough to keep those species alive to the present . The combined effects of intense hunting and deforestation has been referred to as a " Blitzkrieg " against the passenger pigeon , and it has been labeled one of the greatest and most senseless human @-@ induced extinctions in history . As the flocks dwindled in size , the passenger pigeon population decreased below the threshold necessary to propagate the species . 
 The 2014 study that demonstrated natural fluctuations in population numbers prior to human arrival also showed that the species routinely recovered from lows in the population , and suggested that one of these lows may have coincided with the intensified exploitation by humans in the 1800s , a combination which would have led to the rapid extinction of the species . A similar scenario may also explain the rapid extinction of the Rocky Mountain locust ( <unk> <unk> ) during the same period . It has also been suggested that after the population was thinned out , it would be harder for few or solitary birds to locate suitable feeding areas . In addition to the birds killed or driven away by hunting during breeding seasons , many nestlings were also orphaned before being able to fend for themselves . Other , less convincing contributing factors have been suggested at times , including mass drownings , Newcastle disease , and migrations to areas outside their original range . 
 The extinction of the passenger pigeon aroused public interest in the conservation movement , and resulted in new laws and practices which prevented many other species from becoming extinct . The rapid decline of the passenger pigeon has influenced later assessment methods of the extinction risk of endangered animal populations . The International Union for the Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has used the passenger pigeon as an example in cases where a species was declared " at risk " for extinction even though population numbers are high . 
 = = = Re @-@ creation of the species = = = 
 Today , more than 1 @,@ 532 passenger pigeon skins ( along with 16 skeletons ) are in existence , spread across many institutions all over the world . It has been suggested that the passenger pigeon should be revived when available technology allows it ( a concept which has been termed " de @-@ extinction " ) , using genetic material from such specimens . In 2003 , the Pyrenean ibex ( Capra pyrenaica pyrenaica , a subspecies of the Spanish ibex ) was the first extinct animal to be cloned back to life ; the clone lived for only seven minutes before dying of lung defects . A hindrance to cloning the passenger pigeon is the fact that the DNA of museum specimens has been contaminated and fragmented , due to exposure to heat and oxygen . American geneticist George M. Church has proposed that the passenger pigeon genome can be reconstructed by piecing together DNA fragments from different specimens . The next step would be to splice these genes into the stem cells of rock pigeons ( or band @-@ tailed pigeons ) , which would then be transformed into egg and sperm cells , and placed into the eggs of rock pigeons , resulting in rock pigeons bearing passenger pigeon sperm and eggs . The offspring of these would have passenger pigeon traits , and would be further bred to favor unique features of the extinct species . 
 The general idea of re @-@ creating extinct species has been criticized , since the large funds needed could be spent on conserving currently threatened species and habitats , and because conservation efforts might be viewed as less urgent . In the case of the passenger pigeon , since it was very social , it is unlikely that enough birds could be created for revival to be successful , and it is unclear whether there is enough appropriate habitat left for its reintroduction . Furthermore , the parent pigeons that would raise the cloned passenger pigeons would belong to a different species , with a different way of rearing young . 
 = Triturus = 
 Triturus is a genus of newts comprising the crested and the marbled newts , which are found from Great Britain through most of continental Europe to westernmost Siberia , Anatolia , and the Caspian Sea region . Their English names refer to their appearance : marbled newts have a green – black colour pattern , while the males of crested newts , which are dark brown with a yellow or orange underside , develop a conspicuous jagged seam on their back and tail during their breeding phase . 
 Crested and marbled newts live and breed in vegetation @-@ rich ponds or similar aquatic habitats for two to six months and usually spend the rest of the year in shady , protection @-@ rich land habitats close to their breeding sites . Males court females with a ritualised display , ending in the deposition of a spermatophore that is picked up by the female . After fertilisation , a female lays 200 – 400 eggs , folding them individually into leaves of water plants . Larvae develop over two to four months before metamorphosing into land @-@ dwelling juveniles . 
 Historically , most European newts were included in the genus , but taxonomists have split off the alpine newt ( Ichthyosaura ) , the small @-@ bodied newts ( Lissotriton ) and the banded newts ( <unk> ) as separate genera . The closest relatives of Triturus are the European brook newts ( <unk> ) . Two species of marbled newts and seven species of crested newts are accepted , of which the Anatolian crested newt was only described in 2016 . Their ranges are largely contiguous but where they do overlap , hybridisation may take place . 
 Although not immediately threatened , crested and marbled newts suffer from population declines , caused mainly by habitat loss and fragmentation . Both their aquatic breeding sites and the cover @-@ rich , natural landscapes upon which they depend during their terrestrial phase are affected . All species are legally protected in Europe , and some of their habitats have been designated as special reserves . 
 = = Taxonomy and systematics = = 
 The genus name Triturus was introduced in 1815 by the polymath Constantine Samuel Rafinesque , with the northern crested newt ( Triturus cristatus ) as type species . That species was originally described as Triton cristatus by Josephus Nicolaus Laurenti in 1768 , but Linnaeus had already used the name Triton for a genus of sea snails ten years before , making a new genus name for the newts necessary . 
 Triturus included most European newt species until the end of the 20th century , but was substantially revised after it was shown to be polyphyletic . Three separate genera now accommodate former members of the genus : the small @-@ bodied newts ( Lissotriton ) , the banded newts ( <unk> ) , and the alpine newt ( Ichthyosaura ) . The monophyly of the genus Triturus in the strict sense is supported by molecular data and synapomorphies such as a genetic defect causing 50 % embryo mortality ( see below , Egg deposition and development ) . 
 As of 2016 , the genus contains nine accepted species : 
 Crested newts 
 Marbled newts 
 Both the crested and the marbled newts were long considered as single species , Triturus cristatus and T. marmoratus , respectively . Substantial genetic differences between subspecies were , however , noted and eventually led to their recognition as full species , with the crested newts often collectively referred to as " T. cristatus superspecies " . The Balkan and the Anatolian crested newt , the most recent species formally described ( 2013 and 2016 , respectively ) , were only recognised through genetic data ; together with the Southern crested newt , they form a cryptic species complex with no morphological differences known . 
 = = Description = = 
 = = = Common characteristics = = = 
 Triturus is a genus of rather large @-@ bodied newts . They typically have a total length of between 10 and 16 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 and 6 @.@ 3 in ) , with some crested newts of up to 20 cm ( 8 in ) described . Size depends on sex and the environment : females are slightly larger and have a proportionally longer tail than males in most species , and the Italian crested newt seems to be larger in colder parts of its range . 
 Crested newts are dark brown , with black spots on the sides , and white stippling in some species . Their belly is yellow to orange with black blotches , forming a pattern characteristic for individuals . Females and juveniles of some species have a yellow line running down their back and tail . During breeding phase , crested newts change in appearance , most markedly the males . These develop a skin seam running along their back and tail ; this crest is the namesake feature of the crested newts and can be up to 1 @.@ 5 cm high and very jagged in the northern crested newt . Another feature of males at breeding time is a silvery @-@ white band along the sides of the tail . 
 Marbled newts owe their name to their green – black , marbled colour pattern . In females , an orange @-@ red line runs down back and tail . The crest of male marbled newts is smaller and fleshier than that of the crested newts and not indented , but marbled newt males also have a whitish tail band at breeding time . 
 = = = Species identification = = = 
 Apart from the obvious colour differences between crested and marbled newts , species in the genus also have different body forms . They range from stocky with sturdy limbs in the Anatolian , Balkan and the southern crested newt as well as the marbled newts , to very slender with short legs in the Danube crested newt . These types were first noted by herpetologist Willy <unk> , who used the ratio of forelimb length to distance between fore- and hindlimbs to distinguish subspecies of the crested newt ( now full species ) ; this index however sometimes leads to misidentifications . The number of rib @-@ bearing vertebrae in the skeleton was shown to be a better species indicator . It ranges from 12 in the marbled newts to 16 – 17 in the Danube crested newt and is usually observed through radiography on dead or sedated specimens . 
 The two marbled newts are readily distinguished by size and colouration . In contrast , separating crested newt species based on appearance is not straightforward , but most can be determined by a combination of body form , coloration , and male crest shape . The Anatolian , Balkan , and southern crested newt however are cryptic , morphologically indistinguishable species . Triturus newts occupy distinct geographical regions ( see Distribution ) , but hybrid forms occur at range borders between some species and have intermediate characteristics ( see Hybridisation and introgression ) . 
 = = Behaviour and ecology = = 
 Like other newts , Triturus species develop in the water as larvae , and return to it each year for breeding . Adults spend one half to three quarters of the year on land , depending on the species , and thus depend on both suitable aquatic breeding sites and terrestrial habitats . After larval development in the first year , juveniles pass another year or two before reaching maturity ; in the north and at higher elevations , this can take longer . The larval and juvenile stages are the riskiest for the newts , while survival is higher in adults . Once the risky stages passed , adult newts usually attain an age of seven to nine years , although individuals of the northern crested newts have reached 17 years in the wild . 
 = = = Aquatic phase = = = 
 The aquatic habitats preferred by the newts are stagnant , mid- to large @-@ sized , unshaded water bodies with abundant underwater vegetation but without fish , which prey on larvae . Typical examples are larger ponds , which need not be of natural origin ; indeed , most ponds inhabited by the northern crested newt in the UK are human @-@ made . Examples of other suitable secondary habitats are ditches , channels , gravel pit lakes , garden ponds , or ( in the Italian crested newt ) rice paddies . The Danube crested newt is more adapted to flowing water and often breeds in river margins , oxbow lakes or flooded marshland , where it frequently co @-@ occurs with fish . Other newts that can be found in <unk> with Triturus species include the smooth , the palmate , the Carpathian , and the alpine newt . 
 Adult newts begin moving to their breeding sites in spring when temperatures stay above 4 – 5 ° C ( 39 – 41 ° F ) . This usually occurs in March for most species , but can be much earlier in the southern parts of the distribution range . Southern marbled newts mainly breed from January to early March and may already enter ponds in autumn . The time adults spend in water differs among species and correlates with body shape : while it is only about three months in the marbled newts , it is six months in the Danube crested newt , whose slender body is best adapted to swimming . Triturus newts in their aquatic phase are mostly nocturnal and , compared to the smaller newts of Lissotriton and Ichthyosaura , usually prefer the deeper parts of a water body , where they hide under vegetation . As with other newts , they occasionally have to move to the surface to breathe air . The aquatic phase serves not only for reproduction , but also offers the animals more abundant prey , and immature crested newts frequently return to the water in spring even if they do not breed . 
 = = = Terrestrial phase = = = 
 During their terrestrial phase , crested and marbled newts depend on a landscape that offers cover , invertebrate prey and humidity . The precise requirements of most species are still poorly known , as the newts are much more difficult to detect and observe on land . Deciduous woodlands or groves are in general preferred , but conifer woods are also accepted , especially in the far northern and southern ranges . The southern marbled newt is typically found in Mediterranean oak forests . In the absence of forests , other cover @-@ rich habitats , as for example hedgerows , scrub , swampy meadows , or quarries , can be inhabited . Within such habitats , the newts use hiding places such as logs , bark , planks , stone walls , or small mammal burrows ; several individuals may occupy such refuges at the same time . Since the newts in general stay very close to their aquatic breeding sites , the quality of the surrounding terrestrial habitat largely determines whether an otherwise suitable water body will be colonised . 
 Juveniles often disperse to new breeding sites , while the adults in general move back to the same breeding sites each year . The newts do not migrate very far : they may cover around 100 metres ( 110 yd ) in one night and rarely disperse much farther than one kilometre ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) . For orientation , the newts likely use a combination of cues including odour and the calls of other amphibians , and orientation by the night sky has been demonstrated in the marbled newt . Activity is highest on wet nights ; the newts usually stay hidden during daytime . There is often an increase in activity in late summer and autumn , when the newts likely move closer to their breeding sites . Over most of their range , they hibernate in winter , using mainly subterranean hiding places , where many individuals will often congregate . In their southern range , they may instead sometimes aestivate during the dry months of summer . 
 = = = Diet and predators = = = 
 Like other newts , Triturus species are carnivorous and feed mainly on invertebrates . During the land phase , prey include earthworms and other annelids , different insects , woodlice , and snails and slugs . During the breeding season , they prey on various aquatic invertebrates , and also tadpoles of other amphibians such as the common frog or common toad , and smaller newts . Larvae , depending on their size , eat small invertebrates and tadpoles , and also smaller larvae of their own species . 
 The larvae are themselves eaten by various animals such as carnivorous invertebrates and water birds , and are especially vulnerable to predatory fish . Adults generally avoid predators through their hidden lifestyle but are sometimes eaten by herons and other birds , snakes such as the grass snake , and mammals such as shrews , badgers and hedgehogs . They secrete the poison tetrodotoxin from their skin , albeit much less than for example the North American Pacific newts ( Taricha ) . The bright yellow or orange underside of crested newts is a warning coloration which can be presented in case of perceived danger . In such a posture , the newts typically roll up and secrete a milky substance . 
 = = Reproduction = = 
 = = = Courtship = = = 
 A complex courting ritual performed underwater characterises the crested and marbled newts . Males are territorial and use leks , or courtship arenas , small patches of clear ground where they display and attract females . When they encounter other males , they use the same postures as described below for courting to impress their counterpart . Occasionally , they even bite each other ; marbled newts seem more aggressive than crested newts . Males also frequently disturb the courting of other males and try to guide the female away from their rival . Pheromones are used to attract females , and once a male has found one he will pursue her and position himself in front of her . After this first orientation phase , courtship proceeds with display and spermatophore transfer . 
 Courtship display serves to emphasise the male 's body and crest size and to waft pheromones towards the female . A position characteristic for the large Triturus species is the " cat buckle " , where the male 's body is kinked and often rests only on the forelegs ( " hand stand " ) . He will also lean towards the female ( " lean @-@ in " ) , rock his body , and flap his tail towards her , sometimes lashing it violently ( " whiplash " ) . If the female shows interest , the ritual enters the third phase , where the male creeps away from her , his tail quivering . When the female touches his tail with her snout , he deposits a packet of sperm ( a spermatophore ) on the ground . The ritual ends with the male guiding the female over the spermatophore , which she then takes up with her cloaca . In the southern marbled newt , courtship is somewhat different from the larger species in that it does not seem to involve male " cat buckles " and " <unk> " , but instead slower tail fanning and undulating of the tail tip ( presumably to mimic a prey animal and lure the female ) . 
 = = = Egg deposition and development = = = 
 Females usually engage with several males over a breeding season . The eggs are fertilised internally in the oviduct . The female deposits them individually on leaves of aquatic plants , such as water cress or floating sweetgrass , usually close to the surface , and , using her hindlegs , folds the leaf around the eggs as protection from predators and radiation . In the absence of suitable plants , the eggs may also be deposited on leaf litter , stones , or even plastic bags . In the northern crested newt , a female takes around five minutes for the deposition of one egg . Crested newt females usually lay around 200 eggs per season , while the marbled newt ( T. marmoratus ) can lay up to 400 . Triturus embryos are usually light @-@ coloured , 1 @.@ 8 – 2 mm in diameter with a 6 mm jelly capsule , which distinguishes them from eggs of other co @-@ existing newt species that are smaller and darker @-@ coloured . A genetic particularity in the genus causes 50 % of the embryos to die : their development is arrested when they do not possess two different variants of chromosome 1 ( i.e. , when they are homozygous for that chromosome ) . 
 Larvae hatch after two to five weeks , depending largely on temperature . In the first days after hatching , they live on their remaining embryonic yolk supply and are not able to swim , but attach to plants or the egg capsule with two balancers , adhesive organs on their head . After this period , they begin to ingest small invertebrates , and actively forage about ten days after hatching . As in all salamanders and newts , forelimbs — already present as stumps at hatching — develop first , followed later by the <unk> . Unlike smaller newts , Triturus larvae are mostly nektonic , swimming freely in the water column . Just before the transition to land , the larvae resorb their external gills ; they can at this stage reach a size of 7 centimetres ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) in the larger species . Metamorphosis takes place two to four months after hatching , but the duration of all stages of larval development varies with temperature . Survival of larvae from hatching to metamorphosis has been estimated at a mean of roughly 4 % for the northern crested newt , which is comparable to other newts . In unfavourable conditions , larvae may delay their development and overwinter in water , although this seems to be less common than in the small @-@ bodied newts . <unk> adults , retaining their gills and staying aquatic , have occasionally been observed in several crested newt species . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 Crested and marbled newts are found in Eurasia , from Great Britain and the Iberian Peninsula in the west to West Siberia and the southern Caspian Sea region in the east , and reach north to central Fennoscandia . Overall , the species have contiguous , parapatric ranges ; only the northern crested newt and the marbled newt occur sympatrically in western France , and the southern crested newt has a disjunct , allopatric distribution in Crimea , the Caucasus , and south of the Caspian Sea . 
 The northern crested newt is the most widespread species , while the others are confined to smaller regions , e.g. the southwestern Iberian Peninsula in the southern marbled newt , and the Danube basin and some of its tributaries in the Danube crested newt . The Italian crested newt ( T. carnifex ) has been introduced outside its native range in some European countries and the Azores . In the northern Balkans , four species of crested newt occur in close vicinity , and may sometimes even co @-@ exist . 
 Triturus species usually live at low elevation ; the Danube crested newt for example is confined to lowlands up to 300 m ( 980 ft ) above sea level . However , they do occur at higher altitudes towards the south of their range : the Italian crested newt is found up to 1 @,@ 800 m ( 5 @,@ 900 ft ) in the Apennine Mountains , the southern crested newt up to 2 @,@ 000 m ( 6 @,@ 600 ft ) in the southern <unk> , and the marbled newt up to around 2 @,@ 100 m ( 6 @,@ 900 ft ) in central Spain . 
 = = Evolution = = 
 Molecular phylogenetic data helped clarify relationships within the genus Triturus . A 2011 phylogeny based on complete mitochondrial DNA resolved all divergences with high statistical support . The crested and the marbled newts are sister groups , and within the crested newts , the Balkan – Asian group with T. <unk> , T. <unk> and T. <unk> is sister to the remaining species , results consistent with other studies . The mitochondrial analysis also supports the northern ( T. cristatus ) and the Danube crested newt ( T. dobrogicus ) , as well as the Italian ( T. carnifex ) and the Macedonian crested newt ( T. <unk> ) , respectively , as sister species , but analysis of nuclear DNA gave some conflicting results regarding those divergences . 
 A 24 @-@ million @-@ year @-@ old fossil belonging to Triturus , perhaps a marbled newt , shows that the genus already existed at that time and contradicts the earlier estimate of 8 @.@ 3 million years ago ( mya ) for the split between the crested and marbled newts and their sister genus , the European brook newts ( <unk> ) . An age calibration study based on this and other fossils places that divergence much earlier , at around 39 mya in the Eocene , with an uncertainty range of 47 to 34 mya . Based on this estimation , authors have investigated diversification within the genus and related it to <unk> : The crested and marbled newts split between 30 and 24 mya , and the two species of marbled newts have been separated for 4 @.@ 7 – 6 @.@ 8 million years . 
 The crested newts are believed to have originated in the Balkans and radiated in a brief time interval between 11 @.@ 5 and 8 mya : First , the Balkan – Asian group ( the Anatolian , Balkan and southern crested newt ) branched off from the other crested newts , probably in a vicariance event caused by the separation of the Balkan and Anatolian land masses . The origin of current @-@ day species is not fully understood so far , but one hypothesis suggests that ecological differences , notably in the adaptation to an aquatic lifestyle , may have evolved between populations and led to parapatric speciation . Alternatively , the complex geological history of the Balkan peninsula may have further separated populations there , with subsequent allopatric speciation and the spread of species into their current ranges . 
 = = = Glacial refugia and recolonisation = = = 
 At the onset of the Quaternary glacial cycles , around 2 @.@ 6 mya , the extant Triturus species had already emerged . They were thus affected by the cycles of expansion and retreat of cold , inhospitable regions , which shaped their distribution . A study using environmental niche modelling and phylogeography showed that during the Last Glacial Maximum , around 21 @,@ 000 years ago , crested and marbled newts likely survived in warmer refugia mainly in southern Europe . From there , they recolonised the northern parts after glacial retreat . The study also showed that species range boundaries shifted , with some species replacing others during recolonisation , for example the southern marbled newt which expanded northwards and replaced the marbled newt . Today 's most widespread species , the northern crested newt , was likely confined to a small <unk> region in the Carpathian Basin during the last glaciation , and from there expanded its range north- , east- and westwards when the climate <unk> . 
 = = = Hybridisation and introgression = = = 
 The northern crested newt and the marbled newt are the only species in the genus with a considerable range overlap ( in western France ) . In that area , they have patchy , mosaic @-@ like distributions and in general prefer different habitats . When they do occur in the same breeding ponds , they can form hybrids , which have intermediate characteristics . Individuals resulting from the cross of a crested newt male with a marbled newt female had mistakenly been described as distinct species Triton blasii de l 'Isle 1862 , and the reverse hybrids as Triton <unk> <unk> 1886 . The first type is much rarer due to increased mortality of the larvae and consists only of males , while in the second , males have lower survival rates than females . Overall , viability is reduced in these hybrids and they rarely backcross with their parent species . Hybrids made up 3 – 7 % of the adult populations in different studies . 
 Other Triturus species only meet at narrow zones on their range borders . Hybridisation does occur in several of these contact zones , as shown by genetic data and intermediate forms , but is rare , supporting overall reproductive isolation . <unk> and introgression do however occur as shown by mitochondrial DNA analysis . In a case study in the Netherlands , genes of the introduced Italian crested newt were found to <unk> into the gene pool of the native northern crested newt . The two marbled newt species can be found in proximity in a narrow area in central Portugal and Spain , but they usually breed in separate ponds , and individuals in that area could be clearly identified as one of the two species . Nevertheless , there is introgression , occurring in both directions at some parts of the contact zone , and only in the direction of the southern marbled newt where that species had historically replaced the marbled newt ( see also above , Glacial refugia and recolonisation ) . 
 = = Threats and conservation = = 
 Most of the crested and marbled newts are listed as species of " least concern " by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature , but population declines have been registered in all assessed species . The Danube crested newt and the southern marbled newt are considered " near threatened " because populations have declined significantly . Populations have been affected more heavily in some countries and species are listed in some national red lists . The Anatolian , Balkan and the Macedonian crested newt , recognised only recently , have not yet been evaluated separately for conservation status . 
 = = = Reasons for decline = = = 
 The major threat for crested and marbled newts is habitat loss . This concerns especially breeding sites , which are lost through the upscaling and intensification of agriculture , drainage , urban sprawl , and artificial flooding regimes ( affecting in particular the Danube crested newt ) . Especially in the southern ranges , exploitation of groundwater and decreasing spring rain , possibly caused by global warming , threaten breeding ponds . Aquatic habitats are also degraded through pollution with agricultural pesticides and fertiliser . Introduction of crayfish and predatory fish threatens larval development ; the Chinese sleeper has been a major concern in Eastern Europe . Exotic plants can also degrade habitats : the swamp stonecrop replaces natural vegetation and overshadows waterbodies in the United Kingdom , and its hard leaves are unsuitable for egg @-@ laying to crested newts . 
 Land habitats , equally important for newt populations , are lost through the replacement of natural forests by plantations or clear @-@ cutting ( especially in the northern range ) , and the conversion of structure @-@ rich landscapes into uniform farmland . Their limited dispersal makes the newts especially vulnerable to fragmentation , i.e. the loss of connections for exchange between suitable habitats . High concentrations of road salt have been found to be lethal to crested newts . 
 Other threats include illegal collection for pet trade , which concerns mainly the southern crested newt , and the northern crested newt in its eastern range . The possibility of hybridisation , especially in the crested newts , means that native species can be genetically polluted through the introduction of close species , as it is the case with the Italian crested newt introduced in the range of the northern crested newt . Warmer and wetter winters due to global warming may increase newt mortality by disturbing their hibernation and forcing them to expend more energy . Finally , the genus is potentially susceptible to the highly pathogenic fungus Batrachochytrium <unk> , introduced to Europe from Asia . 
 = = = Conservation measures = = = 
 The crested newts are listed in Berne Convention Appendix II as " strictly protected " , and the marbled newts in Appendix III as " protected " . They are also included in Annex II ( species requiring designation of special areas of conservation ; crested newts ) and IV ( species in need of strict protection ; all species ) of the EU habitats and species directive . As required by these frameworks , their capture , disturbance , killing or trade , as well as the destruction of their habitats , are prohibited in most European countries . The EU habitats directive is also the basis for the Natura 2000 protected areas , several of which have been designated for the crested newts . 
 Habitat protection and management is seen as the most important element for the conservation of Triturus newts . This includes preservation of natural water bodies , reduction of fertiliser and pesticide use , control or eradication of introduced predatory fish , and the connection of habitats through sufficiently wide corridors of uncultivated land . A network of aquatic habitats in proximity is important to sustain populations , and the creation of new breeding ponds is in general very effective as they are rapidly colonised when other habitats are nearby . In some cases , entire populations have been moved when threatened by development projects , but such translocations need to be carefully planned to be successful . Strict protection of the northern crested newt in the United Kingdom has created conflicts with local development projects ; at the same time , the charismatic crested newts are seen as flagship species , whose conservation also benefits a range of other amphibians . 
 = Catch Me If You Can = 
 Catch Me If You Can is a 2002 American biographical crime film , based on the life of Frank Abagnale , who , before his 19th birthday , successfully performed cons worth millions of dollars by posing as a Pan American World Airways pilot , a Georgia doctor , and a Louisiana parish prosecutor . His primary crime was check fraud ; he became so experienced that the FBI eventually turned to him for help in catching other check forgers . The film was directed by Steven Spielberg and stars Leonardo DiCaprio and Tom Hanks , with Christopher Walken , Martin Sheen , Nathalie Baye and Amy Adams in supporting roles . 
 Development for the film started in 1980 but did not progress until 1997 when the film rights to Abagnale 's book were sold to Spielberg 's DreamWorks . David Fincher , Gore Verbinski , Lasse Hallström , Miloš Forman , and Cameron Crowe had all been possible candidates for director before Spielberg decided to direct . Filming took place from February to May 2002 . The film was a financial and critical success , and the real Abagnale reacted positively to it . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 1963 , teen @-@ aged Frank Abagnale ( Leonardo DiCaprio ) lives in New Rochelle , New York with his father Frank Abagnale , Sr. ( Christopher Walken ) , and French mother Paula ( Nathalie Baye ) . When Frank Sr. is denied a business loan at Chase Manhattan Bank due to unknown difficulties with the IRS , the family is forced to move from their large home to a small apartment . Paula carries on an affair with Jack ( James Brolin ) , a friend of her husband . Meanwhile , Frank poses as a substitute teacher in his French class . Frank 's parents file for divorce , and Frank runs away . When he runs out of money , he begins relying on confidence scams to get by . Soon , Frank 's cons increase and he even impersonates an airline pilot . He forges Pan Am payroll checks and succeeds in stealing over $ 2 @.@ 8 million . 
 Meanwhile , Carl Hanratty ( Tom Hanks ) , an FBI bank fraud agent , begins tracking Frank . Carl and Frank meet at a hotel , where Frank convinces Carl his name is Barry Allen of the Secret Service , and that he was also after the fraud . Frank leaves , Carl angrily realizing a minute too late that he has been fooled . Later , at Christmas , Carl is still at work when Frank calls him , attempting to apologize for duping Carl . Carl rejects his apology and tells him he will soon be caught , but laughs when he realizes Frank actually called him because he has no one else to talk to . Frank hangs up , and Carl continues to investigate , suddenly realizing ( thanks to a waiter ) that the name " Barry Allen " is from the Flash comic books and that Frank is actually a teenager . 
 Frank , meanwhile , has expanded his con to include the identities of a doctor and lawyer . While playing Dr. Frank Conners , he falls in love with Brenda ( Amy Adams ) . While asking her father 's permission to marry her , he admits the truth about himself and asks for help with the Louisiana State Bar exam . Carl tracks him to his engagement party and Frank is able to sneak out a bedroom window minutes before Carl bursts in . Before leaving , Frank makes Brenda promise to meet him in Miami two days later so they can elope . Frank sees her waiting for him two days later , but also notices plainclothes agents waiting to arrest him , realizing he has been set up and escapes on a flight to Europe . 
 Seven months later , Carl shows his boss that Frank has been forging checks all over western Europe and asks permission to go to Europe to look for him . When his boss refuses , Carl brings Frank 's checks to printing professionals who claim that the checks were printed in France . From an interview with Frank 's mother , Carl remembers that she was actually born in Montrichard , France . He goes there and locates Frank , and tells him that the French police will kill him if he does not go with Carl quietly . Frank assumes he is lying at first , but Carl promises Frank he would never lie to him , and Carl takes him outside , where the French police escort him to prison . 
 The scene then flashes forward to a plane returning Frank home from prison , where Carl informs him that his father has died . Grief @-@ stricken , Frank escapes from the plane and goes back to his old house , where he finds his mother with the man she left his father for , as well as a girl who Frank realizes is his half @-@ sister . Frank gives himself up and is sentenced to 12 years in prison , getting visits from time to time from Carl . When Frank points out how one of the checks Carl is carrying as evidence is fake , Carl convinces the FBI to offer Frank a deal by which he can live out the remainder of his sentence working for the bank fraud department of the FBI , which Frank accepts . While working at the FBI , Frank misses the thrill of the chase and even attempts to fly as an airline pilot again . He is cornered by Carl , who insists that Frank will return to the FBI job since no one is chasing him . On the following Monday , Carl is nervous that Frank has not yet arrived at work . However , Frank eventually arrives and they discuss their next case . 
 The ending credits reveal that Frank has been happily married for 26 years , has three sons , lives in the Midwest , is still good friends with Carl , has caught some of the world 's most elusive money forgers , and earns millions of dollars each year because of his work creating <unk> checks . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Leonardo DiCaprio as Frank Abagnale , Jr . Before his 19th birthday , Frank successfully conned millions of dollars ’ worth of checks as a Pan Am pilot , doctor , and Louisiana parish prosecutor . 
 Tom Hanks as Carl Hanratty , an FBI agent who pursues Frank for most of the film . Hanratty is often teased by other agents who take check fraud as a joke . Hanratty is divorced , and his daughter and ex @-@ wife live in Chicago . In the end , Carl and Frank become great friends . 
 Christopher Walken as Frank Abagnale , Sr. , Frank 's father , and a World War II veteran . Frank , Sr. loses his wife Paula and most of his wealth after he committed tax evasion . Frank , Sr. dies after falling down a staircase in a train station . 
 Nathalie Baye as Paula Abagnale . Frank , Sr. meets her when she is 18 years old in Montrichard , France during World War II . Five weeks later , the couple marries . They divorce when Frank Jr. is 16 , leaving Paula to marry Jack Barnes , with whom she has a daughter . 
 Amy Adams as Brenda Strong . Before becoming a nurse , Brenda had an abortion . Her strict Lutheran parents disown her , until they meet Frank , Jr . 
 Martin Sheen as Roger Strong , Brenda 's father , and Carol 's husband . Roger is a well @-@ recognized district attorney in Louisiana and is not easily convinced that Frank , Jr. graduated from law school . 
 James Brolin as Jack Barnes , an associate of Frank , Sr. at the New Rochelle , New York Rotary Club . Barnes later carries on an affair with Paula , leading to the divorce of Frank Jr . ' s parents . 
 Nancy <unk> as Carol Strong , Brenda 's mother and Roger 's wife . When thinking that Frank , Jr. is a doctor , lawyer and Lutheran , she is highly ecstatic for her daughter 's marriage . 
 Brian Howe , Frank John Hughes and Chris Ellis portray FBI agents . Jennifer Garner cameos as a call girl . Ellen Pompeo , Elizabeth Banks , and Kaitlin Doubleday have small roles . The real Frank Abagnale appears in a cameo as a French police officer arresting his character . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Frank Abagnale sold the film rights to his autobiography in 1980 . Executive Producer Michel Shane purchased the film rights in 1990 , for Paramount Pictures . By December 1997 , Barry Kemp purchased the film rights from Shane , bringing the project to DreamWorks , with Jeff Nathanson writing the script . By April 2000 , David Fincher was attached to direct over the course of a few months , but dropped out in favor of Panic Room . In July 2000 , Leonardo DiCaprio had entered discussions to star , with Gore Verbinski to direct . Steven Spielberg signed on as producer , and filming was set to begin in March 2001 . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Verbinski cast James Gandolfini as Carl Hanratty , Ed Harris as Frank Abagnale , Sr. , and Chloë Sevigny as Brenda Strong . Verbinski dropped out because of DiCaprio 's commitment on Gangs of New York . Lasse Hallström was in negotiations to direct by May 2001 , but dropped out in July 2001 . At this stage Harris and Sevigny left the film , but Gandolfini was still attached . Spielberg , co @-@ founder of DreamWorks , offered the job of director to Miloš Forman , and considered hiring Cameron Crowe . During this negotiation period , Spielberg began to consider directing the film himself , eventually dropping projects such as Big Fish and Memoirs of a Geisha . Spielberg officially committed to directing in August 2001 . 
 The search for Strong 's portrayer lasted months but Amy Adams was eventually cast . Spielberg " loved " her tape and producer Walter F. Parkes commented that she was " as fresh and honest as anyone we ’ d seen , " which was an important element in the role . Christopher Walken was cast as Frank Abagnale , Sr. following Parkes ’ suggestion . Martin Sheen played Roger Strong as he had " intimidating presence " . Spielberg wanted a French actress to portray Paula Abagnale to stay true to the facts . He asked for the help of Brian De Palma , who was living in Paris and he did tests with several actresses such as Nathalie Baye . Spielberg had seen Jennifer Garner on Alias and wanted her to play a small role in the film due to her busy schedule . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The original start date was January 2002 , but was pushed to February 7 in Los Angeles , California . Other locations included Burbank , Downey , New York , LA / Ontario International Airport ( which doubled for Miami International Airport ) , Quebec City and Montreal . The film was shot in 147 different locations in only 52 days . DiCaprio reflected , " Scenes that we thought would take three days took an afternoon " . Filming ran from April 25 – 30 in Park Avenue , just outside the Waldorf @-@ Astoria Hotel . Production moved to Orange , New Jersey and returned to Brooklyn for bank and courthouse scenes . Shooting also took place at the TWA Flight Center at John F. Kennedy International Airport . Quebec City was chosen for its European character and French feel . Place Royale , within Old Quebec , stands for Montrichard — the church in the background of the arrest scene is Notre @-@ Dame @-@ des @-@ Victoires . Filming ended on May 12 in Montreal . 
 = = Music = = 
 The film 's soundtrack was released on December 10 , 2002 by DreamWorks Records . The original score was composed by John Williams . 
 = = Fictions = = 
 Despite the various changes from real @-@ life events , Abagnale believed Spielberg was the only filmmaker who " could do this film justice " . However , Abagnale had little involvement with the film . In November 2001 , he had " never met nor spoken to Steven Spielberg and I have not read the script . I prefer not to . I understand that they now portray my father in a better light , as he really was . Steven Spielberg has told the screenplay writer ( Jeff Nathanson ) that he wants complete accuracy in the relationships and actual scams that I perpetrated " , Abagnale reported . " I hope in the end the movie will be entertaining , exciting , funny and bring home an important message about family , childhood and divorce " . 
 The real Abagnale never saw his father again after he ran away from home . Spielberg " wanted to continue to have that connection where Frank kept trying to please his father ; by making him proud of him ; by seeing him in the uniform , the Pan @-@ American uniform " . However , Abagnale praised the idea . " Even though I didn 't see my dad again , every night after living a brilliant day and meeting many women , and making much money , I 'd come back alone to a hotel room and I would just think of my mom and dad and fantasize about getting them back together again , and cry . It 's the justification of a fantasy . " Carl Hanratty ( portrayed by Tom Hanks ) is based on FBI agent Joseph Shea . In the shooting script the character was referred to as Joseph Shea , but was changed to Carl Hanratty for unknown reasons . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Catch Me if You Can deals with themes of broken homes and troubled childhoods . Spielberg 's parents divorced when he was a teenager , similar to Frank Abagnale 's situation . In the film , Carl Hanratty is also divorced from his wife , who lives with their daughter in Chicago . " Some of my films have had to do with broken homes and people on the run from their sad pasts " , Spielberg stated . " But there are those strands that got me to say : you know , there 's something also about me that I can say through the telling of this kind of lighthearted story " . 
 Spielberg also wanted to create a film that sympathized with a crook . He explained , " Frank was a 21st century genius working within the innocence of the mid ' 60s , when people were more trusting than they are now . I don 't think this is the kind of movie where somebody could say , ' I have a career plan . ' " 
 = = Release = = 
 Game Show Network aired the 1977 episode of the television game show To Tell the Truth that featured Frank Abagnale . Segments were shown on December 29 , 2002 and January 1 , 2003 as promotion . The marketing department was careful to market the film as " inspired by a true story " in order to avoid controversy similar to that surrounding A Beautiful Mind ( 2001 ) and The Hurricane ( 1999 ) , both of which deviated from history . The premiere took place at Westwood , Los Angeles , California on December 18 , 2002 . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Catch Me If You Can was released on December 25 , 2002 , earning slightly above $ 30 million in 3 @,@ 225 theaters during its opening weekend . The film went on to gross $ 164 @.@ 6 million in North America and $ 187 @.@ 5 million in foreign countries , coming at a worldwide total of $ 352 @.@ 1 million . The film was a financial success , recouping the $ 52 million budget six times over . Catch Me If You Can was the eleventh highest grossing film of 2002 . Minority Report ( also directed by Spielberg ) was tenth highest . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 On Rotten Tomatoes , the film has a rating of 96 % , based on 195 reviews , with the site 's critical consensus reading , " With help from a strong performance by Leonardo DiCaprio as real @-@ life wunderkind con artist Frank Abagnale , Steven Spielberg crafts a film that 's stylish , breezily entertaining , and surprisingly sweet . " On Metacritic the film has a score of 76 out of 100 , based on 38 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " . 
 Roger Ebert heavily praised DiCaprio 's performance , and concluded " This is not a major Spielberg film , although it is an effortlessly watchable one " . Mick LaSalle said it was " not Spielberg 's best movie , but one of his smoothest and maybe his friendliest . The colorful cinematography , smart performances and brisk tempo suggest a filmmaker subordinating every other impulse to the task of manufacturing pleasure . " Stephen Hunter believed DiCaprio shows " the range and ease and cleverness that Martin Scorsese so underutilized in Gangs of New York " . 
 James Berardinelli observed , " Catch Me if You Can never takes itself or its subjects too seriously , and contains more genuinely funny material than about 90 % of the so @-@ called ' comedies ' found in multiplexes these days " . In addition Berardinelli praised John Williams ' film score , which he felt was " more intimate and jazzy than his usual material , evoking ( intentionally ) Henry Mancini " . Peter Travers was one of few who gave the film a negative review . Travers considered Catch Me if You Can to be " bogged down over 140 minutes . A film that took off like a hare on speed ends like a winded tortoise . " 
 At the 75th Academy Awards , Christopher Walken and John Williams were nominated for Best Supporting Actor and Best Original Score . Walken won the same category at the 56th British Academy Film Awards , while Williams , costume designer Mary <unk> and screenwriter Jeff Nathanson received nominations . DiCaprio was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor in a Motion Picture – Drama . Williams also earned a Grammy Award nomination . Elements of the film were later parodied in The Simpsons episode " Catch ' Em If You Can " . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Catch Me If You Can was released on DVD on May 6 , 2003 and on Blu @-@ ray on December 4 , 2012 . 
 = = Musical adaptation = = 
 A musical adaptation of the same name premiered at the 5th Avenue Theatre in Seattle , Washington in July 2009 , starring Aaron <unk> and Norbert Leo Butz . It began previews on Broadway at the Neil Simon Theatre on March 11 , 2011 and officially opened April 10 , 2011 . The musical was nominated for four Tony Awards , including Best Musical . 
 = Kenesaw Mountain Landis = 
 Kenesaw Mountain Landis ( / <unk> <unk> <unk> / ; November 20 , 1866 – November 25 , 1944 ) was an American jurist who served as a federal judge from 1905 to 1922 and as the first Commissioner of Baseball from 1920 until his death . He is remembered for his handling of the Black Sox scandal , in which he expelled eight members of the Chicago White Sox from organized baseball for conspiring to lose the 1919 World Series and repeatedly refused their reinstatement requests . His firm actions and iron rule over baseball in the near quarter @-@ century of his commissionership are generally credited with restoring public confidence in the game . 
 Landis was born in Millville , Ohio in 1866 , his name a spelling variation on the Battle of Kennesaw Mountain in the American Civil War , where his father was wounded in 1864 . Landis spent much of his youth in Indiana ; he left school at fifteen and worked in a series of positions in that state . His involvement in politics led to a civil service job . At age 21 , Landis applied to become a lawyer — there were then no educational or examination requirements for the Indiana bar . Following a year of unprofitable practice , he went to law school . After his graduation , he opened an office in Chicago , but left it when Walter Q. Gresham , the new United States Secretary of State , named him his personal secretary in 1893 . After Gresham 's death in 1895 , Landis refused an offer of an ambassadorship , and returned to Chicago to practice law and marry . 
 President Theodore Roosevelt appointed Landis a federal judge in 1905 . Landis received national attention in 1907 when he fined Standard Oil of Indiana more than $ 29 million for violating federal laws forbidding rebates on railroad freight tariffs . Though Landis was reversed on appeal , he was seen as a judge determined to rein in big business . During and after World War I , Landis , an ardent patriot , presided over several high @-@ profile trials of draft resisters and others whom he saw as opposing the war effort . He imposed heavy sentences on those who were convicted ; some of the convictions were reversed on appeal , and other sentences were commuted . 
 In 1920 , Judge Landis was a leading candidate when American League and National League team owners , embarrassed by the Black Sox scandal and other instances of players throwing games , sought someone to rule over baseball . Landis was given full power to act in the sport 's best interest , and used that power extensively over the next quarter @-@ century . Landis was widely praised for cleaning up the game , although some of his decisions in the Black Sox matter remain controversial : supporters of " Shoeless Joe " Jackson and Buck Weaver contend that he was overly harsh with those players . Others blame Landis for , in their view , delaying the racial integration of baseball . Landis was elected to the National Baseball Hall of Fame by a special vote shortly after he died in 1944 . 
 = = Early life and pre @-@ judicial career ( 1866 – 1905 ) = = 
 = = = Boyhood and early career ( 1866 – 1893 ) = = = 
 Kenesaw Mountain Landis was born in Millville , Ohio , the sixth child and fourth son of Abraham Hoch Landis , a physician , and Mary <unk> Landis , on November 20 , 1866 . The <unk> descended from Swiss Mennonites who had emigrated to Alsace before coming to the United States . Abraham Landis had been wounded fighting on the Union side at the Battle of Kennesaw Mountain in Georgia , and when his parents proved unable to agree on a name for the new baby , Mary Landis proposed that they call him Kenesaw Mountain . At the time , both spellings of " Kenesaw " were used , but in the course of time , " Kennesaw Mountain " became the accepted spelling of the battle site . 
 Abraham Landis worked in Millville as a country physician . When Kenesaw was eight , the elder Landis moved his family to Delphi , Indiana and subsequently to Logansport , Indiana where the doctor purchased and ran several local farms — his war injury had caused him to scale back his medical practice . Two of Kenesaw 's four brothers , Charles Beary Landis and Frederick Landis , became members of Congress . 
 As " Kenny " , as he was sometimes known , grew , he did an increasing share of the farm work , later stating , " I did my share — and it was a substantial share — in taking care of the 13 acres ... I do not remember that I particularly liked to get up at 3 : 30 in the morning . " Kenesaw began his off @-@ farm career at age ten as a news delivery boy . He left school at 15 after an unsuccessful attempt to master algebra ; he then worked at the local general store . He left that job for a position as errand boy with the Vandalia Railroad . Landis applied for a job as a brakeman , but was laughingly dismissed as too small . He then worked for the Logansport Journal , and taught himself shorthand reporting , becoming in 1883 official court reporter for the Cass County Circuit Court . Landis later wrote , " I may not have been much of a judge , nor baseball official , but I do pride myself on having been a real shorthand reporter . " He served in that capacity until 1886 . In his spare time , he became a prize @-@ winning bicycle racer and played on and managed a baseball team . Offered a professional contract as a ballplayer , he turned it down , stating that he preferred to play for the love of the game . 
 In 1886 , Landis first ventured into Republican Party politics , supporting a friend , Charles F. Griffin , for Indiana Secretary of State . Griffin won , and Landis was rewarded with a civil service job in the Indiana Department of State . While employed there , he applied to be an attorney . At that time , in Indiana , an applicant needed only to prove that he was 21 and of good moral character , and Landis was admitted . Landis opened a practice in Marion , Indiana but attracted few clients in his year of work there . Realizing that an uneducated lawyer was unlikely to build a lucrative practice , Landis enrolled at Cincinnati 's YMCA Law School ( now part of the University of Cincinnati ) in 1889 . Landis transferred to Union Law School ( now part of Northwestern University ) the following year , and in 1891 , he took his law degree from Union and was admitted to the Illinois Bar . He began a practice in Chicago , served as an assistant instructor at Union and with fellow attorney Clarence Darrow helped found the nonpartisan Chicago Civic Centre Club , devoted to municipal reform . Landis practiced with college friend Frank O. Lowden ; the future commissioner and his law partner went into debt to impress potential clients , buying a law library secondhand . 
 = = = Washington years and aftermath ( 1893 – 1905 ) = = = 
 In March 1893 , President Grover Cleveland appointed federal judge Walter Q. Gresham as his Secretary of State , and Gresham hired Landis as his personal secretary . Gresham had a long career as a political appointee in the latter part of the 19th century ; though he lost his only two bids for elective office , he served in three Cabinet positions and was twice a dark horse candidate for the Republican presidential nomination . Although Gresham was a Republican , he had supported Cleveland ( a Democrat ) in the 1892 election because of his intense dislike for the Republican nominee , President Benjamin Harrison . Kenesaw Landis had appeared before Judge Gresham in court . According to Landis biographer J.G. Taylor Spink , Gresham thought Landis " had something on the ball " and believed that Landis 's shorthand skills would be of use . 
 In Washington , Landis worked hard to protect Gresham 's interests in the State Department , making friends with many members of the press . He was less popular among many of the Department 's senior career officials , who saw him as brash . When word leaked concerning President Cleveland 's Hawaiian policy , the President was convinced Landis was the source of the information and demanded his dismissal . Gresham defended Landis , stating that Cleveland would have to fire both of them , and the President relented , later finding out that he was mistaken in accusing Landis . President Cleveland grew to like Landis , and when Gresham died in 1895 , offered Landis the post of United States Ambassador to Venezuela . Landis declined the diplomatic post , preferring to return to Chicago to begin a law practice and to marry Winifred Reed , daughter of the Ottawa , Illinois postmaster . The two married July 25 , 1895 ; they had two surviving children , a boy , Reed , and a girl , Susanne — a third child , Winifred , died almost immediately after being born . 
 Landis built a corporate law practice in Chicago ; with the practice doing well , he deeply involved himself in Republican Party politics . He built a close association with his friend Lowden and served as his campaign manager for governor of Illinois in 1904 . Lowden was defeated , but would later serve two terms in the office and be a major contender for the 1920 Republican presidential nomination . A seat on the United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois was vacant ; President Theodore Roosevelt offered it to Lowden , who declined it and recommended Landis . Other recommendations from Illinois politicians followed , and Roosevelt nominated Landis for the seat . According to Spink , President Roosevelt wanted " a tough judge and a man sympathetic with his viewpoint in that important court " ; Lowden and Landis were , like Roosevelt , on the progressive left of the Republican Party . On March 18 , 1905 , Roosevelt transmitted the nomination to the Senate , which confirmed Landis the same afternoon , without any committee hearing . 
 = = Judge ( 1905 – 1922 ) = = 
 Landis 's courtroom , room 627 in the Chicago Federal Building , was ornate and featured two murals ; one of King John conceding Magna Carta , the other of Moses about to smash the tablets of the Ten Commandments . The mahogany and marble chamber was , according to Landis biographer David Pietrusza , " just the spot for Landis 's sense of the theatrical . In it he would hold court for nearly the next decade and a half . " According to Spink , " It wasn 't long before Chicago writers discovered they had a ' character ' on the bench . " A. L. Sloan of the Chicago Herald @-@ American , a friend of Landis , recalled : 
 The Judge was always headline news . He was a great showman , theatrical in appearance , with his sharp jaw and shock of white hair , and people always crowded into his courtroom , knowing there would be something going on . There were few dull moments . 
 If Judge Landis was suspicious of an attorney 's line of questioning , he would begin to wrinkle his nose , and once told a witness , " Now let 's stop fooling around and tell exactly what did happen , without reciting your life 's history . " When an elderly defendant told him that he would not be able to live to complete a five @-@ year sentence , Landis <unk> at him and asked , " Well , you can try , can 't you ? " When a young man stood before him for sentencing after admitting to stealing jewels from a parcel , the defendant 's wife stood near him , infant daughter in her arms , and Landis mused what to do about the situation . After a dramatic pause , Landis ordered the young man to take his wife and daughter and go home with them , expressing his unwillingness to have the girl be the daughter of a convict . According to sportswriter Ed Fitzgerald in SPORT magazine , " [ w ] omen wept unashamed and the entire courtroom burst into spontaneous , prolonged applause . " 
 Landis had been a lawyer with a corporate practice ; upon his elevation to the bench , corporate litigants expected him to favor them . According to a 1907 magazine article about Landis , " Corporations smiled pleasantly at the thought of a corporation lawyer being on the bench . They smile no more . " In an early case , Landis fined the Allis @-@ Chalmers Manufacturing Company the maximum $ 4 @,@ 000 for illegally importing workers , even though Winifred Landis 's sister 's husband served on the corporate board . In another decision , Landis struck down a challenge to the Interstate Commerce Commission 's ( ICC ) jurisdiction over rebating , a practice banned by the Elkins Act of 1903 in which railroads and favored customers agreed that the customers would pay less than the posted tariff , which by law was to be the same for all shippers . Landis 's decision allowed the ICC to take action against railroads which gave rebates . 
 = = = Standard Oil ( 1905 – 1909 ) = = = 
 By the first decade of the 20th century , a number of business entities had formed themselves into trusts , which dominated their industries . Trusts often sought to purchase or otherwise neutralize their competitors , allowing the conglomerates to raise prices to high levels . In 1890 , Congress had passed the Sherman Anti @-@ Trust Act , but it was not until the Theodore Roosevelt administration ( 1901 – 1909 ) that serious efforts were made to break up or control the trusts . The dominant force in the oil industry was Standard Oil , controlled by John D. Rockefeller . Modern @-@ day Exxon , Mobil , Atlantic Richfield , Chevron , <unk> , Amoco and Continental Oil all trace their ancestry to various parts of Standard Oil . 
 In March 1906 , Commissioner of Corporations James Rudolph Garfield submitted a report to President Roosevelt , alleging large @-@ scale rebating in Standard Oil shipments . Federal prosecutors in several states and territories sought indictments against components of the Standard Oil Trust . On June 28 , 1906 , Standard Oil of Indiana was indicted on 6 @,@ 428 counts of violation of the Elkins Act for accepting rebates on shipments on the Chicago & Alton Railroad . The case was assigned to Landis . 
 Trial on the 1 @,@ 903 counts that survived pretrial motions began on March 4 , 1907 . The fact that rebates had been given was not contested ; what was at issue was whether Standard Oil knew the railroad 's posted rates , and if it had a duty to enquire if it did not . Landis charged the jury that it " was the duty of the defendant diligently in good faith to get from the Chicago & Alton ... the lawful rate " . The jury found Standard Oil guilty on all 1 @,@ 903 counts . 
 The maximum fine that Landis could impose was $ 29 @,@ 240 @,@ 000 . To aid the judge in determining the sentence , Landis issued a subpoena for Rockefeller to testify as to Standard Oil 's assets . The tycoon had often evaded subpoenas , not having testified in court since 1888 . Deputy United States marshals visited Rockefeller 's several homes , as well as the estates of his friends , in the hope of finding him . After several days , Rockefeller was found at his lawyer 's estate , Taconic Farm in northwestern Massachusetts , and was served with the subpoena . The tycoon duly came to Landis 's Chicago courtroom , making his way through a mob anxious to see the proceedings . Rockefeller 's actual testimony , proffered after the judge made him wait through several cases and witnesses , proved to be anticlimactic , as he professed almost no knowledge of Standard Oil 's corporate structure or assets . 
 On August 3 , 1907 , Landis pronounced sentence . He fined Standard Oil the maximum penalty , $ 29 @,@ 240 @,@ 000 , the largest fine imposed on a corporation to that point . The corporation quickly appealed ; in the meantime , Landis was lionized as a hero . According to Pietrusza , " much of the nation could hardly believe a federal judge had finally cracked down on a trust — and cracked down hard " . President Roosevelt , when he heard the sentence , reportedly stated , " That 's bully . " Rockefeller was playing golf in Cleveland when he was brought a telegram containing the news . Rockefeller calmly informed his golfing partners of the amount of the fine , and proceeded to shoot a personal record score , later stating , " Judge Landis will be dead a long time before this fine is paid . " He proved correct ; the verdict and sentence were reversed by the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit on July 22 , 1908 . In January 1909 , the Supreme Court refused to hear the case , and in a new trial before another judge ( Landis recused himself ) , Standard Oil was acquitted . 
 = = = Federal League and Baby <unk> cases ( 1909 – 1917 ) = = = 
 A lifelong baseball fan , Landis often slipped away from the courthouse for a White Sox or Cubs game . In 1914 , the two existing major leagues were challenged by a new league , the Federal League . In 1915 , the upstart league brought suit against the existing leagues and owners under the Sherman Act and the case was assigned to Landis . Baseball owners feared that the reserve clause , which forced players to sign new contracts only with their former team , and the 10 @-@ day clause , which allowed teams ( but not players ) to terminate player contracts on ten days notice , would be struck down by Landis . 
 Landis held hearings in late January 1915 , and newspapers expected a quick decision , certainly before spring training began in March . During the hearings , Landis admonished the parties , " Both sides must understand that any blows at the thing called baseball would be regarded by this court as a blow to a national institution " . When the National League 's chief counsel , future Senator George Wharton Pepper referred to the activities of baseball players on the field as " labor " , Landis interrupted him : " As a result of 30 years of observation , I am shocked because you call playing baseball ' labor . ' " Landis reserved judgment , and the parties waited for his ruling . Spring training passed , as did the entire regular season and the World Series . In December 1915 , still with no word from Landis , the parties reached a settlement , and the Federal League disbanded . Landis made no public statement as to the reasons for his failure to rule , though he told close friends that he had been certain the parties would reach a settlement sooner or later . Most observers thought that Landis waited because he did not want to rule against the two established leagues and their contracts . 
 In 1916 , Landis presided over the " Ryan Baby " or " Baby <unk> " case . The recent widow of a prominent Chicago banker , Anna Dollie Ledgerwood Matters , had brought a baby girl home from a visit to Canada and claimed that the child was her late husband 's posthumous heir . Matters had left an estate of $ 250 @,@ 000 . However , a shop girl from Ontario , Margaret Ryan , claimed the baby was hers , and brought a writ of habeas corpus in Landis 's court . Ryan stated that she had given birth to the girl in an Ottawa hospital , but had been told her baby had died . In the era before blood and DNA testing , Landis relied on witness testimony and awarded the child to Ryan . The case brought comparisons between Landis and King Solomon , who had judged a similar case . Landis was reversed by the Supreme Court , which held he had no jurisdiction in the matter . A Canadian court later awarded the child to Ryan . 
 Although Landis was an autocrat in the courtroom , he was less so at home . In a 1916 interview , he stated , 
 Every member of this family does exactly what he or she wants to do . Each one is his or her supreme court . Everything for the common good of the family is decided according to the wishes of the whole family . Each one knows what is right and each one can do whatever he thinks is best . It is purely democratic . 
 = = = Wartime cases ( 1917 – 1919 ) = = = 
