 In early 1917 , Landis considered leaving the bench and returning to private practice — though he greatly enjoyed being a judge , the salary of $ 7 @,@ 500 was considerably lower than what he could make as an attorney . The entry of the United States into World War I in April ended Landis 's determination to resign ; a firm supporter of the war effort , he felt he could best serve the country by remaining on the bench . Despite this decision and his age , fifty , Landis wrote to Secretary of War Newton D. Baker , asking him to take him into the service and send him to France , where the war was raging . Baker urged Landis to make speeches in support of the war instead , which he did . The judge 's son , Reed , had already served briefly in the Illinois National Guard ; when war came he became a pilot and eventually became an ace . 
 Landis 's disdain for draft dodgers and other opponents of the war was evident in July 1917 , when he presided over the trials of some 120 men , mostly foreign @-@ born Socialists , who had resisted the draft and rioted in Rockford , Illinois . According to Pietrusza , Landis " was frequently brutal in his remarks " to the defendants , interrogating them on their beliefs . Landis tried the case in Rockford , and found all guilty , sentencing all but three to a year and a day in jail , the maximum sentence . The prisoners were ordered to register for the draft after serving their sentences — except 37 , whom he ordered deported . 
 On September 5 , 1917 , federal officers raided the national headquarters , in Chicago , of the Industrial Workers of the World ( IWW , sometimes " Wobblies " ) , as well as 48 of the union 's halls across the nation . The union had opposed the war and urged members and others to refuse conscription into the armed forces . On September 28 , 166 IWW leaders , including union head Big Bill Haywood were indicted in the Northern District of Illinois ; their cases were assigned to Landis . Some 40 of the indicted men could not be found ; a few others had charges dismissed against them . Ultimately , Landis presided over a trial against 113 defendants , the largest federal criminal trial to that point . 
 The trial began on April 1 , 1918 . Landis quickly dismissed charges against a dozen defendants , including one A.C. Christ , who showed up in newly @-@ obtained Army uniform . Jury selection occupied a month . Journalist John Reed attended the trial , and wrote of his impressions of Landis : 
 Small on the huge bench sits a wasted man with untidy white hair , an emaciated face in which two burning eyes are set like jewels , parchment @-@ like skin split by a crack for a mouth ; the face of Andrew Jackson three years dead ... Upon this man has devolved the historic role of trying the Social Revolution . He is doing it like a gentleman . In many ways a most unusual trial . When the judge enters the court @-@ room after recess , no one rises — he himself has abolished the pompous formality . He sits without robes , in an ordinary business suit , and often leaves the bench to come down and perch on the step of the jury box . By his personal orders , <unk> are placed by the prisoners ' seats ... and as for the prisoners themselves , they are permitted to take off their coats , move around , read newspapers . It takes some human understanding for a Judge to fly in the face of judicial ritual as much as that . 
 Haywood biographer Melvyn <unk> wrote that Landis " exercised judicial objectivity and restraint for five long months " . Baseball historian Harold Seymour stated that " [ o ] n the whole , Landis conducted the trial with restraint , despite his reputation as a foe of all radical groups . " Landis dismissed charges against an elderly defendant who was in obvious pain as he testified , and allowed the release of a number of prisoners on bail or on their own recognizances . 
 On August 17 , 1918 , following the closing argument for the prosecution ( the defendants waived argument ) , Landis instructed the jury . The lead defense counsel objected to the wording of the jury charge several times , but Haywood believed it to have been fair . After 65 minutes , the jury returned with guilty verdicts for all of the remaining accused , much to their shock ; they had believed that Landis 's charge pointed towards their acquittal . When the defendants returned to court on August 29 , Landis listened with patience to the defendants ' final pleas . For the sentencing , according to Richard Cahan in his history of Chicago 's district court , " mild @-@ mannered Landis returned a changed man " . Although two defendants received only ten days in jail , all others received at least a year and a day , and Haywood and fourteen others received twenty years . A number of defendants , including Haywood , obtained bail during the appeal ; even before Haywood 's appeals were exhausted , he jumped bail and took ship for the Soviet Union . The labor leader hung a portrait of Landis in his Moscow apartment , and when Haywood died in 1928 , he was interred near John Reed ( who had died of illness in Moscow after the Bolshevik Revolution ) in the Kremlin Wall — they remain the only two Americans so honored . President Calvin Coolidge commuted the sentences of the remaining incarcerated defendants in 1923 , much to the disgust of Landis , who issued an angry statement . After leaving his judgeship , Landis referred to the defendants in the Haywood case as " scum " , " filth " , and " slimy rats " . 
 Landis hoped that the Kaiser , Wilhelm II would be captured and tried in his court ; he wanted to indict the Kaiser for the murder of a Chicagoan who lost his life on the RMS Lusitania in 1915 . The State Department notified Landis that extradition treaties did not permit the rendition of the Kaiser , who fled into exile in the Netherlands as the war concluded . Nevertheless , in a speech , Landis demanded that Kaiser Wilhelm , his six sons , and 5 @,@ 000 German military leaders " be lined up against a wall and shot down in justice to the world and to Germany " . 
 Even with the armistice in November 1918 , the war @-@ related trials continued . The Socialist Party of America , like the IWW , had opposed the war , and had also been raided by federal authorities . Seven Socialist Party leaders , including Victor Berger , who was elected to Congress in November 1918 , were indicted for alleged anti @-@ war activities . The defendants were charged under the Espionage Act of 1917 , which made it illegal " to utter , print , write , or publish any disloyal , profane , scurrilous or abusive language " about the armed forces , the flag , the Constitution , or democracy . The defendants , who were mostly of German birth or descent , moved for a change of venue away from Landis 's courtroom , alleging that Landis had stated on November 1 , 1918 that " [ i ] f anybody has said anything about the Germans that is worse than I have said , I would like to hear it so I could use it myself . " Landis , however , examined the transcript of the trial in which the statement was supposedly made , failed to find it , declared the affidavit in support of the motion " <unk> " , and denied the motion . While the jury was being selected , Berger was indicted on additional espionage charges for supposedly violating the law during an earlier , unsuccessful political campaign . At the conclusion of the case , Landis took an hour to dramatically charge the jury , emphasizing the secretive nature of conspiracies and pointing at the jury box as he noted , " the country was then at war " . At one point , Landis leapt out of his seat , twirled his chair around , then sat on its arm . Later in his charge , he lay prone upon the bench . The jury took less than a day to convict Congressman @-@ elect Berger and his four remaining codefendants . Landis sentenced each defendant to twenty years in federal prison . Landis denied the defendants bail pending appeal ; but they quickly obtained it from an appellate court judge . The Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals declined to rule on the case itself , sending it on to the Supreme Court , which on January 31 , 1921 overturned the convictions and sentences by a 6 – 3 vote , holding that Landis should have stepped aside once he was satisfied that the affidavit was legally sufficient , leaving it for another judge to decide whether it was actually true . Landis refused to comment on the Supreme Court 's decision , which ordered a new trial . In 1922 , charges against the defendants were dropped by the government . 
 = = = Building trades award , controversy , and resignation ( 1920 – 1922 ) = = = 
 The postwar period saw considerable deflation ; the shortage of labor and materials during the war had led to much higher wages and prices , and in the postwar economic readjustment , wages were cut heavily . In Chicago , employers in the building trades attempted a 20 % wage cut ; when this was rejected by the unions , a lockout followed . Both sides agreed to submit the matter to a neutral arbitrator , and settled on Landis , who agreed to take the case in June 1921 . By this time , Landis was Commissioner of Baseball , and still a federal judge . In September , Landis issued his report , cutting wages by an average of 12 @.@ 5 % . To improve productivity , he also struck restrictions on machinery which saved labor , established a standardized overtime rate , and resolved jurisdictional conflicts between unions . The labor organizations were not completely satisfied , but Landis 's reforms were adopted in many places across the country and were credited with reviving the building industry . 
 Criticism of Landis having both the judicial and baseball positions began almost as soon as his baseball appointment was announced in November 1920 . On February 2 , 1921 , lame duck Congressman Benjamin F. Welty ( Democrat @-@ Ohio ) offered a resolution calling for Landis 's impeachment . On February 11 , Attorney General A. Mitchell Palmer opined that there was no legal impediment to Landis holding both jobs . On February 14 , the House Judiciary Committee voted 24 – 1 to investigate Landis . Reed Landis later stated , " [ n ] one of the other congressmen wanted Father impeached but they did want him to come down and defend himself because they knew what a show it would be . " 
 Although Welty 's departure from office on March 4 , 1921 began a lull in criticism of Landis , in April , the judge made a controversial decision in the case of Francis J. Carey , a 19 @-@ year @-@ old bank teller , who had pleaded guilty to embezzling $ 96 @,@ 500 . Carey , the sole support of his widowed mother and unmarried sisters , gained Landis 's sympathy . He accused the bank of underpaying Carey , and sent the youth home with his mother . Two members of the Senate objected to Landis 's actions , and the New York Post compared Carey with Les Misérables 's Jean Valjean , noting " [ b ] etween a loaf of bread [ Valjean was incarcerated for stealing one ] and $ 96 @,@ 500 there is a difference . " A bill barring outside employment by federal judges had been introduced by Landis 's foes , but had expired with the end of the congressional session in March ; his opponents tried again in July , and the bill failed in the Senate on a tie vote . On September 1 , 1921 , the American Bar Association , a trade group of lawyers , passed a resolution of censure against Landis . 
 By the end of 1921 , the controversy was dying down , and Landis felt that he could resign without looking pressured . On February 18 , 1922 , he announced his resignation as judge effective March 1 , stating , " There are not enough hours in the day for all these activities " . In his final case , he fined two theatre owners for evading the federal amusement tax . One owner had refused to make restitution before sentencing ; he was fined $ 5 @,@ 000 . The owner who had tried to make his shortfall good was fined one cent . 
 = = Commissioner ( 1920 – 1944 ) = = 
 = = = Appointment = = = 
 = = = = Black Sox scandal = = = = 
 By 1919 , the influence of gamblers on baseball had been a problem for several years . Historian Paul Gardner wrote , 
 Baseball had for some time been living uneasily in the knowledge that bribes were being offered by gamblers , and that some players were accepting them . The players knew it was going on , and the owners knew it was going on . But more important , the players knew that the owners knew — and they knew the owners were doing nothing about it for fear of a scandal that might damage organized baseball . Under such conditions it quite obviously did not pay to be honest . 
 The 1919 World Series between the Chicago White Sox and Cincinnati Reds was much anticipated , as the nation attempted to return to normalcy in the postwar period . Baseball had seen a surge of popularity during the 1919 season , which set several attendance records . The powerful White Sox , with their superstar batter " Shoeless Joe " Jackson and star pitchers Eddie Cicotte and Claude " Lefty " Williams , were believed likely to defeat the less @-@ well @-@ regarded Reds . To the surprise of many , the Reds defeated the White Sox , five games to three ( during 1919 – 1921 , the World Series was a best @-@ of @-@ nine affair ) . 
 Rumors that the series was fixed began to circulate after gambling odds against the Reds winning dropped sharply before the series began , and gained more credibility after the White Sox lost four of the first five games . Cincinnati lost the next two games , and speculation began that the Reds were losing on purpose to extend the series and increase gate revenues . However , Cincinnati won Game Eight , 10 – 5 , to end the series , as Williams lost his third game ( Cicotte lost the other two ) . After the series , according to Gene Carney , who wrote a book about the scandal , " there was more than the usual complaining from those who had bet big on the Sox and lost " . 
 The issue of the 1919 Series came to the public eye again in September 1920 , when , after allegations that a game between the Chicago Cubs and Philadelphia Phillies on August 31 had been fixed , a grand jury was empaneled in state court in Chicago to investigate baseball gambling . Additional news came from Philadelphia , where gambler Billy <unk> stated that he had worked with former boxer Abe <unk> and New York gambler Arnold Rothstein to get the White Sox to throw the 1919 Series . Cicotte and Jackson were called before the grand jury , where they gave statements incriminating themselves and six teammates : Williams , first baseman Chick <unk> , shortstop Swede <unk> , third baseman Buck Weaver , center fielder Happy Felsch and reserve infielder Fred McMullin . Williams and Felsch were also called before the grand jury and incriminated themselves and their teammates . Through late September , the 1920 American League season had been one of the most exciting on record , with the White Sox , Cleveland Indians , and New York Yankees dueling for the league lead . By September 28 , the Yankees were close to elimination , but the White Sox and Indians were within percentage points of each other . On that day , however , the eight players , seven of whom were still on the White Sox , were indicted . They were immediately suspended by White Sox owner Charles Comiskey . The Indians were able to pull ahead and win the pennant , taking the American League championship by two games over Chicago . 
 = = = = Search for a commissioner = = = = 
 Baseball had been governed by a three @-@ man National Commission , consisting of American League President Ban Johnson , National League President John Heydler and Cincinnati Reds owner Garry Herrmann . In January 1920 , Herrmann left office at the request of other club owners , leaving the Commission effectively deadlocked between Johnson and Heydler . A number of club owners , disliking one or both league presidents , preferred a single commissioner to rule over the game , but were willing to see the National Commission continue if Herrmann was replaced by someone who would provide strong leadership . Landis 's name was mentioned in the press for this role , and the influential baseball newspaper The Sporting News sought his appointment . 
 Another proposal , known as the " Lasker Plan " after Albert Lasker , a shareholder in the Chicago Cubs who had proposed it , was for a three @-@ man commission to govern the game , drawn from outside baseball . On September 30 , 1920 , with the Black Sox scandal exposed , National League President Heydler began to advocate for the Lasker Plan , and by the following day , four major league teams had supported him . Among the names discussed in the press for membership on the new commission were Landis , former Secretary of the Treasury William Gibbs McAdoo , former President William Howard Taft , and General John J. Pershing . 
 The start of the 1920 World Series on October 5 distracted the public from baseball 's woes for a time , but discussions continued behind the scenes . By mid @-@ October , 11 of the 16 team owners ( all eight from the National League and the owners of the American League Yankees , White Sox and Boston Red Sox ) were demanding the end of the National Commission and the appointment of a three @-@ man commission whose members would have no financial interest in baseball . Heydler stated his views on baseball 's requirements : 
 We want a man as chairman who will rule with an iron hand ... Baseball has lacked a hand like that for years . It needs it now worse than ever . Therefore , it is our object to appoint a big man to lead the new commission . 
 On November 8 , the owners of the eight National League and three American League teams which supported the Lasker Plan met and unanimously selected Landis as head of the proposed commission . The American League clubs that supported the plan threatened to move to the National League , away from Johnson , who opposed the plan . Johnson had hoped that the minor leagues would support his position ; when they did not , he and the " Loyal Five " teams agreed to the Lasker Plan . In the discussions among the owners that followed , they decided that Landis would be the only commissioner – no associate members would be elected . On November 12 , the team owners came to Landis 's courtroom to approach him . Landis was trying a bribery case ; when he heard noise in the back of the courtroom from the owners , he <unk> them to silence . He made them wait 45 minutes while he completed his docket , then met with them in his chambers . 
 The judge heard out the owners ; after expressing initial reluctance , he took the job for seven years at a salary of $ 50 @,@ 000 , on condition he could remain on the federal bench . During Landis 's time serving as both judge and commissioner , he allowed a $ 7 @,@ 500 reduction in his salary as commissioner , to reflect his pay as judge . The appointment of Landis was met with acclaim in the press . A tentative agreement was signed by the parties a month later — an agreement which itemized Landis 's powers over baseball , and which was drafted by the judge . The owners were still reeling from the perception that baseball was crooked , and accepted the agreement virtually without dissent . Under the terms of the contract , Landis could not be dismissed by the team owners , have his pay reduced , or even be criticized by them in public . He also had nearly unlimited authority over every person employed in the major or minor leagues , from owners to <unk> . The owners waived any recourse to the courts to contest Landis 's will . Humorist Will Rogers stated , " [ D ] on 't kid yourself that that old judicial bird isn 't going to make those baseball birds walk the <unk> " . Player and manager Leo Durocher later stated , " The legend has been spread that the owners hired the Judge off the federal bench . Don 't you believe it . They got him right out of Dickens . " 
 = = = Establishing control = = = 
 = = = = Banning the Black Sox = = = = 
 On January 30 , 1921 , Landis , speaking at an Illinois church , warned : 
 Now that I am in baseball , just watch the game I play . If I catch any crook in baseball , the rest of his life is going to be a pretty hot one . I 'll go to any means and to anything possible to see that he gets a real penalty for his offense . 
 The criminal case against the Black Sox defendants suffered unexpected setbacks , with evidence vanishing , including some of the incriminating statements made to the grand jury . The prosecution was forced to dismiss the original indictments , and bring new charges against seven of the ballplayers ( McMullin was not charged again ) . Frustrated by the delays , Landis placed all eight on an " ineligible list " , banning them from major and minor league baseball . Comiskey supported Landis by giving the seven who remained under contract to the White Sox their unconditional release . Public sentiment was heavily against the ballplayers , and when Jackson , Williams , Felsch , and Weaver played in a semi @-@ pro game , The Sporting News mocked the 3 @,@ 000 attendees , " Just Like Nuts Go to See a Murderer " . 
 The criminal trial of the Black Sox indictees began in early July 1921 . Despite what Robert C. Cottrell , in his book on the scandal , terms " the mysterious loss of evidence " , the prosecution was determined to pursue the case , demanding five @-@ year prison terms for the ballplayers for defrauding the public by throwing the World Series . On August 2 , 1921 , the jury returned not guilty verdicts against all defendants , leading to happy pandemonium in the courtroom , joined by the courtroom bailiffs , with even the trial judge , Hugo Friend , looking visibly pleased . The players and jury then repaired to an Italian restaurant and partied well into the night . 
 The jubilation proved short @-@ lived . On August 3 , Landis issued a statement : 
 Regardless of the verdict of juries , no player that throws a ball game ; no player that undertakes or promises to throw a ball game ; no player that sits in a conference with a bunch of crooked players and gamblers where the ways and means of throwing ball games are planned and discussed and does not promptly tell his club about it , will ever play professional baseball . Of course , I don 't know that any of these men will apply for reinstatement , but if they do , the above are at least a few of the rules that will be enforced . Just keep in mind that , regardless of the verdict of juries , baseball is competent to protect itself against crooks , both inside and outside the game . 
 According to ESPN columnist Rob Neyer , " with that single decision , Landis might have done more for the sport than anyone else , ever . Certainly , Landis never did anything more important . " According to Carney , " The public amputation of the eight Sox was seen as the only acceptable cure . " Over the years of Landis 's commissionership , a number of the players applied for reinstatement to the game , notably Jackson and Weaver . Jackson , raised in rural South Carolina and with limited education , was said to have been drawn unwillingly into the conspiracy , while Weaver , though admitting his presence at the meetings , stated that he took no money . Both men stated that their play on the field , and their batting percentages during the series ( .375 for Jackson , .324 for Weaver ) indicated that they did not help to throw the series . None was ever reinstated , with Landis telling a group of Weaver supporters that his presence at the meetings with the gamblers was sufficient to bar him . Even today , long after the deaths of all three men , efforts are periodically made to reinstate Jackson ( which would make him eligible for election to the National Baseball Hall of Fame ) and Weaver ( deemed by some the least culpable of the eight ) . In the 1990s , a petition drive to reinstate Jackson drew 60 @,@ 000 signatures . He has been treated sympathetically in movies such as Eight Men Out and Field of Dreams , and Hall of Famers Ted Williams and Bob Feller expressed their support for Jackson 's induction into the Hall . Landis 's expulsion of the eight men remains in force . 
 = = = = Cracking down on gambling = = = = 
 Landis felt that the Black Sox scandal had been initiated by people involved in horse racing , and stated that " by God , as long as I have anything to do with this game , they 'll never get another hold on it . " In 1921 , his first season as commissioner , New York Giants owner Charles Stoneham and manager John McGraw purchased Oriental Park Racetrack in Havana , Cuba . Landis insisted that they could be involved in baseball or horse racing , but not both . They sold the track . 
 Even before the Black Sox scandal had been resolved , Commissioner Landis acted to clean up other gambling cases . Eugene Paulette , a first baseman for the Philadelphia Phillies , had been with the St. Louis Cardinals in 1919 , and had met with gamblers . It is uncertain if any games were fixed , but Paulette had written a letter naming two other Cardinals who might be open to throwing games . The letter had fallen into the hands of Phillies President William F. Baker , who had taken no action until Landis 's appointment , then turned the letter over to him . Paulette met with Landis once , denying any wrongdoing , then refused further meetings . Landis placed him on the ineligible list in March 1921 . In November 1921 , Landis banned former St. Louis Browns player Joe Gedeon . The player had been released by the Browns after admitting to sitting in on meetings with gamblers who were trying to raise the money to bribe the Black Sox , and a minor league official asked if he was eligible . Landis settled the matter by placing Gedeon on the ineligible list . 
 Two other player gambling affairs marked Landis 's early years as commissioner . In 1922 , Giants pitcher Phil Douglas , embittered at McGraw for disciplining him for heavy drinking , wrote a letter to Cardinals outfielder Leslie Mann , suggesting that he would take a bribe to ensure the Giants did not win the pennant . Although Mann had been a friend , the outfielder neither smoked nor drank and had long been associated with the YMCA movement ; according to baseball historian Lee Allen , Douglas might as well have sent the letter to Landis himself . Mann immediately turned over the letter to his manager , Branch Rickey , who ordered Mann to contact Landis at once . The Giants placed Douglas on the ineligible list , an action backed by Landis after meeting with the pitcher . On September 27 , 1924 , Giants outfielder Jimmy O 'Connell offered Phillies shortstop Heinie Sand $ 500 if Sand didn 't " bear down too hard against us today " . Sand was initially inclined to let the matter pass , but recalling the fate of Weaver and other Black Sox players , told his manager , Art Fletcher . Fletcher met with Heydler , who contacted Landis . O 'Connell did not deny the bribe attempt , and was placed on the ineligible list . 
 In total , Landis banned eighteen players from the game . Landis biographer Pietrusza details the effect of Landis 's stand against gambling : 
 Before 1920 if one player approached another player to throw a contest , there was a very good chance he would not be informed upon . Now , there was an excellent chance he would be turned in . No honest player wanted to meet the same fate as Buck Weaver ... Without the forbidding example of Buck Weaver to haunt them , it is unlikely Mann and Sand would have <unk> on their fellow players . After Landis ' unforgiving treatment of the popular and basically honest Weaver they dared not to . And once prospectively crooked players knew that honest players would no longer shield them , the scandals stopped . 
 = = = = Ruth @-@ Meusel barnstorming incident = = = = 
 At the time of Landis 's appointment as commissioner , it was common for professional baseball players to supplement their pay by participating in postseason " barnstorming " tours , playing on teams which would visit smaller cities and towns to play games for which admission would be charged . Since 1911 , however , players on the two World Series teams had been barred from barnstorming . The rule had been indifferently enforced — in 1916 , several members of the champion Red Sox , including pitcher George Herman " Babe " Ruth had barnstormed and had been fined a token $ 100 each by the National Commission . 
 Ruth , who after the 1919 season had been sold to the Yankees , and who by then had mostly abandoned his pitching role for the outfield , was the focus of considerable fan interest as he broke batting records in 1920 and 1921 , some by huge margins . Ruth 's major league record 29 home runs with the Red Sox in 1919 fell to his own efforts in 1920 , when he hit 54 . He then proceeded to hit 59 in 1921 , leading the Yankees to their first pennant . Eight major league teams failed to hit as many home runs in 1921 as Ruth hit by himself . The Yankees lost the 1921 World Series to the Giants ( Ruth was injured and missed several games ) and after the series , the outfielder proposed to capitalize on fan interest by leading a team of <unk> , including Yankees teammate Bob Meusel , in violation of the rule . According to Cottrell , 
 [ T ] he two men clashed who helped the national pastime overcome the Black Sox scandal , one through his seemingly iron will , the other thanks to his magical bat . Judge Kenesaw Mountain Landis and Babe Ruth battled over the right of a ballplayer from a pennant @-@ winning squad to barnstorm in the off @-@ season . Also involved was the commissioner 's continued determination to display , as he had through his banishment of the Black Sox , that he had established the boundaries for organized baseball . These boundaries , Landis intended to demonstrate , applied even to the sport 's most popular and greatest star . Significant too , only Babe Ruth now contended with Commissioner Landis for the title of baseball 's most important figure . 
 Ruth had asked Yankees general manager Ed Barrow for permission to barnstorm . Barrow had no objection but warned Ruth he must obtain Landis 's consent . Landis biographer Spink , who was at the time the editor of The Sporting News , stated , " I can say that Ruth knew exactly what he was doing when he defied Landis in October , 1921 . He was willing to back his own popularity and well @-@ known drawing powers against the Judge . " Ruth , to the commissioner 's irritation , did not contact Landis until October 15 , one day before the first exhibition . When the two spoke by telephone , Landis ordered Ruth to attend a meeting with him ; Ruth refused , stating that he had to leave for Buffalo for the first game . Landis angrily refused consent for Ruth to barnstorm , and after slamming down the receiver , is recorded as saying , " Who the hell does that big ape think he is ? That <unk> @-@ blank ! If he goes on that trip it will be one of the sorriest things he has ever done . " By one account , Yankees co @-@ owner Colonel Tillinghast Huston attempted to dissuade Ruth as he departed , only to be told by the ballplayer , " Aw , tell the old guy to jump in a lake . " 
 The tour also featured fellow Yankees Bob Meusel and Bill Piercy ( who had been called up late in the season and was ineligible for the World Series ) as well as Tom Sheehan , who had been sent to the minor leagues before the end of the season . Two other Yankees , Carl Mays and Wally Schang , had been scheduled to join the tour , but given Landis 's position , according to Spink , " wisely decided to pass it up " . Spink describes the tour as " a fiasco . " On Landis 's orders , it was barred from all major and minor league ballparks . In addition , it was plagued by poor weather , and was called off in late October . In early December , Landis suspended Ruth , Piercy , and Meusel until May 20 , 1922 . Yankee management was actually relieved ; they had feared Landis would suspend Ruth for the season or even longer . Both the Yankees and Ruth repeatedly asked Landis for the players ' early reinstatement , which was refused , and when Landis visited the Yankees during spring training in New Orleans , he lectured Ruth for two hours on the value of obeying authority . " He sure can talk " , noted Ruth . 
 When Ruth returned on May 20 , he batted 0 @-@ for @-@ 4 , and was booed by the crowd at the Polo Grounds . According to Pietrusza , " Always a politician , there was one boss Landis did fear : public opinion . He had no guarantee at the start of the Ruth controversy that the public and press would back him as he assumed unprecedented powers over baseball . Now , he knew they would . 
 = = = Policies as commissioner = = = 
 = = = = Major @-@ minor league relations ; development of the farm system = = = = 
 At the start of Landis 's commissionership , the minor league teams were for the most part autonomous of the major leagues ; in fact the minor leagues independently chose to accept Landis 's rule . To ensure players did not become mired in the minor leagues without a chance to earn their way out , major league teams were able to draft players who played two consecutive years with the same minor league team . Several minor leagues were not subject to the draft ; Landis fought for the inclusion of these leagues , feeling that the non @-@ draft leagues could prevent players from advancing as they became more skilled . By 1924 , he had succeeded , as the International League , the final holdout , accepted the draft . 
 By the mid @-@ 1920s , major league clubs were beginning to develop " farm systems " , that is , minor league teams owned or controlled by them , at which they could develop young prospects without the risk of the players being acquired by major league rivals . The pioneer in this development was Branch Rickey , who then ran the St. Louis Cardinals . As the 1921 National Agreement among the major and minor leagues which implemented Landis 's hiring lifted a ban on major league teams owning minor league ones , Landis was limited in his avenues of attack on Rickey 's schemes . Developing talent at little cost thanks to Rickey , the Cardinals dominated the National League , winning nine league titles in the years from 1926 to 1946 . 
 Soon after Landis 's appointment , he surprised the major league owners by requiring that they disclose their minor league interests . Landis fought against the practice of " covering up " , using transfers between two teams controlled by the same major league team to make players ineligible for the draft . His first formal act as commissioner was to declare infielder Phil Todt a free agent , dissolving his contract with the St. Louis Browns ( at the time run by Rickey , who soon thereafter moved across town to run the Cardinals ) ; in 1928 he ruled future Hall of Famer Chuck Klein a free agent as he held the Cardinals had tried to cover Klein up . The following year , he freed Detroit Tigers prospect and future Hall of Famer Rick Ferrell , who attracted a significant signing bonus from the Browns . In 1936 , Landis found that teenage pitching prospect Bob Feller 's signing by minor league club Fargo @-@ Moorhead had been a charade ; the young pitcher was for all intents and purposes property of the Cleveland Indians . However , Feller indicated that he wanted to play for Cleveland and Landis issued a ruling which required the Indians to pay damages to minor league clubs , but allowed them to retain Feller , who went on to a Hall of Fame career with the Indians . 
 Landis 's attempts to crack down on " covering up " provoked the only time he was ever sued by one of his owners . After the 1930 season , minor leaguer Fred Bennett , convinced he was being covered up by the Browns , petitioned Landis for his release . Landis ruled that the Browns could either keep Bennett on their roster for the entire 1931 season , trade him , or release him . Instead , Browns owner Phil Ball brought suit against Landis in his old court in Chicago . Federal Judge Walter Lindley ruled for Landis , noting that the agreements and rules were intended to " endow the Commissioner with all the attributes of a benevolent but absolute despot and all the disciplinary powers of the proverbial pater <unk> " . Ball intended to appeal , but after a meeting between team owners and Landis in which the commissioner reminded owners of their agreement not to sue , agreed to drop the case . 
 Landis had hoped that the large Cardinal farm system would become economically unfeasible ; when it proved successful for the Cardinals , he had tolerated it for several years and was in a poor position to abolish it . In 1938 , however , finding that the Cardinals effectively controlled multiple teams in the same league ( a practice disliked by Landis ) , he freed 70 players from their farm system . As few of the players were likely prospects for the major leagues , Landis 's actions generated headlines , but had little effect on the Cardinals organization , and the development of the modern farm system , whereby each major league club has several minor league teams which it uses to develop talent , proceeded apace . Rob Neyer describes Landis 's effort as " a noble effort in a good cause , but it was also doomed to fail . " 
 = = = = Baseball color line = = = = 
 One of the most controversial aspects of Landis 's commissionership is the question of race . From 1884 , black ballplayers were informally banned from organized baseball . No black ballplayer played in organized baseball during Landis 's commissionership ; Rickey ( then running the Brooklyn Dodgers ) broke the color line by signing Jackie Robinson to play for the minor league Montreal Royals in 1946 , after Landis 's death ; Robinson became the first black in the major leagues since the 19th century , playing with the Dodgers beginning in 1947 . 
 According to contemporary newspaper columns , at the time of his appointment as commissioner , Landis was considered a liberal on race questions ; two Chicago African @-@ American newspapers defended him against the 1921 efforts to impeach him from his judgeship . A number of baseball authors have ascribed racism to Landis , who they say actively perpetuated baseball 's color line . James Bankes , in The Pittsburgh Crawfords , tracing the history of that Negro League team , states that Landis , whom the author suggests was a Southerner , made " little effort to disguise his racial prejudice during 25 years in office " and " remained a steadfast foe of integration " . Negro League historian John Holway termed Landis " the hard @-@ bitten Carolinian [ sic ] Kennesaw [ sic ] Mountain Landis " . In a 2000 article in Smithsonian magazine , writer Bruce Watson states that Landis " upheld baseball 's unwritten ban on black players and did nothing to push owners toward integration " . A number of authors say that Landis banned major league play against black teams for fear the white teams would lose , though they ascribe various dates for this action , and the Dodgers are known to have played black teams in and around their Havana spring training base as late as 1942 . 
 Landis 's documented actions on race are inconsistent . In 1938 , Yankee Jake Powell was interviewed by a radio station , and when asked what he did in the offseason , made comments that were interpreted as meaning he worked as a police officer and beat up African Americans . Landis suspended Powell for ten days . In June 1942 , the Negro League Kansas City Monarchs played several games against the white " Dizzy Dean All @-@ Stars " at major league ballparks , attracting large crowds . After three games , all won by the Monarchs , Landis ordered a fourth canceled , on the ground that the games were outdrawing major league contests . On one occasion , Landis intervened in Negro League affairs , though he had no jurisdiction to do so . The Crawfords lost a game to a white semi @-@ pro team when their star catcher , Josh Gibson dropped a pop fly , and Gibson was accused of throwing the game at the behest of gamblers . Landis summoned the black catcher to his office , interviewed him , and announced Gibson was cleared of wrongdoing . 
 In July 1942 , Dodger manager Leo Durocher charged that there was a " grapevine understanding " keeping blacks out of baseball . He was summoned to Landis 's Chicago office , and after emerging from a meeting with the commissioner , alleged that he had been misquoted . Landis then addressed the press , and stated , " 
 Negroes are not barred from organized baseball by the commissioner and never have been in the 21 years I have served . There is no rule in organized baseball prohibiting their participation and never has been to my knowledge . If Durocher , or if any other manager , or all of them , want to sign one , or twenty @-@ five Negro players , it is all right with me . That is the business of the managers and the club owners . The business of the commissioner is to interpret the rules of baseball , and to enforce them . 
 In his 1961 memoir , Veeck as in Wreck , longtime baseball executive and owner Bill Veeck told of his plan , in 1942 , to buy the Phillies and stock the team with Negro League stars . Veeck wrote that he told Landis , who reacted with shock , and soon moved to block the purchase . In his book , Veeck placed some of the blame on National League President Ford Frick , but later reserved blame exclusively for Landis , whom he accused of racism , stating in a subsequent interview , " [ a ] fter all , a man who is named Kenesaw Mountain was not born and raised in the state of Maine . " However , when Veeck was asked for proof of his allegations against Landis , he stated , " I have no proof of that . I can only surmise . " According to baseball historian David Jordan , " Veeck , nothing if not a storyteller , seems to have added these embellishments , sticking in some guys in black hats , simply to juice up his tale . " 
 In November 1943 , Landis agreed after some persuasion that black sportswriter Sam Lacy should make a case for integration of organized baseball before the owners ' annual meeting . Instead of Lacy attending the meeting , actor Paul Robeson did . Robeson , though a noted black actor and advocate of civil rights , was a controversial figure due to his affiliation with the Communist Party . The owners heard Robeson out , but at Landis 's suggestion , did not ask him any questions or begin any discussion with him . 
 Neyer noted that " Landis has been blamed for delaying the integration of the major leagues , but the truth is that the owners didn 't want black players in the majors any more than Landis did . And it 's not likely that , even if Landis hadn 't died in 1944 , he could have prevented Branch Rickey from bringing Jackie Robinson to the National League in 1947 . " C.C. Johnson Spink , son of Landis biographer J.G. Taylor Spink and his successor as editor of The Sporting News , noted in the introduction to the reissue of his father 's biography of Landis , 
 <unk> Landis was quite human and not infallible . If , for example , he did drag his feet at erasing baseball 's color line , he was grievously wrong , but then so were many others of his post @-@ Civil War generation . 
 = = = = World Series and All @-@ Star Game ; other innovations = = = = 
 Landis took full jurisdiction over the World Series , as a contest between representatives of the two major leagues . Landis was blamed when the umpires called a game on account of darkness with the score tied during the 1922 World Series , even though there was still light . Landis decided that such decisions in future would be made by himself , moved forward the starting time of World Series games in future years , and announced that proceeds from the tied game would be donated to charity . In the 1932 World Series , Landis ordered that tickets for Game One at Yankee Stadium only be sold as part of strips , forcing fans to purchase tickets for all Yankee home games during that Series . Bad weather and the poor economy resulted in a half @-@ filled stadium , and Landis allowed individual game sales for Game Two . During the 1933 World Series , he instituted a rule that only he could throw a player out of a World Series game , a rule which followed the ejection of Washington Senator Heinie <unk> by umpire Charley Moran . The following year , with the visiting Cardinals ahead of the Detroit Tigers , 9 – 0 in Game Seven , he removed Cardinal Joe Medwick from the game for his own safety when Medwick , the left fielder , was pelted with fruit by Tiger fans after Medwick had been involved in a fight with one of the Tigers . Spink notes that Landis would most likely not have done so were the game within reach of the Tigers . In the 1938 World Series , umpire Moran was hit by a wild throw and suffered facial injuries . He was able to continue , but the incident caused Landis to order that World Series games and All @-@ Star Games be played with six umpires . 
 The All @-@ Star Game began in 1933 ; Landis had been a strong supporter of the proposal for such a contest , and after the first game remarked , " That 's a grand show , and it should be continued . " He never missed an All @-@ Star Game in his lifetime ; his final public appearance was at the 1944 All @-@ Star Game in Pittsburgh . 
 In 1928 , National League ball clubs proposed an innovation whereby each team 's pitcher , usually the weakest hitter in the lineup , would not bat , but be replaced for the purposes of batting and base @-@ running by a tenth player . There were expectations that at the interleague meetings that year , the National League teams would vote for it , and the American League teams against it , leaving Landis to cast the deciding vote . In the event , the proposal was withdrawn , and Landis did not disclose how he would have voted on this early version of the " designated hitter " rule . 
 Landis disliked the innovation of " night baseball " , played in the evening with the aid of artificial light , and sought to discourage teams from it . Despite this , he attended the first successful minor league night game , in Des Moines , Iowa , in 1930 . When major league night baseball began in the late 1930s , Landis got the owners to restrict the number of such games . During World War II , many restrictions on night baseball were reduced , with the Washington Senators permitted to play all their home games ( except those on Sundays and holidays ) at night . 
 = = = World War II , death , and legacy = = = 
 With the entry of the United States into World War II in late 1941 , Landis wrote to President Franklin D. Roosevelt , inquiring as to the wartime status of baseball . The President responded urging Landis to keep baseball open , foreseeing that even those fully engaged in war work would benefit from inexpensive diversions such as attending baseball games . Many major leaguers enlisted or were drafted ; even so Landis repeatedly stated , " We 'll play as long as we can put nine men on the field . " Although many of the teams practiced at their normal spring training sites in 1942 , beginning the following year they were required to train near their home cities or in the Northeast . Landis was as virulently opposed to the Axis Powers as he had been towards the Kaiser , writing that peace would not be possible until " about fifteen thousand little Hitler , <unk> and <unk> " were killed . 
 Landis retained a firm hold on baseball despite his advancing years and , in 1943 , banned Phillies owner William D. Cox from baseball for betting on his own team . In 1927 , Landis 's stance regarding gambling had been codified in the rules of baseball : " Any player , umpire , or club or league official or employee who shall bet any sum whatsoever upon any baseball game in connection with which the <unk> had a duty to perform shall be declared permanently ineligible . " Cox was required to sell his stake in the Phillies . 
 In early October 1944 , Landis checked into St. Luke 's Hospital in Chicago , where his wife Winifred had been hospitalized , with a severe cold . While in the hospital , he had a heart attack , causing him to miss the World Series for the first time in his commissionership . He remained fully alert , and as usual signed the World Series share checks to players . His contract was due to expire in January 1946 ; on November 17 , 1944 , baseball 's owners voted him another seven @-@ year term . However , on November 25 , he died surrounded by family , five days after his 78th birthday . His longtime assistant , Leslie O 'Connor , wept as he read the announcement for the press . Landis is buried at Oak Woods Cemetery in Chicago . 
 Two weeks after his death , Landis was voted into the National Baseball Hall of Fame by a special committee vote . The Baseball Writers ' Association of America renamed its Most Valuable Player Awards after Landis . 
 American League President Will Harridge said of Landis , " He was a wonderful man . His great qualities and downright simplicity impressed themselves deeply on all who knew him . " Pietrusza suggests that the legend on Landis 's Hall of Fame plaque is his true legacy : " His integrity and leadership established baseball in the esteem , respect , and affection of the American people . " Pietrusza notes that Landis was hired by the baseball owners to clean up the sport , and " no one could deny Kenesaw Mountain Landis had accomplished what he had been hired to do " . According to his first biographer , Spink , 
 [ Landis ] may have been arbitrary , self @-@ willed and even unfair , but he ' called ' em as he saw ' em ' and he turned over to his successor and the future a game cleansed of the nasty spots which followed World War I. Kenesaw Mountain Landis put the fear of God into weak characters who might otherwise have been inclined to violate their trust . And for that , I , as a lifelong lover of baseball , am eternally grateful . 
 = William ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " William " is the sixteenth episode of the ninth season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files , which originally aired on the Fox network on April 28 , 2002 . The teleplay of the episode was written by series creator Chris Carter , from a story by former series star David Duchovny , Carter , and executive producer Frank Spotnitz ; the entry was directed by Duchovny . " William " helps to explore the series ' overarching mythology . The episode received a Nielsen household rating of 5 @.@ 8 , being watched by 6 @.@ 1 million households and 9 @.@ 3 million viewers upon its initial broadcast . It received mixed reviews from television critics , many of whom were unhappy with the episode 's conclusion . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files ; this season focuses on the investigations of John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) , Monica Reyes ( Annabeth Gish ) , and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) . In this episode , Doggett finds a strange , disfigured man ( Chris Owens ) in the X @-@ Files office and , on his whim , they test his DNA . They learn that the man shares DNA with Fox Mulder ( Duchovny ) , and may possibly even be him . The answers become even more surprising when Scully 's son , baby William , is put on the line . 
 " William " marked the return of David Duchovny to the series , after his departure following the eighth season finale " Existence " . The genesis for the episode was a storyline Duchovny had developed during the series ' eighth season ; he originally pitched an idea featuring a mysteriously disfigured person introducing himself to Scully and admitting that he possessed a connection to Mulder . Chris Owens , whose character Jeffrey Spender had previously been killed off in the sixth season episode " One Son " , was asked to return to the series for the episode . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In the teaser , a couple , the Van De Kamps ( Adam Nelson and Shannon <unk> ) , adopt Dana Scully 's ( Gillian Anderson ) infant son , William ( James and Travis Riker ) . The episode then jumps back a week . Scully takes William out of her car while an unknown man ( Chris Owens ) watches them . Later , John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) is attacked in the X @-@ Files office by the same man . After a struggle , Doggett subdues him . His face is revealed to be horribly scarred . 
 Later , Scully speaks with the man . He claims he received his burns due to alien testing and that he knew Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) . He further elaborates that he was sent to the FBI to retrieve certain files . Scully suspects the man is lying , but asks to examine his burns to investigate his strange claims . He notes that they are the result of an injection that failed to transform him into one of the aliens . The man claims a new conspiracy has formed after the previous one was destroyed ; the new one being hidden within the government and the conspirators involved being alien . Doggett theorizes that the man is actually Mulder . Scully takes the man to her house to give him the files he seeks . Suddenly , William begins to cry , only to be quieted when the scarred man picks him up . Meanwhile , Walter Skinner ( Mitch Pileggi ) meets with Doggett and the two discuss the idea that the man is actually Mulder . Skinner points out the inconsistencies in Doggett 's reasoning , but a DNA test is undertaken anyway . 
 Scully is told by the scarred man that William is part alien and that she is being used to raise the child . Monica Reyes ( Annabeth Gish ) and Doggett tell Scully that the man 's DNA is a match to Mulder 's , but Scully refuses to believe it . While the three are talking , the scarred man quietly slips into William 's room with a syringe . Though William 's crying alerts the agents , the scarred man manages to sneak out of the room before they reach William . Reyes and Scully take the baby to the hospital and Doggett discovers the man 's syringe . The doctor reports that William is fine except for an elevated amount of iron in his blood . In interrogation , Scully confronts the scarred man about his motives . It is revealed that he is actually Jeffrey Spender , a former FBI agent supposedly killed by The Smoking Man ( William B. Davis ) three years earlier . Spender is also Mulder 's half @-@ brother . Spender admits his actions were a ruse and that the syringe contained magnetite meant to make William normal . He explains that the aliens need the child in order to successfully invade the world , but now they have lost him . However , he notes that the conspirators will always pursue the child , despite what he has done . Spender says that he acted out of his hatred for his father , since the new conspiracy was created by The Smoking Man after the alien rebels burned the original group . 
 Scully muses over Spender 's words and decides that the only way to truly protect William is to give him up for adoption so that he may have a better life . The episode then jumps to the Van De Kamps , who tuck in their new son . William looks at his mobile but he can no longer move it telekinetically , an event which happened in " Nothing Important Happened Today " . 
 = = Production = = 
 The story for " William " was written by former series co @-@ star David Duchovny , series creator Chris Carter , and executive producer Frank Spotnitz ; the screenplay was written solely by Carter , and the entry was directed by Duchovny . " William " marked the return of David Duchovny , in some capacity , to the series , after his departure following the eighth season finale " Existence " . In fact , Duchovny makes a cameo appearance in the episode , appearing as a reflection in Scully 's eye . 
 The genesis for the episode was a storyline Duchovny had developed during the series ' eighth season . He had originally pitched an idea featuring a mysteriously disfigured person introducing himself to Scully and admitting that he has a connection to Mulder . Reportedly , the idea for Scully to give William up for adoption was mandated by Carter and Spotnitz . Duchovny , Anderson , and executive producer John Shiban were not happy with this turn of events , due to them being parents and feeling that the action was not realistic , but " grudgingly consented " . 
 Three years after Spender had been written out of the series — in the sixth season episode " One Son " — and actor Chris Owens had moved to Toronto , Canada , Owens received an unexpected phone call from David Duchovny , who said that The X @-@ Files ' production crew was filming the series ' finale as well as another episode late in the season , and that he wanted to bring Spender back for these two episodes . Duchovny reassured Owens that Spender 's survival of the shooting years earlier could be explained away via the plot device of an alien injection but mentioned that the experience would not be fun for Owens , as he would be " under all that shit " ; Owens did not realize what Duchovny meant until he got to the studio and personally saw the makeup for Spender 's disfigured appearance , a sight that shocked Owens . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " William " originally aired on the Fox network on April 28 , 2002 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC One on March 2 , 2003 . The episode 's initial broadcast was viewed by approximately 6 @.@ 1 million households , and 9 @.@ 3 million viewers . " William " earned a Nielsen household rating of 5 @.@ 8 , meaning that roughly 5 @.@ 8 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , were tuned in to the episode . It was the fifty @-@ fourth most watched episode of television that aired during the week ending April 28 . The episode was later included on The X @-@ Files Mythology , Volume 4 – Super Soldiers , a DVD collection that contains episodes involved with the alien super soldiers arc . 
 The episode received mixed reviews from television critics . Jessica Morgan from Television Without Pity gave the episode an A – grade . John Keegan from Critical Myth gave the episode a largely positive review and awarded it an 8 out of 10 . He wrote , " Overall , this was an uneven yet highly enjoyable mythology episode , far better than the episode that appears to have spawned it ( ' <unk> ' ) [ sic ] . I look forward to whatever directorial / writing work David Duchovny might do in the future . And if this is indeed the last we see of William , well , I ’ m not going to complain ! Still , by now , Carter and Spotnitz ought to know how to write an episode with the time constraints in mind . " 
 Other reviews were not as positive . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode three stars out of five . The two criticized the idea that Scully would give her child up for adoption solely based on the word of Jeffrey Spender , noting " if she wasn 't going to give it away for the sake of its own protection after a UFO cult abducted it [ in ' Provenance ' / ' Providence ' ] , then why should she because Jeffrey Spender of all people comes along and informs her that it 's under threat ? " Shearman and Pearson , however , did praise Chris Owens ' acting , writing that he did a " great job " . Tom Kessenich , in his book Examinations , wrote a largely negative review of the episode and derided its plot . He heavily criticized the idea that Scully would offer William up for adoption . Kessenich did however praise Duchovny 's directing , noting that " [ he ] did a masterful job of luring me back to this world of The X @-@ Files " . Aaron Kinney from Salon wrote that the episode " scuttled the entire " baby William subplot . M.A. Crang , in his book Denying the Truth : Revisiting The X @-@ Files after 9 / 11 , praised the decision to conclude the William subplot but called the episode 's conclusion " sappy " . 
 = Russian monitor Charodeika = 
 The Russian monitor Charodeika was the lead ship of her class of monitors built for the Imperial Russian Navy in the 1860s . She served for her entire career with the Baltic Fleet , mostly as a training ship . She was decommissioned in 1907 , but was not broken up until 1911 – 12 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Charodeika was 206 feet ( 62 @.@ 8 m ) long at the waterline . She had a beam of 42 feet ( 12 @.@ 8 m ) and a maximum draft of 12 feet 7 inches ( 3 @.@ 8 m ) . The ship was designed to displace 1 @,@ 882 long tons ( 1 @,@ 912 t ) , but turned out to be overweight and actually displaced 2 @,@ 100 long tons ( 2 @,@ 100 t ) . Her crew numbered 13 officers and 171 crewmen in 1877 . 
 The ship had two simple horizontal direct @-@ acting steam engines , each driving a single propeller . The engines were designed to produce a total of 900 indicated horsepower ( 670 kW ) using steam provided by two coal @-@ fired rectangular fire @-@ tube boilers , but only achieved 786 ihp ( 586 kW ) and a speed of approximately 8 @.@ 5 knots ( 15 @.@ 7 km / h ; 9 @.@ 8 mph ) during her sea trials . She carried a maximum of 250 long tons ( 254 t ) of coal for her boilers . 
 Charodeika was initially armed with a pair of nine @-@ inch ( 229 mm ) rifled Model 1867 guns in the forward gun turret and a pair of fifteen @-@ inch ( 381 mm ) smoothbore Rodman guns in the aft turret . The Rodman guns were replaced by a pair of Obukhov 9 @-@ inch ( 229 mm ) rifled guns in 1871 and all of the nine @-@ inch guns were replaced in their turn by longer , more powerful nine @-@ inch Obukhov guns in 1878 – 79 . No light guns for use against torpedo boats are known to have been fitted aboard the ship before the 1870s when she received 4 four @-@ pounder 3 @.@ 4 @-@ inch ( 86 mm ) guns mounted on the turret tops as well as a variety of smaller guns that included 45 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 8 in ) Engström quick @-@ firing ( QF ) guns , 1 @-@ inch ( 25 mm ) Nordenfelt guns , single @-@ barreled QF 47 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) Hotchkiss guns , QF 37 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) Hotchkiss revolving cannon , and 25 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) Palmcrantz @-@ Nordenfelt guns . 
 The ship had a complete waterline belt of wrought iron that was 4 @.@ 5 inches ( 114 mm ) thick amidships and thinned to 3 @.@ 75 inches ( 95 mm ) at the bow and 3 @.@ 25 inches ( 83 mm ) at the stern . The armor was backed by 12 to 18 inches ( 300 to 460 mm ) of teak . The circular turrets were protected by armor 5 @.@ 5 inches ( 140 mm ) thick and the walls of the ship 's oval conning tower were also 4 @.@ 5 inches thick . Her deck was 1 inch ( 25 mm ) thick amidships , but reduced to 0 @.@ 25 – 0 @.@ 5 inches ( 6 @.@ 4 – 12 @.@ 7 mm ) at the ends of the ship . 
 = = Construction and service = = 
 Charodeika ( Sorceress ) was ordered on 26 January 1865 and construction began on 10 June at the Admiralty Shipyard , Saint Petersburg , although the formal keel @-@ laying was not until 6 June 1866 . She was launched on 12 September 1867 and completed in 1869 at the cost of 762 @,@ 000 rubles . Construction was considerably delayed by late deliveries of drawings , material , and the death of her original builder . The ship served her entire career with the Baltic Fleet and was later assigned to the Mine ( Torpedo ) Training Detachment . Charodeika was reclassified as a coast @-@ defense ironclad on 13 February 1892 and remained in service until 31 March 1907 when she was turned over to the Port of Kronstadt for disposal . The ship was stricken from the Navy List on 7 April and was finally scrapped in 1911 – 12 . 
 = No. 82 Wing RAAF = 
 No. 82 Wing is the strike and reconnaissance wing of the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) . It is headquartered at RAAF Base Amberley , Queensland . Coming under the control of Air Combat Group , the wing operates F / A @-@ 18F Super Hornet multirole fighters and Pilatus PC @-@ 9 forward air control aircraft . Its units include Nos. 1 and 6 Squadrons , operating the Super Hornet , and No. 4 Squadron , operating the PC @-@ 9 . 
 Formed in August 1944 , No. 82 Wing operated B @-@ 24 Liberator heavy bombers in the South West Pacific theatre of World War II . Initially comprising two flying units , Nos. 21 and 24 Squadrons , the wing was augmented by 23 Squadron in 1945 . After the war its operational units became Nos. 1 , 2 and 6 Squadrons . It re @-@ equipped with Avro Lincolns in 1948 and , from 1953 , English Electric Canberra jets . Both types saw action in the Malayan Emergency during the 1950s ; the Canberras were also deployed in the Vietnam War from 1967 to 1971 . 
 Between 1970 and 1973 , as a stop @-@ gap pending delivery of the long @-@ delayed General Dynamics F @-@ 111C swing @-@ wing bomber , Nos. 1 and 6 Squadrons flew leased F @-@ 4E Phantoms . No. 2 Squadron continued to fly Canberras until it was disbanded in 1982 . After taking delivery of their F @-@ 111Cs in 1973 , Nos. 1 and 6 Squadrons operated the type for 37 years through numerous upgrades , augmented in the mid @-@ 1990s by ex @-@ USAF G models . The forward air control unit joined No. 82 Wing in 2002 . In 2010 , the wing retired its F @-@ 111s and replaced them with Super Hornets as an interim force until the planned entry into Australian service of the F @-@ 35 Lightning Joint Strike Fighter . Twelve Boeing EA @-@ 18G Growlers are scheduled to augment the Super Hornet fleet from 2017 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 No. 82 ( Heavy Bomber ) Wing — the RAAF 's first such wing — was formed at Ballarat , Victoria , on 25 August 1944 , under the command of Group Captain Deryck <unk> . Comprising Nos. 21 and 24 Squadrons , both equipped with B @-@ 24 Liberators , the wing became operational on 11 January 1945 . By this time it was headquartered in the Northern Territory , and came under the control of the RAAF 's North @-@ Western Area Command ( NWA ) . Based at Fenton Airfield , the wing 's aircraft sank seven Japanese ships in the Dutch East Indies during March . On 6 April , all of its available Liberators joined B @-@ 25 Mitchells of No. 79 Wing in an assault on a Japanese convoy that included the cruiser Isuzu . Anti @-@ aircraft fire from the cruiser and other ships , as well as attacks by enemy fighters , resulted in the loss of two Liberators , and the crews ' standard of aerial gunnery was criticised afterwards . Allied submarines sank the damaged Isuzu the following day . Later that month , No. 23 Squadron , having recently converted to Liberators from A @-@ 31 Vengeances , was added to No. 82 Wing 's strength . The wing 's three flying squadrons identified themselves with black chevrons on the tail fins of their aircraft , No. 21 's facing backwards , No. 23 's downwards , and No. 24 's forwards . 
 The Liberator bombers of No. 82 Wing played both a tactical and a strategic role in the Borneo Campaign , beginning with the lead @-@ up to Operation Oboe One , the invasion of Tarakan on 1 May 1945 . During that month a detachment relocated from Fenton to Morotai , attacking targets in Celebes and Balikpapan prior to Operation Oboe Six , the invasion of Labuan . In June , while the final Allied offensive of the Borneo Campaign got under way as Operation Oboe Two , the Battle of Balikpapan , the remainder of No. 82 Wing transferred from NWA to the command of the Australian First Tactical Air Force in Morotai . In the middle of the month the wing dropped 120 tons of bombs on Balikpapan 's oil fields and surrounding areas , as well as coastal defence sites . During July it bombed targets at Celebes and Borneo , losing five Liberators for the month , including that of its new commanding officer , Group Captain Donald McLean . McLean died with most of his crew after being hit by anti @-@ aircraft fire and ditching into the sea , a notoriously risky operation in the Liberator owing to the fuselage 's tendency to break in two upon striking the water . Just before the end of hostilities in the Pacific , the recently established garrison headquarters No. 11 Group unofficially directed the wing 's operations . Following the Japanese surrender in September 1945 , No. 82 Wing 's Liberators were converted to transports and used to repatriate RAAF personnel from the South West Pacific . Over the course of its wartime existence , the wing 's personnel numbered between 3 @,@ 000 and 5 @,@ 000 , of whom more than half were ground crew . Along with its flying squadrons , its complement included No. 24 Air Stores Park , No. 6 Repair and Servicing Unit , and No. 30 Medical Clearing Station . 
 = = = Cold War and after = = = 
 No. 82 Wing moved to its present location at RAAF Base Amberley , Queensland , in 1946 , where it came under the control of the RAAF 's Eastern Area Command . In May that year , No. 482 ( Maintenance ) Squadron was formed from No. 4 Repair and Servicing Unit , to be responsible for repair and upkeep of the wing 's aircraft . Its flying complement now included Nos. 12 ( formerly of No. 85 Wing ) , 21 , and 23 Squadrons , but these were renumbered Nos. 1 , 2 and 6 Squadrons respectively in February 1948 . At the same time , the wartime Liberators were replaced by Avro Lincoln heavy bombers . During 1949 – 50 , some of the Lincolns were specially modified with advanced radar and other instrumentation to participate in Operation Cumulative , a joint program with the Royal Air Force gathering long @-@ range navigation and bombing data for use in potential air campaigns against the Soviet Union . Between 1950 and 1958 — for the first two years under the control of No. 90 ( Composite ) Wing — the Lincolns of No. 1 Squadron were deployed for service in the Malayan Emergency , tasked with the prime responsibility for the Commonwealth 's bombing campaign against Communist insurgents . This arrangement meant that No. 82 Wing 's flying units were reduced to Nos. 2 and 6 Squadrons . From 1952 to 1957 , the wing flew observation flights in connection with British atomic tests in Australia . No protective clothing was issued to air or ground crews during these flights and , following the second such operation in October 1953 , nine of the twelve Lincolns involved were found to be contaminated , four so heavily that they were parked in a remote corner of the Amberley air base and never flown again . On 9 April 1953 , the wing wrote off three Lincolns — without loss of life — in two separate incidents that collectively became known as " Black Thursday " ; one of the Lincolns crashed on landing at Amberley during the day , and that night another Lincoln collided with one of its brethren at Cloncurry Aerodrome , Queensland . 
 In December 1953 , No. 82 Wing took delivery of the RAAF 's first jet bomber , the Canberra Mk.20 , 48 of which re @-@ equipped the wing 's three squadrons over the next five years . The new bombers were acquired partly for their capacity to deliver nuclear weapons , an ordnance option the RAAF seriously investigated but never implemented . Following the re @-@ equipping of Nos. 2 and 6 Squadrons with the Canberra , a Lincoln Conversion Flight was formed in July 1955 under No. 82 Wing to provide training on the older bomber for crews preparing to deploy to Malaya for service with No. 1 Squadron ; it disbanded in March 1956 . Canberras from No. 2 Squadron relieved the Lincolns of No. 1 Squadron in Malaya during 1958 . In January 1959 , No. 1 ( Bomber ) Operational Conversion Unit ( No. 1 OCU ) was established at Amberley under the control of No. 82 Wing . Its role was to convert pilots and navigators to the Canberra , and train them for operations with the three bomber squadrons . In 1964 , No. 82 Wing 's Canberras were slated for possible bombing and reconnaissance tasks against Indonesian forces under Operation Handover , a little @-@ publicised contingency plan put into effect during the Indonesia – Malaysia Konfrontasi , although no combat ensued . No. 2 Squadron Canberras saw extensive action in the Vietnam War from 1967 to 1971 , under the control of the USAF 's 35th Tactical Fighter Wing . The Canberras flew almost 12 @,@ 000 sorties and delivered over 76 @,@ 000 pounds of bombs , for the loss of two aircraft to enemy action , and gained a high reputation for their accuracy . No. 1 OCU was made independent of No. 82 Wing in April 1968 ; its sole purpose from then until its disbandment in June 1971 was to supply trained crews to No. 2 Squadron in Vietnam . Nos. 1 and 6 Squadrons effectively ceased operations in 1968 , while their crews underwent conversion to the General Dynamics F @-@ 111C swing @-@ wing bomber , which was expected to enter service soon afterwards . Between 1970 and 1973 , as an interim measure pending the delayed delivery of the F @-@ 111 , Nos. 1 and 6 Squadrons flew leased F @-@ 4E Phantoms ; meanwhile No. 2 Squadron continued to operate the Canberra , mainly for aerial survey work in Australia and Indonesia , until disbanding in 1982 . The Air Force retained the option to purchase the Phantoms if the F @-@ 111C program was cancelled . Though not as sophisticated an aircraft as the F @-@ 111 , the Phantom was a significant advance over the Canberra , and was highly regarded by its RAAF crews . 
 On 1 June 1973 , the Officer Commanding No. 82 Wing , Group Captain Jake Newham , led the first F @-@ 111Cs in to land at Amberley , a gala occasion attended by the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Defence , Lance Barnard , the Chief of the Air Staff , Air Marshal Charles Read , the Air Officer Commanding Operational Command , Air Vice Marshal Brian Eaton , and a large media contingent . Read ordered Newham to operate the F @-@ 111 with great caution initially , well within limits , lest the controversial aircraft suffer greater damage to its reputation through early attrition . Over its 37 @-@ year career with No. 82 Wing , the F @-@ 111 underwent numerous upgrades , including the Pave Tack infra @-@ red and laser @-@ guided precision weapons targeting system , Harpoon anti @-@ shipping missiles , and advanced digital avionics . Roles within the wing were demarcated such that No. 1 Squadron was the lead strike unit , while No. 6 Squadron was primarily tasked with providing crew conversion training ; No. 6 Squadron was also responsible for reconnaissance missions using specially modified RF @-@ 111Cs until these aircraft were transferred to No. 1 Squadron in 1996 , and flew leased <unk> for survey work between 1982 and 1987 . During 1982 – 83 , four F @-@ 111s from the RAAF 's original order that had been lost through accidents were replaced by four F @-@ 111As upgraded to C models . In 1992 an order was placed to augment the F @-@ 111C force with fifteen ex @-@ USAF G models , to be operated by No. 6 Squadron . No. 82 Wing was awarded the Duke of Gloucester Cup as most proficient RAAF unit of 1994 , in part for its success in introducing the F @-@ 111G with minimal additional staff . Alan Stephens , in the official history of the post @-@ war Air Force , described the F @-@ 111 as " the region 's pre @-@ eminent strike aircraft " and the RAAF 's most important acquisition . The closest the bombers came to being used in anger , however , was during the Australian @-@ led INTERFET intervention into East Timor in September 1999 . Both F @-@ 111 squadrons were deployed to RAAF Base Tindal , Northern Territory , to support the international forces , and remained there until December . From 20 September , when INTERFET began to arrive in East Timor , the aircraft were maintained at a high level of readiness to conduct reconnaissance flights or air strikes if the situation deteriorated . As it happened , INTERFET did not encounter significant resistance , and F @-@ 111 operations were limited to reconnaissance by the RF @-@ 111Cs from 5 November through 9 December . 
 No. 482 Squadron merged with Amberley 's No. 3 Aircraft Depot to form No. 501 Wing in March 1992 . The squadron completed its disbandment in June that year . In 1998 the RAAF became the only air force operating the F @-@ 111 , after the USAF retired the type . From 2001 , Boeing Australia performed all F @-@ 111 maintenance under contract . In February 2002 , No. 82 Wing came under the control of the newly established Air Combat Group ( ACG ) , formed by merging Tactical Fighter Group ( TFG ) and Strike Reconnaissance Group ( SRG ) . The reorganisation altered the wing 's responsibilities , as it transferred lead @-@ in training for the F @-@ 111s to No. 78 Wing at RAAF Base Williamtown , New South Wales , and put No. 82 Wing in charge of the strike capability of No. 81 Wing 's F / A @-@ 18 Hornet fighters , also based at Williamtown . No. 82 Wing 's role was reiterated as " precision strike and reconnaissance " ; the Forward Air Control Development Unit ( FACDU ) , flying Pilatus PC @-@ 9s , was added to its strength . The merger of TFG and SRG was designed to position the Air Force to replace both the F @-@ 111 and the F / A @-@ 18 with a single Joint Strike Fighter ( JSF ) . In 2007 , the Australian government decided to retire all of the F @-@ 111s by 2010 , and acquire 24 F / A @-@ 18F Super Hornets as an interim replacement , pending the arrival of the F @-@ 35 Lightning JSF then under development . The F @-@ 111 fleet was considered to be at risk due to fatigue issues , and too expensive to operate as each aircraft required 180 hours of maintenance for every hour of flying time . No. 82 Wing began re @-@ equipping with the Super Hornet in 2010 , and the last F @-@ 111s were retired on 3 December that year . FACDU was combined with the RAAF Special Tactics Project in July 2009 to form No. 4 Squadron . The following year , No. 82 Wing became home to No. 5 Flight , which was responsible for training personnel to operate the RAAF 's two IAI Heron unmanned aerial vehicles based at Kandahar in Afghanistan . The Air Force acquired a third Heron in 2011 , based in Australia and operated by No. 5 Flight . As of that year , the F @-@ 35 was not expected to enter Australian service until 2018 . The RAAF hoped to be able to sell off its Super Hornets " with very low kilometres on the clock " by 2020 , but this would depend on delivery of the replacement F @-@ 35s . In April 2013 , No. 5 Flight was transferred from No. 82 Wing to Surveillance and Response Group 's No. 92 Wing . The following month , the Federal government announced plans to purchase twelve Boeing EA @-@ 18G Growlers to supplement the Super Hornet fleet . No. 6 Squadron is expected to begin taking delivery of the Growlers in 2017 , at which point its Super Hornets will be transferred to No. 1 Squadron . 
 = Ice Princess ( song ) = 
 " Ice Princess " is a song recorded by American rapper Azealia Banks for her debut studio album Broke with Expensive Taste ( 2014 ) . It was released as the fourth single from the album on March 23 , 2015 . Production of the song was handled by <unk> , while it was written by Banks , Kevin James , and Jonathan Harris . " Ice Princess " contains a sample of " In the Air " , originally produced by progressive house DJ Morgan Page . Lyrically , Banks brags about her wealth , with Jordan Sargent of Pitchfork Media describing it as Banks " spitting knotty rhymes about her diamonds " . " Ice Princess " garnered praise from music critics , with one describing the song as " Banks at her best " . To promote the song , an accompanying music video for the track was released on March 31 , 2015 . It features Banks ruling over a kingdom of ice warriors , flying through the sky destroying anything colorful while turning everything into ice . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 2011 , it was reported that Banks was working on a studio album with British producer Paul Epworth despite not having signed to a record label at that time . In January 2012 , Banks signed a record deal with Interscope and Polydor Records to work on new music , and a month later , she announced the title of the album – Broke with Expensive Taste . Approximately a year later , she handed a complete version of Broke with Expensive Taste in to the labels . Banks initially thought it would receive favorable reception from the labels ; however , the representatives told Banks that she had not recorded a " hit " single for the album . Ultimately , Banks ended the record deal with Interscope / Polydor in July 2014 . She later approached Jeff Kwatinetz and signed a contract with his company , Prospect Park . Banks eventually released the album on November 7 , 2014 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Ice Princess " received positive reviews from critics . Pitchfork Media gave the song their " Best New Track " honor , with Jordan Sargent commenting that it displayed " Banks at her best : doing something unexpected simply because she can . " While Brennan Carley of Spin described the song as having the potential to " be the single that finally breaks the Harlem MC on the radio , and it 's about time . " Kate Beaudoin from Mic commented on the song , praising Banks ' flow , " It 's a captivating video and an even better song . Her flow is unbelievable : ' You broke honey , and they call me Banks cause I can loan money / Colder than December , my diamonds on Anna Wintour / So that 's fly ice in my life / I don 't see no limits so I strive and I shine twice , ' Banks raps . Anyone who can fit Anna Wintour into a rhyme about winter automatically gets points . " 
 = = Promotion = = 
 = = = Music video = = = 
 The video for " Ice Princess " was directed by duo <unk> . It was released on March 31 , 2015 , via Banks ' VEVO channel . The video depicts Banks as the frozen leader of a robotic ninja army , with snakes for hair , in the style of Greek mythology 's Medusa . She leads her CGI army into battle with a volcano that produces multicolored clouds , that eventually end up destroying her . Reviews of the video were positive . Kate Beaudoin of Mic called the video " epic " , while Daily Mail 's Jennifer Pearson called it " spine @-@ tingling " and according to James Rettig from Stereogum , it 's a " slick " music video . Banks initially caused controversy with promotion for the song , posting pictures of her in makeup for the video , claiming she was in whiteface , which caused outrage on the internet . However , Banks ultimately revealed that she was trolling the media , and the makeup was not finished , being applied for the music video for " Ice Princess " . She later tweeted " Lol u crackers wish I cared enough to be doing whiteface . I 'm becoming the ICE <unk> <unk> " . 
 = = = Live performances = = = 
 On April 10 , 2015 , Banks performed " Ice Princess " at the Coachella Festival . On July 10 , 2015 , she performed it during her set at the Bilbao BBK Live festival in Bilbao , Spain . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from Broke with Expensive Taste liner notes . 
 = = = Credits = = = 
 " Ice Princess " contains a sample of " In the Air " , a song by progressive house DJ Morgan Page . 
 = = = Personnel = = = 
 Azealia Banks – songwriting , vocals 
 Kevin James – songwriting 
 Jonathan Harris – songwriting 
 <unk> – production 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Hurricane Bonnie ( 1986 ) = 
 Hurricane Bonnie caused moderate damage along the Gulf Coast of the United States in late June 1986 . The second named storm and first hurricane of the 1986 Atlantic hurricane season , Bonnie developed out of an area of low pressure over the central Gulf of Mexico on June 23 . The system gradually intensified and was declared Tropical Storm Bonnie the next day as it moved generally towards the west @-@ northwest . On June 25 , Bonnie was upgraded to a hurricane . Bonnie strengthened further and on the following day , the storm attained its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) . Shortly thereafter , Bonnie made Landfall near High Island , Texas . Following landfall , Bonnie quickly weakened below tropical storm status and dissipated over Missouri on June 28 . 
 Prior to Bonnie moving ashore , 22 @,@ 000 people were evacuated in Texas and Louisiana . Upon making landfall , Hurricane Bonnie produced a storm surge peaking at 5 @.@ 2 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) at Sabine Pass . Rainfall from the storm peaked at 13 inches ( 330 mm ) in Ace , Texas , which caused some street flooding and destroyed a small dam in Liberty County , Texas . Three fatalities were reported in the Port Arthur , Texas area ; two deaths were from separate car accidents and another occurred after a partially paralyzed woman died in a house fire . Flooding also impacted northwestern Louisiana . In the Shreveport area alone , 381 homes , 20 businesses , and 80 major highway intersections were flooded . The hurricane also spawned 11 tornadoes , destroying about 25 houses in southwestern Louisiana . Overall , Hurricane Bonnie caused $ 42 million ( 1986 USD ) in damage and five fatalities . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 In mid @-@ June , a mid @-@ level center of circulation formed in association with a quasi @-@ stationary cold front that stretched across northern Florida and the extreme northeast Gulf of Mexico . On June 20 , a weak and disorganized area of low pressure developed in conjunction with the front and it passed by Tampa Bay , Florida the following day . Upon moving into the eastern Gulf of Mexico , there was little convection on observed on satellite imagery , although a distinguishable wind @-@ shift was noted by an offshore buoy . However , by June 23 , the presence of deep convection atop a circulation had become well @-@ defined enough for the National Hurricane Center to classify the disturbance as a tropical depression , while centered 330 mi ( 535 km ) southwest of Cape Coral , Florida . Moving generally west to west @-@ northwestward across the central Gulf of Mexico , the National Hurricane Center sent a reconnaissance plane into the tropical depression at 1500 UTC on June 24 , at which time winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) were found . About three hours later , the depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Bonnie . 
 In the 24 hours after becoming a tropical storm , satellite imagery showed a substantial increase in upper @-@ level outflow as Tropical Storm Bonnie gradually intensified . A reconnaissance plane into the system shortly before 1200 UTC on June 25 revealed hurricane force winds 1 @,@ 500 ft ( 460 m ) above the surface . This evidence was the basis of Bonnie 's upgrade to a Category 1 on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale at 1800 UTC on June 25 . During the afternoon hours of June 26 , Bonnie reached its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 992 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 23 inHg ) . While accelerating towards the northwest , the hurricane retained this intensity until landfall near High Island , Texas at 1000 UTC on June 26 . Eight hours later , Bonnie weakened to a tropical storm and was downgraded to tropical depression status at 0000 UTC on June 27 . The depression persisted until 1200 UTC on June 28 , at which time it was absorbed by a frontal zone while located over the U.S. state of Missouri . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Upon the system being classified as a tropical depression , a high risk of landfall near Port Arthur , Texas was noted , giving federal officials sufficient lead time to warn local residents about a possible approaching hurricane . As the system neared landfall , tropical cyclone watches and warnings were issued for the Gulf Coast of the United States . At 1200 UTC on June 25 , the National Hurricane Center issued a gale warning and a hurricane watch , stretching from Port O 'Connor , Texas to the mouth of the Mississippi River . A few hours later , a hurricane warning was issued for area west of Morgan City , Louisiana to Freeport , Texas . In advance of the approaching storm , roughly 22 @,@ 000 residents were evacuated , with 10 @,@ 000 from Galveston County , Texas alone . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Due to the small size of Hurricane Bonnie , damage was relatively light , totaling to $ 42 million . The storm was also attributed to five deaths , four in Texas and one in Louisiana . 
 = = = Texas = = = 
 In some areas of eastern Texas , the storm dropped 10 to 13 in ( 250 to 330 mm ) of rain , with a peak total of 13 inches ( 330 mm ) in Ace . Heavy rains caused by Bonnie also lead a small dam collapse in northeastern Liberty County , Texas , resulting in severe flooding . In Hardin County , the Pine Island Bayou overflowed , causing water to enter hundreds of homes and businesses . Several major roadways were flooded due to flooding , including Highway 59 between Livingston and Shepherd , U.S. Route 79 in Panola County , and Interstate 20 and several farm @-@ to @-@ market roads in Harrison County . The Bear Foot Lake dam overflowed , damaging some homes and forcing 200 families to evacuate . Overall , approximately 1 @,@ 300 people in southeastern Texas fled their homes due to flooding . Severe flooding left behind by the heavy rains caused $ 5 million in damage . 
 In addition to rain and flooding , winds damaged more homes and businesses , and a tornado was spawned a few miles southwest of Port Arthur . More than 19 @,@ 000 power outages were reported in the area near where Bonnie made landfall . Texas State Highway 87 was closed in Jefferson County due to debris and electrical poles fallen on the roadway . The storm left broken windows , scattered tree limbs , and debris filled streets in Port Arthur and Beaumont . At the latter , strong winds toppled a radio tower at the Texas Department of Public Safety building , while several schools suffered damage to the roof and windows . Marinas and boats at Lake Sam Rayburn were damaged . Hank Creek Marina , located across the lake , broke free from its moorings and floated away , while portions of were submerged . Four indirect fatalities were confirmed in Texas , two from traffic accidents , one from a house fire ignited by a candle , and another from drowning . Several injuries were also reported , including four after a truck flipped over due to strong winds . 
 = = = Louisiana = = = 
 Most of the damage in Louisiana occurred in Cameron Parish . Twenty @-@ five homes , trailers , and cabins in southwestern Louisiana were destroyed , resulting in about $ 400 @,@ 000 in damages . Two tornadoes were spawned in Webster Parish . The first caused about $ 15 @,@ 000 in damage to the roofs of three homes . The other tornado destroyed three mobile homes and severely damaged an additional two as well as three permanent homes . Damage from this tornado totaled $ 200 @,@ 000 . Just south of Blanchard , 10 @.@ 2 in ( 260 mm ) of rain fell within a 12 @-@ hour period . Interstate 20 was closed from Shreveport to the Louisiana @-@ Texas state line due to flooding , with as much as 5 ft ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) of standing water near Greenwood . 
 Torrential rains caused water inundation up to 10 ft ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) in some areas of Shreveport . Firefighters used boats to rescue some stranded Shreveport residents in their homes by sudden high water . Rescuers also had to bind themselves together to rescue some people stranded in a flooded trailer park . Flooding in the city forced police to barricade 50 major highway intersections . Along the shore of Cross Lake , about 80 homes were damaged by water intrusion . About 381 homes and 20 businesses in Shreveport were damaged by flooding . A tornado spawned in the city overturned an airplane at Shreveport Downtown Airport , damaged a roof from a house , and shattered a number of windows . No injuries were reported from the tornado . Damage in Louisiana from flooding alone totaled $ 11 – 13 million , with $ 4 million to highways and bridges , $ 1 – 2 million to vehicles , $ 5 million to property , and $ 1 – 2 million to boats . Three fishermen were tossed into a lake after a boat was capsized due to high winds . Two were rescued , but one perished . 
 = = = Elsewhere = = = 
 Heavy rains from the remnant low @-@ pressure area of Bonnie led to heavy rains in several states in the Southeastern United States . Rainfall was generally minor in most areas , however in Arkansas , rains totaled up to 11 @.@ 75 in ( 254 mm ) at the South Arkansas Regional Airport . Several roads were washed out in Ouachita County near Elliott . A number of roads and bridges were also washed out in Union County , with damage totaling $ 200 @,@ 000 . U.S. Route 79 was closed between Magnolia and Stephens because of standing water . Three or four families evacuated near the Ouachita @-@ Union County line after the <unk> Creek overflowed its banks and flooded 20 homes . There was also a small area of heavy rains totaling up to 5 in ( 127 mm ) along the border of Tennessee and Georgia . 
 = Arad , Israel = 
 Arad ( Hebrew : <unk> ( audio ) ; Arabic : <unk> ) is a city in the Southern District of Israel . It is located on the border of the Negev and Judean Deserts , 25 kilometres ( 16 miles ) west of the Dead Sea and 45 kilometres ( 28 miles ) east of Beersheba . The city is home to a diverse population of 24 @,@ 229 , including Ashkenazi and Sephardi Jews , both secular and religious , Bedouins and Black Hebrews , as well as new immigrants . The city is notable for its clean , dry air and serves as a major attraction to asthmatics worldwide . 
 After attempts to settle the area in the 1920s , Arad was founded in November 1962 as an Israeli development town , the first planned city in Israel . Arad 's population grew significantly with the Aliyah from the Commonwealth of Independent States in the 1990s , and peaked in 2002 at 24 @,@ 500 residents . 
 Landmarks in Arad include the ruins of Tel Arad , Arad Park , a domestic airfield and Israel 's first legal race circuit . The city is known for its annual summer music festival , The Arad Festival . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Antiquity = = = 
 Arad is named after the Biblical Canaanite town located at Tel Arad ( a Biblical archaeology site famous for the discovery of ostraca ) , which is located approximately 8 kilometers ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) west of modern Arad . The Bible ( Judges 1 : 16 ) describes it as a Canaanite stronghold whose king kept the Israelites from moving from the Negev to the Judean Mountains , although Tel Arad was destroyed over 1 @,@ 200 years before the arrival of the Israelites . However , Shoshenq I 's chronicles seem to mention a settlement in Tel Arad . During the Byzantine period , the location was still correctly identified by Eusebius , and the name " Arad " was preserved by the Bedouins . Ancient Arad became a Christian bishopric . Stephanus , one of its bishops , was a signatory of the synodal letter of John III of Jerusalem against Severus of Antioch in 518 and took part in the 536 synod of the three Roman provinces of Palaestina Prima , Palaestina Secunda , and Palaestina <unk> ( to the last of which Arad belonged ) against Anthimus I of Constantinople . No longer a residential bishopric , Arad is today listed by the Catholic Church as a titular see . 
 = = = British Mandate era = = = 
 The first modern attempt to settle the area was made by the Yishuv , the body of Jewish residents in Mandatory Palestine , on 23 February 1921 , when the British Mandate government allowed discharged soldiers from the Jewish Legion to settle in the area . Nine men and two women attempted the task , but after four months were forced to leave because water was not found in the area . 
 = = = State of Israel = = = 
 On 15 November 1960 , a planning team ( followed by a full @-@ fledged committee on 29 December ) was appointed by the Israeli cabinet to examine the possibility of establishing a city in the northeastern Negev desert and Arad region . An initial budget of 50 @,@ 000 Israeli liras was granted for the project , headed by Aryeh <unk> . On 31 January 1961 , the final location was chosen ( 3 @.@ 5 kilometers ( 2 @.@ 2 mi ) southwest of Mount Kidod ) , and plans were approved for roads and water connections . In March 1961 , blueprints for a city of <unk> 20 @,@ 000 residents were drawn up . Yona <unk> was the chief architect and planner . 
 The plan took into account topography and climate , with residential buildings constructed with large inner courtyards that offered protection from the desert sun and wind . High density residential areas were built first in order to create an urban milieu and shorten walking distances . 
 The oil company Nefta built a work camp in the area in July 1961 , consisting of six temporary sheds , after oil was found there in commercial quantities . The town itself was established in 1962 by a group of young ex @-@ kibbutz and ex @-@ moshav members seeking an environment free of overcrowding , traffic , noise , and pollution . The founding ceremony was held on 21 November , and attended by then @-@ Prime Minister David Ben @-@ Gurion . It was one of the last development towns to be founded . According to the city website , Arad was the first pre @-@ planned city in Israel . 
 Until 1964 Arad had about 160 families , most of whom were natives . After 1971 Arad began absorbing olim ( Jewish immigrants ) , mostly from the Soviet Union , but also from English speaking countries and Latin America , and its population increased from 4 @,@ 000 in 1969 to 10 @,@ 500 in 1974 . During the first half of the 1990s , Arad absorbed 6 @,@ 000 immigrants from the former Soviet Union . Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin declared Arad a city on 29 June 1995 . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Arad is located mostly on the western and southwestern Kidod Range , and the Arad Plain , which marks the southwestern end of the Judean Desert . It is located 23 kilometers ( 14 @.@ 3 mi ) west of the southern end of the Dead Sea , and is by road , 45 kilometers ( 28 @.@ 0 mi ) east of <unk> , 111 kilometers ( 69 @.@ 0 mi ) south of Jerusalem , 138 kilometers ( 85 @.@ 7 mi ) south east of Tel Aviv , and 219 kilometers ( 136 @.@ 1 mi ) north of the southern @-@ most city of Eilat . 
 The city spans an area of 93 @,@ 140 dunams ( 93 @.@ 1 km2 ; 36 @.@ 0 sq mi ) , one of the largest municipal areas in Israel , even though its urban area is much smaller . In 1993 , the city 's jurisdiction was 73 @,@ 934 @.@ 3 dunams ( 73 @.@ 9 km2 ; 28 @.@ 5 sq mi ) , still many times larger than the urban area . The historical site of Tel Arad and the Arad Park ( also known as Ran Grove ) can also be found within its municipal area , west of the urban core . Arad also has a commercial landing strip located slightly to the south of its urban core . It borders the Tamar and Abu <unk> regional councils , and the closest local municipality to Arad is the Bedouin local council <unk> . 
 = = Neighborhoods = = 
 Each neighborhood in Arad contains streets named in a thematic manner , for example , a neighborhood where all streets are named after jewels . The exception to this are the four central quarters , which have more conventional street names , and the original two neighborhoods ( Rishonim and Ne <unk> ) . The themed neighborhoods make up the entire city north of Highway 31 . South of the highway is Arad 's industrial zone ( the northern area being the light industry zone ) . The neighborhoods are as follows : 
 = = Geology and topography = = 
 The western part of Arad is made up of Loess land , while the eastern part is made up of sedimentary rock , including chalk , flint and dolomite . 
 Arad 's elevation ranges between approximately 361 @.@ 5 and 631 @.@ 1 metres ( 1 @,@ 186 and 2 @,@ 071 ft ) above sea level , a notable peak being Mount Kidod ( 600 m or 1 @,@ 969 ft ) , located at the northeastern point of the city and named after Ras al @-@ <unk> , the Arabic name for the hill . Other peaks within the municipal borders include Mount Kina ( 635 m or 2 @,@ 083 ft ) and Mount <unk> ( 537 m or 1 @,@ 762 ft ) . There are several wadis that pass through Arad , notably the Ye 'elim Stream ( which runs along Highway 31 ) and Tze 'elim Stream . Others include the <unk> , Keisan , Kidod , Kina , <unk> , Pra 'im , <unk> , and other streams . 
 = = Climate = = 
 Between 1964 and 1974 , Arad 's average temperature in January was 11 ° C ( 52 ° F ) , and 27 ° C ( 81 ° F ) in July . The average yearly precipitation between 1960 and 1990 was 150 millimetres ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) , and 158 millimetres ( 6 @.@ 2 in ) between 1962 and 1978 . Arad is thus situated in an arid area , where most precipitation falls in the winter months of December , January and February . It does however , on rare occasions , snow . Two examples are the massive snowstorm during the 1991 – 92 winter that swept through entire mountainous of the Negev and January 's snowstorm of 2008 . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 According to the Israel Central Bureau of Statistics , of Arad 's 23 @,@ 300 2005 population , 82 % were Jews , and another 17 @.@ 2 % were other non @-@ Arabs . 11 @,@ 100 ( ~ 47 @.@ 6 % ) were men and 12 @,@ 200 were women . 42 @.@ 9 % ( the second highest in the country ) were immigrants since 1990 . Arad 's population peaked in 2002 at 24 @,@ 500 . Arad 's former mayor , Moty Brill , said that the reason for the city 's decline is its failure to absorb the massive immigration from Russia . In early 2007 , a study ordered by the Israeli Housing and Construction Ministry found that Arad suffered from a negative image , and described it a " settlement that drives residents away " . In March , The Ministerial Committee on Development in the Negev and Galilee approved a plan to move the State Archives from Jerusalem to Arad and to subsidize the costs of land development for reserve soldiers , anticipating the IDF 's plan to relocate its training bases to the Negev . 
 In 2005 , Arad had 10 @,@ 227 ( ~ 43 @.@ 9 % ) salaried workers and 476 ( ~ 2 % ) self @-@ employed . 10 @,@ 474 were receiving children 's benefits , 290 were receiving unemployment benefits , and 2 @,@ 010 were receiving income guarantee . The average monthly income for self @-@ employed workers was NIS 5 @,@ 694 , up 10 @.@ 2 % from 2004 's 5 @,@ 165 , with salaried employees earning an average of NIS 5 @,@ 686 ( NIS 7 @,@ 531 for men and NIS 3 @,@ 904 for women ) . 
 The IDF 's City of Training Bases , under construction near Beersheba , hopes to bring thousands of soldiers ( mostly officers , senior NCOs and other staff ) to live in the Negev , including Arad . According to Orli Yehezkel , CEO of the Ministry for the Development of the Negev and Galilee , said NIS 4 @.@ 5 million will be invested in Arad , including a subsidy of NIS 1 @,@ 000 per family per month for two years for families of soldiers wishing to move to Arad . 
 The Negev and Galilee Development Ministry envisions a tripling of Arad 's population by 2025 . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Other than tourist venues , Arad 's commerce is mostly concentrated in the central commerce area , as envisioned in the original plan . There is one shopping mall in the city , the Arad Mall , in the northern block of the commerce sector . In addition to the main area , there are small shop clusters in most neighborhoods in the city , notably a building called The Star ( <unk> ) in the Tlalim quarter . A lone supermarket outside the center , Mega in the City , is located in the industrial zone , near the entrance to the city , and a major shopping complex is planned near it by a real estate company called Zim Centers . The Arad Market , open on Mondays , is located in the light industry zone . 
 Among the companies with manufacturing plants in Arad are Arad Textile Industries , one of Israel 's largest producers of towels , <unk> Israel , <unk> Electronics who manufacture printed circuit boards and electronic products , El @-@ Ran Timber Industries , <unk> who manufacture cosmetic products , and a Unilever <unk> Israel cereal plant . Since 1971 , Arad has been producing phosphoric acid , made from brine collected from the Dead Sea , and phosphates from the nearby <unk> . Rotem <unk> Negev Ltd , a subsidiary of Israel Chemicals Ltd ( ICL ) , has been planning a new phosphate plant in the <unk> <unk> area for several years . In 2008 , the Ministry of the Environment decided not to contest the company 's bid , despite studies showing it may increase air pollution @-@ related deaths in the area . 
 = = Tourism = = 
 In addition to the annual music festival , Arad 's fresh air attracts asthmatics from all over the world , and its proximity to the Dead Sea provides a less expensive accommodation alternative to the pricey hotel zone on the sea shore . The Arad municipality has begun to develop hiking and ecological tourism . Additionally , many visitors to Masada stay in Arad , which is the closest ( 22 km ( 13 @.@ 7 mi ) by road ) urban settlement to the site and provides the only access to its western side . On the outskirts of Arad , near the hotel area , there is a large white monument conceived by Yigal <unk> in 1968 , called <unk> Mo 'av ( Mo 'av Lookout ) , which also offers a view of the Judean Desert . 
 The Israel National Trail passes through Arad , between Mount Kina and Tel Arad , a major archeological site and national park . Although not located within Arad 's jurisdiction , the Zohar Peak ( 552 m or 1 @,@ 811 ft ) and Zohar Lookout ( <unk> Zohar ) are common hiking and biking destinations on the national trail . The trails codenamed <unk> and <unk> run along the national trail in this area . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Arad 's main cultural center is the Center for Culture , Youth and Sports ( Hebrew : <unk> " ס , <unk> ) , named after Samuel Rubin and located on Ben Yair Street near the city 's only mall , the Arad Mall . It was built in 1983 and contains the Arad Museum , Arad 's public library , a concert hall , a tourist information center about the Judean and Negev deserts ( called Arad Visitor Center , founded in 1989 ) , which is temporarily closed , and various related offices . 
 The Oron movie theater designed by the architect Menachem Cohen closed down during the tenure of Mayor Moty Brill . <unk> Lot , an artists quarter , is located in the city 's industrial zone , utilizing old warehouses . The city also has a conservatory and concert hall . 
 In accordance with the 7 March 2007 decision taken by the Ministry for the Development of the Negev and Galilee to move the national archive of Israel from Jerusalem to Arad , a museum is planned , which will display various gifts given to Israeli politicians over the years . 
 Arad was widely known for its Hebrew Music Festival , held annually since 1982 . The festival attracted Israel 's best musicians and bands until 18 July 1995 , when three teenagers were crushed to death by a falling gate during a farewell concert by the popular band <unk> . Since then the festival has become a minor event . Five of the festival 's organizers received prison sentences of up to one year . 
 The main public park and picnic area in Arad is the Arad Park , also called the Ran Grove ( after Ran <unk> , who was killed in the Yom Kippur War ) , which is located about 8 kilometers ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) west of the city center and measures 3 @,@ 000 dunams ( 3 @.@ 0 km2 ; 1 @.@ 2 sq mi ) . Other notable parks include : 
 Gan <unk> ( a.k.a. Park <unk> ) , the park at the entrance to the city , with monuments of various desert animals 
 Gan <unk> ( Garden of the Five ) , a memorial park for the five residents of Arad who were killed in action in the Six @-@ Day War . Includes a monument for the soldiers , as well as a stone structure called <unk> <unk> ( lit . Pillar of the Potatoes , because of its shape ) , which marks Arad 's place in the desert and their residents ' control of the territory according to Bedouin tradition – designed by Yona <unk> . 
 Northern Park , to the north of the Halamish neighborhood 
 Gan <unk> 'ot ( Adventure Park ) , a large playground and open grass area in the Rishonim neighborhood 
 The main cluster of recreational facilities in the city is located in a small neighborhood known as <unk> , also called the Sports Town ( Kiryat <unk> ) . The area contains a swimming pool , tennis courts , a country club and various playgrounds . The city 's main football stadium is located outside this cluster , on the corner of Yehuda and Palmach Streets . The stadium is home to Hapoel Arad , who currently play in Liga Bet , the fourth tier of Israeli football . 
 Arad has also hosted a mountain biking tournament annually since 2000 , called Riding Arad , in honor of <unk> Ilya , a soldier killed in action in Lebanon in 1997 . In March 2008 , the tournament became part of an international Union Cycliste Internationale competition , which is co @-@ hosted by <unk> and Ma <unk> . Arad 's professional course is 37 kilometers ( 23 @.@ 0 mi ) long , while the expert course is 22 @.@ 5 kilometers ( 14 @.@ 0 mi ) . 
 = = Healthcare = = 
 Arad does not have a hospital , but there are numerous medical clinics , including <unk> , <unk> and Maccabi . Emergencies are handled by the single Magen David Adom station , located in the municipal compound . 
 A medical center was also built in the compound in 2004 , named Schaller Medical Centre after Leon and Freda Schaller from London , who were the prime donors . It serves as an emergency ward , but does not have the equipment needed to perform operations , and such patients are transferred to the <unk> Medical Center . On average , 10 % of the patients are transferred . 
 = = Law enforcement = = 
 Arad is served by a local Israel Police station , located next to the municipal compound and the Magen David Adom station . It is commanded by Superintendent Yuval Paz and has 58 members . Arad 's station also serves the Sodom area . 
 Arad 's police force was chosen as the exceptional force for 2007 , and awarded an award of excellence on 5 March 2008 . Among others , a severe reduction in property crime was cited . Arad 's force was able to reduce the amount of such crimes from 1 @,@ 092 in 2003 to just 168 in 2007 . On 18 July 2008 , Arad police , in a rare incident , shot dead a man threatening to kill his ex @-@ wife with a knife . 
 = = Education and religious institutions = = 
 Arad has a public elementary school in every central neighborhood ( Halamish , Tlalim , <unk> , Leva 'ot and Ye 'elim ( called Ye 'elim @-@ <unk> ) ) , while Tlalim is a religious school . There is one public middle school , Re <unk> , located near the junction of the <unk> and <unk> 'im streets . The second middle school , Allon , was closed in 2007 and merged into ORT Arad , the city 's only public secondary school , which shares a building with the Re <unk> middle school and the former Yigal Allon school . In the 2006 – 07 school year , 57 @.@ 14 % of Arad 's 12th graders were eligible for a <unk> ( matriculation ) certificate , compared to a national average of 45 @.@ 9 % . In the 2007 – 08 year , the number dropped to 49 @.@ 67 % , compared to a national average of 46 @.@ 3 % . 
 In addition , there are several private and Haredi schools in Arad , such as the <unk> movement 's grades 1 – 8 school , and the Gerrer Haredi school . Other Haredi schools include the boys ' Beit Ya 'akov and girls ' Kol Ya 'akov in the Halamish neighborhood , the Lev Simcha Yeshiva , and the Beit Ya 'akov High School . Religious Zionist schools include the Ne 'ot Avraham Bnei Akiva <unk> , which also provides young women with the guidance to perform volunteer activities in the community , and the Tlalim Elementary School , founded in 1971 . 
 Also in Arad is the <unk> Democratic School , which is an alternative school for students up through the high school level . It allows students to create their own schedules , and choose how they would like to spend their entire day at school . 
 SOS Children 's Village Arad ( known as Kfar <unk> ) was built in the southern outskirts of Arad and inaugurated on 27 October 1981 . It consists of twelve family houses , to accommodate up to 120 children . There is also an SOS Youth Facility to accommodate 12 to 14 youths from the SOS Children 's Village . In January 2005 , an SOS Social Centre was opened at Arad . It runs a day @-@ care center and various community outreach programmes to support socially weak families . Until fall 2008 , the World Union of Jewish Students ( <unk> ) , funded by Jews from New Jersey , had an institute in Arad which allowed post @-@ college young Jews from around the world to study Israeli society and the Hebrew language . When <unk> 's ownership changed , the institute was moved to the center of the country . 
 Arad has 22 synagogues , of which 11 are Ashkenazi , 9 are Sephardi , one is Yemenite , and one is Ethiopian . Both the central Ashkenazi and Sephardi synagogues are located in the Ye 'elim neighborhood . There are Gerrer synagogues in <unk> and Halamish , and a Chabad synagogue in Ye 'elim . There are two <unk> in the city – in the Tlalim and <unk> neighborhoods . The city also has a small Messianic community that is being accused of illegal missionary activities by the Haredim and certain right @-@ wing groups . Arad 's dead are mostly buried in the local cemetery , located in the northeastern outskirts of the city , close to the road to Masada . 
 = = Media = = 
 Arad 's local newspaper , Kidod , was published by the entrepreneurs Eli and <unk> Ziv , early founders of Arad . Kidod started as a small leaflet in December 1966 and grew to a become a full paper . At its peak , it was circulated , free of charge , in groceries , kiosks , etc . , in 3 @,@ 000 copies each week . Kidod ran for 23 years and had a key role in the cultural and community life of Arad . <unk> Arad is the local newspaper today . 
 = = Transportation = = 
 There are two ways to get to Arad : by air or road . The only highway connecting Arad with the rest of the country is Highway 31 , which connects it with Beersheba to the west , and the Dead Sea to the east . It has two junctions within Arad 's municipal area — the Arad Junction ( within the city itself , with Road <unk> ) , and the Tel Arad Junction ( with Highway 80 ) . The local Road <unk> connects Arad with Masada , but does not connect to the road next to the dead sea ( Highway 90 ) . It is therefore the only way to get to Masada 's western side . 
 Arad 's airfield , which was first used during the music festival of 1994 , is located to the south of the city , and serves domestic flights according to demand . A railway line , which would also go through the <unk> Airbase , is in the planning stages . Its terminus will be adjacent to the central bus station . 
 The main bus station of Arad , Arad Central Bus Station , was located on the corner of Jerusalem ( Yerushalayim ) Street and <unk> ( Yehuda ) Street . It has however been closed due to a legal battle between Arad 's municipality and the Egged Bus Cooperative , and its bus stops are now located nearby on Jerusalem St. Construction of the central station officially restarted 18 January 2009 . The new station will include seven platforms and a large parking lot for park and ride . The planned cost of the project is NIS 4 @.@ 5 million . 
 Buses in Arad are served by the Egged Bus Cooperative and , since 1 June 2007 , also the <unk> company . A multitude of inter @-@ city bus routes are served by the main station , two more inter @-@ city Haredi routes which leave from the north , as well as five inner routes ( 1 , 2 , 3 , 11 , 12 ) . The inter @-@ city routes are as follows : 
 = = Local government = = 
 Arad has , since its inception in 1962 , been under the governance of a regional council and local council , before being designated as a city council in 1995 . Democratic elections have been held in Arad since 1966 , although only Avraham <unk> , <unk> Tabib and Moty Brill were ever elected or re @-@ elected as the head of the municipality . The first mayor of the city of Arad was <unk> Tabib who served as both head of the local council and city council . He was replaced by Mordechai Brill in 2003 , although due to his inability to pass a yearly budget , Brill was dismissed by the Minister of the Interior Meir <unk> in August 2007 , and a government @-@ appointed clerk , Gideon Bar @-@ Lev , took his place . An election took place again 13 April 2010 , won by Tali <unk> of the Yisrael <unk> party . The longest serving head of Arad 's municipality was Avraham <unk> who served as head of the local council between 1967 and 1986 . 
 Arad 's yearly budget is over 100 million NIS and over $ 30 million USD . On 27 December 2007 , the 2008 budget was unanimously passed at NIS 123 million by the city council . The city 's total income for the year is estimated at approximately NIS 119 million . 
 While it is not customary for Israeli cities to have major unique / auxiliary laws , many cities have minor laws . In Arad , it is illegal to feed animals in public places . It is also illegal to sell or consume sunflower seeds , peanuts , etc. in public places , due to an anti @-@ littering law enacted in 1965 . There are in all 27 auxiliary laws in Arad , which were enacted between 1965 and 2000 . 
 = = = Municipal flag and emblem = = = 
 The emblem of Arad is a square with a hill and a flame . The hill represents Mount Kidod , a hill in the northeastern part of the city , and the flame represents natural gas , which was extracted in the area in Arad 's early days and spurred the city 's growth . The emblem was adopted on 19 May 1966 . The flag of Arad is a rectangle with a 2 : 3 ratio , which has a light blue background and shows the emblem in the center with the Hebrew text for " Municipality of Arad " at the top and the English text " City of <unk> Israel " ( or variations thereof ) and the bottom . This is the de facto flag , and there is no law or edict making it official . 
 = = Notable residents = = 
 Amos Oz ( born 1939 ) , writer 
 = = Twin towns — sister cities = = 
 Wilmington , Delaware became a sister city of Arad in 1973 , to commemorate the 25th anniversary of the State of Israel . 
 <unk> , Germany signed a twinning agreement with Arad in 1989 . 
 Burlington , Vermont , developed a sister city relationship with Arad in 1991 . Then Mayor Bezalel Tabib , along with Professor Walid Dajani , who represented Bethlehem , visited Burlington , Vermont to sign a three cities cooperative agreement — the first @-@ ever sister @-@ city pacts among American , Palestinian , and Israeli communities . 
 = Johari Window ( Fringe ) = 
 " Johari Window " is the 12th episode of the second season of the American science fiction drama television series Fringe . The episode , written by co @-@ executive producer Josh Singer and directed by filmmaker Joe Chappelle , is set in a fictional upstate New York town and begins with the discovery of a seemingly deformed child by a state trooper . The Fringe investigative team of Olivia Dunham , Walter Bishop , and Peter Bishop arrives on the scene , only to discover a secret government experiment gone awry , with signs from Walter 's past . 
 Originally called " Edina City Limits " , the episode 's title was changed shortly before it aired . It premiered in the United States on January 14 , 2010 , on Fox , to 6 @.@ 529 million viewers and a 2 @.@ 6 share 18 – 49 . The episode received average reviews , as many critics compared it either negatively or positively to a B @-@ movie , though most agreed that it seemed to be rehashed from older The X @-@ Files episodes . Several of the main actors , however , thoroughly enjoyed the episode ; Noble named it one of his favorite Fringe episodes . Critics also noted the popular culture references to The Wizard of Oz ( 1939 ) , Deliverance ( 1972 ) , and Joseph Merrick . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In upstate New York , a child is picked up on the road by a state trooper . While en route , the child suddenly morphs into a deformed creature . At the station , the troopers try to decide what to do with him , and one takes his picture . Two other deformed people enter the station , kill the troopers and take the boy . 
 The Fringe team comes on the scene to investigate and find the boy 's photograph , along with recorded sightings of deformed people going back 30 years . They arrive in Edina , the city these sightings occurred near , and Olivia Dunham ( Anna Torv ) hears a buzz called the " Edina hum " . The sheriff explains it is coming from a nearby military base and offers to show them case files of past sightings . While driving , the SUV containing Olivia , Peter ( Joshua Jackson ) , and Walter ( John Noble ) is run off the road by another vehicle , whose driver then starts shooting at them before getting shot and leaving . The FBI find the abandoned vehicle and follow a blood trail to the shooter . Peter is visibly disturbed after killing his first person , and Olivia tries to comfort him . 
 Agent Broyles discovers that the army did classified experiments in Edina called " Project Elephant " , but most of the records are gone . The team brings the body , along with a butterfly Walter found in the town and thought Astrid would like , back to the lab in Boston . They discover that both have transformed into deformed versions of themselves . Peter and Olivia go back to Edina to talk with the sheriff and try to locate the owner of the truck . Meanwhile , back in the lab , Walter tries to remember why the case feels so familiar . Throughout the episode Walter had been humming some strange melody , and he and Astrid realize he might previously have worked on the project with the army . The melody was a memory trick Walter used to remind himself where he stored the experiment files so many years ago . The experiment was done by the army in the late 1970s to test how electromagnetic pulses can camouflage soldiers and was conducted on the townspeople ; the army was unaware of the long @-@ term effects of the study until it was too late , and the people were stuck in a deformed state . The " hum " hides their deformities from the human eye through a massive electromagnetic pulse that runs through the town , and once they leave and are out of the pulse 's reach , their true deformities show . 
 Walter and Astrid find the source of the electromagnetic pulse , and begin investigating the house the pulse was built on . At the same time , Peter and Olivia go to a rural meeting place where the sheriff said they would find the truck 's owner , only to be shot at by the sheriff and his deputy , who are hell bent on keeping the town 's secret . Walter manages to turn off the pulse , and all of the townsfolk revert to their deformed appearance . The daughter of one of the army scientists saves Olivia and Peter from getting shot , and explains that her father stayed in Edina to perfect the pulse . After Walter pleads to Broyles to let the townspeople keep their secret , the Fringe team decides to not report the case so that the remaining residents can live a normal life . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was the second written by co @-@ executive producer and writer Josh Singer , and was the third directed by co @-@ executive producer Joe Chappelle . It was originally titled " Edina City Limits " in press and promotional items , until Fox changed it to " Johari Window " without explanation on January 5 , a week before it broadcast . A <unk> window is a cognitive psychological tool used to help people better understand their interpersonal communication and relationships , and may have been chosen as the episode 's title because it corresponded to the transformative nature of the plot . 
 The sound mixing department 's inspiration for the " Edina hum " ( the frequency hiding the deformities of the townsfolk ) came from executive producer Jeff Pinkner . Supervising sound editor Paul Curtis later recalled Pinkner 's asking for it to sound like " 100 @-@ year locusts back east " , consequently what the crew " basically ... ended up with were bugs " . They also layered in a variety of machine sounds . Sound effects editor Bruce Tanis remarked that because the background sound lasted the entire episode , it had to be handled " thoughtfully " . 
 " What 's weird about the Edina hum is that you hear it all over the town . It goes to the borders of this little town : indoors , outdoors , down the street , in the basement ; you hear some level of it , but you don 't want to hear that for 44 minutes of a show . It 'll drive you nuts . So you have to blend it in , pick moments , bring it up , take it down , so that people can reference it , but you 're not listening to 44 minutes of hum " . 
 Actor Joshua Jackson later remarked that " Johari Window " was a " stand @-@ alone " episode in an interview : " There is nothing from that thing that broadens the story , except at the heart of it , is a story about love and acceptance and family ... Which of course , for these two guys , is the entire theme of the show for them . So I think we 've done that really well " . Actor John Noble added , " Tolerance . Acceptance . I loved ' Johari Window ' . I thought it was one of my favourite stories " . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 When Walter refuses to get out of the car to enter a supermarket , he mentions he is " learning to appreciate cowardice " and that " the lion had a point " , a reference , he explains to Peter , about the cowardly lion from The Wizard of Oz ( 1939 ) . Walter also mentions flying monkeys and talking lions later in the episode , both also homages to the movie . Later , Walter excitedly says he remembers someone who played the banjo and looked like the kidnapped , deformed boy , and starts humming a tune . Peter completes the tune and explains it is from the movie Deliverance ( 1972 ) , which depicts murderous , inbred , and deformed people living in rural Georgia . The army experiment was titled " Project Elephant " , a possible reference to Joseph Merrick , a deformed person known as the " Elephant Man " . When Walter shows Astrid how the moth changes back to the butterfly when they enter the town , he says , " a friend once said ' any sufficiently advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic . ' " This was originally said by Arthur C. Clarke , originally appearing in Clarke 's 1973 revision of " Hazards of Prophecy : The Failure of Imagination " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Johari Window " was watched by more than 6 @.@ 529 million viewers , achieving a 2 @.@ 6 share of viewers aged 18 – 49 . It rose thirteen percent from the previous week 's episode , and was the highest rated night of Fringe since the season premiere . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Ramsey Isler of IGN thought there was not much original or well @-@ done about the episode , and negatively compared it to previous episodes of The X @-@ Files . He wrote the " slow ... story [ lacked ] the intrigue and excitement that other episodes in the series had , " but praised its conclusion as a " pay off " . John McCracken of TV Guide also compared it to The X @-@ Files , and thought the episode was " tedious " and " largely felt like a by @-@ the @-@ numbers B @-@ movie affair " . Jane Boursaw of TV Squad enjoyed the " B @-@ movie " aspects of the plot however , calling them " fun " . She thought the episode felt like " a thriller movie , " and praised Noble 's acting as " brilliantly " . Noel Murray of The A.V. Club gave the episode a C , explaining that " despite some good makeup effects and a few emotional moments , " Johari Window " [ was ] distressingly average " . Andrew Hanson of the LA Times enjoyed how the " Edina hum " remained in the background of every town scene , but missed the " investigation exposition " <unk> presence of Charlie Francis ( Kirk Acevedo ) . Television Without Pity graded the episode a B- . 
 = Whitney High School ( Rocklin , California ) = 
 Whitney High School is a public magnet school located in the southern Placer County city of Rocklin , California , a settlement in the northern Sacramento metropolitan area . Whitney is one of two high schools in Rocklin Unified School District ; its counterpart is Rocklin High School . The school is the district 's newest educational facility , having opened in 2005 to freshmen and sophomores ; Whitney 's first freshmen graduated at the end of the 2008 – 09 school year . That same school year , Whitney was recognized as a California Distinguished School . 
 The school educates its students using a modified block schedule program that alternates four periods every two days . Students are subject to eight different periods in total . Students at the school are also taught through a standard @-@ based essential skills program , where students must demonstrate mastery of all skills deemed necessary in a class before credits can be earned ; additionally , students must achieve a grade higher than C by the year 's end , as scores lower than C equate to a " No mark " , and the course must be retaken . As of the end of the 2009 – 10 school year , the high school fielded twenty @-@ three clubs , including an award @-@ winning school yearbook ( known as Details ) , a school newspaper ( known as the Roar ) , and an Emmy winning broadcast program ( known as Unleashed ) . Whitney also ran twenty @-@ three sports teams as of the 2008 – 09 school year ; the football and girls ' soccer teams were champions at the 2009 Sac @-@ Joaquin Section Championships for the respective sports . 
 = = History = = 
 Whitney 's name was a significant subject of debate , as the school 's first two proposed names were associated too closely with other schools in the area . The school was initially designated Granite Ridge High School , which was deemed too similar to <unk> 's Granite Oaks Middle School . It was then designated as Liberty High School , but the name was associated with the rival Lincoln High School . Rocklin Unified School District finally decided on " Whitney " in honor of Joel Parker Whitney , the man who suggested that his successful Boston businessman father , George Whitney , invest in the 1854 development of Placer County , which was then a major locale for gold @-@ seeking Argonauts . George Whitney would later found and develop the city of Rocklin . Additional debate revolved around the school 's mascot and colors ; deliberation around data collected via survey from the city of Rocklin and other Rocklin Unified School District entities ultimately convinced the district administration to choose the wildcat and the colors of maroon and gold . Construction began in October 2003 with preliminary site work and underground utilities ; construction of the buildings started on April 2004 . 
 The high school opened its doors to over 721 ninth and tenth grade students on August 22 , 2005 , while still partially under construction . Its opening relieved the strain of overcrowding that had previously affected Rocklin High School . 
 Whitney was recognized as a California Distinguished institution on April 1 , 2009 , four years after its opening in 2005 ; the school was noted for this achievement , and is one of six in Placer County to merit the title . On May 19 , 2009 , Whitney and other recently designated California Distinguished Schools were congratulated in a ceremony in Anaheim . 
 Three petitions were issued by local charter school Rocklin Academy to found a 7 – 12 grade charter school called Western Sierra Collegiate Academy in 2008 and base it on the grounds of either Whitney or Rocklin High School . Rocklin Unified School District denied the school its facilities in its first two attempts , although the academy secured a location where Rocklin 's Sierra Christian Academy once operated by 2009 . 
 Whitney teacher Matthew Yamamoto was arrested in September 2012 on suspicion of molesting an underage student . The school district waited two days after the arrest before informing parents . In 2013 , Yamamoto pleaded no contest to oral copulation with a minor , attempted sexual intercourse with a minor and sexual penetration with a foreign object on a minor , and pleaded guilty to one felony count of conspiracy to obstruct justice . He received the maximum sentence of five years in prison , in light of his violation of a restraining order during the investigation . 
 = = = Facility = = = 
 The 50 @-@ acre ( 200 @,@ 000 m2 ) campus was designed to accommodate 1800 students and 175 employees . The area that Whitney 's thirteen campus buildings occupy total approximately 200 @,@ 000 square feet ( 19 @,@ 000 m2 ) and includes a total of 65 classrooms , while Whitney 's sports fields encompass 20 acres ( 81 @,@ 000 m2 ) of hard court and grass athletic areas . Of all structures on the campus , the theatre was amongst the last to be completed ; construction was finished the following January . In all , the school 's construction cost $ 82 million . 
 Excluding Whitney 's sports fields , the school 's outdoor facilities are composed of a number of circular gathering areas ( including an amphitheatre ) that were designed for use during lunch hour and for outdoor class excursions . In addition , Whitney 's class campus structures have private workspaces for the teaching faculty from which each of the structure 's classrooms branch off . 
 = = Academic curriculum = = 
 In accordance with recommendations made by the California 's Department of Education , Rocklin Unified School District students are taught using a standards @-@ based curriculum ; each student much fulfill a set of essential skills before they are allowed to pass the class . The program is initially implemented in district elementary schools . For some classes , like English , essential skills may be demonstrated by receiving a passing grade on assigned essays or tests . In classes like mathematics , Essential Skills must be demonstrated by receiving a passing grade in specific skills on cumulative tests . In addition , WHS policy does not allow F or D grades . Any grade below a grade of C is considered a No Mark ( NM ) or a No Credit ( NC ) ; the class must then be repeated to get a passing grade . This plan attempts to prepare students for the California High School Exit Exam , or <unk> test , which they are expected to pass prior to graduation ; <unk> is provided to students during their second year . The test covers grade 6 – 10 language arts concepts , as well as pre @-@ algebraic and Algebra I mathematics . 
 Whitney High School offers a college preparatory @-@ based curriculum where students are required to take four years of language arts , three and a half years of social studies , three years of mathematics and science each , three years of physical education , and one year 's worth of foreign languages , technology and applied sciences , and visual and performing arts ( <unk> ) . One semester of health education and ten semesters ' worth of electives are also mandatory for graduation , in addition to twenty @-@ five hours of completed community service . 
 Whitney sports fifteen advanced placement classes , ranging from subjects in foreign language and core classes to <unk> electives , such as art . 
 Each class is managed by one of eleven academic departments . Nine departments will be experienced by students before the end of their senior year , as one or more of their classes are mandatory for graduation . The other two departments are specialized courses ; one involves the Culinary Arts , while the other involves a <unk> form of ROTC . This system of Professional Learning Communities was designed by Illinois 's former Adlai E. Stevenson High School principal , Richard Du Four . 
 Whitney High School runs along the Response to Intervention guideline ; the RTI model implements a three @-@ tiered research @-@ based plan to catch students who are struggling in their schooling . The model implements a number of measures intended to assist students , including an intervention period , an AVID program , night and summer school programs , and Section 504 plans . Among the programs , the intervention periods are twenty minutes set before lunch that is intended for students who need to fulfill the academic requirements in which they are lacking . The AVID program pertains to students who are socially or economically disadvantaged . 
 Whitney students undergo a full eight @-@ class period school day extended over two individual days in a modified block schedule . Each year , as a result , students complete eight classes . Of the 320 possible credits , 250 credits are required for graduation . 
 At the end of the 2007 – 2008 school year , 48 @.@ 6 % of Whitney 's graduating seniors were qualified for entry into a University of California or California State University campus ; 39 @.@ 6 % were accepted into four @-@ year institutions . 12 % of the graduating class motioned directly for employment or joined the US military . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 1 @,@ 438 students attended Whitney High School during the 2007 – 08 school year ; of these students , there were 361 freshmen , 424 sophomores , 355 juniors , and 298 seniors . The student body is predominantly Caucasian ( 70 @.@ 51 % ) , where the largest minorities represented are Hispanics ( 9 @.@ 18 % ) and Asians ( 5 @.@ 35 % ) . 9 @.@ 6 % of the school 's students marked their race as either " mixed " or did not respond at all . 14 % of the student body reported themselves socio @-@ economically disadvantaged , 8 % reported themselves as having a disability , and 3 % of the school population reported themselves as ESL students . 96 @.@ 1 % of the Whitney student body graduated in its first school year ; in the 2005 – 06 school year , every student passed the requirements for graduation . The school 's first dropout students were in the 2006 – 07 school year ; 1 @.@ 5 % of the school 's students were part of that group . 
 Class sizes had increased in all core classes between the school 's founding in 2005 and the School Accountability Report Card for the 2007 – 08 school year , where an average 23 @.@ 1 English class size and an average 21 @.@ 9 mathematics class size had increased to , respectively , average class sizes of 25 @.@ 4 and 25 @.@ 0 . 
 = = Extracurricular activities = = 
 = = = Clubs and publications = = = 
 As of April of the 2010 – 2011 school year , Whitney High School runs forty @-@ seven clubs . Many of these clubs , including those pertaining to art , dance , music ( the school 's band and orchestra ) , foreign language , and the United States Air Force Junior Reserve Officers ' Training Corps , directly correspond to official classes that are run by the school itself . Others , including the California Scholarship Federation and National Honor Society , can be used as catalysts to fulfill the community service graduation requirement . The high school 's yearbook , known as Details , was awarded a Silver Crown Award at the 2009 Scholastic Awards Convention at Columbia University alongside Rocklin High School 's yearbook ; in addition , Whitney 's yearbook placed first in the 2006 National Student Press Association Best @-@ of @-@ Show 's Yearbook length 1 – 224 pages category . The school 's newspaper , known as The Roar , was founded in the spring of 2005 by the school 's Journalism I course ; the first issue was released in March of the following year . 
 Whitney High School 's student government is known as the Associated Student Body , or ASB . The association is responsible for organizing rallies , dances , and other schoolwide activities . 
 = = = Sports = = = 
 Whitney High School fields eleven boys ' sports teams and twelve girls ' sports teams . Nearly all sports have teams of both genders , although exceptions do exist : baseball and football are specific to males , while cheerleading , drill team , softball , and team tennis are specific to females . Whitney 's sports teams participate in the Pioneer Valley League , which includes six other high schools in El Dorado County , Placer County , Nevada County , and Sacramento County . Whitney 's football team won the Sac @-@ Joaquin Section championships in 2008 ; they were runners @-@ up to Oakdale High School the previous year and reached the championships again in 2009 . Likewise , the girls ' soccer team won the Sac @-@ Joaquin Section championships in 2009 . Nazir <unk> was the champion of the 2009 Sac @-@ Joaquin Section Wrestling Championship , and was the first Whitney wrestler to qualify for the State championship . 
 = Operation Auca = 
 Operation Auca was an attempt by five Evangelical Christian missionaries from the United States to bring Christianity to the Huaorani people of the rain forest of Ecuador . The Huaorani , also known by the pejorative <unk> ( a modification of <unk> , the Quechua word for " savages " ) , were an isolated tribe known for their violence , against both their own people and outsiders who entered their territory . With the intention of being the first Christians to evangelize the previously <unk> Huaorani , the missionaries began making regular flights over Huaorani settlements in September 1955 , dropping gifts , which were reciprocated . After several months of exchanging gifts , on January 3 , 1956 , the missionaries established a camp at " Palm Beach " , a sandbar along the Curaray River , a few kilometers from Huaorani settlements . Their efforts came to an end on January 8 , 1956 , when all five — Jim Elliot , Nate Saint , Ed McCully , Peter Fleming , and Roger Youderian — were attacked and speared by a group of Huaorani warriors . The news of their deaths was broadcast around the world , and Life magazine covered the event with a photo essay . 
 The deaths of the men galvanized the missionary effort in the United States , sparking an outpouring of funding for evangelization efforts around the world . Their work is still frequently remembered in evangelical publications , and in 2006 was the subject of the film production End of the Spear . Several years after the death of the men , the widow of Jim Elliot , Elisabeth , and the sister of Nate Saint , Rachel , returned to Ecuador as missionaries with the Summer Institute of Linguistics ( now SIL International ) to live among the Huaorani . This eventually led to the conversion of many , including some of those involved in the killing . While largely eliminating tribal violence , their efforts exposed the tribe to increased influence from the outside . 
 = = Huaorani = = 
 The Huaorani around the time of Operation Auca were a small tribe occupying the jungle of Eastern Ecuador between the Napo and Curaray Rivers , an area of approximately 20 @,@ 000 square kilometers ( 7 @,@ 700 mi ² ) . They numbered approximately 600 people , and were split into three groups , all mutually hostile — the <unk> , the <unk> , and the <unk> . They lived on the gathering and cultivation of plant foods like manioc and plantains , as well as fishing and hunting with spear and blowgun . Family units consisted of a man and his wife or wives , their unmarried sons , their married daughters and sons @-@ in @-@ law , and their grandchildren . All of them would reside in a longhouse , which was separated by several kilometers from another longhouse in which close relatives lived . Marriage was always endogenous and typically between cousins , and arranged by the parents of the young people . 
 Before their first peaceful contact with outsiders ( <unk> ) in 1958 , the Huaorani fiercely defended their territory . Viewing all <unk> as cannibalistic predators , they killed rubber tappers around the turn of the 20th century and Shell Oil Company employees during the 1940s , in addition to any lowland Quechua or other outsiders who encroached on their land . Furthermore , they were prone to internal violence , often engaging in vengeance killing of other Huaorani . Raids were carried out in extreme anger by groups of men who attacked their victims ' longhouse by night and then fled . Attempts to build truces through gifts and exchange of spouses became more frequent as their numbers decreased and the tribes fragmented , but the cycle of violence continued . 
 = = Missionaries = = 
 Jim Elliot first heard of the Huaorani in 1950 from a former missionary to Ecuador , and afterwards indicated that God had called him to Ecuador to evangelize the Huaorani . He began corresponding with his friend Pete Fleming about his desire to minister in Ecuador , and in 1952 the two men set sail for Guayaquil as missionaries with the Plymouth Brethren . For six months they lived in Quito with the goal of learning Spanish . They then moved to Shandia , a Quechua mission station deep in the Ecuadorian jungle . There they worked under the supervision of a Christian Missions in Many Lands missionary , Wilfred <unk> , and began exposing themselves to the culture and studying the Quechua language . 
 Another team member was Ed McCully , a man Jim Elliot had met and befriended while both attended Wheaton College . Following graduation , he married <unk> <unk> and enrolled in a one @-@ year basic medical treatment program at the School of Missionary Medicine in Los Angeles . On December 10 , 1952 , McCully moved to Quito with his family as a Plymouth Brethren missionary , planning to soon join Elliot and Fleming in Shandia . In 1953 , however , the station in Shandia was wiped out by a flood , delaying their move until September of that year . 
 The team 's pilot , Nate Saint , had served in the military during World War II , receiving flight training as a member of the Army Air Corps . After being discharged in 1946 , he too studied at Wheaton College , but quit after a year and joined the Mission Aviation Fellowship in 1948 . He and his wife Marj traveled to Ecuador by the end of the year , and they settled at MAF headquarters in Shell Mera . Shortly after his arrival , Saint began transporting supplies and equipment to missionaries spread throughout the jungle . This work ultimately led to his meeting the other four missionaries , who he joined in Operation Auca . 
 Also on the team was Roger Youderian , a 32 @-@ year @-@ old missionary who had been working in Ecuador since 1953 . Under the mission board Gospel Missionary Union , he and his wife Barbara and daughter Beth settled in <unk> , a mission station in the southern jungle of Ecuador . There , he and his wife ministered to the <unk> people , learning their language and transcribing it . After working with them for about a year , Youderian and his family began ministering to a tribe related to the <unk> , the Achuar people . He worked with Nate Saint to provide important medical supplies ; but after a period of attempting to build relationships with them , he failed to see any positive effect and , growing depressed , considered returning to the United States . However , during this time Saint approached him about joining their team to meet the Huaorani , and he assented . 
 = = Initial contact = = 
 The first stage of Operation Auca began in September 1955 . Saint , McCully , Elliot , and fellow missionary Johnny Keenan decided to initiate contact with the Huaorani and began periodically searching for them by air . By the end of the month , they had identified several clearings in the jungle . Meanwhile , Elliot learned several phrases in the language of the Huaorani from Dayuma , a young Huaorani woman who had left her society and become friends with Rachel Saint , a missionary and the sister of Nate Saint . The missionaries hoped that by regularly giving gifts to the Huaorani and attempting to communicate with them in their language , they would be able to win them over as friends . 
 Because of the difficulty and risk of meeting the Huaorani on the ground , the missionaries chose to drop gifts to the Huaorani by fixed @-@ wing aircraft . Their drop technique , developed by Nate Saint , involved flying around the drop location in tight circles while lowering the gift from the plane on a rope . This kept the bundle in roughly the same position as it approached the ground . On October 6 , 1955 , Saint made the first drop , releasing a small kettle containing buttons and rock salt . The gift @-@ giving continued during the following weeks , with the missionaries dropping machetes , ribbons , clothing , pots , and various trinkets . 
 After several visits to the Auca village , which the missionaries called " Terminal City " , they observed that the Huaorani seemed excited to receive their gifts . Encouraged , they began using a loudspeaker to shout simple Huaorani phrases as they circled . After several more drops , in November the Huaorani began tying gifts for the missionaries to the line after removing the gifts the missionaries gave them . The men took this as a gesture of friendliness and developed plans for meeting the Huaorani on the ground . Saint soon identified a 200 @-@ yard ( 200 m ) sandbar along the Curaray River about 4 @.@ 5 miles ( 7 km ) from Terminal City that could serve as a runway and camp site , and dubbed it " Palm Beach " . 
 = = Palm Beach = = 
 At this point , Pete Fleming had still not decided to participate in the operation , and Roger Youderian was still working in the jungle farther south . On December 23 , the Flemings , Saints , Elliots and <unk> together made plans to land at Palm Beach and build a camp on January 3 , 1956 . They agreed to take weapons , but decided that they would only be used to fire into the air to scare the Huaorani if they attacked . They built a sort of tree house that could be assembled upon arrival , and collected gifts , first aid equipment , and language notes . 
 By January 2 , Youderian had arrived and Fleming had confirmed his involvement , so the five met in <unk> to prepare to leave the following day . After minor mechanical trouble with the plane , Saint and McCully took off at 8 : 02 a.m. on January 3 and successfully landed on the sandy beach along the Curaray River . Saint then flew Elliot and Youderian to the camp , and then made several more flights , carrying equipment . After the last delivery , he flew over a Huaorani settlement and , using a loudspeaker , told the Huaorani to visit the missionaries ' camp . He then returned to <unk> , and the next day , he and Fleming flew out to Palm Beach . 
 = = = First visit = = = 
 On January 6 , after the Americans had spent several days of waiting and shouting basic Huaorani phrases into the jungle , the first Huaorani visitors arrived . A young man and two women emerged on the opposite river bank around 11 : 15 a.m. , and soon joined the missionaries at their encampment . The younger of the two women had come against the wishes of her family , and the man , named Nankiwi , who was romantically interested in her , followed . The older woman ( about thirty years old ) acted as a self @-@ appointed chaperone . The men gave them several gifts , including a model plane , and the visitors soon relaxed and began conversing freely , apparently not realizing that the men 's language skills were weak . Nankiwi , whom the missionaries nicknamed " George " , showed interest in their aircraft , so Saint took off with him aboard . They first completed a circuit around the camp , but Nankiwi appeared eager for a second trip , so they flew toward Terminal City . Upon reaching a familiar clearing , Nankiwi recognized his neighbors , and leaning out of the plane , wildly waved and shouted to them . Later that afternoon , the younger woman became restless , and though the missionaries offered their visitors sleeping quarters , Nankiwi and the young woman left the beach with little explanation . The older woman apparently had more interest in conversing with the missionaries , and remained there most of the night . 
 After seeing Nankiwi in the plane , a small group of Huaorani decided to make the trip to Palm Beach , and left the following morning , January 7 . On the way , they encountered Nankiwi and the girl , returning unescorted . The girl 's brother , Nampa , was furious at this , and to defuse the situation and divert attention from himself , Nankiwi claimed that the foreigners had attacked them on the beach , and in their haste to flee , they had been separated from their chaperone . <unk> , a senior member of the group whose experience with outsiders had taught him that they could not be trusted , recommended that they kill the foreigners . The return of the older woman and her account of the friendliness of the missionaries was not enough to dissuade them , and they soon continued toward the beach . 
 = = = Attack = = = 
 On January 8 the missionaries waited , expecting a larger group of Huaorani to arrive sometime that afternoon , if only to get plane rides . Saint made several trips over Huaorani settlements , and on the following morning he noted a group of Huaorani men traveling toward Palm Beach . He excitedly relayed this information to his wife over the radio at 12 : 30 p.m. , promising to make contact again at 4 : 30 p.m. 
 The Huaorani arrived at Palm Beach around 3 : 00 p.m. , and in order to divide the foreigners before attacking them , they sent three women to the other side of the river . One , Dawa , remained hidden in the jungle , but the other two showed themselves . Two of the missionaries waded into the water to greet them , but were attacked from behind by Nampa . Apparently attempting to scare him , Elliot , the first missionary to be speared , drew his pistol and began firing . One of these shots mildly injured Dawa , still hidden , and another grazed the missionary 's attacker after he was grabbed from behind by one of the women . Accounts differ on the effect of that bullet . Missionaries interpreted the testimonies of Dawa and Dayuma to mean that Nampa was killed months later while hunting , but others , including missionary anthropologist James Yost , came to believe that his death was a result of the bullet wound . Rachel Saint did not accept this , holding that eyewitnesses supported her position , but researcher Laura Rival , a critic of the expedition , suggests that it is now commonly believed among Huaorani that Nampa died of the wound . The other missionary in the river , Fleming , before being speared , desperately reiterated friendly overtures and asked the Huaorani why they were killing them . Meanwhile , the other Huaorani warriors , led by <unk> , attacked the three missionaries still on the beach , spearing Saint first , then McCully as he rushed to stop them . Youderian ran to the airplane to get to the radio , but he was speared as he picked up the microphone to report the attack . The Huaorani then threw the men 's bodies and their belongings in the river , and ripped the fabric from their aircraft . They then returned to their village and , anticipating retribution , burned it to the ground and fled into the jungle . 
 = = = Search = = = 
 At 4 : 30 p.m. , Marj Saint and Pete Fleming 's wife , Olive , were waiting for the call from Saint . Not receiving word at 4 : 30 p.m. immediately caused his wife Marj to worry , but Marj and Olive did not tell anyone about the lack of communication until that evening . ( To avoid interference , the entire mission had been kept a secret from all those not directly involved at the time , thus making the timing of this announcement more difficult . ) The next morning , January 9 , Johnny Keenan flew to the camp site , and at 9 : 30 a.m. he reported via radio to the wives that the plane was stripped of its fabric , and that the men were not there . The Commander in Chief of the Caribbean Command , Lieutenant General William K. Harrison , was contacted , and Quito @-@ based radio station <unk> released a news bulletin saying that five men were missing in Huaorani territory . Soon , aircraft from the United States Air Rescue Service in Panama were flying over the jungle , and a ground search party consisting of missionaries and military personnel was organized . The first two of the bodies were found on Wednesday , January 11 , and on Thursday , Ed McCully 's body was identified by a group of <unk> . They took his watch as evidence of the finding but did not move his body from its location on the bank of the Curaray ; it later washed away . Two more bodies were found on January 12 . The searchers hoped that one of the unidentified bodies would be McCully , thinking that perhaps one of the men had escaped . However , on January 13 , all four of the bodies found were positively identified by watches and wedding rings , and McCully 's body was not among them , confirming that all five were dead . In the midst of a tropical storm , they were buried in a common grave at Palm Beach on January 14 by members of the ground search party . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Life magazine covered the deaths of the men with a photo essay , including photographs by Cornell Capa and some taken by the five men before their deaths . The ensuing worldwide publicity gave several missionary organizations significant more visibility , especially in the United States and Latin America . Most notable among these was the Summer Institute of Linguistics ( SIL ) , the organization for which both Elisabeth Elliot and Rachel Saint worked . Because of the martyrdom of her brother , Saint considered herself spiritually bonded to the Huaorani , believing that what she saw as his sacrifice for the Huaorani was symbolic of Christ 's death for the salvation of humanity . In 1957 , Saint and her Huaorani companion Dayuma toured across the United States and appeared on the television show This Is Your Life . The two also appeared in a Billy Graham crusade in New York City , contributing to Saint 's increasing popularity among evangelical Christians and generating significant monetary donations for SIL . 
 Saint and Elliot returned to Ecuador to work among the Huaorani ( 1958 @-@ 1960 ) , establishing a camp called <unk> near a former Huaorani settlement . Rachel Saint and Dayuma became bonded in Huaorani eyes through their shared mourning and Rachel 's adoption as a sister of Dayuma , taking the name Nemo from the latter 's deceased youngest sister . The first Huaorani to settle there were primarily women and children from a Huaorani group called the <unk> , but in 1968 an enemy Huaorani band known as the <unk> joined them . Elliot had returned to the United States in the early 1960s , so Saint and Dayuma worked to alleviate the resulting conflict . They succeeded in securing cohabitation of the two groups by overseeing numerous cross @-@ band weddings , leading to an end of inter @-@ clan warfare but obscuring the cultural identity of each group . 
 Saint and Dayuma , in conjunction with SIL , negotiated the creation of an official Huaorani reservation in 1969 , consolidating the Huaorani and consequently opening up the area to commerce and oil exploration . By 1973 , over 500 people lived in <unk> , of which more than half had arrived in the previous six years . The settlement relied on aid from SIL , and as a Christian community , followed rules foreign to Huaorani culture like prohibitions on killing and polygamy . By the early 1970s , SIL began to question whether their impact on the Huaorani was positive , so they sent James Yost , a staff anthropologist , to assess the situation . He found extensive economic dependence and increasing cultural assimilation , and as a result , SIL ended its support of the settlement in 1976 , leading to its disintegration and the dispersion of the Huaorani into the surrounding area . SIL had hoped that the Huaorani would return to the isolation in which they had lived twenty years prior , but instead they sought out contact with the outside world , forming villages of which many have been recognized by the Ecuadorian government . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Christian views = = = 
 Among evangelical Christians , the five men are commonly considered martyrs and missionary heroes . Books have been written about them by numerous biographers , most notably Elisabeth Elliot . Anniversaries of their deaths have been accompanied by stories in major Christian publications , and their story , as well as the subsequent acceptance of Christianity among the Huaorani , has been turned into several motion pictures . 
 Even so , Christians have noted with concern the disintegration of traditional Huaorani culture and westernization of the tribe , beginning with Nate Saint 's own journal entry in 1955 and continuing through today . However , many continue to view as positive both Operation Auca and the subsequent missionary efforts of Rachel Saint , mission organizations such as Mission Aviation Fellowship , Wycliffe Bible Translators , <unk> World Radio , Avant Ministries ( formerly Gospel Missionary Union ) , and others . Specifically , they note the decline in violence among tribe members , numerous conversions to Christianity , and growth of the local church . 
 = = = Anthropologist views = = = 
 Anthropologists generally have less favorable views of the missionary work begun by Operation Auca , viewing the intervention as the cause for the recent and widely recognized decline of Huaorani culture . Leading Huaorani researcher Laura Rival says that the work of the SIL " pacified " the Huaorani during the 1960s , and argues that missionary intervention caused significant changes in fundamental components of Huaorani society . Prohibitions of polygamy , violence , chanting , and dancing were directly contrary to cultural norms , and the relocation of Huaorani and subsequent intermarrying of previously hostile groups eroded cultural identity . Others are somewhat less negative — <unk> , after noting that the work of the missionaries opened the area to outside intervention and led to the deterioration of the culture , says that the SIL also informed the Huaorani of their legal rights and taught them how to protect their interests from developers . <unk> goes even further , suggesting that the " pacification " of the Huaorani was a result of " active effort " by the Huaorani themselves , not the result of missionary imposition . He argues that Christianity served as a way for the Huaorani to escape the cycle of violence in their community , since it provided a motivation to abstain from killing . 
 = = = Film depictions = = = 
 There have been several screen depictions of Operation Auca . The 2004 documentary Beyond the Gates of Splendor featured interviews with some of the Huaorani and surviving family members of the missionaries . The 2006 drama film End of the Spear grossed over $ 12 million . 
 = Greece in the Eurovision Song Contest 2006 = 
 Anna Vissi represented Greece in the Eurovision Song Contest 2006 with her song " Everything " . The Greek national broadcaster , Ellinikí Radiofonía Tileórasi ( ERT ) , internally selected Vissi to represent the country at the contest , which took place in Athens after Greece 's win at the 2005 contest with the song " My Number One " performed by Elena Paparizou . " Everything " , composed by Nikos Karvelas and written by Anna Vissi herself , was selected on March 14 , 2006 at a national final by a combination of a televoting / SMS vote ( 60 % ) and expert jury ( 40 % ) . At Eurovision , Vissi placed 9th , receiving 128 points . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Eurovision Song Contest 2006 marked Greece 's twenty @-@ seventh participation in the Contest since its first entry in 1974 . It won for the first time at the previous contest in 2005 with the song " My Number One " performed by Elena Paparizou , and had been placed third twice up to the Contest : in 2001 with the song " Die for You " performed by the duo Antique and in 2004 with " Shake It " performed by Sakis Rouvas . Following the introduction of semi @-@ finals for the 2004 contest , Greece has had a top ten placing each year . Greece 's least successful result was in 1998 when it placed twentieth with the song " Mia Krifi Evesthisia " by Thalassa , receiving only twelve points in total , all from Cyprus . 
 The Greek national broadcaster , Ellinikí Radiofonía Tileórasi ( ERT ) broadcasts the event in Greece each year and organizes the selection process for its entry . From 2001 to 2003 , ERT held a national final with several artists , but for 2004 and 2005 , it selected high @-@ profile artists internally and set up national finals to choose their song . ERT continued the internal selection of the artist for 2006 and subsequently held a national final to select the song . 
 = = Performer = = 
 As it had done in 2005 , ERT asked 2004 entrant Sakis Rouvas to represent Greece in the 2006 contest , but he once again denied . In an interview with Down Town magazine Rouvas recalled getting the proposal from the network in " either August or September " and considering it briefly ; however , he ultimately found there was no reason for him to go , especially when Greece was the reigning champion , making chances of winning little to none . Nevertheless , ERT still wanted Rouvas involved in some way and they asked him to host the competition , which he accepted . With the news leaked by the newspaper Ethnos , a public announcement was made on 1 November 2005 . Rouvas said of his decision " but when I received the proposal for the hosting of Eurovision I found it intriguing " and that it would challenge him . American television personality and actress Maria Menounos would eventually be announced as his female co @-@ host . The two presented all of the major Eurovision events , including the allocation draw , in addition to the semi @-@ final and final . 
 On August 6 , 2005 , MAD TV reported that Despina Vandi was " seriously considering " representing Greece in 2006 and would be or possibly already had been proposed to by ERT to be the Greek entrant . Vandi had been asked previously to represent the country at the 2005 contest , but declined , fearing a bad result while her international career was going well . A few months later on December 12 , 2005 , Star Channel announced that ERT would soon officially propose to a different artist , Anna Vissi , to be the representative . Vissi said in reply that she " never [ excludes ] a Eurovision Song Contest participation as long as everything is organized well " . She had participated in the contest twice before : in 1980 with " <unk> " for Greece and in 1982 for Cyprus with the song " Mono I <unk> " , placing 13th and 5th respectively . She had also attempted to take part in the contest on several other years , either failing to win against other artists or having deals not materialize . An official announcement was not made soon after as no agreement could be made at the time , but one month later on January 24 , 2006 , Vissi was officially announced as the artist for 2006 . A few days later in an interview with the press , she said " finally [ a decision is made ] , I want to go to Eurovision too much " . She said the reason that the final decision took so long to be announced was because she was still debating entering ; using opinion polls along with talking to her usual collaborators . It was also announced that Vissi would sing either four or five songs live at the national final to choose her song . 
 = = National final = = 
 The date of the final was set for March 14 , 2006 and took place at club <unk> ; broadcast live as a television program titled Feel the Party . The show was hosted by Giorgos <unk> and Zeta <unk> from the Greek television series Sto Para <unk> and included a recap of Greece 's entries from 1974 to 2005 . Past entries such as " <unk> <unk> " , " Stop " , " I <unk> " , and " I Would Die for You " were shown on a large screen along with a video message by 2006 Eurovision host Maria Menounos , while Sakis Rouvas , Elena Paparizou , and Nana Mouskouri all sent personal messages via satellite . During the show , guest acts representing other countries partaking in Eurovision performed their entries and they included : Fabrizio <unk> of Malta with " I Do " , Sibel Tuzun of Turkey with " Süper Star " , Mihai <unk> of Romania with " <unk> " , Christine <unk> of Norway with " <unk> " , and Annet Artani of Cyprus with " Why Angels Cry " . 
 Four candidate songs were decided on for Vissi to sing at the national final by ERT : " Who Cares About Love " which was written and composed by Nikos Karvelas , " Everything " which was also composed by Karvelas , with lyrics by Anna Vissi , " Welcome to the Party " which was composed by Dimitris Kontopoulos with lyrics by Dimitris S , and " A Beautiful Night " which was written and composed by <unk> ( Antonis and Dimitris <unk> ) . " Everything " is described as a ballad , while the three others are more upbeat . 
 The winning song was chosen by the public through televoting and a jury weighted at 60 % and 40 % of the result respectively . The jury panel was made up of Mimis <unk> , Antonis Andrikakis , Dimitris <unk> , <unk> <unk> , Christina <unk> , <unk> <unk> , Antonis <unk> , Rena <unk> , and a ninth vote was split between Sietse Bakker of <unk> and <unk> <unk> of <unk> . 
 = = = Result of national final = = = 
 " Everything " was proclaimed the winner after receiving 47 @.@ 79 % of the total vote , representing over 200 @,@ 000 televotes . She received 55 @.@ 66 % of the vote from the viewers and 35 @.@ 98 % from the jury . " Welcome to the Party " placed second with 26 @.@ 32 % ( 27 @.@ 69 % from the viewers ; 24 @.@ 27 % from the jury ) , 13 @.@ 72 % ( 7 @.@ 25 % from the viewers ; 24 @.@ 43 % from the jury ) for " Who Cares About Love " in third place , and 12 @.@ 6 % ( 9 @.@ 39 % from the viewers ; 16 @.@ 32 % from the jury ) for " A Beautiful Night " which placed last . Vissi stated that she liked all four songs , and after seeing the results , pledged to sing " Everything " " from the heart and give all her best for Greece " . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 Before her appearance at the contest , Vissi went on a promotional tour , singing her song in several Eurovision countries . The first stop was Moscow on March 25 , 2006 , Greek Independence Day , and she attended a reception at the Greek embassy . She stayed for three days and gave seven television appearances , three newspaper interviews and posed for several magazines . Following Russia , Vissi traveled to Malta and then Cyprus where she performed at a large club in Nicosia . Cyprus was followed by Albania , where she appeared at the " Albania Awards Kult " , an awards show , and also gave a few interviews . The next stop was Serbia and Montenegro , followed by Romania . By the end of April , Vissi had visited Sweden where she gave several more interviews to the local press . Bosnia and Herzegovina was next at the beginning of May , followed by Belgium on the fourth . She met with Greek Orthodox Metropolitan Panteleimon of Belgium to whom she offered an autographed copy of her CD single " Everything " after having spoken to the media . Vissi then attended a reception at the Greek embassy before meeting up with Belgium entrant Kate Ryan with whom she visited a chocolate museum . After Belgium , Vissi returned to Greece for a break before leaving for Israel , the last stop on the tour , where she remained for ten days . 
 On April 25 , 2006 , Vissi re @-@ released her most recent album at the time , Nylon , as Nylon : Euro Edition to include the four tracks from the national final and to coincide with the ongoing international promotional tour . At the same time , " Welcome to the Party " had entered the American market , already being played on some radio stations . 
 = = At Eurovision = = 
 At a press conference on May 16 , Anna Vissi thanked her fans and God for everything that had been given to her . She also explained how important the competition was to her saying that she " really , really [ wants ] to win " and she also received several gifts from journalists and fans . 
 " Everything " was considered a favorite at the contest , placing in the top three in a majority of fan polls and first in online betting houses . British commentator for the semi @-@ final stated that " she 's massive in Greece , she 's even bigger than the country itself " . " None of the rehearsals were attended by so many people as Anna Vissi 's " , noted Sietse Bakker , one of the jury members from the national final , " not only a large amount of fans and journalists took seat in the arena [ ... ] but the president of Greek broadcaster ERT also entered the arena to see how ' his ' artist was doing " . 
 = = = Final = = = 
 As the winning country of the 2005 edition , Greece was automatically qualified for the final of the 2006 contest , and was drawn to present its song 16th on the night of the final , after the United Kingdom and before Finland . 
 At the final , held on May 20 , 2006 , Anna Vissi appeared on stage surrounded by a fog effect created by dry ice . She was alone on the large stage and wore an exclusive Jean Paul Gaultier black and white outfit with black leggings . By the end of the song , she was down on her knees singing . Her choreography for the final was arranged by Mia Michaels . Although considered a favorite , a ninth @-@ place finish was all Vissi could manage . She received 128 points , including the coveted " douze points " from Bulgaria and Cyprus . 
 The ninth @-@ place finish guaranteed Greece a place in the final of the Eurovision Song Contest 2007 . 
 = = After Eurovision = = 
 The day after the contest , Vissi could be seen crying in front of cameras while recounting her experience , but thanking the Greek public for all their love and support . She soon re @-@ released Nylon again as a dual disc with music videos , and also a remix of " Everything " by Valentino and Siganos . After Eurovision Vissi went on hiatus from the Greek music industry , performing a worldwide tour for the Greek diaspora in 2007 as well as recording English @-@ language material for her planned international album in Los Angeles , California with her then @-@ producer Greg Ladanyi . A court case also further postponed her Greek career . Since the second re @-@ release of Nylon in autumn 2006 , Vissi had not released any new material until October 29 , 2008 , when she released the song " To <unk> Mou " ( my past ) as the lead soundtrack single for the Greek movie Bank Bang . On December 9 , 2008 she released the album <unk> ( 2008 ) which was certified double platinum in Greece under the new 2009 thresholds , denoting shipments of 24 thousand copies , one of her lowest selling albums and lowest of the 2000s . It was certified triple platinum in her native Cyprus . Her first album in the 2010s , <unk> <unk> Esi , performed worse than its predecessor , being certified gold for shipments of six thousand copies and falling off of the charts after two months , while her concert attendances generally did not meet expectations , despite heavy promotion . 
 While Vissi 's popularity and commercial appeal had already begun declining by the early 2000s , as seen by the sales of albums such as Nylon — which although successful had relatively low sales compared to her other albums — Eurovision was considered to have had a detrimental affect to her career . The Greeks viewed the sudden departure and abstaining completely from the media as Vissi being ashamed about her result in the contest , furthered by Vissi 's own statements of the participation being a mistake . Although this was partially due to hardships faced by the Greek music industry including piracy , the financial crisis , and changing musical tastes , leading to a general decline of the <unk> @-@ pop scene and image @-@ based singers , her career choices , such as the pursuit of an international career at a relatively advanced age , leading to several long absences from Greece and attempting to use Eurovision as a gateway , were thought to be major components . In an article about the " golden trio of Greek pop " consisting of Vissi , Despina Vandi , and Sakis Rouvas , Anna <unk> of To Vima considered Vissi to have " the most vociferous " decline of the group . <unk> interpreted her tears on the night : 
 " When America looked to big to be won , Anna Vissi turned towards Europe . She took part in Eurovision to conquer the summit of the Alps and lost Mount Olympus too . Her tears on the evening of the contest in 2006 , following her failure , showed that she was fully aware of her situation : not only had she not conquered the European audience , but she had lost the Greek one too . " 
 Vissi 's music rival Despina Vandi also became less prominent . While the supposed rivalry between the two was once a grand topic in the media , with speculation as to who would come out on top , the possible overexposure of the story and their subsequent absences allowed fellow <unk> @-@ pop singer Elena Paparizou , fresh off of the momentum of her 2005 Eurovision win , to ultimately overshadow the two during the second half of the decade . While reviewing <unk> , Haris <unk> of <unk> felt that Vissi appeared to be attempting to catch up to her contemporaries , Paparizou and Peggy Zina . Vissi continued to make music and while her career never fully recovered to its previous state , she did continue to have some impact , being placed 15th in Forbes list of the most powerful and influential Greece celebrities in 2010 . Her time on hiatus in the late 2000s was filmed and used for a reality show called Oso <unk> Foni in 2011 . 
 = Jim Wallhead = 
 Jim Wallhead ( born 14 March 1984 ) is an English professional mixed martial artist who competes in the Welterweight division . He has competed for BAMMA , Bellator , and M @-@ 1 Challenge . 
 Wallhead is a member of Team Rough House and Leicester <unk> . In addition to his training at Leicester <unk> , Wallhead also works as a coach . Wallhead joined Team Rough House after back @-@ to @-@ back losses at the beginning of his professional career and dropped his competing weight from Light Heavyweight and Middleweight to Welterweight . 
 = = Mixed martial arts career = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Wallhead comes from a judo background , where he holds a black belt . He was introduced to judo accidentally after being taken to a class that was believed to be a karate class . Wallhead was successful early in his judo career for the Beaumont Leys Judo club , before moving to a club in Coventry under Olympic silver medallist Neil Adams . Under Adams , Wallhead won three Under @-@ 21s British titles as well as placing 7th in the European youth Olympics . 
 Wallhead joined Team Rough House in 2005 , following back @-@ to @-@ back losses between May and July 2005 . Wallhead is still a member of Team Rough House to this date , alongside fighters such as Dan Hardy , Ross Pearson , Paul Daley and Andre <unk> also trains Muay Thai with the former multi @-@ time Kickboxing champion Owen <unk> , who previously trained Dan Hardy . Wallhead works his strength and conditioning with Ollie Richardson at the Leicester Tigers Rugby Union training ground . Wallhead also trains Brazilian jiu @-@ jitsu under Victor <unk> , he holds a Blue Belt under him . 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Early in his career , Wallhead was associated with the Urban Combat Leicester team . He made his semi @-@ professional debut against Steve Matthews on 8 April 2005 , in a two @-@ round fight . This fight was fought at heavyweight , at the " Cage Warriors : Quest " event where Wallhead was able to defeat his opponent with a rear naked choke after 27 seconds of the first round . 
 Wallhead soon turned professional and on 30 April 2005 , he made his debut at Cage Warriors : Ultimate Force . Jim fought Leslee Ojugbana , utilising knee strikes from the clinch , whilst preventing Ojugbana from succeeding with takedown attempts . After one @-@ sided striking from Wallhead , Ojugbana gave up his back and Wallhead was able to pull off a rear naked choke for his debut win after just 64 seconds . 
 Wallhead competed just weeks later and made his second professional appearance against Boris <unk> at Cage Warriors : Strike Force . This fight was fought at the lower weight of middleweight and saw Wallhead succeed with judo throw attempts early in the fight . However , Wallhead 's ground game was not to the same standard at <unk> 's and he lost via first round submission ( neck crank ) after 4 : 20 . 
 This was followed up by his second consecutive loss , two months later at the Cage Warriors : Quest 2 event , at the hands of Chris Rice . Wallhead was <unk> 3 : 32 into the first round , resulting in a 1 – 2 record at the start of his professional MMA career . Following this loss , Wallhead joined Team Rough House after meeting Dan Hardy and receiving an invitation to join the team . Upon doing so , Wallhead dropped two weight categories to his current status as a welterweight . 
 = = = Early affiliation with Team Rough House = = = 
 In his welterweight debut and his first fight under Team Rough House affiliation , Wallhead was victorious . The fight took place at Cage Warriors : Strike Force 3 where Wallhead faced Greco @-@ Roman wrestler Steve Singh @-@ Sidhu . Though Wallhead had dropped to welterweight , he still had a considerable weight advantage over his opponent who weighed in at 3 @.@ 5 kg less than Wallhead . This perhaps was significant as Singh @-@ Sidhu 's strikes seemed to have little bearing on Wallhead , who was able to land takedowns and a standing choke . Midway through the first round , Singh @-@ Sidhu appeared to be backing away from Wallhead , who chased him down with punches and knees to the head . After a shin strike to the head , Singh @-@ Sidhu 's corner threw in the towel , resulting in a first round TKO victory for Wallhead . 
 In December 2005 , Wallhead fought Welshman Paul Jenkins . This was Wallhead 's first title fight in mixed martial arts , as they competed for the House of Pain Welterweight title in front of Jenkins ' home crowd of Cardiff , Wales . Wallhead won the fight via majority decision after five rounds , giving him the title . Just over two years to that day , Wallhead <unk> Jenkins in a kickboxing bout ( thus not counting towards his pro @-@ MMA record ) ; this time in Wallhead 's hometown of Nottingham . Wallhead showed effective low kicks and combinations which earned him a unanimous decision victory . 
 After his third successive victory , with his win over Henning Svendsen in March 2006 , Wallhead made his first title defense of his House of Pain Welterweight title just two weeks later . His opponent was John Phillips who was making his second professional appearance . Wallhead defeated Phillips to retain the title , after a TKO victory due to elbows . 
 After going 4 – 0 under the tutelage of Team Rough House , Wallhead then faced Peter Angerer in May 2006 . Despite controlling the fight , Angerer defeated Wallhead via submission ( arm @-@ triangle choke ) . During the submission attempt , Wallhead 's arm was stuck , meaning he had to tap with his feet , earning the nickname " Scuba Steve " from his teammates . 
 = = = European and worldwide exposure = = = 
 Following his loss to Angerer , Wallhead entered the <unk> 83 kg tournament in Holland , on just 72 hours notice , despite the tournament being at a higher weight than he was adjusted to . In the first round of the tournament , Wallhead defeated Camara <unk> via two @-@ round decision , before defeating Xander Nel in the final via TKO . 
 Wallhead then captured the Cage Gladiators British Welterweight Title , defeating the UFC veteran Jason Tan . 
 Returning to Cage Warriors , Wallhead faced the UFC @-@ bound Dennis <unk> . Despite being on a three fight winning streak , Wallhead was submitted via armbar taking his record to 8 – 4 . Wallhead faced Lewis Barrow four months later and won via submission ( punches ) to begin a four fight win streak . Wallhead 's next three fights resulted in submission victories ; a victory via choke over Jordan James , an arm @-@ triangle choke victory over Soli <unk> and a rear naked choke victory over Steven Lynch . 
 Wallhead began to gain more recognition and exposure in the United States when his fight against Charles Blanchard was featured on Inside MMA on HDNet . Unfortunately for Wallhead , this fight resulted in a decision loss . Wallhead would later state : " I didn 't throw my hands enough in the first round when I was fresh and that 's my own fault . " 
 Wallhead then began to show improved boxing and knockout power in his next few fights , the first of which was against Tom Haddock in April 2008 who he defeated via submission due to punches . 
 Just under three months later , Wallhead faced off against Fabricio Nascimento . Wallhead kept the fight on their feet throughout , preventing Nascimento 's takedowns . Frustrated by Wallhead 's superior boxing , Nascimento visibly showed his disdain . Wallhead took the unanimous decision victory which was regarded as the most important victory he had claimed at that stage in his career . 
 Wallhead 's next fight came at M @-@ 1 Challenge UK in September 2008 and was intended to be against Jason Ball . However , Ball had to withdraw with a knee injury and was replaced by Igor Araújo . In preparation for his fight with Araújo , Wallhead temporarily joined Xtreme Couture Mixed Martial Arts in Las Vegas , Nevada to further polish his skills . 
 Araújo himself had just finished training at Xtreme Couture and entered the fight having won seven of his last eight fights . After just 79 seconds , Wallhead won via TKO due to punches - the fifth TKO victory of his career . 
 Wallhead then applied to become a castmember of The Ultimate Fighter : United States vs. United Kingdom . After passing the assessment and interview successfully , he was told he was " too experienced " for the show , though strangely , he was instead made into an " alternate " who would step up if another castmember withdrew with injury . 
 Wallhead would then have an eight @-@ month layoff . This was due to his signing with the debuting " British Fighting Championships " - an organisation aimed at combining domestic British MMA into one entity - that would eventually dissolve before its premiere broadcast . The knockout @-@ style tournament saw him drawn against the Brazilian Fabio <unk> . However , the BFC organisation would eventually dissolve and in May 2009 , the Ultimate Force organisation picked up the fight . The fight saw Wallhead continue to utilise his improved boxing after an early scare , where <unk> knocked Wallhead down . Wallhead would go on to defeat his opponent via knockout , which was described by one of Wallhead 's team mates as " one of the worst knockouts they 've seen " . 
 In September 2009 , Wallhead won the Clash of Warriors Welterweight title by defeating Marius <unk> . 
 In November 2009 , Wallhead scored arguably the most high profile win of his career when he defeated The Ultimate Fighter : United States vs. United Kingdom participant Che Mills at " <unk> At The Manor " in Newport , Wales . The fight , which was seen as " a clash between the UK ’ s two top unsigned welterweights , " was a close fight that was difficult to score for the judges . Mills was able to block Wallhead 's takedown attempts and get back up quickly when Wallhead was successful . In the first round , Wallhead was able to take Mills down and get into side mount , though Mills almost won the first round in the eyes of the judges after a late flurry of strikes . The second round saw Mills use foot stomps and elbows from the clinch , which prevented Wallhead from utilising his wrestling . In the final round , Wallhead continued with takedowns before hitting Mills with elbows . With 45 seconds of the fight remaining , Wallhead was able to cut Mills with his strikes . 
 Wallhead 's overall control , strategy and constant aggression led to him taking a unanimous decision . 
 = = = Bellator Fighting Championships = = = 
 Despite speculation about joining the UFC , in December 2009 , Wallhead was signed by the Bellator Fighting Championships to compete in their 2010 eight man , number 1 contender Welterweight Tournament , which began on 8 April 2010 . 
 Wallhead 's first appearance in the tournament was scheduled to be at Bellator 15 against the American Jacob McClintock . 
 However , on 20 April , just two days before his fight with McClintock , Wallhead was forced to withdraw from the Bellator tournament as he was grounded in England due to the 2010 eruptions of Eyjafjallajökull . Wallhead was replaced by Ryan Thomas . 
 A month later , Bellator CEO Bjorn <unk> stated that they were aiming to include Wallhead in the third season - despite the absence of a welterweight tournament - with a view to including him in the fourth season 's welterweight tournament . 
 In the meantime , Wallhead took a fight in Cage Warriors against Shaun Lomas and defeated him via rear naked choke in the first round . Due to an injury to Wallhead 's previous opponent , Lomas had to step in at short notice , meaning that Wallhead competed at middleweight for the first time in two years . 
 Bellator 's plans to include Wallhead in their third season were confirmed in September 2010 , when Wallhead signed to face Ryan Thomas on 14 October 2010 at Bellator 32 . Wallhead went on to defeat Thomas via unanimous decision ( 29 – 28 , 29 – 28 , 29 – 28 ) . 
 In the fourth season welterweight tournament opening round , Wallhead faced fellow judoka , Rick Hawn , losing via unanimous decision . 
 = = = BAMMA = = = 
 Wallhead made his BAMMA debut at BAMMA 7 against Frank Trigg . Trigg was set to face Tom ' Kong ' Watson for Watson 's middleweight title , but Watson suffered a back injury forcing his withdrawal and allowing Wallhead to step up as his replacement . In the opening round , Wallhead caught Trigg with a left hook which appeared to hurt him , before executing a successful takedown . He ended the first round landing ground @-@ and @-@ pound shots which opened up a cut on Trigg 's cheek . The second round saw Wallhead land the stronger strikes , but less often than Trigg . The final round was also close , though Wallhead once again managed to rock Trigg early in the round . The fight went to the judges , where Wallhead won via split decision ( 29 @-@ 28 , 28 @-@ 29 and 30 @-@ 27 ) . 
 He competed at BAMMA 8 in a welterweight bout against Joey Villasenor , winning via first round KO . 
 Wallhead faced off against UFC veteran Matt Veach in the main event of BAMMA 12 in Newcastle , England on 9 March 2013 . He won the fight via submission in the first round . 
 = = = Return to Bellator = = = 
 Wallhead returned to Bellator to compete in the season seven welterweight tournament . His opening round match was against Lyman Good . He lost the fight via unanimous decision . 
 = = = Back to BAMMA = = = 
 On 9 March 2013 he took on UFC veteran Matt Veach at BAMMA 12 , winning by first round submission due to Rear @-@ Naked Choke . Wallhead faced former TUF contestant Eddy Ellis at BAMMA 13 on 14 September 2013 . He lost the fight in a highly controversial decision after breaking Ellis ' jaw in the first round and stuffing many of his takedown attempts . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 In mid @-@ 2015 , Wallhead signed with Poland @-@ based promotion <unk> <unk> Walki , and is currently expected to face Rafał <unk> at <unk> 32 : Road to Wembley in a welterweight bout on 31 October 2015 . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 On 9 April 2016 , Wallhead fought at <unk> 17 against <unk> Kovalev . He won the bout via unanimous decision 
 = = Mixed martial arts record = = 
 = = Titles and accomplishments = = 
 Judo 
 Three time Under @-@ 21 British Judo champion 
 Seventh place in the European Youth Olympics 
 Mixed Martial Arts 
 Former House of Pain Welterweight champion ( defended once , then relinquished ) 
 <unk> 83 kg tournament winner 
 Former Cage Gladiators British Welterweight champion 
 Clash of Warriors Welterweight champion 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Wallhead has a son . 
 = Vision in White = 
 Vision In White is the first book of the Bride Quartet series of romance novels , written by Nora Roberts . It spent two weeks atop the New York Times Bestseller List and reached number 3 on the USA Today bestseller list , marking the first time one of Roberts ' books had become a bestseller in trade paperback format . A downloadable casual @-@ play computer game based on the book was introduced by I @-@ Play in 2010 . 
 In her thirty @-@ year career , Roberts had published almost 200 novels . Vision in White was one of ten Roberts novels published in 2009 , including five new releases and five reprints . When it was released on April 28 , 2009 , its cover premiered the use of a special logo to differentiate her new releases from reprints of her past works . 
 The novel marked Roberts ' return to contemporary romance . The new series revolved around a wedding planning enterprise run by four childhood friends . This first story featured the developing relationship between wedding photographer <unk> " Mac " Elliot and English professor Carter Maguire . Like several other Roberts novels , Vision In White explored how a protagonist balanced a successful career with a dysfunctional family environment . Although the hero is a fairly typical representation of the romance novel archetype of the professor , the novel is slightly unusual for a romance in that the hero must convince the heroine to take a chance on love . 
 = = Background = = 
 Nora Roberts is a prolific author of romance and futuristic suspense novels . From 1979 through 2008 , almost 200 of her novels were published . On average , she completed a book every 45 days . She does not outline the novels in advance or create character biographies , preferring to develop the plot as she goes . 
 According to Publishers Weekly , three of the top @-@ ten bestselling mass market paperbacks of 2008 were Roberts novels . Her new releases focused primarily on paranormal and fantasy romance . In 2009 , Roberts returned to the traditional contemporary romance subgenre with Vision in White . The novel was the first in her Bride Quartet , which also included Bed of Roses , <unk> the Moment , and Happy Ever After . Each novel in the series focuses on the love story of a different founder of Vows , a fictional wedding planning business . 
 Vision in White was released by Berkley Books on April 28 , 2009 . The novel was one of ten Roberts books released that year . Five of the releases were paperback reprints of books previously issued . Three were new hardcovers , including two published under the pseudonym J. D. Robb . Vision in White and its sequel , Bed of Roses , were released in trade paperback . To help readers differentiate the new releases from the reprints , the covers of the two trade paperbacks included a medallion with the initials NR . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 The novel follows the relationship of photographer <unk> " Mac " Elliot and English teacher Carter Maguire . Mac and her childhood friends Parker , Emma , and Laurel are the founders of Vows , a fictional wedding planning company in Connecticut . While accompanying his sister to a planning session at Vows , Carter renews his acquaintance with Mac , and confesses that he had been infatuated with her since high school . She is intrigued by his honesty and earnestness and decides to embark on a casual fling with him . 
 After seeing her parents ' numerous failed marriages , Mac does not trust the idea of commitment . Her determination to avoid emotional intimacy is reinforced as she struggles against her mother 's continued tactics of emotional manipulation . 
 Their relationship progresses slowly through the book . Each protagonist receives much advice from a large circle of friends and family . With the support of her friends and Carter , Mac develops the courage to stand up to her mother . By the end of the novel , she realizes that she does not have to relive her parents ' mistakes , and chooses to embrace her love for Carter . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 The four novels of the Bride Quartet share a strong emphasis on sisterhood . The heroines of the books bonded as children and have become sisters by choice . Throughout the series , they provide mutual support and acceptance of each other 's quirks . Focused on their careers , the heroines have little time for outside relationships , and they rely heavily on each other for comfort , help , and distractions . A similar theme is seen in several of Roberts ' other works ; her In Death series , written as J. D. Robb , has a heroine who has created a family from female friends and colleagues . 
 According to critic Betsy Prioleau , Vision In White 's hero is a typical representation of one of the eight archetypes of a romance hero : the professor . Several scenes in the novel show him teaching students or in parent @-@ teacher conferences . Like most intellectual romance heroes , Carter is a " sober good guy " , and the heroine is attracted to him primarily for his mind . In an unusual twist for a romance novel , however , the hero is the character who is ready for a commitment but must help the heroine overcome her fears . After seeing her mother divorce four husbands and discard countless boyfriends , Mac prefers to avoid emotional intimacy rather than risk the relationship splintering . Carter provides reassurance that their relationship is built on a solid foundation . 
 Critic Mary Ellen Snodgrass calls Vision In White a story of the New Woman , with a strong heroine who is extremely proud of her significant career accomplishments . Roberts uses the heroine 's choices of how to pose or spotlight her photography clients as pointed ways of celebrating both monogamy and " unconventional views of femininity " . In one scene , Mac convinces a heavily pregnant woman to pose nude , despite her feelings of awkwardness ; through the resulting photos , the client comes to believe that she is actually beautiful . In another poke at traditional stereotypes , Mac photographs a bride and groom posing together on a horse , evoking the metaphor of a knight coming to rescue the princess — but the couple are equals . 
 Roberts contrasts Mac 's competence in business matters with her difficulties in dealing with an extremely dysfunctional family , a theme Roberts had previously used in the Chesapeake Bay Series ( Rising Tides , Sea Swept , and Inner Harbor ) and the Calhoun Series . In Visions in White , the family difficulties are caused by the heroine 's mother , who is essentially a cross between the mothers in Carolina Moon and Tribute . Roberts shows that , as a result of her family 's dysfunction , Mac has chosen to distance herself from deeper emotions . The camera allows Mac to interact with other people 's happiness and lives without having to fully participate ; as the book progresses , she gradually develops the courage to come out of her shell and fully participate in life . 
 The use of the wedding industry is , per Snodgrass , " a wry reprise of Roberts ' career in fictional matchmaking " . The novel celebrates the joy of a traditional wedding ceremony , including the playful ceremonies arranged by children playing dress @-@ up . Roberts ' treatment of these themes " validates the dress @-@ up game of playing bride as both fantasy and a stabilizing preface on women 's devotion to mate and family " . Roberts included significant detail on the wedding planning industry , which Snodgrass posits is meant to highlight and celebrate the success the female characters had at niche marketing . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Jill M. Smith in Romantic Times gave the novel four out of five stars , labeling it a " wonderful and cozy read " . A Publishers Weekly review highlighted the " gentle humor and likable cast " and predicted that readers would be eager to follow the characters through the rest of the series . In Booklist , John Charles called the novel " thoroughly charming " and lauded the deep characterization and " sharp , clever writing " that combined to celebrate " friendship and love " . 
 In a survey of readers , Snodgrass found mixed opinions . Many were delighted to see Roberts return to traditional contemporary romances , minus the elements of fantasy and magic that had woven through her more recent novels . Some praised the tight bonds of sisterhood that Roberts created for the four founders of Vows , but other readers complained that the character voices were too similar . A vocal minority pointed out similarities between this novel and Roberts ' Calhoun series . 
 By February 2010 , Vision In White and Bed of Roses had sold a combined 1 million print copies . Over 100 @,@ 000 copies of Vision in White were sold in Canada alone between May and October 2009 . The novel spent 32 weeks on the USA Today bestseller list , peaking at number 3 . It was number 1 on the New York Times Bestseller List for trade paperback fiction for two weeks . It was the first of Roberts ' novels to be a bestseller in trade paperback format . 
 = = Computer game = = 
 Within months of the novel 's release , computer gaming company I @-@ Play began developing a downloadable casual @-@ play game based on the story . Roberts ' input was limited to approval of the graphics and the game 's interpretation of the story line . The game followed the general plot of the novel , from the perspective of the heroine . More than 40 different locations from the book were featured , including Mac 's office and Carter 's kitchen . There were hidden @-@ object tasks and several mini @-@ games featuring wedding @-@ related activities , such as cake decorating and floral arranging . Roberts was pleased with the final product , remarking that " to have a story translated into a game like this , it 's tremendous fun for me . It 's my initial vision , but I enjoy seeing how , when you translate it into that other medium , how somebody else 's vision manages to affect it but keep the core of the story . " The game was released in February 2010 . According to Roberts ' website , game sales did not match the developer 's expectations , and plans for sequels to the game were cancelled . 
 = Three Sisters ( Oregon ) = 
 The Three Sisters are a complex volcano of three volcanic peaks of the Cascade Volcanic Arc and the Cascade Range in the U.S. state of Oregon . Each exceeding 10 @,@ 000 feet ( 3 @,@ 000 m ) in elevation , they are the third , fourth , and fifth highest peaks in the state of Oregon , and are located in the Three Sisters Wilderness , about 10 miles ( 16 km ) south of the nearest town of Sisters . Diverse species of flora and fauna inhabit the area on and around the mountains , which is subject to frequent snowfall , occasional rain , and extreme temperature differences between seasons . The mountains , particularly South Sister , are popular for climbing and scrambling . 
 Although they are often grouped together and seen as one unit , the three mountains evolved under differing geologic situations , and the <unk> composition of each mountain can vary significantly . Whereas North Sister is extinct and Middle Sister is dormant , South Sister last erupted about 2 @,@ 000 years ago and still could erupt , threatening life within the region . After satellite imagery detected tectonic uplifting near South Sister in 2000 , the United States Geological Survey made plans to improve monitoring in the immediate area . 
 = = Geography and geology = = 
 The Three Sisters are located on the boundaries of Lane and Deschutes counties and the Willamette and Deschutes national forests in the U.S. state of Oregon , about 10 miles ( 16 km ) south of the nearest town of Sisters . The three peaks , the third , fourth , and fifth highest peaks in Oregon , have 15 named glaciers among them , nearly half of the 35 named glaciers in Oregon . The Sisters were named Faith , Hope , and Charity by early settlers , but " these names have not prevailed " , and instead they are named North Sister , Middle Sister , and South Sister . 
 A complex volcano that extends for 20 miles ( 32 km ) , the Three Sisters are located at latitude 44 @.@ 103 ° N and longitude 121 @.@ 768 ° W. Part of the Cascade Volcanic Arc and the Cascade Range , the volcanoes formed during separate time periods from several varieties of magma , and the amount of rhyolite found in the lava of the younger two mountains is unusual relative to nearby volcanoes . Like other Cascade volcanoes , the Three Sisters were fed by magma chambers produced by the subduction of the Juan de Fuca Plate under the western edge of the North American Plate . They were also affected by the changing atmosphere of the Pleistocene epoch , a geologic period during which an Ice Age occurred where glaciers ate away at mountains as they retreated . Specifically , Three Sisters join several other volcanoes in the eastern segment of the Cascade Range known as the High Cascades , which trends from north – south . 
 The Three Sisters form the centerpiece of a region of closely grouped volcanic peaks , an exception to the typical 40 @-@ to @-@ 60 @-@ mile ( 64 to 97 km ) spacing between volcanoes elsewhere in the Cascades . These nearby peaks include Belknap Crater , Mount Washington , Black Butte , and Three Fingered Jack to the north , and Broken Top and Mount Bachelor to the south . The region was active in the Pleistocene epoch , with eruptions between 700 @,@ 000 and 170 @,@ 000 years ago from an explosively active complex known as the <unk> volcanic center . Basaltic lava flows from North Sister overlay the newest <unk> pyroclastic deposits , placing the age of North Sister , the eldest , at less than 170 @,@ 000 years . 
 = = Wilderness and climate = = 
 The Three Sisters Wilderness covers an area of 281 @,@ 190 acres ( 1 @,@ 137 @.@ 9 km2 ) , making it the second largest wilderness area in Oregon . Created by the U.S. Congress in 1964 , it borders the Mount Washington Wilderness to the north and shares a southern edge with the Waldo Lake Wilderness . The Three Sisters Wilderness includes 260 miles ( 420 km ) of trails , in addition to many forests , lakes , waterfalls , and streams , such as the source of <unk> Creek . More specifically , the Three Sisters and Broken Top account for about a third of the Three Sisters Wilderness — an area known as the Alpine Crest Region . Rising from about 5 @,@ 200 feet ( 1 @,@ 600 m ) to 10 @,@ 358 feet ( 3 @,@ 157 m ) in elevation , it features the wilderness area 's most @-@ frequented glaciers , lakes , and meadows . 
 Weather in the area varies because of separation created by the mountain barrier . The west is wetter and the east is drier , and precipitation increases with elevation . The moisture , falling mostly as winter snow , originates from warm air pockets over the Pacific Ocean and cools as it ascends the mountains . In the western section , precipitation ranges from 80 to 125 inches ( 200 to 320 cm ) annually , varying from 40 to 80 inches ( 100 to 200 cm ) in the east . Temperature extremes reach 80 to 90 ° F ( 27 to 32 ° C ) in summers and − 20 to − 30 ° F ( − 29 to − 34 ° C ) during the winters . 
 In the wilderness , part of the National Wilderness Preservation System , motor vehicles and means of transport are prohibited . These include bicycles , wagons , motorboats , and helicopters . From Memorial Day to October 31 , permits are required for entry to the wilderness . 
 = = = Flora and fauna = = = 
 While Douglas fir and ponderosa pine trees predominate in the western and eastern parts of the Cascades , respectively , flora in the Three Sisters Wilderness also consists of lodgepole pine , Pacific silver fir , subalpine fir , western hemlock , western white pine , Englemann spruce , and western redcedar . White fir , once a common species in the area , has declined due to recent blights of mountain pine beetle . At higher altitudes , alpine meadows are common , and they feature the following flowers : lupine , red Indian paintbrush , heather , <unk> , <unk> , sunflowers , <unk> , and many other genera . Also common at high altitudes are mountain hemlock and whitebark pine trees . 
 The local fauna of the Three Sisters includes fish such as brook and rainbow trout , birds such as blue and ruffed grouse , and larger species like the Columbian black @-@ tailed deer , mule deer , Roosevelt elk , and American black bear . In addition to predator bobcats , cougars , and coyotes , raccoons , martens , weasels , and American minks live throughout the Three Sisters area . 
 = = Peaks = = 
 = = = North Sister = = = 
 North Sister , also known as " Faith , " is the oldest and most eroded of the three , with towering rock pinnacles and glaciers . A stratovolcano atop an ancient shield volcano named Little Brother , North Sister is 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) wide . Consisting primarily of basaltic andesite , it is more mafic ( rich in magnesium and iron ) than the other two volcanoes . Its deposits are rich in palagonite and red and black cinders , and grow progressively more iron @-@ rich with decreasing age . North Sister 's lava flows demonstrate similar composition throughout its eruptive history , which lasted for a long period of time . Estimates place the volcano 's last eruption at more than 100 @,@ 000 years ago , so the volcano is considered extinct . The North Sister possesses more dikes than any similar Cascade peak , and many dikes were pushed aside by the intrusion of a 980 @-@ foot ( 300 m ) -wide plug dome that now forms the mountain 's summits of Prouty Peak and the South Horn . The remainder of the peak is chiefly loose debris held in place by the dike system . 
 North Sister has not erupted since the late Pleistocene . Extensive erosion exposed the volcanic edifice , including magma pathways such as dikes and sills . At one point , the volcano stood more than 11 @,@ 000 feet ( 3 @,@ 400 m ) in elevation , but this erosion claimed a quarter to a third of its original volume . 
 = = = Middle Sister = = = 
 Middle Sister also known as " Hope , " is a stratovolcano consisting primarily of basalt , but it also has erupted andesite , dacite , and rhyodacite . The smallest and most poorly @-@ studied of the trio , it is also the middle in age , its most recent flows dating to 14 @,@ 000 years ago , making them slightly older than South Sister 's . These flows , thick and rich in dacite , extended from the northern and southern sides . They stand in contrast to older , andesitic lava remains which reach as far as 4 @.@ 35 miles ( 7 @.@ 00 km ) from the volcano 's base . 
 The mountain has a cone shape that lost its eastern side to glaciation , but its western portion remains near @-@ intact . The Hayden and Diller glaciers continue to cut into the east face , while the Renfrew Glacier sits on the northwestern slope . The large but retreating Collier Glacier descends along the north side of Middle Sister , cutting into North Sister 's west side . Erosion from Pleistocene and Holocene glaciation exposed a plug near the center of Middle Sister . 
 = = = South Sister = = = 
 South Sister , also known as " Charity , " is the youngest and tallest volcano of the trio . Its eruptive products range from basaltic andesite to rhyolite and rhyodacite . It is a stratovolcano overlying an older shield structure , no more than 50 @,@ 000 years old , which last erupted about 2 @,@ 000 years ago . The first such episode , termed the Rock Mesa eruptive cycle , first spread tephra from flank vents from the south and southwest flanks , followed by a thick rhyolite lava flow . The second cycle , the Devils Hill eruptive cycle , was similar in result , but was caused by the intrusion of a dike of new silicic magma that erupted from about 20 vents on the southeast side and from a smaller line on the north side . 
 Unlike its sister peaks , South Sister has an <unk> summit crater about 1 ⁄ 4 mile ( 0 @.@ 40 km ) in diameter that holds a small crater lake known as Teardrop Pool , the highest lake in Oregon . The slopes of South Sister have a number of small glaciers , including the Lewis , Clark , Lost Creek and Prouty glaciers near the crater rim . 
 = = Climbing and recreation = = 
 The Three Sisters are a popular climbing destination for hikers and mountaineers . The United States Forest Service requires permits for use from Memorial Day until the beginning of September , and dogs must be kept on leashes on the Green Lakes , Moraine Lakes , South Sister , Soda Creek , Todd Lake , and Crater Ditch trails from July 15 through September 15 . Horses are prohibited , and ice axes are required during the winter climbing season for safety reasons . 
 Due to extensive erosion , which causes rockfall , North Sister is the most dangerous climb of the three volcanic peaks . However , one of its peaks , Little Brother , can be scrambled . The first recorded ascent of North Sister was made by six people , including Oregon politicians George Lemuel Woods and James McBride , in 1857 , according to a story published in Overland Monthly in 1870 . Today , the common trail lasts 11 miles ( 18 km ) round @-@ trip , gaining 3 @,@ 165 feet ( 965 m ) in elevation and lasting about 6 – 7 hours for the average climber . After passing through forest , lava flows , and meadows , from the summit scramblers can see various cinder cones as well as North Sister and nearby volcanoes . 
 Middle Sister can also be scrambled , for a round @-@ trip of 16 @.@ 4 miles ( 26 @.@ 4 km ) and an elevation gain of 4 @,@ 757 feet ( 1 @,@ 450 m ) . The trip lasts about 12 hours , beginning with a route through dense forest and ending on Middle Sister 's southern summit . In addition to views of North Sister , the summit offers sights of South Sister , Hayden Glacier , and other Cascade Volcanoes including Mount Hood . 
 The standard climbing route up the south ridge of South Sister runs for 12 @.@ 6 miles ( 20 @.@ 3 km ) round @-@ trip , and rises from 5 @,@ 446 feet ( 1 @,@ 660 m ) at the trailhead to 10 @,@ 358 feet ( 3 @,@ 157 m ) at its summit . Traveling over cinder cones , domes , and lava flows , the hike does not become demanding until the last mile as it ascends to the summit . In his book Into the Wild , Jon Krakauer notes that his first climb of South Sister with his father inspired him to pursue mountaineering . Popular starting points are the Green Lakes and Devils Lake trailheads . Although this path does not require any technical skills or much in the way of mountaineering knowledge , many environmental dangers remain the same , and rescue operations are common during the climbing season . 
 = = Recent history and potential hazards = = 
 Neither North nor Middle Sister is likely to resume volcanic activity , while South Sister could become active . If South Sister were to erupt , it would pose a threat to nearby life . The proximal danger zone extends from 1 @.@ 24 to 6 miles ( 2 @.@ 00 to 9 @.@ 66 km ) from the volcano 's summits . Tephra would accumulate to 1 to 2 inches ( 25 to 51 mm ) in the city of Bend , and lahars ( volcanically induced mudflows ) and pyroclastic flows would run down the flanks of the mountain , threatening any life in their paths . 
 South Sister was found to be potentially active when in 2000 , satellite imagery showed a deforming tectonic uplift 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) west of the mountain . The ground began to bulge in late 1997 , when magma started to pool about 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) underground . Scientists were concerned that the volcano was awakening . A map at the Lava Lands Visitor Center of the Newberry National Volcanic Monument south of Bend shows the extent of the uplift , which reaches a maximum of 11 inches ( 28 cm ) . In 2004 an earthquake swarm occurred with an epicenter in the area of uplift , and the hundreds of small earthquakes subsided after several days . By 2007 the uplift had slowed somewhat , though the area was still considered potentially active . In February 2013 , scientists determined that the uplift had slowed to a rate of about 0 @.@ 3 inches ( 7 @.@ 6 mm ) per year , compared to up to 2 inches ( 51 mm ) per year in the early 2000s . Because of the uplift at South Sister , the United States Geological Survey planned to increase monitoring of the Three Sisters and their vicinity by installing a global positioning system ( GPS ) receiver , sampling airborne and ground @-@ based gases , and adding seismometers . 
 = 1950 Australian National Airways Douglas DC @-@ 4 crash = 
 On 26 June 1950 , a Douglas DC @-@ 4 Skymaster aircraft departed from Perth , Western Australia for an eight @-@ hour flight to Adelaide , South Australia . It crashed 18 minutes after take @-@ off , 32 nautical miles ( 59 km ) from Perth Airport . All but one of the 29 occupants were killed in the accident and the sole survivor died six days later . It was the worst civil aviation accident in Australia . 
 As the aircraft flew eastwards over the outer suburbs of Perth numerous witnesses observed that it was flying at a lower altitude than usual for the daily Skymaster services , and at least one of the engines was running roughly and backfiring at regular intervals . In the minutes before it crashed , witnesses heard a number of different engine noises – sometimes operating normally , sometimes all engine noise ceased , only to be replaced by a very loud , high @-@ pitched scream . When the wrecked engines were examined many weeks after the accident a significant amount of corrosion product was found in the fuel system within two of the engines . After a preliminary investigation , Investigators from the Department of Civil Aviation believed the water responsible for the corrosion was also responsible for rough running of at least one engine , and ultimately temporary loss of power from all engines on at least one occasion . The Investigators did not find a likely source for the water . 
 All but one of the 29 occupants on board the aircraft died , either from multiple injuries and burns , or from incineration . One elderly male passenger survived the crash . The first rescuers at the crash site found him wandering about , dazed and distressed . He suffered serious burns and was admitted to hospital where he died six days later . 
 The accident became the subject of an Inquiry chaired by a Supreme Court judge . In the absence of evidence indicating the source of any water in the fuel , the Inquiry dismissed the submission that water was responsible for the accident . The Inquiry did not determine the cause of the accident but it made recommendations to enhance the safety of aircraft operations . 
 = = The flight = = 
 Photo Frank Leyden 1948 ( NLA ) 
 The aircraft was the Amana , a Douglas DC @-@ 4 @-@ 1009 registered VH @-@ ANA and the flagship of the Australian National Airways fleet . It flew for the first time on 28 January 1946 and was flown to Australia on 9 February 1946 . 
 The Amana departed from Perth Airport at 9 : 55 pm for the 8 @-@ hour flight to Adelaide . On board were 24 passengers , 3 pilots and two air hostesses . 
 A radio report was received from the Amana at 10 : 00 pm advising it was on course and climbing to 9 @,@ 000 feet . Nothing more was heard from the aircraft . As it flew east over the outer suburbs of Perth numerous people on the ground observed that it was flying unusually low , and heard at least one of its engines running roughly and backfiring repeatedly . Amana crashed at about 10 : 13 pm . 
 = = Crash = = 
 A number of residents on farming properties to the west of York heard a large aircraft flying low over the area . The aircraft seemed to be in trouble because the noise from the engines was changing significantly . At times the engines seemed to be operating normally but on at least one occasion all engine noise ceased for a brief time and then returned as a very loud , high @-@ pitched noise . One resident reported that when all engine noise ceased he could hear a rushing sound until the scream from the engines returned . Several residents reported seeing a bright flash of white light in the distance , followed by a loud crashing and scraping noise . Those closest to the crash could then see the yellow glow of a major fire . 
 Ten minutes after the Amana set course for Adelaide , a Douglas DC @-@ 4 operated by Trans Australia Airlines became airborne at Perth , also heading for Adelaide . As the TAA aircraft set course for Adelaide , the captain , Douglas MacDonald , saw a vivid white flash on the horizon in precisely the direction in which he was heading . It lasted about six seconds , long enough for him to draw it to the attention of the two other crew members . Eight minutes later , the TAA aircraft passed over a band of fire on the ground . MacDonald estimated the fire was 28 nautical miles ( 52 km ) east of Perth Airport . As MacDonald approached Cunderdin , he was aware the Amana , flying about ten minutes ahead of him , had not yet radioed its position report at Cunderdin . He became concerned that the vivid white flash and the ground fire might indicate some tragedy had befallen the Amana so he advised Air Traffic Control about his observations . Air Traffic Control was also concerned about the Amana 's failure to report at Cunderdin so on hearing MacDonald 's observations of the vivid white flash and the ground fire they activated emergency procedures . They asked MacDonald to fly back to the fire and determine its position . MacDonald did so and advised Air Traffic Control of bearings from the fire to York and Northam , the towns nearest the crash site . 
 = = Search and rescue = = 
 Frank McNamara ( 62 ) , an <unk> , and Geoff Inkpen ( 25 ) , a young farmer , heard the sound of a big aircraft in serious trouble , flying low nearby . McNamara described the noise from the engines as " terrifying " . They investigated and saw the bright light of a flash fire . McNamara sent his two teenage sons in his utility truck to York to alert the police . McNamara and Inkpen then set out on foot in the direction of the fire . As there was bright moonlight , they were able to hurry through the bush . After about half an hour , they came upon a scene of devastation . They were astonished to find an elderly man in a dazed state wandering around the burning wreckage . He gave his name and explained that he had been a passenger on a large aircraft . He had survived the crash despite being badly burned . No one else was found alive . 
 In response to notification from Air Traffic Control , three ambulances from Perth were despatched in the direction of the crash site , known to be somewhere between Chidlow and York . The crash site was several miles from the road so the ambulance crews travelled eastwards all the way to York without sighting a fire . The crews were eventually guided back along the main road and then along a dirt road that enabled them to drive to within three or four miles of the crash site . The crews then took their first @-@ aid boxes and set out on foot . 
 Frank McNamara made a bed of leaves for the survivor and built a fire to help keep him as warm and comfortable as possible . McNamara stayed with the survivor while Inkpen went to summon help . After several hours , ambulance crews arrived and administered first @-@ aid and morphia . Rescue workers constructed a stretcher using saplings , bandages and overcoats . They covered the survivor with an overcoat and carried him for two hours to cover about two miles through thickly wooded country to McNamara 's utility truck , which then carried him and his rescuers to a waiting ambulance . 
 Frank McNamara and Geoff Inkpen were publicly thanked by the Minister for Civil Aviation for the great assistance they rendered to the rescue effort throughout the night . In a public letter to Frank McNamara , the minister acknowledged the unrelenting effort of McNamara and his sons under extremely difficult conditions . He also acknowledged McNamara 's care of the survivor and regretted that McNamara was not rewarded by seeing the survivor recover . In a public letter to Geoff Inkpen , the Minister expressed his deep appreciation for Inkpen 's actions on the night of the crash . During World War II , Inkpen had served in the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) as a navigator and the minister acknowledged that , in peacetime , Inkpen had continued to uphold " the fine traditions " of the RAAF . 
 = = Fate of those onboard = = 
 The survivor was Edgar Forwood , 67 @-@ year @-@ old Managing @-@ Director of Forwood Down and Company Ltd . , a South Australian engineering company . He was the oldest person on board the flight , and probably the most experienced air traveller . He was interviewed by police in hospital in Perth , but was not aware of much detail about the final minutes of the flight . He said there was no sign of fire prior to the crash and no announcement to passengers to fasten their seat belts . He died six days after the crash and was buried at the North Road cemetery in Adelaide , his home town . 
 Investigators believed the aircraft captain survived for a short time after the crash . His body was a short distance away from his seat and both were a few metres ahead of the wreckage where they had been thrown after the nose of the aircraft was split open in the impact with a large tree . The seat belt had not broken , but it had been undone . The captain 's tunic was pulled up over his head as though to protect his face from the heat of the nearby inferno . Investigators believed he survived the crash and undid his seat belt to drag himself away from the fire . His body was not burnt , but autopsy showed both his legs were broken and he died from a fractured skull . 
 Postmortem examinations were performed on the 28 victims of the crash . The two co @-@ pilots died from multiple injuries . Twenty @-@ three passengers and the two air hostesses were found to have died from multiple injuries and burns , or incineration . Only 12 of the 28 victims could be formally identified . The remaining 16 victims were either unrecognisable or identifiable and were buried in a mass grave at Perth 's Karrakatta cemetery . 
 = = Passengers = = 
 On its fatal flight the Amana was carrying 24 passengers , including 2 infants . All except Edgar Forwood died in the crash or the ensuing inferno . Passengers included : 
 Five Polish immigrants ( including an infant ) , previously of the Northam Migration Camp , travelling to Adelaide . 
 The Anglican Bishop of the Riverina , Bishop Charles Murray . 
 The Anglican Dean of Newcastle , the Very Reverend Norman Blow . 
 Victor Anquetil , an executive of Charles Read Limited in Melbourne . 
 Stan Baker , an employee of <unk> Petroleum Company . In 1931 Mr Baker was booked to fly on the fatal flight of the Southern Cloud but finally travelled by train instead . 
 Kenneth Douglas , the managing director of Winterbottom Motor Company . 
 Douglas Engler , secretary of the Pioneer Bus Company . 
 Vincent Finnigan , a world authority on diesel @-@ electric locomotives and electric traction . 
 Six other male passengers , four other female passengers and an infant . 
 = = Investigation = = 
 Three investigators from the Department of Civil Aviation began work at the crash scene the day after the accident . They found the Amana had crashed in a heavily timbered area on the Inkpen family property Berry Brow , on the easterly track between Perth airport and Kalgoorlie , at a point where the elevation was about 1 @,@ 100 feet ( 340 m ) above sea level . The aircraft struck the tops of tall gum trees while descending at an angle of about 15 ° below horizontal . Its speed at impact was estimated at 250 miles per hour ( 400 km / h ) . It crashed through large trees , breaking them off as if they were matchsticks , before impacting the ground violently and gouging a long , wide furrow . The left wing was torn away from the fuselage and then the aircraft broke up and burst into flames . Only the rear fuselage with the fin and rudder were not affected by fire . The wreckage trail was about 280 yards ( 260 m ) long and 35 yards ( 32 m ) wide . At the time of impact the Amana 's left wing was lower than its right , suggesting it may have been turning left . It was heading north , not east towards Cunderdin . Investigators speculated that the crew may have been turning with the intention of returning to Perth airport ; or they may have been preparing for a crash @-@ landing in a large clear area to the north of the crash site . 
 Possibly as a result of rough @-@ running of one or more of its engines , the Amana was observed flying over Perth 's outer @-@ eastern suburbs at an unusually low altitude . No witness report was received from anyone along the next 16 nautical miles ( 30 km ) of the Amana 's track from Perth 's outer suburbs to within 5 nautical miles ( 9 km ) of the crash site . In the minute before it crashed , eight witnesses heard a large aeroplane in distress and reported unusual engine noise , including engine noise ceasing on at least one occasion , followed by the sudden return of very loud engine noise . This suggested that , on at least one occasion , none of the engines were producing power , followed by a resumption of power on some of the engines . The investigation team concluded that the Amana failed to reach its assigned altitude of 9 @,@ 000 feet , and that it experienced intermittent engine problems of such severity that all engine power was lost on at least one occasion . Without power and with only one of its propellers feathered , a Douglas DC @-@ 4 loses altitude at a great rate , possibly as fast as 100 feet per second ( 6 @,@ 000 feet per minute ) . 
 Engines and propellers numbers 1 to 3 suffered substantial damage in the crash , but engine and propeller number 4 suffered much less damage . The investigators determined that at the time of impact , propellers 1 , 2 and 3 were turning normally and their engines were producing power but propeller number 4 was feathered and its engine was not operating . There was also some evidence that action was taken by the crew to <unk> propeller number 4 in the moments before impact . None of the engines contained evidence of any internal failure prior to impact . All the magnetos were tested and the results indicated normal ignition was available to all engines up to the time of impact . 
 Engine number 4 suffered only minor , external damage . It was dismantled by the investigation team in an attempt to determine why it might have been shut down by the crew . A substantial amount of corrosion product was found in the passages of the fuel flow meter on engine number 4 . Western Australia 's Deputy Mineralogist identified the corrosion product as magnesium hydroxide . This is a corrosion product formed by reaction of magnesium and water , suggesting the fuel passages had been filled with water in the months between the crash and the detailed examination of the engine . Charles Gibbs , an engine specialist employed by the Department of Civil Aviation , estimated at least 45 cubic centimetres of water must have been involved . Rain falling on the crash site before engine number 4 was removed could not account for this much water in the fuel passages . Gibbs first examined the fuel system of engine number 4 and discovered the corrosion about two months after the accident . He conducted a test on an identical flow meter and found that after he left water in the fuel flow passages for approximately 8 weeks a similar amount of corrosion product developed . This suggested the rough running heard by witnesses on the ground may have been caused by water in the fuel reaching engine number 4 . The steel rotor in the fuel pump of engine number 1 was slightly corroded but the fuel systems of engines 2 and 3 showed no evidence of corrosion . Investigators formed the opinion that the rough running heard by witnesses on the ground , and the crew 's decision to shut down engine number 4 and feather its propeller , may have been related to water in the fuel reaching that engine . Similarly , the intermittent loss of power on all engines in the final minutes of the flight may indicate that all engines were receiving fuel contaminated with water . 
 The only abnormality found in all four engines was the vapour vent float in the fuel strainer chamber of the carburettors . The floats had been crushed by extreme fuel pressure . Inquiries were made to the engine manufacturer and other civil aviation authorities but none had prior experience of vapour vent floats collapsing . Tests on carburettors were also carried out in Australia by the Aeronautical Research Laboratories but without finding any suitable explanation . Whether the floats were crushed in flight or in the crash could not be determined , but even if it had occurred in flight it would not have affected operation of the engines . 
 The earliest reports from the crash site speculated that the Amana was already on fire when it struck the tops of trees because those trees , and pieces of the aircraft 's left wing torn off in the impact with them , showed signs of scorching . Several eyewitnesses reported seeing flames in the sky before the aircraft struck the ground . Department of Civil Aviation investigators discounted this speculation because only one of the Amana 's push @-@ button engine fire extinguishers had activated and this had most likely occurred during the crash or the fire . 
 Australian National Airways ( ANA ) ground staff in Sydney checked the Amana 's fuel tanks for the presence of water prior to its first departure on 26 June . They found none . The Amana was subsequently re @-@ fuelled in Melbourne and Adelaide but no check of the fuel tanks was made on these occasions . After being re @-@ fuelled in Perth immediately prior to the fatal flight , the fuel filters in all 4 engines and the fuel drain serving the cross @-@ feed pipe in the wing centre @-@ section were all checked for the presence of water . The fuel tanks themselves were not checked , partly because , on the night of 26 June , the ground staff were " pressed for time " because one despatch engineer was absent due to illness . 
 ANA was of the opinion that if a small amount of water entered a fuel tank during refuelling it would only reach the drain cocks when the aircraft was in level flight so it could not be detected immediately after re @-@ fuelling . For 15 years ANA had operated in the knowledge that the only satisfactory time to check fuel tanks for the presence of water was prior to the first flight of the day , after the aircraft had been stationary overnight . Throughout this time ANA checked fuel tanks for the presence of water prior to the first flight of the day . 
 Prior to its final flight , the Amana received 1 @,@ 756 US gallons ( 6 @,@ 650 L ) of fuel from a tanker operated by the Vacuum Oil Company . The tanker had been checked for the presence of water in the morning and again at 6 : 30 pm , about 2 hours prior to re @-@ fuelling the Amana . It had also supplied fuel to 3 de Havilland Dove aircraft , none of which suffered any engine problems or were found to have water in the fuel . 
 The Department of Civil Aviation performed tests on parts of the DC @-@ 4 fuel system . Tests on the engine fuel system showed that when the engine boost pump was operating , a vortex formed in the engine fuel tank . If a small amount of water was present , this vortex held the water in suspension and prevented it from entering the engine . The tests also showed that when the boost pump was turned off , the vortex dissipated and any water would soon find its way into the engine . Investigators believed this might explain why all engines were operating normally during the takeoff but at least one engine began to run roughly around the time the engine boost pumps would be turned off . 
 = = Inquiry = = 
 The Minister for Civil Aviation , Thomas White , appointed Justice William Simpson of the ACT Supreme Court to conduct an Air Court of Inquiry into the crash of the Amana . The Inquiry opened in Perth on 7 February 1951 . Justice Simpson was assisted by two assessors – Captain J.W. Bennett , a pilot with British Commonwealth Pacific Airlines ; and Mr D.B. Hudson , an aeronautical engineer with Qantas Empire Airways . The Commonwealth Crown Solicitor was represented by L.D. Seaton and B. Simpson . Australian National Airways was represented by George Pape . The Department of Civil Aviation was represented by Henry Winneke . The Air Pilots ' Association was represented by Francis Burt . The Inquiry sat in Perth for 12 days ; heard evidence from 67 witnesses and concluded on Tuesday 20 February . 
 Western Australia 's Deputy Mineralogist gave evidence that he had identified magnesium hydroxide , a corrosion product , in fuel passages in one of Amana 's engines . Counsel for the Department of Civil Aviation explained that evidence gathered during investigation of the crash indicated water in some of the fuel on board Amana was responsible for the corrosion products found in engines numbers 1 and 4 ; for the rough running of an engine heard by a number of witnesses ; and for the intermittent failure of all engines , leading to the aircraft descending to ground level . The Inquiry heard evidence from the Department of Civil Aviation 's Acting Chief Inspector of Air Accidents , <unk> Lum , a former RAAF Douglas Dakota pilot , who described his personal experience of a flight in 1946 in which all fuel tanks were checked for the presence of water prior to take @-@ off and the flight proceeded normally for 20 minutes until both engines began running roughly . Lum returned to the aerodrome and checked again for water in the tanks , this time finding a significant amount of water . Counsel for the Vacuum Oil Co. explained that it was almost impossible for water to be introduced to an aircraft during refuelling , and vigorously rejected the theory that water in the fuel contributed to the crash . 
 Counsel for the Commonwealth Crown Solicitor presented evidence that the Amana was on fire before it first struck trees . Counsel for the widow of one of the victims suggested the crash may have been caused by the elevator trim tab jamming in the diving position . 
 In April 1951 Justice Simpson advised the Minister for Civil Aviation that new evidence had become available . The Minister gave permission for the Inquiry to be re @-@ opened . The Inquiry re @-@ opened in Melbourne on 4 June 1951 . The Department of Civil Aviation had recently completed tests on the DC @-@ 4 fuel system . The tests showed that when an engine boost pump was operating , a vortex in the engine fuel tank prevented water from entering the engine . The tests also showed that when the boost pump was turned off , any water would soon find its way into the engine . The Department of Civil Aviation believed this might explain why all engines were operating normally during the takeoff but at least one engine began to run roughly around the time the engine boost pumps would be turned off . However , Justice Simpson stated that the re @-@ opened Inquiry served only to confirm his view that the Amana 's loss of power was not due to water in the fuel . 
 Justice Simpson 's report was tabled in the House of Representatives on 28 June 1951 by the new Minister for Civil Aviation , Larry Anthony . The Inquiry found that the Amana suffered total loss of engine power on at least one occasion , followed by rapid loss of height until it struck the ground . However , the evidence did not allow the court to determine the cause of the total loss of engine power . Consequently , the court was unable to determine the cause of the accident . Simpson stated he was satisfied water had not been introduced into the Amana 's fuel system in Sydney , Melbourne , Adelaide or Perth . 
 The Inquiry uncovered two deviations from the Air Navigation Regulations although it did not consider these deviations contributed to the accident : 
 ANA was not in the practice of performing a fuel @-@ drain check immediately after each re @-@ fuelling , as required by Air Navigation Orders . 
 On the fatal flight , 8 @,@ 545 feet of photographic film were carried as cargo . Air Navigation Orders specified that a maximum of 3 @,@ 000 feet of photographic film may be carried . 
 The Inquiry also uncovered three irregularities in the safety regulation of civil aviation in Australia although none of these irregularities contributed to the accident . Justice Simpson 's report contained recommendations to deal with the irregularities : 
 fuel companies that supply fuel to aircraft should be required to check every compartment in a tanker wagon for the presence of water each time fuel in the tanker wagon is replenished . 
 when fuel was being drained from an aircraft 's tanks to check for the presence of impurities , the sample should be collected in a transparent vessel to allow more reliable identification of any water that might be present . 
 when pilots who regularly fly four @-@ engine aeroplanes perform 6 @-@ monthly checks for renewal of their commercial pilot licences , the check should be carried out in a four @-@ engine aeroplane rather than in a two @-@ engine aeroplane as was the common practice . 
 During the House of Representatives debate on the report , the Minister , Larry Anthony , stated that he had already asked fuel companies to check their tanker wagons for the presence of water after each replenishment , and the relevant Air Navigation Order would be amended to require fuel to be drained into transparent containers . He stated that his Department did not intend to amend the relevant Air Navigation Order to require pilots of four @-@ engine aeroplanes to perform the periodic checks in a four @-@ engine aeroplane because it considered it was more challenging to fly with one engine inoperative in a two @-@ engine aeroplane than in a four @-@ engine aeroplane . 
 = = Subsequent speculation about cause of the crash = = 
 Investigators from the Department of Civil Aviation believed water in some of the fuel tanks of VH @-@ ANA was responsible for rough running of one or more of the engines ; and this ultimately led to intermittent failure of all the engines . The Inquiry led by Mr Justice Simpson found no evidence that there was significant water in the fuel tanks . No radio call was received from Amana to indicate the nature of any problem , or even that the crew was aware of a problem . The Inquiry concluded without determining the cause of the crash . 
 In the weeks and months after conclusion of the Inquiry one possible explanation of the crash began to circulate among employees of ANA . This possibility began with one piece of evidence uncovered by the Inquiry during cross @-@ examination of ANA 's ground staff . It was reported that after sunrise the morning after the crash the one @-@ gallon container used to check Amana 's fuel filters was found empty and lying on its side on the apron a short distance from where Amana had been parked . The Inquiry attached no significance to this evidence and did not explore it further . 
 Employees of ANA believed the container had last been used to drain fuel from the cross @-@ feed drain cock , the fuel cock that serves the pipe in the wing centre @-@ section for cross @-@ feeding of fuel from tanks in one wing to engines in the other wing . Moments after this procedure commenced , the staff member was advised of a telephone call from his wife and he went to answer the telephone . With the cross @-@ feed selector valves closed , little fuel ran out when the drain cock was opened . Some employees believed that because no fuel was running out neither the staff member nor anyone else noticed the drain cock was still open . Due either to the wind or the slipstream from Amana 's propellers as it began to taxi prior to take @-@ off , the almost @-@ empty container was blown over and rolled some distance along the apron where it was found the next morning . 
 Some employees of ANA speculated that approximately ten minutes after take @-@ off the crew of Amana were aware of the seriousness of rough running on number 4 engine so decided to shut it down . Company procedures specified that if an operational problem occurred prior to reaching Kalgoorlie , 290 nautical miles ( 540 km ) east of Perth , the aircraft was to return to Perth ; but if a problem occurred after reaching Kalgoorlie the flight could continue to Adelaide . The Douglas DC @-@ 4 was capable of flying from Perth to Adelaide with one engine inoperative . The crew of Amana on the fatal flight might have decided to wait until past Kalgoorlie before making a radio call to report one engine had been shut down , and then continue to Adelaide . To manage fuel usage and balance the weight of fuel across the wing , the crew might have selected some of the operating engines to draw fuel from number 4 tank . The DC @-@ 4 had a complex fuel selection system and , either deliberately or inadvertently , all operating engines might have been connected to number 4 tank . If the drain cock in the cross @-@ feed pipe was still open to the atmosphere , air would be drawn into the pipe , causing an interruption of fuel supply to the engines , all engines to stop operating and their propellers to move to fine pitch . When the crew realised engines 1 , 2 and 3 had all suddenly failed and that cross @-@ feeding of fuel was the source of the problem they would have changed the fuel selections and restored fuel to the engines , causing the sudden screaming noise heard by witnesses as the engines burst back into life with their propellers in fine pitch . Amana had been flying at lower altitude than usual so there was inadequate height for the crew to arrest the high rate of descent before the aircraft struck high ground on the Inkpen family property . ( At the Air Court of Inquiry , George Pape , representing ANA , described as " fantastic " any suggestion that the crew of the Amana would be cross @-@ feeding fuel from one wing to the engines on the other wing at such an early stage of the flight . ) 
 The Flight Superintendent and the Technical Superintendent of ANA simulated some of these events during a test flight in another DC @-@ 4 . They were satisfied that the time intervals between events were compatible with the likely sequence of events leading to the crash of the Amana , and that it was a plausible explanation of the accident . However , on legal advice this possible explanation of the crash was not made public . Two accidents involving Douglas DC @-@ 4s , one approaching Dublin Airport , Ireland , in 1961 and another approaching Stockport Airport , Manchester , United Kingdom , in 1967 were attributed to interruption of fuel supply when engines were supplied from the cross @-@ feed system which was open to an empty fuel tank , allowing air to be drawn into the cross @-@ feed pipe . 
 = = Memorials = = 
 After the accident , souvenir hunters proved to be such a problem that the owners of Berry Brow kept all gates locked . Geoff Inkpen stated that after completion of an Inquiry a bulldozer would be used to dig a ditch at the crash site and what remained of the Amana would be buried . 
 A small memorial to the loss of the Amana , its passengers and crew , has been created in the aeronautical museum in the town of Beverley , 29 miles ( 47 km ) south @-@ east of the crash site . The memorial includes the nose undercarriage from the Amana . A memorial plaque was erected in the main street of Beverley on 26 June 2001 , the fifty @-@ first anniversary of the crash . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Australian National Airways ( ANA ) never recovered from the crash of the Amana . Since the beginning of 1945 , 77 people had been killed in accidents in aircraft operated by ANA . In late 1948 , ANA suffered 4 crashes in 4 months . The loss of ANA 's reputation as a safe airline , together with the unblemished safety record and growing commercial success of its rival Trans Australia Airlines , sent ANA into decline . In 1957 ANA was taken over by Ansett Transport Industries Limited and merged with Ansett Airways to form the domestic airline Ansett @-@ ANA . 
 = Burnside Fountain = 
 The Burnside Fountain is a non @-@ functioning drinking fountain at the southeast corner of Worcester Common in Worcester , Massachusetts . It consists of two parts , a pink granite basin , and a bronze statue of a young boy riding a sea turtle . The basin was designed by architect Henry Bacon , who later designed the Lincoln Memorial in Washington , D.C. , and the figure was created by sculptor Charles Y. Harvey . Harvey committed suicide before finishing the sculpture , and Sherry Fry completed the bronze . The Burnside Fountain was commissioned in 1905 by the city of Worcester after Harriet F. Burnside bequeathed US $ 5 @,@ 000 to create a fountain to provide fresh water for people , horses and dogs , in the memory of her father , a prominent lawyer . The fountain was installed in 1912 in Central Square , then moved in 1969 to its current location on Worcester Common . In 1970 the statue was stolen , and was re @-@ installed two years later . An attempted theft occurred in 2004 . 
 The bronze is officially named Boy with a Turtle but is known to locals as Turtle Boy . Turtle Boy has become an unofficial mascot for Worcester , much in the same way the Manneken Pis is for Brussels . The Burnside Fountain 's popularity is derived mostly from viewers ' incorrect interpretation of the statue . Over its 100 @-@ year existence , it has been referenced in stories and songs , as well as having a music contest and a microbrew named after it . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Burnside Fountain is 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) wide , 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) tall , and consists of two parts , the basin and the sculpture . The pink granite basin is rectangular and has four large bowls , two on either end , carved into its top . These bowls were originally designed as water troughs for horses , and a smaller , lower , bowl located on the rear of the fountain was designed for dogs . 
 The bronze sculpture sits on a circular base in the middle of the basin . The sculpture is officially known as Boy with a Turtle , as its figure is of a young boy , in the nude , riding a sea turtle . In 1986 the Worcester municipal parks and recreation department described the statue with the sentence , " The boy holding the turtle , his hair flying , a sly smile on his face , is charming and disarming . " 
 = = Background = = 
 Samuel Burnside was a prominent lawyer in Worcester who studied law at Dartmouth College in the early 1800s . Burnside had three daughters , Sophia , Harriet , and Elizabeth , who went on to be called by Frederick Clifton Pierce " the most notable figures in the life of Worcester . " The notability of the three daughters was due in part to the prestige and wealth Samuel Burnside had accrued as Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas . Both before and after Samuel Burnside 's death on July 25 , 1850 , his three daughters were known for charitable works , having donated public gardens and a library to the city of Worcester . One daughter 's most well @-@ known donation to the city came in the form of a bequest in her will . In 1904 , Harriet Burnside died and left $ 5 @,@ 000 in her will to the city of Worcester to build a fountain as a memorial to her father . 
 = = History = = 
 When Burnside bequeathed the money for the fountain , she asked that it be designed for use as a drinking trough for horses and also for dogs . The commission was originally intended for Daniel Chester French , but , according to a paper by <unk> W. Coombs , French turned down the commission due to " pressure of other engagements , however ... he did supervise the work . " French assigned the design of the basin to Henry Bacon , who would later work with French on the Lincoln Memorial . The sculpture was assigned to Charles Y. Harvey , a graduate of the American Academy in Rome , who had worked with Augustus Saint @-@ Gaudens on the Robert Gould Shaw Memorial in Boston . 
 Charles Y. Harvey began work on Boy with Turtle at his studio in New York City , believing that this work was going to be his masterpiece . Almost immediately he began second guessing his design and feeling that it was inadequate . This negativity was a trait that he had shown many times in the past . Roughly a week after beginning the sculpture , Harvey began hearing voices commanding him to kill himself . A paper about restoring the sculpture written at Worcester Polytechnic Institute claims the voices he was hearing were coming from the partially carved sculpture itself . These voices set the date of Saturday January 27 , 1912 for Harvey to kill himself . On that date he laid down his tools , headed to Bronx Park with two razors , and slit his own throat along the west bank of the Bronx River . 
 After Harvey 's death , Sherry Fry , a fellow American Academy graduate , was invited to finish the work according to the original designs Harvey had laid out . Fry completed the sculpture , and it was delivered along with the basin to Worcester in 1912 . There had been much discussion about where to install the fountain . Central Square , just off the Worcester Common was chosen with only slight opposition from " market gardeners who had been using the east end of the Common for their summer outdoor market . " When it was installed in Central Square , There was no dedication ceremony or unveiling for the fountain . A news article on October 11 , 1912 stated that Worcester Mayor Philip O ’ Connell , " believes it will be well to have the fountain placed in use without ceremony . ” This lack of a ceremony is presumably due to Harvey 's suicide and the desire to not celebrate such an act . 
 By 1912 , the use of horse and buggy had fallen out of fashion , and the Burnside Fountain saw little use in its intended purpose . By 1939 citizens of Worcester were already calling for the fountain to be moved to a more suitable place where it could be of more use . It took until 1969 for the Burnside Fountain to be moved from Central Square . It was relocated to the Worcester Common and turned to face Salem Square . One year later , in May 1970 , the statue was ripped from its pedestal and stolen . It was returned later that same year , but it took until 1972 for the boy and turtle to be placed back on top of the basin . Another apparent theft attempt happened in 2004 when the bronze sculpture was toppled off its pedestal and left dangling off the basin . The city was quick to fix the statue this time , with it being righted and reattached within days . 
 In 2010 , the Burnside Fountain was named one of WAAF 's " Hill @-@ Man 's 25 Greatest Places in Massachusetts . " That same year , it was also nominated for " Worst Public Art in New England " by a regional Art blog . Around this same time a small group of volunteers began the " Turtle Boy Urban Gardeners , " a group dedicated to keeping the plantings around the Burnside Fountain presentable . 
 For the last few decades the Burnside Fountain has been in disrepair . A 1986 inventory of public memorials in Worcester , compiled by the municipal parks and recreation department , listed the fountains problems as " chipped stone , water system , bronze surface corrosion , rust staining , litter , " and the Smithsonian Art Inventories Catalog surveyed the fountain in September 1994 and listed its condition as " treatment urgent . " With the one @-@ hundredth anniversary of the Burnside Fountain coming in 2012 , there has been renewed interest in restoring the fountain . Restoration estimates run between USD $ 40 @,@ 000 to $ 60 @,@ 000 , which is more than the city is willing to spend . Probably because of this , there are no official plans to restore the fountain , as of June 2012 . 
 = = " Turtle Boy " = = 
 The statue that sits atop the Burnside Fountain is now commonly referred to as Turtle Boy . In the tradition of the Manneken Pis in Brussels , Turtle Boy has become an unofficial mascot for Worcester . Much of the local popularity of the statue is due to bawdy insinuations about how the boy and the turtle are portrayed . Anonymous members of the Worcester community sometimes dress the statue in festive clothes for holidays , local bands write crowd @-@ pleasing songs about it , and the statue has even graced postcards of the city . 
 The popularity of Turtle Boy began around the time it was installed in Central Square . In 1916 the Burnside Fountain 's boy and turtle appeared in The Cloud Bird , a children 's book by Margaret C. <unk> in which each chapter was about a Worcester landmark . In the eighth chapter , " The Adventurer in Armor , " a small girl finds a young , Peter Pan @-@ like faun who had agreed to hold back the turtle . They later go on an adventure upon the turtle 's back , but return at the end of the day . By the late 2000s " Turtle Boy " was a common term used to align events and objects with Worcester . A local music contest was named the " Turtle Boy Music Awards , " and the <unk> Brewing Company in Worcester began selling a " Turtle Boy Blueberry Ale . " 
 Kristina Wilson , associate professor in the Department of Visual and Performing Arts at Worcester 's Clark University , asked people on campus what they thought of Turtle Boy . One person replied " Oh , that 's Worcester 's monument to bestiality . " Wilson said the sculpture is intended to portray " innocence , joy , and rebirth , " and that historically Charles Y. Harvey came from an artistic tradition in which " the human figure is the apex of beauty , and how well you can capture that is the demonstration of your artistic talents . " Regarding the artistic merit of the work , Wilson said : " It 's unfortunate , because it really does look like something untoward is going on . " 
 Mostly because of the ambiguity in what the Burnside Fountain is depicting , Turtle Boy pops up occasionally in social media . The sculpture also appeared on comedian Daniel Tosh 's Tosh.0 blog . 
 = Gisborough Priory = 
 Gisborough Priory is a ruined Augustinian priory in Guisborough in the borough of Redcar and Cleveland and ceremonial county of North Yorkshire , England . It was founded in 1119 as the Priory of St Mary by the Norman feudal magnate Robert de Brus , also an ancestor of the Scottish king , Robert the Bruce . It became one of the richest monastic foundations in England with grants from the crown and bequests from de Brus , other nobles and gentry and local people of more modest means . Much of the Romanesque Norman priory was destroyed in a fire in 1289 . It was rebuilt in the Gothic style on a grander scale over the following century . Its remains are regarded as among the finest surviving examples of early Gothic architecture in England . 
 The priory prospered until the Dissolution of the Monasteries in 1540 , when it was abolished along with England 's other monastic communities . The priory buildings were demolished and the stone re @-@ used in other buildings in Guisborough . The east end of the priory church was left standing with its great window forming a distinctive arch , a well @-@ known landmark used as a symbol for Guisborough . It became part of the estate of the Chaloner family , who acquired it in 1550 . The east window was preserved by them as part of a Romantic vista adjoining their seat , Gisborough Hall , from which the priory takes its idiosyncratically spelled name . It is owned by the Chaloners but is in the care of English Heritage as a scheduled monument . 
 Since the 19th century archaeological excavations have taken place in the priory grounds , though a substantial part of the site has not yet been investigated . In addition to the east window , surviving visible fragments of the complex include the lower courses of the west range , a vaulted undercroft , a gateway and a 14th @-@ century dovecote still in use today . The adjoining Priory Gardens , laid out by the Chaloners in the 18th century , are under restoration by a volunteer group . The priory ruins and gardens are open to the public throughout the year . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Establishment = = = 
 Guisborough was well @-@ established at the time of the priory 's founding ; the town 's name refers to the fortified place of a Scandinavian called <unk> , who may have taken over a site established by the Anglo @-@ Saxons or Romans who lived in the vicinity before the arrival of Vikings in the 8th and 9th centuries . A priest , church and mill were recorded in 1086 in the Domesday Book which refers to the town as " <unk> " . Following the Norman Conquest , William the Conqueror gave lands in the area to the Count of Mortain . He passed them to his friend Robert de Brus , Lord of Skelton , one of the largest landowners in the north , owning more than 40 @,@ 000 acres ( 160 km2 ) in Yorkshire alone . William 's Harrying of the North left the region in a severely depressed and depopulated state . There were few monasteries north of the River Humber and opportunities existed for new agricultural and religious developments . The Augustinian order came to England at the start of the 12th century and established houses in England , including major ones at Bridlington , Nostell and Kirkham . They were communities of canons living under the rule of St. Augustine , wearing dark robes that earned them the name the " Black Canons " . 
 According to the priory 's founding charter , Robert de Brus " founded a certain Monastery of a religious order in <unk> [ sic ] , to the honour of God , and the holy Virgin Mary " . He gave " to the same Church and the service of God in it , all <unk> , with all things pertaining thereto it " . The gift included lands amounting to twenty carucates and two oxgangs ( roughly equivalent to about 2 @,@ 500 acres ( 10 km2 ) ) , churches , mills and other possessions , and grants from others . The charter started that the endowment was to provide " material for ever for their buildings , and all other necessities of their house " . The foundation was authorised by Pope Calixtus II and Thurstan , Archbishop of York . De Brus may have been emulating his peers in Yorkshire , who had founded monastic institutions for their religious obligations . The date of the foundation is unclear . The 14th @-@ century canon and historian Walter of Guisborough gives it as 1129 , but a charter of confirmation from Pope Calixtus dates to the period of his pontificate between 1119 – 24 . The priory may have had two foundation charters , a shorter one dating possibly to 1119 and a detailed one dating to 1129 that may have been the definitive document . 
 The rights and privileges of the prior and canons grew over the centuries added to by royal grants . Henry III granted the rights of soc and sac , <unk> and <unk> and infangtheof . He established a Monday market at Guisborough and the right to hold an annual three @-@ day fair to mark the feast of the Assumption ( 15 August ) . The proceeds and fees from these events supported the priory . The prior and canons were granted free warren in the lands around Guisborough and several nearby villages which was extended to more demesnes by Edward III , who permitted them to convert 80 acres ( 320 @,@ 000 m2 ) of land into a deer park ( now Park Wood ) . Henry IV gave them the twice @-@ yearly right of <unk> , the right of waif and stray and the return of briefs and writs which gave the priory a steady income from rents , fines , licences and other fees . The canons of Guisborough owned 4 @,@ 000 sheep , mostly in Eskdale , in the 13th and 14th century . 
 The priory became known for its strict observance of the Augustinian rule and religious precepts . Its reputation for <unk> <unk> vitam ( " living a canonical life " ) attracted Saint Malachy from Ireland who , as Saint Bernard of Clairvaux had a long and close involvement with Gisborough . The canons were closely associated with the Cistercians who , like the <unk> , had a reformist outlook . One Gisborough canon , William of Newminster , moved to the <unk> 's Fountains Abbey to become its abbot . The priory was supported by the local people and records survive of numerous small grants , related to the almonry ( the place or chamber where alms were distributed to the poor ) and to support building work . The canons leased , bought and sold land and <unk> money using property grants as collateral to benefit the priory 's building fund . As the priory became more wealthy , discipline among its canons slipped and the Archbishops of York found it necessary to take corrective action in the late 13th century . A number of canons were sent to Kirkham and Bridlington for correction and Gisborough in turn took in disobedient canons from other places . The priory also became embroiled in a dispute with a local landowner , Robert de Thweng , who raided its properties and tithe barns in 1232 under the alias of " Will Wither " , in the course of a dispute with the priory over the advowson of Kirkleatham parish church . 
 On 16 May 1289 , the priory suffered a catastrophic fire . According to an account by Walter of Guisborough , a plumber soldering the lead roof forgot to put out his fire , causing the roof timbers to catch fire and molten lead ran down into the church below . Much of the building was destroyed and many effects , costly books , chalices and vestments were lost . The canons sought to raise funds for rebuilding . They petitioned the king to grant them the advowsons of the parish churches of Barnham , Easington and <unk> , and in 1309 and 1311 the Archbishop of York and the Bishop of Durham rewarded the priory 's donors with indulgences granting remission of temporal punishment for sins . Most of the nave and chancel was rebuilt with the support of the de Brus family , whose coat of arms was displayed on its buildings . 
 Rebuilding probably took around a century to complete . Work was slowed by high costs and civil unrest in the early 14th century , when Scottish raiders repeatedly plundered the north of England . The priory 's lands were reduced in value by the raids , diminishing its income . Its wealth was tapped by Archbishop Melton of York to make good his own losses in 1319 , and in 1320 it had to take in refugees from monastic houses that had been forced to disperse to escape the raiders . Probably as a consequence of the troubles , in 1328 the priory petitioned the king to be exempted from the " clerical tenth " ( a 10 % tax on clerical property ) and in 1344 it was granted permission to fortify its buildings . By 1380 its staff had diminished to 26 canons and two lay brothers . 
 The Yorkshire line of the de Brus family died out with the death of the childless Peter IV de Brus in 1272 but the priory was still patronised by the local nobility . The Fauconberg and Thweng families , who married Peter 's sisters Agnes and Lucia , took over the patronage which continued for several centuries . Many prominent local nobles were buried there , as was the Scottish Robert V de Brus , grandfather of King Robert the Bruce . At least nine patrons and their families were buried in the priory between 1295 and 1411 . The priory received substantial financial support from its patrons ; in 1381 William , Lord Latimer provided funds to complete the north nave and donated £ 333 6s 8d ( roughly equivalent to £ 1 @.@ 6 million today ) for a new belfry . He left the priory cattle from his manor at <unk> , bequeathed a range of religious items , and made arrangements for his body to be interred there on his death . 
 = = = Dissolution and after = = = 
 In 1533 Henry VIII of England was excommunicated for divorcing Catherine of Aragon . The Act of Supremacy passed in 1534 declared Henry Supreme Head of the Church of England and the church 's estate in England became part of the king 's estate . In 1535 Henry ordered a comprehensive survey of the church 's property , the Valor Ecclesiasticus . It found that Gisborough Priory had an annual net value of £ <unk> , which made it the fourth wealthiest monastic house in Yorkshire . In 1536 monasteries with less than £ 200 of annual income were suppressed , exempting the priory from the first wave of suppression . 
 A second survey carried out by the king 's commissioners , Thomas Legh and Richard Leyton , provided for the final suppression on charges of a lack of quality of religious life . Prior James Cockerell of Guisborough was forced to resign and was replaced by Robert <unk> , who was loyal to the king . The priory 's dissolution was not welcomed by locals , who derived economic benefit from its presence – in 1536 , around 500 families depended on it for their livelihood . The strength of feeling was recorded in a letter from Lord Conyers and Sir John Bulmer to Thomas Cromwell : " On Sunday , 11th July [ 1539 ] , at <unk> in Yorkshire , when the parish priest was declaring the articles [ of dissolution ] directed by the King to the Archbishop of York , one John <unk> alias Brotton came violently and took book forth of the priest 's hands , and pulled it in pieces . " Popular discontent sparked the Pilgrimage of Grace , in which Prior Cockerell was implicated . When the revolt failed , he was hanged at Tyburn with the Prior of Bridlington , the Abbot of <unk> and the former Abbot of Fountains . 
 The priory was formally dissolved on 8 April 1540 and surrendered to the king 's men on 22 December 1540 , making it one of the last monastic houses in England to be suppressed . A proposal to found a secular college there came to nothing and the priory buildings – with the exception of the gatehouses and the great east window – were demolished . On 21 November 1541 Thomas Legh was granted a lease " of the buildings with the site and precincts of the Priory to be then demolished and carried away . " Demolition was carried out by collapsing its central tower into the body of the church , crushing it in its fall and reducing it to rubble . 
 The site and lands were re @-@ let in 1550 to Sir Thomas Chaloner , who later purchased the property outright . The Chaloners occupied the former priors ' quarters in the west range before moving to their new mansion , Old Gisborough Hall , on Bow Street in the late @-@ 17th century . The priory remains were cleared and the fallen stonework looted or sold . The grounds were redeveloped as formal gardens within the grounds of Old Gisborough Hall . John Walker Ord , a local historian in the mid @-@ 19th century , described how the priory 's stonework could be seen in many buildings around Guisborough . He deplored the profane uses to which it had been put : 
 I have seen with my own eyes broken pillars and pedestals of this august pile desecrated to the vile uses of gateposts , stands for rainwater casks , and stepping @-@ stones over a common sewer . A richly ornamented doorway of the venerable priory forms the entrance to a privy . I have beheld with sorrow , shame , and indignation , the richly ornamented columns and carved architraves of God 's temple supporting the thatch of a pig @-@ house . 
 Some fragments of the priory travelled further afield . At Hardwick Hall near Sedgefield , a mock ruin was built incorporating sculptured stones brought from the priory . The priory 's wealth became the stuff of local legends , one of which claimed an underground passage led from the priory to a cave under the hills in which a raven stood guard over a chest of gold . 
 The priory 's lands around Guisborough were a source of wealth for the Chaloners . Around 1595 , Sir Thomas Chaloner 's son , also called Thomas , established England 's first alum works at <unk> Bank south of the town . Alum was an important product with a variety of industrial uses . It was especially important to the cloth industry as a mordant ( a substance used to fix dyes on cloth ) . The supply of alum was controlled by a cartel controlled by the Papal States and Spain which were in conflict with England and exercised a virtual monopoly on the provision of alum to Christian Europe , as the import of cheaper Turkish alum was banned by Pope Paul II in the mid @-@ 15th century . Chaloner visited the Pope 's alum works at <unk> near Rome and noticed the soil and vegetation around them resembled those of his estate at Guisborough . On his return he established alum works at <unk> Bank with the aid of workmen smuggled from Rome , earning him a papal excommunication . John Walker Ord casts doubt on the story , noting an account published a few decades afterwards stated that the workmen came from France and does not mention Chaloner 's travels in Italy . 
 The only substantial part of the priory to survive was the eastern gable of the presbytery with its great east window . Its survival owed much to the rise of Romanticism in the 18th century . The portrayal of ruined buildings in idealised landscapes by J. M. W. Turner and his contemporaries inspired a fashion for the nobility and gentry to produce paintings of monasteries providing an incentive for landowners to preserve them as romantic ruins , rather than using them as quarries . Gisborough Priory 's east window was one of the first examples of a monastic ruin to be retained for its visual qualities . It was incorporated into the grounds of Old Gisborough Hall as a romantic ruin and the sill of the great window removed to ensure an uninterrupted view . Fittingly , given his role in inspiring the east window 's preservation , Turner himself sketched it in 1801 during a visit to Yorkshire . 
 East Lawn was laid out in front of the east window and was used for grand bazaars and fêtes until the early 20th century . A ha @-@ ha was installed behind to keep cattle out of the grounds . To the south of the priory buildings the Long Terrace ran almost the full length of the grounds . It afforded access to the ruins via a flight of steps flanked by two carved demi @-@ sea wolves , reflecting the coat of arms of the Chaloners . They were thought to be dragons by local people and the steps were referred to as the Dragon Steps . 
 Old Gisborough Hall was demolished around 1825 and the Chaloners built a mansion house , Gisborough Hall , about half a mile to the east in 1857 . In 1932 , Thomas Chaloner , 2nd Baron Gisborough transferred control of the priory to the Office of <unk> which became the responsibility of the Ministry of Works , then the Department of the Environment and from 1984 , English Heritage . It remains the property of Lord Gisborough ; English Heritage is responsible for maintaining the ruins , while day @-@ to @-@ day running is managed by Redcar and Cleveland Borough Council . 
 According to folklore , the priory is haunted by the ghost of a monk in a black habit who returns annually to check that its buried treasure has not been disturbed . He is said to arrive at midnight on the year 's first new moon to lower a ghostly drawbridge spanning a vanished moat . In 1966 and 1967 a hundred people turned out to watch and allegedly managed to spot a <unk> figure , but in 1968 the few spectators who turned up saw nothing . 
 = = Description of the priory buildings = = 
 Gisborough Priory is characterised by a few highly visible remains . The priory church survives in a fragmentary state , dominated by the east wall of the presbytery that stands to its full height . Several of the priory church 's column bases can also be seen , as can a number of excavated graves within the presbytery . Elsewhere on the site , the outline of the cloister is visible but is largely unexcavated , while the ruins of the west ( or cellarer 's ) range constitutes the largest area of other remains above ground . A ruined gatehouse and a still @-@ intact dovecote ( the latter off @-@ limits to visitors ) stand on the western edges of the site . 
 = = = Priory church = = = 
 The remains of the priory church are dominated by the eastern gable wall of the presbytery that still stands to its full height . Its great east window is regarded as one of the finest examples of late @-@ 13th @-@ century church architecture . The design is so close to that of the eastern arm of Ripon Cathedral , which was built around the same time , that it is thought to have been modelled on Ripon 's design . The window 's tracery has disappeared , as has its sill , but from the stubs and surviving fragments it can be deduced that it had seven major lights ( the glazed openings in the window ) . At its centre was a great circle of tracery filled with <unk> lights . The main gable of the east wall is flanked by massive buttresses capped with gables and octagonal pinnacles . A similar pair of pinnacles top the main gable , flanking a window of unusual design ; a bracket projects from the lower lobe to support a statue ( no longer present ) , possibly of the Virgin Mary , to whom the priory was dedicated . 
 Little remains above ground of the rest of the priory , but much can be deduced from the surviving stonework . In its final form the priory church had a nave of eight bays and a quire and presbytery of nine bays , with a total length of 107 metres ( 351 ft ) . The survival of the east wall allows us to deduce that the ridge line of the roof stood 29 @.@ 6 metres ( 97 ft ) above ground . The presbytery 's arcades were supported by eight clustered shafts , the bases of which are still visible , with capitals carved with naturalistic foliage . The clerestory and triforium were combined into a single arch with the main arcade below . The presbytery 's high vault was executed in stone with bosses decorated in red and white paint and gold leaf , traces of which were still visible when several of the bosses were found in the 19th century . The eastern bay of the presbytery was divided into several chapels and the remnants of parclose screens are visible on the main aisle 's north and south responds . The main altar would have stood a short distance to the west , behind a tall screen . 
 At the angle of each aisle , a spiral staircase – still visible on each side of the surviving east wall – gave access to a passage inside the walls and to secondary stairs within the angles of the main gable enabling access to all parts of the building for maintenance and cleaning without requiring scaffolding . Nothing remains of the north or south transepts , which extended on the north side beyond the present boundary wall into the graveyard of St Nicholas 's Church . 
 Several burials ( presumably of high @-@ ranking benefactors and clergy ) were made within the priory and 19th @-@ century archaeologists found stone coffins during excavations . They are visible against the east wall , but their original location was not recorded . Two centrally placed grave slabs are visible below the east window . The priory once housed the Brus cenotaph , a memorial to its founders erected in 1521 . It was removed in 1540 and dismantled . Most of its parts were recovered and reassembled in the 19th century , and the reconstructed cenotaph is displayed in Saint Nicholas ' Church next to the ruins . 
 The priory church housed a shrine to the Virgin Mary which one of the most significant Marian shrines in the north , along with others at Walsingham , Lincoln , Scarborough , Jesmond and Carlisle . Although it was destroyed during the Reformation along with the priory , it was revived in 1949 by Father Arthur Mercer , Guisborough 's first Roman Catholic parish priest for 400 years , and is housed in the town 's St Paulinus Church . 
 = = = Ranges and cloister = = = 
 Fragments of other buildings associated with the priory can be seen on the site . There was a cloister measuring 36 @.@ 5 metres ( 120 ft ) square to the south of the priory church surrounded by domestic buildings or ranges . They replaced an earlier cloister and ranges destroyed in the fire of 1289 rebuilt to a new , larger , design . Processional doors on the cloister 's north wall gave access to the nave of the church . In 1854 , surviving arches and columns from the cloister were taken to London for display in the Crystal Palace where they provided the basis for a reconstruction of a medieval cloister in the " English National Art Court " section of the exhibition . 
 Fragments of the west range – the cellarer 's range – are extant . It was entered from the west by an outer parlour , projecting from the north end of the range , where members of the community received visitors . The prior lived on the upper floor which comprised a hall , chamber and chapel dedicated to Saint Hilda . The prior 's rooms were probably located above the outer parlour , as was the pattern at other monasteries , accessing the cloister and the outside world . The largest surviving fragment of the range comprises a <unk> or storehouse where supplies were kept . It is a vaulted undercroft of nine bays constructed from stone ashlar with its floor level below that of the cloister . It is relatively well @-@ preserved and believed to have been divided by timber partitions which were later replaced in stone . 
 Most of the refectory ( dining hall ) range to the south of the cloister and the <unk> range to the east , which contained the chapter house and dormitory , have yet to be excavated . Only the western end of the refectory range has been excavated ; it presents a vaulted undercroft , three bays of which survive , above which the refectory was located on the first floor . A service passage survives between the kitchen and the refectory . The western part of the undercroft was used as a buttery in the late Middle Ages but would have had severely restricted headroom due to its raised floor . 
 = = = Outer buildings = = = 
 The priory buildings stood at the centre of a walled precinct arranged in two courts , inner and outer with gatehouses at the entrances to both ; the remains of the great gate of the inner court are extant but the outer gatehouse no longer survives . The gate comprised an outer porch , an inner <unk> and a porter 's lodge on the ground floor with chambers above the arch . It survived intact into the early 18th century but only the outer porch remains . The structure consists of a single large round @-@ headed archway on the outer side with two smaller arches of different sizes , both deeply <unk> to accommodate doors , a few metres to the south . The larger arch was for wagons while pedestrians entered through the smaller arch . Little remains of the <unk> or the porter 's lodge ; the only remnants visible are the stub of its north wall and a latrine shaft . 
 The canons built an octagonal dovecote a short distance to the west of the west range . The dovecote is extant , though it cannot be visited and is not part of the priory grounds . Built in the 14th century , it was modified in the mid @-@ 18th century with the addition of a pyramidal roof tiled with Welsh slate and capped with an open @-@ sided timber cupola . The original nesting boxes have been removed and the dovecote is used as a garden store . 
 = = = Older buildings on the site = = = 
 Gisborough Priory was rebuilt three times ; the ruins visible today are principally those of the third rebuild . The site was occupied in Anglo @-@ Saxon times by at least one structure , possibly a timber @-@ framed church or boundary wall , indicated by a number of postholes . It is believed there was a Saxon settlement in the vicinity as late @-@ Saxon potsherds and an 8th @-@ century coin have been found buried under the remains of the priory 's west nave . The site was abandoned at some point and by the time the priory was built the land on which it stood was mostly under cultivation . Part of it was used as a graveyard in the early 12th century and an early Norman building was erected in the vicinity , possibly a temporary church . 
 The Norman priory , completed around 1180 , was relatively short and narrow . It was constructed in the Romanesque style with twin aisles either side of the nave and a single tower at the west end , aligned with the main axis of the church . It could be entered from the north , via an external door , and the south via the cloister . The existence of the northward door suggests it was used by a secular congregation , possibly the local nobility and patrons . A number of graves associated with the first priory have been found in the south aisle 's floor and against the north wall . 
 The priory was rebuilt around 1200 on a larger scale with the Romanesque church demolished to its first course of ashlar . The construction of the new church continued through much of the 13th century . The enlarged priory had twin towers at the west end flanking a large double doorway above which was a central rose window ; piped water was provided using lead pipes from the cloister , under the church to buildings or standpipes to the north or west of the priory . The main body of the church comprised a nave with two aisles , transepts and a choir . The aisles were laid with geometric coloured tiles adjoining the sandstone columns of the nave . The north aisle was divided into alcoves or private chapels where a number of people – probably local nobles and gentry – were buried . An unusual feature of the church was a well , sunk into the nave , possibly built in an effort to safeguard its water supplies . 
 The effects of the fire that destroyed the priory in 1289 can be seen in scorched paving between the surviving pillars . It was thought the church had been completely rebuilt , but excavations in the 1980s show that a substantial amount of the less damaged west end was reused which resulted in a distinct inconsistency between the two ends , which were constructed in different architectural styles . Rebuilding was a major task that took several generations and was probably not completed until the end of the 14th century . It is unclear how much of the second priory survived the fire . Where the priory was rebuilt , its builders reused as much as possible ; the core of the surviving eastern gable wall is full of fragments from the destroyed second priory . 
 = = = Priory Gardens and Monks ' Pond = = = 
 Land immediately south of the priory was used by the Chaloners for formal gardens attached to Old Gisborough Hall . In the early 18th century they planted an oval @-@ shaped double avenue of trees , the Monks ' Walk , where stonework recovered from mid @-@ 19th century excavations was deposited . In between the trees was a manicured lawn used to hold musical and theatrical productions . The Monks ' Walk fell into disuse and became overgrown but is under restoration by the Gisborough Priory Project . 
 In the late 19th century , Margaret Chaloner , wife of the first Lord Gisborough , laid out formal gardens of a typical late @-@ Victorian and Edwardian design with elaborate bedding schemes and gravelled paths . There was a rose garden and a sunken Italian garden with an ornamental pool at its centre . They were open to the public for a small fee and could be entered through a gateway on Bow Street . The gardens are now freely accessible . 
 Further east , off the Whitby Road , is the Monks ' Pond , the canons ' fish pond . It presents a dramatic vista in which the priory arch is reflected and has often been photographed and painted . In 1908 , the pond was the scene of an elaborate water tableau organised by Lady Gisborough to raise funds for the restoration of St Nicholas ' Church . The pond was home to a number of exceptionally large fish , but pollution in 2000 caused by a sewage leak led to the death of more than 5 @,@ 000 fish . 
 = = = Other properties owned by the priory = = = 
 The priory was responsible for St Leonard 's leper hospital at Hutton <unk> to the south @-@ west of Guisborough . The hospital was probably founded in the 12th century and became a dependency of the priory in 1275 . It was last documented in 1339 . Its fate is unclear but it probably survived until the Dissolution in 1540 . 
 The priory may also have owned a cell at Scarth Wood at <unk> . A grant issued by Stephen de Meynell in the reign of Henry I records the donation of the hamlet of Scarth to enable the priory to establish a cell for habitation by a single monk or canon . It is unclear whether the cell was built as Scarth is not mentioned in the priory 's deeds or in Henry VIII 's commissioners ' valuation of its property . Fragmentary building remains at Scarth are recorded as existing in the mid @-@ 18th century . They were cleared by the start of the 19th century so there is no trace of whatever might once have stood there or indication of what it might have been used for . 
 = = Excavations = = 
 In 1865 – 1867 Captain Thomas Chaloner and William Downing Bruce carried out the first major excavation by cutting a trench across the site . A number of features were discovered , including a stone coffin containing the skeleton of a tall man thought to be Robert de Brus , the remnants of a monumental shrine and painted roof bosses . Evidence of the 1289 fire was discovered in the form of pieces of fused metal – an amalgam of lead , silver and iron that had melted and penetrated the floor in the heat of the fire . The Office of Works carried out excavations in 1932 in conjunction with work to consolidate the walls and grounds so they could be opened to the public . Further work was carried out by Roy Gilyard Beer between 1947 – 54 for the Ministry of Works , which exposed more of the site and cleared material from the 19th century . 
 In 1985 – 86 Cleveland County Archaeology Section carried out a major excavation of the west end of the nave to consolidate an area of subsidence . Its cause was the collapse of an unrecorded burial vault . The excavations found more evidence of the fire of 1289 including scorched masonry , a shattered bell and broken grave @-@ slabs . The remains of 47 people – 21 men , 17 women , 6 children and 3 of undetermined gender – were discovered , some of whom had been buried with grave goods including a gold finger ring and jet crosses . Two chalices and patens were found alongside the remains of two priests . The skeletons were cremated and the ashes scattered in the Monks ' Walk in the Priory Gardens . A geophysical survey carried out to the west and east of the west range , indicated the existence of the remains of other monastic buildings which have yet to be excavated . 
 = = Priors = = 
 Between its establishment and its dissolution , 24 priors were recorded holding office at Gisborough Priory . Their names and dates of taking office or periods when they held office , where known , were as follows : 
 William de Brus ( 1119 – 45 ? ) 
 Cuthbert ( 1146 – 54 ) 
 Ralph ( 1174 ? – 80 ) 
 Roald ( <unk> ? ) 
 Lawrence ( 1211 – 12 ) 
 Michael ( 1218 – 34 ) 
 John ( 1239 – 51 , 1257 ) 
 Simon ( date uncertain ) 
 Ralph de <unk> ( 1262 ) 
 Adam de Newland ( 1280 ) 
 William de Middleburgh ( 1281 ) 
 Robert de Wilton ( 1320 – 1 ) 
 John de Darlington ( 1346 ) 
 John de <unk> or Hurworth ( 1364 – 93 ) 
 Walter de Thorp ( 1393 ) 
 John de <unk> ( 1408 ) 
 John Thweng ( 1425 ) 
 Richard <unk> ( 1437 ) 
 Richard de <unk> ( 1452 ) 
 Thomas Darlington ( 1455 ) 
 John <unk> ( 1475 ) 
 John Whitby ( 1491 – 1505 ) 
 John <unk> ( 1505 ) 
 William Spires ( 1511 ) 
 James Cockerill ( 1519 – 1534 ? ) 
 Robert <unk> ( 1537 , 1539 ) 
 = John Collins Covell = 
 John Collins Covell ( December 19 , 1823 – June 4 , 1887 ) was a 19th @-@ century American educator and school administrator specializing in deaf education in the U.S. states of Virginia and West Virginia . 
 Born in 1823 in Rhode Island , Covell was the son of Episcopal minister Reverend Joseph S. Covell and the grandson of Rhode Island Governor John Collins . Covell attended Trinity College and graduated from the institution in 1847 . He was recommended as a candidate for Holy Orders in the Episcopal Diocese of Connecticut and received the orders of a deacon . 
 Covell accepted a teaching position in the Deaf Department of the Virginia School for the Deaf and the Blind and relocated there in 1847 . Covell was made a vice @-@ principal of the institution and given charge of the entire Deaf Mute Department in 1852 . During the American Civil War , Covell entered the Confederate States Army with the rank of major and served on the staff of Brigadier General Henry A. Wise . Covell served on General Wise 's staff only briefly before returning to the Virginia School for the Deaf and Blind to serve as its principal in 1862 , a position he held until 1872 . In 1874 , Covell was selected to serve as the principal of the West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and Blind . Under his leadership , the West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and Blind experienced " unprecedented success " and its student body began to grow due to his initiatives . He served as the institution 's principal until his death in 1887 . 
 Covell was an active and prominent member of the Episcopal Diocese of West Virginia and was appointed the first churchwarden of Saint Stephen 's Episcopal Church in Romney . Covell played an instrumental role in the construction of the church through his donation of property for the building site and his financial contribution of the majority of its construction costs . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 John Collins Covell was born on December 19 , 1823 , in Newport , Rhode Island , and was the son of Episcopal minister , Reverend Joseph S. Covell . Covell was named for his maternal grandfather , Rhode Island Governor John Collins . He spent his childhood in Princess Anne , Maryland , where he received his education from the common schools for eight years before attending an academy in Connecticut . Covell then worked as a store clerk for three years . Seeking to further his education , Covell attended Trinity College in Hartford , Connecticut , and graduated from the institution in 1847 . After graduating from Trinity College , Covell was recommended as a candidate for Holy Orders in the Episcopal Diocese of Connecticut and received the orders of a deacon in the Episcopal Church . 
 = = Educator and school administrator = = 
 = = = Virginia School for the Deaf and the Blind = = = 
 Upon graduating from Trinity College , Covell accepted a teaching position in the Deaf Department of the Virginia School for the Deaf and the Blind in Staunton , Virginia and relocated there in September 1847 . Covell continued teaching until 1852 when he was made a vice @-@ principal of the institution and given charge of the entire Deaf Mute Department . 
