 Following the outbreak of the American Civil War in 1861 , Covell entered the Confederate States Army with the rank of major and served on the staff of Brigadier General Henry A. Wise . Covell served on General Wise 's staff only briefly before the state of Virginia recalled him to the Virginia School for the Deaf and Blind in 1862 to become the institution 's principal . According to the National Conference of Superintendents and Principals of Institutions for Deaf <unk> in 1888 , the state of Virginia considered Covell 's services " of more value as manager of one of her noblest public institutions than as a soldier in the field . " While serving as principal , Covell continued to head and instruct in the school 's Deaf Mute Department . Covell remained principal of the Virginia School for the Deaf and Blind for nine years until his resignation from the institution in 1872 . 
 In an 1870 address entitled " The Nobility , Dignity , and Antiquity of the Sign Language " which Covell delivered at the Convention of American Instructors of the Deaf in Indianapolis , Indiana , he asserted that sign language would gain in popularity among hearing people and would be taught alongside philology as part of the basic curricula of universities . Over a century after Covell 's 1870 prediction , American Sign Language has been added to curricula of language departments in a growing number of American universities . 
 = = = West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and Blind = = = 
 In June – July 1874 , Covell was selected by the Board of Regents of the West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and Blind in Romney , West Virginia to serve as the institution 's principal , and he began his tenure there in August of that year . Upon his arrival , Covell found the schools " in a chaotic condition " with decreasing attendance , but the situation improved after Covell provided leadership , order , and a process of reorganization . Under his leadership , the West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and Blind experienced " unprecedented success " and its student body began to grow due to Covell 's initiatives . Covell found that 12 out of West Virginia 's 54 counties had no representatives at the schools , so he urged the Board of Regents to canvass the state for students eligible to attend the institution . The board approved Covell 's recommendation , and the resulting investigation identified students in those counties , which validated Covell 's request . By the schools ' tenth anniversary in 1880 , the West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and Blind 's attendance reached 120 , consisting of 87 " deaf @-@ mute " and 33 blind students . At his death in 1887 , the institution had grown from a student body of 60 pupils in 1874 to 130 . 
 Among his other reforms , Covell undertook to modernize the facilities of the West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and Blind by urging the state to install gas lighting and to install plumbing for the purposes of providing tap water . In addition to the school 's infrastructure , Covell overhauled the school 's levels of comprehension in 1875 by introducing a classification system in which students were arranged in grades . Covell also introduced the tradition of publishing biennial reports , then annual reports , which have continued to be released every year since 1876 . In 1877 , at Covell 's recommendation , the schools ' board established the Department of Visible Speech in which deaf @-@ mute students were instructed in the manner of articulation and lip reading . 
 As an educator , Covell was described as " an instructor of rare ability , being well @-@ versed in literature , science , and the arts " and as " a gentleman of fine abilities and ripe experience " . He had great personal influence on his students and took an interest in their religious well @-@ being . Covell continued serving as principal of the West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and Blind until his death from stomach cancer on Saturday , June 4 , 1887 , in Romney . Known for his excellence as an executive and administrative officer , all his affairs were found by the president of the school 's Board of Regents " to be finished , so that nothing remained to be done " on the day of his death . 
 Following his death , Covell was honored in 1888 at the National Conference of Superintendents and Principals of Institutions for Deaf <unk> in Jackson , Mississippi , by W. O. Connor , Principal of the Georgia School for the Deaf , who stated : 
 [ W ] e greatly deplore his [ Covell 's ] loss to the Institution over which he presided with such universal acceptability ; and that in his death we recognize the loss of a friend worthy of the fullest confidence , and an official of marked ability and adaptation to his duties , which he always performed with a faithfulness and efficiency <unk> . 
 His obituary in The Churchman remarked of Covell : 
 [ W ] ith untiring zeal and fidelity , he has labored in the noble work of elevating and educating the deaf , dumb and the blind . He stood without an equal in methods entirely original . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Covell married on December 24 , 1850 in Staunton , Virginia to Anita " Annie " E. Eskridge ( June 18 , 1810 – July 26 , 1895 ) . Covell is interred with his wife Annie at Indian Mound Cemetery in Romney . He and his wife had five children together , including two daughters : 
 Covell was an active and prominent member of the Episcopal Diocese of West Virginia and belonged to Saint Stephen 's Episcopal Church in Romney . He was appointed the first churchwarden of Saint Stephen 's by Bishop of the Episcopal Diocese of West Virginia , George William Peterkin . Covell played an instrumental role in the construction of a church for Saint Stephen 's in 1885 through his donation of property for the building site across the Northwestern Turnpike from the West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and Blind and through his financial contribution of the majority of the $ 1 @,@ 800 USD construction cost . Covell 's efforts were described in The Churchman as the " crowning work of his life . " Prior to the church 's construction , it is likely Covell that allowed Saint Stephen 's to utilize the chapel at the West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and Blind to hold their services . In addition to his affiliation with the Episcopal Church , Covell was a Mason of " high standing " and a member of the Romney Literary Society . 
 = No. 38 Squadron RAAF = 
 No. 38 Squadron is a Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) transport unit . It was formed in 1943 and saw service during World War II transporting supplies and personnel between Australia and the combat zones in New Guinea and Borneo , using Douglas Dakota aircraft . Following the war , the squadron conducted regular courier flights between Australia and Japan in 1947 and 1948 . No. 38 Squadron was deployed to Singapore from 1950 to 1952 , supplying Commonwealth forces engaged in the Malayan Emergency and undertaking courier flights across Asia . In 1954 it became responsible for training RAAF personnel to operate Dakotas . 
 After being re @-@ equipped with de Havilland Canada DHC @-@ 4 Caribous in 1964 , No. 38 Squadron served as the RAAF 's operational conversion unit for the type and also conducted transport tasks within Australia and its territories . Throughout Australia 's involvement in the Vietnam War , it prepared aircrew for operational service with No. 35 Squadron , and maintained a detachment in Papua New Guinea to provide pilots with experience flying in tropical conditions . A Caribou was deployed to Pakistan from 1975 to 1978 to support United Nations peacekeepers , and detachments were established within Australia during the 1980s to provide search and rescue capabilities and work with Australian Army units . From 1999 until 2001 , a detachment was deployed to East Timor as part of the Australian @-@ led peacekeeping force in the newly independent nation . No. 38 Squadron continued to operate Caribous after No. 35 Squadron was disbanded in 2000 , though the age of the aircraft increasingly affected its operations . 
 Following the retirement of the Caribous from service in 2009 , No. 38 Squadron was re @-@ equipped with eight Beechcraft King Air 350 aircraft . The squadron is currently stationed at RAAF Base Townsville , Queensland , and is responsible for training RAAF pilots to operate King Airs , and performing light transport tasks . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 No. 38 Squadron was formed as a transport unit at RAAF Base Richmond near Sydney on 15 September 1943 . Equipped with Lockheed Hudsons , the squadron conducted its first operation on 17 December , when one of its aircraft flew from Richmond to RAAF Base Darwin . During the period No. 38 Squadron was equipped with Hudsons , it operated only within Australia . 
 The squadron 's activities expanded in early 1944 , when its obsolescent Hudsons were replaced with more capable Douglas Dakota transports . It received its first Dakota on 3 March 1944 , and was completely equipped with the type by the end of May . While the squadron continued to fly to locations within Australia after receiving Dakotas , it also began transporting supplies to Allied forces fighting the Japanese in western New Guinea . During return flights from New Guinea , the Dakotas typically carried wounded personnel to Australia for treatment . In October 1944 , No. 38 Squadron was given the additional task of supporting the RAAF 's Paratroop Training Unit at Richmond . The squadron moved to RAAF Station Archerfield near Brisbane in early December 1944 , but continued to maintain a detachment at Richmond . By this time No. 38 Squadron was mainly tasked with transporting supplies to the battle zone in New Guinea , which included making supply drops to Australian Army units in the field and evacuating casualties to the mainland . From 17 July 1945 , the squadron maintained a detachment at Morotai Island , which dropped supplies to Army units fighting in Borneo . No. 38 Squadron 's only loss during World War II was a Dakota that crashed on a mountain in western New Guinea while flying between Biak and Morotai ; the wreckage of this aircraft was not located until 1970 . 
 Following the end of the war , No. 38 Squadron flew into Singapore , Bangkok and locations in Borneo to evacuate released Australian prisoners of war . In addition , the squadron transported other service personnel back to Australia until 1946 as part of the demobilisation of the Australian military . During May 1946 , three of No. 38 Squadron 's Dakotas were assigned the unusual task of flying 25 tonnes of pig bristles from Chongqing in China to Hong Kong , from where the bristles were shipped to Australia . This mission , which was designated " Operation Pig Bristle " , took two weeks to complete and sought to rectify a shortage of paint brushes , which was hindering the Australian construction industry . 
 = = = Asian deployments = = = 
 No. 38 Squadron relocated to RAAF Station Schofields near Sydney on 15 August 1946 . It became part of No. 86 Wing , along with Nos. 36 and 37 Squadrons , which also operated Dakotas , and No. 486 ( Maintenance ) Squadron , which serviced the wing 's flying units . Commencing on 22 January 1947 , one of No. 38 Squadron 's main responsibilities was to conduct thrice @-@ weekly courier flights to Japan to support the Australian element of the British Commonwealth Occupation Force . These flights were the longest regular air route serviced by twin @-@ engined aircraft at the time , and took several days to complete . The courier flights continued until 13 January 1948 , after which chartered Qantas aircraft were used to support the force in Japan . In August 1948 , five of No. 38 Squadron 's air crews were dispatched to Europe where , as members of the RAAF Squadron Berlin Air Lift , they participated in the international efforts to fly supplies into Berlin during the Soviet blockade of the city . These personnel remained in Europe for 12 months , and their absence greatly disrupted No. 38 Squadron 's operations . Overall , twenty members of No. 86 Wing were sent to Europe ; the resulting shortage of personnel forced Nos. 36 and 38 Squadrons to operate for a period as a single unit , all flying hours being attributed to No. 38 Squadron in official records . No. 86 Wing moved to Richmond between 22 June and 1 July 1949 . 
 In 1950 , No. 38 Squadron was selected to form part of the Australian force assigned to the Commonwealth Far East Air Force . As an element of this force , the Australian Government agreed for the unit to be tasked with courier flights across Asia and providing support for the British @-@ led counterinsurgency operations in Malaya . The squadron 's advance party arrived at RAF Changi in Singapore on 19 June 1950 , and all of its personnel and eight Dakotas were operational there by 6 July . While in Malaya the squadron came under the command of No. 90 ( Composite ) Wing , along with the Avro Lincoln @-@ equipped No. 1 Squadron . Half the squadron 's aircrew were veterans of the Berlin Airlift , but none had any direct experience of tropical environments . No. 38 Squadron began flying transport missions in Malaya in early July , with British and New Zealand pilots accompanying its aircrews during the first two weeks of operations to help them become familiar with local conditions . From July 1950 until February 1951 , No. 38 Squadron 's main task was to conduct courier flights to Borneo , Ceylon , Hong Kong , Indonesia , Japan and the Philippines , and these remained an important responsibility throughout the period it was based at Singapore . Following the outbreak of the Korean War , the squadron flew British troops and supplies from Singapore to Japan and Korea , and four of No. 38 Squadron 's Dakotas were transferred to No. 30 Communication Unit in Japan during November 1950 . 
 After losing half its strength , No. 38 Squadron remained at Changi and conducted supply and aeromedical evacuation flights throughout Malaya to support the British @-@ led forces there . The squadron 's aircraft were also occasionally used to mark targets ahead of bombing raids and to drop propaganda leaflets . From April to July 1951 , No. 38 Squadron and an attached flight from No. 41 Squadron RNZAF was stationed at RAF Kuala Lumpur , and was the main unit tasked with dropping supplies to Commonwealth forces in the field . The squadron made another deployment to Kuala Lumpur between November 1951 and February 1952 . In February 1952 , No. 38 Squadron successfully parachuted 54 personnel from the British 22nd Special Air Service Regiment into a remote area near the Malaya @-@ Thailand border . 
 Supporting the Australian units in Korea placed heavy demands on the RAAF 's transport force , which was too small to fully meet its domestic and international responsibilities , and it became increasingly difficult to sustain the four Dakotas in Malaya during 1952 . As a result , the Australian Government decided in September that year to return the squadron to Australia . No. 38 Squadron left Changi for Richmond on 8 December . The squadron 's only fatality during the deployment was an airman who was killed when the No. 110 Squadron RAF Dakota he was co @-@ piloting crashed during a flight between Changi and Saigon on 31 August 1950 . 
 = = = Operational conversion unit = = = 
 After returning to Richmond , No. 38 Squadron was mainly tasked with routine transport duties . The squadron also occasionally provided aircraft for CSIRO <unk> experiments . During the 1950s and early 1960s , No. 38 Squadron developed a reputation as a " cowboy " unit with lax flying standards . The squadron did not conduct proper conversion courses , and new Dakota pilots received only ad @-@ hoc instruction on the type while serving as the co @-@ pilot during operational tasks . On 8 March 1953 , No. 38 Squadron absorbed No. 36 Squadron 's Dakotas , after which No. 30 Transport Unit ( previously No. 30 Communication Unit ) in Japan was renamed No. 36 Squadron . From late March until September 1954 , No. 38 Squadron conducted VIP flights out of RAAF Station Canberra . In November that year , it was renamed the Transport Training Squadron and became responsible for instructing new Dakota crews and RAAF air movements personnel . It resumed its previous name on 13 June 1963 . 
 No. 38 Squadron was re @-@ equipped with new de Havilland Canada DHC @-@ 4 Caribou tactical transport aircraft during 1964 . In January 1964 the unit 's commanding officer , five other pilots and three navigators undertook conversion training on the type in Canada . At the completion of this course the personnel flew the RAAF 's first three Caribous from Toronto to RAAF Base Richmond between 17 March and 22 April . The process of fully converting No. 38 Squadron to Caribous was delayed by the government 's decision to deploy several of the aircraft to Vietnam ; at the time this decision was made , in June 1964 , the squadron had received six of its planned allocation of nine aircraft , and the next batch of three aircraft was sent directly to Vietnam . No. 38 Squadron was the last operational RAAF squadron to fly Dakotas , though several other units did so until the 1990s . After receiving its Caribous , No. 38 Squadron 's main role was to train aircrews for operational service with the RAAF Transport Flight Vietnam ( later redesignated No. 35 Squadron ) . On 1 July 1964 , one of the squadron 's Caribous suffered severe damage when it made a crash landing at HMAS Albatross ; this aircraft was subsequently written off and its fuselage used for training purposes by the Army 's 1st Commando Regiment . The squadron became an independent unit under Headquarters RAAF Base Richmond in August that year , following the disbandment of No. 86 Wing . On 13 October 1965 , Detachment A of No. 38 Squadron began operations from Port Moresby in Papua New Guinea , equipped with two Caribous . One of the detachment 's tasks was to give Caribou pilots experience in tropical and mountainous conditions , and all aircraft captains were required to complete at least one two @-@ month deployment to Port Moresby before serving with No. 35 Squadron in Vietnam . In addition to its training role , No. 38 Squadron undertook transport flights in and around Australia , taking part when required in relief efforts following natural disasters . 
 = = = Peacekeeping deployments = = = 
 The squadron undertook two operational deployments during the mid @-@ 1970s . From March 1975 until November 1978 Detachment B , comprising a single Caribou and support staff , was stationed at Rawalpindi , Pakistan , and transported personnel and supplies for the United Nations Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan . From August to October 1975 , a No. 38 Squadron Caribou was assigned to transport Red Cross supplies and personnel from Darwin to East Timor after a civil war broke out in that country . On 4 September that year this aircraft was hijacked by East Timorese soldiers , who forced the pilot to fly 54 refugees to Darwin ; it remains the only RAAF aircraft ever to have been hijacked . Detachment A was no longer required after Papua New Guinea achieved independence from Australia and established its own defence force , and the unit was disbanded on 17 January 1976 . Three Caribous were lost while operating with the detachment ; A4 @-@ 202 crashed near <unk> on 3 June 1965 , A4 @-@ 147 was written off after it landed short of the runway at <unk> Airport on 6 October 1968 and A4 @-@ 233 was destroyed when it crashed at <unk> Gap on 28 August 1972 . The last of these crashes caused the deaths of 25 aircrew and passengers , making it the RAAF 's worst peacetime disaster ; 21 of the people killed were high school students returning from an army cadet camp . Following the end of its permanent presence at Port Moresby , No. 38 Squadron continued to fly periodic training sorties in Papua New Guinea . During the 1980s , detachments of No. 38 Squadron were established at RAAF Base Darwin and RAAF Base Pearce near Perth to provide these regions with a search @-@ and @-@ rescue capability and to exercise with Army units . The Pearce detachment was nicknamed " <unk> Airlines " . 
 No. 38 Squadron moved from Richmond to RAAF Base Amberley , west of Brisbane , in October 1992 . At this time the squadron continued to be responsible for all Caribou conversion training , as well as conducting tactical transport operations . The permanent detachment of No. 38 Squadron aircraft to RAAF Base Pearce ceased in 1999 , and Detachment B of the squadron was established at RAAF Base Townsville in North Queensland during 2000 . From 1999 until early 2001 , elements of No. 38 Squadron , designated No. 86 Wing Detachment C , were stationed in East Timor and supported the international peacekeeping force which had been deployed there to end the violence that had broken out following a successful referendum on independence conducted in August 1999 . At its peak strength , four Caribous were assigned to the detachment . The air and ground crew deployed to East Timor endured difficult living conditions until their accommodation and recreation facilities were upgraded in mid @-@ 2000 , and the pilots were regularly required to fly into poorly maintained air strips . Despite the age of the Caribous and shortages of spare parts , Detachment C 's ground crew managed to maintain a high aircraft serviceability rate . In 2000 No. 35 Squadron was deactivated , leaving No. 38 Squadron the RAAF 's sole Caribou operator . By September 2002 , No. 38 Squadron was equipped with 14 Caribous . In July 2003 , two aircraft were deployed to the Solomon Islands as part of the Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands peacekeeping force . Both Caribous were based at Honiara International Airport , and a detachment remained in the country until July 2004 . All of No. 38 Squadron moved to RAAF Base Townsville during 2008 . 
 By the late 2000s the Caribous were becoming difficult to maintain , and were no longer capable of operating in war zones as they lacked electronic warfare systems and other forms of self @-@ protection . As a result , it was decided in late 2008 to retire the aircraft and replace them with Beechcraft King Air 350s on an interim basis until another tactical transport entered service . The Caribous were gradually retired from May 2009 , the last leaving service on 27 November that year when A4 @-@ 140 was flown to Canberra and handed over to the Australian War Memorial for preservation . By the time the aircraft were retired , No. 38 Squadron had been operating Caribous for 45 years . Three King Air 350s were transferred to No. 38 Squadron from the Army 's 173rd Surveillance Squadron on 20 November 2009 , and deliveries of a further five newly built aircraft were completed in July 2010 . In March 2015 two No. 38 Squadron King Airs were deployed to Vanuatu as part of Australia 's aid effort following Cyclone Pam . The aircraft were used to conduct flights over the affected areas to assess the extent of the damage , and also evacuated Australian and New Zealand citizens . In February 2016 it was reported that the RAAF was considering consolidating its two squadrons equipped with King Airs into a single squadron located at RAAF Base East Sale . 
 = = Current role = = 
 No. 38 Squadron is currently responsible for providing conversion training on the King Air and conducting light transport operations . The unit has a strength of 60 RAAF personnel as well as 25 aircraft maintenance contractors from Hawker Pacific . It is organised into two flights ; A Flight undertakes transport operations , and B Flight is responsible for delivering training courses . Along with Nos. 33 and 36 Squadrons , No. 38 Squadron forms part of No. 86 Wing . 
 The RAAF has been pleased with the King Air 's performance in the light transport role , though the aircraft cannot be deployed into combat areas . No. 38 Squadron often operates with the Army 's Townsville @-@ based 3rd Brigade , as well as the 51st Battalion , Far North Queensland Regiment , which conducts operational patrols across Far North Queensland during peacetime . The unit is also frequently tasked with transporting senior politicians and other VIPs . The King Airs often operate in Papua New Guinea , as well as other parts of the Asia @-@ Pacific region . The Australian Government ordered 10 Alenia C @-@ 27J Spartan battlefield transports in May 2012 , and these aircraft will be operated by No. 35 Squadron from 2015 . No. 38 Squadron marked its 70th anniversary in 2013 , and has the longest period of continual operation of any of the RAAF 's flying squadrons . 
 = Katy Hudson ( album ) = 
 Katy Hudson is the eponymous debut studio album by American singer Katy Hudson , who subsequently adopted the stage name Katy Perry . It was released on February 8 , 2001 by Red Hill Records . It primarily incorporates Christian rock and contemporary Christian music elements with lyrical themes of childhood , adolescence and Hudson 's faith in God . Reviews of the album were mixed and it sold fewer than 200 copies . Later , due to Hudson 's increased popularity , demand for the album increased as well . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Katy Hudson saw Hudson exploring Christian rock and contemporary Christian music ( CCM ) . Amongst what was described as an alternative direction were prominent influences of pop rock . During an interview for her official website at the time , Hudson cited artists Jonatha Brooke , Jennifer Knapp , Diana Krall , and Fiona Apple as her musical influences . " Trust in Me " , " Naturally " , and " My Own Monster " were said to capture " loneliness , fear and doubt often ascribed to teens " . 
 The first features " haunting " strings with " electronica effects " and " solid rock roots " . An aggressive track , " Piercing " depicts the infatuation people have with expendable things . In " Piercing " , Hudson sings : " Lord , help me see the reality / That all I 'll ever need is You " . " Last Call " was written by Hudson while reading the book Last Call for Help : Changing North America One Teen at a Time , written by Dawson McAllister . Musically , it sees Hudson going into a more jazz @-@ oriented sound . Hudson described " Growing Pains " as an anthem for children and adolescents , explaining that society shares a <unk> image of them , often viewing them as individuals that do not believe in or do not know much about God . Written by Hudson when she was in eighth grade , the song " Spit " addresses the hypocrisy she faced in Christian school . 
 " Faith Won 't Fail " was inspired by faith always sufficing in Bible situations and chapters ; and Hudson commented on " Search Me " : " I was struggling with the fact that I would have the huge responsibility of how others would be affected through what I was doing or saying on stage . I don 't want to put on some kind of front that everything is good when it 's not . I wanted to keep it real , but still give people hope . " The record closes with " When There 's Nothing Left " , which has been described as a " crisp and clean ' love note ' to God " . The album was described as not being in the vein of the bubble gum pop variety rather evoking comparisons to the Christian pop songstresses Rachel Lampa and Jaci Velasquez . 
 = = Promotional tour = = 
 To promote the album Hudson went on a tour , opening for Phil Joel , Earthsuit , and V * Enna and later a 46 @-@ state solo tour . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Stephen Thomas Erlewine from AllMusic awarded Katy Hudson three stars out of five , stating that with the album , Hudson had " betray [ ed ] a heavy , heavy debt to Alanis Morissette " . Erlewine also interpreted some of the songs ' lyrics as having sexual overtones , and identifying those as " the most interesting things " in the album , describing the record 's overall sound as " the kind of assaultive , over @-@ produced Wall of Sound that some CCM rockers do in order to prove they 're contemporary " . 
 Christianity Today writer Russ Breimeier was positive about Katy Hudson , highlighting Hudson 's songwriting style for being " insightful and well matched to the emotional power " of Hudson 's music . He further deemed Hudson a " young talent " and expected to hear more from her in the next year . Similarly , Tony Cummings from Cross Rhythms also considered Hudson to be a " vocal talent " , recommending readers to listen to the album . The Phantom Tollbooth 's Andy Argyrakis stated that Hudson having been reared in church had " paid off " , and noted that " Although a mere pop lightweight , it 's hard to ignore Hudson 's sincerity and lyrical maturity . " DEP from Billboard , also calling Hudson a talent , classified the record as " textured modern @-@ rock collection that is equal parts grit and vulnerability " and " impressive " . The album was a commercial failure for Red Hill Records , selling between 100 and 200 copies . 
 = = Musical change = = 
 Some time after the album 's release , the label Red Hill Records went bankrupt . Katy Hudson is the only Christian music @-@ influenced album by Hudson , who subsequently adopted Katy Perry as a stage name . After her popularity increased , copies of Katy Hudson have become a sought @-@ after item amongst her fans . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Credits extracted from Katy Hudson liner notes . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Adapted from Katy Hudson liner notes . 
 = Action of 21 October 1794 = 
 The Action of 21 October 1794 was a minor naval engagement between Great Britain and France fought off the Breton coast of France during the second year of the French Revolutionary Wars . French frigates had been raiding British Atlantic trade routes with considerable success since the outbreak of the war , and in response the Admiralty had formed a frigate squadron to patrol the French Channel and Atlantic coasts in search of French raiders . On 13 October 1794 , the large , modern and powerful 40 @-@ gun French frigate Révolutionnaire under the command of Captain Antoine René Thévenard sailed from Le Havre for a raiding cruise against British trade routes in the Atlantic . Eight days later , while rounding the Breton headland of Ushant about 25 – 30 nautical miles ( 56 km ) miles out to sea , Révolutionnaire encountered the British frigate squadron , commanded by Commodore Sir Edward Pellew , which had secured a number of victories over French raiding frigates during the previous two years . 
 Pellew ordered his ships to give chase , as Thévenard fled towards the French coast before the British numerical supremacy . One British ship was faster than the others , the 38 @-@ gun HMS Artois under Captain Edmund Nagle cutting Révolutionnaire off from the shore and bringing the larger French ship to action . For 45 minutes Artois battled Révolutionnaire until support arrived , at which point the French frigate 's crew surrendered their ship in defiance of their captain 's orders . Casualties and damage were light on both sides , and Révolutionnaire was rapidly commissioned into the Royal Navy , joining the squadron that had captured her and subsequently capturing the French frigate Unité at the Action of 13 April 1796 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following the French Republic 's declaration of war on Great Britain in February 1793 , the French Navy immediately launched squadrons , individual cruisers and privateers against British trade routes in the Eastern Atlantic . The French Atlantic fleet , based at the fortified port of Brest in Brittany , was in a state of political turmoil during the early years of the war , suffering a mutiny in August 1793 , and then defeat at the battle of Glorious First of June in 1794 . In spite of these difficulties , the independent raiders caused considerable damage to British commerce , and in response the Admiralty ordered a squadron of frigates from the Channel Fleet to cruise the French coastline in search of these raiders . This force , known as the flying squadron and initially commanded by Sir John Borlase Warren , achieved a number of successes in the first year of the war , most notably in the Action of 23 April 1794 , when a French frigate squadron was destroyed . 
 By the autumn of 1794 , the squadron was under the command of Commodore Sir Edward Pellew in the frigate HMS Arethusa , accompanied by HMS Artois under Captain Edmund Nagle , HMS Diamond under Captain Sir Sidney Smith and HMS Galatea under Captain Richard Goodwin Keats . All four ships had specially selected crews and equipment and the squadron formed the elite force of the Channel Fleet 's light warships . Pellew led his squadron out of Cawsand Bay on 19 October with the intention of cruising off the entrance to Brest and intercepting shipping entering or leaving the port . The French fleet , its principal squadrons blockaded in Brest , continued to send raiders to sea . One such ship , was the large newly commissioned 40 @-@ gun frigate Révolutionnaire under Captain Antoine René Thévenard with a hastily assembled and disaffected crew and a main battery of 18 – pounder cannon , which departed from the Channel port of Le Havre on 13 October , sailing westwards towards the Atlantic . 
 = = Battle = = 
 On 21 October , eight days after leaving Le Havre , and between 25 – 30 nautical miles ( 56 km ) off the island of Ushant at the tip of the Breton Peninsula , Révolutionnaire was discovered at dawn by Pellew 's squadron . Pellew immediately ordered his ships to give chase while Thévenard turned away in an effort to reach the shoreline before the larger British squadron could overwhelm his ship . Pellew 's squadron was however to windward of the French ship , thus cutting it off from the relative safety of the shore and instead Révolutionnaire swung southeast in an effort to outdistance the British squadron and pull ahead of Pellew 's ships in the hazy weather . 
 One British frigate , Nagle 's Artois , was however faster than the others . Artois was a strong modern frigate with a main battery of 9 – pounder cannon and 32 – pounder carronades on the quarterdeck , and Nagle was able to bring his frigate alongside the slightly larger French vessel . For forty minutes the two frigates traded broadsides , Nagle 's fire damaging the French ship 's rigging and slowing Révolutionnaire enough that the rest of Pellew 's squadron could come up . Captain Smith 's Diamond was the first to reach the combat , Smith ranging his ship up below Thévenard 's stern and firing two warning shots to indicate that unless the French ship surrendered he would fire a devastating raking broadside into the French ship 's stern . Arethusa and Galatea were close behind Diamond , and although Thévenard wished to continue the engagement , his men refused and the French captain was forced to surrender . At the point Révolutionnaire surrendered , breakers from the waves striking the Saints Rocks could be seen dead ahead . 
 = = = Combatant summary = = = 
 In this table , " Guns " refers to all cannon carried by the ship , including the maindeck guns which were taken into consideration when calculating it 's rate , as well as any carronades carried aboard . Broadside weight records the combined weight of shot which could be fired in a single simultaneous discharge of an entire broadside . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Casualties were light on both sides ; Révolutionnaire lost five men killed and four wounded , including Thévenard who had suffered minor wounds , while Artois was the only British ship engaged , losing two sailors and a lieutenant of Royal Marines killed and five men wounded . Pellew 's squadron brought Révolutionnaire back to Falmouth immediately , having discovered an outbreak of small pox among the prisoners of war taken from the French frigate . Subsequently , the light damage the ship had suffered enabled the Royal Navy to rapidly purchase and commission the frigate as the 38 @-@ gun HMS Révolutionnaire under the command of Captain Francis Cole and attach the ship to Pellew 's squadron . Eighteen months later , Révolutionnaire fought and captured the French frigate Unité at the Action of 12 April 1796 , and remained in the Royal Navy throughout the following 21 years of warfare . The arrival of Révolutionnaire in Britain caused a stir among naval architects as the frigate was significantly larger than those produced in Britain at the time . The ship was extensively planned and modelled and a ship was commissioned for the Royal Navy to the design of Révolutionnaire , although severe delays at the shipyards meant that HMS Forte , as the ship was eventually named , was not launched until 1814 . 
 In reward for his action against Révolutionnaire , Nagle was made a Knight Bachelor , and first Lieutenant Robert Dudley Oliver was promoted to commander . Pellew , in his report on the action , stated that " the <unk> state of the Enemy allows me the Opportunity of saying , that her <unk> could have been of no <unk> , had the Artois been alone " , but historian William James was more reserved , noting in 1827 that the ships " would have been a well matched pair of combatants , had the Artois been alone . " The prize money was extensive : part payment of £ 10 @,@ 000 ( £ 1 @,@ 036 @,@ 111 as of 2016 ) was made in January 1795 , the reward shared between the entire squadron . Pellew , who had been knighted the previous year following the Action of 18 June 1793 , was reported to be unhappy that Nagle had been honoured for his part in this action and complained to the Admiralty about the condition and speed of Arethusa , requesting a faster vessel . The following year he would receive command of the 44 @-@ gun razee HMS Indefatigable as a result . 
 = U.S. Route 23 in Michigan = 
 US Highway 23 ( US 23 ) is a United States Numbered Highway that runs from Jacksonville , Florida , to Mackinaw City , Michigan . In the US state of Michigan , it is a major , 362 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 583 km ) , north – south state trunkline highway that runs through the Lower Peninsula ( LP ) . The trunkline is a freeway from the Michigan – Ohio state line near Lambertville to the city of Standish , and it follows the Lake Huron shoreline from there to its northern terminus . Serving the cities of Ann Arbor and Flint , US 23 acts as a freeway bypass of the Metro Detroit area . Overall , the highway runs through rural areas of the state dominated by farm fields or woodlands ; some segments are urban in character in the Ann Arbor , Flint and Tri @-@ Cities areas . The section from Flint north to Standish also carries Interstate 75 ( I @-@ 75 ) along a concurrency that includes a segment that carries almost 70 @,@ 000 vehicles on a daily basis . 
 The first transportation routes along what is now US 23 in the state were sections of two Indian trails . The route of what is now US 23 follows portions of two separate trails . In the early 20th century , four different auto trail names were applied to roads now a part of the highway . These roads were included as part of two state highways in the initial state highway system in 1919 . When the United States Numbered Highway System was first designated on November 11 , 1926 , the new US 23 replaced the other designations along its route . Since creation , the road has been moved and realigned several times . Through the 1930s and 1940s , the lakeshore routing was created to replace a path that ran further inland through the northern portion of the state . Starting in the early 1950s , various sections in the southeastern and central areas of the LP were upgraded to freeways , bypassing several major cities in the area . These improvements were completed by the end of the 1960s . Since then a new crossing of the Saginaw River at Zilwaukee was built to replace a drawbridge that carried the I @-@ 75 / US 23 freeway over a shipping channel . 
 Various memorial or tourist route designations have been applied to US 23 in the state since the 1980s . The highway has been a part of the Lake Huron Circle Tour since the creation of the Great Lakes Circle Tours in 1986 . The non @-@ freeway section was designated the Sunrise Side Coastal Highway by the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) in 2004 as a part of what is now the Pure Michigan Byway Program . Since 2009 , it has been called the Huron Shores Heritage Route . The highway has also carried two memorial designations related to war veterans and a third related to local civic leaders since a 2001 consolidation of related legislation in the state . MDOT has listed two of the highway 's bridges on its historic bridge list , one of which is also on the National Register of Historic Places ( NRHP ) . Future improvements to the route of US 23 include a proposed northerly extension of the freeway from Standish to one of several locations along the Lake Huron shoreline . Another freeway has been proposed in the Flint area that could connect US 23 directly to the south end of I @-@ 475 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 US 23 runs for 362 @.@ 152 miles ( 582 @.@ 827 km ) through the LP of Michigan , serving as a freeway bypass to the west of Metro Detroit and a scenic highway through the northern portion of the state along Lake Huron . Between Flint and Standish , US 23 runs concurrently with I @-@ 75 ; the combined freeway section from Flint to Bay City can contain between six and eight lanes total while the rest of the US 23 freeway is mostly four lanes . Non @-@ freeway segments of US 23 in the state are two lanes . Like other state trunkline highways , it is maintained by the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) . All of US 23 in the state south of the M @-@ 32 junction in Alpena has been listed on the National Highway System , a network of roads important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . From the Standish area north , the highway is also a part of the Lake Huron Circle Tour and the Huron Shores Heritage Route , a Pure Michigan Byway . 
 = = = Southeastern Michigan = = = 
 US 23 enters Michigan on a freeway northwest of Toledo , Ohio , concurrent with US 223 . This freeway runs north through farm fields in rural western Monroe County near Lambertville . About five miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) north of the state line , US 223 leaves the freeway and turns west onto St. Anthony Road ; US 23 continues northward on the freeway . South of Dundee , US 23 crosses the River Raisin before coming to an interchange with M @-@ 50 next to the Cabela 's store west of town . North of town , the freeway passes near an industrial area . Farther north , it crosses a line of the Ann Arbor Railroad near <unk> as the trunkline runs to the east of Milan at the Monroe @-@ Washtenaw county line . North of Milan , the freeway crosses a line of the Norfolk Southern Railway . 
 The landscape takes on a more suburban residential character as the freeway approaches the Ann Arbor area . There are separate interchanges for US 12 ( Michigan Avenue ) and I @-@ 94 on the southeast side of the city . Between I @-@ 94 and Washtenaw Avenue , US 23 carries the Business Loop I @-@ 94 ( BL I @-@ 94 ) moniker as well . That secondary designation leaves the freeway and runs west on Washtenaw Avenue into downtown Ann Arbor and the campus of the University of Michigan . At the same interchange , a Business US 23 ( Bus . US 23 ) designation also follows Washtenaw Avenue to the west ; east of US 23 , M @-@ 17 follows Washtenaw Avenue and connects the freeway with Ypsilanti . North of this interchange , US 23 crosses the Huron River near the campus of the local community college and continues north to a junction with the M @-@ 14 freeway . The two merge and run westward along the north side of the city before US 23 turns north and M @-@ 14 curves south . 
 North of Ann Arbor , the freeway runs through woodlands and near several lakes . In the community of Whitmore Lake , US 23 crosses into Livingston County near the city 's namesake body of water . East of Brighton , the freeway intersects I @-@ 96 and continues north to an intersection with M @-@ 59 south of Hartland . The highway turns northeasterly by Runyon Lake and runs toward the city of Fenton . The trunkline passes through town and bends back toward the northwest , running between lakes <unk> and Fenton . Continuing north , the environment around US 23 transitions to rural farm fields as the freeway approaches the south side of the Flint area . 
 = = = Flint and the Tri @-@ Cities area = = = 
 West of Grand Blanc , US 23 meets I @-@ 75 , and the two freeways merge near the Bishop International Airport and continue along the west side of the Flint metro area . I @-@ 75 / US 23 has an interchange with I @-@ 69 near the crossing with the Canadian National Railway line . Continuing northwards through suburban residential areas , the highway crosses the Flint River while running along the west side of the city . In Mount Morris Township , the freeway intersects the northern end of I @-@ 475 before meeting M @-@ 57 near Clio . The highest traffic totals along US 23 in the state of Michigan were recorded by MDOT near the M @-@ 57 interchange ; in 2009 an average 68 @,@ 800 vehicles used that section of freeway daily . These traffic counts are expressed in terms of annual average daily traffic ( AADT ) , which is a statistical calculation of the average daily number of vehicles on a segment of roadway . 
 Near Birch Run , the highway turns northwesterly next to a large outlet mall . Between here and the Saginaw area , the freeway runs through more wooded lands , crossing the Cass River near Bridgeport . I @-@ 75 / US 23 enters the Tri @-@ Cities ( named for Saginaw , Bay City and Midland ) when it bypasses Saginaw to the east . The freeway intersects M @-@ 46 in Buena Vista Township south of the junction with I @-@ 675 . North of downtown Saginaw , the freeway crosses the Saginaw River on the Zilwaukee Bridge , a " post @-@ tensioned , segmental , [ concrete ] box girder bridge " that is " infamous " for a series of " construction mishaps , cost overruns , and government foibles . " 
 Past the bridge , I @-@ 75 / US 23 meets the northern end of I @-@ 675 and continues through fields and woods to the Bay City area . At exit 162 , the freeway meets the eastern terminus of US 10 and the western terminus of M @-@ 25 west of downtown . The next interchange north is with the Connector M @-@ 13 ( CONN M @-@ 13 ) freeway , which was the previous northern end of US 23 's freeway in Michigan . The connector runs due northward , and I @-@ 75 / US 23 turns northwesterly to bypass around Kawkawlin . The highway veers north , crosses the Kawkawlin River and the Pinconning Creek before coming to an interchange southwest of Standish . There , US 23 curves east , separating from I @-@ 75 . US 23 continues for about three miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) as a freeway which ends at the intersection with M @-@ 13 south of Standish . The lowest AADT along any freeway section of US 23 in Michigan is the section immediately east of I @-@ 75 ; here the traffic levels drop from 20 @,@ 763 to 4 @,@ 466 vehicles per day after US 23 separates from I @-@ 75 . 
 = = = Northern Michigan = = = 
 US 23 runs north from the end of its freeway along Huron Road through the community of Standish . The trunkline turns northeasterly through lakeshore woodlands after the intersection with Old M @-@ 76 . Northeast of this intersection , the highest , non @-@ freeway AADT level on US 23 was recorded by MDOT at 16 @,@ 757 vehicles daily . Running through Omer , the highway crosses the Rifle River and a line of the Lake State Railway . In between the two crossings , it curves due east on its way out of town . At Hale Road , US 23 meets the southern end of M @-@ 65 before it continues east to Au Gres , where it runs along the Saginaw Bay and crosses the Au Gres River . Huron Road meanders northward along the lakeshore , staying inland near Point Lookout . US 23 runs through woods as it follows the Saginaw Bays shoreline northeasterly through Alabaster to Tawas City . The highway intersects the eastern terminus of M @-@ 55 , runs north and east around Tawas Bay to East Tawas and follows the Lake Huron shoreline to Oscoda . Through this area , US 23 runs parallel to the Lake State Railway and crosses into the Huron National Forest . 
 Oscoda is the location of the eastern termini of both the River Road National Scenic Byway and County Road F @-@ 41 . In between those two junctions , the highway crosses the Au Sable River near its mouth , and the trunkline passes by the former Wurtsmith Air Force Base . Huron Road continues north , running next to Van Etten Lake as it leaves the national forest . Further north , it runs along Cedar Lake when it crosses into Alcona County . The highway meets the eastern termini of F @-@ 30 and M @-@ 72 in Greenbush and Harrisville respectively . It also passes Harrisville State Park in the latter community . The highway shifts a bit further inland north of Harrisville , continuing to parallel the railroad through the Mackinaw State Forest . Near <unk> , the trunkline turns back toward the lake , running along the shoreline of Thunder Bay . 
 When US 23 enters Alpena , it follows State Street through town and turns northwesterly on Chisholm Street . The intersection of Chisholm and Washington streets marks the eastern terminus of M @-@ 32 . Chisholm Street runs along the Thunder Bay River and crosses the river near Lake Besser . The highway leaves town and runs through rural woodlands to the south shore of Long Lake , curving around the eastern side of the lake . Near the northern end of the lake , US 23 crosses into Presque Isle County and runs along the west shore of Grand Lake . At the north end of that lake , the highway turns west along the Lake Huron shoreline near Thompson 's Harbor State Park . The trunkline continues to Rogers City where it bypasses town to the south and west , intersecting F @-@ 21 and M @-@ 68 in the process ; Bus . US 23 runs through downtown . On the other side of Rogers City , US 23 runs along the lake past Hoeft State Park and along Hammond Bay before crossing into Cheboygan County . This area had the lowest AADT levels in 2009 at 1 @,@ 097 vehicles per day . 
 US 23 follows the Lake Huron shoreline through Cheboygan County through woodlands past Cheboygan State Park and Duncan Bay . On the eastern edge of Cheboygan the highway intersects F @-@ 05 before following State Street through a commercial district . State Street crosses the Cheboygan River on the Cheboygan Bascule Bridge near the mouth of the river and the dock for the USCGC Mackinaw . On the west side of the river , US 23 meets the northern terminus of M @-@ 27 at the intersection with Main Street . State Street continues westerly as C @-@ 66 as US 23 turns north on Main Street for a block before resuming west on Mackinaw Avenue . The highway continues along the lake toward Mackinaw City . As it approaches the village , it passes Historic Mill Creek State Park and several motels . At Nicolet Street in town , the highway crosses into Emmet County for the short distance to the highway 's national northern terminus at I @-@ 75 's exit 338 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 Before Michigan became a state , the first land transportation corridors were the Indian trails . The original Shore Trail ran roughly parallel to the route of the modern US 23 from the Bay City area to Cheboygan . Another section of the current highway followed the Saginaw Trail between Flint and Saginaw . 
 Later , during the auto trail era , the modern US 23 also coincided with the east branch of the Dixie Highway and part of the Lower Peninsula section of the Theodore Roosevelt International Highway . The Dixie Highway was created by William S. <unk> after he developed the Lincoln Highway . The highway was designed to link the Great Lakes with the Gulf of Mexico , and to commemorate a half century of peace between the North and the South after the American Civil War . At the urging of Governor Woodbridge Ferris , the northern terminus was located at the Straits of Mackinac . The highway had two branches in the Lower Peninsula ; the eastern branch followed what later became US 23 north of Standish . The Theodore Roosevelt International Highway was named for former US president Theodore Roosevelt after his death in 1919 . Overall , this highway ran from Portland , Oregon , to Portland , Maine , by way of Michigan and the Canadian province of Ontario . In Michigan , it also followed US 23 north of Standish . 
 The highway was also part of the East Michigan Pike , designed to be a counterpart of the West Michigan Pike on the other side of the LP . The original route of the East Michigan Pike included a section along the coast of The Thumb between Bay City and Port Huron and used the same route as the Dixie Highway north of Bay City . Backers of this auto trail lost out in terms of name recognition to the Dixie Highway , relegating the East Michigan Pike to the list of failed auto trails . The southern part of what is now US 23 in the state was also part of the auto trail craze . The Top of Michigan Trail was designated in 1917 from the state line north to the Bay City area , before turning inland along other roadways . The name faded from shortly after the time the Michigan State Highway Department ( MSHD ) assigned the first highway numbers in the state . 
 The first state highways along the US 23 corridor were numbered M @-@ 65 from the Ohio line north to the Flint area and M @-@ 10 from Flint north to Mackinaw City by July 1 , 1919 . When originally designated , M @-@ 65 was in two sections : the southern segment ran from the Ohio state line north to the Dundee area ; the northern section ran between Ann Arbor and Flint by way of Brighton and Fenton . The gap between the two segments was eliminated by the middle of 1926 . 
 = = = United States Numbered Highways = = = 
 US 23 was commissioned on November 11 , 1926 , with the debut of the United States Numbered Highway System . The MSHD removed the M @-@ 10 and M @-@ 65 designations from the highway at the time . As it was originally designated , US 23 crossed into Michigan from Ohio south of Temperance and ran north to Ypsilanti via Ida and Maybee . Once the highway entered Ann Arbor , it followed the roads that preceded the modern freeway up to Flint . From Flint to Saginaw , US 23 ran concurrently with US 10 . On the way north to Bay City , the highway ran on the west side of the Saginaw River before turning north to the Standish area . From Standish to Mackinaw City , US 23 initially took a more inland route through the northeastern LP . 
 Starting in 1929 , MSHD started updating the route that US 23 followed through the Lower Peninsula . Late that year , the routing was moved to the east side of the Saginaw River , and M @-@ 47 was extended along the former course on the west side of the river . During 1930 , a set of changes realigned the highway 's route through the southeast corner of the state . Near Ida , US 23 was rerouted along M @-@ 50 to Dundee and north through Milan to Ann Arbor , bypassing Maybee and Whittaker . US 23 was moved from its inland routing between Omer and Tawas City via Whittemore to follow a shoreline alignment by way of Au Gres along Saginaw Bay around 1932 ; the former route through Twining and Whittemore became an extension of M @-@ 65 and the section from Whittemore east to Tawas City was added to M @-@ 55 as a part of these changes . 
 In 1932 , US 23 was moved closer to the lakeshore between Spruce and Alpena ; the former routing was redesignated M @-@ 171 . The highway was also moved to a route closer to the lakeshore between Tawas City and Oscoda , with part of the old inland route taking the designation Old US 23 . A few years later in 1936 , US 23 replaced M @-@ 72 between Oscoda and Harrisville and followed a new roadway north to the Spruce area . The M @-@ 171 designation was removed from its original routing and applied to the 1932 routing of US 23 by way of Mikado and Lincoln . In the middle of 1937 , US 27 was extended concurrently along US 23 between Cheboygan and Mackinaw City . Around the end of the decade , US 23 's routing was moved in another location to follow the lakeshore ; this time the highway was rerouted between Alpena and Rogers City . M @-@ 65 was extended northwards from Lachine through Posen to terminate over the former US 23 routing . 
 US 23 was moved to its current lakeshore routing between Rogers City and Cheboygan in 1940 , and M @-@ 33 was extended westerly from Onaway to Afton and north to Cheboygan over the former US 23 roadway while M @-@ 68 was extended eastward through Onaway to Rogers City . In early 1941 , a bridge across the Saginaw River connecting Salzburg and Lafayette avenues in Bay City was added to the route of US 23 in the city ; at the same time the former routing was redesignated Bus . US 23 . The highway was also realigned between Hartland and Fenton in 1941 . By 1945 , the northernmost segment of M @-@ 65 in downtown Rogers City was redesignated Bus . US 23 , and M @-@ 65 was truncated to its junction with US 23 southeast of town , removing the concurrency that existed since 1940 . North of Dundee , a more direct alignment to <unk> was added to US 23 , turning the former routing back to local control in late 1947 or early 1948 ; at the same time , the last gravel section of the highway was paved near Hammond Bay in northwestern Presque Isle County . 
 = = = Freeway conversion = = = 
 One of the first pieces of what would later become part of US 23 's freeway route was completed in late 1951 or early 1952 , when a two @-@ lane bypass was built around the eastern side of Milan . Two years later , a similar bypass was built from Bridgeport to M @-@ 81 on the east side of Saginaw , with the old route becoming a Bus . US 23 designation . Both bypasses would later be upgraded to four @-@ lane freeways by 1961 , with the Saginaw one later incorporated into the route of I @-@ 75 . When the Mackinac Bridge opened on November 1 , 1957 , US 23 , US 27 and US 31 were extended along the access roadways to the foot of the bridge . 
 The first future freeway portion of US 23 was built in 1957 from north of Ann Arbor to Whitmore Lake as a divided highway . On June 30 , 1958 , the first stretch of the " Fenton – Clio Expressway " opened , stretching from Fenton to Birch Run . The freeway connection from Dundee south to Ohio was opened on October 1 , 1959 . In late 1959 , the portion from Flint to Birch Run also gained the I @-@ 75 designation . 
 In late 1960 or early 1961 , a new I @-@ 75 / US 23 / US 10 freeway was built from the north end of the Saginaw bypass to Kawkawlin , utilizing the Zilwaukee drawbridge ( later replaced by the Zilwaukee Bridge ) over the Saginaw River ; when it opened , MSHD extended M @-@ 13 along the former route of US 23 from the northside of Saginaw into Bay City to the end of the freeway at Kawkawlin . Another section connected the Whitmore Lake area with Brighton in the same timeframe . General Motors was bidding in 1961 to construct an electronic highway . US 23 between Ann Arbor and Toledo was under consideration to be the location of this project ; the testing for such a roadway was ultimately done at Ohio State University instead . By the end of the year , freeway sections opened to bypass Saginaw south and ran south to Birch Run , another connected south from Fenton to Hartland , and a third connected Milan with Dundee . The remaining gaps were eliminated with additional freeway openings in 1962 : Brighton to Hartland opened in September , and Milan to Ann Arbor opened in November . The I @-@ 75 / US 23 freeway north of the Kawkawlin area to Standish opened in 1967 , and M @-@ 13 was shown on maps following US 23 's former route through Linwood and Pinconning after the change . 
 The MSHD requested additional Interstate Highway mileage in 1968 under the Federal @-@ Aid Highway Act of 1968 including a freeway along US 23 between Standish and Mackinaw City . This extension was rejected by Congress on December 13 , 1968 ; instead , Michigan was allotted additional mileage for an extension of I @-@ 69 to Flint . Once the last piece of I @-@ 75 was completed along the M @-@ 76 corridor in November 1973 , the I @-@ 75 designation was extended north of Bay City on US 23 . 
 The MSHD first proposed a realignment of US 223 in 1965 ; this change would reroute that highway to replace M @-@ 151 in southern Monroe County , and use the US 23 freeway to connect to Sylvania , Ohio . The rerouting change was made in 1977 when Michigan shifted its segment of US 223 as proposed twelve years prior . Instead of running south through Ottawa Lake , US 223 continued east to the US 23 freeway and south into Ohio . 
 The original bridge across the Saginaw River at Zilwaukee was built in 1960 as a bascule bridge to allow shipping traffic to use the river . Opening the drawbridge would back traffic up on I @-@ 75 / US 10 / US 23 for upwards of four hours on holiday weekends . Approved in 1974 , construction on the replacement bridge started in October 1979 . A major construction accident in August 1982 delayed completion of the new Zilwaukee Bridge ; a bridge pier partially collapsed when contractors overloaded a section under construction . The affected 300 @-@ foot ( 91 m ) deck segment tilted to rest three feet ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) higher on one end and five feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) lower on the other . The structure was originally supposed to cost $ 76 @.@ 8 million with a 1983 completion date ; in the end it cost $ 131 @.@ 3 million ( equivalent to $ 342 million in 2015 ) when the southbound span finally opened on September 19 , 1988 . The structure is the largest segmental concrete bridge in the country . 
 While that construction was being done , MDOT truncated US 10 at Bay City in 1986 ; this removed the concurrency between US 10 and US 23 that existed since 1926 . A few years later in 1992 , the freeway concept for the northeastern LP was revived again when MDOT initiated plans to study and build a new US 23 freeway from Standish northerly to Tawas City , Oscoda or Alpena . This proposal was brought up due to a high level of tourist traffic along the current routing since the mid @-@ 1960s . The FHWA mandated additional environmental studies for the project in 2000 , and MDOT withdrew the proposals two years later . 
 In 2015 , work began to reconfigure the interchange with I @-@ 96 near Brighton . The new configuration will add express lanes for I @-@ 96 in the previous median of that freeway while the existing carriageways will be converted into collector @-@ distributor lanes . Work on the project is expected to continue into 2016 . 
 = = Future = = 
 Officials in the Flint area have proposed extending a freeway to directly connect I @-@ 475 to US 23 . Such an extension , if built , would " include a new freeway coming out of I @-@ 475 , which would snake across Fenton and Cook roads before connecting into US 23 at Baldwin Road " . Proposals for the freeway connection have been around since the late 1990s , but they were indefinitely postponed in 2011 . 
 = = Memorial highway designations and tourist routes = = 
 Most of US 23 , along with US 2 in the Upper Peninsula , has been designated the United Spanish War Veterans Memorial Highway . The designation was conferred in Public Act 207 of 1945 , with companion legislation for US 2 in 1949 . Signs marking the highway were not erected until 1968 when Governor George W. Romney had them installed . 
 North of Standish , US 23 is a part of the Lake Huron Circle Tour ( LHCT ) . This tour was created in May 1986 as part of the overall Great Lakes Circle Tour through a joint effort between MDOT and its counterparts in Wisconsin , Minnesota and Ontario . 
 When the Michigan State Legislature consolidated the statutes defining the various memorial highways in 2001 , they included the Veterans of World War I Memorial Highway in the law . Defined along I @-@ 75 / US 23 between Saginaw and Bay City , the designation was included in Public Act 142 . That act also affected another previously designated moniker between the two cities . The Roberts @-@ Linton Highway was named in 1931 for local leaders who championed the construction of a highway along the Saginaw River . This name was applied to the original highway routing between Saginaw and Bay City ( now a part of M @-@ 13 ) . After the 2001 change , the name was moved to the US 23 freeway . 
 In May 2004 , the highway north of Standish was named the Sunrise Side Coastal Highway , a scenic highway designation through what is now called the Pure Michigan Byway Program . Since 2009 , they local committee that manages the byway designation has started using the Huron Shores Heritage Route name for the corridor . At the end of 2011 , the Northeast Michigan Council of Governments ( <unk> ) was working on funding a tourist promotion called " Telling Stories of the Sunrise Coast " through the US 23 Heritage Route Interpretive Program . Past efforts by <unk> included print media , logos , and other marketing efforts . 
 = = Historic bridges = = 
 MDOT maintains a listing of the historic bridges in the state ; along US 23 , the department has listed two structures . The bridge over the Ocqueoc River in Ocqueoc Township in Presque Isle County was built in 1937 . The 106 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 32 m ) structure is one of the last three deck truss bridges in the state . The roadway on the bridge is 38 feet ( 11 @.@ 6 m ) wide and carries two lanes of traffic . The bridge was reconstructed in 1994 . 
 The second bridge is the Cheboygan Bascule Bridge in Cheboygan . This bascule bridge was built in 1940 over the Cheboygan River as the last of its kind before World War II . It was built as a " two @-@ leaf bridge in a place where a single @-@ leaf bridge probably would have sufficed . " The initial construction of the structure was delayed when the contractor died , but it was completed in December 1940 . It was the second moveable bridge on the site , replacing an iron swing bridge built in 1877 . The structure is 155 feet ( 47 m ) long , composed of two 42 @-@ foot ( 13 m ) spans on either side of the central 70 @-@ foot ( 21 m ) span ; the roadway is 40 feet ( 12 m ) wide with four lanes for vehicle traffic . There are also pedestrian sidewalks on either side of the roadway . When the bridge is opened to allow river traffic to pass , boats have a 60 @-@ foot @-@ wide ( 18 m ) channel for navigation . The bridge was added to the National Register of Historic Places on December 1 , 2000 , and reconstructed in 2003 . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 = HMS Temeraire ( 1798 ) = 
 HMS Temeraire was a 98 @-@ gun second @-@ rate ship of the line of the Royal Navy . Launched in 1798 , she served during the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars , mostly on blockades or convoy escort duties . She fought only one fleet action , the Battle of Trafalgar , but became so well known for her actions and her subsequent depictions in art and literature that she has been remembered as " The Fighting Temeraire " . 
 Built at Chatham Dockyard , Temeraire entered service on the Brest blockade with the Channel Fleet . Missions were tedious and seldom relieved by any action with the French fleet . The first incident of note came when several of her crew , hearing rumours they were to be sent to the West Indies at a time when peace with France seemed imminent , refused to obey orders . This act of mutiny eventually failed and a number of those responsible were tried and executed . Laid up during the Peace of Amiens , Temeraire returned to active service with the resumption of the wars with France , again serving with the Channel Fleet , and joined Horatio Nelson 's blockade of the Franco @-@ Spanish fleet in Cadiz in 1805 . At the Battle of Trafalgar on 21 October , the ship went into action immediately astern of Nelson 's flagship , HMS Victory . During the battle Temeraire came to the rescue of the beleaguered Victory , and fought and captured two French ships , winning public renown in Britain . 
 After undergoing substantial repairs , Temeraire was employed blockading the French fleets and supporting British operations off the Spanish coasts . She went out to the Baltic in 1809 , defending convoys against Danish gunboat attacks , and by 1810 was off the Spanish coast again , helping to defend Cadiz against a French army . Her last action was against the French off Toulon , when she came under fire from shore batteries . The ship returned to Britain in 1813 for repairs , but was laid up . She was converted to a prison ship and moored in the River Tamar until 1819 . Further service brought her to Sheerness as a receiving ship , then a victualling depot , and finally a guard ship . The Admiralty ordered her to be sold in 1838 , and she was towed up the Thames to be broken up . 
 This final voyage was depicted in a J. M. W. Turner oil painting greeted with critical acclaim , entitled The Fighting Temeraire tugged to her last Berth to be broken up , 1838 . The painting continues to be held in high regard and was voted Britain 's favourite painting in 2005 . 
 = = Construction and commissioning = = 
 Temeraire was ordered from Chatham Dockyard on 9 December 1790 , to a design developed by Surveyor of the Navy Sir John Henslow . She was one of three ships of the Neptune class , alongside her sisters HMS Neptune and HMS Dreadnought . The keel was laid down at Chatham in July 1793 . Her construction was initially overseen by Master Shipwright Thomas Pollard and completed by his successor Edward <unk> . Temeraire was launched on 11 September 1798 and the following day was taken into the graving dock to be fitted for sea . Her hull was fitted with copper sheathing , a process that took two weeks to complete . Refloated , she finished fitting out , and received her masts and yards . Her final costs came to £ 73 @,@ 241 , and included £ 59 @,@ 428 spent on the hull , masts and yards , and a further £ 13 @,@ 813 on rigging and stores . 
 She was commissioned on 21 March 1799 under Captain Peter Puget , becoming the second ship of the Royal Navy to bear the name Temeraire . Her predecessor had been the 74 @-@ gun third @-@ rate HMS Temeraire , a former French ship taken as a prize at the Battle of Lagos on 19 August 1759 by a fleet under Admiral Edward Boscawen . Puget was only in command until 26 July 1799 , during which time he oversaw the process of fitting the new Temeraire for sea . He was superseded by Captain Thomas Eyles on 27 July 1799 , while the vessel was anchored off St Helens , Isle of Wight . 
 = = With the Channel Fleet = = 
 Under Eyles 's command Temeraire finally put to sea at the end of July , flying the flag of Rear Admiral Sir John Borlase Warren , and joined the Channel Fleet under the overall command of Admiral Lord Bridport . The Channel Fleet was at that time principally engaged in the blockade of the French port of Brest , and Temeraire spent several long cruises of two or three months at a time patrolling the area . Eyles was superseded during this period by Temeraire 's former commander , Captain Puget , who resumed command on 14 October 1799 , and the following month Temeraire became the flagship of Rear Admiral James Whitshed . 
 Lord Bridport had been replaced as commander of the Channel Fleet by Admiral Lord St Vincent in mid @-@ 1799 , and the long blockade cruises were sustained throughout the winter and into the following year . On 20 April 1800 Puget was superseded as commander by Captain Edward Marsh . Marsh commanded Temeraire through the remainder of that year and for the first half of 1801 , until his replacement , Captain Thomas Eyles , arrived to resume command on 31 August . Rear Admiral Whitshed had also struck his flag by now , and Temeraire became the flagship of Rear Admiral George Campbell . By this time the Second Coalition against France had collapsed , and negotiations for peace were underway at Amiens . Lord St Vincent had been promoted to First Lord of the Admiralty , and command of the Channel Fleet passed to Admiral Sir William Cornwallis . With the end of the war imminent , Temeraire was taken off blockade duty and sent to Bantry Bay to await the arrival of a convoy , which she would then escort to the West Indies . Many of the crew had been serving continuously in the navy since the start of the French Revolutionary Wars in 1793 , and had looked forward to returning to England now that peace seemed imminent . On hearing rumours that instead they were to be sent to the West Indies , around a dozen men began to agitate for the rest of the crew to refuse orders to sail for anywhere but England . 
 = = Mutiny = = 
 The first open clash between the mutineers and officers came on the morning of 3 December , when a small group of sailors gathered on the forecastle and , refusing orders to leave , began to argue with the officers . Captain Eyles asked to know their demands , which were an assurance that Temeraire would not go to the West Indies , but instead would return to England . Eventually Rear Admiral Campbell came down to speak to the men , and having informed them that the officers did not know the destination of the ship , he ordered them to disperse . The men went below decks and the incipient mutiny appeared to have been quashed . The ringleaders , numbering around a dozen , remained determined however , and made discreet inquiries among the rest of the crew . Having eventually determined that the majority of the crew would , if not actually support a mutiny , at least not oppose it , and that the Temeraire 's crew would be supported by the ship 's marines as well as the crews of some of the other warships in Bantry Bay , they decided to press ahead with their plans . The mutiny began with the crew closing the ship 's gunports , effectively barricading themselves below deck . Having done so , they refused orders to open them again , jeered the officers and threatened violence . The crew then came up on deck and once again demanded to know their destination and refused to obey orders to sail for anywhere but England . Having presented their demands they returned below decks and resumed the usual shipboard routine as much as they could . 
 Alarmed by the actions of the Temeraire 's crew , Campbell met with Vice @-@ Admiral Sir Andrew Mitchell the following day and informed him of the mutineers ' demands . Mitchell reported the news to the Admiralty while Campbell returned to Temeraire and summoned the crew on deck once more . He urged them to return to duty , and then dismissed them . Meanwhile , discipline had begun to break down among the mutineers . Several of the crew became drunk , and some of the officers were struck by rowdy seamen . When one of the marines who supported the mutiny was placed in irons for drunken behaviour and insolence , a crowd formed on deck and tried to free him . The officers resisted these attempts and as sailors began to push and threaten them , Campbell gave the order for the marines to arrest those he identified as the ringleaders . The marines hesitated , but then obeyed the order , driving the unruly seamen back and arresting a number of them , who were immediately placed in irons . Campbell ordered the remaining crew to abandon any mutinous actions , and deprived of its leaders , the mutiny collapsed , though the officers were on their guard for several days afterwards and the marines were ordered to carry out continuous patrols . 
 News of the mutiny created a sensation in England , and the Admiralty ordered Temeraire to sail immediately for Spithead while an investigation was carried out . Vice @-@ Admiral Mitchell was granted extraordinary powers regarding the death sentence and Temeraire 's marine complement was hastily augmented for the voyage to England . On the ship 's arrival , the 14 imprisoned ringleaders were swiftly court @-@ martialled in Portsmouth aboard HMS Gladiator , some on 6 January 1802 and the rest on 14 January . After deliberations , twelve were sentenced to be hanged , and the remaining two were to receive two hundred lashes each . Four men were duly hanged aboard Temeraire , and the remainder were hanged aboard several of the ships anchored at Portsmouth , including HMS Majestic , HMS Formidable , HMS Achille and HMS Centaur . 
 = = West Indies and the peace = = 
 After the executions , Temeraire was immediately sent to sea , sailing from Portsmouth for the Isle of Wight the day after and beginning preparations for her delayed voyage to the West Indies . She sailed for Barbados , arriving there on 24 February , and remained in the West Indies until the summer . During her time there the Treaty of Amiens was finally signed and ratified , and Temeraire was ordered back to Britain . She arrived at Plymouth on 28 September and Eyles paid her off on 5 October . Because of the drawdown in the size of the active navy as a result of the peace , Temeraire was laid up in the Hamoaze for the next eighteen months . 
 = = Return to service = = 
 The peace of Amiens was a brief interlude in the wars with Revolutionary France , and in 1803 the War of the Third Coalition began . Temeraire had deteriorated substantially during her long period spent laid up , and she was taken into dry dock on 22 May to repair and refit , starting with the replacement of her copper sheathing . Work was delayed when a heavy storm hit Plymouth in January 1804 , causing appreciable damage to Temeraire , but was finally completed by February 1804 , at a cost of £ 16 @,@ 898 . Command was assigned to Captain Eliab Harvey , and he arrived to take up his commission on 1 January 1804 . On putting to sea he sailed to join the Channel Fleet , still under the overall command of Admiral Cornwallis . 
 Temeraire now resumed her previous duties blockading the French at Brest . Heavy weather took its toll , forcing her to put into Torbay for extensive repairs after her long patrols , repairs which eventually amounted to £ 9 @,@ 143 . During this time Harvey was often absent from his command , usually attending to his duties as Member of Parliament for Essex . He was temporarily replaced by Captain William Kelly on 27 August 1804 , and he in turn was succeeded by Captain George <unk> on 6 April 1805 . Harvey returned to his ship on 9 July 1805 , and it was while he was in command that the reinforced Rochefort squadron under Vice @-@ Admiral Sir Robert Calder intercepted and attacked a Franco @-@ Spanish fleet at the Battle of Cape Finisterre . The French commander , Pierre @-@ Charles Villeneuve , was thwarted in his attempt to join the French forces at Brest , and instead sailed south to Ferrol , and then to Cadiz . When news of the Franco @-@ Spanish fleet 's location reached the Admiralty , they appointed Vice @-@ Admiral Horatio Nelson to take command of the blockading force at Cadiz , which at the time was being commanded by Vice @-@ Admiral Cuthbert Collingwood . Nelson was told to pick whichever ships he liked to serve under him , and one of those he specifically chose was Temeraire . 
 = = Battle of Trafalgar = = 
 Temeraire duly received orders to join the Cadiz blockade , and having sailed to rendezvous with Collingwood , Harvey awaited Nelson 's arrival . Nelson 's flagship , the 100 @-@ gun HMS Victory , arrived off Cadiz on 28 September , and he took over command of the fleet from Collingwood . He spent the next few weeks forming his plan of attack in preparation for the expected sortie of the Franco @-@ Spanish fleet , issuing it to his captains on 9 October in the form of a memorandum . The memorandum called for two divisions of ships to attack at right angles to the enemy line , severing its van from the centre and rear . A third advance squadron would be deployed as a reserve , with the ability to join one of the lines as the course of the battle dictated . Nelson placed the largest and most powerful ships at the heads of the lines , with Temeraire assigned to lead Nelson 's own column into battle . The fleet patrolled a considerable distance from the Spanish coast to lure the combined fleet out , and the ships took the opportunity to exercise and prepare for the coming battle . For Temeraire this probably involved painting her sides in the Nelson Chequer design , to enable the British ships to tell friend from foe in the confusion of battle . 
 The combined fleet put to sea on 19 October 1805 , and by 21 October was in sight of the British ships . Nelson formed up his lines and the British began to converge on the distant Franco @-@ Spanish fleet . Contrary to his original instructions , Nelson took the lead of the weather column in Victory . Concerned for the commander @-@ in @-@ chief 's safety in such an exposed position , Henry Blackwood , a long @-@ standing friend of Nelson and commander of the frigate HMS Euryalus that day , suggested that Nelson come aboard his ship to better observe and direct the battle . Nelson refused , so Blackwood instead tried to convince him to let Harvey come past him in the Temeraire , and so lead the column into battle . Nelson agreed to this , and signalled for Harvey to come past him . As Temeraire drew up towards Victory , Nelson decided that if he was standing aside to let another ship lead his line , so too should Collingwood , commanding the lee column of ships . He signalled Collingwood , aboard his flagship HMS Royal Sovereign , to let another ship come ahead of him , but Collingwood continued to surge ahead . Reconsidering his plan , Nelson is reported to have hailed the Temeraire , as she came up alongside Victory , with the words " I 'll thank you , Captain Harvey , to keep in your proper station , which is astern of the Victory " . Nelson 's instruction was followed up by a formal signal and Harvey dropped back reluctantly , but otherwise kept within one ship 's length of Victory as she sailed up to the Franco @-@ Spanish line . 
 Closely following Victory as she passed through the Franco @-@ Spanish line across the bows of the French flagship Bucentaure , Harvey was forced to sheer away quickly , just missing Victory 's stern . Turning to starboard , Harvey made for the 140 @-@ gun Spanish ship Santísima Trinidad and engaged her for twenty minutes , taking raking fire from two French ships , the 80 @-@ gun Neptune and the 74 @-@ gun Redoutable , as she did so . Redoutable 's broadside carried away Temeraire 's mizzen topmast , and while avoiding a broadside from Neptune , Temeraire narrowly avoided a collision with Redoutable . Another broadside from Neptune brought down Temeraire 's fore @-@ yard and main topmast , and damaged her fore mast and bowsprit . Harvey now became aware that the Redoutable had come up alongside the Victory and swept her decks with musket fire and grenades . A large party of Frenchmen now gathered on her decks ready to board the Victory . Temeraire was brought around ; appearing suddenly out of the smoke of the battle and slipping across Redoutable 's stern , Temeraire discharged a double @-@ shotted broadside into her . Jean Jacques Étienne Lucas , captain of the Redoutable , recorded that " ... the three @-@ decker [ Temeraire ] – who had doubtless perceived that the Victory had ceased fire and would inevitably be taken – ran foul of the Redoutable to starboard and overwhelmed us with the point @-@ blank fire of all her guns . It would be impossible to describe the horrible carnage produced by the murderous broadside of this ship . More than two hundred of our brave lads were killed or wounded by it . " 
 = = = Temeraire and Redoutable = = = 
 Temeraire then rammed into the Redoutable , dismounting many of the French ship 's guns , and worked her way alongside , after which her crew lashed the two ships together . Temeraire now poured continuous broadsides into the French ship , taking fire as she did so from the 112 @-@ gun Spanish ship Santa Ana lying off her stern , and from the 74 @-@ gun French ship Fougueux , which came up on Temeraire 's un @-@ engaged starboard side . Harvey ordered his gun crews to hold fire until Fougueux came within point blank range . Temeraire 's first broadside against Fougueux at a range of 100 yards caused considerable damage to the Frenchman 's rigging , and she drifted into Temeraire , whose crew promptly lashed her to the side . Temeraire was now lying between two French 74 @-@ gun ships . As Harvey later recalled in a letter to his wife " Perhaps never was a ship so <unk> as mine , to have for more than three hours two of the enemy 's line of battle ships lashed to her . " Redoutable , sandwiched between Victory and Temeraire , suffered heavy casualties , reported by Captain Lucas as amounting to 300 dead and 222 wounded . During the fight grenades thrown from the decks and topmasts of Redoutable killed and wounded a number of Temeraire 's crew and set her starboard rigging and foresail on fire . There was a brief pause in the fighting while both sides worked to douse the flames . Temeraire narrowly escaped destruction when a grenade thrown from Redoutable exploded on her maindeck , nearly igniting the after @-@ magazine . Master @-@ At @-@ Arms John <unk> prevented the fire from spreading and saved not only Temeraire , but the surrounding ships , which would have been caught in the explosion . 
 After twenty minutes fighting both Victory and Temeraire , the Redoutable had been reduced to a floating wreck . Temeraire had also suffered heavily , damaged when Redoutable 's main mast fell onto her poop deck , and having had her own topmasts shot away . Informed that his ship was in danger of sinking , Lucas finally called for quarter to the Temeraire . Harvey sent a party across under the second lieutenant , John Wallace , to take charge of the ship . 
 = = = Temeraire and Fougueux = = = 
 <unk> together , Temeraire and Fougueux exchanged fire , Temeraire initially clearing the French ship 's upper deck with small arms fire . The French rallied , but the greater height of the three @-@ decked Temeraire compared to the two @-@ decked Fougueux thwarted their attempts to board . Instead Harvey dispatched his own boarding party , led by First @-@ Lieutenant Thomas Fortescue Kennedy , which entered Fougueux via her main deck ports and chains . The French tried to defend the decks port by port , but were steadily overwhelmed . Fougueux 's captain , Louis Alexis Baudoin , had suffered a fatal wound earlier in the fighting , leaving Commander Francois Bazin in charge . When he learned that nearly all of the officers were dead or wounded and that most of the guns were out of action , Bazin surrendered the ship to the boarders . 
 Temeraire had by now fought both French ships to a standstill , at considerable cost to herself . She had sustained casualties of 47 killed and 76 wounded . All her sails and yards had been destroyed , only her lower masts remained , and the rudder head and starboard <unk> had been shot away . Eight feet of her starboard hull was staved in and both quarter galleries had been destroyed . Harvey signalled for a frigate to tow his damaged ship out of the line , and HMS Sirius came up to assist . Before Sirius could make contact , Temeraire came under fire from a counter @-@ attack by the as @-@ yet unengaged van of the combined fleet , led by Rear Admiral Pierre Dumanoir le Pelley . Harvey ordered that the few guns that could be brought to bear be fired in response , and the attack was eventually beaten off by fresh British ships arriving on the scene . 
 = = Storm = = 
 Shortly after the battle had ended , a severe gale struck the area . Several of the captured French and Spanish ships foundered in the rising seas , including both of Temeraire 's prizes , the Fougueux and the Redoutable . Lost in the wrecks were a considerable number of their crews , as well as 47 Temeraire crewmen , serving as prize crews . Temeraire rode out the storm following the battle , sometimes being taken in tow by less damaged ships , sometimes riding at anchor . She took aboard a number of Spanish and French prisoners transferred from other prizes , including some transferred from the Euryalus , which was serving as the temporary flagship of Cuthbert Collingwood . Harvey took the opportunity to go aboard the Euryalus and present his account of the battle to Collingwood , and so became the only captain to do so before Collingwood wrote his dispatch about the victory . 
 = = = Return to England = = = 
 Temeraire finally put into Gibraltar on 2 November , eleven days after the battle had been fought . After undergoing minor repairs she sailed for England , arriving at Portsmouth on 1 December , three days before Victory passed by carrying Nelson 's body . The battle @-@ damaged ships quickly became tourist attractions , and visitors flocked to tour them . Temeraire was particularly popular on her arrival , being the only ship singled out by name in Collingwood 's dispatch for her heroic conduct . Collingwood wrote 
 A circumstance occurred during the action which so strongly marks the invincible spirit of British seamen , when engaging the enemies of their country , that I cannot resist the pleasure I have in making it known to their Lordships ; the Temeraire was boarded by accident ; or design , by a French ship on one side , and a Spaniard on the other ; the contest was vigorous , but , in the end the combined ensigns were torn from the poop and the British hoisted in their places . 
 Collingwood 's account , probably based largely on Harvey 's report in the immediate aftermath of the battle , contained several errors . Temeraire had closely engaged two French ships , rather than a French and a Spanish ship , and had not been boarded by either during the action . Nevertheless , the account was popular and a print was rushed out purporting to show Harvey taking the lead in clearing Temeraire 's decks of enemy seamen . 
 A number of artists visited the newly returned Trafalgar ships , including John <unk> , drawing master at the Royal Naval Academy . <unk> produced several sketches of battle @-@ damaged ships , sending them to Nicholas Pocock to be used for Pocock 's large paintings of the battle . Temeraire was one of the ships he sketched . Another visitor to Portsmouth was J. M. W. Turner . It is not known whether he visited Temeraire , though he did go aboard Victory , making preparatory notes and sketches and interviewing sailors who had been in the battle . The story of the Temeraire had become firmly ingrained in the public mind , so much so that when the House of Commons passed a vote of thanks to the men who had fought at Trafalgar , only three were specifically named . Nelson , Collingwood , and Harvey of the Temeraire . 
 = = Mediterranean and Baltic service = = 
 The battle @-@ damaged Temeraire was almost immediately dry @-@ docked in Portsmouth to undergo substantial repairs , which eventually lasted sixteen months and cost £ 25 @,@ 352 . She finally left the dockyard in mid @-@ 1807 , now under the command of Captain Sir Charles Hamilton . Having fitted her for sea , Hamilton sailed to the Mediterranean in September and joined the fleet blockading the French in Toulon . The service was largely uneventful , and Temeraire returned to Britain in April 1808 to undergo repairs at Plymouth . During her time in Britain the strategic situation in Europe changed as Spain rebelled against French domination and entered the war against France . Temeraire sailed in June to join naval forces operating off the Spanish coast in support of anti @-@ French forces in the Peninsular War . 
 This service continued until early 1809 , when she returned to Britain . By now Britain was heavily involved in the Baltic , protecting mercantile interests . An expedition under Sir James Gambier in July 1807 had captured most of the Danish Navy at the Battle of Copenhagen , in response to fears that it might fall into Napoleon 's hands , but precipitating war with the Danes . Captain Hamilton left the ship , and was superseded by Captain Edward Sneyd Clay . Temeraire now became the flagship of Rear Admiral Sir Manley Dixon , with orders to go to the Baltic to reinforce the fleet stationed there under Sir James Saumarez . Temeraire arrived in May 1809 and was sent to blockade Karlskrona on the Swedish coast . 
 While on patrol with the 64 @-@ gun HMS Ardent and the frigate HMS Melpomene , Temeraire became involved in one of the heaviest Danish gunboat attacks of the war . A party of men from Ardent had been landed on the island of <unk> , but were taken by surprise in a Danish night attack , which saw most of the Ardent men captured . The Melpomene was sent under a flag of truce to negotiate for their release , but on returning from this mission , was becalmed . A flotilla of thirty Danish gunboats then launched an attack , taking advantage of the stranded Melpomene 's inability to bring her broadside to bear on them . Melpomene signalled for help to the Temeraire , which immediately dispatched boats to her assistance . They engaged and then drove off the Danish ships , and then helped the Melpomene to safety . She had been heavily damaged and suffered casualties of five killed and twenty @-@ nine wounded . Temeraire 's later Baltic service involved being dispatched to observe the Russian fleet at Reval , during which time she made a survey of the island of <unk> . After important blockading and convoy escort work , Temeraire was ordered back to Britain as winter arrived , and she arrived in Plymouth in November 1809 . 
 = = Iberian service = = 
 After a period under repair in Plymouth , Temeraire was recommissioned under the command of Captain Edwin H. Chamberlayne in late January 1810 . The Peninsular War had reached a critical stage , with the Spanish government besieged in Cadiz by the French . Temeraire , now the flagship of Rear Admiral Francis Pickmore , was ordered to reinforce the city 's water defences , and provided men from her sailor and marine complement to crew batteries and gunboats . Men from Temeraire were heavily involved in the fighting until July 1810 , when Pickmore was ordered to sail to the Mediterranean and take up a new position as port admiral at Mahón . Temeraire was thereafter based either at Mahón or off Toulon with the blockading British fleet under Admiral Sir Edward Pellew . Chamberlayne was replaced by Captain Joseph Spear in March 1811 , and for the most part the blockade was uneventful . Though possessing a powerful fleet , the French commander avoided any contact with the blockading force and stayed in port , or else made very short voyages , returning to the harbour when the British appeared . 
 Temeraire 's one brush with the French during this period came on 13 August 1811 . Having received orders to sail to Minorca , Spear attempted to tack out of Hyères Bay . As he tried to do so , the wind fell away , leaving Temeraire becalmed and caught in a current which caused her to drift towards land . She came under fire from a shore battery on Pointe des Medes , which wounded several of her crew . Her boats were quickly manned , and together with boats sent from the squadron , Temeraire was towed out of range of the French guns . She then sailed to Minorca and underwent repairs . During this period an epidemic of yellow fever broke out , infecting nearly the entire crew and killing around a hundred crewmen . Pellew ordered her back to Britain , and health gradually improved as she sailed through the Atlantic . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 Temeraire arrived in Plymouth on 9 February 1812 and was docked for a survey several weeks later . The survey reported that she was " A well built and strong ship but apparently much decay 'd " . Spear was superseded on 4 March by Captain Samuel Hood Linzee , but Linzee 's command was short @-@ lived . Temeraire left the dock on 13 March and was paid off one week later . Advances in naval technology had developed more powerful and strongly built warships , and though still comparatively new , Temeraire was no longer considered desirable for front @-@ line service . While laid up the decision was taken to convert her into a prison ship to alleviate overcrowding caused by large influxes of French prisoners from the Peninsular War campaigns . Conversion work was carried out at Plymouth between November and December 1813 , after which she was laid up in the River Tamar as a prison hulk . From 1814 she was under the nominal command of Lieutenant John Wharton . Despite being laid up and disarmed Temeraire and the rest of her class were nominally re @-@ rated as 104 @-@ gun first rates in February 1817 . 
 Temeraire 's service as a prison ship lasted until 1819 , at which point she was selected for conversion to a receiving ship . She was extensively refitted at Plymouth between September 1819 and June 1820 at a cost of £ 27 @,@ 733 , and then sailed to Sheerness Dockyard . As a receiving ship she served as a temporary berth for new naval recruits until they received a posting to a ship . She fulfilled this role for eight years , until becoming a victualling depot in 1829 . Her final role was as a guard ship at Sheerness , under the title " <unk> of the Ordinary and Captain @-@ Superintendent 's ship of the Fleet Reserve in the Medway " . This final post as flagship of the Medway Reserve involved her being repainted and rearmed , and she was used to train boys belonging to The Marine Society . For the last two years of her service , from 1836 to 1838 she was under the nominal command of Captain Thomas Fortescue Kennedy , in his post as Captain @-@ Superintendent of Sheerness . Kennedy had been Temeraire 's first @-@ lieutenant at Trafalgar . 
 = = Sale and disposal = = 
 Kennedy received orders from the Admiralty in June 1838 to have Temeraire valued in preparation for her sale out of the service . She fired her guns for the last time on 28 June in celebration of the Coronation of Queen Victoria , and work began on dismantling her on 4 July . Kennedy delegated this task to Captain Sir John Hill , commander of HMS Ocean . Her masts , stores and guns were all removed and her crew paid off , before Temeraire was put up for sale with twelve other ships . She was sold by Dutch auction on 16 August 1838 to John Beatson , a shipbreaker based at Rotherhithe for £ 5 @,@ 530 . Beatson was then faced with the task of transporting the ship 55 miles from Sheerness to Rotherhithe , the largest ship to have attempted this voyage . To accomplish this he hired two steam tugs from the Thames Steam Towing Company and employed a Rotherhithe pilot named William Scott and twenty five men to sail her up the Thames , at a cost of £ 58 . 
 = = Last voyage = = 
 The tugs took the hulk of the Temeraire in tow at 7 : 30 am on 5 September , taking advantage of the beginning of the slack water . They had reached Greenhithe by 1 : 30 pm at the ebb of the tide , where they anchored overnight . They resumed the journey at 8 : 30 am the following day , passing Woolwich and then Greenwich at noon . They reached Limehouse Reach shortly afterwards and brought her safely to Beatson 's Wharf at 2 pm . The Temeraire was hauled up onto the mud , where she lay as she was slowly broken up . The final voyage was announced in a number of papers , and thousands of spectators came to see her towed up the Thames or laid up at Beatson 's yard . The shipbreakers undertook a thorough dismantling , removing all the copper sheathing , rudder <unk> and <unk> , copper bolts , nails and other fastenings to be sold back to the Admiralty . The timber was mostly sold to house builders and shipyard owners , though some was retained for working into specialist commemorative furniture . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The immediate legacy of the Temeraire was the use of the timber taken from her as she was broken up . A gong stand made from Temeraire timber was a wedding present to the future King George V on the occasion of his marriage to Mary of Teck , and is held at Balmoral Castle . A barometer , gavel , and some miscellaneous timber are in the collections of the National Maritime Museum , and chairs made from Temeraire oak are in the possession of the Royal Naval Museum , Portsmouth , Lloyd 's Register , London and the Whanganui Regional Museum , Whanganui . An altar , communion rail and two bishop 's chairs survive in St. Mary 's Church , Rotherhithe . A ship model of the Temeraire made by prisoners of war uses a stand made from wood taken from her , and is currently in the <unk> 's Hall in London . Other relics of the Temeraire known to exist or have existed are a tea caddy made for her signal midshipman at Trafalgar , James Eaton , and sold at auction in 2000 , the frame for an oil painting by Sir Edwin Landseer titled Neptune , and a mantelpiece made for Beatson 's office , supported by figures of Atlas supposedly taken from Temeraire 's stern gallery . The mantelpiece can no longer be traced , nor can a plaque once fixed to Temeraire 's deck commemorating Nelson 's signal at Trafalgar , nor a wooden leg made for a Trafalgar veteran from Temeraire 's wood . John Ruskin foreshadowed the fate of the Temeraire 's wood in an essay which claimed that " Perhaps , where the low gate opens to some cottage garden , the tired traveller may ask , idly , why the moss grows so green on its rugged wood , and even the sailor 's child may not answer nor know that the night dew lies deep in the war rents of the wood of the old Temeraire . " 
 = = = Art = = = 
 Temeraire features in a number of paintings and prints , the earliest commemorating her role in the battle of Trafalgar . She can be seen at least partially in paintings of the battle by Clarkson Frederick Stanfield , John Christian <unk> , Nicholas Pocock , Thomas Buttersworth and Thomas Whitcombe . A fictionalised depiction of her launch was produced by Philip Burgoyne . Later representations of the retired Temeraire were also popular . Though no known contemporary image of her in the prison ship role exists , she was painted while a guardship on the Medway in 1833 by Edward William Cooke , and by William Beatson and J. J. Williams while laid up at Rotherhithe in 1838 . More recently she has been the subject of paintings by Geoff Hunt . The most famous painting of Temeraire was made by J. M. W. Turner and titled The Fighting Temeraire tugged to her last Berth to be broken up , 1838 . Turner depicts the Temeraire on her last voyage , towed up the Thames by a small black steam tug as the sun sets ( or dawns ) . In choosing his title Turner created an enduring appellation , as previously she had been known to her crew as the " saucy " Temeraire . Turner presented it for exhibition at the Royal Academy in 1839 with an accompanying excerpt , slightly altered , of Thomas Campbell 's poem Ye Mariners of England . 
 The flag which braved the battle and the breeze , 
 no longer owns her . 
 Turner 's painting achieved widespread critical acclaim , and accolades from the likes of John Ruskin and William Makepeace Thackeray . It was Turner 's particular favourite ; he only lent it once and refused to ever do so again . He also refused to sell it at any price , and on his death bequeathed it to the nation . It hangs today in the National Gallery , and in 2005 it was voted the nation 's favourite painting in a poll organized by BBC Radio 4 's Today programme . 
 = = = Poetry and songs = = = 
 The Temeraire became the subject of a number of poems and songs commemorating her life and fate . An early work by James Duff written between 1813 and 1819 referenced her role as a prison ship , and was set to music in 1857 under the title The Brave Old Temeraire . More generally , an anonymous poem entitled The Wooden Walls of Old England appeared in Fraser 's Magazine shortly after Temeraire 's arrival at Rotherhithe , and lamented the fate of the great sailing warships . Turner 's painting created an enduring interest in the story of the Temeraire and several poems appeared in the decades following her breaking up . Gerald Massey wrote The Fighting Temeraire <unk> to Her Last Berth , Herman Melville produced The Temeraire , and Henry Newbolt wrote The Fighting Temeraire , with its closing lines 
 Now the sunset 's breezes shiver , 
 And she 's fading down the river , 
 But in England 's song forever , 
 She 's the Fighting Temeraire . 
 = Murasaki Shikibu = 
 Murasaki Shikibu ( <unk> <unk> , English : Lady Murasaki ; c . 973 or 978 – c . 1014 or 1031 ) was a Japanese novelist , poet and lady @-@ in @-@ waiting at the Imperial court during the Heian period . She is best known as the author of The Tale of Genji , written in Japanese between about 1000 and 1012 . Murasaki Shikibu is a nickname ; her real name is unknown , but she may have been Fujiwara Takako , who was mentioned in a 1007 court diary as an imperial lady @-@ in @-@ waiting . 
 Heian women were traditionally excluded from learning Chinese , the written language of government , but Murasaki , raised in her erudite father 's household , showed a precocious aptitude for the Chinese classics and managed to acquire fluency . She married in her mid @-@ to late twenties and gave birth to a daughter before her husband died , two years after they were married . It is uncertain when she began to write The Tale of Genji , but it was probably while she was married or shortly after she was widowed . In about 1005 , Murasaki was invited to serve as a lady @-@ in @-@ waiting to Empress Shōshi at the Imperial court , probably because of her reputation as a writer . She continued to write during her service , adding scenes from court life to her work . After five or six years , she left court and retired with Shōshi to the Lake Biwa region . Scholars differ on the year of her death ; although most agree on 1014 , others have suggested she was alive in 1031 . 
 Murasaki wrote The Diary of Lady Murasaki , a volume of poetry , and The Tale of Genji . Within a decade of its completion , Genji was distributed throughout the provinces ; within a century it was recognized as a classic of Japanese literature and had become a subject of scholarly criticism . Early in the 20th century her work was translated ; a six @-@ volume English translation was completed in 1933 . Scholars continue to recognize the importance of her work , which reflects Heian court society at its peak . Since the 13th century her works have been illustrated by Japanese artists and well @-@ known ukiyo @-@ e woodblock masters . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Murasaki Shikibu was born c . 973 in Heian @-@ kyō , Japan , into the northern Fujiwara clan descending from Fujiwara no <unk> , the first 9th @-@ century Fujiwara regent . The Fujiwara clan dominated court politics until the end of the 11th century through strategic marriages of Fujiwara daughters into the imperial family and the use of regencies . In the late 10th century and early 11th century , Fujiwara no Michinaga arranged his four daughters into marriages with emperors , giving him unprecedented power . Murasaki 's great @-@ grandfather , Fujiwara no <unk> , had been in the top tier of the aristocracy , but her branch of the family gradually lost power and by the time of Murasaki 's birth was at the middle to lower ranks of the Heian aristocracy — the level of provincial governors . The lower ranks of the nobility were typically posted away from court to undesirable positions in the provinces , exiled from the centralized power and court in Kyoto . 
 Despite the loss of status , the family had a reputation among the literati through Murasaki 's paternal great @-@ grandfather and grandfather , both of whom were well @-@ known poets . Her great @-@ grandfather , Fujiwara no <unk> , had fifty @-@ six poems included in thirteen of the Twenty @-@ one Imperial Anthologies , the Collections of Thirty @-@ six Poets and the Yamato Monogatari ( Tales of Yamato ) . Her great @-@ grandfather and grandfather both had been friendly with Ki no Tsurayuki , who became notable for popularizing verse written in Japanese . Her father , Fujiwara no <unk> , attended the State Academy ( Daigaku @-@ ryō ) and became a well @-@ respected scholar of Chinese classics and poetry ; his own verse was anthologized . He entered public service around 968 as a minor official and was given a governorship in 996 . He stayed in service until about 1018 . Murasaki 's mother was descended from the same branch of northern Fujiwara as <unk> . The couple had three children , a son and two daughters . 
 The names of women were not recorded in the Heian era . Murasaki 's real name is not known ; as was customary for women of the period , she went by a nickname , Murasaki Shikibu . Women took nicknames associated with a male relative : " Shikibu " refers to Shikibu @-@ shō , the Ministry of <unk> where her father was a functionary ; " Murasaki " may be derived from the color violet associated with wisteria , the meaning of the word <unk> , although it is more likely that " Murasaki " was a court nickname . Michinaga mentions the names of a few ladies @-@ in @-@ waiting in a 1007 diary entry ; one , Fujiwara Takako ( <unk> ) , may be Murasaki 's real name . 
 In Heian @-@ era Japan , husbands and wives kept separate households ; children were raised with their mothers , although the patrilineal system was still followed . Murasaki was unconventional because she lived in her father 's household , most likely on <unk> Street in Kyoto , with her younger brother <unk> . Their mother died , perhaps in childbirth , when the children were quite young . Murasaki had at least three half @-@ siblings raised with their mothers ; she was very close to one sister who died in her twenties . 
 Murasaki was born at a period when Japan was becoming more isolated , after missions to China had ended and a stronger national culture was emerging . In the 9th and 10th centuries , Japanese gradually became a written language through the development of kana , a syllabary based on abbreviations of Chinese characters . In Murasaki 's lifetime men continued to write in Chinese , the language of government , but kana became the written language of noblewomen , setting the foundation for unique forms of Japanese literature . 
 Chinese was taught to Murasaki 's brother as preparation for a career in government , and during her childhood , living in her father 's household , she learned and became proficient in classical Chinese . In her diary she wrote , " When my brother ... was a young boy learning the Chinese classics , I was in the habit of listening to him and I became unusually proficient at understanding those passages that he found too difficult to understand and memorize . Father , a most learned man , was always regretting the fact : ' Just my luck , ' he would say , ' What a pity she was not born a man ! ' " With her brother she studied Chinese literature , and she probably also received instruction in more traditional subjects such as music , calligraphy and Japanese poetry . Murasaki 's education was unorthodox . Louis Perez explains in The History of Japan that " Women ... were thought to be incapable of real intelligence and therefore were not educated in Chinese . " Murasaki was aware that others saw her as " pretentious , awkward , difficult to approach , prickly , too fond of her tales , haughty , prone to <unk> , disdainful , cantankerous and scornful " . Asian literature scholar Thomas Inge believes she had " a forceful personality that seldom won her friends . " 
 = = Marriage = = 
 Aristocratic Heian women lived restricted and secluded lives , allowed to speak to men only when they were close relatives or household members . Murasaki 's autobiographical poetry shows that she socialized with women but had limited contact with men other than her father and brother ; she often exchanged poetry with women but never with men . Unlike most noblewomen of her status , she did not marry on reaching puberty ; instead she stayed in her father 's household until her mid @-@ twenties or perhaps even to her early thirties . 
 In 996 when her father was posted to a four @-@ year governorship in Echizen Province , Murasaki went with him , although it was uncommon for a noblewoman of the period to travel such a distance on a trip that could take as long as five days . She returned to Kyoto , probably in 998 , to marry her father 's friend Fujiwara no Nobutaka ( c . 950 – c . 1001 ) , a much older second cousin . Descended from the same branch of the Fujiwara clan , he was a court functionary and bureaucrat at the Ministry of <unk> , with a reputation for dressing extravagantly and as a talented dancer . In his late forties at the time of their marriage , he had multiple households with an unknown number of wives and offspring . Gregarious and well known at court , he was involved in numerous romantic relationships that may have continued after his marriage to Murasaki . As was customary , she would have remained in her father 's household where her husband would have visited her . Nobutaka had been granted more than one governorship , and by the time of his marriage to Murasaki he was probably quite wealthy . Accounts of their marriage vary : Richard Bowring writes that the marriage was happy , but Japanese literature scholar Haruo Shirane sees indications in her poems that she resented her husband . 
 The couple 's daughter , Kenshi ( <unk> ) , was born in 999 . Two years later Nobutaka died during a cholera epidemic . As a married woman Murasaki would have had servants to run the household and care for her daughter , giving her ample leisure time . She enjoyed reading and had access to romances ( monogatari ) such as The Tale of the Bamboo Cutter and The Tales of Ise . Scholars believe she may have started writing The Tale of Genji before her husband 's death ; it is known she was writing after she was widowed , perhaps in a state of grief . In her diary she describes her feelings after her husband 's death : " I felt depressed and confused . For some years I had existed from day to day in listless fashion ... doing little more than registering the passage of time ... The thought of my continuing loneliness was quite unbearable " . 
 According to legend , Murasaki retreated to Ishiyama @-@ dera at Lake Biwa , where she was inspired to write The Tale of Genji on an August night while looking at the moon . Although scholars dismiss the factual basis of the story of her retreat , Japanese artists often depicted her at Ishiyama Temple staring at the moon for inspiration . She may have been commissioned to write the story and may have known an exiled courtier in a similar position to her hero Prince Genji . Murasaki would have distributed newly written chapters of Genji to friends who in turn would have re @-@ copied them and passed them on . By this practice the story became known and she gained a reputation as an author . 
 In her early to mid @-@ thirties , she became a lady @-@ in @-@ waiting ( <unk> ) at court , most likely because of her reputation as an author . <unk> Mulhern writes in Japanese Women Writers , a <unk> Sourcebook that scholars have wondered why Murasaki made such a move at a comparatively late period in her life . Her diary evidences that she exchanged poetry with Michinaga after her husband 's death , leading to speculation that the two may have been lovers . Bowring sees no evidence that she was brought to court as Michinaga 's concubine , although he did bring her to court without following official channels . Mulhern thinks Michinaga wanted to have Murasaki at court to educate his daughter Shōshi . 
 = = Court life = = 
 Heian culture and court life reached a peak early in the 11th century . The population of Kyoto grew to around 100 @,@ 000 as the nobility became increasingly isolated at the Heian Palace in government posts and court service . Courtiers became overly refined with little to do , insulated from reality , preoccupied with the minutiae of court life , turning to artistic endeavors . Emotions were commonly expressed through the artistic use of textiles , fragrances , calligraphy , colored paper , poetry , and layering of clothing in pleasing color combinations — according to mood and season . Those who showed an inability to follow conventional aesthetics quickly lost popularity , particularly at court . Popular pastimes for Heian noblewomen — who adhered to rigid fashions of floor @-@ length hair , whitened skin and blackened teeth — included having love affairs , writing poetry and keeping diaries . The literature that Heian court women wrote is recognized as some of the earliest and among the best literature written in the Japanese canon . 
 = = = Rival courts and women poets = = = 
 When in 995 Michinaga 's two brothers Fujiwara no <unk> and Fujiwara no <unk> died leaving the regency vacant , Michinaga quickly won a power struggle against his nephew Fujiwara no Korechika ( brother to Teishi , Emperor Ichijō 's wife ) , and , aided by his sister Senshi , he assumed power . Teishi had supported her brother Korechika , who was later discredited and banished from court , causing her to lose power . Four years later Michinaga sent Shōshi , his eldest daughter , to Emperor Ichijō 's harem when she was about 12 . A year after placing Shōshi in the imperial harem , in an effort to undermine Teishi 's influence and increase Shōshi 's standing , Michinaga had her named Empress although Teishi already held the title . As historian Donald <unk> explains , " Michinaga shocked even his admirers by arranging for the unprecedented appointment of Teishi ( or Sadako ) and Shōshi as concurrent empresses of the same emperor , Teishi holding the usual title of " Lustrous Heir @-@ bearer " <unk> and Shōshi that of " Inner Palatine " ( <unk> ) , a <unk> derived equivalent coined for the occasion " . About five years later , Michinaga brought Murasaki to Shōshi 's court , in a position that Bowring describes as a companion @-@ tutor . 
 Heian Imperial court life was immensely fashionable , but also dissolute . Court women lived in seclusion , were known by nicknames and , through strategic marriages , were used to gain political power . Despite their seclusion , some women wielded considerable influence , often achieved through competitive salons , dependent on the quality of the attendants . Ichijō 's mother and Michinaga 's sister , Senshi , had an influential salon , and Michinaga probably wanted Shōshi to surround herself with skilled women such as Murasaki to build a rival salon . 
 Shōshi was 16 to 19 when Murasaki joined her court . According to Arthur Waley , Shōshi was a serious @-@ minded young lady , whose living arrangements were divided between her father 's household and her court at the Imperial Palace . She gathered around her talented women writers such as Izumi Shikibu and <unk> Emon — the author of an early vernacular history , The Tale of Flowering Fortunes . The rivalry that existed among the women is evident in Murasaki 's diary , where she wrote disparagingly of Izumi : " Izumi Shikibu is an amusing letter @-@ writer ; but there is something not very satisfactory about her . She has a gift for dashing off informal compositions in a careless running @-@ hand ; but in poetry she needs either an interesting subject or some classic model to imitate . Indeed it does not seem to me that in herself she is really a poet at all . " 
 Sei Shōnagon , author of the The Pillow Book , had been in service as lady @-@ in @-@ waiting to Teishi when Shōshi came to court ; it is possible that Murasaki was invited to Shōshi 's court as a rival to Shōnagon . Teishi died in 1001 , before Murasaki entered service with Shōshi , so the two writers were not there concurrently , but Murasaki , who wrote about Shōnagon in her diary , certainly knew of her , and to an extent was influenced by her . Shōnagon 's The Pillow Book may have been commissioned as a type of propaganda to highlight Teishi 's court , known for its educated ladies @-@ in @-@ waiting . Japanese literature scholar Joshua Mostow believes Michinaga provided Murasaki to Shōshi as an equally or better educated woman , so as to showcase Shōshi 's court in a similar manner . 
 The two writers had different temperaments : Shōnagon was witty , clever , and outspoken ; Murasaki was withdrawn and sensitive . Entries in Murasaki 's diary show that the two may not have been on good terms . Murasaki wrote , " Sei Shōnagon ... was dreadfully conceited . She thought herself so clever , littered her writing with Chinese characters , [ which ] left a great deal to be desired . " Keene thinks that Murasaki 's impression of Shōnagon could have been influenced by Shōshi and the women at her court because Shōnagon served Shōshi 's rival empress . Furthermore , he believes Murasaki was brought to court to write Genji in response to Shōnagon 's popular Pillow Book . Murasaki contrasted herself to Shōnagon in a variety of ways . She denigrated the pillow book genre and , unlike Shōnagon who flaunted her knowledge of Chinese , Murasaki pretended to not know the language . 
 = = = " Our Lady of the Chronicles " = = = 
 Although the popularity of the Chinese language diminished in the late Heian era , Chinese ballads continued to be popular , including those written by Bai Juyi . Murasaki taught Chinese to Shōshi who was interested in Chinese art and Juyi 's ballads . Upon becoming Empress , Shōshi installed screens decorated with Chinese script , causing outrage because written Chinese was considered the language of men , far removed from the women 's quarters . The study of Chinese was thought to be unladylike and went against the notion that only men should have access to the literature . Women were supposed to read and write only in Japanese , which separated them through language from government and the power structure . Murasaki , with her unconventional classical Chinese education , was one of the few women available to teach Shōshi classical Chinese . Bowring writes it was " almost subversive " that Murasaki knew Chinese and taught the language to Shōshi . Murasaki , who was reticent about her Chinese education , held the lessons between the two women in secret , writing in her diary , " Since last summer ... very secretly , in odd moments when there happened to be no one about , I have been reading with Her Majesty ... There has of course been no question of formal lessons ... I have thought it best to say nothing about the matter to anybody . " 
 Murasaki most likely earned her second nickname , " Our Lady of the Chronicles " ( Nihongi no tsubone ) , for teaching Shōshi Chinese literature . A lady @-@ in @-@ waiting who disliked Murasaki accused her of flaunting her knowledge of Chinese and began calling her " Our Lady of the Chronicles " — an allusion to the Chronicles of Japan — after an incident in which chapters from Genji were read aloud to the Emperor and his courtiers , one of whom remarked that the author showed a high level of education . Murasaki wrote in her diary , " How utterly ridiculous ! Would I , who hesitate to reveal my learning to my women at home , ever think of doing so at court ? " Although meant to be insulting , Mulhern believes Murasaki was probably flattered by the nickname . 
 The attitude toward the Chinese language was contradictory . In Teishi 's court , Chinese had been flaunted and considered a symbol of imperial rule and superiority . Yet , in Shōshi 's salon there was a great deal of hostility towards the language — perhaps owing to political expedience during a period when Chinese began to be rejected in favor of Japanese — even though Shōshi herself was a student of the language . The hostility may have affected Murasaki and her opinion of the court , and forced her to hide her knowledge of Chinese . Unlike Shōnagon , who was both ostentatious and flirtatious , as well as outspoken about her knowledge of Chinese , Murasaki seems to have been humble , an attitude which possibly impressed Michinaga . Although Murasaki used Chinese and incorporated it in her writing , she publicly rejected the language , a commendable attitude during a period of burgeoning Japanese culture . 
 Murasaki seems to have been unhappy with court life and was withdrawn and somber . No surviving records show that she entered poetry competitions ; she appears to have exchanged few poems or letters with other women during her service . In general , unlike Sei Shōnagon , Murasaki gives the impression in her diary that she disliked court life , the other ladies @-@ in @-@ waiting , and the drunken revelry . She did , however , become close friends with a lady @-@ in @-@ waiting named Lady Saishō , and she wrote of the winters that she enjoyed , " I love to see the snow here " . 
 According to Waley , Murasaki may not have been unhappy with court life in general but bored in Shōshi 's court . He speculates she would have preferred to serve with the Lady Senshi , whose household seems to have been less strict and more light @-@ hearted . In her diary , Murasaki wrote about Shōshi 's court , " [ she ] has gathered round her a number of very worthy young ladies ... Her Majesty is beginning to acquire more experience of life , and no longer judges others by the same rigid standards as before ; but meanwhile her Court has gained a reputation for extreme dullness " . 
 Murasaki disliked the men at court whom she thought to be drunken and stupid . However , some scholars , such as Waley , are certain she was involved romantically with Michinaga . At the least , Michinaga pursued her and pressured her strongly , and her flirtation with him is recorded in her diary as late as 1010 . Yet , she wrote to him in a poem , " You have neither read my book , nor won my love . " In her diary she records having to avoid advances from Michinaga — one night he snuck into her room , stealing a newly written chapter of Genji . However , Michinaga 's patronage was essential if she was to continue writing . Murasaki described his daughter 's court activities : the lavish ceremonies , the complicated courtships , the " complexities of the marriage system " , and in elaborate detail , the birth of Shōshi 's two sons . 
 It is likely that Murasaki enjoyed writing in solitude . She believed she did not fit well with the general atmosphere of the court , writing of herself : " I am wrapped up in the study of ancient stories ... living all the time in a poetical world of my own scarcely realizing the existence of other people .... But when they get to know me , they find to their extreme surprise that I am kind and gentle " . Inge says that she was too outspoken to make friends at court , and Mulhern thinks Murasaki 's court life was comparatively quiet compared to other court poets . Mulhern speculates that her remarks about Izumi were not so much directed at Izumi 's poetry but at her behavior , lack of morality and her court liaisons , of which Murasaki disapproved . 
 Rank was important in Heian court society and Murasaki would not have felt herself to have much , if anything , in common with the higher ranked and more powerful <unk> . In her diary , she wrote of her life at court : " I realized that my branch of the family was a very humble one ; but the thought seldom troubled me , and I was in those days far indeed from the painful consciousness of inferiority which makes life at Court a continual torment to me . " A court position would have increased her social standing , but more importantly she gained a greater experience to write about . Court life , as she experienced it , is well reflected in the chapters of Genji written after she joined Shōshi . Her nickname , Murasaki , was most probably given at a court dinner in an incident she recorded in her diary : in c . 1008 the well @-@ known court poet Fujiwara no Kintō inquired after the " Young Murasaki " — an allusion to the character named Murasaki in Genji — which would have been considered a compliment from a male court poet to a female author . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 When Emperor Ichijō died in 1011 , Shōshi retired from the Imperial Palace to live in a Fujiwara mansion in Biwa , most likely accompanied by Murasaki , who is recorded as being there with Shōshi in 1013 . George Aston explains that when Murasaki retired from court she was again associated with Ishiyama @-@ dera : " To this beautiful spot , it is said , Murasaki no Shikibu retired from court life to devote the remainder of her days to literature and religion . There are sceptics , however , <unk> being one , who refuse to believe this story , pointing out ... that it is irreconcilable with known facts . On the other hand , the very chamber in the temple where the Genji was written is shown — with the ink @-@ slab which the author used , and a Buddhist Sutra in her handwriting , which , if they do not satisfy the critic , still are sufficient to carry conviction to the minds of ordinary visitors to the temple . " 
 Murasaki may have died in 1014 . Her father made a hasty return to Kyoto from his post at <unk> Province that year , possibly because of her death . Writing in A Bridge of Dreams : A Poetics of " The Tale of Genji " , Shirane mentions that 1014 is generally accepted as the date of Murasaki Shikibu 's death and 973 as the date of her birth , making her 41 when she died . Bowring considers 1014 to be speculative , and believes she may have lived with Shōshi until as late as 1025 . Waley agrees given that Murasaki may have attended ceremonies with Shōshi held for her son , Emperor Go @-@ Ichijō around 1025 . 
 Murasaki 's brother <unk> died in around 1011 , which , combined with the death of his daughter , may have prompted her father to resign his post and take vows at <unk> temple where he died in 1029 . Murasaki 's daughter entered court service in 1025 as a wet nurse to the future Emperor Go @-@ Reizei ( 1025 – 68 ) . She went on to become a well @-@ known poet as <unk> no <unk> . 
 = = Works = = 
 Three works are attributed to Murasaki : The Tale of Genji , The Diary of Lady Murasaki and Poetic Memoirs , a collection of 128 poems . Her work is considered important because her writing reflects the creation and development of Japanese writing during a period when Japanese shifted from an unwritten vernacular to a written language . Until the 9th century , Japanese language texts were written in Chinese characters using the man 'yōgana writing system . A revolutionary achievement was the development of kana , a true Japanese script , in the mid @-@ to late 9th century . Japanese authors began to write prose in their own language , which led to genres such as tales ( monogatari ) and poetic journals ( Nikki <unk> ) . Historian Edwin Reischauer writes that genres such as the monogatari were distinctly Japanese and that Genji , written in kana , " was the outstanding work of the period " . 
 = = = Diary and poetry = = = 
 Murasaki began her diary after she entered service at Shōshi 's court . Much of what we know about her and her experiences at court comes from the diary , which covers the period from about 1008 to 1010 . The long descriptive passages , some of which may have originated as letters , cover her relationships with the other ladies @-@ in @-@ waiting , Michinaga 's temperament , the birth of Shōshi 's sons — at Michinaga 's mansion rather than at the Imperial Palace — and the process of writing Genji , including descriptions of passing newly written chapters to calligraphers for transcriptions . Typical of contemporary court diaries written to honor patrons , Murasaki devotes half to the birth of Shōshi 's son Emperor Go @-@ Ichijō , an event of enormous importance to Michinaga : he had planned for it with his daughter 's marriage which made him grandfather and de facto regent to an emperor . 
 Poetic Memoirs is a collection of 128 poems Mulhern describes as " arranged in a biographical sequence " . The original set has been lost . According to custom , the verses would have been passed from person to person and often copied . Some appear written for a lover — possibly her husband before he died — but she may have merely followed tradition and written simple love poems . They contain biographical details : she mentions a sister who died , the visit to Echizen province with her father and that she wrote poetry for Shōshi . Murasaki 's poems were published in 1206 by Fujiwara no Teika , in what Mulhern believes to be the collection that is closest to the original form ; at around the same time Teika included a selection of Murasaki 's works in an imperial anthology , New Collections of Ancient and Modern Times . 
 = = = The Tale of Genji = = = 
 Murasaki is best known for her The Tale of Genji , a three @-@ part novel spanning 1100 pages and 54 chapters , which is thought to have taken a decade to complete . The earliest chapters were possibly written for a private patron either during her marriage or shortly after her husband 's death . She continued writing while at court and probably finished while still in service to Shōshi . She would have needed patronage to produce a work of such length . Michinaga provided her with costly paper and ink , and with calligraphers . The first handwritten volumes were probably assembled and bound by ladies @-@ in @-@ waiting . 
 In his The Pleasures of Japanese Literature , Keene claims Murasaki wrote the " supreme work of Japanese fiction " by drawing on traditions of waka court diaries , and earlier monogatari — written in a mixture of Chinese script and Japanese script — such as The Tale of the Bamboo Cutter or The Tales of Ise . She drew on and blended styles from Chinese histories , narrative poetry and contemporary Japanese prose . Adolphson writes that the juxtaposition of formal Chinese style with mundane subjects resulted in a sense of parody or satire , giving her a distinctive voice . Genji follows the traditional format of monogatari — telling a tale — particularly evident in its use of a narrator , but Keene claims Murasaki developed the genre far beyond its bounds , and by doing so created a form that is utterly modern . The story of the " shining prince " Genji is set in the late 9th to early 10th centuries , and Murasaki eliminated from it the elements of fairy tales and fantasy frequently found in earlier monogatari . 
 The themes in Genji are common to the period , and are defined by <unk> as encapsulating " the tyranny of time and the inescapable sorrow of romantic love " . The main theme is that of the fragility of life , " the sorrow of human existence " , mono no aware — she used the term over a thousand times in Genji . Keene speculates that in her tale of the " shining prince " , Murasaki may have created for herself an idealistic escape from court life , which she found less than savory . In Prince Genji she formed a gifted , comely , refined , yet human and sympathetic protagonist . Keene writes that Genji gives a view into the Heian period ; for example love affairs flourished , although women typically remained unseen behind screens , curtains or fusuma . 
 Helen McCullough describes Murasaki 's writing as of universal appeal and believes The Tale of Genji " transcends both its genre and age . Its basic subject matter and setting — love at the Heian court — are those of the romance , and its cultural assumptions are those of the mid @-@ Heian period , but Murasaki Shikibu 's unique genius has made the work for many a powerful statement of human relationships , the impossibility of permanent happiness in love ... and the vital importance , in a world of sorrows , of sensitivity to the feelings of others . " Prince Genji recognizes in each of his lovers the inner beauty of the woman and the fragility of life , which according to Keene , makes him heroic . The story was popular : Emperor Ichijō had it read to him , even though it was written in Japanese . By 1021 all the chapters were known to be complete and the work was sought after in the provinces where it was scarce . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Murasaki 's reputation and influence have not diminished since her lifetime when she , with other Heian women writers , was instrumental in developing Japanese into a written language . Her writing was required reading for court poets as early as the 12th century as her work began to be studied by scholars who generated authoritative versions and criticism . Within a century of her death she was highly regarded as a classical writer . In the 17th century , Murasaki 's work became emblematic of Confucian philosophy and women were encouraged to read her books . In 1673 Kumazawa <unk> argued that her writing was valuable for its sensitivity and depiction of emotions . He wrote in his <unk> Commentary on Genji that when " human feelings are not understood the harmony of the Five Human Relationships is lost . " 
 The Tale of Genji was copied and illustrated in various forms as early as a century after Murasaki 's death . The Genji Monogatari Emaki , is a late Heian era 12th @-@ century <unk> , consisting of four scrolls , 19 paintings , and 20 sheets of calligraphy . The illustrations , definitively dated to between 1110 and 1120 , have been tentatively attributed to Fujiwara no <unk> and the calligraphy to various well @-@ known contemporary calligraphers . The scroll is housed at the Gotoh Museum and the Tokugawa Art Museum . 
 Female virtue was tied to literary knowledge in the 17th century , leading to a demand for Murasaki or Genji inspired artifacts , known as genji @-@ e . Dowry sets decorated with scenes from Genji or illustrations of Murasaki became particularly popular for noblewomen : in the 17th century genji @-@ e symbolically imbued a bride with an increased level of cultural status ; by the 18th century they had come to symbolize marital success . In 1628 , Tokugawa Iemitsu 's daughter had a set of lacquer boxes made for her wedding ; Prince <unk> received a pair of silk genji @-@ e screens , painted by Kanō Tan <unk> as a wedding gift in 1649 . 
 Murasaki became a popular subject of paintings and illustrations highlighting her as a virtuous woman and poet . She is often shown at her desk in <unk> Temple , staring at the moon for inspiration . Tosa Mitsuoki made her the subject of hanging scrolls in the 17th century . The Tale of Genji became a favorite subject of Japanese ukiyo @-@ e artists for centuries with artists such as Hiroshige , Kiyonaga , and Utamaro illustrating various editions of the novel . While early Genji art was considered symbolic of court culture , by the middle of the Edo period the mass @-@ produced ukiyo @-@ e prints made the illustrations accessible for the samurai classes and commoners . 
 In Envisioning the " Tale of Genji " Shirane observes that " The Tale of Genji has become many things to many different audiences through many different media over a thousand years ... unmatched by any other Japanese text or artifact . " The work and its author were popularized through its illustrations in various media : emaki ( illustrated handscrolls ) ; byōbu @-@ e ( screen paintings ) , ukiyo @-@ e ( woodblock prints ) ; films , comics , and in the modern period , manga . In her fictionalized account of Murasaki 's life , The Tale of Murasaki : A Novel , Liza Dalby has Murasaki involved in a romance during her travels with her father to Echizen Province . 
 The Tale of the Genji is recognized as an enduring classic . McCullough writes that Murasaki " is both the quintessential representative of a unique society and a writer who speaks to universal human concerns with a timeless voice . Japan has not seen another such genius . " Keene writes that The Tale of Genji continues to captivate , because , in the story , her characters and their concerns are universal . In the 1920s , when Waley 's translation was published , reviewers compared Genji to Austen , Proust , and Shakespeare . Mulhern says of Murasaki that she is similar to Shakespeare , who represented his Elizabethan England , in that she captured the essence of the Heian court and as a novelist " succeeded perhaps even beyond her own expectations . " Like Shakespeare , her work has been the subject of reams of criticism and many books . 
 Kyoto held a year @-@ long celebration commemorating the 1000th anniversary of Genji in 2008 , with poetry competitions , visits to the Tale of Genji Museum in Uji and Ishiyama @-@ dera ( where a life size rendition of Murasaki at her desk was displayed ) , and women dressing in traditional 12 @-@ layered Heian court <unk> and ankle @-@ length hair wigs . The author and her work inspired museum exhibits and Genji manga spin @-@ offs . The design on the reverse of the first 2000 yen note commemorated her and The Tale of Genji . A plant bearing purple berries has been named after her . 
 A Genji Album , only in the 1970s dated to 1510 , is housed at Harvard University . The album is considered the earliest of its kind and consists of 54 paintings by Tosa <unk> and 54 sheets of calligraphy on <unk> paper in five colors , written by master calligraphers . The leaves are housed in a case dated to the Edo period , with a silk frontispiece painted by Tosa Mitsuoki , dated to around 1690 . The album contains Mitsuoki 's authentication slips for his ancestor 's 16th @-@ century paintings . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Great Fire of London = 
 The Great Fire of London was a major conflagration that swept through the central parts of the English city of London from Sunday , 2 September to Wednesday , 5 September 1666 . The fire gutted the medieval City of London inside the old Roman city wall . It threatened but did not reach the aristocratic district of Westminster , Charles II 's Palace of Whitehall , and most of the suburban slums . It consumed 13 @,@ 200 houses , 87 parish churches , St Paul 's Cathedral , and most of the buildings of the City authorities . It is estimated to have destroyed the homes of 70 @,@ 000 of the City 's 80 @,@ 000 inhabitants . The death toll is unknown but traditionally thought to have been small , as only six verified deaths were recorded . This reasoning has recently been challenged on the grounds that the deaths of poor and middle @-@ class people were not recorded , while the heat of the fire may have cremated many victims , leaving no recognisable remains . A melted piece of pottery on display at the Museum of London found by archaeologists in Pudding Lane , where the fire started , shows that the temperature reached 1700 ° C. 
 The Great Fire started at the bakery of Thomas <unk> ( or <unk> ) on Pudding Lane shortly after midnight on Sunday , 2 September and spread rapidly west across the City of London . The major firefighting technique of the time was to create firebreaks by means of demolition ; this , however , was critically delayed owing to the indecisiveness of Lord Mayor of London Sir Thomas Bloodworth . By the time that large @-@ scale demolitions were ordered on Sunday night , the wind had already fanned the bakery fire into a firestorm which defeated such measures . The fire pushed north on Monday into the heart of the City . Order in the streets broke down as rumours arose of suspicious foreigners setting fires . The fears of the homeless focused on the French and Dutch , England 's enemies in the ongoing Second Anglo @-@ Dutch War ; these substantial immigrant groups became victims of lynchings and street violence . On Tuesday , the fire spread over most of the City , destroying St Paul 's Cathedral and leaping the River Fleet to threaten Charles II 's court at Whitehall , while coordinated firefighting efforts were simultaneously mobilising . The battle to quench the fire is considered to have been won by two factors : the strong east winds died down , and the Tower of London garrison used gunpowder to create effective firebreaks to halt further spread eastward . 
 The social and economic problems created by the disaster were overwhelming . Evacuation from London and resettlement elsewhere were strongly encouraged by Charles II , who feared a London rebellion amongst the dispossessed refugees . Despite numerous radical proposals , London was reconstructed on essentially the same street plan used before the fire . 
 = = London in the 1660s = = 
 By the 1660s , London was by far the largest city in Britain , estimated at half a million inhabitants . John Evelyn compared London to the Baroque magnificence of Paris , calling it a " wooden , northern , and <unk> congestion of Houses , " and expressing alarm about the fire hazard posed by the wood and about the congestion . By " <unk> " , Evelyn meant unplanned and makeshift , the result of organic growth and unregulated urban sprawl . London had been a Roman settlement for four centuries and had become progressively more crowded inside its defensive city wall . It had also pushed outwards beyond the wall into squalid extramural slums such as Shoreditch , Holborn , and Southwark , and had reached far enough to include the independent City of Westminster . 
 By the late 17th century , the City proper — the area bounded by the City wall and the River Thames — was only a part of London , covering some 700 acres ( 2 @.@ 8 km2 ; 1 @.@ 1 sq mi ) , and home to about 80 @,@ 000 people , or one sixth of London 's inhabitants . The City was surrounded by a ring of inner suburbs where most Londoners lived . The City was then , as now , the commercial heart of the capital , and was the largest market and busiest port in England , dominated by the trading and manufacturing classes . The aristocracy shunned the City and lived either in the countryside beyond the slum suburbs , or in the exclusive Westminster district ( the modern West End ) , the site of Charles II 's court at Whitehall . Wealthy people preferred to live at a convenient distance from the traffic @-@ clogged , polluted , unhealthy City , especially after it was hit by a devastating outbreak of bubonic plague in the Plague Year of 1665 . 
 The relationship was often tense between the City and the Crown . The City of London had been a stronghold of republicanism during the Civil War ( 1642 – 1651 ) , and the wealthy and economically dynamic capital still had the potential to be a threat to Charles II , as had been demonstrated by several republican uprisings in London in the early 1660s . The City magistrates were of the generation that had fought in the Civil War , and could remember how Charles I 's grab for absolute power had led to that national trauma . They were determined to thwart any similar tendencies in his son , and when the Great Fire threatened the City , they refused the offers that Charles made of soldiers and other resources . Even in such an emergency , the idea of having the unpopular Royal troops ordered into the City was political dynamite . By the time that Charles took over command from the ineffectual Lord Mayor , the fire was already out of control . 
 = = = Fire hazards in the City = = = 
 The City was essentially medieval in its street plan , an overcrowded warren of narrow , winding , cobbled alleys . It had experienced several major fires before 1666 , the most recent in 1632 . Building with wood and roofing with thatch had been prohibited for centuries , but these cheap materials continued to be used . The only major stone @-@ built area was the wealthy centre of the City , where the mansions of the merchants and brokers stood on spacious lots , surrounded by an inner ring of overcrowded poorer parishes whose every inch of building space was used to accommodate the rapidly growing population . These parishes contained workplaces , many of which were fire hazards — foundries , smithies , glaziers — which were theoretically illegal in the City but tolerated in practice . 
 The human habitations were crowded to bursting point , intermingled with these sources of heat , sparks , and pollution , and their construction increased the fire risk . The typical six- or seven @-@ storey timbered London tenement houses had " jetties " ( projecting upper floors ) . They had a narrow footprint at ground level , but maximised their use of land by " encroaching " on the street , as a contemporary observer put it , with the gradually increasing size of their upper storeys . The fire hazard was well perceived when the top jetties all but met across the narrow alleys ; " as it does facilitate a conflagration , so does it also hinder the remedy " , wrote one observer — but " the covetousness of the citizens and <unk> [ corruption ] of Magistrates " worked in favour of jetties . In 1661 , Charles II issued a proclamation forbidding overhanging windows and jetties , but this was largely ignored by the local government . Charles 's next , sharper message in 1665 warned of the risk of fire from the narrowness of the streets and authorised both imprisonment of recalcitrant builders and demolition of dangerous buildings . It , too , had little impact . 
 The river front was important in the development of the Great Fire . The Thames offered water for firefighting and the chance of escape by boat , but the poorer districts along the riverfront had stores and cellars of combustibles which increased the fire risk . All along the wharves , the rickety wooden tenements and tar paper shacks of the poor were shoehorned amongst " old paper buildings and the most combustible matter of tarr , pitch , hemp , <unk> , and flax which was all <unk> up thereabouts . " London was also full of black powder , especially along the river front . Much of it was left in the homes of private citizens from the days of the English Civil War , as the former members of Oliver Cromwell 's New Model Army still retained their muskets and the powder with which to load them . Five to six hundred tons of powder was stored in the Tower of London . The ship chandlers along the wharves also held large stocks , stored in wooden barrels . 
 = = = 17th century firefighting = = = 
 Fires were common in the crowded wood @-@ built city with its open fireplaces , candles , ovens , and stores of combustibles . There was no police or fire brigade to call , but London 's local militia , known as the Trained Bands , was available for general emergencies , at least in principle , and watching for fire was one of the jobs of the watch , a thousand watchmen or " <unk> " who patrolled the streets at night . Self @-@ reliant community procedures were in place for dealing with fires , and they were usually effective . Public @-@ spirited citizens would be alerted to a dangerous house fire by muffled peals on the church bells , and would congregate hastily to fight the fire . 
 The methods available for this relied on demolition and water . By law , the tower of every parish church had to hold equipment for these efforts : long ladders , leather buckets , axes , and " firehooks " for pulling down buildings ( see illustration right , see also pike pole ) . Sometimes taller buildings were levelled to the ground quickly and effectively by means of controlled gunpowder explosions . This drastic method of creating firebreaks was increasingly used towards the end of the Great Fire , and modern historians believe that it was what finally won the struggle . 
 = = Failures in fighting the fire = = 
 London Bridge was the only physical connection between the City and the south side of the river Thames and was itself covered with houses . It had been noted as a deathtrap in the fire of 1632 and , by dawn on Sunday , these houses were burning . Samuel Pepys observed the conflagration from the Tower of London and recorded great concern for friends living on the bridge . There were fears that the flames would cross London Bridge to threaten the borough of Southwark on the south bank , but this danger was averted by an open space between buildings on the bridge which acted as a firebreak . The 18 @-@ foot ( 5 @.@ 5 m ) high Roman wall enclosing the City put the fleeing homeless at risk of being shut into the inferno . Once the river front was on fire and the escape route cut off by boat , the only exits were the eight gates in the wall . During the first couple of days , few people had any notion of fleeing the burning City altogether . They would remove what they could carry of their belongings to the nearest " safe house " , in many cases the parish church or the precincts of St Paul 's Cathedral , only to have to move again hours later . Some moved their belongings and themselves " four and five times " in a single day . The perception of a need to get beyond the walls only took root late on the Monday , and then there were near @-@ panic scenes at the narrow gates as distraught refugees tried to get out with their bundles , carts , horses , and wagons . 
 The crucial factor which frustrated firefighting efforts was the narrowness of the streets . Even under normal circumstances , the mix of carts , wagons , and pedestrians in the undersized alleys was subject to frequent traffic jams and gridlock . During the fire , the passages were additionally blocked by refugees camping in them amongst their rescued belongings , or escaping outwards , away from the centre of destruction , as demolition teams and fire engine crews struggled in vain to move in towards it . 
 <unk> the houses downwind of a dangerous fire was often an effective way of containing the destruction by means of firehooks or explosives . This time , however , demolition was fatally delayed for hours by the Lord Mayor 's lack of leadership and failure to give the necessary orders . By the time that orders came directly from the King to " spare no houses " , the fire had devoured many more houses , and the demolition workers could no longer get through the crowded streets . 
 The use of water to extinguish the fire was also frustrated . In principle , water was available from a system of elm pipes which supplied 30 @,@ 000 houses via a high water tower at Cornhill , filled from the river at high tide , and also via a reservoir of Hertfordshire spring water in Islington . It was often possible to open a pipe near a burning building and connect it to a hose to play on a fire or fill buckets . Further , Pudding Lane was close to the river . Theoretically , all the lanes from the river up to the bakery and adjoining buildings should have been manned with double rows of firefighters passing full buckets up to the fire and empty buckets back down to the river . This did not happen , or at least was no longer happening by the time that Pepys viewed the fire from the river at mid @-@ morning on the Sunday . Pepys comments in his diary that nobody was trying to put it out , but instead they fled from it in fear , hurrying " to remove their goods , and leave all to the fire . " The flames crept towards the river front with little interference from the overwhelmed community and soon torched the flammable warehouses along the wharves . The resulting conflagration cut off the firefighters from the immediate water supply from the river and set alight the water wheels under London Bridge which pumped water to the Cornhill water tower ; the direct access to the river and the supply of piped water failed together . 
 London possessed advanced fire @-@ fighting technology in the form of fire engines , which had been used in earlier large @-@ scale fires . However , unlike the useful firehooks , these large pumps had rarely proved flexible or functional enough to make much difference . Only some of them had wheels ; others were mounted on <unk> sleds . They had to be brought a long way , tended to arrive too late , and had limited reach , with spouts but no delivery hoses . On this occasion , an unknown number of fire engines were either wheeled or dragged through the streets , some from across the City . The piped water had already failed which they were designed to use , but parts of the river bank could still be reached . Gangs of men tried desperately to manoeuvre the engines right up to the river to fill their reservoirs , and several of the engines toppled into the Thames . The heat from the flames by then was too great for the remaining engines to get within a useful distance ; they could not even get into Pudding Lane . 
 = = Development of the fire = = 
 The personal experiences of many Londoners during the fire are glimpsed in letters and memoirs . The two best @-@ known diarists of the Restoration are Samuel Pepys ( 1633 – 1703 ) and John Evelyn ( 1620 – 1706 ) , and both recorded the events and their own reactions day by day , and made great efforts to keep themselves informed of what was happening all over the City and beyond . For example , they both travelled out to the Moorfields park area north of the City on the Wednesday — the fourth day — to view the mighty encampment of distressed refugees there , which shocked them . Their diaries are the most important sources for all modern retellings of the disaster . Books on the fire by Tinniswood ( 2003 ) and Hanson ( 2001 ) also rely on the brief memoirs of William Taswell ( 1651 – 82 ) , who was a fourteen year @-@ old schoolboy at Westminster School in 1666 . 
 = = = Sunday Morning = = = 
 After two rainy summers in 1664 and 1665 , London had lain under an exceptional drought since November 1665 , and the wooden buildings were tinder @-@ dry after the long hot summer of 1666 . A fire broke out at Thomas <unk> 's bakery in Pudding Lane a little after midnight on Sunday 2 September . The family was trapped upstairs but managed to climb from an upstairs window to the house next door , except for a maidservant who was too frightened to try , who became the first victim . The neighbours tried to help douse the fire ; after an hour , the parish constables arrived and judged that the adjoining houses had better be demolished to prevent further spread . The householders protested , and Lord Mayor Sir Thomas Bloodworth was summoned , who alone had the authority to override their wishes . 
 When Bloodworth arrived , the flames were consuming the adjoining houses and creeping towards the paper warehouses and flammable stores on the river front . The more experienced firemen were clamouring for demolition , but Bloodworth refused on the grounds that most premises were rented and the owners could not be found . Bloodworth is generally thought to have been appointed to the office of Lord Mayor as a yes man , rather than by possessing requisite capabilities for the job . He panicked when faced with a sudden emergency and , when pressed , made the oft @-@ quoted remark , " <unk> ! A woman could piss it out " , and left . After the City had been destroyed , Samuel Pepys looked back on the events and wrote in his diary on 7 September 1666 : " People do all the world over cry out of the simplicity [ the stupidity ] of my Lord Mayor in general ; and more particularly in this business of the fire , laying it all upon him . " 
 Pepys was a senior official in the Navy Office by then , and he ascended the Tower of London on Sunday morning to view the fire from a turret . He recorded in his diary that the eastern gale had turned it into a conflagration . It had burned down several churches and , he estimated , 300 houses and reached the river front . The houses on London Bridge were burning . 
 He took a boat to inspect the destruction around Pudding Lane at close range and describes a " lamentable " fire , " everybody endeavouring to remove their goods , and flinging into the river or bringing them into lighters that lay off ; poor people staying in their houses as long as till the very fire touched them , and then running into boats , or clambering from one pair of stairs by the water @-@ side to another . " Pepys continued westward on the river to the court at Whitehall , " where people come about me , and did give them an account dismayed them all , and word was carried in to the King . So I was called for , and did tell the King and Duke of Yorke what I saw , and that unless His Majesty did command houses to be pulled down nothing could stop the fire . They seemed much troubled , and the King commanded me to go to my Lord Mayor from him , and command him to spare no houses , but to pull down before the fire every way . " Charles ' brother James , Duke of York offered the use of the Royal Life Guards to help fight the fire . 
 Young schoolboy William Taswell had bolted from the early morning service in Westminster Abbey . He saw some refugees arrive in hired lighter boats near Westminster Stairs , a mile west of Pudding Lane , unclothed and covered only with blankets . The services of the <unk> had suddenly become extremely expensive , and only the luckiest refugees secured a place in a boat . 
 = = = Sunday Afternoon = = = 
 The fire spread quickly in the high wind and , by mid @-@ morning on Sunday , people abandoned attempts at extinguishing it and fled . The moving human mass and their bundles and carts made the lanes impassable for firemen and carriages . Pepys took a coach back into the city from Whitehall , but only reached St Paul 's Cathedral before he had to get out and walk . Pedestrians with handcarts and goods were still on the move away from the fire , heavily weighed down . The parish churches not directly threatened were filling up with furniture and valuables , which soon had to be moved further afield . 
 Pepys found Bloodworth trying to co @-@ ordinate the fire @-@ fighting efforts and near to collapse , " like a fainting woman " , crying out plaintively in response to the King 's message that he was pulling down houses . " But the fire overtakes us faster then [ sic ] we can do it . " Holding on to his civic dignity , he refused James 's offer of soldiers and then went home to bed . King Charles II sailed down from Whitehall in the Royal barge to inspect the scene . He found that houses were still not being pulled down , in spite of Bloodworth 's assurances to Pepys , and daringly overrode the authority of Bloodworth to order wholesale demolitions west of the fire zone . The delay rendered these measures largely futile , as the fire was already out of control . 
 By Sunday afternoon , 18 hours after the alarm was raised in Pudding Lane , the fire had become a raging firestorm that created its own weather . A tremendous <unk> of hot air above the flames was driven by the chimney effect wherever constrictions narrowed the air current , such as the constricted space between jettied buildings , and this left a vacuum at ground level . The resulting strong inward winds did not tend to put the fire out , as might be thought ; instead , they supplied fresh oxygen to the flames , and the turbulence created by the <unk> made the wind veer erratically both north and south of the main easterly direction of the gale which was still blowing . 
 Pepys went again on the river in the early evening with his wife and some friends , " and to the fire up and down , it still <unk> " . They ordered the boatman to go " so near the fire as we could for smoke ; and all over the Thames , with one 's face in the wind , you were almost burned with a shower of <unk> " . When the " <unk> " became unbearable , the party went on to an alehouse on the South Bank and stayed there till darkness came and they could see the fire on London Bridge and across the river , " as only one entire arch of fire from this to the other side of the bridge , and in a bow up the hill for an arch of above a mile long : it made me weep to see it " . Pepys described this arch of fire as " a bow with God 's arrow in it with a shining point " . 
 = = = Monday = = = 
 The fire was principally expanding north and west by dawn on Monday , 3 September , the turbulence of the fire storm pushing the flames both farther south and farther north than the day before . The spread to the south was mostly halted by the river , but it had torched the houses on London Bridge and was threatening to cross the bridge and endanger the borough of Southwark on the south bank of the river . Southwark was preserved by a pre @-@ existent firebreak on the bridge , a long gap between the buildings which had saved the south side of the Thames in the fire of 1632 and now did so again . Flying embers started a fire in Southwark but it was quickly stopped . 
 The fire 's spread to the north reached the financial heart of the City . The houses of the bankers in Lombard Street began to burn on Monday afternoon , prompting a rush to get their stacks of gold coins to safety before they melted away , so crucial to the wealth of the city and the nation . Several observers emphasise the despair and helplessness which seemed to seize Londoners on this second day , and the lack of efforts to save the wealthy , fashionable districts which were now menaced by the flames , such as the Royal Exchange — combined bourse and shopping centre – and the opulent consumer goods shops in Cheapside . The Royal Exchange caught fire in the late afternoon , and was a smoking shell within a few hours . John Evelyn , courtier and diarist , wrote : 
 Evelyn lived in Deptford , four miles ( 6 km ) outside the City , and so he did not see the early stages of the disaster . He went by coach to Southwark on Monday , joining many other upper @-@ class people , to see the view which Pepys had seen the day before of the burning City across the river . The conflagration was much larger now : " the whole City in dreadful flames near the water @-@ side ; all the houses from the Bridge , all Thames @-@ street , and upwards towards Cheapside , down to the Three Cranes , were now consumed " . In the evening , Evelyn reported that the river was covered with barges and boats making their escape piled with goods . He observed a great exodus of carts and pedestrians through the bottleneck City gates , making for the open fields to the north and east , " which for many miles were strewed with <unk> of all sorts , and tents erecting to shelter both people and what goods they could get away . Oh , the miserable and calamitous spectacle ! " 
 = = = = Suspicion and Fear = = = = 
 Suspicion soon arose in the threatened city that the fire was no accident . The swirling winds carried sparks and burning flakes long distances to lodge on thatched roofs and in wooden gutters , causing seemingly unrelated house fires to break out far from their source and giving rise to rumours that fresh fires were being set on purpose . Foreigners were immediately suspects because of the current Second Anglo @-@ Dutch War . Fear and suspicion hardened into certainty on Monday , as reports circulated of imminent invasion and of foreign undercover agents seen casting " fireballs " into houses , or caught with hand grenades or matches . There was a wave of street violence . William Taswell saw a mob loot the shop of a French painter and level it to the ground , and watched in horror as a blacksmith walked up to a Frenchman in the street and hit him over the head with an iron bar . 
 The fears of terrorism received an extra boost from the disruption of communications and news as facilities were devoured by the fire . The General Letter Office in Threadneedle Street burned down early on Monday morning , through which post passed for the entire country . The London Gazette just managed to put out its Monday issue before the printer 's premises went up in flames ( this issue contained mainly society gossip , with a small note about a fire that had broken out on Sunday morning and " which continues still with great violence " ) . The whole nation depended on these communications , and the void which they left filled up with rumours . 
 There were also religious alarms of renewed Gunpowder Plots . Suspicions rose to panic and collective paranoia on Monday , and both the Trained Bands and the Coldstream Guards focused less on fire fighting and more on rounding up foreigners , Catholics , and any odd @-@ looking people , arresting them or rescuing them from mobs , or both together . 
 The inhabitants were growing desperate to remove their belongings from the City , especially the upper class . This provided a source of income for the able @-@ bodied poor , who hired out as porters ( sometimes simply making off with the goods ) , and it was especially profitable for the owners of carts and boats . Hiring a cart had cost a couple of shillings on the Saturday before the fire ; on Monday , it rose to as much as £ 40 , a fortune equivalent to more than £ 4 @,@ 000 in 2005 . 
 Seemingly every cart and boat owner within reach of London made their way towards the City to share in these opportunities , the carts jostling at the narrow gates with the panicked inhabitants trying to get out . The chaos at the gates was such that the magistrates ordered the gates shut on Monday afternoon , in the hope of turning the inhabitants ' attention from safeguarding their own possessions to fighting the fire : " that , no hopes of saving any things left , they might have more desperately endeavoured the quenching of the fire . " This headlong and unsuccessful measure was rescinded the next day . 
 Monday marked the beginning of organised action , even as order broke down in the streets , especially at the gates , and the fire raged unchecked . Bloodworth was responsible as Lord Mayor for co @-@ ordinating the fire @-@ fighting , but he had apparently left the City ; his name is not mentioned in any contemporaneous accounts of the Monday 's events . In this state of emergency , Charles again overrode the City authorities and put his brother James , Duke of York in charge of operations . 
 James set up command posts round the perimeter of the fire , press @-@ ganging into teams of well @-@ paid and well @-@ fed firemen any men of the lower classes found in the streets . Three courtiers were put in charge of each post , with authority from Charles himself to order demolitions . This visible gesture of solidarity from the Crown was intended to cut through the citizens ' misgivings about being held financially responsible for pulling down houses . James and his life guards rode up and down the streets all Monday , rescuing foreigners from the mob and attempting to keep order . " The Duke of York hath won the hearts of the people with his continual and indefatigable pains day and night in helping to quench the Fire , " wrote a witness in a letter on 8 September . 
 On Monday evening , hopes were dashed that the massive stone walls of Baynard 's Castle , Blackfriars would stay the course of the flames , the western counterpart of the Tower of London . This historic royal palace was completely consumed , burning all night . 
 A contemporary account said that King Charles in person worked manually , that day or later , to help throw water on flames and to help demolish buildings to make a firebreak . 
 = = = Tuesday = = = 
 Tuesday , 4 September was the day of greatest destruction . The Duke of York 's command post at Temple Bar , where Strand meets Fleet Street , was supposed to stop the fire 's westward advance towards the Palace of Whitehall . He hoped that the River Fleet would form a natural firebreak , making a stand with his firemen from the Fleet Bridge and down to the Thames . However , early on Tuesday morning , the flames jumped over the Fleet and outflanked them , driven by the unabated easterly gale , forcing them to run for it . There was consternation at the palace as the fire continued implacably westward ; " Oh , the confusion there was then at that court ! " wrote Evelyn . 
 Working to a plan at last , James 's firefighters had also created a large firebreak to the north of the conflagration . It contained the fire until late afternoon , when the flames leapt across and began to destroy the wide , affluent luxury shopping street of Cheapside . 
 Everybody had thought St. Paul 's Cathedral a safe refuge , with its thick stone walls and natural firebreak in the form of a wide , empty surrounding plaza . It had been crammed full of rescued goods and its crypt filled with the tightly packed stocks of the printers and booksellers in adjoining Paternoster Row . However , an enormous stroke of bad luck meant that the building was covered in wooden scaffolding , undergoing piecemeal restoration by a relatively unknown Christopher Wren . The scaffolding caught fire on Tuesday night . Leaving school , young William Taswell stood on Westminster Stairs a mile away and watched as the flames crept round the cathedral and the burning scaffolding ignited the timbered roof beams . Within half an hour , the lead roof was melting , and the books and papers in the crypt caught with a roar . " The stones of Paul 's flew like <unk> , " reported Evelyn in his diary , " the melting lead running down the streets in a stream , and the very pavements glowing with fiery redness , so as no horse , nor man , was able to tread on them . " The cathedral was quickly a ruin . 
 During the day , the flames began to move eastward from the neighbourhood of Pudding Lane , straight against the prevailing east wind and towards Pepys 's home on Seething Lane and the Tower of London with its gunpowder stores . The garrison at the Tower took matters into their own hands after waiting all day for requested help from James 's official firemen who were busy in the west . They created firebreaks by blowing up houses on a large scale in the vicinity , halting the advance of the fire . 
 = = = Wednesday = = = 
 The wind dropped on Tuesday evening , and the firebreaks created by the garrison finally began to take effect on Wednesday 5 September . Stopping the fire caused much fire and demolition damage in the lawyers ' area called the Temple . Pepys walked all over the smouldering city , getting his feet hot , and climbed the steeple of Barking Church , from which he viewed the destroyed City , " the saddest sight of desolation that I ever saw . " There were many separate fires still burning themselves out , but the Great Fire was over . 
 Pepys visited Moorfields , a large public park immediately north of the City , and saw a great encampment of homeless refugees , " poor wretches carrying their good there , and every body keeping his goods together by themselves " . He noted that the price of bread had doubled in the environs of the park . Evelyn also went out to Moorfields , which was turning into the main point of assembly for the homeless , and was horrified at the numbers of distressed people filling it , some under tents , others in makeshift shacks : " Many [ were ] without a rag or any necessary utensils , bed or board ... reduced to <unk> misery and poverty . " Evelyn was impressed by the pride of these distressed Londoners , " tho ' ready to perish for hunger and destitution , yet not asking one <unk> for relief . " 
 Fears were as high as ever among the traumatised fire victims , fear of foreign arsonists and of a French and Dutch invasion . There was an outbreak of general panic on Wednesday night in the encampments at Parliament Hill , Moorfields , and Islington . A light in the sky over Fleet Street started a story that 50 @,@ 000 French and Dutch immigrants had risen , widely rumoured to have started the fire , and were marching towards Moorfields to finish what the fire had begun : to cut the men 's throats , rape the women , and steal their few possessions . <unk> into the streets , the frightened mob fell on any foreigners whom they happened to encounter , and were only appeased , according to Evelyn , " with infinite pains and great difficulty " and pushed back into the fields by the Trained Bands , troops of Life Guards , and members of the court . The mood was now so volatile that Charles feared a full @-@ scale London rebellion against the monarchy . Food production and distribution had been disrupted to the point of non @-@ existence ; Charles announced that supplies of bread would be brought into the City every day , and safe markets set up round the perimeter . These markets were for buying and selling ; there was no question of distributing emergency aid . 
 = = Deaths and destruction = = 
 Only a few deaths from the fire are officially recorded , and deaths are traditionally believed to have been few . Porter gives the figure as eight and Tinniswood as " in single figures " , although he adds that some deaths must have gone unrecorded and that , besides direct deaths from burning and smoke inhalation , refugees also perished in the impromptu camps . 
 Hanson takes issue with the idea that there were only a few deaths , enumerating known deaths from hunger and exposure among survivors of the fire , " huddled in shacks or living among the ruins that had once been their homes " in the cold winter that followed , including , for instance , dramatist James Shirley and his wife . Hanson also maintains that " it stretches credulity to believe that the only papists or foreigners being beaten to death or lynched were the ones rescued by the Duke of York " , that official figures say very little about the fate of the undocumented poor , and that the heat at the heart of the firestorms was far greater than an ordinary house fire , and was enough to consume bodies fully or leave only a few skeletal fragments . 
 The fire was fed not merely by wood , fabrics , and thatch , Hanson points out , but also by the oil , pitch , coal , tallow , fats , sugar , alcohol , turpentine , and gunpowder stored in the riverside district . It melted the imported steel lying along the wharves ( melting point between 1 @,@ 250 and 1 @,@ 480 ° C ( 2 @,@ 300 and 2 @,@ 700 ° F ) ) and the great iron chains and locks on the City gates ( melting point between 1 @,@ 100 and 1 @,@ 650 ° C ( 2 @,@ 000 and 3000 ° F ) ) . Nor would anonymous bone fragments have been of much interest to the hungry people sifting through the tens of thousands of tons of rubble and debris after the fire , looking for valuables , or to the workmen clearing away the rubble later during the rebuilding . Hanson appeals to common sense and " the experience of every other major urban fire down the centuries " , emphasising that the fire attacked the rotting tenements of the poor with furious speed , surely trapping at the very least " the old , the very young , the halt and the lame " and burying the dust and ashes of their bones under the rubble of cellars , producing a death toll not of four or eight , but of " several hundred and quite possibly several thousand . " 
 The material destruction has been computed at 13 @,@ 500 houses , 87 parish churches , 44 Company Halls , the Royal Exchange , the Custom House , St Paul 's Cathedral , the Bridewell Palace and other City prisons , the General Letter Office , and the three western city gates — Ludgate , Newgate , and Aldersgate . The monetary value of the loss , first estimated at £ 100 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in the currency of the time , was later reduced to an uncertain £ 10 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 ( over £ 1 billion in 2005 pounds ) . Evelyn believed that he saw as many as " 200 @,@ 000 people of all ranks and stations dispersed , and lying along their heaps of what they could save " in the fields towards Islington and Highgate . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 An example of the urge to identify scapegoats for the fire is the acceptance of the confession of a simple @-@ minded French watchmaker named Robert Hubert , who claimed that he was an agent of the Pope and had started the Great Fire in Westminster . He later changed his story to say that he had started the fire at the bakery in Pudding Lane . Hubert was convicted , despite some misgivings about his fitness to plead , and hanged at Tyburn on 28 September 1666 . After his death , it became apparent that he had been on board a ship in the North Sea , and had not arrived in London until two days after the fire started . These allegations that Catholics had started the fire were exploited as powerful political propaganda by opponents of pro @-@ Catholic Charles II 's court , mostly during the Popish Plot and the exclusion crisis later in his reign . 
 Abroad in the Netherlands , the Great Fire of London was seen as a divine retribution for Holmes 's Bonfire , the burning by the English of a Dutch town during the Second Anglo @-@ Dutch War . 
 In the chaos and unrest after the fire , Charles II feared another London rebellion . He encouraged the homeless to move away from London and settle elsewhere , immediately issuing a proclamation that " all Cities and Towns whatsoever shall without any contradiction receive the said distressed persons and permit them the free exercise of their manual trades . " A special Fire Court was set up to deal with disputes between tenants and landlords and decide who should rebuild , based on ability to pay . The Court was in session from February 1667 to September 1672 . Cases were heard and a verdict usually given within a day ; without the Fire Court , lengthy legal wrangles would have seriously delayed the rebuilding which was so necessary if London was to recover . 
 Radical rebuilding schemes poured in for the gutted City and were encouraged by Charles . If it had been rebuilt under some of these plans , London would have rivalled Paris in Baroque magnificence ( see Evelyn 's plan on the right ) . The Crown and the City authorities attempted to establish " to whom all the houses and ground did in truth belong " to negotiate with their owners about compensation for the large @-@ scale remodelling that these plans entailed , but that unrealistic idea had to be abandoned . <unk> to bring workmen and measure the plots on which the houses had stood were mostly ignored by people worried about day @-@ to @-@ day survival , as well as by those who had left the capital ; for one thing , with the shortage of labour following the fire , it was impossible to secure workmen for the purpose . Apart from Wren and Evelyn , it is known that Robert Hooke , Valentine Knight , and Richard <unk> proposed rebuilding plans . 
 With the complexities of ownership unresolved , none of the grand Baroque schemes could be realised for a City of piazzas and avenues ; there was nobody to negotiate with , and no means of calculating how much compensation should be paid . Instead , much of the old street plan was recreated in the new City , with improvements in hygiene and fire safety : wider streets , open and accessible wharves along the length of the Thames , with no houses obstructing access to the river , and , most importantly , buildings constructed of brick and stone , not wood . New public buildings were created on their predecessors ' sites ; perhaps the most famous is St Paul 's Cathedral and its smaller cousins , Christopher Wren 's 50 new churches . 
 On Charles ' initiative , a Monument to the Great Fire of London was erected near Pudding Lane , designed by Christopher Wren and Robert Hooke , standing 61 metres ( 200 ft ) tall and known simply as " The Monument " . It is a familiar London landmark which has given its name to a tube station . In 1668 , accusations against the Catholics were added to the inscription on the Monument which read , in part : 
 The inscription remained in place until 1830 and the passage of the Catholic Emancipation Act , aside from the four years of James II 's rule from 1685 to 1689 . 
 Another monument marks the spot where the fire stopped : the Golden Boy of Pye Corner in Smithfield . According to the inscription , it was evidence of God 's wrath on the City of London for the sin of gluttony that the fire started at Pudding Lane and stopped at Pye Corner . 
 The Great Plague epidemic of 1665 is believed to have killed a sixth of London 's inhabitants , or 80 @,@ 000 people , and it is sometimes suggested that the fire saved lives in the long run by burning down so much unsanitary housing with their rats and their fleas which transmitted the plague , as plague epidemics did not recur in London after the fire . Historians disagree as to whether the fire played a part in preventing subsequent major outbreaks . The Museum of London website claims that there was a connection , while historian Roy Porter points out that the fire left the most <unk> parts of London untouched , the slum suburbs . 
 Following the Fire , the thoroughfares of Queen Street and King Street were newly laid out , cutting across more ancient thoroughfares in the City , creating a new route up from the Thames to the Guildhall ; they were the only notable new streets following the fire 's destruction of much of the City . 
 = = In culture = = 
 William Harrison Ainsworth 's novel Old St Paul 's is set during the events of the fire . 
 The Great Fire was released on ITV television in 2014 . It was shown in four episodes . It constructs a fictional scenario involving the Pudding Lane baker 's family in an alleged popish plot . 
 The round " London 's Burning " is said to be about the Great Fire . However , the first notation of a song in this theme dates from 1580 as " Scotland 's Burning " . 
 = Widerøe Flight 839 = 
 Widerøe Flight 839 , also known as the Værøy Accident ( Norwegian : Værøy @-@ ulykken ) , was a crash into water of a de Havilland Canada DHC @-@ 6 @-@ 300 Twin Otter just after take @-@ off from Værøy Airport in Norway . The incident occurred on 12 April 1990 at 14 : 44 , and killed all five people on board . The cause of the accident were strong winds that exceeded the structure 's tolerance , causing the tail rudder and tailplane to crack so the plane became uncontrollable . Impact occurred 63 seconds after take @-@ off and 8 seconds after the crack . The aircraft crashed into the water , and a search was conducted for several days to find the wreck . 
 Uneven and strong winds had given the airport low regularity , and prior to take @-@ off , wind speeds of 57 knots ( 106 km / h ) had been <unk> accident caused the airport to be permanently closed , and replaced by Værøy Heliport . The incident was investigated by the Accident Investigation Board Norway , who published their conclusions in 1991 . Three years later , a new investigation was conducted , after an engineer had stated that the cause of the accident could instead have been fatigue . The second investigation came to the same conclusion as the first and all involved parties have since supported the causes made in the initial report . 
 = = Accident = = 
 Widerøe Flight 839 was a scheduled flight from Værøy Airport to Bodø Airport operated with a de Havilland Canada DHC @-@ 6 @-@ 300 Twin Otter . The aircraft had registration LN @-@ BNS and serial number 536 , and was delivered to Widerøe on 27 April 1977 . It was insured with Norsk <unk> . The aircraft left Bodø Airport at 13 : 36 as Flight 838 to Røst Airport , where it landed at 14 : 04 . It continued to Værøy as Flight 839 , leaving Røst at 14 : 14 . During this flight the crew received information that the wind at the east end of the runway was from 270 ° , varying from 18 to 26 knots ( 33 to 48 km / h ) — a moderate gale . When the plane landed at 14 : 30 , the tower had stated that the wind was from 270 ° and max 23 knots ( 43 km / h ) . The crew commented on the wind after landing , and stated that the wind blew from all directions . At Værøy Airport , three passengers disembarked , two passengers boarded and the plane fueled . There was also a passenger in transit from Røst to Bodø , so the total ridership was three passengers , plus the two pilots . Take @-@ off weight was 4 @,@ 548 @.@ 5 kilograms ( 10 @,@ 028 lb ) , including 640 kg ( 1 @,@ 410 lb ) of fuel . 
 The aircraft taxied to runway 25 . During the departure briefing , the captain decided not to follow the company 's standard procedure and have a climb at 320 ° instead of 280 ° . Maximum measured wind had been recorded at 57 knots ( 106 km / h ) while the aircraft had been parked . The aircraft asked for clearance at 14 : 42 : 10 ; this was granted , and the air control informed that the wind at the west end was between 210 ° and 290 ° , varying from 18 to 34 knots ( 33 to 63 km / h ) . The eastern wind was not communicated to the aircraft , but was 270 ° , varying from 20 to 40 knots ( 37 to 74 km / h ) . The take @-@ off started at 14 : 42 : 43 and the aircraft was airborne after having passed half the runway . Witnesses described that the aircraft after take @-@ off climbed quickly , but then started falling , and then climbed quickly again . It then entered clouds west of the airport . During climb , the captain wanted to keep the flaps at 10 ° , contradictory to standard procedure that involved decreasing the flaps . At 14 : 43 : 09 , a rattling sound was registered on the cockpit voice recorder ( CVR ) . Thirty @-@ five seconds later , sounds from unsynchronized propellers were registered . The co @-@ pilot indicates that the flight was in difficulty . Eight seconds later , at 14 : 43 : 52 , the CVR stopped recording . At 14 : 43 : 54 , the control tower at Værøy registered a distress signal , that lasted four seconds , followed by a loud bang . The aircraft was then repeatedly called by radio . At 14 : 50 , Bodø Air Traffic Control Center was contacted . 
 The Joint Rescue Coordination Centre of Northern Norway in Bodø dispatched two helicopters and two ships , but one helicopter and one ship had to return due to the bad weather that soon had increased to a hurricane . At 16 : 45 , parts of the aircraft were found 3 @.@ 5 nautical miles ( 6 @.@ 5 km ) northwest of Værøy Airport . After the weather improved , one rescue ship , four fishing vessels and one Westland Sea King were used to find the wreck . On 13 April , twelve ships and two helicopters were being used , and several parts from the wreck were found . This allowed the searching crew to use divers search for the wreck . The aircraft was found on 15 April , 2 @,@ 300 metres ( 7 @,@ 500 ft ) from the airport . Eighty percent of the wreck was found within an area of 300 by 400 m ( 980 by 1 @,@ 310 ft ) and at about 10 m ( 33 ft ) depth . 
 The deceased were Captain Idar Nils Persen ( 40 ) , Co @-@ pilot Arnt Vidar <unk> ( 31 ) , and passengers Stig <unk> ( 25 ) , Frank <unk> ( 27 ) and Runa Dagny <unk> ( 23 ) . All passengers died immediately upon impact , but the Captain 's body was never found . 
 = = Cause = = 
 The runway at Værøy Airport , that runs east – west , ran parallel to a mountain to the south that is about 500 m ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) tall . Prior to construction , Widerøe had performed test flights in the area , and these had concluded with unacceptable wind conditions , particularly from the south over the mountain . From 31 October 1988 , Widerøe introduced self @-@ imposed restrictions on landing at Værøy . Aircraft were not allowed to land or take off if the wind came from 090 ° – 240 ° ( though south ) if the wind speed exceeded 20 knots ( 37 km / h ) , including gusts . Additional restrictions were introduced following an incident on 18 January 1989 ; these were again modified on 1 November 1989 . Flight 839 took off within the permitted limits of these restrictions . However , Twin Otters were not to operate on the ground during winds that exceeded 50 knots ( 93 km / h ) , and since the aircraft started taxiing following a report of wind speeds of 57 knots ( 106 km / h ) , this was a breach of procedure . The wind also changed direction immediately after take @-@ off . 
 The aircraft had not had any mechanical or technical errors or problems prior to take @-@ off . The turbulence and wind shear caused a crack in either the tail rudder , the tailplane , or both . This was caused by strong winds acting on both sides of the structure , due to shifting winds . These structural failures caused the aircraft to crash . Out of the 63 seconds from take @-@ off to impact , the aircraft was under control for the first 55 seconds ; only during the last 8 seconds did the crew not have control over the aircraft . 
 The Accident Investigation Board Norway stated in its report that the crew should not have landed with the amounts of wind that were reported , and that they definitively should not have taken off . However , since the wind came from the west , which by pilots was reported to cause less fewer problems than from other directions , they may have decided to ignore the wind exceeding the permitted values . In particular , the Accident Investigation Board criticized the choice of taxiing in 57 knots ( 106 km / h ) , 7 knots ( 13 km / h ) above the permitted wind speed for ground operation and far over the permitted levels for take @-@ off from the airport . The board commented that although it was common to cancel flights to Værøy , no flights had been canceled after the plane had landed , instead being canceled prior to landing . The board commented that the flight being the last before Easter , it may have influenced the pilots ' sense of duty towards getting the passengers to their destinations . This may have been aggravated by the very low regularity that was at Værøy . The board also commented that pilots did not trust the wind data they received , since they often experienced it to be incorrect and that the wind could vary considerably within the airport . While the plane was at the ground , it had been raining . Pilots at Værøy often experienced that weather was better between rain showers , and there were indications that the captain wanted to take @-@ off before the next rain shower hit . 
 The Accident Investigation Board concluded : 
 The cause of the accident is that the plane during climb was subject to wind that succeeded the planes construction criteria . This caused a crack in the tail rudder / tailplane causing the plane to become uncontrollable . " 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = New airport = = = 
 Værøy Airport had opened on 1 July 1986 as part of the regional airport network in Northern Norway operated by Widerøe . Prior to this , Værøy and Røst had been served by helicopters using a heliport ; that had replaced previous services with seaplanes . All services to the airport were suspended immediately after the incident . On 7 May , Widerøe stated that they would not use Værøy Airport , and that they would decline the concession to operate to Værøy if the island community did not receive a new airport . They commented that the restrictions caused by the wind forced the airline to terminate up to half the departures . The chairman of the Widerøe 's Pilots ' Union , Cpt . Helge Høvik , stated the same day that the airline might have to lower the number of calls at some other regional airports , namely Mosjøen Airport , Kjærstad , Mo i Rana Airport , <unk> , Sandnessjøen Airport , Stokka and Sandane Airport , Anda . Høvik stated that he felt that many of the airports were located in the wrong place , for instance at the bottom of valleys , on top of hills and between mountains . Widerøe stated that there was not a safety problem at any other regional airports . 
 The report from the Accident Investigation Board was highly critical to the Norwegian Civil Aviation Administration , stating that the airport should never have been built where it was and that it was " clearly unsuitable for regular traffic " . It stated that the administration had overlooked comments from meteorologists and test flights in the area that had concluded that the wind conditions in the area were not suitable for an airport . The commission that wrote the report and conducted the investigation , stated that the Civil Aviation Administration had not proceeded correctly while planning the airport — they had chosen Nordlandet early as a location and ignored negative comments . After the Norwegian Meteorological Institute had made a favorable report about the weather in the area , the administration had failed to conduct the necessary test flights to test the wind conditions , since this was not determined in the initial recommendation . The commission also commented that the safety division had been critical to the localization of the airport , but had withdrawn their disputes following pressure from higher ranks in the administration . The commission also criticized the Civil Aviation Administration for not conducting investigations following the reports of low regularity and the incidents in 1988 and 1989 . 
 No aircraft has ever taken off from Værøy Airport after the accident , except in June 1992 , when a Cessna 172 brought 3 skydivers from Bodø Skydiving Club ( Bodø <unk> ) to the island , accompanied by a Piper Cherokee 140 from Bodø Flyklubb and an experimental plane . The Cessna made 2 landings and take @-@ offs , and dropped the skydivers over the runway at approx . 8000 feet . The Piper and experimental craft made at least one landing and take @-@ off each , during a public show held close to the airport . In 1992 , the Norwegian Ministry of Transport and Communications decided to permanently close the airport , after it had been temporarily closed since the accident . In 1995 , Værøy Heliport was opened further south on the island , and Helikopter Service was awarded the public service obligation to operate the route . The helicopter service sometimes uses the closed airport as a reserve airport during bad weather . 
 = = = Second investigation = = = 
 In an article published in the newspaper <unk> ( Narvik , Norway ) , in May 1994 , the English aviation engineer Hugh Tyrer stated that the cause of the accident was probably due to fatigue in the end piece of the transfer mechanism to the elevator . The end piece was in such a state that it would have failed sooner or later in ordinary use . Following this discovery in the wreck , Widerøe had grounded all their Twin Otters and checked these pieces , but without finding any other defect <unk> de Havilland Canada had also sent an alert to all operators of the Twin Otter to check the component , and had canceled the contract with the subcontractor . On 800 operating Twin Otters , 86 end pieces were replaced shortly after the accident , although none had fatigue similar to that of LN @-@ BNS . The commission 's chair , Ragnar <unk> , stated that they had not considered the end piece to be part of the cause of the accident , and that they therefore had not stress @-@ tested it or the elevator to see what forces were needed to cause a crack . <unk> stated that the board knew about the fatigue . He also said that he had no problems with the opening of a new inquiry . Widerøe stated that they trusted the report from the Accident Investigation Board . 
 Member of parliament , Inge <unk> , and president of the Norwegian Airline Pilots Association , <unk> Helland , both stated that the Accident Investigation Board should make a new inquiry about the accident . Cpt . Helland stated that the report 's credibility was weakened due to the influence de Havilland Canada had during the process . On 10 June , the commission reopened the case , after having held meetings with Tyrer . The commission stated that there was disagreement as to if the tail rudder and tail plane or the end piece had cracked first , which would be crucial in determining the cause of the accident . Among the inquiries would be to re @-@ investigate the tape of cockpit sound with new technology . The Accident Investigation Board used the National Aerospace Laboratory in the Netherlands to conduct tests on the end pieces . The report from the National Aerospace Laboratory was published on 23 March 1995 , and supported the conclusion in the commissions report . The journalist Oddvar Kristoffersen in <unk> won the <unk> Award for 1994 for his work related to uncovering the controversy . The pilots ' union in Widerøe was initially critical of the report , but by July it stated that it supported the conclusion . In addition , Det Norske Veritas withdrew its critical comments concerning the commission . With this , all officially involved parties supported the report . 
 = SECR K and SR K1 classes = 
 The SECR K class was a type of 2 @-@ 6 @-@ 4 tank locomotive designed in 1914 by Richard Maunsell for express passenger duties on the South Eastern and Chatham Railway ( SECR ) , which operated between London and south @-@ east England . The Southern Railway ( SR ) K1 class was a three @-@ cylinder variant of the K class , designed in 1925 to suit a narrower loading gauge . They were among the first non @-@ Great Western Railway ( GWR ) types to use and improve upon the basic design principles of power and standardisation established by GWR Chief Mechanical Engineer ( CME ) George Jackson Churchward . The locomotives were based on the GWR 4300 class , improved by the Midland Railway 's ideals of simplicity and ease of maintenance . 
 The K class was designed to be mechanically similar to the SECR N class 2 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 mixed @-@ traffic locomotives . The class was the earliest large @-@ scale use of the 2 @-@ 6 @-@ 4 wheel arrangement in Britain . Production began towards the end of the First World War , and the prototype rolled out of Ashford Works three years after design work was completed due to wartime production constraints . The class replaced obsolete 4 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 passenger locomotives in an SECR fleet standardisation programme . 
 Twenty @-@ one locomotives were built : twenty K class ( two cylinders ) and one K1 class ( three cylinders ) , the first in 1917 and the remainder between 1925 and 1926 . They operated over the Eastern section of the Southern Railway network and were given the names of rivers , being referred as the River class from 1925 . Crews referred to the K and K1 classes as " Rolling Rivers " because of their instability when travelling at speed . They were rebuilt as 2 @-@ cylinder SR U class and 3 @-@ cylinder SR U1 class 2 @-@ 6 @-@ 0s ( respectively ) following a railway accident at Sevenoaks , Kent in 1927 . They continued in service with British Railways ( BR ) until the last was withdrawn in 1966 . One K class rebuild ( No. 31806 ) is preserved on the Swanage Railway in Dorset and as of 2016 is operational . 
 = = Background = = 
 Three factors dictated the type of locomotive that could operate on the South Eastern and Chatham Railway ( SECR ) : the heavy passenger train loadings ; the poor track quality ; and the weak , lightly built bridges . On the lines of the former London , Chatham and Dover Railway ( LCDR ) – inherited by the SECR in 1899 – beach pebbles had been used for ballast instead of conventional ballast , which has irregular shapes that lock together to keep the track in place . These economies in construction meant that only locomotives with low axle loadings could operate safely over the track . The SECR was therefore unable to follow a coherent strategy to reduce the number of locomotive types inherited from the two constituent railways . Despite increased passenger and freight traffic between London Charing Cross and the Kentish coast during the first decades of the 20th century , the Operating Department had to use mismatched classes of underpowered and obsolete 4 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 and 0 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 locomotives , which could operate within the restrictions imposed by the infrastructure . This resulted in frequent double @-@ heading , adding to operational costs . 
 Richard Maunsell was appointed CME of the SECR in 1913 , following the enforced retirement of Harry Wainwright , who had left a range of competent but unspectacular locomotive classes that struggled to cope with the increased train lengths and loadings . Maunsell reviewed the situation and planned to introduce six standard classes – using only two boiler designs – which would work the entire traffic of the railway . The first of these was the N class 2 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 , which gave the SECR a capable mixed @-@ traffic locomotive . For the express passenger design that could cope with the heavy boat trains , Maunsell wanted to enlarge the existing L class 4 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 with Walschaerts valve gear and an enlarged superheater , but this design would have resulted in a too heavy axle loading . Maunsell 's newly recruited assistants , G.H. Pearson and Harold Holcroft from the Great Western Railway at Swindon and James Clayton from the Midland Railway at Derby , had recently been involved in the design of large passenger tank engines and persuaded him to use the 2 @-@ 6 @-@ 4 wheel arrangement , which would allow the class to operate at high speeds on the poor @-@ quality track in north Kent . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 The 2 @-@ 6 @-@ 4 wheel arrangement was not in common use in Great Britain at this time , as many railway companies operated routes that required locomotives with greater fuel capacity , or short branch lines that necessitated smaller locomotives . The 2 @-@ 6 @-@ 4 tank engine design had only been used once before for standard gauge locomotives in Britain , on the Great Central Railway 's 1B class freight locomotives of 1914 . However , the configuration was ideal for the SECR , because of its shorter mainlines , and allowed for a long wheelbase with a leading axle to permit greater stability at speed on track curves . The tightness of the curves on the former LCDR mainlines had constrained the size of locomotives operating on the SECR , as they had been hastily erected during the nineteenth century to compete with those of the South Eastern Railway ( SER ) . The longer locomotive could also accommodate a larger boiler than a 4 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 , giving sufficient power to avoid double @-@ heading of locomotives on heavier trains . 
 The K class design used a " Bissel bogie " leading axle and a plain trailing bogie . The trailing bogie permitted the use of a large coal bunker that was capable of sustaining the locomotive over the run between London Charing Cross and Dover Marine , and side water tanks of 2 @,@ 000 imp gal ( 9 @,@ 100 l ; 2 @,@ 400 US gal ) capacity were used , negating the need for a tender . The coupled wheelbase between the rear and centre driving wheels was reduced from that used on the mechanically identical N class to 7 ft 9 in ( 2 @.@ 362 m ) to accommodate the bogie . The cab was fully enclosed , although the set of four small front spectacle plates ( the windows on the front face of the cab for forward visibility ) were the same as those used on the N class . 
 The K class was designed by Maunsell 's team in 1914 as part of his proposed standardisation programme following the N class , but the designs were not shown to the railway directors until early 1915 to enable all six designs to be shown at once . The design incorporated the principles of power and reliability established by George Churchward , using a Belpaire firebox that sloped downwards towards the cab instead of a round @-@ topped version , a regulator located in the smokebox , long @-@ travel valves for free running at high speeds , a sharply tapered and <unk> boiler , and a right @-@ hand driving position . The inclusion of these features is attributed to Holcroft , Maunsell 's personal assistant , who had worked on the GWR 4300 class and the N class . James Clayton , Maunsell 's Chief Locomotive Draughtsman , brought simpler and more functional Midland Railway influences to the design , such as the shape of the cab and the drumhead @-@ type smokebox , which sat on a saddle that was of wider diameter than the fully lagged and clad boiler . The latter was fitted with Ross pop safety valves and pressed to 200 psi ( 1 @.@ 38 MPa ) . 
 Other innovations by Maunsell 's team included greater superheating surface area , locating the boiler water top feed inside a dome @-@ like cover with external <unk> and water feed pipes mounted on either side , outside Walschaerts valve gear , and parts that could be shared with similar locomotive classes to reduce maintenance costs . The firebox was narrower towards the rear and featured a continuously sloping grate , whilst the <unk> was fitted with front and rear damper doors , the latter adjusted to clear the rear driving axle . The lower part of the coal bunker incorporated a water tank of 760 imp gal ( 3 @,@ 500 l ; 910 US gal ) capacity . This was connected to two 620 imp gal ( 2 @,@ 800 l ; 740 US gal ) side tanks by two rectangular pipes on either side of the locomotive that also formed supports for the cab footplate . 
 = = = K class = = = 
 In January 1915 Maunsell received authority to build six examples , but , as with the N class , production was delayed due to the use of the Ashford works for wartime armaments manufacture . Assembly began in 1917 and the first , No. 790 , emerged in July of that year . It was based at Bricklayers Arms depot , preceding the earlier N class design into service by one month . Further construction was deferred until after Ashford had caught up with the maintenance backlog caused by the war . 
 Ten more locomotives were ordered by the SECR from Ashford works in June 1920 , and to speed delivery the construction of frames , cylinders and side tanks was subcontracted to the Royal Arsenal at Woolwich . However , further severe delays at Ashford caused by the backlog of repair work meant that the boilers had to be supplied by the North British Locomotive Company . Construction of these locomotives had not begun by 1 January 1923 , when the Railways Act 1921 merged the SECR with other railways in southern England to form the Southern Railway . 
 Maunsell was appointed CME of the newly formed Southern Railway in 1923 , and inherited the 1920 SECR order for ten K class locomotives . The order was still outstanding in 1924 , although most of the component parts had been made . On 14 January 1925 , Maunsell ordered No. 790 to be overhauled and trialled on the Central section . As the locomotive proved suitable for the operating conditions of this section , the Southern Railway 's Locomotive Committee proceeded with the assembly of the K class parts using outside contractors . Nine sets of parts ( Nos. <unk> – <unk> ) were conveyed to Armstrong Whitworth for assembly and the finished locomotives delivered in May and June 1925 . These were dual @-@ fitted with vacuum and Westinghouse ( air ) brakes for use with the former London , Brighton and South Coast Railway ( LBSCR ) rolling stock on the Central section . Other differences from the prototype included the relocation of the regulator to the dome and an increase in superheater area . The tenth set of parts was retained by Ashford and used for the first member of the K1 class later that year . 
 In May 1925 Maunsell ordered a further ten locomotives from Brighton works ( Nos. A800 – <unk> ) , which only had vacuum brakes for the SECR stock on the Eastern section . They were delivered between July and December 1926 . This group had modified suspension on the bogie and leading axle , in an attempt to address complaints from the crews of rough riding experienced with earlier members of the class . A further 20 members of the class were ordered in March 1926 ( ten each from Ashford and Brighton works ) , despite strong reservations expressed by the Operating Department concerning " the wisdom or desirability of placing so many large passenger tanks in service " . These were allocated the numbers <unk> – <unk> , and work had begun on building the frames and cylinders when the order was cancelled following an accident at Sevenoaks in 1927 involving locomotive No . A800 . These numbers were later allocated to the first production batch of U class locomotives . 
 = = = K1 class = = = 
 In August 1919 , a proposal was put to the SECR ’ s Locomotive , Carriage and Wagon Committee for 2 and 3 @-@ cylinder tank engines of 2 @-@ 8 @-@ 0 wheel arrangement for heavy shunting of freight wagons . They were to use the same boiler as the K and N classes and the general layout was similar to designs used by the GWR in South Wales . Nothing came of this proposal because of other commitments and the absorption of the SECR into the Southern Railway . In 1922 , Holcroft suggested that 3 @-@ cylinder 2 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 tender locomotives with 6 ft ( 1 @,@ 830 mm ) driving wheels should be built instead of tank locomotives . Despite the benefit of a greater operational range , Holcroft 's immediate superior , Clayton , refused to pass this suggestion on to Maunsell . The 3 @-@ cylinder principle was therefore applied to the K class . 
 At the Southern Railway ’ s January 1925 Locomotive Committee meeting , when it was decided to use outside contractors to build the K class , Maunsell received authority to retain one set of parts at Ashford works to construct a prototype 3 @-@ cylinder 2 @-@ 6 @-@ 4 tank . The modification was based upon that used on N class No. 822 to produce a 3 @-@ cylinder locomotive in 1922 , although it retained the 6 ft ( 1 @,@ 830 mm ) driving wheels and shorter wheelbase of the K class . The modification was the inclusion of an additional ( inside ) cylinder between the frames , and a crank axle was fitted to the middle driving wheels . The axle was connected to the inside cylinder assembly by a connecting rod inclined at 1 in 8 to clear the front driving axle . This arrangement was supplemented by two smaller @-@ diameter outside cylinders with 16 in ( 406 mm ) bore ( compared to the 19 in ( 483 mm ) cylinders of the K class ) , and a greater chimney diameter . The resulting prototype 3 @-@ cylinder " K1 " was narrower than the K class and hence could work on routes with restricted loading gauge . As with No. 822 , this locomotive used Holcroft 's derivative of the Gresley conjugated valve gear to drive the inside cylinder . To accommodate this , the boiler had to be raised by 3 in ( 76 mm ) above the inside gear , raising the centre of gravity on the locomotive . 
 The main visual difference between the K and K1 classes was at the front end : the K1 incorporated a vertical metal cover above the front buffer beam to protect the third cylinder and associated Holcroft valve gear assembly from the elements . It also featured a new cab design with redesigned single front spectacle plates , and a pair of substantially constructed steps were fitted behind both outside cylinders to provide access to the running plate . The lack of a middle cylinder on the K class locomotives had allowed the provision of a footplate that curved from the buffers to the water tanks . The K1 prototype emerged from Ashford works as No . A890 , and underwent trials from 1 December 1925 before entering regular service . Only one locomotive of the K1 class was built ; plans to build a further ten ( Nos. <unk> @-@ <unk> ) alongside a batch of five N1 class 2 @-@ 6 @-@ 0s were cancelled after the Sevenoaks accident in August 1927 . Following rebuilding as a 2 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 tender locomotive in 1928 , No . A890 was reclassified U1 and was the forerunner of twenty more basically similar locomotives built in 1931 . 
 = = = K and K1 class construction history = = = 
 = = = Naming the locomotives = = = 
 For details of K and K1 class locomotive names , see : List of SECR K and SR K1 class locomotives 
 The K class prototype operated without a name until 1925 , when the Southern Railway 's publicity department decided to name all express passenger locomotives . The locomotives constructed from 1925 were named after rivers found within the Southern Railway 's operating area , and the class became known collectively as the River class . The first @-@ completed Southern Railway K class No . <unk> was named River Adur whilst the former SECR prototype was given the name River Avon ; names were also allocated to the cancelled 1926 batch of locomotives . The K1 class locomotive No . A890 was named River Frome . The names were displayed on a rectangular brass nameplate fitted to the water tank sides . 
 = = Operational details = = 
 The K class was intended to haul the SECR 's Kent expresses , and was trialled between Charing Cross , Tonbridge , Canterbury East and Folkestone East . A trial non @-@ stop run between Cannon Street and Folkestone Harbour by No. 790 pulling a train of 300 long tons ( 305 t ) had proved the water capacity of the side tanks to be insufficient for such runs . No. 790 was also tested on fast Cannon Street , Redhill and Tonbridge trains during the spring of 1922 , although rough riding between the latter two stations meant slower speeds over that part of route on subsequent runs . 
 The Southern Railway 's motive power re @-@ organisation following the Grouping of 1923 expanded the class for operations over the Central section . The Westinghouse @-@ fitted Armstrong Whitworth batch was used on the air @-@ braked Eastbourne and Brighton expresses and regular passenger service trains to Portsmouth . The vacuum @-@ braked Brighton batch was run @-@ in on the Portsmouth route in preparation for operating the Redhill – Reading line , the class regularly hauling the daily Birkenhead – Dover through train . The K1 was mainly rostered to haul the early evening express from Cannon Street to Dover Marine . 
 = = = Performance of the tank locomotives = = = 
 The K class proved successful on well @-@ maintained track . It was capable of high speeds on express passenger duties , although their use was limited by the lower storage capacity of tank locomotives , which meant the K and K1 classes were prone to water shortages on the long Kent Coast routes , and precluded them from working many of the former London and South Western Railway ( LSWR ) routes west of London . The need to save weight meant that compromises were made in some aspects of the design . The boiler size was constrained by the SECR ’ s axle @-@ loading restrictions , with the result that the design ’ s full steaming potential was not realised . The failure to capitalise upon a larger boiler would also affect Maunsell ’ s subsequent 2 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 classes , as they were given the same boiler despite their lower axle @-@ loadings . 
 On the Southern Railway 's Central and Eastern sections , crews complained that the locomotives rolled heavily and unpredictably on the cheaply laid track of the former SECR and LBSCR networks , leading to their nickname , " Rolling Rivers " . The rolling was in part caused by the type of coil suspension and steadying springs used on the Bissel truck and bogie axles , which caused adverse springing on poor track . These were modified in later batches , with limited success . The rough @-@ riding was also attributed to the frames , which were of insubstantial construction to save weight . The bracing proved incapable of counteracting the stresses applied to the frames when travelling at speed and caused excessive vibration on the footplate at higher outputs . 
 The K1 prototype was slightly faster and more powerful than the K class , and gave a smoother ride at low speeds . It was also found to have a wider route availability due to the smaller outside cylinders . However , the Holcroft valve gear proved to be difficult to maintain in everyday service . This locomotive was also noted for particularly poor riding characteristics at high speed , derailing twice in 1927 . The first derailment occurred at Borough Green & Wrotham , near Maidstone on 31 March , when the flanges of the lead coupled wheel mounted the rails at 60 mph ( 97 km / h ) . The second derailment was at Bearsted on 20 August , when the lead driving wheel mounted and completely dropped off the rails at 40 mph ( 64 km / h ) , derailing the train and causing serious damage to the track . These derailments were attributed to the slightly higher centre of gravity of the boiler on the K1 . Although the official reports of these accidents blamed the poor quality of the track , a group of directors sought to have both classes banned from use on passenger services , but were overruled by the Southern Railway 's Chairman of the Board of Directors , Everard Baring on grounds of cost . 
 = = = Accidents and incidents = = = 
 In March 1927 , locomotive No. 890 River Frome was hauling a train which derailed at Wrotham , Kent . 
 On 2 August 1927 , Locomotive No. 800 River Cray was derailed at Maidstone , Kent . 
 On 20 August 1927 , locomotive No. 890 River Frome was hauling a passenger train which was derailed at Bearsted , Kent . The cause was attributed to track defects . The locomotive was repaired and re @-@ entered service on 23 August . It was involved in a serious accident the next day . 
 = = = = Sevenoaks disaster = = = = 
 The K and K1 classes suffered from stability problems when travelling at speed over points and curves . The locomotive would initially roll ( briefly lean heavily ) to one side , followed by several further rolls of gradually reducing amplitude , combined with a side @-@ slipping movement that caused the driving wheels to mount the rails . Several minor derailments of members of the class were followed by the serious derailment of No . A800 River Cray at Sevenoaks , Kent , in August 1927 , caused by a combination of a surge in the water tanks and the flanges of the locomotive 's lead driving wheels mounting the rail at speed due to poor quality track @-@ work . The locomotive was hauling a Cannon Street to Deal express with a Pullman carriage when the leading driving wheels derailed at 55 mph ( 89 km / h ) over catch points in a cutting . Several carriages were flung against a road bridge , injuring 40 and killing 13 passengers . 
 In the days following the accident , two K and K1 class engines were trialled on the London and North Eastern Railway 's ( LNER ) Great Northern mainline under the supervision of that company 's CME , Nigel Gresley , to gain an unbiased review of their riding qualities . Locomotives No . <unk> ( K ) and No . A890 ( K1 ) , and King Arthur class No . <unk> , were tested on the well @-@ maintained LNER line between Huntingdon and St. Neots in October 1927 , where few problems were found with locomotive stability . On runs between Kings Cross and Potters Bar with the LNER 's dynamometer car , No . A890 was recorded at a top speed of 83 miles per hour ( 134 km / h ) and <unk> at 79 miles per hour ( 127 km / h ) , with no problems in riding . When these engines returned from the LNER , the Southern Railway 's General Manager , Sir Herbert Walker ordered further trials to be led by Sir John Aspinall on the Western section main line near Woking . These were terminated by the Southern Railway 's Operating Department , as the riding of the locomotives at speeds near 80 miles per hour ( 130 km / h ) rendered the locomotives unsafe . The instability of No . A890 at speed was attributed to the helical springs on the Bissel truck and bogie . 
 The 1928 accident inquiry did not attach blame to the Southern Railway for track maintenance or locomotive performance issues , and noted that the prototype had run for eight years over the same stretch of line without complaint . However , it identified the Brighton batch and No . A890 as being more susceptible to rolling on sharp curves with weak rail joints , although the entire class operated without incident on the former LBSCR network . The management of the Southern Railway realised that to have any success in operating the K class tanks on other parts of the network , vast stretches of track would require upgrading . With the prospect of storing 20 locomotives whilst the necessary upgrading took place , the management recommended the class be fully withdrawn from service . To recoup the expense of constructing the engines , Maunsell was given permission to rebuild them to the new SR U class 2 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 tender engine design in 1928 . This decision also reduced the adverse publicity generated by the accident . However , many of the components discarded during the rebuilding process would later be re @-@ used on another 2 @-@ 6 @-@ 4 tank locomotive designed to haul heavy freight on short trips : the 3 @-@ cylinder W class of 1932 . 
 = = Rebuilding = = 
 The rebuilding of the class as tender locomotives was cheaper than relaying track , particularly as in most respects the class had performed well . Rebuilding took place at Ashford , Brighton and Eastleigh railway works between March and December 1928 , where the water tanks , rear bogie and coal bunker were removed . The straight @-@ sided 3 @,@ 500 @-@ imperial @-@ gallon ( 15 @,@ 900 l ) variant of Maunsell tender was attached , allowing a greater operational range for the locomotives . The rear bogies were later used on the SR W class 2 @-@ 6 @-@ 4 tank locomotives ( the only subsequent use of this wheel arrangement by the Southern Railway , and their use was restricted to freight operations around London ) . The solitary K1 class locomotive was rebuilt in June 1928 , and so became the three @-@ cylinder prototype of the SR U1 class . The Holcroft valve gear was later replaced with a third set of Walschaerts valve gear in February 1932 , thus reducing maintenance . None of the rebuilds retained their names . 
 = = = Performance of the rebuilt locomotives and withdrawal = = = 
 As members of the U and U1 classes , rebuilds were used mainly on mixed @-@ traffic as well as secondary passenger duties on lines between the main routes . They were used all over the Southern Railway network , but were little @-@ used over the steep track gradients west of Exeter . The smaller @-@ wheeled N class was preferred amongst crews for the same duties , as high @-@ speed running was rare away from the main lines in the West Country . Heavier passenger work was allocated to Bulleid 's Unrebuilt Light Pacifics , which were within weight restrictions in this area . The 21 rebuilt locomotives entered British Railways service in 1948 . From 1955 a few were given replacement frames at overhaul : these had a shallower curve between the front buffer beam and the smokebox . 
 Withdrawals took place between 1962 and 1966 , by which time many of the rebuilds were based at Guildford shed . Work was taken over by Oliver Bulleid 's Light Pacifics , and the electrification of much of the former Southern Railway network was imminent , making all the 2 @-@ 6 @-@ 0s surplus to requirements from 1963 . The final rebuild was withdrawn from service in June 1966 . 
 = = Livery and numbering = = 
 = = = SECR and Southern Railway = = = 
 The K class prototype was painted in an unlined dark grey livery with white lettering and numbering . This Maunsell grey livery was introduced by the SECR as a wartime economy measure . On Grouping in 1923 , the SR replaced the liveries of the constituent companies with a standard sage green livery ( the colour being that previously used by Urie on the LSWR ) with black and white lining , primrose yellow numbering and " Southern " on the tender . From 1925 , the K and K1 classes were repainted in a darker olive green livery , introduced by Maunsell , with plain white lining and primrose yellow markings . When rebuilt into the U and U1 classes , the locomotives were repainted in the olive green livery with " Southern " added to the tender tank . This was carried into the Second World War when labour shortages meant that many U class locomotives were painted in plain black , with the result that by 1945 all the class were running in black . 
 The class prototype was initially numbered 790 , with the rest following consecutively with a prefix " A " to denote a locomotive designed for the former SECR . The system of prefixes had been adopted by the SR to distinguish between locomotives with identical numbers acquired from different companies , and the K1 class became No . A890 when built in 1925 . This system was replaced from 1928 by a renumbering of all locomotives into one sequence , in which the K class rebuilds became Nos. 1790 – 1809 , and the K1 class rebuild became No. 1890 . 
 = = = <unk> in British Railways service = = = 
 The K and K1 classes were absorbed by British Railways as part of the U and U1 classes in 1948 , which were given the BR power classification 4MT ( mixed @-@ traffic ) in 1950 . This was later revised to <unk> in the light of operational experience on freight trains . The locomotives at first retained their Southern Railway livery , with " British Railways " added to the tender when repaints were due . From 1949 to 1955 , the U and U1 class locomotives were gradually repainted in the British Railways mixed @-@ traffic lined black livery with red , cream and grey lining and the British Railways crest on the tender . Numbers were changed to the British Railways standard numbering system : the series <unk> – 31809 was allocated to the K class rebuilds , and <unk> to the K1 class . 
 = = Operational assessment and preservation = = 
 For location details and current status of the preserved ( rebuilt ) locomotive , see : List of K and K1 class locomotives . 
 Sir Nigel Gresley 's independent report on the K and K1 classes during the mainline stability trials stated that they were well designed , mechanically reliable and capable of hauling expresses at high speeds on well @-@ maintained track , which meant that they could have been useful additions to the Southern Railway 's suburban commuter fleet . However , they were undoubtedly prone to rough riding and instability , and not only on the poorest quality tracks . The restricted water capacity also limited their use outside the Southern Railway 's Central section . The impending electrification of the Brighton Main Line , scheduled for 1932 also meant that fewer duties suitable for heavy passenger tank locomotives would be available in the 1930s . The lack of a suitable role for both classes was considered when the decision was made to rebuild them as U / U1 tender engines following the Sevenoaks disaster . In rebuilt form they continued to operate until the 1960s , and were capable of attaining speeds in excess of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) with a greater degree of stability . 
 One K class rebuild has survived : No . <unk> River Torridge – converted to U class No. 1806 – was rescued from Woodham Brothers scrap yard in Barry , Vale of Glamorgan , South Wales in October 1976 for use on the Watercress Line . It was restored to ex @-@ British Railways condition as No. 31806 . In August 2014 , the locomotive entered service with the Swanage Railway . 
 = Golden Age of Trucking Museum = 
 The Golden Age of Trucking Museum is a defunct trucking museum in Middlebury , Connecticut , United States . Founded in 1998 by Richard and Frances Guerrera , it was non @-@ profit organization dedicated to trucking that focused on trucks of the 1950s . The museum was dedicated on September 23 , 2002 and housed in a 32 @,@ 000 square foot building . It featured a collection of historic and antique vehicles including the first registered car in Connecticut , a 1928 Pierce @-@ Arrow Motor Car Company dump truck . Among the trucks in the museum were Mack Trucks , GMC and Autocar Company trucks , including a 1963 Mack B61 motivated Guerrera to found the museum . The Golden Age of Trucking Museum also featured a collection of toy trucks , hats , state license plates and images relating to trucking . Throughout its entire operation , the museum ran a deficit and it closed after a 2009 fund raising campaign failed . The museum 's final day of operation was on July 20 , 2010 . The economic impact of the museums closure was expected to be low , but according to Steven <unk> of the Boston <unk> the Golden Age of Trucking Museum made its mark on the auto world . 
 = = History = = 
 Founded in 1998 by Richard and Frances Guerrera , the Golden Age of Trucking Museum was a non @-@ profit organization dedicated to trucking . The <unk> owned and operated R.J. Guerrera , a liquid transportation trucking company . Originally , a collection of trucks were restored and stored in barns and garages throughout Connecticut . The Golden Age of Trucking Museum was opened to bring the collection under a single roof . After the property for the museum was purchased in July 1998 , Richard Guerrera was diagnosed with cancer . In June 1999 , he was transported to the site for an unofficial groundbreaking event . Richard Guerrera died a month later and the facility was completed in 2002 . The museum was designed by Francis Guerrera 's son @-@ in @-@ law , a general contractor . On September 23 , 2002 , the museum was formally opened with a ribbon @-@ cutting ceremony in the complete 32 @,@ 000 square foot building . 
 The museum never was able to sustain itself through its visitors and it ran a deficit throughout its entire operation ; the museums operating costs that were covered by Frances Guerrera . In 2009 , a $ 100 @,@ 000 funding raising campaign was undertaken , but it only resulted in a total of $ 20 @,@ 000 being raised prior to July 2010 . On July 6 , 2010 , the board of directors came to the conclusion to close the museum . The museum 's final day was on July 20 , 2010 and also featured a gathering of antique cars in a " Cruise Night " event . 
 = = Collection = = 
 The Golden Age of Trucking Museum featured a collection of historic trucks , cars and other items related to the trucking operation , with a special focus on trucking in the 1950s . Many of the historic vehicles on display were noted for their rarity or otherwise unique quality . These include the first registered car in Connecticut , a 1902 Merry Oldsmobile , and a 1928 Pierce @-@ Arrow Motor Car Company five @-@ to @-@ seven ton dump truck , one of only 55 Pierce @-@ Arrow trucks produced . The displays included a 1916 Mack Paddy Wagon , a 1929 Diamond T truck , a 1931 Ford Model AA Service Car , a 1936 Ford Roadster Deluxe and a Model T Ford Tank Truck . A 1953 <unk> moving van with original owner 's banner was located near some <unk> and carriages . Other early period vehicles on display included a 1912 Autocar two @-@ cylinder transit bus , a 1914 Trumbull , a 1915 Barker , and a 1917 Republic Model 10 1 @-@ ton express and a 1920 3 ½ ton Model AC Mack . 
 Trucks of the 1930s and 1940s included a 1937 Ford tow truck , a 1940 Dodge VK , a 1940 Mack FN , a 1941 Federal Model <unk> and a 1942 Dodge WC @-@ 21 . The 1950s ' vehicles were represented by a 1952 Diamond T <unk> , 1955 IH <unk> and a 1955 GMC Model 860 . Later vehicles included two Autocar Company trucks , a 1962 <unk> and a 1974 <unk> 10 @-@ wheel dump truck . The 1963 Mack B61 was of special importance to the founder Richard Guerrera who acquired the truck with the purchase of a local company , Oil Transport . Guerrera sold the truck and reacquired the same vehicle in 1985 to restore it . This Mack B61 was described as the " impetus " for the museum . Also on display was a 1996 Volvo prototype truck cab . 
 Other items on display included " Bumpers " , a dog sculpture made of Mack Truck bumpers and a collection of toy trucks , hats , state license plates and images relating to trucking . The museum also included an exhibit featuring kerosene lamps . According to Stephen Wood , the kerosene lamps might have come from the defunct Kerosene Lamp Museum . Also on display was Stephen <unk> 's Guinness World Record breaking Popsicle stick structure , made of 396 @,@ 000 sticks . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Throughout its operation , the Golden Age of Trucking Museum was one of two trucking museums in Connecticut . Steven <unk> of the Boston Globe wrote , " It may seem strange that two trucking museums would be located in the same state , but [ t ] he Haul of Fame truck museum and [ t ] he Golden Age of Trucking Museum make their individual marks on the auto world . " The economic impact of the museum 's closure was not expected to be large according to John Cookson , co @-@ chairman of Economic and Industrial Development Commission . Janet Serra , the director for the Western Connecticut Convention and Visitor 's Bureau , said the effect of closure would not be immediate , but noted it could impact tourism and area hotels . 
 = SAS ( software ) = 
 SAS ( Statistical Analysis System ) is a software suite developed by SAS Institute for advanced analytics , multivariate analyses , business intelligence , data management , and predictive analytics . 
 SAS was developed at North Carolina State University from 1966 until 1976 , when SAS Institute was incorporated . SAS was further developed in the 1980s and 1990s with the addition of new statistical procedures , additional components and the introduction of JMP . A point @-@ and @-@ click interface was added in version 9 in 2004 . A social media analytics product was added in 2010 . 
 = = Technical overview and terminology = = 
 SAS is a software suite that can mine , alter , manage and retrieve data from a variety of sources and perform statistical analysis on it . SAS provides a graphical point @-@ and @-@ click user interface for non @-@ technical users and more advanced options through the SAS programming language . In order to use Statistical Analysis System , Data should be in an Excel table format or SAS format . SAS programs have a DATA step , which retrieves and manipulates data , usually creating a SAS data set , and a PROC step , which analyzes the data . 
 Each step consists of a series of statements . The DATA step has executable statements that result in the software taking an action , and declarative statements that provide instructions to read a data set or alter the data 's appearance . The DATA step has two phases , compilation and execution . In the compilation phase , declarative statements are processed and syntax errors are identified . Afterwards , the execution phase processes each executable statement sequentially . Data sets are organized into tables with rows called " observations " and columns called " variables " . Additionally , each piece of data has a descriptor and a value . 
 The PROC step consists of PROC statements that call upon named procedures . Procedures perform analysis and reporting on data sets to produce statistics , analyses and graphics . There are more than 300 procedures and each one contains a substantial body of programming and statistical work . PROC statements can also display results , sort data or perform other operations . SAS <unk> are pieces of code or variables that are coded once and referenced to perform repetitive tasks . 
 SAS data can be published in HTML , PDF , Excel and other formats using the Output Delivery System , which was first introduced in 2007 . The SAS Enterprise Guide is SAS ' point @-@ and @-@ click interface . It generates code to manipulate data or perform analysis automatically and does not require SAS programming experience to use . 
 The SAS software suite has more than 200 components Some of the SAS components include : 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 The development of SAS began in 1966 after North Carolina State University re @-@ hired Anthony Barr to program his analysis of variance and regression software so that it would run on IBM System / 360 computers . The project was funded by the National Institute of Health and was originally intended to analyze agricultural data to improve crop yields . Barr was joined by student James Goodnight , who developed the software 's statistical routines , and the two became project @-@ leaders . In 1968 , Barr and Goodnight integrated new multiple regression and analysis of variance routines . In 1972 , after issuing the first release of SAS , the project lost its funding . According to Goodnight , this was because NIH only wanted to fund projects with medical applications . Goodnight continued teaching at the university for a salary of $ 1 and access to mainframe computers for use with the project , until it was funded by the University Statisticians of the Southern Experiment Stations the following year . John Sall joined the project in 1973 and contributed to the software 's econometrics , time series , and matrix algebra . Another early participant , Caroll G. Perkins , contributed to SAS ' early programming . <unk> W. Service and Jane T. Helwig created SAS ' first documentation . 
 The first versions of SAS were named after the year in which they were released . In 1971 , SAS 71 was published as a limited release . It was used only on IBM mainframes and had the main elements of SAS programming , such as the DATA step and the most common procedures in the PROC step . The following year a full version was released as SAS 72 , which introduced the <unk> statement and added features for handling missing data or combining data sets . In 1976 , Barr , Goodnight , Sall , and Helwig removed the project from North Carolina State and incorporated it into SAS Institute , Inc . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 SAS was re @-@ designed in SAS 76 with an open architecture that allowed for compilers and procedures . The <unk> and <unk> statements were improved so they could read most data formats used by IBM mainframes . Generating reports was also added through the PUT and <unk> statements . The ability to analyze general linear models was also added as was the <unk> procedure , which allowed developers to customize the appearance of data . In 1979 , SAS 79 added support for the CMS operating system and introduced the <unk> procedure . Three years later , SAS 82 introduced an early macro language and the <unk> procedure . 
 SAS version 4 had limited features , but made SAS more accessible . Version 5 introduced a complete macro language , array subscripts , and a full @-@ screen interactive user interface called Display Manager . In 1985 , SAS was rewritten in the C programming language . This allowed for the SAS ' <unk> Architecture that allows the software to run on UNIX , MS @-@ DOS , and Windows . It was previously written in PL / I , Fortran , and assembly language . 
 In the 1980s and 1990s , SAS released a number of components to complement Base SAS . SAS / <unk> , which produces graphics , was released in 1980 , as well as the SAS / ETS component , which supports econometric and time series analysis . A component intended for pharmaceutical users , SAS / PH @-@ Clinical , was released in the 1990s . The Food and Drug Administration standardized on SAS / PH @-@ Clinical for new drug applications in 2002 . Vertical products like SAS Financial Management and SAS Human Capital Management ( then called CFO Vision and HR Vision respectively ) were also introduced . JMP was developed by SAS co @-@ founder John Sall and a team of developers to take advantage of the graphical user interface introduced in the 1984 Apple Macintosh and shipped for the first time in 1989 . Updated versions of JMP were released continuously after 2002 with the most recent release being from 2012 . 
 SAS version 6 was used throughout the 1990s and was available on a wider range of operating systems , including Macintosh , OS / 2 , Silicon Graphics , and <unk> . SAS introduced new features through dot @-@ releases . From 6 @.@ 06 to 6 @.@ 09 , a user interface based on the windows paradigm was introduced and support for SQL was added . Version 7 introduced the Output Delivery System ( <unk> ) and an improved text editor . <unk> was improved upon in successive releases . For example , more output options were added in version 8 . The number of operating systems that were supported was reduced to UNIX , Windows and z / OS , and Linux was added . SAS version 8 and SAS Enterprise Miner were released in 1999 . 
 = = = Recent history = = = 
 In 2002 , the Text Miner software was introduced . Text Miner analyzes text data like emails for patterns in Business Intelligence applications . In 2004 , SAS Version 9 @.@ 0 was released , which was dubbed " Project Mercury " and was designed to make SAS accessible to a broader range of business users . Version 9 @.@ 0 added custom user interfaces based on the user 's role and established the point @-@ and @-@ click user interface of SAS Enterprise Guide as the software 's primary graphical user interface ( GUI ) . The Customer Relationship Management ( CRM ) features were improved in 2004 with SAS Interaction Management . In 2008 SAS announced Project Unity , designed to integrate data quality , data integration and master data management . 
 SAS sued World Programming , the developers of a competing implementation , World Programming System , alleging that they had infringed SAS 's copyright in part by implementing the same functionality . This case was referred from the United Kingdom 's High Court of Justice to the European Court of Justice on 11 August 2010 . In May 2012 , the European Court of Justice ruled in favor of World Programming , finding that " the functionality of a computer program and the programming language cannot be protected by copyright . " 
 A free version was introduced for students in 2010 . SAS Social Media Analytics , a tool for social media monitoring , engagement and sentiment analysis , was also released that year . SAS Rapid Predictive <unk> ( RPM ) , which creates basic analytical models using Microsoft Excel , was introduced that same year . JMP 9 in 2010 added a new interface for using the R programming language from JMP and an add @-@ in for Excel . The following year , a High Performance Computing appliance was made available in a partnership with <unk> and EMC <unk> . In 2011 , the company released Enterprise Miner 7 @.@ 1 . The company introduced 27 data management products from October 2013 to October 2014 and updates to 160 others . At the 2015 SAS Global Forum , it announced several new products that were specialized for different industries , as well as new training software . 
 = = Software products = = 
 As of 2011 SAS 's largest set of products is its line for customer intelligence . Numerous SAS modules for web , social media and marketing analytics may be used to profile customers and prospects , predict their behaviors and manage and optimize communications . SAS also provides the SAS Fraud Framework . The framework 's primary functionality is to monitor transactions across different applications , networks and partners and use analytics to identify anomalies that are indicative of fraud . SAS Enterprise GRC ( Governance , Risk and Compliance ) provides risk modeling , scenario analysis and other functions in order to manage and visualize risk , compliance and corporate policies . There is also a SAS Enterprise Risk Management product @-@ set designed primarily for banks and financial services organizations . 
 SAS ' products for monitoring and managing the operations of IT systems are collectively referred to as SAS IT Management Solutions . SAS collects data from various IT assets on performance and utilization , then creates reports and analyses . SAS ' Performance Management products consolidate and provide graphical displays for key performance indicators ( <unk> ) at the employee , department and organizational level . The SAS Supply Chain Intelligence product suite is offered for supply chain needs , such as forecasting product demand , managing distribution and inventory and optimizing pricing . There is also a " SAS for Sustainability Management " set of software to forecast environmental , social and economic effects and identify causal relationships between operations and an impact on the environmental or ecosystem . 
 SAS has product sets for specific industries , such as government , retail , telecommunications and aerospace and for marketing optimization or high @-@ performance computing . 
 = = = Comparison to other products = = = 
 In a 2005 article for the Journal of Marriage and Family comparing statistical packages from SAS and its competitors Stata and SPSS , Alan C. Acock wrote that SAS programs provide " extraordinary range of data analysis and data management tasks , " but were difficult to use and learn . SPSS and Stata , meanwhile , were both easier to learn ( with better documentation ) but had less capable analytic abilities , though these could be expanded with paid ( in SPSS ) or free ( in Stata ) add @-@ ons . Acock concluded that SAS was best for power users , while occasional users would benefit most from SPSS and Stata . A comparison by the University of California , Los Angeles , gave similar results . 
 Competitors such as Revolution Analytics and Alpine Data Labs advertise their products as considerably cheaper than SAS ' . In a 2011 comparison , Doug <unk> of InformationWeek found that start @-@ up fees for the three are similar , though he admitted that the starting fees were not necessarily the best basis for comparison . SAS ' business model is not weighted as heavily on initial fees for its programs , instead focusing on revenue from annual subscription fees . 
 = = Adoption = = 
 According to IDC , SAS is the largest market @-@ share holder in " advanced analytics " with 35 @.@ 4 percent of the market as of 2013 . It is the fifth largest market @-@ share holder for business intelligence ( BI ) software with a 6 @.@ 9 % share and the largest independent vendor . It competes in the BI market against conglomerates , such as SAP <unk> , IBM <unk> , SPSS <unk> , Oracle Hyperion , and Microsoft BI . SAS has been named in the Gartner Leader 's Quadrant for Data Integration Tools and for Business Intelligence and Analytical Platforms . A study published in 2011 in BMC Health Services Research found that SAS was used in 42 @.@ 6 percent of data analyses in health service research , based on a sample of 1 @,@ 139 articles drawn from three journals . 
 = The Voice Within = 
 " The Voice Within " is a song recorded by American singer Christina Aguilera for her fourth studio album , Stripped ( 2002 ) . The song was written by Aguilera and Glen Ballard , with production handled by Ballard . It is a piano @-@ driven ballad that talks about trusting oneself and one 's instincts . " The Voice Within " was released as the fifth and final single from Stripped on October 27 , 2003 by RCA Records . 
 Upon its release , " The Voice Within " received mainly positive reviews from music critics , who called it an inspirational ballad and praised Aguilera 's strong vocals on the track . Some likened the song to works by Celine Dion and Mariah Carey . Commercially , " The Voice Within " achieved moderate success on charts worldwide , peaking within the top ten of charts in several countries including Australia , Ireland , Switzerland and the United Kingdom , and it reached number 33 on the US Billboard Hot 100 . 
 An accompanying music video for " The Voice Within " was directed by David LaChapelle . It was filmed in black and white as a one shot . The video was nominated for three MTV Video Music Awards at the 2004 ceremony . In support of Stripped , Aguilera performed the track on her two major concert tours : Justified and Stripped Tour ( 2002 – 03 ) and The Stripped Tour ( 2003 ) . " The Voice Within " has been covered on several television talent shows . 
 = = Recording and composition = = 
 " The Voice Within " was written by Christina Aguilera and Glen Ballard , and was produced by Ballard . The track was recorded by Scott Campbell at The Record Plant in Hollywood , Los Angeles , California and at NRG Recording Studios in North Hollywood , LA , CA , while it was mixed by Peter Mokran . Bass was performed by Mike Elizondo , while Matt Chamberlain played drums . Ballard also played guitar with John Goux , and played keyboards with Randy Kerber . Musically , " The Voice Within " is a piano @-@ driven ballad . Composed in the key of G major , it has a moderately slow tempo of 66 beats per minute . Aguilera 's vocal range on the track spans from the low @-@ note of D3 to the high @-@ note of F ♯ 5 . Her vocals on the song were been described as strong and powerful by critics . Lyrically , " The Voice Within " is an inspirational song that says that one should trust one 's heart and own mind , and find inner strength . The motivational lyrics include , " When there 's no @-@ one else , look inside yourself , like your oldest friend just trust the voice within " . As recalled by Aguilera , " I wrote this song when I was 20 , 21 , and it was a time in my life when you 're being pushed and pulled in so many directions . " 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 " The Voice Within " was released to US contemporary hit and adult contemporary radio stations on October 27 , 2003 as the fifth and final single from Stripped by RCA Records . It was also available for Maxi single sales in stores . 
 = = = Critical = = = 
 Upon its release , " The Voice Within " received generally favorable reviews from music critics . Chuck Taylor of Billboard praised the " breathtaking and organically flowing " melody , noting that " Aguilera delivers what is perhaps her most assured vocal yet , punching through the clouds and taking her place as a fist @-@ shaking member of the heavenly choir . " Taylor also highlighted that the track " is an inspired recording and a showcase for all that this artist can accomplish when she lets the voice precede that offputting image . " Josh Kun from Spin labelled it a " swoony Celine @-@ for @-@ teens ballad " . Sal Cinquemani for Slant Magazine gave the song a very positive review , naming it an " inspirational " ballad and praised her powerful vocals . CD Universe also praised Aguilera 's " rich , throaty style " vocals on the track and compared the song to works by Mariah Carey . Sputnikmusic 's critic Amanda Murray commented that the song is " tacky " yet " powerful all the same " . Rachel <unk> of Wetpaint complimented the song 's inspiration melody , declaring that it " basically reduces us to tears every time we hear it " . 
 = = = Commercial = = = 
 On November 29 , 2003 , " The Voice Within " made it chart debut on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart at number 62 , becoming the week 's " Hot Shot Debut " . On the chart issue dated December 6 , 2003 , the single jumped to number 57 . During the following week , the song rose to number 46 . In its fourth week charting , it charted at number 36 . Finally , it reached its peak at number 33 on January 10 , 2004 . The song became Aguilera 's eleventh top @-@ forty hit on the chart , and remained on the Hot 100 for a total of 16 weeks . It also charted at number 11 on the Pop Songs chart , number 16 on the Adult Contemporary chart , and number 33 on the Adult Pop Songs chart . The song reached number ten on the Canadian Hot 100 chart . Throughout Europe , " The Voice Within " achieved moderate success on charts , reaching the top ten on many of them . It was also a top @-@ ten song in Australia , peaking at number eight in the country , making the fifth single from the album to reach the top @-@ ten . In Switzerland , " The Voice Within " was Stripped 's highest charting @-@ single along with the lead @-@ single " Dirrty " , peaking at number three . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = Music video = = 
 The song 's music video was directed by David LaChapelle , who previously directed the music videos for " Dirrty " ( 2002 ) and " Can 't Hold Us Down " ( 2003 ) . He explained to MTV News that the video 's concept , " There 's all kinds of connotations to the word ' stripped . ' I wanted to strip it down to one take . Just her and this incredible voice . And really not have anything that is going to overshadow that . She 's trying to grow as an artist and along the way she 's taking all kinds of risks and a lot of times people let those things overshadow her ability and her talent . I wanted to bring it all back as a sort of bookend to this album " . The video begins with a close @-@ up scene of Aguilera and zooms out to her wearing a slip and sitting in an abandoned prop room . In one continuous black and white shot , Aguilera walks through several rooms , exits the building , and finally lays on a light box . The video was filmed at a deserted theater in downtown Los Angeles . It was inspired by neorealist works . The video was nominated for three 2004 MTV Video Music Awards : Best Female Video , Viewer 's Choice , and Best Cinematography . 
 = = Live performances and covers = = 
 Aguilera performed " The Voice Within " for the first time during the Justified & Stripped Tour ( 2003 ) , a tour held in support of Aguilera 's Stripped and Justin Timberlake 's album Justified ( 2002 ) . During the tour 's late 2003 extension , The Stripped Tour , Aguilera also performed the track . The performance is included in the video release Stripped Live in the U.K. ( 2004 ) . Aguilera included the song on her setlist at a concert in Kuala Lumpur in 2014 . In 2016 , Aguilera also performed the track during her set at the 15th edition of Mawazine Festival . 
 On October 3 , 2005 , Roxane <unk> covered " The Voice Within " during the top nine show of the third season of Australian singing contest Australian Idol . Despite being well received by judges , she was eliminated that night . On March 28 , 2006 , Katharine McPhee performed the track live on the 24th show of the fifth season of American Idol , which resulted McPhee as one of the bottom two . Simon Cowell compared McPhee 's abilities to those of Aguilera , commenting that her performance was almost as good as the original singer . " The Voice Within " was also covered by Meliz Serman on the 2006 TV series How Do You Solve a Problem like Maria ? . In 2009 , British girl group The Nolans performed " The Voice Within " live during there I 'm in the Mood Again Tour , which was held to support their 2009 comeback album I 'm in the Mood Again . 
 Hong Kong singer G.E.M. recorded a cover version of the song , which is included in her album My Secret Limited Edition ( 2010 ) . The same year , " The Voice Within " was also performed by Jessica Robinson on Over the Rainbow . On May 26 , 2012 , contestant Ruth Brown performed the song live during the semi @-@ finals of the first season of The Voice UK , which left tears on her eyes . Brown revealed that the song was personal to her because she had a hard time at school . Judge Sir Tom Jones complimented her performance , " The story of the song means a lot to her , I think this girl is stronger than even she realises it herself " , " You didn ’ t just sing it , you lived it " . On June 8 , 2013 , eleven @-@ year @-@ old <unk> <unk> sang " The Voice Within " during the final round of the seventh series of Britain 's Got Talent . The song was also played during the first season of Ghost Whisperer on an episode entitled " The Vanishing " . Chris Mann and Jacquie Lee , both contestants and team members of Aguilera 's team on The Voice , performed the track during the second and fifth seasons , respectively . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording places 
 Recorded at The Record Plant in Hollywood , Los Angeles , California and NRG Recording Studios in North Hollywood , Los Angeles , California 
 Personnel 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Stripped , RCA Records . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Priscilla Duffield = 
 Priscilla Duffield ( April 8 , 1918 – July 21 , 2009 ) worked on the Manhattan Project during World War II . She was secretary to Ernest O. Lawrence at the Radiation Laboratory , and to J. Robert Oppenheimer at the Los Alamos Laboratory . After the war she was executive assistant to directors of Scripps Institute of Oceanography and the National Accelerator Laboratory . 
 A graduate of the University of California , from which she obtained a degree in political science , Priscilla Greene started working for Lawrence in February 1942 , and then for Oppenheimer later that year . She arrived in Santa Fe , New Mexico , on March 1943 , and established the Los Alamos Laboratory 's office . She became the office manager at Los Alamos , greeting visitors , answering the telephone , making travel arrangements , arranging security passes and accommodation , and taking notes of telephone calls . In September 1943 , she married Robert Duffield , a chemist working at the Los Alamos laboratory , and changed her surname from Greene to Duffield . 
 In the post @-@ war years , Duffield was secretary and executive assistant to Roger Revelle , the director of the Scripps Institution of Oceanography . In November 1967 , she became secretary and executive assistant to Robert R. Wilson , the founding director of the National Accelerator Laboratory , and once again she helped establish a new scientific laboratory on a new site . In later life she moved to Colorado , where she served on the board of the Uncompahgre Medical Clinic . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Priscilla Greene was born in Berkeley , California , on April 8 , 1918 , and grew up in Corning , California . She entered the University of California , from which she obtained a degree in political science . After graduation , she studied and travelled in New York and Europe before returning to Berkeley , where she got a job as secretary to Ernest O. Lawrence , the director of the Radiation Laboratory at the University of California , in February 1942 , replacing Helen Griggs , who had left to marry Glenn Seaborg . 
 = = Manhattan Project = = 
 When J. Robert Oppenheimer began working on the nuclear weapon design for the Manhattan Project during World War II , Lawrence loaned Greene part @-@ time to take dictation and do general secretarial work for Oppenheimer , while still working full @-@ time for himself . " When Robert returned from travel and told me that he had just been to a beautiful place , all I could say is , ' take me too ! ' " she later recalled . Lawrence reluctantly let her go . She immediately started working for Oppenheimer full @-@ time , taking over the disused office of a physics professor who was absent on leave in November 1942 . 
 Greene arrived in Santa Fe , New Mexico , on March 18 , 1943 with Oppenheimer 's son Peter and his nurse . She found Los Alamos , New Mexico , " a pretty appalling place . It was windy , dusty , cold , snowy ... and nothing was finished . " " Everything was put together amazingly fast ... ( but ) it was nothing spectacular . There were unfinished buildings , mud and trucks everywhere . " Since there was no telephone line to Los Alamos , the office was initially established at 109 East Palace in Santa Fe . There was no purchasing system in place either , so she bought a typewriter in Santa Fe with her own money . She would spend the rest of the war trying to get reimbursed for it . 
 When the office moved to Los Alamos , Greene became the office manager , greeting visitors and answering the telephone . She would listen in on all of Oppenheimer 's calls and take notes , except when the director of the Manhattan Project , Brigadier General Leslie R. Groves , Jr . , told her to get off the line . She typed Oppenheimer 's correspondence . Numerous typed documents would end with " JRO : pg " . She handled travel arrangements , security passes and accommodation . Alex <unk> noted that : 
 While Oppenheimer gets much credit for keeping the entire bomb project in his head , it was actually Greene who managed the director ’ s office and kept it organized ; it was Greene who took notes on phone conversations and managed the correspondence with far @-@ flung sites ; it was Greene who helped Oppenheimer , a man who had never managed anything in his life , stay on top of the innumerable tasks assigned to him . 
 Greene married Robert Duffield , a chemist working on the project , in a ceremony at Dorothy McKibbin 's house on September 5 , 1943 . McKibben had a local judge conduct the ceremony , but due to the project 's security , he was not allowed to know the surnames of the couple . Nor was any family allowed to attend , although Greene 's brother <unk> , whom she had recruited to work on the project as a technician , was on hand to give the bride away , and guests included Robert Serber , Robert R. Wilson , Harold Agnew and Katherine Oppenheimer . Three weeks later everyone assembled there again for the wedding of her bridesmaid , Marjorie Hall , to Hugh Bradner . 
 When Duffield became pregnant , she wanted to quit working , but the demands of the project were so great that Oppenheimer kept refusing her requests . He eventually recruited Anne Wilson from Groves 's office as her replacement . 
 = = Later life = = 
 After the war , Duffield became secretary and executive assistant to Roger Revelle , the director of the Scripps Institution of Oceanography . On November 6 , 1967 , she became secretary and executive assistant to Robert R. Wilson , the founding director of the National Accelerator Laboratory , and served in that capacity until December 31 , 1972 . Duffield likened this job to working for Oppenheimer at Los Alamos : 
 " There was the same close feeling of a group of people in a strange land , ... a group of people who were isolated from the rest of the world and trying to do something special . " Duffield said that moving to the Weston site evoked memories of the esprit de corps at Los Alamos , and " that did really make it a frontier . " She also recalled The feeling of independence and adventure in those early days on the Weston site . " We had a flagpole and a big fancy colorful tent was put alongside the house " As she explained , " It was a place to sit and have a meeting : but it also " was a symbol . " And at both labs , " everyone did sort of everything — there was a crisis every day . " Duffield emphasized : " Bob managed to give people the feeling of tremendous urgency , of getting the thing done and getting it done fast and getting it done cheap . " Later , secretary Barb ( <unk> ) Kristen recalled that many new employees considered it hard to know just what to do in those early days , but Duffield , unlike everyone else , knew exactly what was needed and how to get things done . 
 Duffield moved to Norwood , Colorado , where she served on the board of the Uncompahgre Medical Clinic . She died of natural causes at her home there on July 21 , 2009 . She was survived by her daughters Deborah and Libby . Her husband Robert died in 2000 . 
 = Hurricane John ( 1994 ) = 
 Hurricane John , also known as Typhoon John , formed during the 1994 Pacific hurricane season and became both the longest @-@ lasting and the farthest @-@ traveling tropical cyclone ever observed . John formed during the El Niño of 1994 – 95 and peaked as a Category 5 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale , the highest categorization for hurricanes . 
 Over the course of its existence , it followed a 7 @,@ 165 @-@ mile ( 13 @,@ 280 @-@ km ) path from the eastern Pacific to the western Pacific and back to the central Pacific , lasting 31 days in total . Because it existed in both the eastern and western Pacific , John was one of a small number of tropical cyclones to be designated as both a hurricane and a typhoon . Despite lasting for a full month , John barely affected land at all , bringing only minimal effects to the Hawaiian Islands and the United States military base on Johnston Atoll . Its remnants later affected Alaska . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Hurricane John were thought by the United States National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) to be from a tropical wave that moved off the coast of Africa on July 25 , 1994 . The wave subsequently moved across the Atlantic Ocean and Caribbean without distinction , before it crossed Central America and moved into the Eastern Pacific Ocean on or around August 8 . Upon entering the Eastern Pacific the wave gradually developed , before the NHC initiated advisories on the system and designated it as Tropical Depression Ten @-@ E during August 11 . The system was at this time moving westwards and located around 345 miles ( 555 km ) to the south @-@ southeast of Acapulco , Mexico . Conditions were not ideal for development , but it quickly developed banding features and well @-@ defined outflow , and was upgraded to a tropical storm and named John later that day . 
 A strong ridge of high pressure over the northeastern Pacific Ocean forced John westward , where upper level wind shear kept John a tropical storm . Intensity fluctuated considerably , however , as shear levels varied . More than once , shear cleared away most of the clouds above John and nearly caused it to weaken to a tropical depression . However , after eight days of slow westward movement across the Pacific Ocean , shear lessened greatly on August 19 , and John intensified significantly and was designated as a hurricane at 1700 PDT . During an eighteen @-@ hour period between August 19 and August 20 , John further strengthened from a weak Category 1 hurricane to a major Category 3 hurricane . Around 1100 PDT on August 20 , it crossed into the central Pacific , the first of three basin crosses John would make . 
 After entering the central Pacific , John left the area monitored by the NHC and was instead monitored by the Central Pacific Hurricane Center ( CPHC ) . As it moved slowly westward , Hurricane John continued to strengthen considerably in an increasingly favorable environment well south of the Hawaiian Islands ; on 22 August John was designated a Category 5 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane scale ( the highest classification for hurricanes ) and later that day ( by Hawaii Standard Time ) reached its peak winds of 175 miles per hour ( 280 km / h ) . Also on August 22 ( by Hawaii Standard Time ) , John made its closest approach to the Hawaiian Islands , 345 miles ( 500 km ) to the south . John had threatened to turn north and affect the islands days before , but the ridge of high pressure that typically shields the islands from hurricanes kept John on its southerly path . Nonetheless , heavy rains and wind from the outer bands of John affected the islands . 
 With the Hawaiian Islands behind it , John began a slow turn to the north , taking near @-@ direct aim at Johnston Atoll , a small group of islands populated only by a United States military base . The storm slowly weakened from its peak as a Category 5 hurricane in the face of increasing shear , dropping down to a Category 1 hurricane with 90 miles per hour ( 145 km / h ) maximum winds . On August 25 local time , John made its closest approach to the Johnston Atoll only 15 miles ( 24 km ) to the north . On Johnston Atoll , sustained winds were reported up to 60 miles per hour ( 95 km / h ) , the equivalent of a strong tropical storm , and gusts up to 75 miles per hour ( 120 km / h ) were recorded . 
 Clearing Johnston Atoll , John turned to the northwest and began strengthening again as shear decreased . On August 27 local time , John reached a secondary peak strength of 135 miles per hour ( 210 km / h ) , and shortly thereafter it crossed the International Date Line at approximately 22 ° N and came under the surveillance of the Guam branch of the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) . By crossing into the western Pacific , John also became a typhoon and was referred to as Typhoon John during its time in the western Pacific . Immediately after crossing the Date Line , John again weakened and its forward motion stalled . By September 1 , John had weakened to a tropical storm and was nearly motionless just west of the Date Line . There , John lingered for six days while performing a multi @-@ day counterclockwise loop . On September 7 , a trough moved into the area and quickly moved John to the northeast . John crossed the Date Line again on September 8 and reentered the central Pacific . 
 After reentering the central Pacific , John briefly reached a tertiary peak strength of 90 miles per hour ( 145 km / h ) , a strong Category 1 hurricane , well to the north of Midway Island . However , the trough was rapidly pulling apart John 's structure , and the cold waters of the northern central Pacific were not conducive to a tropical cyclone . On September 10 , the 120th advisory was released on the system , finally declaring John to have become extratropical approximately 1000 miles ( 1600 km ) south of Unalaska Island . 
 = = Forecasting difficulties = = 
 During John 's time in the Western North Pacific , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) had particular difficulty in forecasting and even estimating the strength of John . John weakened considerably after entering the Western North Pacific , and , before estimates were later revised , four consecutive advisories were issued that declared John a tropical depression . Each of these advisories called for imminent dissipation . As John persisted and did not dissipate as the JTWC had predicted , it was upgraded to a minimal tropical storm in the next advisory . At the same time , however , two separate ship reports indicated that John had sustained winds of at least 55 knots ( 100 km / h , 65 mph ) , far stronger than the advisory strength of 35 knots ( 65 km / h , 40 mph ) . John would go on to restrengthen into a strong Category 1 hurricane after reentering the Central North Pacific , defying all JTWC predictions . After later reanalysis , the JTWC raised the estimated wind speeds of John for every advisory from 1200 UTC September 1 to its final advisory exactly a week later by at least 5 knots ( 9 km / h , 6 mph ) and as much as 25 knots ( 46 km / h , 29 mph ) . 
 = = Records = = 
 Its 31 @-@ day existence made John the longest @-@ lasting tropical cyclone recorded in both the Pacific Ocean and worldwide , surpassing both Hurricane Tina 's previous record in the Pacific of 24 days in the 1992 season and the 1899 San Ciriaco hurricane 's previous world record of 28 days in the 1899 Atlantic season . In addition , despite its slow movement throughout much of its path , John was the farthest @-@ traveling tropical cyclone in both Pacific Ocean and worldwide , with a distance traveled of 7 @,@ 165 miles ( 13 @,@ 280 km ) , out @-@ distancing previous record holders Hurricane Fico in the Pacific of 4 @,@ 700 miles ( 8 @,@ 700 km ) in the 1978 season and Hurricane Faith worldwide of 6 @,@ 850 miles ( 12 @,@ 700 km ) in the 1966 Atlantic season . 
 Pressure readings from John 's peak are not consistently available as the CPHC did not monitor pressures at the time , but Air Force Reserve aircraft did measure a surface pressure of 929 mbar ( hPa ) , making John one of the most intense hurricanes recorded in the central Pacific ; both Hurricane Emilia and Hurricane Gilma recorded a lower pressure in the central Pacific earlier in the 1994 season , but with lower wind speeds . ( Intensity is measured by minimum central pressure , which correlates with but is not directly linked to wind speeds ) . John was also only the fourth Category 5 hurricane recorded in the central Pacific ( the first was Hurricane Patsy in 1959 , the second was Hurricane Emilia and the third one was Hurricane Gilma , both earlier in 1994 ) , and possessed the highest recorded wind speed in a central Pacific hurricane , 175 mph ( 280 km / h ) . Since 1994 , only one Category 5 hurricane , Hurricane Ioke , has formed in or entered into the Central Pacific ; Ioke , like Emilia and Gilma , had a lower central pressure but lower wind speeds than John . However , John 's pressure record is incomplete ; the 929 mbar reading was only measured when the winds were 160 mph ; there is no pressure reading when it had winds of 175 mph , so it could have been stronger than Emilia , Gilma or Ioke . Also , John was the first hurricane formed in the eastern Pacific that become a typhoon , a feat only matched by Hurricane Genevieve in 2014 . 
 Additionally , John was only the fourth of seven tropical cyclones to exist in all three tropical cyclone basins in the Pacific Ocean . The others were Typhoon Georgette and hurricanes Enrique , Li , Dora , Jimena and Genevieve in 1986 , 1991 , earlier in 1994 , 1999 , 2003 and 2014 , respectively . Also , was the sixth of nine tropical cyclones to enter the central Pacific from the western Pacific . Typhoon June , hurricanes Patsy and Skip and tropical storms Virginia and Carmen in 1958 , 1959 , 1985 , 1968 and 1980 , respectively , had done so previously , and only Tropical Depression 17W , and tropical storms Wene and Omeka in 1996 , 2000 and 2010 , respectively , did so later . Finally , John was one of only six tropical cyclones to cross the Date Line twice , alongside Typhoon June , hurricanes Patsy and Skip , Tropical Storm Carmen and Tropical Depression 17W . 
 = = Impact = = 
 John affected both the Hawaiian Islands and Johnston Atoll , but only lightly . While John passed over 345 miles ( 550 km ) to the south of Hawaiʻi , the islands did experience strengthened trade winds and rough surf along the <unk> and south @-@ facing shores , and , as John moved westward , on west @-@ facing shores as well . The waves , ranging from 6 to 10 ft ( 1 @.@ 8 to 3 @.@ 0 m ) in height , flooded beach parks in Kailua @-@ Kona . Additionally , heavy rains on the Big Island of Hawaiʻi caused minor , localized flooding and some short @-@ term road closures . No deaths , injuries or significant damages were reported in Hawaiʻi . 
 Although John passed within 25 km ( 16 mi ) of Johnston Atoll , it had weakened greatly to a Category 1 system by closest approach . Prior to the storm 's arrival , waves between 20 and 30 ft ( 6 @.@ 1 and 9 @.@ 1 m ) were reported on the island . Additionally , in the Northern Hemisphere , the strongest winds and heaviest rain lie to the north of a tropical cyclone , so the atoll , which lay to the south of the storm 's path , was spared the brunt of the storm . Nonetheless , the 1 @,@ 100 @-@ man personnel for the United States military base on Johnston Atoll had been evacuated to Honolulu as a precaution while John approached . Damage to structures was considerable , but the size of the island and relative functionality of the base led to low damage ; monetary losses were estimated at close to $ 15 million ( 1994 US $ ) . 
 The remnants of John moved through the Aleutian Islands , producing a wind gust of 46 mph ( 74 km / h ) in Unalaska . The storm brought a plume of warm air , and two stations recorded a high temperature of 66 ° F ( 19 ° C ) . 
 = Remixed & Revisited = 
 Remixed & Revisited is a remix album by American singer @-@ songwriter Madonna . It was released on November 24 , 2003 by Maverick Records and Warner Bros. Records . The album contains four songs , in remixed form , from her 2003 ninth studio album American Life and a previously unreleased song , " Your Honesty , " originally written for her 1994 sixth studio album Bedtime Stories . The other tracks included are the live performance of " Like a Virgin " and " Hollywood " on the 2003 MTV Video Music Awards — which ended with Madonna kissing co @-@ performers Britney Spears and Christina Aguilera — and a remix of 1985 single " Into the Groove " . The release peaked at number 115 on the Billboard 200 in the United States . It received mixed reviews from critics ; " Your Honesty " was generally the only song to receive praise . The remix album also marked the closing release under her contract with Maverick Records . 
 = = Conception = = 
 In 2003 , Madonna planned to release a special commemorative box set to celebrate her twentieth anniversary in the music business and the release of her first studio album , Madonna , in 1983 . The plan for the box set was eventually cancelled and Remixed & Revisited was conceived in its place . The compilation contains remixed versions of four songs from American Life and a previously unreleased song called " Your Honesty " ; co @-@ written and co @-@ produced by Dallas Austin , the track is from Madonna 's sixth studio album Bedtime Stories era ( 1994 ) . " Nobody Knows Me " was remixed by performance artist Mount Sims , Headcleanr mixed " American Life " and " Love Profusion " . DJ Jason Nevins remixed " Nothing Fails " , while " Into the Hollywood Groove " was created by The Passengerz . On December 9 , 2003 , Warner Music France released a box set version containing both the remix collection and the original album American Life in a cardboard sleeve entitled Édition <unk> <unk> : American Life + Remixed & Revisited . 
 = = = 2003 MTV VMA performance = = = 
 The medley track " Like a Virgin / Hollywood " was performed during the opening of the 2003 MTV Video Music Awards on August 27 , 2003 , where Madonna was joined by Britney Spears , Christina Aguilera , and Missy Elliott . The performance started with Spears appearing on stage on top of a giant wedding cake while wearing a wedding gown and veil ; she sang the first few lines of " Like a Virgin " before Aguilera appeared from behind the cake and joined her . Madonna then emerged from the cake wearing a black coat and a hat and started singing " Hollywood " before proceeding to kiss Spears and Aguilera on the lips . Missy Elliott came out from a wedding chapel to sing her song " Work It " halfway through the performance . The kiss generated strong reaction from the media . Feminist author Camille Paglia described the moment as great ; she noted that the kiss was like Madonna saying to Spears , " I 'm passing the torch to you . " However , according to her , Spears could not take advantage of the kiss as later her career and lifestyle came under immense media scrutiny and criticism . Paglia said that " literally from that kiss , from that moment onward , Britney has spiraled out of control . It ’ s like Madonna gave her the kiss of death ! " Madonna commented on the kiss ; " I am the mommy pop star and she is the baby pop star . And I am kissing her to pass my energy on to her . " This performance was listed by Blender magazine as one of the twenty @-@ five sexiest music moments on television history . MTV listed the performance as the number @-@ one opening moments in the history of MTV Video Music Awards . 
 = = Commercial reception = = 
 In the United States , Remixed & Revisited debuted at number 115 on the Billboard 200 , selling 22 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . It also debuted and peaked at number 128 on the Top Comprehensive Albums chart . According to Nielsen SoundScan , the EP has sold 114 @,@ 000 copies as of August 2005 in the United States . The Nevins ' mix of " Nothing Fails " charted on the Canadian Singles Chart at seven and topped the Hot Dance Club Play chart . It also debuted on the album charts of Belgium , in Flanders and Wallonia , and Switzerland . The album charted in Italy as a song , reaching a peak of number two . It also charted in Finland and Denmark as an EP on the singles charts . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic felt that the presence of a " strong hook and a strong sense of fun " was missing from the compilation , except for the song " Your Honesty " , which he declared as the best track despite feeling its beats to be a little outdated . He compared the work of the remixers as " as subtle as a jackhammer , whether it 's on the metallic @-@ flaked " American Life " by Headcleanr or the ' 90s @-@ retro Nevins mix of " Nothing Fails " . On all these mixes , Madonna sounds as if she 's out of step with the music of 2003 " . Erlewine also compared Spears ' vocals with that of Madonna 's during her early days and Aguilera 's with that of Cher 's . Nathan Brackett of Rolling Stone commented that the release " improves upon American Life 's standout single " Love Profusion " , but the rest botches an opportunity to revive interest on its parent album " . Fabian from Daily Breeze commented that Remixed & Revisited " is an amusing collection of novelties . " Sarah Crompton from Boston Herald proclaimed the album to be " more fun than her full @-@ length 2003 offering American Life . " The Malay Mail said that the remixes from the album are for " true blue Madonna fans . " 
 A writer for The Miami Herald was negative towards the release saying that " Madonna 's latest misstep is this pointless Remixed & Revisited seven @-@ track EP in which she tries to resell five songs from her recent American Life CD to an audience who deserve far better efforts from the queen , than this . " Ricardo Baca from The Denver Post compared Madonna to actress Drew Barrymore on the cover of the EP , feeling that the singer looked foolish and that the tracks were weal attempts at " spicing up " the already non @-@ commercial songs from American Life . Kevin C. Johnson from St. Louis Post @-@ Dispatch said that with the remixes , Madonna " put some life " back into the songs of American Life , complementing " Your Honesty " and wondering why it was left from the Bedtime Stories sessions . Keith Caulfield of Billboard was impressed with " Your Honesty " and the remixes of " Love Profusion " and " Nobody Knows Me " . He said , " Die @-@ hard fans , even those <unk> of American Life will dig this EP . " In his book The Essential Rock Discography , Martin Charles Strong called the release as " equally dispensable as its parent album " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Additional notes 
 ^ a signifies an additional producer 
 ^ b signifies a remixer and additional producer 
 ^ c signifies a co @-@ producer 
 ^ d signifies an editor 
 ^ e signifies an remixer 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits and personnel as per Remixed & Revisited Allmusic credits . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Telopea truncata = 
 Telopea truncata , commonly known as the Tasmanian waratah , is a plant in the family Proteaceae . It is endemic to Tasmania where it is found on moist acidic soils at altitudes of 600 to 1200 m ( 2000 – 4000 ft ) . Telopea truncata is a component of alpine eucalypt forest , rainforest and scrub communities . It grows as a multistemmed shrub to a height of 3 metres ( 10 ft ) , or occasionally as a small tree to 10 m ( 35 ft ) high , with red flower heads , known as inflorescences , appearing over the Tasmanian summer ( November to February ) and bearing 10 to 35 individual flowers . Yellow @-@ flowered forms are occasionally seen , but do not form a population distinct from the rest of the species . 
 Collected by French botanist Jacques Labillardière in 1792 – 93 , Telopea truncata was first scientifically described in 1805 . Genetic analysis revealed that the Tasmanian waratah is the most distinctive of the five waratah species . It can be cultivated in temperate climates , requiring soils with good drainage and ample moisture in part @-@ shaded or sunny positions . Several commercially available cultivars that are hybrids of T. truncata with the New South Wales waratah ( T. speciosissima ) and Gippsland waratah ( T. oreades ) have been developed . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Tasmanian waratah is a large erect shrub up to 3 metres ( 10 ft ) in height with several stems , although it sometimes grows as a single @-@ stemmed tree to 10 m ( 35 ft ) high . Unlike the New South Wales waratah ( T. speciosissima ) , which has a few stems topped with flowers , the stems of the Tasmanian waratah branch freely , with numerous smaller branches topped with flower heads . Younger branches and flower heads frequently have a coating of brownish hairs . The narrow adult leaves are 3 – 14 cm ( 1 1 ⁄ 8 – 5 1 ⁄ 2 in ) long and 0 @.@ 5 – 2 @.@ 2 cm ( 1 ⁄ 4 – 7 ⁄ 8 in ) across and have a rough texture . <unk> ( spoon @-@ shaped ) to obovate in shape , they have smooth , slightly down @-@ curved margins . The undersurface of the leaves is hairy . Occasional lobed leaves are seen . 
 Flowering occurs from October to January , and is related to altitude : plants at lower elevations flower earlier than ones higher up . The flower heads , known as inflorescences , are terminal — that is , they arise on the ends of small branches — and are surrounded by small inconspicuous hairy bracts . This sets T. truncata apart from all other waratah species , which have hairless bracts . In the shape of a flattened raceme , the flower heads are 3 @.@ 5 – 6 cm ( 1 3 ⁄ 8 – 2 3 ⁄ 8 in ) in diameter and composed of 10 to 35 individual flowers . They are most commonly bright red , though scattered yellow @-@ flowered plants occur . These were described as forma lutea but are mere colour variations and not genetically distinct . Yellow @-@ flowered plants have both red- and yellow @-@ flowered progeny . Anthesis is <unk> ; that is , the flowers at the base ( edges ) of the flower head open first . The flower is composed of a 2 cm @-@ long perianth on a 1 cm @-@ long stalk , with a pronounced kink in the style above the ovary ; all other waratah species have gently incurving styles . Anatomically , the individual flower bears a sessile anther ( that is , it lacks a filament ) , which lies next to the stigma at the end of the style . The ovary lies at the base of the style and atop a stalk known as the gynophore , and it is from here that the seed pod then develops . Meanwhile , a crescent @-@ shaped nectary lies at the base of the gynophore . 
 After flowering , the curved leathery to woody follicles develop . Hanging downwards on wooden stalks , these are roughly oblong in shape , and measure around 5 cm ( 2 in ) long . They split longitudinally to release the winged seeds , which are ripe around March . There are around 16 seeds , which are arranged in two rows . Wooden structures known as lamellae separate the seeds from each other and the follicle walls . 
 = = Taxonomy and evolution = = 
 While exploring Van Diemen 's Land ( Tasmania ) in 1792 – 3 , French botanist Jacques Labillardière collected specimens of what he later formally described as Embothrium truncatum in his 1805 work Novae Hollandiae Plantarum Specimen . The specific epithet is the Latin adjective truncatus , meaning " truncated " or " ending abruptly " , referring to the end of the seed wing . This characteristic is not specific to the Tasmanian waratah ; all members of the subtribe Embothriinae have truncate seed wings . Embothrium was a wastebasket taxon at the time , and Robert Brown proposed placing the species in a new genus , Telopea , in a talk he gave in 1809 , publishing the new name Telopea truncata in 1810 . Richard Salisbury had attended the talk and controversially published the species as Hylogyne australis , or southern <unk> , in Joseph Knight 's 1809 book On the cultivation of the plants belonging to the natural order of Proteeae , thus claiming precedence over Brown 's formal 1810 description . Salisbury was involved in disputes with several prominent naturalists of the time , and his preemption of Brown was seen as unethical , so his names were largely ignored by his contemporaries in favor of Brown 's . 
 James Ross described a new species of waratah , Telopea tasmaniana , in his Hobart Town Almanack in 1835 , but it is now considered a synonym of T. truncata . In 1891 , German botanist Otto Kuntze published Revisio generum plantarum , his response to what he perceived as a lack of method in existing nomenclatural practice . He revived the genus Hylogyne on the grounds of priority , and correctly made the new combination Hylogyne truncata for T. truncata . However , Kuntze 's revisionary program was not accepted by the majority of botanists . Ultimately , the genus Telopea was nomenclaturally conserved over Hylogyne by the International Botanical Congress of 1905 . 
 Telopea truncata is one , and possibly the most distinctive , of five species from southeastern Australia which make up the genus Telopea . It is the earliest offshoot of a lineage that gives rise to the Gippsland waratah ( T. oreades ) and Monga waratah ( T. mongaensis ) of southeastern mainland Australia . The perianths of T. truncata are of a single shade of red , whereas those of its mainland relatives are coloured with two distinct shades of red — the surfaces facing the centre of the flower head are a much brighter red than those facing away . 
 The genus is classified in the subtribe Embothriinae of the Proteaceae , along with the tree waratahs ( Alloxylon ) from eastern Australia and New Caledonia , and the South American genera Oreocallis and Embothrium . Almost all of these species have red terminal flowers , and hence the subtribe 's origin and floral appearance most likely pre @-@ dated the splitting of Gondwana into Australia , Antarctica , and South America over 60 million years ago . <unk> ambiguus ( formerly <unk> ambiguus ) is the oldest identifiable member of the Embothriinae . It is known only from pollen deposits , and was originally described from Eocene deposits in Victoria . The fossil pollen closely resembles that of T. truncata , Alloxylon pinnatum and Oreocallis grandiflora . Fossil remains of Telopea truncata have been recovered from early to middle Pleistocene strata at Regatta Point in western Tasmania . The leaves are small , and these beds housed a subalpine plant community in what is now lowland terrain . Leaves identical to ( and classified as ) Telopea truncata have been recovered from early Oligocene deposits around Lake <unk> near Sheffield . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The species is found in central , southern , and western Tasmania and is absent from warmer , dryer areas . It grows on moist acidic soils in wet sclerophyll forest or subalpine scrub at altitudes of 600 to 1200 m ( 2000 – 4000 ft ) . It is an understory component of subalpine forest stands of alpine ash ( Eucalyptus delegatensis ) and alpine yellow gum ( E. <unk> ) , as well as Athrotaxis selaginoides – Nothofagus <unk> short rainforest , Athrotaxis selaginoides rainforest , Leptospermum @-@ with @-@ rainforest scrub , the tall Nothofagus – <unk> rainforest and Nothofagus – <unk> short rainforest . It is occasionally found in the Leptospermum scoparium – Acacia <unk> forest community of western Tasmania . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 The prominent position and striking colour of the flowers of T. truncata and many of its relatives within the subtribe Embothriinae in both Australia and South America strongly suggest it is adapted to pollination by birds , and has been for over 60 million years . The flower heads produce abundant nectar , which is fed upon by many bird species . The Tasmanian waratah has a swollen woody base largely under the soil known as a lignotuber , which stores energy and nutrients as a resource for rapid growth after a bushfire . 
 Like most Proteaceae , T. truncata has fine proteoid roots that arise from larger roots . These are roots with dense clusters of short lateral rootlets that form a mat in the soil just below the leaf litter . They are particularly efficient at absorbing nutrients from nutrient @-@ poor soils , including the phosphorus @-@ deficient native soils of Australia . Waratah seeds are often eaten — and destroyed — by animals and do not travel far ( just several metres ) from the parent plants . 
 = = Cultivation = = 
 The flowers of the Tasmanian waratah provide ample nectar and hence are a food source for bird visitors to the garden . The species can be propagated by seed , though seedlings may succumb to damping off . Growing in a natural shady location delays flowering by two to four weeks , while growing in a cooler conditions ( due either to latitude or altitude ) can delay flowering by up to six weeks . Pruning flower heads can promote subsequent growth of leaves and branches . It grows best in a cool climate with ample water and good drainage , and has done well in cultivation in England . The Royal Horticultural Society gave it an Award of Merit in 1934 and a First Class Certificate in 1938 . The relationship between light duration and intensity , temperature , vegetative growth and flower production is poorly known . Yellow forms in cultivation were originally propagated from a plant found on Mount Wellington . 
 = = = Cultivars = = = 
 Telopea ' Champagne ' is a cultivar registered under plant breeders ' rights ( PBR ) in 2006 . Its creamy @-@ yellow flowerheads appear from October to December . It is a three @-@ way hybrid between T. speciosissima , T. oreades and the yellow @-@ flowered form of T. truncata . 
 Telopea ' Golden Globe ' is a cultivar registered under PBR in 2006 . Larger than ' Champagne ' , it is also a three @-@ way hybrid between T. speciosissima , T. oreades and the yellow @-@ flowered form of T. truncata . It has been propagated and sold as ' Shady Lady Yellow ' . It was originally bred in the <unk> east of Melbourne . 
 = = Uses = = 
 The flowers of T. truncata were once used extensively for decoration . Geoffrey Smith observed in 1909 that the collection of the flowers for this purpose had caused the decline of some populations on Mount Wellington . The timber of larger specimens has been used for inlays ; it has an attractive grain and a pale red color . 
 = John Harrison Clark = 
 John Harrison Clark or Changa @-@ Changa ( c . 1860 – 1927 ) effectively ruled much of what is today southern Zambia from the early 1890s to 1902 . Alone and unassisted , he arrived from South Africa in about 1887 , reputedly as an outlaw , and assembled and trained a private army of Senga natives , which he used to drive off various bands of slave @-@ raiders . He took control of a swathe of territory on the north bank of the Zambezi river called Mashukulumbwe , became known as Chief " Changa @-@ Changa " and , through a series of treaties with local chiefs , gained mineral and labour concessions covering much of the region . 
 Starting in 1897 , Clark attempted to secure protection for his holdings from the British South Africa Company . The Company took little notice of him . When a local chief , Chintanda , complained to the Company in 1899 that Clark had secured his concessions while passing himself off as a Company official and had been collecting hut tax for at least two years under this pretence , the Company resolved to remove him from power , and did so in 1902 . Clark then farmed for about two decades , with some success , and moved in the late 1910s to Broken Hill , where he became a prominent local figure , and a partner in the first licensed brewery in Northern Rhodesia . Remaining in Broken Hill for the rest of his life , he died there in 1927 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Not much is known about John Harrison Clark 's early life . The son of a man " in the hardware business " ( according to a military officer who knew him , Major G R Deare ) , he was born in Port Elizabeth , Cape Colony around 1860 , and engaged for a time in the Cape Mounted Riflemen during the 1880s . A tall , physically strong man , he wore a large black moustache and was regarded as a fine shot and a capable hunter . 
 Harrison Clark left South Africa in 1887 , but it is unclear why ; according to a story that may be apocryphal , he fled the country as an outlaw soon after his revolver fired — by accident , so the story goes — and killed a man . Whatever the truth , he travelled to Mozambique , then a Portuguese territory , where he made his way upriver along the Zambezi until he reached Feira , a long @-@ abandoned Portuguese settlement at the confluence of the Zambezi and Luangwa Rivers , in what is today southern Zambia . Feira was founded by missionaries from Portugal in about 1720 , but by 1887 it was a ghost town . Its last inhabitants had fled amid a native rising about half a century before , and since then it had been deserted . 
 David Livingstone , who visited Feira in 1856 , described it as utterly ruined at that time , but still conspicuous by the ramshackle monastery buildings on the site . When Clark arrived about three decades later , the Portuguese still maintained a boma ( fort ) called Zumbo on the opposite bank of the Luangwa , but the surrounding country , then called Mashukulumbwe , was largely wild , and out of the control of any government . Harrison Clark settled at Feira , initially alone . According to a letter he wrote in 1897 , he flew the British Merchant Navy 's Red Ensign flag over his house . 
 = = Rise to power = = 
 Slave @-@ raiding was rife in Mashukulumbwe , with gangs of Arab , Portuguese and mixed Chikunda @-@ Portuguese ethnicity competing for the capture of local Baila and <unk> people for use as slaves . Clark , who became known to the locals as " Changa @-@ Changa " , raised and trained an " army " from among the Senga people , and issued these men a vague uniform . How he became a chief is equivocal — Deare asserted that Clark arrived in Mashukulumbwe " on the very day the chief died ... [ and ] was finally made chief of the tribe " . According to a story told by an acquaintance , Harry Rangeley , and partly corroborated by Alexander Scott in the Central African Post in 1949 , he became chief by virtue of winning a battle . Rangeley 's version has him defeating a rival chief ; Scott has Clark coming to the rescue of a Baila village under attack by Portuguese slavers , " <unk> [ ing ] the slaves " and thereupon being proclaimed chief by the grateful villagers . 
 As chief , Clark secured his authority with his army of Senga warriors , defined and collected " taxes " and oversaw the activities of foreign traders in the area . Locals paid tribute in the form of cattle , and overseas merchants had to obtain a " trading licence " from Harrison Clark before they could operate in his territory . Where a trader was harvesting ivory to sell overseas , Clark levied every other tusk as an " export tax " . As well as regulating local trade , Clark encouraged the people to make paths between their villages , and repeatedly defended them against the various slave @-@ raiding gangs . As his Senga troops expanded , he conferred various grandiose titles on himself , including " King of the Senga " and " Chief of the Mashukulumbwe " . 
 All of this caused considerable annoyance to the Portuguese at Zumbo , though the boma coexisted with Clark 's settlement for the most part . The most prominent trans @-@ river clash came when Clark demonstrated the strength of his army by overpowering the fort 's garrison , pulling down the Portuguese flag and running up the Union Jack in its place . He then returned to Feira , leaving the British flag flying over Zumbo . His point made , he made no attempt to stop the Portuguese garrison from returning . The Portuguese arrested Clark at one point , according to one story , but released him after the native troopers refused to guard him , saying he was " too great a man to be arrested " . A similar tale has Harrison Clark being captured in Mozambique and deported to Feira under guard by two Portuguese soldiers ; these men found the journey so harrowing that Clark ended up escorting them back . According to one of Clark 's indigenous followers , he once put an intruding Chikunda force to flight simply by bellowing at the enemy leader to " <unk> you bloody nigger " . 
 Clark consolidated his chieftainship by marrying a daughter of <unk> , the chief of the Chikunda people ; according to Deare this was just one of " the usual assortment of wives " . In 1895 he relocated north to the confluence of the <unk> and <unk> Rivers , where he established his own village . He named the settlement " Algoa " after the Portuguese name for Port Elizabeth , and lived in a small stone fort he built . Writing in 1954 , the historian W V Brelsford described Clark 's sphere of influence from Algoa as " the <unk> Valley and the uplands as far westwards as the Kafue and southwards to Feira " . 
 = = Contact with the British South Africa Company = = 
 The British South Africa Company ( BSAC ) , established by Cecil Rhodes in 1889 , was designed to occupy and develop the area immediately north of the Transvaal , with the ultimate goal of aiding Rhodes 's dream of a Cape to Cairo railway through British territory . Having a firm hold over Matabeleland , Mashonaland and <unk> by 1894 , the Company began officially calling its domain " Rhodesia " in 1895 . The BSAC sought to further expand its influence north of the Zambezi , and to that end regularly sent expeditions into what was dubbed North @-@ Eastern Rhodesia to negotiate concessions with local rulers and found settlements . 
 In 1896 , Major Deare led one such expedition north from the main seat of Company administration , Fort Salisbury , to meet with the Ngoni chief Mpezeni , who ruled to the east of Harrison Clark . One day , to Deare 's surprise , a small group of warriors approached his party from the west , carrying a letter . This message , written in English and signed " Changa @-@ Changa , Chief of the Mashukulumbwe " — the name John Harrison Clark was given in the body of the letter — said that its author had heard of a white man being entertained recently by Mpezeni , and wished to provide the same hospitality at Algoa . " Really , wonders never cease ! " Deare recalled . " I had heard of this man on the Zambezi and had known him well many years ago in the Cape Colony ... We had both lived in the same town for years . I learnt his story later . " It is unclear whether Deare took up Clark 's invitation to Algoa . 
 Harrison Clark subsequently sought protection from the British South Africa Company . He negotiated concessions with two neighbouring chiefs , Chintanda and <unk> , each of whom signed over the mining and labour rights for his respective territory in return for a specified fee whenever Clark wished to use them . In August 1897 , Clark wrote to the Company administrator in Salisbury , Earl Grey , requesting that the Company honour these holdings , enclosing copies of the concessions he had secured . Also providing a cursory description of gold mining prospects in the region , Clark criticised the actions of Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Robert Warton , who was in the vicinity representing the North <unk> Exploration Company , a BSAC subsidiary . " Mashukulumbwe can be occupied without fighting , " he wrote . " I am on friendly terms with all the natives , and , if necessary , can raise a force of three to seven thousand to operate on <unk> [ Mpezeni ] or Mashukulumbwe . Colonel Warton 's Administration of this country has been a mistake ; the country is rich in alluvial and reef gold . " The Company took little notice of Clark , but he continued in the same vein , acquiring similar concessions from the chiefs <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and Mubruma over the following two years . 
 Clark wrote to the Company again on 12 April 1899 , once more attaching copies of his concessions , with an offer to supply the BSAC settlements in Southern Rhodesia with contract labourers taken from among his neighbouring chiefs ' populations . He said he had permission from all of the chiefs involved to do so . He requested as his fee £ 1 per man , and said that he had agreed a monthly wage of 10 shillings for each worker plus food , accommodation and fuel . Having split his concessions into two sections to draw labour from , Clark proposed to provide Salisbury with workers from his eastern concessions , and Bulawayo with those from the west . The chiefs had agreed to provide workers on contracts lasting six months , but Clark wrote that he could attempt to supply labour all year round if the Company wished . 
 = = Decline and fall = = 
 On 14 April 1899 , Chief Chintanda gave a BSAC commissioner at <unk> , Southern Rhodesia a statement in which , among other things , he asserted that Clark had been claiming to be a Company official and had been collecting tariffs such as hut tax under that pretence for at least two years . Clark 's labour and mining concessions , Chintanda said , had been agreed under the impression that he represented the BSAC . Chintanda furthermore claimed that Clark was a prolific womaniser who had once raped a pregnant woman . " Whenever Clark sees a girl he fancies he takes her as his mistress for a few days , and when tired of her sends her home , " Chintanda said . " The fathers and husbands of these girls are constantly complaining to me about Clark 's actions , but I can do nothing as Clark is a white man , and professed to be representing the government . " The chief asked the Company to send a genuine representative . 
 Chintanda 's affidavit caused the BSAC to become concerned about Clark 's continued authority in North @-@ Eastern Rhodesia and to begin investigating him more thoroughly . The situation was complicated when , after a month 's perusal , the Company 's lawyers resolved that the courts in Salisbury and Bulawayo held no jurisdiction outside Southern Rhodesia and therefore could not hear any case brought against Clark . On 4 July 1899 , Arthur Lawley , the Company 's administrator in Matabeleland , wrote to Cape Town to report the situation to the resident High Commissioner for Southern Africa , Alfred Milner . Lawley briefly summarised the charges against Clark and requested permission to hold a court north of the Zambezi under the supervision of one of three chiefs friendly to the Company . Milner replied on 17 August that he could not legally sanction this , and that Lawley should pursue the matter further only when authority extended over Clark 's area . 
 On 24 August 1899 , Sub @-@ Inspector A M Harte @-@ Barry of the British South Africa Police interviewed Chief Mubruma , who corroborated much of what Chintanda had said regarding Clark 's claims to represent the Company . Mubruma said that Clark had visited the previous week and had told him to have his men ready for work south of the river within a month . When told that Clark had no connection with the BSAC , Mubruma said that he would not give Clark the workers , but would readily take part in the kind of scheme he had suggested if the Company wished . He made no comment relevant to Clark 's alleged sexual misconduct . 
 The BSAC established two forts to the north @-@ west of Algoa in 1900 , then a boma at Feira in 1902 , bringing Mashukulumbwe under Company control . Harrison Clark said that his concessions gave him authority over the area and demanded that the Company pay him for them . The BSAC said Clark 's documents were illegal and refused to deal with him . It offered him compensation , the form of which differs by source ; Brelsford and a man who knew Clark personally during the 1920s , Colonel N O Earl Spurr , say that he was given farms as compensation , while a 1920s business acquaintance , A M Bentley , writes that the Company promised grants of land and the right to reserve some mining claims . Clark reluctantly accepted the compensation when he realised that to challenge the BSAC he would have to travel a great distance , possibly to England , and invest heavily in a court case he could not be sure of winning . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 Clark became a successful farmer , experimenting with the growing of rubber , cotton and other plants previously absent from the area . His cotton plantation developed promisingly for a few years , but he abandoned it after heavy rain destroyed an entire crop around 1909 . He remained on the farm until the late 1910s , when he either gave or sold it to Catholic missionaries , and moved to Broken Hill , one of the largest settlements in what had become Northern Rhodesia in 1911 . Here he lived for the rest of his life . Retaining " Changa @-@ Changa " as a nickname , he helped to develop various businesses and events , acted as a partner in the first licensed brewery in Northern Rhodesia ( alongside Lester Blake @-@ Jolly ) , and became " one of the pillars of society in the Broken Hill of those days " , according to Spurr . He owned one of the first automobiles in Northern Rhodesia — a dark green Ford Model T. 
 According to Brelsford , the elderly Harrison Clark remained highly respected among the indigenous people and was sometimes called upon to settle disputes . His last job was personnel manager at a local mine . He dedicated his final years to the writing of a book about his life , the manuscript for which was lost when his house burned down . Clark alleged that the BSAC orchestrated the fire to stop him from publishing unflattering information about the early days of Company rule . He died from heart disease in Broken Hill on 9 December 1927 , aged about 67 , and was buried in the Protestant section of the town cemetery . The modest savings he possessed at the time of his death were left to his sister in Port Elizabeth . 
 According to M D D <unk> , Clark embodied much of the pioneering spirit of the time and was " an object of legend " to his fellow frontiersmen . " He had led a wild , tough life but it had not turned him either into a rascal or into an uncouth bush dweller , " Brelsford writes . " Changa @-@ Changa " endured in the local vernacular as a word roughly meaning " boss " , and was still in use in Zambia in the 1970s . Summarising Clark 's life , Peter <unk> and Lewis Gann conclude that he " experienced in his own person the transition from bush feudalism to capitalism . " 
 = New York Rescue Workers Detoxification Project = 
 The New York Rescue Workers Detoxification Project was founded in New York City in 2003 with the stated purpose of treating rescue workers for toxins inhaled from the smoke of the September 11 attacks . It has two clinics : Downtown Medical on Fulton Street , two blocks from the site of the World Trade Center , and another at Williston Park , Long Island . The project 's co @-@ founder and top fundraiser is the actor Tom Cruise . It uses the Purification Rundown , a " detoxification " program invented by L. Ron Hubbard as part of Scientology 's Bridge to Total Freedom . This rundown has been criticized by many doctors as pseudoscientific and medically dangerous , although it has produced positive testimonials from some recipients . It was reported in October 2007 that 838 people had completed the program . 
 The project has been supported by some public officials , and received some public funding , but received criticism for its financial ties to the Church of Scientology , for exposing rescue workers to potential medical dangers , and for discouraging their use of orthodox medicine . Sources in the Fire Department told a reporter that several participants had joined Scientology , even disconnecting from their families . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Scientologists criticise EPA = = = 
 Tom Cruise explained his motivation for setting up the project in a Scientology promotional video that leaked onto the internet in January 2008 . The Environmental Protection Agency had stated after the World Trade Center attack that the air was safe to breathe . The video narration contradicted this , saying , " The devastation had spread an unprecedented combination of toxins through the air — and it was lethal . " Cruise is seen dismissing the EPA 's all @-@ clear : 
 " Of course , as a Scientologist , you go , that 's a lie . Outright lie . Liar . Fine . Finally you say , dammit , just go there and do it . Put it there , let 's go , here 's the money , let 's go . Let 's just get one person treated . I can 't sleep another night . " 
 In an appearance on CNN 's Larry King Live , Cruise said that he founded the project out of concern that 9 / 11 survivors would suffer leukemia , parkinsonism , multiple sclerosis or cancer as a result of toxins in their fatty tissue . He advocated Hubbard 's " research " as the only way to deal with these problems , claiming , " Doctors do not know how to diagnose chemical exposures [ ... ] You go to a doctor and now he 's going to put you on more and more drugs , steroids and things that are ineffective . " 
 = = = " Detoxification " in Scientology = = = 
 The " detoxification " program was created by L. Ron Hubbard , who set out the procedure in Clear Body , Clear Mind , one of the canonical texts of Scientology . Known as the " Purification rundown " or " <unk> , " it is promoted through various groups affiliated with the Church of Scientology , including Narconon drug rehabilitation and the Second Chance Program . It claims to flush poisons from the body 's fat stores using exercise , saunas , and high doses of vitamins , particularly niacin . Medical professionals have judged it to be unproven , ineffective and / or potentially dangerous . A report for the Department of Health in California described the mega @-@ doses of vitamins as " hazardous " and " in some cases lethal . " Scientology 's own literature reports dehydration , electrolyte disturbances including hyponatremia ( low sodium level ) and hypokalemia ( low potassium level ) , and heat @-@ related illnesses as being frequent side @-@ effects of the program . Testimonials from some participants credit it with improvements in physical and mental health , but several families blame the Rundown for the death of a relative . 
 The project 's clients were required to attend this programme three hours each day , for between twenty @-@ one and forty days . This was promoted as a way to treat memory loss , respiration problems , fatigue and other problems suffered by the Ground Zero workers . 
 = = Finances and organization = = 
 From 2003 to 2007 , Downtown Medical received US $ 900 @,@ 000 in public funding , including $ 630 @,@ 000 from the City of New York . The project also received private funding , the biggest supporter being Tom Cruise . Other celebrity donors included Paul Newman , Paul McCartney , Adam Sandler , Leah Remini , Will Smith and Jada Pinkett Smith . By late 2004 , these donations amounted to $ 2 @.@ 3 million . The detoxification program has been offered for free to rescue workers , and also offered to other New York City residents , some of whom paid $ 5 @,@ 000 . 
 According to tax filings , the project pays on some of its money to two bodies , related to the Church of Scientology , that promote the Purification Rundown . These are the Association for Better Living and Education ( ABLE ) , which receives 5 % of all contributions , and the Foundation for Advancements in Science and Education ( <unk> ) . The Executive Director of the Church of Scientology was involved in creating the Foundation and later described it as a " front group " . In one year , $ 173 @,@ 300 of Downtown Medical 's income went to Dr. Steven Lager , a Scientologist . As of 2007 , the director of the project was Jim Woodworth , a former drug addict who credits his recovery to the Purification Rundown . He was formerly the executive director of <unk> , a Sacramento , California group which promotes Hubbard 's approach to detoxification . 
 = = Endorsements and criticism = = 
 The project had a mixed response from public officials . Margarita López , a former member of New York City Council , endorsed the program and helped it to win public funding . Subsequently , she received nearly $ 115 @,@ 000 in campaign contributions from Scientologists . Another councillor , Joseph Addabbo , Jr . , also supported the project , telling reporters , " The project seems to work . I 've seen it firsthand . " Mayor Michael Bloomberg spoke out against Addabbo and López for their connections with the program , saying that Scientology is " not science , and we should only fund those programs that reputable scientists believe will stand the light of day . " 
 Another supportive member of the City Council was Hiram Monserrate . Monserrate went through the program himself , and drafted official proclamations honoring both Tom Cruise and L. Ron Hubbard . Describing himself as a Christian , he distanced himself from Scientology but said he believes in the Purification Rundown . Another councillor ( and chair of the Public Safety Committee ) , Peter Vallone , Jr. vocally criticized the detoxification project and argued that public money should not be spent on it . He accused Monserrate of crossing the line between " cult and state . " 
 The project 's publicity included favorable quotations from Senator Charles Schumer and from Michael Balboni , New York 's deputy secretary for Public Security , though Schumer later withdrew his support and Balboni denied ever making the statement . Council speaker Christine C. Quinn denounced the program as meritless . U.S. Representative Carolyn B. Maloney wrote a letter supporting the project . Dr. Bob Hoffman of the New York City Poison Control Center warned that the Purification Rundown is potentially dangerous , calling it " <unk> <unk> . " Mayor Doreen Ehrbar of Williston Park took part in the opening ceremony for the Long Island clinic . 
 Neither the police nor the fire department officially supported the project . The Uniformed Firefighters Association initially supported it , but withdrew when the connection to the Church of Scientology was revealed . Firefighter Union President Patrick <unk> said his members ' lives had benefited from the program , and that it had involved no religious rhetoric . Deputy Fire Commissioner Frank <unk> of the FDNY told the New York Times , " while we are aware some members of the department have availed themselves of the program , we in no way endorse it . " Officials at the department raised concerns that firefighters were giving up existing medications in order to take part . The department 's deputy chief medical officer Dr. David <unk> said , " It 's not our job to say you can 't go . All we can do is say there 's no proven evidence it works . " 
 Actress and radio show host Janeane Garofalo drew criticism by allowing actress Leah Remini , then a Scientologist , to promote the project on her Air America Radio show . 
 = = Outcomes = = 
 It was reported in October 2007 that 838 people had completed the program . The clinic displayed towels with colored stains , as evidence that toxic material had been sweated out in the saunas . According to its Director , Jim Woodworth , during the Purification Rundown firefighters had passed odd @-@ colored bowel movements and sweated out mercury , aluminium and magnesium . The Fire Department 's chief medical officer , Dr. Kerry Kelly , criticized the lack of objective evidence , saying , " I have trouble believing in these purple @-@ stained towels . " 
 An investigation by the New York Press asked a number of independent doctors about the evidence for the Purification Rundown . None of them endorsed the program 's effectiveness and some explicitly described it as dangerous . Several said that no peer @-@ reviewed research on the rundown had been published in any medical journal . Some apparently supportive studies have been published , but these lack control groups and have other scientific failings . According to Deputy Fire Commissioner Frank <unk> , doctors investigating the program on behalf of the Fire Department concluded that it was not detoxifying . University of Georgia bioterrorism expert Cham Dallas also denied that the procedure could detoxify , saying " It sounds great and they mean well , but it just doesn 't work . " 
 In 2007 , James Dahlgren and colleagues published a small @-@ sample pilot study assessing the project . Dahlgren is a doctor who promotes the Purification Rundown as a method of detoxification . The study claimed to find evidence both of elevated levels of polychlorinated biphenyls ( PCBs ) and polychlorinated <unk> ( <unk> ) in the rescue workers and improvement during the regime . Two scientists from Cambridge Environmental , Inc. published a thorough critique of the study . They questioned the premise that WTC rescue workers needed detoxification , citing studies that had found that their blood concentration of toxins was no greater than normal . 
 " [ W ] ith few exceptions , people 's body burdens of PCBs and other ' dioxin @-@ like compounds ' are determined almost exclusively by the food we eat , not by the air we breathe . Firefighters may occasionally receive on @-@ the @-@ job exposures to PCBs and <unk> , but these would be from having fought PCB @-@ containing electrical transformer fires , not from 9 / 11 . " 
 The paper argues that the project never properly tested its outcomes and concludes that application of the " potentially dangerous " Purification Rundown to the health problems of 9 / 11 workers is " unconscionable " . 
 Many of the participants spoke favorably of the program and reported improved physical and mental health . Others said they were just taking advantage of the free saunas . One Fire Department lieutenant was quoted describing colleagues as desperate for help with the distress they felt in the aftermath of the attacks , to the point that they would try anything . Fire Department officials raised concerns about the project , saying that firefighters were being required to give up inhalers , pills and other orthodox medication . Two weeks into the program , one firefighter passed out and was taken to an emergency room with severe asthma , later saying that he had been asked to stop using his inhaler . According to the clinic 's associate medical director , Dr. <unk> <unk> , participants were being helped off medication at their own insistence , not at the request of Downtown Medical . A former worker at Downtown Medical told reporters that staff were discouraged from calling for an ambulance even in an emergency , and that one of them had been required to break off contact with her boyfriend because he had left Scientology . A spokesman responded that the clinic had " a clear policy of calling 911 when needed . " 
 = Three @-@ cent nickel = 
 The copper @-@ nickel three @-@ cent piece , often called a three @-@ cent nickel piece or three @-@ cent nickel , was designed by US Mint Chief Engraver James B. Longacre and struck by the United States Bureau of the Mint from 1865 to 1889 . It was initially popular , but its place in commerce was supplanted by the five @-@ cent piece , or nickel . 
 With precious metal federal coinage hoarded during the economic turmoil of the American Civil War , including the silver three @-@ cent piece , and even the copper @-@ nickel cent commanding a premium , Congress issued paper money in denominations as small as three cents to replace the hoarded coins in commerce . These small slips of paper became ragged and dirty , and the public came to hate " shinplasters " . After the issuance in 1864 of a lighter bronze cent and a two @-@ cent piece of that metal , both of which circulated freely , there were proposals for a three @-@ cent piece in copper @-@ nickel to replace the three @-@ cent note . The advocates were led by Pennsylvania industrialist Joseph Wharton , who then controlled the domestic supply of nickel ore . On the last legislative day of the congressional session , March 3 , 1865 , a bill for a three @-@ cent piece in copper @-@ nickel alloy was introduced in Congress , passed both houses without debate , and was signed by President Abraham Lincoln . 
 The three @-@ cent nickel piece initially circulated well , but became less popular when the five @-@ cent nickel was introduced in 1866 , a larger , more convenient coin , with a value of five cents better fitting the decimal system . After 1870 , most years saw low annual mintages for the three @-@ cent nickel , and in 1890 Congress abolished it . The last were struck in 1889 ; many were melted down to coin more five @-@ cent pieces . The issue is not widely collected , and prices for rare dates remain low by the standards of American collectible coinage . 
 = = Background = = 
 The great influx of bullion from the California Gold Rush and other finds caused the price of silver relative to gold to increase starting in 1848 , and silver coins were hoarded or exported for melting . In 1851 , a bill for a three @-@ cent piece in 75 % silver and 25 % copper was introduced in Congress by New York Senator Daniel S. Dickinson , who wanted to lower postage rates from five to three cents . This percentage of silver was less than the normal 90 % so that the coins would circulate at a time of hoarding . The copper large cent did not circulate in the Pacific Coast region or South due to prejudice against coins that did not contain precious metal , and some means of allowing the purchase of a postage stamp without the use of copper cents was necessary . Dickinson 's bill passed on March 3 , 1851 , and in addition to authorizing the new three @-@ cent silver , lowered rates for most domestic mails . By 1854 , the imbalance had abated , and Congress increased the silver content of the three @-@ cent piece to the standard 90 % for silver coins , though its weight was reduced . 
 The large cent was replaced by a smaller version made of 88 % copper and 12 % nickel in 1857 . In 1861 , the Civil War began , and when efforts to finance the war via borrowing failed , the Treasury stopped paying out gold in December 1861 . The United States shifted to a paper money @-@ based economy with little disruption . By June 1862 , the price of silver had risen to the point where coins of that metal vanished from circulation , many exported to Canada , where they were both acceptable in circulation , and could be exchanged for gold . This departure of low @-@ value coins was far more disruptive to commerce than the loss of the high @-@ denomination gold coins , and change in transactions was made by a variety of makeshifts . These included currency issues by cities and businesses , encased postage stamps , and federally issued fractional currency — paper notes in denominations as small as three cents . The low @-@ value paper currency , whether issued by government or business , were called shinplasters by the public , which disliked them . On the Pacific Coast , where paper money was not favored , silver and gold continued to circulate . 
 Since fractional currency in three @-@ cent denominations did not appear until late 1864 , the cent was the only means then circulating of making change from the five @-@ cent note , and came , in 1862 and 1863 , to command a premium when sold in lots , of about 4 % . The Philadelphia Mint tried to keep up with demand , limiting public purchases of cents to five dollars , and sending shipments to major cities . Despite these attempts , Mint Director James Pollock noted in his annual reports that cents were almost unobtainable , hoarded despite the fact that their metallic value remained less than one cent each . Numismatist Neil Carothers theorized that they were put aside by the public as the only circulating federal coinage , made of metal at a time when the public was forced to accept flimsy pieces of paper instead of silver and gold . 
 With cents from the Philadelphia Mint selling at a premium , many private token issues were issued in 1863 , and passed as cents in commerce . Mint officials took notice that the tokens , often made of bronze rather than the copper @-@ nickel alloy then being used in the cent , were not hoarded and began to consider issuing bronze coins . When Pollock proposed legislation for bronze one- , two- , and three @-@ cent pieces , it was opposed by industrialist Joseph Wharton , owner of the major source of nickel in the United States at the time , a mine at Gap , Pennsylvania . Pollock 's bill , as introduced , provided for one- and two @-@ cent pieces of bronze , and the Wharton interests opposed it . According to Carothers , 
 Congress declined to compromise with the nickel interests ... In the House , its opponents managed to delay its passage for a month . Thaddeus Stevens , one of the most influential men in the House , fought it bitterly , admitting , however , that he objected to it because it adversely affected Wharton 's interests . 
 The Coinage Act of 1864 passed into law on April 22 of that year . After entering circulation several months later , the bronze cent and two @-@ cent piece circulated in trade without being hoarded . The bronze alloy was easier to strike than the copper @-@ nickel one , allowing details to be brought forth sharply and extending the life of coinage dies . 
 = = Legislation = = 
 Nickel , formerly used in the cent , now had no place in American coinage . This was unsatisfactory to Wharton , who sought its return . Although Pollock made no mention of further nickel coinage in his 1864 annual report , Wharton in April of that year published a pamphlet proposing that all non @-@ precious metal coinage be composed of 75 % copper and 25 % nickel . The copper @-@ nickel cents had contained only 12 % nickel , and even so had been difficult for the Mint to strike due to the hardness of the metal , the use of which damaged equipment and quickly broke dies . An alloy of 25 % nickel would be even more difficult to coin . Wharton argued that the tough alloy would be difficult to counterfeit . 
 Congress had by the Act of March 3 , 1863 authorized fractional currency in the denomination of 3 cents ; when these notes reached circulation the following year they proved wildly unpopular . The 1864 law which had substituted bronze for copper @-@ nickel had also outlawed " copperheads " or private token issues . Even though these could now only be issued anonymously , and so could not be redeemed , the copperheads were preferred to the 3 @-@ cent shinplasters . Some copperhead tokens even read " Substitute for shinplasters " . The notes soon became filthy and ragged , making them even more disliked . They were more difficult to value in quantity than notes with denominations divisible by five . According to Walter Breen , " This was the moment Wharton 's supporters had been waiting for . " Wharton and his advocates argued that the three @-@ cent notes should be redeemed with equivalent coins . They contended that were Congress to order a three @-@ cent bronze coin , such a piece would be as big as an obsolete large cent , and might be used to deceive the blind into accepting the pre @-@ 1857 cent rather than the more valuable coin . Pollock , previously an opponent of nickel coinage , had a change of heart and became a supporter . 
 There are several slightly varying accounts of why the bill for the three @-@ cent nickel passed . Breen told of the pressure advocates for nickel put on House Coinage Committee chairman John Adam Kasson , finally winning him over to the position that even 25 % nickel coins ( which would be hard on the Mint 's equipment ) would be better than the continued use of shinplasters , and presenting him with a draft of a bill for a three @-@ cent piece of that alloy . The bill made the new coin legal tender to sixty cents . The 1864 act had made the cent legal tender to ten cents , and the two @-@ cent piece to twenty ; both limits were reduced to four cents . The bill did not abolish the three @-@ cent silver piece , which was still being struck in small quantities . The new copper @-@ nickel coins would be issued in exchange for three @-@ cent shinplasters — the Currency Bureau was instructed to print no more three @-@ cent notes . 
 The bill passed the House of Representatives on the evening of March 3 , 1865 . At the time , it was usual to extend the final day of the congressional session in odd @-@ numbered years to noon on March 4 , and this occurred . The Senate took up the bill late on the morning of March 4 . Action was repeatedly interrupted , first by Ohio Senator John Sherman reporting progress on an appropriations bill , then by Iowa 's James Grimes stating that ticket holders for the inaugural festivities at noon were being soaked by rain outside the Capitol , causing some debate as to whether they should be admitted early . Once female guests were admitted ( males were left outside ) , the Senate passed the three @-@ cent nickel bill without debate , and it was shortly thereafter signed by President Abraham Lincoln . 
 Q. David Bowers said of the sudden passage of the legislation " We can only guess what happened behind the scenes " . Carothers wrote that Kasson had opposed nickel coinage , but nevertheless introduced the bill for it during the rush of the final day of the congressional session , " There was no report and no explanation ... The influences that brought about the passage of the measure in this fashion were never revealed . " Numismatic historian Don Taxay suggested that by March 3 , 1865 , " the wide circulation of the bronze cent and two @-@ cent piece had made a three @-@ cent coin superfluous . " 
 = = Design = = 
 Mint Chief Engraver James B. Longacre had , since 1849 , designed coins with various visages of the goddess Liberty , based on a bust , Venus <unk> , he had seen in a Philadelphia museum on loan from the Vatican . Although the Liberty as used on the three @-@ cent nickel piece is closest to Longacre 's experimental cents of 1857 and quarter eagles of 1860 , she resembles most of the Chief Engraver 's other depictions of Liberty . On the three @-@ cent piece , she wears a coronet with her name on it , and a ribbon binds her hair . For the reverse , Longacre combined the Roman numeral III as rendered on the silver three @-@ cent piece with the laurel wreath used on the 1859 Indian Head cent reverse . Breen suggested that the similarity of design to other Longacre coins has contributed to the low level of collector interest in the three @-@ cent nickel . 
 According to Lange , " resourceful as always , J.B. Longacre simply revised an existing image of Liberty for the obverse of the nickel three @-@ cent piece . The same classical profile that appears on the Indian Head cent , the gold dollar , and the $ 3 piece is seen fitted with a new hairstyle and a studded coronet inscribed Liberty . " The act that authorized the three @-@ cent nickel contained a provision requiring the use of the motto " In God We Trust " on all pieces large enough to bear it , but the new coin was deemed too small . No change was made to the design of the three @-@ cent piece in nickel during its lifetime . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Early years ( 1865 – 73 ) = = = 
 The three @-@ cent nickel piece was very popular when it entered circulation in mid @-@ 1865 . More convenient than the larger two @-@ cent bronze piece , it largely replaced that coin , starting the two @-@ cent on its way to decreased popularity and abolition in 1873 . The hard alloy , though , caused high levels of die breakage . Between 1865 and 1876 , some 17 million three @-@ cent pieces were used by the government to redeem the three @-@ cent fractional currency notes . 
 The Wharton nickel interests were not satisfied by the issuance of the three @-@ cent piece , and soon began to agitate for the passage of a five @-@ cent coin , to be made of the same alloy as the three @-@ cent piece . The Act of May 16 , 1866 introduced the five @-@ cent nickel piece , or " nickel " , as it has come to be known . According to David Lange in his history of the Mint , the five @-@ cent piece has " become one of the mainstays of the country 's coinage " . The new five @-@ cent coin was legal tender up to a dollar . 
 The introduction of the five @-@ cent copper @-@ nickel piece greatly decreased the popularity and use of the three @-@ cent piece . The three @-@ cent piece had debuted in 1865 with a mintage of over eleven million and nearly five million in 1866 ; thereafter strikings declined , falling to under a million by 1871 , a figure the coin would thereafter exceed only twice . The public had preferred small bronze coins to paper money , then the three @-@ cent nickel piece rather than the bronze ; they now preferred the five @-@ cent nickel to the three . One reason for this was that the base metal five @-@ cent piece would be redeemed by the government if presented in $ 100 lots pursuant to a provision in the authorizing legislation . There was no such provision for the three @-@ cent nickel piece ; neither was there any for the other base metal coins . Following Pollock 's resignation in 1866 over his objections to President Johnson 's Reconstruction policies , the new Mint Director was Henry Linderman , who in his first annual report in 1867 , described the redemption clause in the nickel 's authorizing legislation as " a most wise and just provision " , urging its extension to the cent , two @-@ cent piece , and three @-@ cent piece . Postmasters were compelled to take three @-@ cent nickel pieces in exchange for stamps , but had difficulty in depositing them in the Treasury in payment of their obligations , as the government would take no more than sixty cents worth of them in a single transaction . Private individuals and firms similarly refused them beyond the legal tender limit ; those with a surplus of base metal coins often sold them at a discount . 
 Congress took no action on a redemption bill , and in 1868 Linderman wrote again in his annual report , urging that the public be allowed to redeem small @-@ denomination coins , as commerce was flooded with them . He disclosed that he had been redeeming the old copper @-@ nickel cents with three @-@ cent pieces and nickels . Carothers pointed out that exchanging the copper @-@ nickel pieces for cents violated the 1865 and 1866 acts , that stated the three @-@ cent piece and nickel could not be purchased with cents , but only for greenbacks or specie . Linderman strongly advocated a redemption law to relieve the glut of small coins : 
 But the government that sold these tokens at par for their face value , or paid them as money to its creditors , now turns round and refuses to receive them back in payment from its own officers ... Was there ever an act of the government of a respectable people that , for meanness , can compare with this ? An individual that practiced such a confidence game would be branded as a two @-@ penny thief , and would soon be consigned to a house of correction . A government that practices such frauds upon the people cannot hope long to receive the respect of anybody . 
 In 1866 , Treasury Department official John Jay Knox was sent to examine the San Francisco Mint . After his return to Washington , he submitted a report that recommended many changes to how the Mint did business , including reform of the base @-@ metal coinage . Knox complained that the various enactments for non @-@ specie coinage were " entirely disconnected and incongruous " . Linderman submitted legislation to discontinue fractional currency of less than 25 cents , and authorizing copper @-@ nickel coins of one , three and five cents , legal tender and redeemable , and in the case of the three @-@ cent piece , larger and heavier than the existing coin . Linderman 's bill was introduced by Pennsylvania Representative William D. Kelley in February 1868 . It passed the House in amended form , but was not voted on in the Senate . Kelley tried again in the following term of Congress , and the bill met the same fate as its predecessor . 
 Pollock returned to office as Mint Director in 1869 . Although Pollock opposed redemption , Treasury Secretary George S. Boutwell did not , and a bill allowing for redemption of base @-@ metal coins in lots of at least $ 20 was signed into law by President Ulysses S. Grant on March 3 , 1871 . By then , early versions of what became the Coinage Act of 1873 were being considered by Congress . This was a major piece of legislation that reformed the laws relating to the Mint . As introduced by Ohio Senator John Sherman on April 28 , 1870 , it included Linderman 's proposal for the use of copper @-@ nickel in the minor coins . The debate over the bill stretched over the next three years . The use of nickel was a sticking point for the legislation ; some congressmen alleged that the whole point of the bill was to benefit Wharton . Between 1870 and 1872 , different versions of the bill , with a larger three @-@ cent piece , twice passed the House and once the Senate , but differences between the houses could not be reconciled . After the second House passage , in May 1872 , the Senate Finance Committee struck the provisions for copper @-@ nickel coinage . After a conference committee met , both houses passed a version that left the cent , three @-@ cent nickel piece , and nickel unaltered , and it was signed by President Grant on February 12 , 1873 . The act eliminated the two @-@ cent piece , silver three @-@ cent piece , silver half dime and the standard silver dollar ( the last denomination was reinstated in 1878 ) . The three @-@ cent piece was made legal tender to twenty @-@ five cents , as were the other two base @-@ metal coins , the cent and nickel ( the surviving silver coins were legal tender to five dollars ) . Numismatic writer Breen deemed the decision to eliminate the silver three @-@ cent piece and the half dime , which might directly compete with the two copper @-@ nickel coins , a favor to Wharton . Carothers called the abolition of the silver three- and five @-@ cent pieces " a necessity if the 3 cent and 5 cent nickel pieces were to be continued after the revival of silver coinage " . 
 = = = Decline and end ( 1873 – 90 ) = = = 
 On January 18 , 1873 , Philadelphia Mint Chief Coiner A. Loudon Snowden formally complained to Pollock that on the new year 's coins , the digit " 3 " too closely resembled an " 8 " . Pollock ordered Chief Engraver William Barber ( Longacre had died in office on January 1 , 1869 ) to redo the <unk> for the date . Thus , most denominations of American coinage dated 1873 , including the three @-@ cent nickel piece , have varieties : the Close ( or Closed ) 3 from early in the year , and the Open 3 from after Barber made his modifications . A total of 390 @,@ 000 Closed 3 and 783 @,@ 000 Open 3 of the three @-@ cent nickel were minted . 
 Numismatist Bruce C. Goldstein indicated that several factors combined to keep the nickel three @-@ cent piece in decline after the passage of the 1873 act . Less and less fractional currency was being redeemed , as almost a decade had passed since the issuance of three @-@ cent notes . Rich silver strikes in the West lowered the price of that metal to the point where old silver coins emerged from hoarding and circulated again . These factors , combined with ample stocks of cents and nickels , made the three @-@ cent nickel , a non @-@ silver coin of odd denomination , less desirable . By 1876 , the mintage for circulation had declined to 162 @,@ 000 . None were struck for circulation in 1877 and 1878 , though some proof coins were minted for sale to the public . 
 Although more than a million were minted in 1881 , another blow to the three @-@ cent piece occurred on October 1 , 1883 , when first @-@ class mail rates were lowered from three to two cents for the first 0 @.@ 5 ounces ( 14 g ) . Although the rate for pieces weighing up to 1 ounce ( 28 g ) initially remained at three cents , the two @-@ cent rate was extended to one ounce effective July 1 , 1885 . Deprived of the original reason for the denomination 's existence , no three @-@ cent pieces were struck for circulation in 1886 ( though several thousand proof coins were produced ) , and in the three remaining years of the piece 's life , a total of less than 60 @,@ 000 circulation strikes were minted . As the production of three @-@ cent pieces dwindled , the other non @-@ specie coins prospered , with record numbers of cents being struck in the 1880s to address the need to make change , and for penny arcade machines . The nickel proved popular in slot machines and street railways , which often set fares at five cents . With silver again circulating , the three @-@ cent piece became more unpopular because it was almost the same diameter as the dime , leading to confusion and small frauds . 
 Beginning in 1880 , in their annual reports , the Mint Director and Treasury Secretary appealed to Congress to discontinue the three @-@ cent piece . The last three @-@ cent pieces were struck in 1889 , and the denomination was discontinued , along with the gold dollar and the three @-@ dollar piece , by the Act of September 26 , 1890 . Many of the coins from 1888 and 1889 were still held at the Treasury Department and were melted after passage of the act , the fate of millions more as they flowed back from banks . The resultant metal contributed to large mintages of the Liberty Head nickel between 1890 and 1893 . 
 One proposal to revive the three @-@ cent piece was made in 1911 , when Mayors Brand Whitlock of Toledo , Ohio , and Newton D. Baker of Cleveland sent a joint memorial to Congress urging its return . The following year , a subcommittee of the House Committee on Coinage , Weights and Measures held a hearing on bills to authorize a copper @-@ nickel three @-@ cent piece and to change the composition of the cent to copper @-@ nickel . Mint Director George E. Roberts testified and indicated he had no objection to a three @-@ cent piece , as there was at least limited demand for a coin larger than the cent and smaller than the nickel . In 1936 , a bill for a three @-@ cent nickel was among various coin legislation considered by the Senate Banking Committee . In 1942 , Congress granted the Treasury Secretary the temporary authority to change the composition of the nickel because of wartime metal shortages , and if public demand for the five @-@ cent piece required it , the Mint could strike three @-@ cent pieces . Nothing came of any of the proposals . The three @-@ cent piece was made fully legal tender by the Coinage Act of 1965 , which proclaimed all coin and currency of the United States good to any amount for payment of public and private debt . By then , that coin had long since passed from the scene . 
 = = Collecting = = 
