 After traveling across Spain , the embassy sailed on the Mediterranean aboard three Spanish frigates towards Italy . Due to bad weather , they had to stay for a few days in the French harbour of Saint @-@ Tropez , where they were received by the local nobility , and made quite a sensation on the populace . 
 The visit of the Japanese Embassy is recorded in the city 's chronicles as led by " Philip Francis Faxicura , Ambassador to the Pope , from Date <unk> , King of <unk> in Japan " . 
 Many picturesque details of their movements were recorded : 
 " They never touch food with their fingers , but instead use two small sticks that they hold with three fingers . " 
 " They blow their noses in soft silky papers the size of a hand , which they never use twice , so that they throw them on the ground after usage , and they were delighted to see our people around them precipitate themselves to pick them up . " 
 " Their swords cut so well that they can cut a soft paper just by putting it on the edge and by blowing on it . " 
 ( " Relations of Mme de St <unk> " , October 1615 , Bibliothèque <unk> , <unk> ) . 
 The visit of Hasekura Tsunenaga to Saint @-@ Tropez in 1615 is the first recorded instance of France – Japan relations . 
 = = = Italy = = = 
 The Japanese Embassy went on to Italy where they were able to meet with Pope Paul V in Rome in November 1615 , the same year Galileo Galilei was first confronted by the Roman Inquisition regarding his findings against <unk> . Hasekura remitted to the Pope two gilded letters , one in Japanese and one in Latin , containing a request for a trade treaty between Japan and Mexico and the dispatch of Christian missionaries to Japan . These letters are still visible in the Vatican archives . The Latin letter , probably written by Luis Sotelo for Date Masamune , reads , in part : 
 Kissing the Holy feet of the Great , Universal , Most Holy Lord of The Entire World , Pope Paul , in profound submission and reverence , I , <unk> Masamune , King of <unk> in the Empire of Japan , <unk> say : 
 The Franciscan Padre Luis Sotelo came to our country to spread the faith of God . On that occasion , I learnt about this faith and desired to become a Christian , but I still haven 't accomplished this desire due to some small issues . However , in order to encourage my subjects to become Christians , I wish that you send missionaries of the Franciscan church . I guarantee that you will be able to build a church and that your missionaries will be protected . I also wish that you select and send a bishop as well . Because of that , I have sent one of my samurai , Hasekura Rokuemon , as my representative to accompany Luis Sotelo across the seas to Rome , to give you a stamp of obedience and to kiss your feet . Further , as our country and Nueva España are neighbouring countries , could you intervene so that we can discuss with the King of Spain , for the benefit of dispatching missionaries across the seas . " Translation of the Latin letter of Date Masamune to the Pope . 
 The Pope agreed to the dispatch of missionaries , but left the decision for trade to the King of Spain . 
 The Roman Senate also gave to Hasekura the honorary title of Roman Noble and Roman Citizen , in a document he brought back to Japan , and which is preserved today in Sendai . 
 Sotelo also described the visit to the Pope , book De ecclesiae Iaponicae statu relatio ( published posthumously in 1634 ) : 
 " When we got there by the aid of God in the Year of Our Salvation 1615 , not only were we kindly received by His Holiness the great Pope , with the Holy College of the Cardinals and a gathering of bishops and nobles , and even the joy and general happiness of the Roman People , but we and three others ( whom the Japanese Christians had specially designated to announce their condition with respect to the Christian religion ) were heard , rested , and just as we were hoping , dispatched as quickly as possible . " ( Sotelo , De ecclesiae Iaponicae statu relatio ) . 
 = = = Rumours of political intrigue = = = 
 Besides the official description of Hasekura 's visit to Rome , some contemporary communications tend to indicate that political matters were also discussed , and that an alliance with Date Masamune was suggested as a way to establish Christian influence in the whole of Japan : 
 " The Ambassador strongly insisted that the authority and power of his ruler was superior to that of many European countries " ( Anonymous Roman communication , dated 10 October 1615 ) 
 " The Franciscan Spanish fathers are explaining that the King of the Ambassador [ Hasekura Tsunenaga ] will soon become the supreme ruler of his country , and that , not only will they become Christians and follow the will of the church of Rome , but they will also in turn convert the rest of the population . This is why they are requesting the dispatch of a high <unk> together with the missionaries . Because of this , many people have been doubting the true purpose of the embassy , and are wondering if they are not looking for some other benefit . " ( Letter of the Venetian ambassador , 7 November 1615 ) . 
 = = = Second visit to Spain = = = 
 For the second time in Spain , in April 1616 Hasekura met again with the King , who declined to sign a trade agreement , on the ground that the Japanese Embassy did not appear to be an official embassy from the ruler of Japan Tokugawa Ieyasu , who , on the contrary , had promulgated an edict in January 1614 ordering the expulsion of all missionaries from Japan , and started the persecution of the Christian faith in Japan . 
 The embassy left Sanlúcar de Barrameda for Mexico in June 1616 after a period of two years spent in Europe , but some of the Japanese remained in Spain in a town near Seville ( Coria del Río ) , where their descendants to this day still use the surname Japón . 
 = = = Western publications on Hasekura 's embassy = = = 
 The embassy of Hasekura Tsunenaga was the subject of numerous publications throughout Europe . The Italian writer Scipione Amati , who accompanied the embassy in 1615 and 1616 , published in 1615 in Rome a book titled History of the Kingdom of <unk> . This book was also translated into German in 1617 . In 1616 , the French publisher Abraham <unk> published an account of Hasekura 's visit to Rome : " <unk> de l <unk> <unk> et <unk> faite à Rome , par Dom Philippe Francois Faxicura " ( " Account of the solemn and remarkable entrance in Rome of Dom Philippe Francois Faxicura " ) . 
 = = = Return to Mexico = = = 
 Hasekura stayed for 5 months in Mexico on his way back to Japan . The San Juan Bautista was waiting in Acapulco since 1616 , after a second trip across the Pacific from Japan to Mexico . Captained by <unk> <unk> , she was laden with fine pepper and lacquerware from Kyoto , which were sold on the Mexican market . Following a request by the Spanish king , in order to avoid too much silver leaving to Japan , the Viceroy asked for the proceeds to be spent on Mexican goods , except for an amount of 12 @,@ 000 pesos and 8 @,@ 000 pesos in silver which Hasekura and <unk> could bring back with them respectively . 
 = = = Philippines = = = 
 In April 1618 , the San Juan Bautista arrived in the Philippines from Mexico , with Hasekura and Luis Sotelo on board . The ship was acquired by the Spanish government there , with the objective of building up defenses against the attacks of the Dutch and the English . In Manila , the archbishop described the deal to the king of Spain in a missive dated 28 July 1619 : 
 " The Governor was extremely friendly with the Japanese , and provided them with his protection . As they had many expensive things to buy , they decided to lend their ship . The ship was immediately furbished for combat . The Governor eventually bought the ship , because it turned out that it was of excellent and sturdy construction , and available ships were dramatically few . In favour of your Majesty , the price paid was reasonable . " ( Document 243 ) 
 During his stay in the Philippines , Hasekura purchased numerous goods for Date Masamune , and built a ship , as he explained in a letter he wrote to his son . He finally returned to Japan in August 1620 , reaching the harbour of Nagasaki . 
 = = Return to Japan = = 
 By the time Hasekura came back , Japan had changed quite drastically : an effort to eradicate Christianity had been under way since 1614 , Tokugawa Ieyasu had died in 1616 and been replaced by his more xenophobic son Tokugawa Hidetada , and Japan was moving towards the " Sakoku " policy of isolation . Because news of these persecutions arrived in Europe during Hasekura 's embassy , European rulers – especially the King of Spain – became very reluctant to respond favorably to Hasekura 's trade and missionary proposals . 
 Hasekura reported his travels to Date Masamune upon his arrival in Sendai . It is recorded that he remitted a portrait of Pope Paul V , a portrait of himself in prayer ( shown above ) , and a set of Ceylonese and Indonesian daggers acquired in the Philippines , all preserved today in the Sendai City Museum . The " Records of the House of Masamune " describe his report in a rather succinct manner , ending with a rather cryptic expression of surprise bordering on the outrage ( " <unk> " ) at Hasekura 's discourse : 
 " Rokuemon went to the country of the Southern Barbarians , he paid his respects to the king Paolo , he stayed there for several years , and now he sailed back from Luzon . He brought paintings of the king of the Southern Barbarians , and a painting of himself , which he remitted . Many of his descriptions of the Southern Barbarian countries , and the meaning of Rokuemon 's declarations were surprising and extraordinary . " 
 = = = Interdiction of Christianity in Sendai = = = 
 The direct effect of Hasekura 's return to Sendai was the interdiction of Christianity in the Sendai fief two days later : 
 " Two days after the return of Rokuemon to Sendai , a three @-@ point edict against the Christian was promulgated : first , that all Christians were ordered to abandon their faith , in accordance with the rule of the Shogun , and for those who did not , they would be exiled if they were nobles , and killed if they were citizens , peasants or servants . Second , that a reward would be given for the denunciation of hidden Christians . Third that propagators of the Christian faith should leave the Sendai fief , or else , abandon their religion " ( November 1620 letter of father Angelis , Japan @-@ China archives of the Jesuits in Rome , quoted in Gonoi 's " Hasekura Tsunenaga " , <unk> ) 
 What Hasekura said or did to bring about such a result is unknown . As later events tend to indicate that he and his descendants remained faithful Christians , Hasekura may have made an enthusiastic – and to a certain extent , disturbing – account of the greatness and might of Western countries and the Christian religion . He may also have encouraged an alliance between the Church and Date Masamune to take over the country ( an idea <unk> by the Franciscans while in Rome ) , which , in 1620 Japan , would have been a totally unrealistic proposition . Lastly , hopes of trade with Spain evaporated when Hasekura communicated that the Spanish King would not enter an agreement as long as persecutions were occurring in the rest of the country . 
 Date Masamune , heretofore very tolerant of Christianity for his desire to destroy Bakufu and He was aiming at governing the whole country , in spite of the Bakufu 's prohibition in the land it directly controlled , thus suddenly chose to distance himself from the Western faith . The first executions of Christians started 40 days later . The anti @-@ Christian measures taken by Date <unk> were however comparatively mild , and Japanese and Western Christians repeatedly claimed that he only took them to appease the Shogun : 
 " Date <unk> , out of fear of the Shogun , ordered the persecution of Christianity in his territory , and created several martyrs . " ( Letter of 17 prominent Japanese Christians from Sendai , to the Pope , 29 September 1621 ) . 
 One month after Hasekura 's return , Date Masamune wrote a letter to the Shogun Tokugawa Hidetada , in which he makes a very clear effort to evade responsibility for the embassy , explaining in detail how it was organized with the approval , and even the collaboration , of the Shogun : 
 " When I sent a ship to the Southern Barbarian countries several years ago , upon the advice of Mukai Shogen , I also dispatched the Southern Barbarian named Sotelo , who had resided for several years in Edo . At that time , your highness also gave messages for the Southern Barbarians , as well as presents , such as folding screens and sets of armour . " ( 18 October 1620 , quoted in Gonoi , p . 234 ) . 
 Spain was by far the most threatening power for Japan at that time ( with a colony and an army in the nearby Philippines ) . Hasekura 's eyewitness accounts of Spanish power and colonial methods in Nueva España ( Mexico ) may have precipitated the Shogun Tokugawa Hidetada 's decision to sever trade relations with Spain in 1623 , and diplomatic relations in 1624 , although other events such as the smuggling of Spanish priests into Japan and a failed Spanish embassy also contributed to the decision . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 What became of Hasekura is unknown and accounts of his last years are numerous . Contemporary Christian commentators could only rely on hearsay , with some rumours stating that he abandoned Christianity , others that he was martyred for his faith , and others that he practiced Christianity in secret . The fate of his descendants and servants , who were later executed for being Christians , would suggest that Hasekura remained strongly Christian himself , and transmitted his faith to the members of his family . 
 Sotelo , who returned to Japan but was caught and finally burnt at the stake in 1624 , gave before his execution an account of Hasekura returning to Japan as a hero who propagated the Christian faith : 
 " My other colleague , the ambassador Philippus Faxecura , after he reached his aforementioned king ( Date Masamune ) , was greatly honored by him , and sent to his own estate , to rest after such a long and tiring journey , where he made his wife , children , servants , and many other vassals into Christians , and advised other nobles who were his kith and kin to accept the faith , which they indeed did . While he was engaged in these and other pious works , a full year after his return , having provided much instruction and a great example , with much preparation , he piously passed on , leaving for his children by a special inheritance the propagation of the faith in his estate , and the protection of the religious ( i.e. " members of religious orders " ) in that kingdom . The King and all the nobles were greatly saddened by his passing , but especially the Christians and Religious , who knew very well the virtue and religious zeal of this man . This is what I heard by letters from the very Religious who administered the sacraments to him , and who had been present at his death , as well as from others . " ( Luis Sotelo , De ecclesiae Iaponicae statu relatio ) . 
 Hasekura also did bring back to Japan several Catholic artifacts , but he did not give them to his ruler , and instead kept them in his own estate . 
 Hasekura Tsunenaga died of illness ( according to Japanese as well as Christian sources ) in 1622 , but the location of his grave is not known for certain . Three graves are claimed as Hasekura 's . The most likely is in the outskirts of Osato town ( <unk> ) in Miyagi . Another is visible in the Buddhist temple of <unk> ( <unk> ) in Miyagi . Another is clearly marked ( along with a memorial to <unk> ) in the cemetery of in the Kitayama neighborhood at <unk> Temple ( <unk> ) . 
 = = = Execution of his descendants and servants = = = 
 Hasekura had a son , named Rokuemon Tsuneyori . Two of his son 's servants , <unk> ( <unk> ) and his wife , were convicted of being Christian but refused to recant their faith under torture ( reverse hanging , called " <unk> " , <unk> ) and as a result died in August 1637 ( as the lives of Christians were spared if they recanted , these executions indicate that they were steadfast and refused to deny their faith ) . In 1637 , Rokuemon Tsuneyori himself also came under suspicion of Christianity after being denounced by someone from Edo , but escaped questioning because he was the master of the Zen temple of <unk> ( <unk> ) . In 1640 , two other servants of Tsuneyori , <unk> ( <unk> , 71 ) , who had followed Hasekura to Rome , and his wife ( 59 ) , were convicted of being Christians , and , also refusing to recant their faith under torture , died . Tsuneyori was held responsible this time and decapitated the same day , at the age of 42 , for having failed to denounce Christians under his roof , although it remained unconfirmed whether he was himself Christian or not . Also , two Christian priests , the Dominican Pedro Vazquez and Joan Bautista Paulo , had given his name under torture . Tsuneyori 's younger brother , <unk> , was convicted as a Christian , but managed to flee and disappear . But <unk> ( <unk> ) who is the son of Tsuneyori , who is the grand son of Tsunenaga Hasekura , survived , and then the first to 10th head of Hasekura Family had lived in Osato @-@ city , Miyagi prefecture , furthermore the 11th to the present 13th head of them <unk> Hasekura has lived in Wakabayashi @-@ ward , Sendai @-@ city , Miyagi prefecture . The 13th head actively works in Both Miyagi prefecture and Akita prefecture . 
 The privileges of the Hasekura family were abolished at this point by the Sendai fief , and their property and belongings seized . It is at this time , in 1640 , that Hasekura 's Christian artifacts were confiscated , and they were kept in custody in Sendai until they were rediscovered at the end of the 19th century . 
 Altogether , around fifty Christian artifacts were found in Hasekura 's estate in 1640 , such as crosses , rosaries , religious gowns and religious paintings . The artifacts were seized and stored by the Date fief . An inventory was made again in 1840 describing the items as belonging to Hasekura Tsunenaga . Nineteen books were also mentioned in the inventory , but they have been lost since . The artifacts are today preserved in the Sendai City Museum and other museum in Sendai . 
 = = Re @-@ discovery = = 
 The very existence of the travels of Hasekura was forgotten in Japan until the reopening of the country after the Sakoku policy of isolation . In 1873 , a Japanese embassy to Europe ( the Iwakura mission ) headed by Iwakura Tomomi heard for the first time of the travels of Hasekura when shown documents during their visit to Venice in Italy . 
 = = = Hasekura today = = = 
 Today , there are statues of Hasekura Tsunenaga in the outskirts of Acapulco in Mexico , at the entrance of Havana Bay in Cuba , in Coria del Río in Spain , in the Church of Civitavecchia in Italy , in <unk> , near Ishinomaki and two in Osato town in Miyagi . 
 Approximately 700 inhabitants of Coria del Río bear the surname Japón ( originally Hasekura de Japón ) , identifying them as descendants of the members of Hasekura Tsunenaga 's delegation . 
 A theme park describing the embassy and displaying a replica of the San Juan Bautista was established in the harbour of Ishinomaki , from which Hasekura initially departed on his voyage . 
 Today there stands a statue of Hasekura in a park in Manila , the Philippines . 
 Shusaku Endo wrote a 1980 novel , titled The Samurai , a fictitious account relating the travels of Hasekura . 
 The 1991 film Journey of Honor ( aka Kabuto , aka Shogun Mayeda ) starring Sho Kosugi was loosely based on Hasekura 's expedition and recounts the adventures of a samurai journey from Japan to Spain . 
 A 2005 animation film produced in Spain and titled <unk> relates the adventures of a young Japanese samurai named Yohei who visited Spain in the 17th century , in a story loosely taking its inspiration from the travels of Hasekura . Yohei survived in hiding to the present day due to magical powers ( " After centuries of lethargy , he awakes in a World he does not know " ) , and accomplishes many adventures in modern Europe as a superhero . 
 = = Timeline and itinerary = = 
 = New Jersey Route 87 = 
 Route 87 is a state highway located in Atlantic County in the U.S. state of New Jersey . It runs 1 @.@ 70 mi ( 2 @.@ 74 km ) , heading north from Atlantic City at an intersection with U.S. Route 30 ( Absecon Boulevard ) to Brigantine , where it terminates at the end of the Justice Vincent S. Haneman Memorial Bridge over the Absecon Channel , continuing as County Route 638 ( Brigantine Boulevard ) . In Atlantic City , the route runs through the Marina District , which contains a few casinos , along Huron Avenue and Brigantine Boulevard . Here , Route 87 intersects with Route 187 ( Brigantine Boulevard ) and the Atlantic City @-@ Brigantine Connector , the latter providing a limited @-@ access route between Route 87 and the Atlantic City Expressway . Route 87 is the only road to and from Brigantine . 
 What is now Route 87 was initially proposed as Route S4A in 1927 , a spur from Route 4 ( now U.S. Route 9 ) in Tuckerton , Ocean County , south through Brigantine to Atlantic City . The portion of this route south of Little Beach was to be built by Atlantic County ; however , the state took over plans of building the road in 1938 . Despite this , Route S4A was never completed between Brigantine and Little Beach , and the portion of the road that existed in Ocean County was removed from the state highway system by 1941 . In 1945 , Route S56 , a spur of Route 56 ( now U.S. Route 30 ) , was proposed to run from Atlantic City to Brigantine along Brigantine Boulevard . Route 87 was created on its current alignment in 1953 as an unsigned route , replacing Route S4A and the proposed Route S56 . Previously , Route 87 split into two alignments in Atlantic City along Huron Avenue and Brigantine Boulevard ; the Brigantine Boulevard alignment eventually became Route 187 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Route 87 begins at an intersection with U.S. Route 30 in Atlantic City , heading to the northeast on Huron Avenue , an undivided road with two northbound lanes and three southbound lanes . Immediately after beginning , it passes under the Atlantic City – Brigantine Connector and comes to a ramp that provides access from southbound Route 87 to the southbound connector . From here , the route widens to seven lanes , with two northbound lanes and five southbound lanes . It passes by the Borgata casino , with a ramp from the casino to the northbound direction . The road becomes a four @-@ lane divided highway and passes under a ramp from the Atlantic City – Brigantine Connector to the Borgata before heading under northbound direction of the connector . Here , a ramp from the connector provides access to Route 87 . A short distance later , the route comes to the northern terminus of Route 187 and turns north to follow Brigantine Boulevard , which is a four @-@ lane divided highway . 
 The route passes to the west of the Golden Nugget casino and comes to a ramp that provides access from northbound Route 87 to both the Trump Marina and Harrah 's Atlantic City casinos before passing under the northbound Atlantic City – Brigantine Connector again . Immediately after , the route has a ramp from the southbound direction that provides access to the connector and westbound U.S. Route 30 . The northbound Atlantic City – Brigantine Connector parallels Route 87 to the east as it turns northeast and comes to a right @-@ in / right @-@ out in the southbound direction that serves both Harrah 's and Borgata . From here , the route passes to the southeast of Harrah 's . The northbound Atlantic City – Brigantine Connector merges onto northbound Route 87 before the route comes to a ramp that provides access to the northbound direction of the route from Harrah 's . Past here , the route crosses over the Absecon Channel on the Justice Vincent S. Haneman Memorial Bridge and runs along the border of Atlantic City to the northwest and Brigantine to the southeast . After crossing the Absecon Channel , the route arrives on Brigantine Island and passes through wetlands , with U @-@ turn ramps in both directions . A short distance later , Route 87 ends and County Route 638 continues along Brigantine Boulevard through Brigantine . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1927 , a spur of Route 4 , Route S4A , was proposed as a route running from Route 4 ( now U.S. Route 9 ) in Tuckerton in Ocean County south to Little Beach . In 1929 , this route was to continue south through Brigantine to Atlantic City , with the portion south of Little Beach to be built by Atlantic County . The state of New Jersey took over the proposed extension of Route S4A from Little Beach to Atlantic City in 1938 . However , the portion of this route between Brigantine and the Atlantic / Ocean County line was never built , and the portion of road that existed in Ocean County was removed from the state highway system by 1941 . In 1945 , another route called Route S56 , a spur of Route 56 ( now U.S. Route 30 ) , was proposed to run north along Brigantine Boulevard ( present @-@ day Route 187 and Route 87 ) from Atlantic City to Brigantine . In the 1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering , Route 87 was designated as an unsigned route along the former alignment of Route S4A and the proposed Route S56 between U.S. Route 30 in Atlantic City and Brigantine . Following the 1953 renumbering , the southern portion of Route 87 in Atlantic City split into two alignments , with one following Huron Avenue and the other following Brigantine Boulevard . Eventually , the alignment of Route 87 along Brigantine Boulevard between U.S. Route 30 and Huron Avenue became Route 187 . In 2001 , the Atlantic City – Brigantine Connector was completed , linking Route 87 , the casinos in the Marina District , and Brigantine with the Atlantic City Expressway . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 The entire route is in Atlantic County . 
 = Phan Xích Long = 
 Phan Xích Long , also known as Hồng Long , born Phan Phát Sanh ( 1893 – 1916 ) , was a 20th @-@ century Vietnamese mystic and geomancer who claimed to be the Emperor of Vietnam . He attempted to exploit religion as a cover for his own political ambitions , having started his own ostensibly religious organisation . Claiming to be a descendant of Emperor Hàm Nghi , Long staged a ceremony to crown himself , before trying to seize power in 1913 by launching an armed uprising against the colonial rule of French Indochina . His supporters launched an attack on Saigon in March 1913 , drinking potions that purportedly made them invisible and planting bombs at several locations . The insurrection against the French colonial administration failed when none of the bombs detonated and the supposedly invisible supporters were apprehended . 
 The French authorities imprisoned Long and many of his supporters , who openly admitted their aim of overthrowing French authorities at the trial . During the 1916 Cochinchina uprisings against French rule , many of Long 's supporters attempted to break him out of jail . The French easily repelled the attack on the jail , decimating Long 's movement . Following the attempted breakout , Long and his key supporters were put to death . Many of the remnants of his support base went on to join what later became the Cao Đài , a major religious sect in Vietnam . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Long was born in 1893 in southern Vietnam as Phan Phát Sanh . His place of birth is disputed ; the historians R. B. Smith and Hue @-@ Tam Ho Tai say that he was from Cholon , the Chinese business district of Saigon , while Oscar Chapuis records Tan An as his place of birth . Sanh 's father was a police <unk> and it has been speculated that the family were of Chinese descent . He started as a servant in a French family , before travelling to the That Son ( Seven Mountains ) region in the far south of Vietnam , a region that was known as a hotbed of mysticism . There Long trained in mysticism . As a youth , Sanh travelled from Vietnam to Siam , earning his living as a fortune @-@ teller and geomancer . 
 In mid @-@ 1911 , Sanh formed a secret society on the unverified pretense that he was a descendant of Hàm Nghi , the boy emperor of the 1880s . Led by Tôn Thất Thuyết and Phan Đình Phùng — two high @-@ ranking mandarins — Hàm Nghi 's Cần Vương movement battled against French colonisation in the decade leading up to 1895 . Their objective was to expel the French authorities and establish Ham Nghi as the emperor of an independent Vietnam . This failed , and the French exiled the boy emperor to Algeria , replacing him with his brother Đồng Khánh . From then on , the French retained the monarchy of the Nguyễn Dynasty , exiling any emperors who rose against colonial rule and replacing them with more cooperative relatives . Sanh also claimed descent from the Lê Dynasty , which ruled Vietnam in the 15th and 16th centuries . He was a strong warrior , further presenting himself as the founder of China 's Ming Dynasty . 
 At the time of Sanh 's activities in the 1910s , there were two members of the Nguyễn Dynasty who commanded respect among Vietnamese monarchists . The first was the boy emperor Duy Tân , who was himself deported in 1916 after staging an uprising . Duy Tan 's grandfather , Emperor Dục Đức , was the adopted son of the childless Emperor Tự Đức , the last independent emperor of Vietnam . The second figure who was seen by Vietnamese as a possible leader of an independent monarchy was Prince Cường Để . Cường Để was a direct descendant of Emperor Gia Long , who had established the Nguyễn Dynasty and unified Vietnam in its modern state . Cường Để was a prominent anti @-@ colonial activist who lived in exile in Japan . 
 Sanh 's two main assistants were Nguyen Huu Tri and Nguyen Van Hiep , whom he met at Tân Châu in Châu Đốc Province ( now in An Giang Province ) . The trio agreed to plot an uprising against the French under the cover of a religious sect . The genesis of their cooperation is unclear , but it may have started before mid @-@ 1911 . Tri and Hiep were said to have been in awe when Sanh produced a golden plaque that read " heir to the throne " . The men agreed that the geographical foci of their movement would be in Cholon and Tan An in Vietnam and Kampot in Cambodia . The trio decided to model their actions on an uprising that had occurred in Kampot in 1909 . On that occasion , a group of Cambodians of Chinese descent had marched into the town wearing white robes , claiming to be followers of a Battambang @-@ based Cambodian prince who would overthrow French rule and lead them to independence . After the formation of the sect , Sanh temporarily moved abroad , spending time in Siam and Cambodia . During this time , he learned sorcery and magic , supplementing his mystical training with a military education . He learned pyrotechnics for the purpose of making fireworks and bombs . 
 = = Coronation = = 
 Sanh returned to southern Vietnam , and began dressing as a Buddhist monk . He travelled through the six provinces of the Mekong Delta region . His associates Hiep and Tri found an elderly man from Cholon in Saigon , and presented the senior citizen to the populace as a " living Buddha " . After some local elders objected to their activities , they moved to the centre of Cholon . The old man took up residence with Sanh , and peasants and tradespeople soon began flocking to their makeshift temple , located in a house in Cholon 's Thuan <unk> Street . As their temple was located in a prominent commercial area , the group began to collect more funds . The donors made offerings of gold and silver , with some individual donations being worth as much as 1 @,@ 500 piastres . When the " living Buddha " unexpectedly died in February 1912 , he was interred in the family shrine of a notable follower . Sanh 's strategists declared that before the old man had died , he named Sanh as the rightful Emperor of Vietnam . In the meantime , the old man 's remains became the object of veneration , providing further cover for political plotting and fundraising when visitors came to pay their respects . After the completion of the funeral rites , Sanh and his followers staged an impromptu coronation ceremony at Battambang in October 1912 . Sanh took on the name Phan Xích Long and was also known as Hồng Long , both of which mean " red dragon " . 
 Vast crowds of locals began flocking to pay homage to Long , vowing to contribute labour and finance in an effort to expel the French from Vietnam and install Long as the independent monarch . By this time , Long was claiming to have received a letter from <unk> De , which supposedly confirmed his royal descent . Long 's followers spared no expense in decorating Long with royal accoutrements . They made a medallion inscribed " Phan Xích Long <unk> Đế " ( Emperor Phan Xích Long ) and a royal seal with a dragon 's head with the words " Đại Minh Quốc , Phan Xích Long <unk> Đế , Thiên <unk> " ( Greater Ming State , Emperor Phan Xích Long , Son of Heaven ) . The words " Đại Minh " were interpreted as either having arbitrarily been copied from local Chinese Vietnamese secret society slogans , or as a strategic ploy to invoke the names of the Ming Dynasty to appeal to the Chinese who had emigrated to Vietnam after the fall of the Ming . Long 's supporters produced a sword with the inscription " Tiên <unk> <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> " ( First strike the debauched king , next the traitorous officials ) and a ring inscribed " Dân Công " ( Popular Tribute ) . From then on , Long presented himself as the emperor and signed documents under the royal title . 
 Long 's strategy of proclaiming himself as a royal descendent or claiming to have supernatural powers in order to rally support for political ends was not new ; it has been repeatedly used throughout Vietnamese history . In 1516 , a man calling himself Trần <unk> rebelled against the Lê Dynasty , claiming to be a descendant of the deposed Trần Dynasty and a reincarnation of Indra . During the 19th century , there was a Buddhist revival and many people masqueraded as monks claiming to have supernatural powers . These false monks were frequently able to start new religious movements and secret societies based on millenarianism . Quickly gathering large numbers of disciples , they staged rebellions against Vietnamese imperial and French colonial armies alike . However , these uprisings were typically incoherent and caused minimal disruption to the ruling authorities . On the other hand , the French were often troubled by resistance movements in southern Vietnam that were led by more conventionally motivated nationalist militants , such as the guerrilla outfits of Trương Định and Nguyễn Trung <unk> . 
 = = Military buildup = = 
 During the time he spent in Battambang for the coronation , Long organised the construction of a pagoda in the town , and in December , he unsuccessfully applied for a land concession . After the coronation , Long was taken to the That Son region in Châu Đốc , in the far south of the Mekong Delta . There the peasants built a temple for him . They used a small restaurant in a nearby village as a reception centre for the temple , as the temple was increasingly used as a military base , where fighters , weaponry and munitions were being assembled for an uprising . In the village of Tan Thanh , a local leader recruited his peasants for Long 's revolt . The village chieftain predicted that a new Vietnamese monarch would descend from the sky at Cholon in March 1913 , and that only the royalists would survive this miracle . 
 Such proclamations were repeated across southern Vietnam and in Cambodia , and notices were posted in Saigon , Phnom Penh , the road between the cities , and in many community venues in rural communities . Long 's supporters presented them in the form of a royal edict on wooden blocks , declaring their intention to attack French military installations . They called on the people to rise up and topple French rule and said that supernatural forces would aid the independence fighters , saying that an unnamed monk would arrive from the mountains to lead them . At the time , southern Vietnam was beset by heavy corvée labour demands , especially with large @-@ scale roadworks in progress . This meant that the peasants had less time to tend to their farmland , and revolts and strikes had been common . The simmering discontent is seen as a reason for Long 's ability to gather such levels of support in a short time . Long 's supporters called on merchants to flee and convert their colonial bank notes into solid copper cash . Word of the planned revolt spread quickly , leading to a substantial depreciation in the currency . 
 Long took the lead in preparing the explosives , telling his followers that his experience as a fortuneteller , mystic and natural healer made him an expert . The bombs were made from cannon shot , carbon , sulphur and saltpeter , which were then wrapped together . 
 = = Failed uprising = = 
 On March 22 , the French arrested Long in the coastal town of Phan Thiết , some 160 kilometres to the east of Saigon . His activities and proclamations had attracted the attention of French colonial officials , and just days before , the Resident of Kampot visited the Battambang temple and spotted the collection of white robes , which were similarly styled to the uniforms worn during the 1909 uprising . However , Long 's disciples were unaware that he had been arrested and continued with their plot . After nightfall on March 23 , the bombs were taken into Saigon and placed at strategic points , with proclamation notices being erected in close proximity . None of the bombs successfully detonated . One source says that the bombs failed because the French authorities had defused all of them after uncovering the conspiracy . 
 On March 28 , the second phase of the operation started when several hundred rebels marched into Saigon dressed all in white , armed with only sticks and spears . Before the march , they had ingested potions that purportedly made them invisible . However , the French military were able to capture more than 80 of the supposedly invisible rebels during demonstrations against French rule . The police raided the homes of several people who were known to be involved with Long 's plot , resulting in more arrests . They captured most of Long 's main supporters , rendering the organisation impotent . However , Tri managed to escape . 
 = = Trial and imprisonment = = 
 Those involved were taken before a tribunal in November 1913 , where the leaders freely stated their intentions of overthrowing the French colonial regime . Of the 111 people arrested , the tribunal convicted 104 , of whom 63 received prison sentences . During the trial , some community leaders wrote to the Governor @-@ General of Indochina , blaming French oppression of the populace through <unk> labour and the confiscation of land , for the discontent that led to the uprising . The prosecutor also criticised the way in which colonial authorities operated . 
 Ernest <unk> , the French Governor of Cochinchina , the southern region of Vietnam , was known for his support of colonial enterprise and rigid rule of the colony . He was unmoved by claims that the uprising had been fuelled by a sense of injustice . He said 
 Individually , the leaders of the movement have no personal motive to invoke in order to justify their xenophobic sentiments . Some of them are men who have remained imbued with the ancient order of things predating French conquest and who have adamantly remained within the tradition and ideas of the past ; others are fanatics , who are persuaded that they are devoted to a noble cause . 
 The governor went on to <unk> the French press for their criticism of colonial policy , claiming that they boosted the morale of anti @-@ colonial activists . The prosecutor thought that because Long 's movement was affiliated with the Việt Nam Quang <unk> Hội ( VNQPH ) , an exiled monarchist organisation led by the leading anti @-@ colonial activist Phan Bội Châu , and Cường Để . The suspicion was based on the fact that the VNQPH had printed their own currency and circulated them into Vietnam at the same time that Long 's monetary policy had led to a depreciation . Cường Để had also secretly re @-@ entered southern Vietnam and had been travelling through the countryside when Long 's uprising was launched in March . The prosecutor claimed that activists from northern and central Vietnam , the main source of the VNQPH 's followers , were behind the plot . The defendants denied this , asserting that most of the participants were " illiterate peasants " , while the VNQPH were dominated by members of the scholar @-@ gentry . 
 The French intended to deport Long to French Guiana , but the outbreak of World War I in 1914 interrupted their plans . As a result , Long remained in Saigon Central Prison , serving his life sentence with hard labour . The French were unaware that Long was still in contact with his supporters . 
 = = Attempted jailbreak and execution = = 
 Over time , resentment against French rule rose again , due to World War I. The colonial authorities had forced each village to send a quota of men to serve on the Western Front . In Vietnam , rumours circulated , claiming that France was close to defeat . Believing that the colonial hold had been weakened by the strain of war in Europe , Vietnamese nationalists were buoyed . In February 1916 , uprisings broke out in southern Vietnam , with rebels demanding the restoration of an independent monarchy . One of their many objectives was to secure Long 's release by breaking down Saigon prison , and this was the most noted incident during the tumult . 
 Attacks on prisons were not uncommon in French Indochina , as rebels often viewed the prisoners as a source of reinforcements . Georges <unk> , regarded as French Indochina 's leading scholar on anti @-@ French religious movements , said that " The attack on Saigon Central Prison was not simply an attempt to release the pseudo @-@ Emperor , Phan <unk> Long , but was intended to deliver all prisoners " . 
 Before daybreak on February 15 , 1916 , between 100 and 300 Vietnamese wearing white headbands , white trousers and black tops , armed with sticks , farm implements and knives , sailed along the Arroyo <unk> waterway and disembarked near the centre of Saigon . They had pretended to be working the transport industry , delivering fruit , vegetables and building materials . The plan was that this advance party would give signals to a larger party of rebels , who were waiting on the outskirts of Saigon with the majority of the weapons , to move into the city for the main part of the uprising . 
 The advance party then attempted to proceed to the Central Prison to forcibly release Long , shouting " Let 's free big Brother [ Long ] " . Long had provided his followers with a detailed strategy from his prison cell , and the attack was led by a Cholon gang leader named Nguyen Van <unk> ( also known as Tu Mat ) with Tri 's assistance . <unk> was the leader of a powerful underworld gang that was linked to the Heaven and Earth Society . 
 The French had anticipated the trouble , and police , whose presence had been increased along the waterways , arrived quickly , dispersing Long 's followers with ease . Although some of the disciples reached the prison , none managed to breach its defenses . Ten of Long 's men were killed , whereas only one sentry perished . The French arrested 65 rebels on the spot , including Tri . Of these , 38 were sentenced to death . Long was sentenced to death for his participation in the uprising , and he was executed on February 22 , 1916 . The French Governor @-@ General of Indochina wrote to the French Minister of Colonies , describing the incident as " a serious attempt to put in execution a vast plot that has been prepared carefully and for a long time by a secret society which grouped together with professional bandits all the enemies of our domination " . The colonial authorities commissioned the publication of poems , which praised French rule and warned the populace against insurrections . 
 Similar events occurred across southern Vietnam , and in one case in Bến Tre , another self @-@ proclaimed mystic launched an uprising that was similar to Long 's 1913 effort . In all , riots or uprisings broke out in 13 of the 20 provinces of Cochinchina . The French declared a state of emergency and continued their crackdown against Long 's followers and other rebels , making a further 1 @,@ 660 arrests , which resulted in 261 incarcerations . 
 = = Aftermath and legacy = = 
 The damage inflicted on Long 's organisation led many of his followers to disperse and join a group that has now developed into the Cao Đài politico @-@ religious sect based in Tây Ninh . Nevertheless , Long 's uprising was significant because of its abnormal roots . It was the first uprising led by a self @-@ styled religious leader whose support base came about due to man @-@ made discontent . Prior to Long , peasant uprisings with religious themes had always been preceded by floods , outbreaks of disease , famine , crop failure or other natural phenomena , as sections of the rural populace attributed such disasters to the wrath of the heavens and sought help from leaders who purported to have supernatural powers . 
 Long 's demise did not end the sequence of self @-@ proclaimed mystics who raised armies and engaged in politics . During the interwar period , a sorcerer named Chem Keo claimed to be Long 's reincarnation . During World War II , Huỳnh Phú Sổ claimed to be a living Buddha and quickly gathered more than a million supporters . He raised a large peasant army and battled both the French and the communist Viet Minh independence movement , before being killed by the latter . In another case in 1939 , a Taoist attempted to demonstrate that he was immune to French bullets . Furthermore , in the years immediately after World War II , the Cao Đài 's numbers swelled to 1 @.@ 5 million . 
 Phan <unk> Long is a quickly developing street at the junction of Districts 1 , Binh Thanh , and Phu <unk> . 
 = Dig Me Out = 
 Dig Me Out is the third studio album by the American rock band Sleater @-@ Kinney , released on April 8 , 1997 by Kill Rock Stars . The album was produced by John Goodmanson and recorded from December 1996 to January 1997 at John and Stu 's Place in Seattle , Washington . Dig Me Out marked the debut of Janet Weiss , who is the band 's longest serving and current drummer . The music on the record was influenced by traditional rock and roll bands , while the lyrics deal with issues of heartbreak and survival . 
 Two singles were released in support of the album : " One More Hour " and " Little Babies " . The title track " Dig Me Out " peaked at number six on the KEXP Top 90 @.@ 3 Album Chart in 1997 without being released as a single . The album received substantial acclaim from music critics , who praised the album 's energy and feminist lyrics . Dig Me Out is included on several publications ' best album lists . In 2003 , Rolling Stone ranked it number 272 on its list of The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 Dig Me Out is the follow @-@ up to Sleater @-@ Kinney 's highly acclaimed second album Call the Doctor , released in 1996 by the queercore independent record label Chainsaw Records . Call the Doctor confirmed the band 's reputation as one of the major musical acts from the Pacific Northwest , rebelling against gender roles , consumerism , and indie rock 's male @-@ dominated hierarchy . After the release of Call the Doctor , drummer Janet Weiss of Quasi joined the band . Previously , the band had had a number of temporary drummers , including Misty Farrell , Lora Macfarlane , and Toni <unk> . Weiss would eventually become Sleater @-@ Kinney 's longest serving and current drummer . For its third album , Sleater @-@ Kinney worked again with producer John Goodmanson . The band left Chainsaw Records and decided to release the album through Kill Rock Stars , another independent record label which singer and guitarist Corin Tucker thought had better resources to ensure the band 's distribution . Goodmanson also remarked that Kill Rock Stars afforded the band a generous amount of studio time for an independent label , stating that Call the Doctor only took four days to record while Dig Me Out was recorded over the period of eight days . 
 Dig Me Out was written in nearly two months and recorded from December 1996 to January 1997 at John and Stu 's Place in Seattle , Washington . During the recording sessions , recording the vocal interplay between Tucker and co @-@ vocalist and guitarist Carrie Brownstein involved some difficulties . However , the producer took care and prevented favoring one voice over the other . As Goodmanson recalls : " We always used different mikes for the lead vocal and for the second vocal , or different kinds of processing to make those things really distinct . To make it so you can hear both things at once " . Goodmanson also noted that the fact that the band features no bass player was an advantage for the album 's production . He explained : " The awesome thing about having no bass player is you can make the guitars sound as big as you want . Usually you have to clear all that room out for the bass , so you can hear the bass line . With no bass there , you can just go for giant guitar sounds that you wouldn 't normally be able to go for " . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 Musically , Dig Me Out was considered rockier than its predecessor . Weiss ' drumming style was influenced by traditional rock and roll bands such as The Rolling Stones , The Beatles , and The Kinks , as well as numerous blues rock musicians such as Lightnin ' Hopkins , Muddy Waters , Billy Boy Arnold , and Bessie Smith , among others . Both Tucker and Brownstein remarked that Weiss became an essential part of the band 's sound . According to Tucker , " Musically , she 's completed our band . She 's become the bottom end and the <unk> that we 've really wanted for our songwriting " . In addition to playing drums , Weiss provides hand claps and tambourine in " Turn It On " . Dig Me Out also contains more guitar and vocal interplay by Tucker and Brownstein than Call the Doctor . As Brownstein explains , " If you were to separate our guitar parts I don 't necessarily think they would fully stand on their own . Our songs [ ... ] aren 't really complete until the other person has put their part over it , and their vocals " . 
 The lyrical themes on Dig Me Out deal with issues of heartbreak and survival . The song " One More Hour " is about the breakup of Tucker and Brownstein 's romantic relationship . Before the release of the album , Spin magazine published a controversial article discussing Tucker and Brownstein 's personal relationship without their permission . Brownstein felt that " it was a complete invasion of privacy . My parents didn 't know Corin and I were going out . They didn 't know I had ever dated a woman before . It was horrible . I was pissed at Spin , really mad . Luckily my parents are great people , but God forbid I would have some family that would disown me over something like that . And I would have totally held Spin responsible for that . " The song features a lot of vocal interplay by Tucker and Brownstein . Chris Nelson of Addicted to Noise noted that " one can almost hear Tucker crying in the studio as she wails , ' I needed it ' , while behind her Brownstein offers her attempts at consolation " . In her 2015 memoir Hunger Makes Me A Modern Girl , Brownstein also states that almost all the songs on Dig Me Out are about either her or Tucker 's future husband , Lance Bangs . 
 Like its predecessor , Dig Me Out also features songs that show frustration with sexism and gender stereotypes . " Little Babies " is a protest against the traditional maternity role , while the title song " Dig Me Out " exposes a woman in a dominant role . The album 's title was inspired by the fact that the band had to literally dig out the recording studio after a heavy snowstorm that took place in Winter 1996 in Seattle . Musically , the song " Words and Guitar " was said to " [ leap ] and [ skit ] with the just @-@ released repression of early Talking Heads " , while " Dance Song ' 97 " was said to " sport Devo @-@ esque keyboards of a distinctly ' 80s vintage " . Jenn Pelly of Pitchfork Media described " Heart Factory " as a song that " roars over synthetic emotions of the Prozac Nation . " 
 = = Release = = 
 Dig Me Out was released on April 8 , 1997 by Kill Rock Stars . The album cover is an homage to The Kinks ' 1965 album The Kink Kontroversy . After the release , the band went on a tour to promote the album ; a performance of " Words and Guitar " at El Rey Theatre , Los Angeles is featured in the documentary film Songs for Cassavetes by Justin Mitchell . As of July 1999 , the album has sold 64 @,@ 000 copies in the U.S. according to Nielsen SoundScan . As of February 2015 , Dig Me Out has sold 130 @,@ 000 copies . Two songs from the album , " One More Hour " and " Little Babies " , were released as singles by Matador Records on June 1 , 1998 and September 7 , 1998 respectively . The first single features the song " I Wanna Be Your Joey Ramone " from Call the Doctor as the B @-@ side , while the second single features " I 'm Not Waiting " , also from their previous album . The compact disc version of " One More Hour " includes a third song , " Don 't Think You Wanna " , which was originally released on the band 's debut album Sleater @-@ Kinney . The song " Dig Me Out " peaked at number six on the KEXP Top 90 @.@ 3 Album Chart in 1997 without being released as a single . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Dig Me Out received substantial acclaim from music critics . Randall Roberts , writing for CMJ New Music Monthly , described the album as a " hum of life wholly transcending gender and genre , filled with the kind of excitement and singular voice that made punk rock glorious in its infancy [ ... ] Dig Me Out is a monster " . Sara Scribner of Los Angeles Times praised Tucker 's emotional vocal delivery , writing that " she 's obsessed with finding honest emotions within the cold machinery of the human heart . " Ann Powers stated similar pros and highlighted Brownstein 's energetic guitar playing , noting that the band " now [ delivers ] the punch their words describe . " She also gave high marks to the album 's feminist lyrics , commenting " If [ Sleater @-@ Kinney ] wanna be our Simone de Beauvoir , Dig Me Out proves they 're up to it . " Similarly , Matt Diehl of Rolling Stone said that " while the Spice Girls prattle on about ' girl power ' , Sleater @-@ Kinney remain the real socket for that energy " . 
 AllMusic reviewer Jason Ankeny credited the band for expanding their musical boundaries with a more confident and mature sound . <unk> Kim of Entertainment Weekly praised Tucker and Brownstein 's " interlocking " vocals and called the record a " fine example of state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art punk " . In The Village Voice , critic Robert Christgau praised the union and teamwork of the band , stating that " they 're so confident of their ability to please that they just can 't stop . And this confidence is collective : Corin and Carrie chorus @-@ trade like the two @-@ headed girl , dashing and high @-@ stepping around on Janet Weiss 's shoulders . What a ride " . He referred to the album as one of his " favorite albums of the year , easy " . In a retrospective review , Anthony Carew of About.com remarked that Dig Me Out took Sleater @-@ Kinney " from the cult corner of the Pacific Northwest to international acclaim " . 
 Dig Me Out is frequently included on several publications ' best album lists . The album appeared at number four in The Village Voice 's Pazz & Jop critics ' poll for 1997 . In 1999 , Dig Me Out was ranked number 21 on Spin 's list of The 90 Greatest Albums of the ' 90s . In 2001 , Spin placed it at number 19 on its list of " 50 Most Essential Punk Records " . In 2003 , the album was ranked number 272 on Rolling Stone 's list of The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time . In 2005 , the album was ranked number 24 in Spin 's " 100 Greatest Albums , 1985 – 2005 " . In 2012 , Spin also ranked it at number 74 on their " 125 Best Albums of the Past 25 Years " , stating that " Dig Me Out captures the noise of a soul @-@ filled body shaking itself awake , and that 's an experience that bridges any gender divide . " In 2008 , the song " Dig Me Out " was ranked number 44 in Rolling Stone 's " 100 Greatest Guitar Songs of All Time " . In 2011 , the album was placed at number 71 by Slant Magazine on its list of " The 100 Best Albums of the 1990s " . The album was also included in the book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All music composed by Sleater @-@ Kinney . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from AllMusic . 
 = Electra Heart = 
 Electra Heart is the second studio album by Welsh singer and songwriter Marina Diamandis , professionally known as Marina and the Diamonds . It was released on 27 April 2012 by 679 Artists and Atlantic Records . Diamandis collaborated with producers including Liam Howe , Greg Kurstin , Dr. Luke , Diplo , and StarGate during its recording , and subsequently transitioned from the new wave musical styles seen throughout her debut studio album The Family Jewels ( 2010 ) . Their efforts resulted in a concept album inspired by electropop music , a distinct departure from her earlier projects ; its lyrical content is united by the topics of love and identity . Diamandis created the title character " Electra Heart " to represent female stereotypes in popular American culture . 
 Music critics were divided in their opinions of Electra Heart , expressing ambivalence towards Diamandis ' shift in musical style and its overall production . The record debuted at number one on the UK Albums Chart with first @-@ week sales of 21 @,@ 358 copies . In doing so , it became Diamandis ' first chart @-@ topping record there , although it was then distinguished as the lowest @-@ selling number @-@ one record of the 21st century in the country . The album was eventually certified gold by the British Phonographic Industry for exceeding shipments of 100 @,@ 000 units . Electra Heart performed moderately on international record charts , including a peak position at number 31 on the US Billboard 200 , and became Diamandis ' highest @-@ charting project in the United States at the time . 
 Electra Heart was supported by three singles , all of which were supplemented by music videos . " Primadonna " was released as the lead single from the record on 20 March 2012 , and peaked at number 11 on the UK Singles Chart . Follow @-@ up singles " Power & Control " and " How to Be a Heartbreaker " were respectively released on 20 July and 7 December , and reached numbers 193 and 88 in the United Kingdom . The record was additionally promoted by Diamandis ' headlining The Lonely Hearts Club Tour , which visited Europe and North America from May 2012 through May 2013 . 
 = = Background and production = = 
 After returning from the United States after the launch of her debut studio album The Family Jewels ( 2010 ) , Diamandis considered creating a character which would become the centerpiece of her follow @-@ up project . She commented that she was inspired by the " Tumblr generation " to photograph herself in several places across the United States , appearing as a different persona in each picture to <unk> the anonymity of the " mini @-@ stars of the internet " . The final product became " a cold , ruthless character who wasn 't vulnerable " , which she later named " Electra Heart " and detailed as a tool to represent a combination of elements associated with the American Dream and Greek tragedy , and added that visuals would merge the differing concepts into a cohesive idea . 
 Diamandis first announced Electra Heart in August 2011 ; it was initially planned to become a three @-@ piece project inspired by American culture in the 1970s , although it eventually evolved into her second studio album . Diamandis originally planned to release the record as a " side project " under an entity separate from Marina and the Diamonds , although her management disapproved . The track " Living Dead " was the first recorded during its production , and approximately 22 songs were recorded for potential inclusion on the album . She later commented that the record was dedicated to " dysfunctional love " , elaborating that " rejection is a universally embarrassing topic and Electra Heart is my response to that . " Diamandis stated that Electra Heart was influenced by Madonna , Marilyn Monroe , and the French queen Marie Antoinette ; she described Madonna as being " fearless " and felt that she showcased a desire to be a successful artist beyond fame and wealth . Diamandis told Glamour that Britney Spears influenced a " double @-@ sided " theme for the record of both " innocence " and " darkness " . She described the final product as being " a bit cringe " and reflective of her personal experiences , although noted that its promotional campaign would be " pink and fluffy " . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Heavily inspired by electropop musical styles , Electra Heart has been described as a concept album detailing " female identity " and " a recent breakup " . It represents a musical departure from Diamandis ' debut studio album The Family Jewels ( 2010 ) , which incorporated a new wave and indie rock @-@ influenced sonority . She later commented that the album was specifically designed as a pop record to allow her to establish a greater prominence in the contemporary music industry . The title character " Electra Heart " portrays four female archetypes in the album : " Teen Idle " , " Primadonna " , " Homewrecker " , and " Su @-@ Barbie @-@ A " . Their presences on each track are not clearly defined , although Diamandis acknowledged that they are more apparent on the visual aspects of the album . 
 Alexis Petridis from The Guardian compared the lyrical content used throughout the pop punk @-@ inspired opener " Bubblegum Bitch " to " the self @-@ fulfilling I @-@ will @-@ be @-@ huge prophecy " that was developed in The Fame by Lady Gaga . The following track " Primadonna " is a pop number that contains a " surging beat " and an " anti @-@ chorus structure " , which according to James Christopher Monger from AllMusic blends styles reminiscent of Swedish recording artist Lykke Li and the British band Coldplay . " Lies " takes influence from elements of dubstep music . Michael Cragg from BBC Music felt that it allowed Diamandis to " deal directly with her emotions " , and opined that contributions from producer Diplo gave the song " extra gloom wobble sadness " . Cragg classified " Homewrecker " as a " vampy " track which blends verses centred around spoken @-@ word vocals with a " stompy " refrain where Diamandis declares " I broke a million hearts just for fun " , while Christopher Will from the Pennsylvania State University @-@ sponsored Blue Robot recognised elements of house music . Cragg further opined that " Starring Role " was " heart @-@ rending in its simplicity " , and noticed prominent piano and drum instrumentation throughout the recording . 
 Monger saw the sixth track " The State of Dreaming " as a solemn offering from the record for its intellectual lyrical content , which he described as one of several tracks that " reveal the lonely rebel , defiantly eating lunch alone , secretly wishing for acceptance . " " Power & Control " was detailed as an electropop track by Emily Mackay from The Quietus , while Laura Snapes from Pitchfork Media commented that Diamandis repeatedly delivers the lyrics " I am weak " with an " increasingly ephemeral voice " as it progresses . Snapes also felt that " Living Dead " was a more " vulnerable moment " from Electra Heart , and compared it to the " snappy [ and ] taut " works of English duo Soft Cell . Monger recognised inspiration from American recording artist Lana Del Rey in " Teen Idle " and felt that it represented " the feral blood of an army of disenfranchised high @-@ school loners coming into their own " . Bradley Stern from MuuMuse suggested that " The Valley of the Dolls " drew inspiration from the 1967 film of the same name , and described " <unk> " as a " sparkling guitar @-@ pop tune " that takes stylistic influences from 1960s pop music and details the power struggle between romantic partners . Electra Heart closes with its 12th track " Fear and Loathing " , which experiments with electronic music styles ; Petridis made particular note of its minimal production , which according to him , places emphasis on Diamandis ' " coolly enunciated and slightly folky " vocals . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 On 1 March , Diamandis unveiled the album artwork for the standard version of Electra Heart , which depicts a blonde Diamandis wearing several hair rollers . The singer later revealed that because of the dye , her hair started to fall out , so she got a boy 's haircut and wore a wig . Becky Bain from Idolator complimented its " retro film stock look " and opined that it " is just a snapshot from some 1970s exploitation movie " , while Bradley Stern from MuuMuse jokingly referenced the album track " Homewrecker " when stating that she " looks like a proper Suzy Homemaker ! ( Or should I say Suzy Homewrecker ? ) " The artwork for the deluxe version features the same picture of Diamandis , although it is tinted purple . The track listing for the standard version was confirmed on 1 March , while the track listing for the deluxe version was announced on 5 March . A limited edition box set of Electra Heart contained the deluxe version of the record , four photo art cards , a ring , perspex , necklace , and pocket mirror . 
 = = = Music videos = = = 
 Diamandis released 11 music videos through YouTube during the promotional campaign for Electra Heart . She claimed that their production led her record label into bankruptcy , but stated that they would be released and " finish this era the way I want to . " The first , titled " Part 1 : Fear and Loathing " , was released on 8 August 2011 , and sees Diamandis cutting her long brown hair and singing the track on a balcony during the nighttime . It was followed by " Part 2 : Radioactive " on 22 August , which depicts a blonde @-@ wigged Diamandis travelling across the United States with her romantic interest . The track was released through the iTunes Store on 23 September , and peaked at number 25 on the UK Singles Chart on 15 October . The black @-@ and @-@ white clip " Part 3 : The Archetypes " shows the close @-@ up of a blonde Diamandis while the introduction of " The State of Dreaming " is played ; it introduced the archetypes " housewife " , " beauty queen " , " homewrecker " , and " idle teen " on 15 December . " Part 4 : Primadonna " served as the music video for the lead single from the record on 12 March 2012 . 
 <unk> on 18 May , the black @-@ and @-@ white " Part 5 : Su @-@ Barbie @-@ A " is set to the introduction of " Valley of the Dolls " with overlapped commentary mentioning " Quick @-@ Curl Barbie " and " Mod @-@ Hair Ken " ; it depicts Diamandis standing on the porch of a house with her back to the front door . It was followed by " Part 6 : Power & Control " on 30 May , where Diamandis is seen engaging in a series of mind games with her romantic interest . Diamandis alleged that Atlantic Records delayed the premiere of " Part 7 : How to Be a Heartbreaker " because they felt she was " ugly " in the clip ; it was made publicly available on 28 September , and sees Diamandis interacting with several shirtless men in a community shower . " Part 8 : <unk> " introduced the previously @-@ unreleased track " <unk> " on 14 February 2013 . The black @-@ and @-@ white visual shows a brown @-@ wigged Diamandis looking about a room with white @-@ tiled walls . 
 " Part 9 : The State of Dreaming " , premiered on 2 March , presents Diamandis lying on a bed while " alternating between sad eyes and a big smile " . It begins with a black @-@ and @-@ white filter , although transitions into color after the first minute . It was followed by " Part 10 : Lies " on 17 July , and employs a similar black @-@ and @-@ white to color technique . Diamandis is first seen looking into the camera wearing little makeup , and is later shown walking into the woods and sitting at a dinner table in the rain . The final music video " Part 11 : Electra Heart " introduced the previously @-@ unreleased title track ; the clip itself contains footage from the earlier music videos . It symbolically ended the promotional era for Electra Heart , with Diamandis having tweeted " Goodbye , Electra Heart ! " on 8 August , the same day the video was released . 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 Inspired by the six @-@ single promotional campaign for Teenage Dream ( 2010 ) by Katy Perry , Diamandis planned to release six singles from Electra Heart , however , three tracks were released before she finished promoting the album . " Primadonna " was announced as the lead single from the record on 13 March 2012 , and was released through the iTunes Store in the United States on 20 March . Robert Copsey from Digital Spy spoke favourably of the track , complimenting its overall production and Diamandis ' portrayal of its female archetype . It peaked at number 11 on the UK Singles Chart , becoming Diamandis ' fifth song to enter the top 40 in the United Kingdom . " Power & Control " was released through the iTunes Store in the United Kingdom on 20 July 2012 and served as the second single from Electra Heart . It peaked at number 193 on the UK Singles Chart . In July 2012 , it was announced that " How to Be a Heartbreaker " would be released as the second single in the United States and the third single in the United Kingdom . Diamandis commented that she had written the track while Electra Heart was being pressed in the United Kingdom , and consequently missed the cut @-@ off for initial inclusion on the record ; however , it was featured in the revised track listing for the American version . The song was released through the iTunes Store on 7 December 2012 , and peaked at number 88 on the UK Singles Chart . 
 = = = Tour = = = 
 In February 2012 , Diamandis announced the launch of her headlining The Lonely Hearts Club Tour . It ran alongside the Mylo Xyloto Tour headlined by Coldplay , for which Diamandis served as the supporting act . The Lonely Hearts Club Tour was initially scheduled to begin on 4 May at the Manchester Cathedral in Manchester , although it was delayed after Diamandis sustained a vocal cord injury , and ultimately began on 18 June at The Waterfront in Norwich . The American leg of the tour began on 10 July at The Fonda Theatre in Los Angeles , while the tour itself ended on 29 May 2013 after a performance at the Rumsey <unk> in New York City . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 At Metacritic , which assigns a weighted mean rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , Electra Heart received an average score of 57 , which indicates " mixed or average reviews " , based on 16 reviews . Writing for AllMusic , James Christopher Monger compared the record to the works of American recording artists Kesha and Lady Gaga , and favourably summarised it as " a brooding , sexy , desperate , overwrought , and infectious record that 's both aware and unashamed of its contrivance . " Michael Cragg reviewed the album on behalf of BBC Music ; he felt that the recurring concept of failed romance established " a strange dichotomy " that created a sense of cohesiveness , and elaborated that it " [ pulls ] you sharply into her world . " He considered the second half of the disc to be mildly disappointing , although concluded that this was excusable because the overall record " [ balances ] the ironic and the heartfelt , the quirky and the mainstream , the real and the fake with remarkable aplomb . " Tim Stack of Entertainment Weekly complimented Diamandis for her ability to " rival Katy Perry for catchy hooks , command with the swagger of Gwen Stefani , and even come close to the ethereal vocal exhilaration of Florence Welch . " Stack opined that Electra Heart was a healthy combination of up @-@ tempo recordings and genuinely @-@ delivered ballads , and placed additional praise on the female archetypes explored throughout the album . 
 The Guardian writer Alexis Petridis was confident that " there 's clearly an interesting pop star " emerging from Diamandis , but suggested that her creativity was restricted by the heavy integration of alter egos and an implied determination for commercial success , which he commented failed to reflect Diamandis ' inventiveness . Simon Price from The Independent accepted that the record was " too professional to be truly terrible " , although noted that Diamandis ' revamped public image as a " British Katy Perry " lacked ingenuity . NME columnist Priya Elan summarised the album as an " expensive @-@ sounding failure " that suffered from its lack of decisiveness . Writing for Pitchfork Media , Laura Snapes questioned the decision of creating the " Electra Heart " character for the record , and suggested that it was unnecessary . She elaborated that " duller and more unbearable " tracks were unavoidable , and expressed particular disappointment because she thought that Electra Heart could have become " one of the year 's most acclaimed pop albums . " Representing The Observer , Kitty Empire assumed that Diamandis ' collaborations with Dr. Luke and Greg Kurstin were evidence of " a big label push " . She compared the disc to the works of Perry and Britney Spears , although felt that Lana Del Rey was more successful in embodying the themes of " love , identity , femininity and America " than Diamandis ' generic production values allowed . Emily Mackay from The Quietus criticised the songs ' titles for being lacklustre , which she sarcastically stated caused listeners " physical pain " , and was disappointed that the character " Electra Heart " was a scapegoat for expressing " all the worst parts of Marina Diamandis that she didn 't want to become . " The harshest review came from the magazine Clash , with George Boorman writing , " ' Electra heart ' is an ingloriously languid statement of Marina 's demise , the final stamp of disapproval on her flailing excuse of a musical career . There is actually a song called ' Bubblegum Bitch ' on this album . ' <unk> said . " 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Electra Heart debuted at number one on the UK Albums Chart with first @-@ week sales of 21 @,@ 358 copies . It became Diamandis ' first chart @-@ topping album in the United Kingdom , although it was additionally distinguished as the lowest @-@ selling number @-@ one record of the 21st century in the country . It was later surpassed by Write It on Your Skin ( 2012 ) by Newton Faulkner , which debuted at number one on the UK Albums Chart with first @-@ week sales of 16 @,@ 647 copies . On 15 April 2016 , Electra Heart was certified gold by the British Phonographic Industry for exceeding shipments of 100 @,@ 000 units in the United Kingdom . The record additionally reached number one on both the Irish Albums Chart and the Scottish Albums Chart ; it was recognised with a gold certification in the former territory . 
 Electra Heart performed moderately on additional record charts in Europe . The record peaked at number 11 on the Swiss Hitparade , and reached number 17 on the German Media Control Charts . It charted at number 25 on the Ö3 Austria Top 40 , number 30 on the Norwegian VG @-@ lista , and number 41 on the Swedish Sverigetopplistan . The album reached the lower ends of the Dutch MegaCharts and the Belgian Ultratop in Wallonia , respectively peaking at numbers 92 and 132 in each region . However , it reached number 31 on the Official New Zealand Music Chart and number 32 on the Australian ARIA Charts in Oceania . 
 Electra Heart debuted at number 31 on the US Billboard 200 , and reached number two on the Billboard Dance / Electronic Albums component chart . It has sold 129 @,@ 000 copies in the US as of March 2015 . Elsewhere in North America , the record peaked at number 50 on the Canadian Albums Chart . In August 2012 , Diamandis commented that she believed consumers in the United Kingdom had misinterpreted her comical effort with a perceived abandonment of her original musical inspiration , thus resulting in a relative underperformance in the country . In contrast , she felt that her American audience was more receptive of Electra Heart and her evolving public image . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Electra Heart . 
 Notes 
 ^ [ a ] signifies a co @-@ producer 
 ^ [ b ] signifies a remixer 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Electra Heart . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Myxobolus cerebralis = 
 Myxobolus cerebralis is a myxosporean parasite of salmonids ( salmon , trout , and their allies ) that causes whirling disease in farmed salmon and trout and also in wild fish populations . It was first described in rainbow trout in Germany a century ago , but its range has spread and it has appeared in most of Europe ( including Russia ) , the United States , South Africa and other countries . In the 1980s , M. cerebralis was found to require a tubificid oligochaete ( a kind of segmented worm ) to complete its life cycle . The parasite infects its hosts with its cells after piercing them with polar filaments ejected from nematocyst @-@ like capsules . 
 Whirling disease afflicts juvenile fish ( fingerlings and fry ) and causes skeletal deformation and neurological damage . Fish " whirl " forward in an awkward , corkscrew @-@ like pattern instead of swimming normally , find feeding difficult , and are more vulnerable to predators . The mortality rate is high for fingerlings , up to 90 % of infected populations , and those that do survive are deformed by the parasites residing in their cartilage and bone . They act as a reservoir for the parasite , which is released into water following the fish 's death . M. cerebralis is one of the most economically important myxozoans in fish , as well as one of the most pathogenic . It was the first myxosporean whose pathology and symptoms were described <unk> 
 t | first = M. A. | <unk> = <unk> | <unk> = W. O. Jr . | year = 2003 | title = Whirling disease and salmonid fish : life cycle , biology , and disease | journal = Journal of Parasitology | volume = 89 | issue = 4 | pages = 658 – 667 | doi = 10 @.@ 1645 / ge @-@ <unk> | <unk> = <unk> } } < / ref > The parasite is not transmissible to humans . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The taxonomy and naming of both M. cerebralis , and of myxozoans in general , have complicated histories . It was originally thought to infect fish brains ( hence the specific epithet cerebralis ) and nervous systems , though it soon was found to primarily infect cartilage and skeletal tissue . Attempts to change the name to Myxobolus <unk> , which would more accurately describe the organism , failed because of nomenclature rules . Later , the organisms previously called <unk> dubium and T. <unk> ( class <unk> ) were found to be , in fact , triactinomyxon stages of M. cerebralis , the life cycle of which was expanded to include the triactinomyxon stage . Similarly , other <unk> were folded into the life cycles of various <unk> . 
 Today , the myxozoans , previously thought to be multicellular protozoans , are considered animals by many scientists , though their status has not officially changed . Recent molecular studies suggest they are related to Bilateria or Cnidaria , with Cnidaria being closer morphologically because both groups have extrusive filaments , . Bilateria are somewhat closer in some genetic studies . A study in 2015 confirms they are cnidarians . 
 = = Morphology = = 
 M. cerebralis has many diverse stages ranging from single cells to relatively large spores , not all of which have been studied in detail . 
 = = = <unk> stage = = = 
 The stages that infect fish , called triactinomyxon spores , are made of a single style that is about 150 micrometers ( µm ) long and three processes or " tails " , each about 200 micrometers long . A sporoplasm packet at the end of the style contains 64 germ cells surrounded by a cellular envelope . There are also three polar capsules , each of which contains a coiled polar filament between 170 and 180 µm long . Polar filaments in both this stage and in the <unk> stage ( see picture above ) rapidly shoot into the body of the host , creating an opening through which the sporoplasm can enter . 
 = = = <unk> stage = = = 
 Upon contact with fish hosts and firing of the polar capsules , the sporoplasm contained within the central style of the triactinomyxon migrates into the epithelium or gut lining . Firstly , this sporoplasm undergoes mitosis to produce more <unk> cells , which migrate into deeper tissue layers , to reach the cerebral cartilage . 
 = = = <unk> stage = = = 
 Myxospores , which develop from <unk> cell stages inside fish hosts , are lenticular . They have a diameter of about 10 micrometers and are made of six cells . Two of these cells form polar capsules , two merge to form a binucleate sporoplasm , and two form protective valves . Myxospores are infective to oligochaetes , and are found among the remains of digested fish cartilage . They are often difficult to distinguish from related species because of morphological similarities across genera . Though M. cerebralis is the only myxosporean ever found in salmonid cartilage , other visually similar species may be present in the skin , nervous system , or muscle . 
 = = Life cycle = = 
 Myxobolus cerebralis has a two @-@ host life cycle involving a salmonid fish and a tubificid oligochaete . So far , the only worm known to be susceptible to M. cerebralis infection is Tubifex tubifex , though what scientists currently call T. tubifex may in fact be more than one species . First , myxospores are ingested by tubificid worms . In the gut lumen of the worm , the spores extrude their polar capsules and attach to the gut epithelium by polar filaments . The shell valves then open along the suture line and the binucleate germ cell penetrates between the intestinal epithelial cells of the worm . This cell multiplies , producing many <unk> cells by an asexual cell fission process called <unk> . As a result of the multiplication process , the intercellular space of the epithelial cells in more than 10 neighbouring worm segments may become infected . 
 Around 60 – 90 days <unk> , sexual cell stages of the parasite undergo <unk> , and develop into <unk> , each of which contains eight triactinomyxon @-@ stage spores . These spores are released from the oligochaete anus into the water . Alternatively , a fish can become infected by eating an infected oligochaete . Infected <unk> can release <unk> for at least a year . The triactinomyxon spores are carried by the water currents , where they can infect a salmonid through the skin . Penetration of the fish by these spores takes only a few seconds . Within five minutes , a sac of germ cells called a sporoplasm has entered the fish epidermis , and within a few hours , the sporoplasm splits into individual cells that will spread through the fish . 
 Within the fish , both intracellular and extracellular stages reproduce in its cartilage by asexual <unk> , meaning new cells grow from within old cells . The final stage within the fish is the creation of the <unk> , which is formed by <unk> . They are released into the environment when the fish decomposes or is eaten . Some recent research indicates some fish may expel viable myxospores while still alive . 
 Myxospores are extremely tough : " it was shown that Myxobolus cerebralis spores can tolerate freezing at − 20 ° C for at least 3 months , aging in mud at 13 ° C for at least 5 months , and passage through the guts of northern pike Esox <unk> or mallards Anas platyrhynchos without loss of infectivity " to worms . <unk> are much shorter @-@ lived , surviving 34 days or less , depending on temperature . 
 = = Pathology = = 
 M. cerebralis infections have been reported from a wide range of salmonid species : eight species of " Atlantic " salmonids , Salmo ; four species of " Pacific " salmonids , Oncorhynchus ; four species of char , Salvelinus ; the grayling , <unk> <unk> ; and the <unk> , <unk> <unk> . M. cerebralis causes damage to its fish hosts through attachment of triactinomyxon spores and the migrations of various stages through tissues and along nerves , as well as by digesting cartilage . The fish 's tail may darken , but aside from lesions on cartilage , internal organs generally appear healthy . Other symptoms include skeletal deformities and " whirling " behavior ( tail @-@ chasing ) in young fish , which was thought to have been caused by a loss of equilibrium , but is actually caused by damage to the spinal cord and lower brain stem . Experiments have shown that fish can kill Myxobolus in their skin ( possibly using antibodies ) , but that the fish do not attack the parasites once they have migrated to the central nervous system . This response varies from species to species . 
 In T. tubifex , the release of triactinomyxon spores from the intestinal wall damages the worm 's mucosa ; this may happen thousands of times in a single worm , and is believed to impair nutrient absorption . Also , fish infected with worms have lower body mass and may be discolored . Spores are released from the worm almost exclusively when the temperature is between 10 ° C and 15 ° C , so fish in warmer or cooler waters are less likely to be infected , and infection rates vary seasonally . 
 = = = Susceptibility = = = 
 Fish size , age , concentration of triactinomyxon spores , and water temperature all affect infection rates in fish , as does the species of the fish in question . The disease has the most impact on fish less than five months old because their skeletons have not ossified . This makes young fish more susceptible to deformities and provides M. cerebralis more cartilage on which to feed . In one study of seven species of many strains , brook trout and rainbow trout ( except one strain ) were far more heavily affected by M. cerebralis after two hours of exposure than other species were , while bull trout , Chinook salmon , brown trout , and Arctic grayling were least severely affected . While brown trout may harbor the parasite , they typically do not show any symptoms , and this species may have been M. cerebralis ' original host . This lack of symptoms in brown trout meant that the parasite was not discovered until after nonnative rainbow trout were introduced in Europe . 
 = = = Diagnosis = = = 
 Moderate or heavy clinical infection of fish with whirling disease can be presumptively diagnosed on the basis of changes in behavior and appearance about 35 to 80 days after initial infection , though " injury or deficiency in dietary tryptophan and ascorbic acid can evoke similar signs " , so conclusive diagnosis may require finding myxospores in the fish 's cartilage . In heavy infections , only examining cartilage microscopically may be needed to find spores . In less severe infections , the most common test involves digestion of the cranial cartilage with the proteases pepsin and trypsin ( pepsin @-@ trypsin digest — <unk> ) before looking for spores . The head and other tissues can be further examined using histopathology to confirm whether the location and morphology of the spores matches what is known for M. cerebralis . <unk> identification of spores in tissue sections using an antibody raised against the spores is also possible . Parasite identity can also be confirmed using the polymerase chain reaction to amplify the 415 base pair 18S rRNA gene from M. cerebralis . Fish should be screened at the life stage most susceptible to the parasites , with particular focus on fish in aquaculture units . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Although originally a mild pathogen of Salmo trutta in central Europe and other salmonids in northeast Asia , the spread of the rainbow trout ( Oncorhynchus mykiss ) has greatly increased the impact of this parasite . Having no innate immunity to M. cerebralis , rainbow trout are particularly susceptible , and can release so many spores that even more resistant species in the same area , such as S. trutta , can become overloaded with parasites and incur 80 % – 90 % mortalities . Where M. cerebralis has become well @-@ established , it has caused decline or even elimination of whole cohorts of fish . 
 = = = Impact in Europe = = = 
 The impact of M. cerebralis in Europe is somewhat lessened because the species is endemic to this region , giving native fish stocks a degree of immunity . Rainbow trout , the most susceptible species to this parasite , are not native to Europe ; successfully reproducing feral populations are rare , so few wild rainbow trout are young enough to be susceptible to infection . On the other hand , they are widely reared for restocking sport @-@ fishing waters and for aquaculture , where this parasite has its greatest impact . Hatching and rearing methods designed to prevent infection of rainbow trout fry have proved successful in Europe . These techniques include hatching eggs in spore @-@ free water and rearing fry to the " ossification " stage in tanks or raceways . These methods give particular attention to the quality of water sources to guard against spore introduction during water exchanges . Fry are moved to earthen ponds only when they are considered to be clinically resistant to the parasite , after skeletal ossification occurs . 
 = = = Impact in New Zealand = = = 
 M. cerebralis was first found in New Zealand in 1971 . The parasite has only been found in rivers in the South Island , away from the most important aquaculture sites . Additionally , salmonid species commercially <unk> in New Zealand have low susceptibility to whirling disease , and the parasite has also not been shown to affect native salmonids . An important indirect effect of the parasites presence is quarantine restriction placed on exports of salmon products to Australia . 
 = = = Impact in the United States = = = 
 M. cerebralis was first recorded in North America in 1956 in Pennsylvania , having been introduced via infected trout imported from Europe , and has spread steadily south and westwards . Until the 1990s , whirling disease was considered a manageable problem affecting rainbow trout in hatcheries . However , it has recently become established in natural waters of the Rocky Mountain states ( Colorado , Wyoming , Utah , Montana , Idaho , New Mexico ) , where it is causing heavy mortalities in several <unk> rivers . Some streams in the western United States have lost 90 % of their trout . In addition , whirling disease threatens recreational fishing , which is important for the tourism industry , a key component of the economies of some U.S. western states . For example , " the Montana Whirling Disease Task Force estimated trout fishing generated US $ 300 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in recreational expenditures in Montana alone " . Making matters worse , some of the fish species that M. cerebralis infects ( bull trout , cutthroat trout , and steelhead ) are already threatened or endangered , and the parasite could worsen their already precarious situations . For reasons that are poorly understood , but probably have to do with environmental conditions , the impact on infected fish has been greatest in Colorado and Montana , and least in California , Michigan , and New York . 
 = = Prevention and control = = 
 Some biologists have attempted to disarm triactinomyxon spores by making them fire prematurely . In the laboratory , only extreme acidity or basicity , moderate to high concentrations of salts , or electric current caused premature filament discharge ; neurochemicals , cnidarian <unk> , and trout mucus were ineffective , as were anesthetized or dead fish . If spores could be disarmed , they would be unable to infect fish , but further research is needed to find an effective treatment . 
 Some strains of fish are more resistant than others , even within species ; using resistant strains may help reduce the incidence and severity of whirling disease in aquaculture . There is also some circumstantial evidence that fish populations can develop resistance to the disease over time . Additionally , <unk> may avoid M. cerebralis infections by not using earthen ponds for raising young fish ; this keeps them away from possibly infected <unk> and makes it easier to eliminate spores and oligochaetes through filtration , chlorination , and ultraviolet bombardment . To minimise tubificid populations , techniques include periodic disinfection of the hatchery or aquaculture ponds , and the rearing of small trout indoors in pathogen @-@ free water . Smooth @-@ faced concrete or plastic @-@ lined raceways that are kept clean and free of contaminated water keep aquaculture facilities free of the disease . 
 Lastly , some drugs , such as <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , fumagillin , proguanil and <unk> , have been shown to impede spore development , which reduces infection rates . For example , one study showed that feeding fumagillin to O. mykiss reduced the number of infected fish from between 73 % and 100 % to between 10 % and 20 % . Unfortunately , this treatment is considered unsuitable for wild trout populations , and no drug treatment has ever been shown to be effective in the studies required for United States Food and Drug Administration approval . 
 Recreational and sports fishers can help to prevent the spread of the parasite by not transporting fish from one body of water to another , not disposing of fish bones or entrails in any body of water , and ensuring boots and shoes are clean before moving between different bodies of water . Federal , state , provincial , and local regulations on the use of bait should be followed . 
 = Mwng = 
 Mwng ( pronounced [ <unk> ] ; English : Mane ) is the fourth studio album by Welsh rock band the Super Furry Animals , and the first by the group to have lyrics written entirely in the Welsh language . Mwng was released on 15 May 2000 on the band 's own record label , Placid Casual , following the demise of their former label Creation . The album includes the single " Ysbeidiau Heulog " , and reached number 11 on the UK Albums Chart following its release — the first Welsh @-@ language album to reach the top 20 . This success led to Mwng being mentioned in the House of Commons of the United Kingdom by Elfyn Llwyd , who described the record as a celebration of a " new wave of confidence in the Welsh nation " . 
 The Super Furry Animals had attempted to make a hit record with a commercial sound with their previous release , 1999 's Guerrilla . The record 's singles failed to hit the top 10 of the UK Singles Chart , so the band decided to go on " pop strike " . The group had written several Welsh @-@ language songs during sessions for Guerrilla , and opted to release them as a coherent album rather than issue " token Welsh songs " as b @-@ sides — reasoning that , if their English pop songs were not going to be played on the radio they may as well release Welsh pop songs that would not get played on the radio . Singer Gruff Rhys stated that , although the decision to release a Welsh language album was not an explicitly political statement , he does feel the record is a " stand against globalisation " . Recording largely took place at Ofn Studios , Llanfaelog , Anglesey in 1999 , with the band sharing production duties with Gorwel Owen . The " lo @-@ fi " album cost just £ 6 @,@ 000 to make , in contrast with the " excessive expense " of Guerrilla , and was recorded almost entirely live . 
 Mwng is an understated rock record inspired by the band 's love of " Anglo @-@ American pop culture of the 60s , 70s and 80s . " The album has a " wintery persona " that is best summed up by the track " Ymaelodi Â 'r Ymylon " . Rhys feels that the record marks the first time the band managed to escape their influences and clearly establish their own sound . The album 's lyrics deal with a diverse set of subjects , such as the death of rural communities , old school teachers , and Sarn Helen ( a Roman road built in Wales ) . Rhys has stated that many of Mwng 's songs are highly personal reflections on what were difficult years for him . Rhys has also expressed the belief that the album is accessible to non @-@ Welsh speakers , as they can pick up on the mood of the songs even if they cannot understand the lyrics . Critical reception was generally positive , although some reviewers criticised the album for its " bare @-@ boned production " . Mwng was included in both the Melody Maker and NME " Best album of 2000 " lists , with the latter calling the record the band 's best release . 
 = = Origins and recording = = 
 The Super Furry Animals made a conscious decision to make a commercial @-@ sounding " pop jukebox " record with 1999 's Guerrilla . The band had written the album 's intended singles with the hope that they would become " radio hits " , and were disappointed with the limited success they received : the first single , " Northern Lites " , charted just outside the Top 10 of the UK Singles Chart at number 11 , while subsequent releases " Fire in My Heart " and " Do or Die " reached numbers 25 and 20 , respectively . The band blamed their record label , Creation , for the relative failure of the singles — particularly " Northern Lites " , which they felt " could have been bigger " if the label had produced a better music video and conducted a more successful marketing campaign . As a result , the group became tired of playing " chart games " and went on " pop strike " , deciding to release music just " for the joy of it " , with no agenda . 
 The Super Furry Animals had written several Welsh language songs while they were working on Guerrilla and decided that , rather than releasing " token Welsh songs " as b @-@ sides and album tracks , they would issue them together as a coherent record . These tracks would be augmented by " <unk> Hi " , a song written by Rhys in 1987 that he had never " had a chance to do before " , and a cover of the track " Y Teimlad " , which the group wanted to record because of their admiration for Welsh language band Datblygu ( who originally wrote and recorded the song in 1984 ) . According to Rhys , the Super Furry Animals reasoned that , if their English language pop songs were not getting played on the radio , they may as well make a Welsh language album featuring songs that would not be played on the radio . Rhys has said that , although the decision to release a Welsh language album was not " an explicitly political statement " , he does see Mwng as a " stand against globalisation " , railing against " advanced capitalism " and the lack of interest shown in minority cultures by large companies who " just want to make money " . Rhys has also stated that his boredom with writing songs in English inspired him to write Mwng , and that it is a very personal album , rather than a celebration of Welsh culture . 
 The " lo @-@ fi " Mwng was recorded over two weeks in late 1999 , and — in contrast with the " excessive expense " of Guerilla — cost just £ 6 @,@ 000 to make . The band chose Gorwel Owen as co @-@ producer , having previously worked with him on their first two albums , 1996 's Fuzzy Logic and 1997 's Radiator . The majority of Mwng was recorded with Owen at Ofn Studios in Llanfaelog , Wales . According to Rhys , the band had to play in separate rooms to avoid the sound of one instrument bleeding onto the track of another during recording due to Ofn 's small size . " Y Gwyneb Iau " and " Ysbeidiau Heulog " were recorded at Famous Studios in Cardiff , and were engineered by Greg Haver , while " Y Teimlad " was recorded at Real World Studios , Box , Wiltshire , and was engineered by Michael Brennan , Jr . " Sarn Helen " was recorded and engineered by keyboardist Cian Ciaran in his living room . Overdubs for all songs were added at Ofn with Owen , who also mixed the album at the studio along with the Super Furry Animals . Songs were recorded almost entirely live , with the band wanting to make a " really immediate record " as a reaction against the drawn out recording sessions for Guerilla and 1997 's Radiator , which had taken several months and proved frustrating for the group . The version of " Nythod Cacwn " that appears on the album is the original demo , with Rhys on drums . The band felt that , although the demo did not sound very professional , there was a warmth to it that would be impossible to recreate were the group to record the song again . The album 's title translates into English as " Mane " . According to Rhys , the band did not have the mane of a particular animal in mind , but felt it could be " an extension of a Super Furry Animal " . 
 = = Musical style = = 
 Mwng is a " lo @-@ fi " , raw , and understated record of rock songs , " stripped of the bleeps and squelches " that appear on the Super Furry Animals ' other releases . Although the album 's lyrics are in Welsh , singer Rhys has said that " musically there 's nothing Welsh about it at all " , going on to state that the record 's only real Welsh influences are Datblygu ( the writers of " Y Teimlad " ) and Meic Stevens . Instead , the record is a tribute to the band 's obsession with " Anglo @-@ American pop culture of the 60s , 70s and 80s " , and is an album that " can be understood on a musical level anywhere in the Westernised world " regardless of whether or not the listener can understand the lyrics . 
 Bassist Guto Pryce said that he feels Mwng " sounds like an album " rather than a collection of individual songs , due to the fact it was recorded live and over a short period of time . According to Rhys , Mwng marks a refining of the group 's sound , with the band having " sieved off " their influences to truly sound like the Super Furry Animals for the first time . Rhys has said that , although keyboardist Cian Ciaran did not explore " digital frontiers " on the album , he was still able to " deconstruct songs " , even when playing the harmonium . The band had previously thought of the saxophone as " the instrument of Satan " , but actually used one on this record for the first time , reasoning that it was appropriate as Mwng is a " darkish album " . Rhys described the album as the band 's " monochrome " record , stating that it is " less dressed up " than their other releases , and that it is a " good introduction to [ the group 's ] songwriting . " 
 Rhys said that " if there 's a song that sums up the album in terms of mood " , perhaps it is " Ymaelodi Â 'r Ymylon " , typifying its " wintery persona " . The track has been described by Rhys as a celebration of the band 's love of The Beach Boys , Love , and Ennio Morricone , featuring layered vocal harmonies . " Pan <unk> 'r Wawr " features a " wheezing harmonium " and " perishing trumpet swirl " , and has been compared to the music of XTC , Ennio Morricone , and " psychedelic @-@ era " Rolling Stones . According to Rhys , the music of " Sarn Helen " was written to provide the soundtrack to a fictional journey , " cruising down the A5 to Rome in a two @-@ door chariot " . The song has been called " evil personified " and dark , and has been likened to the sound of " an approaching Roman army " . The " folky " , eerily melancholic " Nythod Cacwn " has been compared to the Tori Amos single " <unk> Girl " . " Y Gwyneb Iau " has been described as a " brass @-@ soaked " cross between the music of Herb Alpert and The Doors , featuring " maudlin horns and military beats " , while Rhys has said that the song is a combination of Nick Drake , Gladys Knight , and The Velvet Underground 's third album . " Ysbeidiau Heulog " and the album 's opening track , " <unk> " , have been singled out as the only songs on Mwng that are " distinctly cheery " . Both display glam rock influences and have been compared to Roxy Music , with Rhys describing " Ysbeidiau Heulog " as " old time pop music " with vocal harmonies that are a tribute to late 1960s groups such as the West Coast Pop Art Experimental Band and Os Mutantes . 
 = = Lyrical themes = = 
 Lyrically , the album deals with subjects as diverse as " isolated communities , old school teachers and Roman roads " , but maintains a " warped coherency " . According to Rhys , Mwng 's lyrics — which he considers to be some of his best — were written " very simply " and convey simple messages . The singer made an effort to be economical with his words , not communicating a lot of information with them . Rhys feels that the album is accessible to non @-@ Welsh speakers , citing his own experience of listening to Nirvana : " If I listen to a Nirvana record I don 't understand most of their lyrics cos he 's just screaming away , but I just understand the frustration and the passion in his voice . I think equally people can get off on this record by just hitting on the mood of the song , or connecting to the mood of the song . " 
 Several of the songs on Mwng feature quite solemn , personal lyrics , which reflect on a difficult few years for Rhys . The single , " Ysbeidiau Heulog " , is about " looking back at a bad time which had the odd good moment " , while " Pan <unk> 'r Wawr " deals with the death of rural communities . The singer claims to have wept — rather than sung — the album 's last track , " <unk> <unk> " / " <unk> <unk> Ar y <unk> <unk> " , which features lyrics " so bleak it 's almost comic " about " being rooted to a sad piece of land [ ... ] being doomed to live somewhere and that 's all you have and that 's what you 're stuck with " . Rhys has described Datblygu 's " Y Teimlad " as being about " not knowing what love is or what love means . " " <unk> " is a song about " sleaze [ ... ] about good versus evil , and a person 's need for both " , and " Y Gwyneb Iau " is a " moody song about war " whose title is a Welsh insult that translates into English as " <unk> " . In contrast , " Nythod Cacwn " is a comedic song , based on an incident involving drummer Dafydd Ieuan being chased by bees after he disturbed a beehive while attempting to build a bonfire on a beach . It features lyrics that were " made up on the spot " by Rhys . " <unk> Hi " is inspired by one of Rhys 's former teachers who claimed she had eyes in the back of her head . " Sarn Helen " is about the decline of the Roman road of the same name that was built between North and South Wales . " Ymaelodi Â 'r Ymylon " is partly inspired by the <unk> the band felt from some areas of the Welsh musical community due to their decision to sing in English on earlier albums . The track 's lyrics feature the old Welsh idiom " y <unk> <unk> " , which means " the demon in music " and refers to the friction this can create between people . 
 = = Release and legacy = = 
 The Super Furry Animals had originally intended to issue Mwng in March 2000 , but the release was delayed due to the demise of the band 's UK record label , Creation . The group have variously stated that Creation originally planned to issue Mwng , but allowed the group to buy the rights from them for around £ 6 @,@ 000 , and that the company " didn 't want to take " the record in the first place . The band decided to put the album out on their own label , Placid Casual , as they were worried that a label that did not understand the group might do something " horrific " , such as putting a Welsh flag on the cover . The " Mwng " logo on the cover is based on the logo for Mixmag 
 Mwng was eventually released on 15 May 2000 in the United Kingdom on CD , cassette , and vinyl , and reached number 11 in the UK Albums Chart . In the United States , Mwng was released on 20 June 2000 by <unk> , with a bonus CD entitled Mwng Bach ( pronounced [ <unk> <unk> ] ; English : Little Mane ) featuring five Welsh language tracks : " Sali Mali " , from the 1995 EP Moog <unk> , and four songs which had originally been released in the UK as B @-@ sides . This two @-@ disc version of Mwng was reissued in the US in 2005 by XL Recordings / Beggars Banquet US . " Ysbeidiau Heulog " was released as the only single from the album , and failed to chart inside the UK Singles Top 75 . Although the Super Furry Animals had " no commercial expectations " for the album , Mwng became the first Welsh @-@ language record to reach the Top 20 of the UK album charts , and has frequently been called the biggest @-@ selling Welsh language album of all time . As a result of the record 's success , Mwng was mentioned in the House of Commons of the United Kingdom by Plaid Cymru 's Elfyn Llwyd , who called on his fellow politicians to congratulate the band on their " chart topping new album " and recognise Mwng as a celebration of a " new wave of confidence in the Welsh nation " . Rhys dismissed Llwyd 's statement , saying that the record is very personal and has " bugger all to do with a celebration " . 
 In 2015 , fifteen years since its release , Domino Records bought the rights to re @-@ issue Mwng , as the album 's original pressing had long since discontinued . Like the American release , the CD edition also came with the bonus Mwng Bach disc , which has been expanded to include live recordings and radio sessions . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Mwng received generally positive reviews from critics , with a score of 84 on Metacritic denoting " universal acclaim " . Allmusic called the album " terrific " , and stated that the band 's decision to release an all @-@ Welsh record was courageous and proof that they are " the great eccentric band of [ their ] time " . Drowned in Sound called the album " a poignant , dark , curling , bundle of songs " , but expressed sadness that the band 's usual " skewed play on words " are missed by all but Welsh speakers . In contrast , Rolling Stone said that the album 's " tight arrangements of melodic bliss " manage to cross the " Welsh @-@ language barrier . " Yahoo ! Music stated that Mwng cemented the Super Furry Animals ' position as " figureheads of futuristic rock . " The review went on to state that Mwng is " a theoretically disorientating and complex , but triumphantly audacious , experience " , and said that initial reservations about not being able to understand the lyrics were lost when it became clear that Rhys was always " unintelligible [ ... ] on record anyway " . 
 Matt LeMay , reviewing Mwng on its initial release for Pitchfork , described the album as being not as " fully realised or inventive " as 1999 's Guerrilla and said that , although the record highlights Rhys 's talents for songwriting , the lack of any " electronic wizardry " from keyboard player Ciaran is disappointing . LeMay went on to state , however , that Mwng is " still [ ... ] a damned enjoyable listen " , and said that the record " couples cultural pride with unforgettable melodies in a way few bands have ever attempted " . On the album 's re @-@ release in 2005 , Pitchfork writer Marc Hogan stated that Mwng 's " sinuous pop melodies and organic arrangements " make for an " exciting discovery " , despite the lack of the band 's " usual studio wizardry " . Q said that , while tracks such as " Ymaelodi Â 'r Ymylon " and " Y Gwyneb Iau " are " strangely charming , chiming pop music with a twist " , Mwng is hampered by its " bare @-@ boned production " . Mojo , however , described the album as a " sensuous sonic journey " with an " organic , woody , mystical atmosphere " that compares favourably with the overly @-@ produced sounds of the band 's previous records . The magazine went on to suggest the album 's only flaw is that it " manages to lose its way for a while [ ... ] in the middle " , thanks to the poor sequencing of its tracks . 
 Nude as the News stated that , although the record is " more reserved " than the band 's previous releases , it " conjures up images of the Welsh winter in which the songs were recorded " and fits in with the group 's " unique vision . " Melody Maker described the album as a " sad , beautiful record " , but expressed concern that the Super Furry Animals had moved away from the pop of Guerilla and called on them to deliver another release in the vein of the band 's 1996 single " The Man Don 't Give a Fuck " . Nevertheless , Mwng was ranked number 24 in the magazine 's " Albums of the year 2000 " feature . Website <unk> described the record as a slightly retro album that sees the Super Furry Animals " refashion the past into the present " . Art <unk> , writing for Rock 's Backpages in December 2000 , stated that although the album " [ gathers ] from the past " , the band 's influences are channelled " into a truly organic maverick pop " . NME described Mwng as an antidote to the " preservative pumped @-@ junk " music that they felt was prevalent at the time of the album 's release , and placed it at number nine in their album of the year list for 2000 , calling it the group 's best record . The magazine also described the album as the most accessible Super Furry Animals release , despite its Welsh @-@ language lyrics . Rhys has stated that he considers Mwng to be a " really pure record " . 
 Accolades 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Super Furry Animals except where noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Album chart position = = 
 = Mersea Fort = 
 Mersea Fort , also known as Cudmore Grove Blockhouse , was an artillery fort established by Henry VIII on the East Mersea coast in 1543 . It formed part of the King 's Device programme to protect against invasion from France and the Holy Roman Empire , and defended the River Colne that led to the town of Colchester . It was triangular in shape , with earthwork walls and three bastions to hold artillery . It was demobilised in 1552 , but was brought back into use several times over the next century and saw service during the Second English Civil War of 1648 . The fort hosted an admiralty court to oversea the local oyster trade , until the dilapidation of the site forced the court to move to the Moot Hall in Colchester in the middle of the 18th century . A new gun battery was built at the fort during the Napoleonic Wars , but the fortification then fell into decline and was extensively damaged by the construction of a sea wall along the coast . The remains of the earthworks were excavated by archaeologists between 2002 and 2003 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 16th – 17th centuries = = = 
 Mersea Fort was built as a consequence of international tensions between England , France and the Holy Roman Empire in the final years of the reign of King Henry VIII . Traditionally the Crown had left coastal defences to local lords and communities , only taking a modest role in building and maintaining fortifications , and while France and the Empire remained in conflict , maritime raids were common but an actual invasion of England seemed unlikely . Modest defences based around simple blockhouses and towers existed in the south @-@ west and along the Sussex coast , with a few more impressive works in the north of England , but in general the fortifications were limited in scale . 
 In 1533 , Henry broke with Pope Paul III over the annulment of his long @-@ standing marriage to Catherine of Aragon . Catherine was the aunt of Charles V , the Holy Roman Emperor , who took the annulment as a personal insult . This resulted in France and the Empire declaring an alliance against Henry in 1538 , and the Pope encouraging the two countries to attack England . An invasion of England appeared certain . In response , Henry issued an order , called a " device " , in 1539 , giving instructions for the " defence of the realm in time of invasion " and the construction of forts along the English coastline . 
 The county of Essex was not a priority for new investment , but the town of Harwich was reinforced in 1539 and further new fortifications , including Mersea Fort , were built along the coast in 1543 , under the direction of Richard Lee and Richard <unk> , at an estimated total cost of £ 2 @,@ 717 . The fort was positioned on salt marshland on the south side of the River Colne , and would have protected the entrance to the estuary , working together with the new blockhouses built at St Osyth and <unk> . Mersea was triangular , with earthwork walls between approximately 300 feet ( 91 m ) long , further protected by " <unk> " , round baskets filled with earth , and a defensive ditch with a drawbridge . On each of the three corners was a circular bastion housing up to four guns . Buildings in the courtyard would have housed the garrison , which comprised a captain , a lieutenant , two soldiers , a porter and between three and six artillery gunners . There was a nearby jetty , probably for use by the fort . 
 In 1552 the fort was decommissioned , but was subsequently recommissioned by Mary I. In addition to the fort 's military role , it hosted a court to oversee the <unk> along the East Mersea coast , which were particularly lucrative but at risk of overfishing . In 1566 , Colchester introduced new rules to govern the oyster trade , which were enforced by an admiralty court , held when necessary in Mersea Fort ; the location was chosen so as to demonstrate the town 's authority all the way up to the top of the estuary . A survey in 1586 showed the fort had been abandoned by the military once again : the defences were in a poor state , the guns ' barrels were clogged with dirt and the site had been occupied by an elderly woman . It was brought back into use in 1588 and 1631 to defend against first the Spanish Armada and then the <unk> privateers . 
 = = = = English Civil War and Interregnum = = = = 
 During the First English Civil War between the supporters of King Charles I and Parliament , Mersea Fort saw no action ; after the victory of Parliament in 1646 , the fort 's garrison was demobilised . Conflict flared again in 1648 with the outbreak of the Second English Civil War , and Colchester was taken by the Royalists . The town was immediately besieged by General Thomas Fairfax , who quickly seized Mersea Fort , which controlled the supply route by river into Colchester , before the Royalists could do so . The fort had contained five pieces of artillery : two culverins , two sakers and one drake . A Royalist raiding party of 300 soldiers was sent to recapture the fort , but without success . 
 Mersea Fort was placed under the command of Captain William Burrell . Guns and ammunition were kept there in case of a fresh rebellion , with a garrison of 36 men , which was temporarily reinforced by an additional squadron of horsemen and 50 foot soldiers in July 1650 . Repairs were made from 1651 onwards , and new accommodation was constructed for the fort 's gunners . After an invasion scare in 1655 , Mersea was temporarily used to imprison Royalists suspected of planning an insurgency against Oliver Cromwell 's Commonwealth government . The fort was then demobilised by Cromwell as part of his efforts to reduce defence costs ; Burrell was ordered to dismantle the fort but the order was never carried out , partially because of the practical difficulties and because of opposition from the owner of the land . The admiralty court continued to be held in the fort , although it proved much harder to enforce the fishery rules because of the political turmoil . 
 = = = 18th – 21st centuries = = = 
 By the 18th century , Mersea Fort was in ruins . The fishery rules were reinforced by fresh legislation in 1758 , which created a court of conservancy to oversea the oyster stocks . Officially , this court was supposed to sit at the fort , but rather than using the now dilapidated earthworks , it began to meet in Colchester 's Moot Hall . Instead , a ceremony began to take place each year at the Mersea Stone , near to the fort , involving local dignitaries and extensive eating and drinking . The fort was recommissioned during the Napoleonic Wars at the start of the 19th century , and a new gun battery was constructed overlooking the sea , equipped with six 24 @-@ pounder ( 10 @.@ 9 kg ) guns . After this the fort was abandoned once again . A sea wall was built along the coast early in the century , cutting through the south @-@ east side of the fort . The legislation on oysters was reformed by Parliament in 1870 , which disbanded the previous court structure and severed the historic link with Mersea Fort . A defensive pill @-@ box was constructed at the castle during the Second World War . 
 In the 21st century , the remains of the site are protected under UK law as a scheduled monument . The site was surveyed in 1982 and excavations were carried out between 2002 and 2003 , analysing surviving timber structures that had been exposed by coastal erosion . 
 = Robert of Melun = 
 Robert of Melun ( c . 1100 – 27 February 1167 ) was an English scholastic Christian theologian who taught in France , and later became Bishop of Hereford in England . He studied under Peter Abelard in Paris before teaching there and at Melun , which gave him his surname . His students included John of Salisbury , Roger of Worcester , William of Tyre , and possibly Thomas Becket . Robert was involved in the Council of Reims in 1148 , which condemned the teachings of Gilbert de la Porrée . Three of his theological works survive , and show him to have been strictly orthodox . 
 Robert returned to England in 1160 , and was appointed Bishop of Hereford in 1163 . King Henry II of England appointed him to the see , or bishopric , and was influenced by in his decision by Pope Alexander II and Thomas Becket . Following his consecration , Robert became involved in the dispute between Becket and the king , during which he generally took the king 's side . He also served as a papal and a royal judge . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Robert was born in England , probably in about 1100 . Nothing else is known of his background . He owed his name to the place where he taught , Melun in France . Robert studied under Peter Abelard and Hugh of St. Victor at the University of Paris , where in 1137 he succeeded Abelard as a teacher in the school on Mont Ste @-@ Geneviève . John of Salisbury and William of Tyre were among his pupils in Paris . King Henry II of England 's cousin , Roger of Worcester , later the Bishop of Worcester , was another of Robert 's students . He probably also taught Thomas Becket , later Archbishop of Canterbury , although this is not certain . 
 Robert went to Melun in 1142 to direct a school , but returned to Paris in 1147 . He took part in the condemnation of Gilbert de la Porrée at the Council of Rheims in 1148 , working with Peter Lombard to secure Porrée 's recantation . A small consistory court was held after the ending of the council 's deliberations , and was attended by Bernard of Clairvaux and Suger of St Denis , along with Robert and Peter . This court forced Porrée to repudiate his views on the Trinity . A fellow scholar , Herbert of Bosham , described Robert as a great teacher , who " sent forth from himself , like rays of his light , a great and learned host of students " . 
 = = Appointment to Hereford = = 
 After teaching as a master of arts in Paris for over forty years , Robert was recalled to England by King Henry II in 1160 , and was appointed Bishop of Hereford in 1163 . He was consecrated at Canterbury on 22 December by Archbishop Thomas Becket . Becket had been prominent among those recommending Robert for the vacancy at Hereford ; one of Becket 's later biographers said that Becket urged the king to find benefices for Englishmen living abroad . There is some evidence that Pope Alexander III had a hand in Robert 's election , as Becket in 1166 reminded Robert and Roger of Worcester that they both owed their episcopates to Alexander . 
 Little evidence of Robert 's activities survives from his time as bishop , although it is known that he acted as a papal judge @-@ delegate in 1165 . Five <unk> survive from his time at Hereford , as well as confirmations of gifts by previous bishops to Llanthony Priory , which he augmented with another grant of tithes . He also served as a royal judge . 
 = = Role in the Becket dispute = = 
 In 1163 , a conflict arose between the king and the new Archbishop of Canterbury , Thomas Becket , over the rights of the king in the English church . At a council held at Westminster in October 1163 , the king and Becket contended over the question , with the bishops supporting Becket against the king . Robert was involved in the conflict not only as a bishop @-@ elect , but as an envoy to Becket from the pope , as he accompanied Philip of <unk> , a French abbot , who was sent by Alexander to Becket in after the Council of Westminster to urge Becket not to inflame the situation . Robert went with Philip , probably because it was hoped he would be able to influence Becket . 
 Robert was present in January 1164 when the king summoned a council of the barons and the bishops to Clarendon , where the king demanded that both groups swear to uphold the royal rights of Henry 's grandfather , King Henry I , without any reservations or conditions . Although Becket at first attempted to resist , he eventually submitted , and then forced the other bishops to swear also . In October 1164 , Becket was accused of denying justice to a royal vassal , tried at a council held at Northampton , and was found guilty although he did not accept the sentence . During the trial , Robert attempted to moderate Becket 's behaviour , by persuading him from having his archiepiscopal cross , a symbol of spiritual authority , carried in front of him when he entered the court , which would have been an insult to the king . Shortly after the trial , Robert interceded with the king to order that no injury be done to Becket , who went into voluntary exile . 
 Early in Becket 's exile , Robert received a papal censure for not doing more to support Becket . In summer 1165 , Robert accompanied Gilbert Foliot , the Bishop of London , on a papal mission to King Henry , to convey to the king Pope Alexander 's complaints about the king 's behaviour . The king had been preventing his subjects from visiting or appealing to the papacy , and Alexander wished to protest against that , as well as against the king 's treatment of Becket . In 1166 , Becket tried to convince Robert to switch sides , writing to Robert in conciliatory tones . John of Salisbury , a supporter of Becket 's , prevailed upon two French academics to write to Robert , criticising him for hypocrisy . 
 In October 1166 , Becket ordered Robert and Roger of Worcester to attend him in France , so they could give him guidance on his dispute with the king . When they informed the king of their intended journey he forbade them to leave England . Nevertheless , they attempted to sneak out of the country in February 1167 . They were apprehended on 2 February , and ordered to remain in England not only in the king 's name , but also in Alexander 's . 
 = = Theology = = 
 Robert 's theology is expressed in his three surviving works , the Quaestiones de divina <unk> , Quaestiones de <unk> Pauli , and the unfinished Sententiae . The dating of the works is problematic , but it appears that the first two works were composed between 1145 and 1157 . The Sententiae was revised twice , probably during the 1150s and the 1160s . His works , especially the Sententiae , cover the entire subject of theology and are strictly orthodox in Christian doctrine . 
 Robert 's Sententiae , or Summa Theologica , was well known in his time , and has been considered a key connection in theology between Robert 's own teachers ' works and the works of Peter Lombard . Robert is the first commentator on St Paul to say that resistance to a tyrant might be vindicated by the Bible . Robert also opined that a king might be excommunicated if royal actions harmed the church . Robert used Gratian 's works as sources for his own , citing the Decretum Gratiani . Although he used this work , which dealt with church law , he does not appear to have been considered a lawyer , and his training was that of a theologian . Furthermore , his years as a student predated the establishment of canon law as a distinct discipline in the European schools . Robert 's views of the <unk> , and their main work Glossa Ordinaria was that they had shortened their glosses to such a point that they made them unintelligible . Robert was also known as a logician , and John of Salisbury named him one of the leading <unk> , or a person who used rhetoric and logic to debate in public . 
 Although Robert condemned Gilbert Porrée in conjunction with Peter Lombard , he did not agree with Lombard 's Christology , or views on the nature of Jesus Christ . Likewise , although he disagreed with some of Abelard 's teachings , he defended Abelard against charges of heresy . Robert did , however , agree with some of Abelard 's teachings and methods . The introduction to the Sententiae proclaims Robert 's desire to harmonise the writings of two unnamed scholars , who have been identified by modern writers as Hugh of St Victor and Abelard . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Robert died on 27 February 1167 . William <unk> , one of Becket 's supporters , wrote that Robert died of grief because he was unable to visit Becket in exile . He was buried in Hereford Cathedral . Robert enjoyed a good reputation on the continent , for his knowledge and teaching ability , as well as for his personal qualities . Before his appointment to Hereford , John of Salisbury had praised him , but Robert 's conduct during the Becket controversy soured John 's attitude towards his old teacher . 
 Robert 's works have been published in four volumes , edited by R. M. Martin . His episcopal documents are in Hereford 1079 – 1234 : English Episcopal Acta Number 7 , published in 1993 . 
 = = = Translations = = = 
 = = = Other sources = = = 
 = Battle of Neuburg ( 1800 ) = 
 The Battle of Neuburg occurred on 27 June 1800 in the south German state of Bavaria , on the southern bank of the Danube river . Neuburg is located on the Danube between Ingolstadt and Donauwörth . This battle occurred late in the War of the Second Coalition ( 1798 – 1802 ) , the second war between Revolutionary France and the conservative European monarchies , which included at one time or another Britain , Habsburg Austria , Russia ( until late 1799 ) , the Ottoman Empire ( Turkey ) , Portugal and Naples . After a series of reverses , several of the allies withdrew from the Coalition . By 1800 , Napoleon 's military victories in northern Italy challenged Habsburg supremacy there . French victories in the upper Danubian territories opened a route along that river to Vienna . 
 In a series of battles in what is now southern Germany , the French pushed the combined Austrian and Coalition force back , first capturing Stockach , then Messkirch , then Biberach . After his loss at Biberach , the Coalition commander Pál Kray withdrew to the fortress at Ulm , leaving detachments to secure the Danube crossings that lay further to the east , at Höchstädt , Blindheim , Donauwörth , and Neuburg . The battle at Neuburg was the last of the Danube campaign for the summer of 1800 ; the armistice between the Habsburgs and the French was signed a couple of days later and ended in late November , and the French ultimately defeated the Austrians at the battles at Ampfing and Hohenlinden . The heaviest action of the battle occurred in the village of Unterhausen , in the outskirts of Neuburg . 
 = = Background = = 
 By early 1799 , the French Directory had become impatient with stalling tactics employed by Austria . The uprising in Naples raised further alarms , and recent gains in Switzerland suggested the timing was fortuitous to venture on another campaign in northern Italy and southwestern Germany . At the beginning of 1800 , the armies of France and Austria faced each other across the Rhine . Feldzeugmeister Pál Kray led approximately 120 @,@ 000 troops . In addition to his Austrian regulars , his force included 12 @,@ 000 men from the Electorate of Bavaria , 6 @,@ 000 troops from the Duchy of Württemberg , 5 @,@ 000 soldiers of low quality from the Archbishopric of Mainz , and 7 @,@ 000 militiamen from the County of Tyrol . Of these , 25 @,@ 000 men were deployed east of Lake Constance ( Bodensee ) to protect the Vorarlberg . Kray posted his main body of 95 @,@ 000 soldiers in the L @-@ shaped angle where the Rhine changes direction from a westward flow along the northern border of Switzerland to a northward flow along the eastern border of France . Unwisely , Kray set up his main magazine at Stockach , near the northwestern end of Lake Constance , only a day 's march from French @-@ held Switzerland . 
 = = = Strategic importance of Danube Valley = = = 
 The French war goal , to occupy Vienna and force the Habsburgs to accept and comply with peace terms established in 1798 , required a double @-@ pronged invasion through northern Italy , which First Consul Napoleon commanded , and through southern Germany , a campaign that fell to Moreau . To secure access into Bavaria and , eventually , to Vienna , the French needed to control the Danube riverway . This was not a new tactic : The stretch of river between Ulm and Neuburg had been the site of major battles of the Thirty Years ' War and War of the Spanish Succession . Between Ulm and Ingolstadt , the Danube grows significantly in volume , making it a wide and swift waterway . The Iller joins the Danube at Ulm , dumping massive amounts of water into the stream ; at Donauwörth , the Lech enters the Danube . Neuburg , the first significant city on the river after Donauwörth , had been the family seat of the princes of Pfalz @-@ Neuburg ; taking it from a princely family of the Holy Roman Empire would be a blow to the morale and prestige of the Habsburgs , whose role it was to protect the small princely domains . Control of the bridges and passages between Ulm and Donauwörth , Neuburg , then Ingolstadt offered an advantage of both transport and prestige . 
 = = = Preliminary to battle = = = 
 After withdrawing from Biberach , Kray waited at Ulm for Moreau 's assault , which did not come . Instead of striking directly at the well @-@ fortified and supplied city , Moreau 's first division , approaching Ulm from the south , suddenly veered to the east and struck at the smaller forces posted between Ulm and Donauwörth . Its commander , Claude Lecourbe , secured posts in Landsberg and Augsburg , and left sufficient rearguard troops to protect himself from Prince Reuss @-@ Plauen , who remained in the Tyrol guarding mountain access to Vienna . Lecourbe then approached Dettingen , Blindheim ( Blenheim ) and Höchstädt . The corps of General Paul Grenier had been posted with its right flank to the Danube and Gunzburg , and their left flank at <unk> . General Richepanse protected both shores of the Iller , covering the road from Ulm south to Memmingen , and secured communication with Switzerland ; there , he withstood considerable skirmishing with the Austrians . Three divisions of reserve remained at the hamlets of <unk> and Mindel , to support an attack made by General Lecourbe on Ulm , in a case it should succeed , or Grenier 's attack upon Günzburg , in case Lecourbe should not succeed . At the battle at Höchstädt , a full Austrian corps maintained possession until dislodged by repeated attacks of carabiners , cuirassiers and hussars , who took about 2 @,@ 000 of the Austrians and Württembergers as prisoners , along with some cannons and standards . Once Höchstädt and its nearby bridges fell on 19 June , the French controlled the Danube crossings between Ulm and Donauwörth . Kray abandoned Ulm , and withdrew further downstream . The next French target would be Neuburg . 
 = = Orders of battle = = 
 = = = French = = = 
 The exact order of battle of French forces is not clear , but contemporary sources suggest the presence of a portion of General Claude Lecourbe 's Corps of 28 @,@ 368 , including the forces of generals Laval , Molitor , Jardon , and Vandamme . This is also confirmed in an extract of Moreau 's dispatch to the French Minister of War , published in the London Chronicle , 10 June 1800 . " The 6th Chasseurs , 13th Cavalry , 4th Hussars and 11th Chasseurs distinguished themselves in this affair . The rest of the division , and that of [ Lecourbe ] , passed rapidly [ along ] the Danube ... General Grenier was equally well prepared . " In addition , the presence ( and death ) of Théophile <unk> de la Tour d 'Auvergne , the First Grenadier of France , suggests that the grenadier company of the 46th Demi @-@ brigade infantry de ligne was at least engaged . In addition , General Espagne 's 37th and 84th Regiments were engaged , as were grenadiers the 109th Regiment . Lecourbe mentions the 37th and the 109th several times in his own account of the battle , so apparently they were heavily engaged : this would include the brigades of François Goullus and François Bontemps . 
 = = = = Lecourbe 's Division , Armée du Danube = = = = 
 Lecourbe 's division was reformed in April 1800 while still in Switzerland . After the Battle of Messkirch , both Gouvion Saint @-@ Cyr and Sainte @-@ Suzanne had retired to the Rhine , taking many of their forces with them . Consequently , Moreau had assigned had the cavalry commanded by Jean @-@ Joseph Ange d 'Hautpoul to reinforce Lecourbe 's division . Based on the mentions in the dispatches and Lecourbe 's reconstituted division , portions of the following probably were either present or available : 
 General of Division Dominique Vandamme , Generals of Brigade Jardon , Laval , Molitor : 
 First Demi @-@ Brigade de Légère 
 36th 83rd , 94th Demi @-@ Brigades de Ligne 
 8th Hussar Regiment 
 Total 9 @,@ 963 infantry , 540 cavalry 
 Generals of Brigade François Goullus and François Bontemps 
 10th Demi @-@ Brigade de Légère 
 37th , 84th 109th Demi @-@ Brigades de Ligne 
 36th 93rd , 94th Regiments de Ligne 
 9th Hussars 
 Total 8 @,@ 238 infantry , 464 cavalry 
 General of Division Montrichard and General of Brigade Joseph Augustin Fournier 
 10th Demi @-@ Brigade de Légère 
 38th , 67th Regiments de Ligne 
 Total 6 @,@ 998 
 General of Division Étienne Marie Antoine Champion de Nansouty 
 Combined Grenadiers , 25th Cavalry , 11th Dragoons , 12th <unk> 
 Total 1 @,@ 500 infantry , 1 @,@ 280 cavalry 
 = = = Austrian = = = 
 The Austrian force included : 
 FZM Baron von Kray , Commanding 
 Infanterie Regiments <unk> # 35 , Erbach # 42 ( battalions each ) 
 <unk> Regiment Lothringen # 7 , Hohenzollern # 8 , Kinsky # 12 ( 6 squadrons each ) 
 Dragoon Regiment Latour # 11 ( 6 squadrons ) 
 Total Austrian force : 8 @,@ 000 men . 
 = = Battle = = 
 On 26 June 1800 , Kray 's force held the remaining passages across the Danube between Neuburg and <unk> . On that morning , the divisions of Gudin and Montrichard marched toward the junction of the Danube and Lech rivers from Donauwörth . General Gudin 's division followed a southward track toward Pöttmes and established a line north to <unk> , approximately 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) ( roughly along what is now road 2035 ) . Montrichard 's division , the 10th Demi @-@ Brigade de Légère and the 38th and 67th Regiments de Ligne marched toward Neuburg , which he was instructed to occupy with his right wing connecting to Gudin 's and covered the road between Augsburg and Neuburg . Gudin 's division encountered some resistance before it could take possession of Pöttmes , but succeeded with several charges executed by the 6th and 8th Hussars , who also captured 100 horses from the Austrians . General <unk> , who commanded the brigade on General Gudin 's left , took control of <unk> with little opposition . 
 General Montrichard 's division approached Neuburg on the causeway that ran parallel to the river and took possession of the outskirts of the city with little problem . Kray 's troops , joined with Prince Reuss @-@ Plauen and emerged from Neuburg to defend the outskirts . Both Austrian forces were unprepared for battle at the moment , which allowed Montrichard 's troops to penetrate within four miles of the city with little opposition . Espagne 's brigade supported the advance guard , and after a brief action took the heights of Oberhausen with the 37th and the 84th Regiments . By early afternoon , the Austrians had recovered the village of <unk> , but the village of Unterhausen remained in French hands , defended by 100 marksmen , portions of the 37th Regiment and the 1st company of grenadiers of the 109th regiment . 
 From this point on , combat centered on the village of Unterhausen , 3 @.@ 8 miles ( 6 @.@ 1 km ) west @-@ south @-@ west of Neuburg center . A few French platoons drove the Austrians from the forest located between the village and the Danube with a bayonet charge by the grenadiers of the 109th . As French reserves arrived , the Austrians counterattacked and retook the woods , the heights at Oberhausen , and the village . According to Lecourbe 's account , the Austrians , " embolden by this first success , soon covered all the surrounding heights , on which they planted about twenty @-@ five or thirty pieces of cannon . " At eight o 'clock at night , after twelve hours of battle , companies of the 14th and 46th Regiments ( French ) moved along a small road on the right of the village , and another group proceeded on the left , enveloping the village . The subsequent simultaneous French attack at both flanks and the center convinced the Austrians that , despite the defensive barrages laid by their artillery in Oberhausen , the French had been massively reinforced . The attack on the village , executed without firing a shot , involved fierce hand @-@ to @-@ hand fighting in which the commander of the 46th Regiment and the First Grenadier of France , Latour D 'Auvergne , were both killed . 
 Outside the village , the French 46th and 14th Light Infantry mingled in combat with the Austrian cavalry , yet managed to hold their own , presumably in squares . This melee continued until about 2200 , when the Austrians withdrew from Unterhausen . Lecourbe ordered his troops not to pursue , as nightfall was on them . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The battle had immediate implications . General Ney established his headquarters in the castle at Neuburg , which over looks the battlefield . General Moreau ordered the establishment of a tomb on the location were the First Grenadier had fallen . Emperor Francis II dismissed Pál Kray , who had lost an impressive succession of battles , and appointed his brother , the 18 @-@ year @-@ old general major Archduke John , to command the Austrian army . To compensate for John 's inexperience , the emperor named FZM Franz von Lauer as deputy commander and the zealous Oberst ( Colonel ) Franz von Weyrother became Chief of Staff . 
 In the broader scheme , the series of battles beginning with the losses at Stockach and Engen and ending at Neuburg broke the Austrian control along the strategic Danube . Similarly , in Italy , French successes at the battles at Montebello and Marengo forced Austrian withdrawal to the east . With France threatening Habsburg Austria from the northwest and southwest , the Austrians agreed to a cease fire . Subsequent peace negotiations were complicated by the alliance Austria had made with Britain , and which prevented her from signing any separate peace . The British entered the negotiations to bolster their weakened ally . Initially Britain , which had successfully blockaded French ports , refused the French terms and offered counter terms in September 1800 . Napoleon later claimed that the Austrians did not negotiate in good faith , and sought only to gain time until " the rainy season " ( winter ) , when army movements would be difficult , and the Habsburgs would have an entire season to recruit . 
 = There 's Something About Marrying = 
 " There 's Something About Marrying " is the tenth episode of the sixteenth season of The Simpsons . In the episode , Springfield <unk> same @-@ sex marriage to increase tourism . After becoming a minister , Homer starts to wed people to make money . Meanwhile , Marge 's sister Patty comes out as a lesbian and reveals that she is going to marry a woman named Veronica . Marge originally disapproves of this , making Patty frustrated . When Marge accidentally discovers that Veronica is a man cross @-@ dressed as a woman , she decides to keep quiet about it knowing that Patty will be marrying a man . However , at the ceremony , she is so moved by Patty 's vow that she is forced to reveal Veronica 's secret . After the ceremony is abruptly cancelled , Marge tells Patty that she now accepts her sexuality . 
 This was the third time that an episode of The Simpsons focused on homosexuality . The episode — written by J. Stewart Burns and directed by Nancy Kruse — was inspired by the 2004 same @-@ sex weddings that occurred in San Francisco . According to executive producer Al Jean , the staff wanted the episode to explore what the different characters ' stances on same @-@ sex marriage were . Around the time of the episode 's original airdate , February 20 , 2005 , the same @-@ sex marriage question was a hot political issue in the United States and the episode became controversial . " There 's Something About Marrying " received a lot of criticism from conservative groups , including the Parents Television Council and the American Family Association , that claimed it was promoting gay marriage . Jean stated in response that the staff was not taking a side on the issue and that they were just examining all sides of it . Positive reaction to the episode came from , among others , the Gay & Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation and the gay @-@ oriented website <unk> 
 During the first airing , 10 @.@ 5 million people watched " There 's Something About Marrying " and it became the highest rated episode of the season . The episode had received a lot of publicity in the media before its broadcast — not only because of the same @-@ sex marriage controversy but also because of Patty 's outing . It was revealed in July 2004 , that a character would come out as gay in the episode , leading to much speculation from fans and the press . <unk> websites were even posting odds on which character it would be , with Patty receiving the best odds . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Bart and Milhouse torment a tourist named Howell <unk> ( a parody of television personality Huell Howser ) , who is then chased out of town by bullies Dolph , Jimbo , and Kearney . <unk> is later revealed to be a media personality , and he appears on a network 's morning television show warning tourists against visiting Springfield and giving it his lowest rating for any American location ( six out of ten ) . The Springfield tourism business collapses and Mayor Quimby holds an emergency meeting at the town hall . After many senseless suggestions , Lisa suggests that Springfield legalize same @-@ sex marriage to entice visitors to their town . All of Springfield happily agrees with Lisa 's idea , even Marge . Only one is against the idea , Reverend Lovejoy , who insists they use his ideas to keep same @-@ sex illegal and is ignored . The town makes a commercial that is broadcast throughout America , in the end of it Mayor Quimby warns viewers not to use a certain exit for God 's sake . 
 Hundreds of homosexual couples soon arrive to Springfield . However , Reverend Lovejoy insists that the Bible forbids same @-@ sex marriage and refuses to marry any gay couples . After hearing this Mayor Quimby says that Lovejoy is an idiot and while overhearing Quimby 's statement that ministers are paid $ 200 per couple , Homer abandons his opposition to the process and decides to become a minister himself with help from the online " e @-@ <unk> " Church . He marries every gay couple in town , and then puts up a sign saying " Will marry anyone to anything . " While debating the issue with Lovejoy on the television show Smartline , Homer makes a case for gay marriage and mockingly joins the Bible and Lovejoy in matrimony — adding that Lovejoy is the wife and that he owes Homer $ 200 . 
 Meanwhile , at the Simpson family 's home , Patty comes out of the closet as a lesbian , saying that she is in love with a pro golfer named Veronica and asking Homer to perform the ceremony . This makes Marge extremely uncomfortable , even though the evidence was always there . While Homer accepts Patty 's sexuality , a furious Marge reveals that she doesn 't want her with Veronica and still insists she marries a man . Patty gets angry and points out that Marge acts very " liberal " about the issue but cannot accept her sister 's sexuality , and says she hopes to see Marge at her wedding . Before the wedding , Marge accidentally discovers Veronica is actually a man , ironically while Veronica is singing Aerosmith 's " Dude ( Looks Like a Lady ) " while shaving , and because Veronica left the toilet seat up after leaving . Happily she decides to keep quiet about it knowing that Patty will be marrying a man . But Marge is so moved by Patty 's heartfelt declaration of love for Veronica during the ceremony that she reveals Veronica 's Adam 's apple . " Veronica " explains that as the straight Leslie Robin Swisher , he posed as a woman to get onto the LPGA golf tour . He then asks Patty if she 'll still marry him , but she declines . Afterwards , Marge reconciles with Patty after telling her that she 's learned a lesson and has accepted the fact that Patty 's a lesbian ; they hug after reconciling . Patty and her other sister , Selma , then go to leave a bag at the airport unattended , as a way to meet security personnel they can date . 
 = = Production = = 
 " There 's Something About Marrying " was written by co @-@ executive producer J. Stewart Burns and directed by Nancy Kruse as part of the sixteenth season of The Simpsons . Work on the episode started in March 2004 , after the 2004 San Francisco same @-@ sex weddings , a period during February 2004 when the city was issuing marriage licenses to same @-@ sex couples . This served as the Simpsons staff 's inspiration for " There 's Something About Marrying " . The plot point where Springfield tries to increase tourism by marketing towards the LGBT community also had a basis in reality . An example is Fort Lauderdale , which became a popular tourist destination for gays and lesbians in the mid @-@ 2000s . Executive producer Al Jean said they were interested in doing the episode because they could explore the various characters ' different positions on gay marriage while remaining neutral . " Lisa thinks it 's good for civil rights . The reverend of the local Protestant church is opposed to it . Other people think tourists will come to town . Mayor Quimby wants the money . We don 't take a position as much as explore everybody 's positions , " he commented . 
 Matt Groening , the creator of The Simpsons , stated that the staff wanted to out Patty as gay because portraying her as a " love @-@ starved spinster [ ... ] seemed old " on the show . There had previously been hints about Patty 's orientation . For example , in the season thirteen episode " Jaws Wired Shut " she is part of the Springfield Gay Pride Parade 's " <unk> ' in the closet " float , though only her voice was heard and she was not seen . 
 = = Themes and analysis = = 
 The episode 's plotline revolves around homosexuality — the third time for The Simpsons . The first was season eight 's " Homer 's Phobia " , and the second was " Three Gays of the Condo " from season fourteen , both of which won Primetime Emmy Awards for Outstanding Animated Program . This time it centered on the right for homosexuals to get married and the coming @-@ out of a character . In the episode , Homer is shown as being tolerant with homosexuality , whereas in " Homer 's Phobia " he is portrayed as being strongly homophobic . In that episode , the Simpson family gets a new friend that Homer dissociates himself from after finding out that he is gay . He also fears that the friend will have a negative influence on Bart and decides to ensure Bart 's heterosexuality by taking him to do manly things such as hunting . As James Delingpole of The Daily Telegraph writes , it was first after " Homer 's Phobia " that Homer began to be portrayed as enlightened about homosexuality . Marge , on the other hand , who had previously been portrayed as supportive of gay people on the show , is seen as disapproving of her sister 's sexual orientation . 
 According to the publications Zeek : A Jewish Journal of Thought and Culture and Value War : Public Opinion and the Politics of Gay Rights , it was the controversial lesbian outing of the main character ( played by Ellen DeGeneres ) in the sitcom Ellen in 1997 that paved the way for Patty 's coming @-@ out in this episode , as well as for many other gay characters on other television shows . In his book Queers in American Popular Culture , Jim <unk> noted that unlike many episodes of The Simpsons that go through a situation and then everything returns to normal during the ending , this one does not . He commented that the staff of the show could have made Patty heterosexual again at the end of the episode and leave it how it was before by having her marry Leslie . Instead , they ended it in a way that could potentially be experienced as distasteful to the heteronormative audience by having Patty exclaim " Hell no ! I like girls ! " to Leslie 's marriage proposal . The author also noted that it is possible the Simpsons staff chose Patty to come out as gay instead of a male character because lesbians were " traditionally considered more acceptable " on television . She did , however , not " adhere to the eroticized male lesbian fantasy or fit into the loveable , asexual guise of the comedy lesbian " that had previously been seen on shows such as Ellen . Instead , Patty is " rude , crude , and not ashamed of declaring her sexual preferences " , and this could make her unpalatable to some viewers according to <unk> . 
 Around the episode 's original broadcast in early 2005 , the same @-@ sex marriage question was one of the hottest political issues in America . It had been an especially hot topic during the then @-@ recent presidential election in the United States . Marty Kaplan , a professor at Annenberg School for Communication and radio host on Air America Radio , commented that the episode is telling " those who demonize homosexuality , or what [ these people ] call the homosexual agenda , " anything from " lighten up " to " get out of town " . This was not the first time that an episode of the show had brought up a current issue . Writing in an article about " There 's Something About Marrying " for The New York Times , Sharon Waxman said that " as television 's longest @-@ running situation comedy , The Simpsons is no stranger to hot @-@ button social , religious and political issues , mocking wardrobe malfunctions , Hollywood liberals and born @-@ again Christians , among other targets . " 
 = = Speculation , publicity and broadcast = = 
 " There 's Something About Marrying " was originally broadcast on February 20 , 2005 in the United States . It was reported a long time in advance of the episode 's airing that a major character would come out as gay during the episode . At the Comic @-@ Con convention in July 2004 , Al Jean revealed : " We have a show where , to raise money , Springfield legalises gay marriage . Homer becomes a minister by going on the internet and filling out a form . A long @-@ time character comes out of the closet , but I 'm not saying who . " This led to much media speculation and publicity in the press for the episode . The last such " mystery Simpsons storyline " , as BBC News called it , occurred with the " Alone Again , Natura @-@ Diddily " episode in which it was announced prior to the broadcast that a character would be killed in the episode , leading to weeks of speculation before the revelation that it was Maude Flanders . 
 There was a widespread debate among fans of the series as to who the character coming out of the closet would be , also similar to how they years earlier debated who shot the character Mr. Burns . Matt Groening joked at the Comic @-@ Con convention that " it 's Homer " . Many fans correctly guessed that it would be one of Homer 's sisters @-@ in @-@ law , either Patty or Selma , while others believed it to be Waylon Smithers . It had for a long time been hinted on the show that the Smithers character was gay and in love with his boss Mr. Burns . However , as The Baltimore Sun writes , it would have been unlikely for Smithers to be the outed character because it would not have been a surprise to fans , and his love for his heterosexual boss would prevent him from marrying another person . Patty was suspected by fans and the press because she had not often been seen dating men on the show . The tabloid newspaper The Sun revealed already in September 2004 that the character who would come out was Patty , though this was regarded as a rumor and Jean would not confirm it . Bookmakers in the United States and the United Kingdom took bets on which character would be uncovered as homosexual , and if there would be a kiss featured in the episode — <unk> laid odds at four to five that it was Patty , while Smithers had four to one odds and Ned Flanders fifteen to one odds . A kiss was given odds of seven to five . <unk> said gamblers made more than 900 bets on the coming @-@ out on their website . According to The Baltimore Sun , another betting site named <unk> " stopped taking wagers because so much money was being placed on [ Patty ] . " Jean told The Advocate that he thought it was " an insane thing for someone to take bets on a result that can be determined by other people " , referring to the Simpsons staff , " and could be changed by them at the last minute . " 
 The episode was heavily promoted and hyped , with some sources calling it " much anticipated " and " long @-@ awaited " . In addition to the publicity about the coming @-@ out of a character , " There 's Something About Marrying " was discussed a lot in the media before its airing because of its gay marriage theme . The entertainment website MovieWeb predicted in October 2004 that the episode would become controversial when it aired because of the large children audience and " also because it comes at a time when many states are seeking to ban same @-@ sex wedding ceremonies . " According to Knight Ridder , " some conservative groups [ ... ] growled in advance over the episode " , but most pre @-@ broadcast publicity was directed at the outing . Mark Pinsky , on the other hand , wrote in his book The Gospel According to The Simpsons that when the announcement that an episode of the show would focus on gay marriage was made , " it stoked a debate that few issues and few television shows could . " Before its original airing , Pinsky was interviewed about the episode on ABC 's World News Tonight , CNN , BBC Radio , and more , as the author of a book on religion in The Simpsons . 
 The Fox network , which airs The Simpsons , chose to begin the episode with a Parental Advisory warning stating that it " contains discussions of same @-@ sex marriage " and that " parental discretion is advised . " This was a first for the show , which had not received parental advisories before even when dealing with themes such as drug use , gambling addictions , theft , crime , and violence . A warning similar to the one displayed at the beginning of this episode was used in front of the gay @-@ themed " The Puppy Episode " of the Ellen series . The buzz " There 's Something About Marrying " had received attracted a lot of viewers to its broadcast , and therefore the Fox network chose to air it during the ratings sweeps . The episode was watched by 10 @.@ 5 million people in the United States , making it the highest @-@ rated episode of the sixteenth season of The Simpsons . It was up by two million from the season 's average rating . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " There 's Something About Marrying " featured the first appearance of an animated same @-@ sex marriage on network television . Television columnist Ray Richmond wrote that the episode was a cultural milestone for The Simpsons and that the " issue [ of gay marriage ] was mainstream to some degree , but now that [ the staff has ] deigned it worthy of the show it is interwoven into the popular culture . The Simpsons bestowed upon something a pop culture status it never had before , simply by being ripe for a joke . " John Kenneth White , author of the book Barack Obama 's America , similarly called " There 's Something About Marrying " a cultural barrier breaker . 
 The episode , dealing with " one of the most divisive issues in American society " according to The New York Times , became a subject of controversy after its broadcast . The authors of The Marriage and Family Experience called it " one of the more controversial episodes of a frequently controversial cartoon . " Several conservative groups and American Christian conservatives thought it was promoting same @-@ sex marriage . Parents Television Council president L. Brent Bozell III criticized " There 's Something About Marrying " for bringing up the issue . Even though he had not seen the episode himself , he commented that " at a time when the public mood is overwhelmingly against gay marriage , any show that promotes gay marriage is deliberately bucking the public mood . " A researcher for the American Family Association , named Ed <unk> , claimed the presentation of same @-@ sex marriage in the episode was " very one @-@ sided " . He said that this episode proved " Hollywood 's blatant pro @-@ homosexual bias " because despite The Simpsons being " generally kind of a wacky animated program " it was not neutral on the issue . Bozell also worried about the influence the episode would have on children , despite the parental discretion advisory at the beginning , commenting : " You 've got a show watched by millions of children . Do children need to have gay marriage thrust in their faces as an issue ? Why can 't we just entertain them ? " Similarly , <unk> said that many children watch the The Simpsons and Hollywood " will pull out all the stops to promote same @-@ sex marriage — and children will be influenced by it . " 
 Mark Washburn of Knight Ridder wrote that at the time of the episode 's broadcast , most Americans were accustomed to seeing homosexual characters on television . He said this is why Patty 's coming @-@ out did not become as controversial as the episode 's examination of the same @-@ sex marriage issue , which was more sensitive in the country then . The controversy became so big that local news programs in certain cities aired segments about it . In response to the claims that this episode was supporting gay marriage , Al Jean replied that " we don 't really take any positions for or against anything , we just like to examine all sides of an issue and I think that anyone who would get their political wisdom from a cartoon might be sadly mistaken . " Likewise , Mark Pinsky writes in The Gospel According to The Simpsons that once the episode ended , it was hard to tell what stance on same @-@ sex marriage the writers had and that " both sides of the controversy had their say , voiced by various Simpsons characters " . Jean has also cited the episode in defense to critics who say The Simpsons has lost its relevance and edginess in later years . In his book The Simpsons : An Uncensored , Unauthorized History , John Ortved responded to this , commenting that despite the controversies the episode was " in fact a long @-@ winded and lame exploration of the topic . " 
 " There 's Something About Marrying " was met with positive reception as well , particularly from gay rights groups . The Gay & Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation ( GLAAD ) was welcoming of the episode , calling it " a ray of light " . GLAAD executive director Joan Garry enjoyed seeing Marge 's transformation , from having ambivalent feelings for her sister to then supporting her . He commented that " when Marge learns that Patty 's about to marry someone who isn 't really a lesbian , she comes to realize that what her sister really deserves is to be in love with and married to a person who 's right for her . If millions of Simpsons viewers came away from last night 's episode with that little bit of moral truth , it was time well spent . " AfterEllen.com 's David Kennerley approved of the willingness of a " hit network TV show in prime time , watched by children and adults " to " serve up such a politically charged issue " . Rick Garcia , an activist of the gay rights group Equality Illinois , said to the Chicago Tribune that the episode would likely affect society in a positive way because of the iconic status of the show which " shape [ s ] our attitudes " . Unlike many of the conservative groups , Kennerley noted that " in the show 's tradition of equal @-@ opportunity lampooning , the message is not all pro @-@ gay . <unk> lesbian stereotypes abound , and Nelson the bully suggests they ' legalize gay funerals . ' And naturally , Reverend Lovejoy shutters his church to the same @-@ sex sinners . " According to Simpsons writer Mike Reiss , the episode also had supporters among conservative groups . He told Encore magazine that " gay people came out very much in favor of it and were happy with the episode , but arch conservatives and right @-@ wing Christians loved the episode , too , because they seemed to think we were making fun of gay people . We really had it both ways . " 
 Kennerley further wrote that " based on this episode , [ ... ] The Simpsons is in top form . It still reigns as the funniest , <unk> , fastest @-@ paced half @-@ hour you 'll see on television . " Bill Gibron of PopMatters also thought the episode was funny , commenting that it " explored the often @-@ cited ' slippery slope ' of allowing matrimony to be defined outside the parameters of a man and a woman — with hilarious results . " In regards to the revelation that Patty was gay , The A.V. Club wrote that it " wasn 't particularly earth @-@ shattering " but that Marge 's initial reaction provided a good twist to the episode . J. Stewart Burns received a Writers Guild of America Award nomination in the animation category for his work on " There 's Something About Marrying " , although he lost the award to another Simpsons writer . 
 = Grenada at the 2008 Summer Olympics = 
 Grenada competed in the 2008 Summer Olympics , held in Beijing , People 's Republic of China from 8 to 24 August 2008 . The country was represented by eight track and field athletes and one boxer ; of the eight track and field competitors , five were women , and three were men . Although there were no medalists , runners Allison George and Neisha Bernard @-@ Thomas progressed past the qualification rounds , and participated on behalf of Grenada in the quarterfinals of their events . Grenada 's Beijing delegation held the largest number of athletes yet sent from Grenada , encompassing nine athletes , and marked the seventh consecutive appearance of Grenada at the Summer Olympics . 
 Despite controversy surrounding Chinese activities in Tibet , Grenada continued to support the upholding of the Chinese Olympic Games . As thanks , the People 's Republic of China constructed a new cricket stadium on the island , among other activities . 
 = = Background = = 
 Grenada 's debut was at the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles , where it entered six athletes ( five men and one woman ) across two sports ; since its 1984 Los Angeles Olympics appearance and up to the 2008 Beijing appearance , Grenada sent athletes to seven consecutive Olympic games . Its appearance in Beijing marked its largest appearance yet , with nine Olympic participants ; additionally , more women participated in the Beijing Olympics on behalf of Grenada than any previous year , with five female athletes . This accounts for slightly less than half of all women who have participated in the Olympics between the 2008 Games and the <unk> debut . Although the majority of athletes competing on Grenada 's behalf participated in track and field ( athletics ) events , Rolande Moses participated as a boxer in the welterweight category . Although Neisha Bernard @-@ Thomas and Allison George progressed to the semifinals in their respective events , further than the seven other athletes , no <unk> medaled during the 2008 Summer Olympics . 
 = = Athletics = = 
 = = = Women 's 100 m = = = 
 Sherry Fletcher was the only <unk> participant in the 2008 Olympic women 's 100m sprint event . She participated in the second heat of the 15 August qualification match against seven other competitors , including American finalist Lauryn Williams . Fletcher ran her event in 11 @.@ 65 seconds , ranking fifth place . She completed the event 0 @.@ 28 seconds slower than French runner Christine Arron , who ranked first in the heat . Overall , Fletcher ranked 40th out of the 85 athletes who ranked in the qualification round , tying with British runner Laura Turner and Vietnamese runner Thi Huong Vu . Damola Osayomi of Nigeria , who ranked first in the qualification round , was 0 @.@ 52 seconds faster than Fletcher , who did not advance to further rounds . 
 = = = Women 's 200 m = = = 
 Allison George competed for Grenada in the women 's 200 meter sprint on behalf of its delegation to the 2008 Beijing Olympics . She was placed in the sixth heat of six during the 18 August qualification round . George completed the event in 23 @.@ 45 seconds , ranking sixth in her heat . <unk> <unk> <unk> of the Ukraine ranked first in the heat , finishing 0 @.@ 54 seconds ahead of George . Out of the 46 athletes who ranked during the qualification round , Allison George ranked 30th place . She qualified for semifinals . 
 George was placed in heat four of four during the 19 August semifinals round . She completed the event in 23 @.@ 77 seconds , ranking eighth of eighth in her heat , 1 @.@ 17 seconds behind finalist Sherone Simpson of Jamaica , who lead the heat . Overall , George ranked last of 31 ranking athletes during the semifinal round , tying with Eleni <unk> of Cyprus . George did not advance to finals . 
 = = = Men 's 400 m = = = 
 Grenada sent two athletes , Alleyne Francique and Joel Phillip , as part of their delegation to represent it in the Men 's 400m sprint . Francique participated in the fifth heat during the 17 August qualification round , ranking sixth of eight athletes . Francique earned a time of 46 @.@ 15 seconds , which was 1 @.@ 19 seconds slower than American runner <unk> Merritt , the first @-@ place runner in the heat , who would later earn gold in the event . Overall , Francique ranked 35th of 55 athletes . He did not progress to quarterfinals . 
 Meanwhile , Joel Phillip was placed in the sixth heat during the 17 August qualification race . Phillip also ranked sixth out of eight athletes in his heat , scoring a time of 46 @.@ 30 seconds , which was 1 @.@ 36 seconds behind heat leader Andrew Steele of the United Kingdom . Overall during the qualification match , Phillip ranked 39th of 55 athletes . He did not progress to quarterfinals . 
 = = = Women 's 400 m = = = 
 Trish Bartholomew represented Grenada in the women 's 400 meter run . During the 16 August qualification round , Bartholomew participated in the sixth of seven heats . She completed her event in 52 @.@ 88 seconds , taking fifth place out of eight athletes . Bartholomew was one millisecond behind Kineke Alexander of St. Vincent and the Grenadines , who ranked fourth ; and was 1 @.@ 36 seconds behind Jamaica 's Novelene Williams , who took first in the heat . Bartholomew tied with India 's Mandeep Kaur for 33rd place out of 50 athletes . She did not advance to semifinals . 
 = = = Men 's triple jump = = = 
 Randy Lewis was the only athlete who represented Grenada in the men 's triple jump event of track and field during the 2008 Olympics . Lewis was placed in the second heat of two during the 17 August qualification round . During the round , Lewis completed his event with a final distance of 17 @.@ 06 meters , ranking fifth in a heat of 18 competitors . Lewis was 0 @.@ 24 meters short of Chinese triple jumper Li <unk> , who ranked first in the heat and later ranked tenth in finals . Overall , Lewis ranked 15th out of 37 competitors in the qualification round , and did not proceed to finals . 
 = = = Women 's 800 m = = = 
 Neisha Bernard @-@ Thomas represented Grenada in the women 's 800 meter event during the Beijing Olympics . Placed in heat four of the 14 August qualification round , Bernard @-@ Thomas ranked fifth place out of six with a time of 2 : 00 @.@ 09 . She was within a second of British runner Marilyn <unk> , Slovakian Lucia <unk> , and Australian Tamsyn Lewis , who respectively ranked second , third , and fourth place in the event . Finalist Maria <unk> of Mozambique , who ranked first in the heat , was 1 @.@ 18 seconds faster than Bernard @-@ Thomas . Overall , Bernard @-@ Thomas ranked 7th out of 40 qualifying runners . 
 Progressing to the semifinal round , Bernard @-@ Thomas was placed in the third heat of three on 16 August . She completed the run in 2 : 01 @.@ 84 , ranking last in her heat and falling 4 @.@ 56 seconds behind heat leader <unk> <unk> <unk> of Kenya . Overall , Neisha Bernard @-@ Thomas ranked 21st out of 23 semifinalist runners , and did not advance to the final round . 
 = = = Women 's long jump = = = 
 Patricia Sylvester represented Grenada in the women 's long jump event during the 2008 Summer Olympics . Placed in the first of two heats during the 18 August qualification round , Sylvester jumped a distance of 6 @.@ 44 meters . This placed her at 11th of 19 ranking athletes in her heat . Sylvester 's performance was 0 @.@ 35 meters shorter than <unk> Higa Maggi of Brazil , who ranked first in the heat . Of 38 athletes , Patricia Sylvester tied the time of <unk> <unk> of Romania , ranking 21st . She did not advance to semifinals . 
 Key 
 Note – Ranks given for track events are within the athlete 's heat only 
 Q 
 = Qualified for the next round 
 q = 
 Qualified for the next round as a fastest loser or , in field events , by position without achieving the qualifying target 
 NR 
 = National record 
 N / A = 
 Round not applicable for the event 
 Bye = Athlete not required to compete in round 
 Men 
 Track & road events 
 Field events 
 Women 
 Track & road events 
 Field events 
 = = Boxing = = 
 Grenada sent one boxer to the Olympic boxing tournament . Rolande Moses had fought nine boxing matches , including one at the 2007 World Championships for boxing in Chicago , since starting before he attempted the Olympic qualification event in Trinidad and Tobago . He lost in the qualifying event , although was selected by the Tripartite Commission to attend the Beijing Olympics to supplement the Grenada Olympic team , which historically had had less than six people and thus qualified for the aid . 
 Rolande Moses participated in the 10 August preliminaries , and was placed in the second bout versus Toureano Johnson of the Bahamas . As Olympic boxing rounds are scored by the number of successful punches scored , the end score of Moses ' bout was 18 to 3 punches , with Moses scoring only 3 punches . Because Moses lost the bout , he did not progress to the Round of 16 , which took place between 14 and 16 August . 
 = Alexei Kosygin = 
 Alexei Nikolayevich Kosygin ( Russian : <unk> ́ й Никола ́ евич <unk> ́ <unk> , tr . <unk> <unk> Kosygin ; IPA : [ <unk> <unk> <unk> ] ; 21 February [ O.S. 5 March ] 1904 – 18 December 1980 ) was a Soviet @-@ Russian statesman during the Cold War . Kosygin was born in the city of St. Petersburg in 1904 to a Russian working @-@ class family . He was conscripted into the labour army during the Russian Civil War , and after the Red Army 's demobilisation in 1921 , he worked in Siberia as an industrial manager . Kosygin returned to Leningrad in the early 1930s and worked his way up the Soviet hierarchy . During the Great Patriotic War ( World War II ) , Kosygin was a member of the State Defence Committee and was tasked with moving Soviet industry out of territories soon to be overrun by the German Army . He served as Minister of Finance for a year before becoming Minister of Light Industry and later , the Minister of Light and Food Industry . Stalin removed Kosygin from the Politburo one year before his own death in 1953 , intentionally weakening Kosygin 's position within the Soviet hierarchy . 
 After the power struggle triggered by Stalin 's death in 1953 , Nikita Khrushchev became the new leader . On 20 March 1959 , Kosygin was appointed to the position of Chairman of the State Planning Committee ( Gosplan ) , a post he would hold for little more than a year . Kosygin next became First Deputy chairman of the Council of Ministers . When Khrushchev was replaced in 1964 , Kosygin and Leonid Brezhnev became Premier and First Secretary respectively . Kosygin , along with Brezhnev and Nikolai Podgorny , the Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet , was a member of the newly established collective leadership . Kosygin became one of two major power players within the Soviet hierarchy , the other being Brezhnev , and was able to initiate the failed 1965 economic reform , usually referred to simply as the Kosygin reform . This reform , along with his more open stance on solving the Prague Spring ( 1968 ) , made Kosygin one of the most liberal members of the top leadership . 
 More conservative members of the top leadership saw some of Kosygin 's policies as too radical , but they were never able to depose him as Premier , even if he and Brezhnev disliked each other . By the 1970s , Brezhnev had consolidated enough power to stop any " radical " reform @-@ minded attempts by Kosygin . In 1980 , Kosygin retired from office due to bad health , dying two months later on 18 December 1980 . 
 = = Early life and career ( 1904 – 1964 ) = = 
 Kosygin was born into a Russian working @-@ class family consisting of his father and mother , Nikolai Ilyich and <unk> Alexandrovna and his siblings . The family lived in St. Petersburg . Kosygin was baptised one month after his birth on 7 March . 
 He was conscripted into a labour army on the Bolshevik side during the Russian Civil War . After the Red Army 's demobilisation in 1921 , Kosygin attended the Leningrad Co @-@ operative Technical School and found work in the system of consumer co @-@ operatives in Novosibirsk , Siberia . When asked why he worked in the co @-@ operative sector of the economy , Kosygin replied , quoting a slogan of Vladimir Lenin : " Co @-@ operation – the path to socialism ! " Kosygin stayed there for six years . 
 He applied for a membership in the Communist Party of the Soviet Union in 1927 and returned to Leningrad in 1930 to study at the Leningrad Textile Institute ; he graduated in 1935 . 
 After finishing his studies , Kosygin was employed as a textile mill director . Three years later , he was elected Chairman of the Executive Committee of the Leningrad City Soviets of Working People 's Deputies by the Leningrad Communist Party , and the following year he was appointed People 's Commissar for Textile and Industry and earned a seat on the Central Committee ( CC ) . In 1940 Kosygin became a Deputy chairman of the Council of People 's Commissars , and was appointed in 1943 as Chairman of the Council of People 's Commissars of the Russian SFSR . 
 Kosygin worked for the State Defence Committee during the Great Patriotic War ( World War II ) . As Deputy Chairman of the Council of Evacuation , his task was to evacuate industry from territories soon to be overrun by the Germans . He broke the Leningrad Blockade by organising the construction of a supply route and a pipeline on the bottom of Lake Ladoga . Kosygin was a candidate member of the Politburo from 1946 to 1949 , and became a full member toward the end of Joseph Stalin 's rule ; he lost his seat in 1952 . He briefly served as Minister of Finance in 1948 , and as Minister of Light Industry from 1949 to 1953 . 
 = = = Stalin era = = = 
 His administrative skills led Stalin to take Kosygin under his wing . Stalin shared information with Kosygin , such as how much money the families of Vyacheslav Molotov , Anastas Mikoyan , and Lazar Kaganovich possessed , spent and paid their staff . A Politburo member earned a modest salary by Soviet standards but enjoyed unlimited access to consumer goods . 
 Kosygin was sent by Stalin to each home to put their houses into " proper order " . Assignments such as these made Kosygin unpopular with certain members of the Soviet leadership . Kosygin told his son @-@ in @-@ law Mikhail Gvishiani , an NKVD officer , of the accusations leveled against his co @-@ worker Nikolai Voznesensky , then Chairman of the State Planning Committee and a First Deputy Premier , because of his possession of firearms . Gvishiani and Kosygin threw all their weapons into a lake and searched both their houses for any listening devices . They found one at Kosygin 's house , but it might have been installed to spy on Marshal Georgy Zhukov , who had lived there before him . According to his memoirs , Kosygin never left his home without reminding his wife what to do if he did not return from work . After living two years in constant fear , the family reached the conclusion that Stalin would not harm them . 
 Kosygin , along with Alexey Kuznetsov and Voznesensky , formed a Troika in the aftermath of the war , with all three being promoted up the Soviet hierarchy by high @-@ standing officials such as Stalin . There is a theory that Lavrentiy Beria and Georgy Malenkov plotted against them in 1950 , and initiated what became known as the Leningrad Affair , which consisted of several fabricated criminal charges against Kuznetsov and Voznesensky . Both were executed . Kosygin 's life , which was connected to Kuznetsov through marriage , was hanging by a thread . How or why Kosygin survived the show trials is unknown , but he , as some jokes say , " must have drawn a lucky lottery ticket " . Nikita Khrushchev blamed Beria and Malenkov for the innocent deaths of Kuznetsov and Voznesensky , and accused Malenkov in 1957 of having concocted the plot so that either Malenkov or Beria would succeed Stalin upon his death . 
 = = = Khrushchev era = = = 
 Following Stalin 's death in March 1953 , Kosygin was demoted , but as a staunch ally of Khrushchev , his career soon turned around . While never one of Khrushchev 's protégés , Kosygin quickly moved up the party ladder . Kosygin became an official of the State Planning Committee in 1957 , and was made a candidate member of the Politburo . He was promoted to the State Planning Committee chairmanship , and became Khrushchev 's First Deputy Premier in 1960 . As First Deputy Premier Kosygin travelled abroad , mostly on trade missions , to countries such as North Korea , India , Argentina and Italy , for instance . Later , in the aftermath of the Cuban Missile Crisis , Kosygin was the Soviet spokesman for improved relations between the Soviet Union and the United States . Kosygin regained his old seat in the Politburo at the 22nd Party Congress in 1961 . 
 = = Premiership = = 
 = = = Brezhnev – Kosygin leadership = = = 
 When Khrushchev was dismissed as leader in October 1964 , Kosygin took over Khrushchev 's old post as Premier in what initially was a collective leadership , with Leonid Brezhnev as general secretary and Anastas Mikoyan , and later Nikolai Podgorny , as Chairman of the Presidium . The new Politburo had a more conservative outlook than that found under Khrushchev ; Kosygin , Podgorny and Andrei Kirilenko were the most liberal members , Brezhnev and <unk> <unk> belonged to the moderate faction while Mikhail Suslov retained his leadership of the party 's Stalinist wing . 
 In October 1964 , at a ceremony in honour of Soviet cosmonauts , Brezhnev called for the strengthening of the Party apparatus . This speech was only the beginning of a large campaign directed against Kosygin . Several newspapers , such as Pravda and <unk> , criticised the work of the Council of Ministers , and indirectly Kosygin , its chairman , for planning the economy in an unrealistic fashion , and used the highly aggressive rhetoric previously used to condemn Khrushchev against Kosygin . 
 Brezhnev was able to criticise Kosygin by contrasting him with Vladimir Lenin , whom Brezhnev claimed to have been more interested in improving the conditions of Soviet agriculture than improving the quality of light industrial goods . Kosygin 's support for producing more consumer goods was also criticised by Brezhnev , and his supporters , most notably Konstantin Chernenko , for being a return to quasi First World policies . At the 23rd Party Congress Kosygin 's position was weakened when Brezhnev 's supporters were able to increase expenditure on defence and agriculture . However , Brezhnev did not have a majority in the Politburo , and could count on only four votes . In the Politburo Kosygin could count on Kiril <unk> 's vote , and when Kosygin and Podgorny were not bickering with each other , they actually had a majority in the Politburo over Brezhnev . Unfortunately for Kosygin this was not often the case , and Kosygin and Podgorny were constantly disagreeing on policy . 
 Early during Kosygin 's tenure , the Brezhnev – Kosygin attempt to create stability was failing on various fronts . From 1969 to 1970 discontent within the Soviet leadership had grown to such an extent that some started to doubt both former and current Soviet policies . Examples include the handling of the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia ( which Kosygin initially resisted ) , the decline in agriculture production , the Sino – Soviet border conflict ( he advocated restraint ) , the Vietnam War , and the Soviet – American talks on the limitation of strategic missiles . Two summit conferences between the US and the USSR were held : the Warsaw Pact Summit Conference and the Moscow Summit Conference ; both failed to gain support for Soviet policies . 
 By 1970 these differences had not been resolved , and Brezhnev postponed the 24th Party Congress and the Ninth Five @-@ Year Plan ( 1971 – 1975 ) . The delay in resolving these issues led to rumours circulating in Soviet society that Kosygin , or even Brezhnev , would lose their posts to Podgorny . By March 1971 it became apparent that Brezhnev was the leader of the country , with Kosygin as the spokesman of the five @-@ year plan and Podgorny 's position within the collective leadership strengthened . 
 = = = Foreign policy = = = 
 Early on in his tenure , Kosygin challenged Brezhnev 's right as general secretary to represent the country abroad , a function Kosygin believed should fall into the hands of the head of government , as was common in non @-@ communist countries . This was actually implemented for a short period , which led Henry A. Kissinger to believe that Kosygin was the leader of the Soviet Union . Kosygin , who had been the chief negotiator with the First World during the 1960s , was hardly to be seen outside the Second World after Brezhnev consolidated his position within the Politburo , but also due to Andrei Gromyko 's dislike of Kosygin meddling into his own ministerial affairs . 
 The Six @-@ Day War in the Middle East had the effect of increasing Soviet – American cooperation ; to improve relations even further , the United States Government invited Kosygin to a summit with Lyndon B. Johnson , the President of the United States , following his speech to the United Nations . At the summit , which became known as the Glassboro Summit Conference , Johnson and Kosygin failed to reach agreement on limiting anti @-@ ballistic missile systems , but the summit 's friendly and even open atmosphere was referred to as the " Spirit of Glassboro " . Relations between the two countries improved further when the 1970 Moscow Treaty was signed on 12 August 1970 by Kosygin and Gromyko and Willy Brandt and Walter Scheel who represented West Germany . 
 In 1972 , Kosygin signed a Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation with the government of Iraq , building on strong Soviet ties to the Iraqi Arab Socialist Ba 'ath Party and previous close relations with Iraqi leader Abd al @-@ Karim Qasim . 
 Kosygin protected János Kádár 's economic reforms and his position as leader of the People 's Republic of Hungary from intervention by the Soviet leadership . Polish leader Władysław Gomułka , who was removed from all of his posts in 1970 , was succeeded by Edward Gierek who tried to revitalise the economy of the People 's Republic of Poland by borrowing money from the First World . The Soviet leadership approved both countries ' respective economic experiments , since it was trying to reduce its large Eastern Bloc subsidy programme in the form of cheap oil and gas exports . During the discussions within the Soviet leadership of a possible Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia Kosygin reminded leaders of the consequences of the Soviet suppression of the 1956 Hungarian revolution . Kosygin 's stance became more aggressive later on when he understood that the reforms in Czechoslovakia could be turned against his 1965 Soviet economic reform . 
 Kosygin acted as a mediator between India and Pakistan in 1966 , and got both nations to sign the Tashkent Declaration . Kosygin became the chief spokesman on the issue of arms control . In retrospect , many of Kosygin 's co @-@ workers felt he carried out his work " stoically " , but lacked " enthusiasm " , and therefore never developed a real taste for international politics . 
 The Sino – Soviet split chagrined Kosygin a great deal , and for a while he refused to accept its <unk> ; he briefly visited Beijing in 1969 due to increased tension between the USSR and China . Kosygin said , in a close @-@ knit circle , that " We are communists and they are communists . It is hard to believe we will not be able to reach an agreement if we met face to face " . His view on China changed however , and according to Harold Wilson , former Prime Minister of the United Kingdom , Kosygin viewed China as a " organised military dictatorship " who 's intended goal was to enslave " Vietnam and the whole of Asia " . 
 During an official visit by an Afghan delegation , Kosygin and Andrei Kirilenko criticised Afghan leaders Nur Muhammad Taraki and Hafizullah Amin for Stalinist @-@ like <unk> behaviour . He promised to send more economic and military aid , but rejected any proposal regarding a possible Soviet intervention , as an intervention in Afghanistan would strain the USSR 's foreign relations with the First World according to Kosygin , most notably West Germany . However , in a closed meeting , without Kosygin , who strongly opposed any kind of military intervention , the Politburo unanimously supported a Soviet intervention . 
 = = = Economic policy = = = 
 = = = = Five @-@ Year Plans = = = = 
 The Eighth Five @-@ Year Plan ( 1966 – 1970 ) is considered to be one of the most successful periods for the Soviet economy and the most successful when it comes to consumer production ( see The " Kosygin " reform ) . The 23rd Party Congress and the Ninth Five @-@ Year Plan ( 1971 – 1975 ) had been postponed by Brezhnev due to a power struggle within the Soviet leadership . At the 23rd Party Congress Kosygin promised that the Ninth Five @-@ Year Plan would increase the supply of food , clothing and other household appliances up to 50 percent . The plan envisaged a massive increase in the Soviet standard of living , with Kosygin proclaiming a growth of 40 percent for the population 's cash income in his speech to the congress . 
 The Tenth Five @-@ Year Plan ( 1976 – 1981 ) was referred to by Kosygin as the " plan of quality " . Brezhnev rejected Kosygin 's bid for producing more consumer goods during the Tenth Five @-@ Year Plan . Because of it the total volume of consumer goods in industrial production only stood at 26 percent . Kosygin 's son @-@ in @-@ law notes that Kosygin was furious with the decision , and proclaimed increased defence expenditure would become the Soviet Union 's " complete ruin " . The plan was less ambitious than its predecessors , with targets of national industrial growth no higher than what the rest of the world had already achieved . Soviet agriculture would receive a share investment of 34 percent , a share much larger than its proportional contribution to the Soviet economy , as it accounted for only 3 percent of Soviet GDP . 
 = = = = The " Kosygin " reform = = = = 
 Like Khrushchev , Kosygin tried to reform the command economy within a socialist framework . In 1965 Kosygin initiated an economic reform widely referred to as the " Kosygin reform " . Kosygin sought to make Soviet industry more efficient by including some market measures common in the First World such as profit making for instance ; he also tried to increase quantity of production , increase incentives for managers and workers , and freeing managers from centralised state bureaucracy . The reform had been proposed to Khrushchev in 1964 , who evidently liked it and took some preliminary steps to implement it . Brezhnev allowed the reform to proceed because the Soviet economy was entering a period of low growth . In its testing phase , the reform was applied to 336 enterprises in light industry . 
 The reform was influenced by the works of Soviet economist <unk> Liberman . Kosygin overestimated the ability of the Soviet administrative machine to develop the economy , which led to " corrections " to some of Liberman 's more controversial beliefs about decentralisation . According to critics , Kosygin 's changes to Liberman 's original vision caused the reform to fail . 
 Kosygin , who had for a long time been conscious of the First World 's superiority , believed that decentralisation , semi @-@ public companies , and cooperatives were keys to catching up . His reform sought a gradual change from a " state @-@ administered economy " to an economy in which " the state restricts itself to guiding enterprises " . The reform was implemented , but showed several malfunctions and inconsistencies early on . 
 = = = = = Results = = = = = 
 The salary for Soviet citizens increased abruptly by almost 2 @.@ 5 times during the plan . Real wages in 1980 amounted to 232 @.@ 7 rubles , compared to 166 @.@ 3 rubles before the 1965 Soviet economic reform and the Eight @-@ Five Year Plan . The first period , 1960 – 1964 , was characterised by low growth , while the second period , 1965 – 1981 , had a stronger growth rate . The second period vividly demonstrated the success of the Kosygin reform , with the average annual growth in retail turnover being 11 @.@ 2 billion rubles , 1 @.@ 8 times higher than in the first period and 1 @.@ 2 times higher than the third period ( 1981 – 1985 ) . Consumption of goods and daily demand also increased . The consumption of home appliances greatly increased . Refrigerators increased from a low of 109 @,@ 000 in 1964 to 440 @,@ 000 units by 1973 ; consumption declined during the reversal of the reform . Car production increased , and would continue to do so until the late 1980s . The Soviet leadership , under pressure , sought to provide more attractive goods for Soviet consumers . 
 The removal of Khrushchev in 1964 signalled the end of his " housing revolution " . Housing construction declined between 1960 and 1964 to an average of 1 @.@ 63 million square metres . Following this sudden decrease , housing construction increased sharply between 1965 and 1966 , but dropped again , and then steadily grew ( the average annual growth rate was 4 @.@ 26 million square metres ) . This came largely at the expense of businesses . While the housing shortage was never fully resolved , and still remains a problem in present @-@ day Russia , the reform overcame the negative trend and renewed the growth of housing construction . 
 = = = = = Cancellation and aftermath = = = = = 
 With hostility towards reform growing , the poor results , and Kosygin 's reformist stance , led to a popular backlash against him . Kosygin lost most of the privileges he had enjoyed before the reform , but Brezhnev was never able to remove him from the office of Chairman of the Council of Ministers , despite his weakened position . In the aftermath of his failed reform , Kosygin spent the rest of his life improving the economic administration through the modification of targets ; he implemented various programmes to improve food security and ensure the future intensification of production . There is no proof to back up the claim that the reform itself contributed to the high growth seen in the late @-@ 1960s , and that its cancellation had anything to do with the stagnating growth of the economy which began in the 1970s . 
 = = = = 1973 and 1979 reforms = = = = 
 Kosygin initiated another economic reform in 1973 with the intentions of weakening the central Ministries and giving more powers to the regional authorities in republican and local @-@ levels . The reform 's failure to meet Kosygin 's goal led to its cancellation . However , the reform succeeded in creating associations , an organisation representing various enterprises . The last significant reform undertaken by the pre @-@ perestroika leadership was initiated by Kosygin 's fifth government in a joint decision of the Central Committee and the Council of Ministers . The " Improving planning and reinforcing the effects of the economic mechanism on raising the effectiveness in production and improving the quality of work " , more commonly known as the 1979 reform . The reform , in contrast to the 1965 reform , was intended to increase the central government 's economic involvement by enhancing the duties and responsibilities of the ministries . Due to Kosygin 's resignation in 1980 , and because of Nikolai Tikhonov 's conservative approach to economics , very little of the reform was actually implemented . 
 = = = Later life , resignation and death = = = 
 By the early to mid @-@ 1970s Brezhnev had established a strong enough power base to effectively become leader . According to historian Ilya Zemtsov , the author of Chernenko : The Last Bolshevik : The Soviet Union on the Eve of Perestroika , Kosygin " began to lose power " with the 24th Party Congress in 1971 which for the first time publicised the formula ' the Politburo led by Brezhnev ' " . Along with weakening Kosygin 's position , Brezhnev moved to strengthen the Party 's hold on the Government apparatus , weakening Kosygin 's position further . Historian Robert Wesson , the author of Lenin 's Legacy : The Story of the CPSU , notes that Kosygin 's economic report to the 25th Party Congress " pointed even more clearly to the end of struggle " between Brezhnev and Kosygin . Kosygin was further pushed aside when Brezhnev published his memoirs , which stated that Brezhnev , not Kosygin , was in charge of all major economic decisions . To make matters worse for Kosygin , Brezhnev blocked any future talks on economic reform within the party and government apparatus , and information regarding the reform of 1965 was suppressed . 
 Brezhnev consolidated his own position over the Government Apparatus by strengthening Podgorny 's position as Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet , literally head of state , by giving the office some of the functions of the Premier . The 1977 Soviet Constitution strengthened Podgorny 's control of the Council of Ministers , by giving the post of head of state some executive powers . In fact , because of the 1977 Soviet Constitution , the Council of Ministers became subordinate to the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet . When Podgorny was replaced as head of state in 1977 by Brezhnev , Kosygin 's role in day @-@ to @-@ day management of government activities was lessened drastically , through Brezhnev 's new @-@ found post . Rumours started circulating within the top circles , and on the streets , that Kosygin would retire due to bad health . 
 Brezhnev 's consolidation to power weakened Kosygin 's influence and prestige within the Politburo . By the 1970s , when Kosygin 's position was given one blow after another , he was frequently hospitalised and at several occasions Kiril <unk> , the First Deputy chairman of the Council of Ministers , acted on his behalf during Kosygin 's absence . Kosygin suffered his first heart attack in 1976 . After this incident , it is said that Kosygin changed from having a vibrant personality to being tired and fed up ; he , according to people close to him , seemed to have lost the will to continue his work . He twice filed a letter of resignation between 1976 and 1980 , but was turned down on both occasions . During Kosygin 's sick leave , Brezhnev appointed Nikolai Tikhonov to the post of First Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers . Tikhonov , as with Brezhnev , was a conservative , and through his post as First Deputy chairman Tikhonov was able to reduce Kosygin to a standby role . At a Central Committee plenum in June 1980 , the Soviet economic development plan was outlined by Tikhonov , not Kosygin . The powers of the Premier diminished to the point where Kosygin was forced to discuss all decisions made by the Council of Ministers with Brezhnev . 
 Kosygin was hospitalised in October 1980 ; during his stay Kosygin wrote a brief letter of resignation ; the following day he was deprived of all government protection , communication , and luxury goods he had earned during his political life . Kosygin died alone on 18 December 1980 ; none of his Politburo colleagues , former aides , or security guards visited him . At the end of his life , Kosygin feared the complete failure of the Eleventh Five @-@ Year Plan ( 1981 – 1985 ) , claiming that the sitting leadership was reluctant to reform the stagnant Soviet economy . His funeral was postponed for three days , as Kosygin died on the eve of Brezhnev 's birthday . He was buried in Red Square , Moscow . Kosygin was praised by Brezhnev as an individual who " labored selflessly for the good of the Soviet state " . A state funeral was conducted and Kosygin was honoured by his peers ; Brezhnev , Yuri Andropov , and Tikhonov laid an urn containing his ashes at the Kremlin Wall . 
 = = Personality = = 
 Compared to other Soviet officials , Kosygin stood out as a pragmatic and relatively independent leader . In a description given by an anonymous high @-@ ranking GRU official , Kosygin is described as " a lonely and somewhat tragic figure " who " understood our faults and shortcomings of our situation in general and those in our Middle East policy in particular , but , being a highly restrained man , he preferred to be cautious . " An anonymous old co @-@ worker of Kosygin said " He always had an opinion of his own , and defended it . He was a very alert man , and performed brilliantly during negotiations . He was able to cope quickly with the material that was totally new to him . I have never seen people of that calibre afterwards . " 
 Canadian Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau said Kosygin was like " Khrushchev without the rough edges , a fatherly man who was the forerunner of Mikhail Gorbachev " . He noted that Kosygin was willing to discuss issues so long that the Soviet position was not tackled head @-@ on . Former United States Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger said that Kosygin was devoted , nearly fanatically , to his work . Kosygin was viewed by Western diplomats as a pragmatist " with a glacial exterior who was orthodox if not rigid " . Andrei Sakharov , a Soviet dissident , believed Kosygin to be " the most intelligent and toughest man in the Politburo " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Historical assessments = = = 
 Kosygin would prove to be a very competent administrator , with the Soviet standard of living rising considerably due to his moderately reformist policy . Kosygin 's moderate 1965 reform , as with Nikita Khrushchev 's thaw , radicalised the Soviet reform movement . While Leonid Brezhnev was content to maintain the centralised structure of the Soviet planned economy , Kosygin attempted to revitalise the ailing economic system by decentralising management . Following Brezhnev 's death in 1982 , the reform movement was split between Yuri Andropov 's path of discipline and control and Gorbachev 's liberalisation of all aspects of public life . 
 Chernenko : The Last Bolshevik : The Soviet Union on the Eve of Perestroika author Ilya Zemtsov describes Kosygin as a " Determined and intelligent , an outstanding administrator " and claims he distinguished himself from the other members of the Soviet leadership with his " extraordinary capacity for work " . Historians Moshe Lewin and Gregory Elliott , the authors of The Soviet Century , describes him as a " phenomenal administrator " . " His strengths " , David Law writes , was " his exceptional capability as an administrator " . According to Law Kosygin proved himself to be a " competent politician " also . Historians Evan Mawdsley and Stephen White claim that Brezhnev was unable to remove Kosygin because his removal would mean the loss of his last " capable administrator " . In their book , The Unknown Stalin , Roy Medvedev and Zhores Medvedev called Kosygin an " outstanding organiser " , and the " new Voznesensky " . Historian Archie Brown , the author The Rise & Fall of Communism , believes the 1965 Soviet economic reform to have been too " modest " , and claimed that Kosygin " was too much a product of the Soviet ministerial system , as it evolved under Stalin , to become a radical economic reformer " . However , Brown does believe that Kosygin was " an able administrator " . Gvishiani , a Russian historian , concluded that " Kosygin survived both Stalin and Khrushchev , but did not manage to survive Brezhnev . " 
 Kosygin was viewed with sympathy by the Soviet people , and is still presently viewed as an important figure in both Russian and Soviet history . Because of Kosygin 's popularity among the Soviet people , Brezhnev developed a " strong jealousy " for Kosygin , according to Nikolai <unk> . Mikhail <unk> , the former Executive Officer of the Council of Ministers , recalled that Kosygin refused to go drinking with Brezhnev , a move which annoyed Brezhnev gravely . Nikolai Ryzhkov , the last Chairman of the Council of Ministers , in a speech to the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union in 1987 referred to the " sad experiences of the 1965 reform " , and claimed that everything went from bad to worse following the reform 's cancellation . 
 = = = Honours = = = 
 During his lifetime , Kosygin received seven Orders and two Awards from the Soviet state . He was awarded two Hero of Socialist Labour ( USSR ) ; one being on his 60th birthday by the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet in 1964 , on this occasion he was also awarded an Order of Lenin and a Hammer and Sickle Gold Medal . On 20 February 1974 , to commemorate his 70th birthday , the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet awarded him another Order of Lenin and his second Hammer and Sickle Gold Medal . In total , Kosygin was awarded six Orders of Lenin by the Soviet state , and one Order of the October Revolution and one Order of the Red Banner of Labour . During a state visit to Peru in the 1970s with Leonid Brezhnev and Andrei Gromyko , all three were awarded the Grand Cross of the Order of the Sun by President Francisco Morales Bermúdez . The Moscow State Textile University was named in his honour in 1981 , in 1982 a bust to honour Kosygin was placed in Leningrad , present day St. Petersburg . In 2006 the Russian Government renamed a street after him . 
 = Florence Fuller = 
 Florence Ada Fuller ( 1867 – 17 July 1946 ) was a South African @-@ born Australian artist . Originally from Port Elizabeth , Fuller migrated as a child to Melbourne with her family . There she trained with her uncle Robert Hawker Dowling and teacher Jane Sutherland and took classes at the National Gallery of Victoria Art School , becoming a professional artist in the late 1880s . In 1892 she left Australia , travelling first to South Africa , where she met and painted for Cecil Rhodes , and then on to Europe . She lived and studied there for the subsequent decade , except for a return to South Africa in 1899 to paint a portrait of Rhodes . Between 1895 and 1904 her works were exhibited at the Paris Salon and London 's Royal Academy . 
 In 1904 , Fuller returned to Australia , living in Perth . She became active in the Theosophical Society and painted some of her best @-@ known work , including A Golden Hour , described by the National Gallery of Australia as a " masterpiece " when it acquired the work in 2013 . Beginning in 1908 , Fuller travelled extensively , living in India and England before ultimately settling in Sydney . There , she was the inaugural teacher of life drawing at the School of Fine and Applied Arts , established in 1920 by the New South Wales Society of Women Painters . She died in 1946 . 
 Highly regarded during her active career as a portrait and landscape painter , by 1914 Fuller was represented in four public galleries — three in Australia and one in South Africa — a record for a woman who was an Australian painter at that time . In 1927 she began almost twenty years of institutionalization in a mental asylum , however , and her death went without notice . After her death , information about her was frequently omitted from reference books about Australian painters and knowledge of her work became obscure despite her paintings being held in public art collections including the Art Gallery of South Australia , the Art Gallery of Western Australia , the National Gallery of Australia , the National Gallery of Victoria , the Art Gallery of New South Wales and Australia 's National Portrait Gallery . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Florence Fuller was born in Port Elizabeth , South Africa , in 1867 , a daughter of Louisa and John Hobson Fuller . She had several siblings , including sisters Amy and Christie , both of whom subsequently became singers . 
 The family migrated to Australia when Florence was a child . She worked as a governess while undertaking studies in art , and first took classes at the National Gallery of Victoria Art School in 1883 , then again for a further term of study in 1888 . During this period she was a student of Jane Sutherland , referred to in the Australian Dictionary of Biography as " the leading female artist in the group of Melbourne painters who broke with the nineteenth @-@ century tradition of studio art by sketching and painting directly from nature " . 
 Fuller 's uncle was Robert Hawker Dowling , a painter of orientalist and Aboriginal subjects , as well as portraits and miniatures . British @-@ born , he had grown up in Tasmania and made a living there as a portraitist , before returning to his native England at age thirty . For the next two decades , his works were frequently hung at the Royal Academy . He returned to Australia in 1885 , and Fuller became his pupil . In that year , aged eighteen , Fuller received a commission from Ann Fraser Bon , philanthropist and supporter of Victoria 's Aboriginal people . The commission was for Barak – last chief of the Yarra Yarra Tribe of Aborigines , a formal oil on canvas portrait of the Indigenous Australian leader , William Barak . Ultimately , that painting was acquired by the State Library of Victoria . Although the painting is an important work regularly used to illustrate this significant figure in Australia 's history , interpretations of Fuller 's portrait are mixed : one critic noted the painting 's objectivity and avoidance of romanticising Aboriginal people , while another concluded that " Fuller is painting an ideal rather than a person " . 
 In 1886 , Dowling returned to his native England . Giving up her work as a governess , Fuller began to paint full @-@ time , and had opened her own studio before she had turned twenty . Dowling had intended to return to Australia and had left behind an incomplete portrait of the Victorian governor 's wife , Lady Loch . He died , however , not long after arriving in England ; Fuller then completed Dowling 's commission . Lady Loch became her patron . Other early portraits followed : two pictures of homeless children , entitled Weary ( inspired by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow 's poem on child labour " Weariness " ) and Desolate , in 1888 ; and Gently <unk> circa 1889 . Weary was acquired by the Art Gallery of New South Wales in 2015 . The gallery 's curator of Australian art described the depiction of billboard posters in the painting as giving it a " sense of gritty realism that was arguably unprecedented in Australian art . " 
 Also in 1889 , Fuller was awarded a prize by the Victorian Artists Society for best portrait by an artist under twenty @-@ five . 
 = = Europe and South Africa = = 
 In 1892 , Fuller travelled to the Cape of Good Hope " to convalesce " , although from what illness or injury , her biographer Joan Kerr does not say . While there , she was a guest of her uncle Sir Thomas Ekins Fuller , a member of the Parliament of the Cape of Good Hope , and through him she met Cecil Rhodes , the Colony 's Prime Minister , who commissioned her to paint a landscape showing his home . Two years later , she travelled on to England and France , where she remained for a decade . In the 1890s , Australian artists studying abroad favoured Paris over London , and Fuller was no exception . Other Australians studying in France around that time included Agnes <unk> , Margaret Preston , James Quinn , and Hugh Ramsay . Fuller studied first at the Académie Julian , where her teachers included William @-@ Adolphe Bouguereau , and later , Raphaël Collin , one of whose studios she managed for a time . Many of the French art schools had only recently opened their doors to women , and those at Académie Julian experienced poor , overcrowded conditions and contempt from the ( mostly male ) teachers . Despite this , Fuller 's skills developed , and contemporary critics commented favourably on the influence of the French training . 
 During her time in Europe , Fuller had great success . After a pastel portrait of hers was accepted for the Paris Salon in 1895 , two of her paintings were shown there in 1896 . That was followed by another , La <unk> , in 1897 , in which year she also had a work accepted by the Royal Academy in London . She exhibited in many other locations : the Royal Institute of Oil Painters and Manchester Art Gallery in England , as well as the Victorian Artists Society and the New South Wales Society of Artists , and at the Melbourne studio of Jane Sutherland . There was even a painting , Landscape , hung in the exhibition for the fiftieth anniversary of the founding of Bendigo . Not all her time was spent in Europe , however ; in 1899 she returned to South Africa to paint Cecil <unk> one source suggests that she ultimately prepared five portraits of the founder of Rhodesia . A later newspaper report stated that Fuller also travelled and made sketches in Wales , Ireland , and Italy . 
 While in Europe , Fuller painted <unk> , which portrays the figure of a girl sitting reading a book . It was acquired by the Art Gallery of South Australia . When hanging the work as part of its exhibition The Edwardians , the National Gallery of Australia described the painting as one suggesting a love of reading . In contrast , art historian Catherine Speck regarded the work as " subversive " because of its portrayal of a young woman " gaining knowledge " . In November 1902 , the Australian Federal International Exhibition was held . It was opened by the Governor of Victoria Sir George Clarke , who spoke of its goal to advance " the industrial progress of Australia " . The event occupied the entire Royal Exhibition Building in Melbourne , and was dominated by an exhibition of art , both Australian and international . Included in this extensive survey of painting were six works by Fuller . 
 = = Perth = = 
 Further recognition came with the hanging of one of Fuller 's paintings , Summer Breezes , at the Royal Academy in 1904 . Other Australian artists whose works were hung at the same time included Rupert Bunny , E. Phillips Fox , Albert <unk> , George Lambert , and Arthur Streeton . Fuller was the only woman painter to be represented . A critic writing in The West Australian observed : 
 The work ... is essentially Australian in almost every detail . Standing in a sunlit Australian paddock , a <unk> Australian blonde holds her summer hat on against the rude caresses of an Australian breeze — a subject simple but grand in its simplicity ... Next to its suggestion of breezy sunshine and the incidental portrayal of <unk> grace the picture is to be admired for its colour scheme ... The details of the picture disclose untiring care . 
 By the time Summer Breezes was on display , Fuller had returned to Australia , not to her previous home in Melbourne but to Perth in Western Australia , where she joined her sister , Amy Fuller , who was a singer . Although only in her mid @-@ thirties , Fuller 's background made her " one of the most experienced artists in Western Australia at this time " . For the next four years , she painted portraits , including one of Western Australian politician James George Lee Steere , undertaken posthumously from photographs and recollections of those who had known him . It was acquired by the gallery whose board he chaired . She also took on students , including French @-@ Australian artist Kathleen O 'Connor . 
 Fuller 's paintings from this period included A Golden Hour , described by the National Gallery of Australia as " a masterpiece ... giving us a gentle insight into the people , places and times that make up our history " . The painting , an oil on canvas 109 cm ( 43 in ) high and 135 cm ( 53 in ) wide , portrays a woman and a man standing together in a rural setting in late afternoon , surrounded by grass , scattered gum trees , and Xanthorrhoea . When the painting was put up for sale in 2012 , the auction house catalogue stated that it had been owned by William Ride , former director of the Western Australian Museum . It reported : 
 The current owners assert that Professor Ride always understood the figures in the picture were Sir John Winthrop Hackett , ( then owner of The West Australian newspaper , well known business man and philanthropist , whose gift allowed the construction of the impressive University of Western Australia buildings and St. George 's Residential College ) and his new wife , Deborah Vernon Hackett " . 
 In addition to appearing as the small figure of a woman in A Golden Hour , Deborah Vernon Hackett was also the subject of a portrait , painted around 1908 , again during Fuller 's time in Perth . Anne Gray , the head of Australian art at the National Gallery of Australia , observed of Fuller 's approach to the newspaperman 's wife , that : 
 Fuller portrayed her sitter sympathetically , capturing the young woman 's grace and charm . But she also conveyed the complexity of the young Mrs Hackett 's character through her soft , feminine , pale @-@ blue dress <unk> by the dramatic black hat and direct gaze . 
 Fuller painted other works for the <unk> . In a 1937 piece reflecting on early twentieth @-@ century art in Western Australia , a reviewer recalled : 
 Dr. ( later Sir Winthrop ) Hackett was a great patron of Miss Fuller , and he was a constant visitor to her dignified studio , above his office in the old West Australian Chambers . The first portrait I saw Miss Fuller working on was of Mrs. E. Chase ... The portrait was a commission from Dr. Hackett , and was destined to hang in his gallery . Miss Fuller painted Lady Hackett both before and after her marriage , and one particularly happy picture of her is as a young girl gathering wildflowers in the Darlington hills . Her portraits of the first Hackett babies were charming studies of childhood . 
 = = Theosophy and later career = = 
 Biographer Joan Kerr speculated that it may have been Jane Sutherland who introduced Fuller to Theosophy , a spiritual and mystical philosophy that teaches the unity of existence and emphasises the search for universal wisdom . Described by art historian Jenny McFarlane as " the most important counter @-@ cultural organisation of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries " , it was influential throughout Fuller 's life . She joined the society in Perth on 29 May 1905 , after hearing charismatic theosophist Charles Webster Leadbeater during his lecture tour . Bessie <unk> was a feminist who joined at the same time , and together they influenced the movement 's development in early twentieth century Perth . Fuller was variously secretary , treasurer , and librarian of the local branch of the Theosophical Society . 
 In 1906 Fuller 's portrait of feminist and theosophist Annie Besant was among the paintings exhibited at the West Australian Art Society 's annual exhibition . Around the same period , she painted other portraits of the movement 's leading figures , including Henry Steel Olcott and Helena Petrovna Blavatsky . These representations departed from the academic portraiture in which Fuller had trained , as she incorporated practices of intuition and visualisation " inspired by Indian aesthetics as mediated by the Theosophical Society " . 
 In 1907 , Besant became the president of the Theosophical Society globally , and set to work with a major expansion of the organisation 's headquarters at Adyar , in what was then , Madras . When it was announced that Besant would undertake a speaking tour of Australia in 1908 , she was expected to stay with Fuller while in Perth . Some months later in 1908 , Fuller left Western Australia and travelled to India , staying at Adyar . Of her time in India , Fuller wrote : 
 I went in search not only of beauty , and light , and colour , and the picturesqueness in general , which delight the eye and emotions of all artists — but of something deeper — something less easily expressed . I spent two and a half years in a community that is quite unique — perhaps the most cosmopolitan settlement in the world — the headquarters of the Theosophical Society ... Well , I painted there , of course , but my art was undergoing a change , and I felt that it could not satisfy me unless it became so much greater . 
 Fuller 's time at Adyar was eventful . Leadbeater arrived around the same time as Fuller , and soon afterward he " discovered " the person he believed would become a global teacher and orator , Jiddu Krishnamurti ( then in his teens ) . Leadbetter and others tutored Krishnamurti . Fuller may have taught him photography . She also had a small studio built in the grounds , and painted . Her works from the period include a portrait of Leadbeater and Portrait of the Lord Buddha . McFarlane emphasises the significance of the latter work , pointing out that it is " strikingly modern " in comparison to all of Fuller 's other work , and more radical than compositions created by Grace Cossington Smith and Roland <unk> , half a decade later . The painting owes much to theosophy 's emphasis on seeing the subject " through a psychic , visionary experience " . 
 Sources describing Fuller 's movements after her time in India sometimes are ambiguous . She arrived in England in June 1911 , where she marched with Besant in the suffragette protests associated with the coronation of George V. She continued to paint portraits , but found it difficult to realise the transformation in her art that she had conceptualised in India : 
 I have painted a great many portraits since I have been in England , and have been , I suppose , fairly successful — though I have done nothing in any way remarkable . The hidden inner life has not yet succeeded in expressing itself on canvas , and I can only write myself as one who aspires to a greater art , but who has not yet achieved . 
 Fuller subsequently travelled from London to India in 1914 . One newspaper report described her as a " visitor " to Sydney in 1916 , although McFarlane says she travelled there with Leadbeater and remained in the city . Another report stated that she visited Brisbane a year later . Both newspaper pieces indicated that Fuller had spent a period painting in Java ( at that time part of the Dutch East Indies ) , although when this occurred is not clear , and such a visit is not mentioned by McFarlane . There was at least one subsequent substantial journey , as Fuller arrived again to Sydney , via Perth , from India in 1919 . At some point following these travels , Fuller settled permanently in Mosman in Sydney 's northern suburbs , where she continued to paint , including miniatures . Her 1916 visit to Sydney had included an exhibition of a group of her miniatures , all of them portraits of theosophists including Besant and Henry Olcott , co @-@ founder of the Theosophical Society . 
 In 1920 , the Society of Women Painters in New South Wales established a School of Fine and Applied Arts , with Florence Fuller appointed as the inaugural teacher of life classes . At the exhibition held to mark the school 's establishment , Fuller displayed a portrait of the organisation 's founder , Mrs Hedley Parsons . When the society held a show in 1926 , a portrait by Fuller was one of those selected for favourable comment , but the general opinion of The Sydney Morning Herald reviewer was that " the exhibitors have let their style harden into a groove " . Fuller continued to be associated with the theosophical community as her health and economic circumstances deteriorated . 
 In 1927 , at the age of sixty , she was committed to <unk> Mental Asylum ( as it was then known ) , where she died nearly two decades later , on 17 July 1946 . She was buried at Rookwood Cemetery . 
 = = Style and legacy = = 
 Gwenda Robb and Elaine Smith , in their Concise Dictionary of Australian Artists , considered Fuller 's art to be created in " a free painterly style indebted to Impressionism " . During the first decade of the twentieth century , reviews drew attention to her distinctively Australian style . When one of Fuller 's works was included in an exhibition of colonial artists in London ( including paintings from Canada and Australia ) , the correspondent from the Adelaide Advertiser described Fuller 's contribution as " most Australian in feeling " . Reviewing her work hung in the Royal Academy in 1904 , a Perth critic reported : " Of the 16 or 17 Australian artists exhibiting at the Academy , Miss Fuller was the only one who chose a typically Australian scene . Her picture shows a young girl in thin white , clinging , dress , standing on a bushy piece of country ... As the London Observer says , the atmosphere that bathes the graceful figure of the girl is <unk> managed with its note of subtropical heat " . One reviewer thought very highly of her portraits , but was less convinced about Fuller 's approach to the Australian light , writing : 
 She had less success with our landscapes than with her figure subjects . That was the result of her passion for toning her pictures for ultimate indoor hanging . Thereby she lost , or illuminated , the hard Australian , hard light and shade , and startling relative values . <unk> too was the influence of the English school in her rendering of our foliage ; never could she bring herself to see our trees as dim coloured as they usually are . 
 Art critic and curator Jenny McFarlane considered Fuller 's work to be complex , drawing not only on European modernist academic traditions and Australian subjects , but also at times , incorporating " radical stylistic innovations " that drew on Indian artistic tradition and theosophy 's ideas . 
 Reviewing the Western Australian Art Society 's exhibition in 1906 , the critic for Perth 's Western Mail considered Fuller 's works to be the finest on show , and that " the occasion provides another triumph for Miss Fuller " . In 1914 , it was reported that Fuller was represented in four public galleries — three in Australia and one in South Africa — a record for an Australian woman painter at that time . Yet although she experienced considerable success during her early life , Fuller subsequently became almost invisible . No obituaries appeared in the newspapers in 1946 . She is not mentioned at all in Janine Burke 's Australian Women Artists 1840 – 1940 , Max Germaine 's Dictionary of Women Artists in Australia , nor Caroline Ambrus 's Australian Women Artists . Despite this , in 2013 , Ann Gray described Fuller as " an important Australian woman artist and arguably Western Australia 's most significant artist from the Federation period " . Works by Fuller are held by the Art Gallery of South Australia , the Art Gallery of Western Australia , the National Gallery of Australia , the City of Perth , the National Gallery of Victoria , Australia 's National Portrait Gallery , the Art Gallery of New South Wales and the State Library of Victoria . Internationally , her work is held by the Newport Museum and Art Gallery in South Wales . 
 = Jenny Schecter = 
 Jennifer " Jenny " Diane Schecter is a fictional character from the American Showtime television drama series The L Word , played by Mia Kirshner . Jenny debuted on @-@ screen during the pilot episode and remained until the series ' final episode . Jenny became well documented in the media for her outlandish plots . Jenny was created by series creator Ilene Chaiken , based on herself as a younger woman living in the lesbian community . Chaiken implemented a series of changes to the character , one of which being the inclusion of a sexual abuse storyline and self @-@ harm , which some critics observed as being attempts to make her likable in the LGBT community . One storyline that gained mainstream attention was adopting a homeless dog , only to have it put down for personal gain . Other storylines include stripping , writing novels , coming out , directing a film , affairs , and her possible murder . The final season is based around the lead @-@ up to her death , during which Jenny made herself extremely unpopular with her friends , who became suspects . 
 Jenny 's character was unpopular with both fans and critics throughout the entire series because of her frequent narcissistic tendencies , her prima donna ways , her egotistical attitude , irresponsibility , frequent self @-@ pity and selfish persona . She has also been labeled a " love to hate " character . The majority of critics have been intrigued by her " polarising personality " and branded it as one of the main reasons to watch the series . New York magazine gave a large amount of praise to Jenny and on one occasion stated : " Jenny Schecter is The L Word , and the death of her is the death of the show . " Kirshner received critical praise for her portrayal of the character . Kirshner has stated she loved playing Jenny because she felt like a brand new character during each season . She has also stated that it is difficult for people to like the character as she can be " very despicable " and even the LGBT community does not like her because of her " duplicity and confusion " . 
 = = Character creation and casting = = 
 Series creator Ilene Chaiken created Jenny . She based her on her own past experiences of coming out and dealing with the everyday life in the lesbian community as a younger woman . Like Jenny , Chaiken had befriended a group of lesbians who ran a cafe and had her first sexual encounter with a female . Actress Mia Kirshner was cast in the role . Chaiken admitted she had been searching for the right actress to play Jenny " for a long time " . Kirshner auditioned via video tape , Chaiken recalled that upon viewing it she thought Kirshner was " stunning " . She thought Kirshner had " riveting beauty that is unlike anyone else 's , and she was so deep and intense . " 
 Kirshner would often express her concern that she was not challenged enough or not making Jenny as " deep enough " as she could be . Chaiken said it was these qualities that made Kirshner " the bravest and boldest of actors " and branded her " utterly fearless " in her approach to Jenny . 
 = = Character development = = 
 = = = Characterization = = = 
 Throughout her duration on the series , Jenny went on a journey from the very first episode , which saw her transform into a selfish egotist and many observers have perceived her as a narcissist , and even as a borderline sociopath . This latter assessment was based early on around her recurrent lying , and the fact she seems to excuse her own cheating in the first few seasons as a corollary of empowerment and as research for her book : which features an experimentalist female character who is evidently herself . Kirshner has described Jenny as mostly being duplicitous and confused . Jenny often acted " utterly impulsive " . Kirshner said it is very hard for people in the series and the viewers to like Jenny because she is " a very despicable character who lies , cheats , behaves and treats other people horribly for no reason , and is extremely selfish , self @-@ indulgent and so terribly truthful ... and she does not hesitate to hide any it . " 
 Matthew Gilbert of The Boston Globe described Jenny stating : " Dreary , confused , introverted narcissist [ ... ] downcast , secretive , almost Goth in her black moodiness , she is the epitome of an unhappy egotist . She is so consumed with the ups and downs of her own depression and self @-@ loathing , she just doesn 't have the energy to look outward . Her misery is her mirror , and she 's forever gazing into it . " New York Magazine describe Jenny as a capricious yet obnoxious type of character adding that she can be patronizing . They also observe her as looking " fabulous , fun , and sexy but her downfall is her annoying side . " Diane Shipley of The Guardian branded Jenny a " whiny egomaniac " . Lesbian magazine Curve brands Jenny a " narcissistic navel @-@ <unk> " . 
 = = = Sexuality = = = 
 When Jenny is introduced on @-@ screen she arrives in Los Angeles to stay with her boyfriend Tim <unk> ( Eric Mabius ) . Tim is described as the person who makes Jenny " feel the safest in the world " . She soon becomes aware her neighbors Tina Kennard ( Laurel Holloman ) and Bette Porter ( Jennifer Beals ) are lesbians . Kirshner said that Jenny becomes intrigued by lesbians and attends their party . They introduce her to Marina Ferrer ( Karina Lombard ) , she senses that Jenny wants some danger in her life . When Marina kisses her , Jenny sees her life going into a tailspin and forces her to reckon with herself . Jenny acknowledges her passion for Marina , but realizes that being unfaithful will ruin " the one stable relationship she 's ever had " . However , they begin an affair . In the show 's companion book " The L Word : Welcome to our planet " , they describe Jenny 's confusion as leaving her " unmoored " . She was alone in battling the heartache , along with facing " an overwhelming identity crisis " in a place that was not yet her home . 
 Kirshner opined that the situation with Jenny was " not pretty " . Jenny loves two people at once , She is the kind of character " who will just grab experiences because of the holes inside her [ ... ] she will leave the casualties in the wake behind her . " Kirshner often pushed and encouraged for more truth . She made Jenny 's sex scenes " darker , painful , and sometimes not so pretty to watch " . Kirshner did not mind portraying sex scenes with other females . She described them as " more fun and easier " and that she genuinely felt there was " nothing to be ashamed of . " For her there was a " comfort level that is beautiful " . Kirshner had never appeared nude in previous roles , but she requested to go nude as Jenny in certain scenes to add to the reality . 
 Chaiken decided to keep audiences guessing about Jenny 's sexuality . She stated that whilst sexuality can be fluid , that Jenny 's sexuality " definitely exists on the edge of fluidity " . This was because she had planned to have Jenny romantically involved mostly with females , but with some males too . 
 = = = Sexual abuse = = = 
 One of Jenny 's storylines in season two was her revelation of being sexually abused as a child . The events were portrayed in a series of flashbacks and dream sequences . Yet , this left viewers confused about what actually happened to Jenny . During an interview with LGBT monthly magazine The Advocate , Chaiken commented about the storyline : " Well we all know it was an incident of sexual abuse . I had not wanted to be more explicit about it than that – one because memory of trauma is very strange . Who knows what happened to Jenny ? Jenny doesn 't necessarily know herself . " 
 Chaiken also didn 't want to portray Jenny 's ordeal in an explicit manner , confirming this she said : " I am loath to portray rape as a filmmaker . I think it is really hard to do it without somehow becoming complicit and exploitative . And so as much as it 's important to talk about it , I wanted to be vague and not milk it . " Chaiken has also admitted that the use of dream sequences involving Jenny were not a successful inclusion , but claimed it was necessary to portray Jenny coming to terms with her abuse . Heather Hogan of AfterEllen criticized the storyline because there was no conclusion to it , also stating it was never explored enough , leading everyone to think she was just a jerk . 
 = = = Transformation = = = 
 Jenny was negatively received amongst TV critics and viewers from the very first episode after she cheated on her nice guy boyfriend , Tim , with another woman for no clear reason . This prompted Chaiken to implement a series of changes to Jenny to help make her more likable . Chaiken defended Jenny stating : " I 'm well aware of the response to Jenny . I love the character , and I love that people are passionate about her . I know there are a lot of people who just can 't stand her . And that 's why it 's so important to have that character in the mix . " Kirshner defended Jenny stating : " Jenny 's a very controversial character . I think the great thing about her is the fact that she 's so flawed . " During season two Jenny is seen coming out , getting her hair cut and becoming best friends with Shane McCutcheon ( Katherine <unk> ) . AfterEllen.com stated that Jenny cutting off her hair was a defining moment in her development because it also symbolized her cutting all of the bad stuff that happened before out of her life . Jenny 's transition continued into season three , Chaiken stated : " We find Jenny coming together , I predict this [ ... ] that Jenny will be more likable and accessible to the audience than she has ever been . She 's recovering . " 
 In 2009 , Chaiken was still confused over Jenny 's bad reception , of why it might be she said : " People read into the character that she was a manipulator , self @-@ absorbed , and a trouble maker who puts other people in service of her own neurotic agenda . I think people react so strongly because Jenny is just a mess in the way that so many people are . " 
 Of her character 's changes after season five , Kirshner stated : " I think she 'll continue to be just like a tumbleweed and a car crash and I 'm happy for that , I don 't want it to be wrapped up . She 'll never be normal and that 's just the way it is . " Responding to the criticism Jenny has received , Kirshner states : " Well , I agree with what 's said about the character for the most part . But again ... it 's my job . So , I mean , it 's a fun character . " 
 = = = Murder = = = 
 In December 2008 it was announced that the show 's creators had decided to kill the character off . It was confirmed that Jenny would still appear throughout the season in a " flashback " format . The first episode of the final season starts with Jenny 's murder . However the final series focuses on the events leading up to her death . Chaiken revealed that each episode would focus and tease with another motive . She described how it would play out , stating : " There 's one character at the beginning of each show who comes forward with the motive of the moment . This would be my reason for killing Jenny . " The storyline was described as a " sub @-@ plot " which would define the final season , but not " overpower " it . However , when the final episode aired there was no reveal to who killed Jenny . Showtime released a mini @-@ series titled " Interrogation Tapes " online , via the official website . Each video featured a fellow character being interviewed over the death of Jenny - although the killer was still not revealed . Kate Aurthur of Los Angeles Times questioned if viewers would still want to watch the season after Jenny is killed . New York later gave a large amount of praise to Jenny commenting : " Jenny Schecter is The L Word , and the death of her is the death of the show . " Diane Shipley of The Guardian stated her death was long overdue . Websites started selling " I killed Jenny Schecter " merchandise . Lydia Martin of The Miami Herald said Chaiken was being manipulative not revealing Jenny 's killer , so viewers would watch their online series . She also wanted to know " who the fuck " killed her because it did not give a " decent " ending to the show . Heather Hogan of AfterEllen stated that Jenny 's ending was a dis @-@ service to the character having never found out who killed her . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 = = = Backstory = = = 
 Jenny grew up in Illinois with her mother Sandy . She disliked her step @-@ father Warren and wanted to leave home as soon as she could . Jenny became a writer of fiction at a young age , she completed her Master of Fine Arts at the Iowa Writer 's Workshop at the University of Iowa . She won a major literary award and has had one of her short stories published . Jenny dates a man named Tim who she moved to Los Angeles to start a new life with . 
 = = = 2004 – 09 = = = 
 In season one , Jenny arrives to stay with her boyfriend Tim . On her very first night in Los Angeles , Jenny attends a party with her neighbors Tina and Bette where she meets Marina . Despite knowing of her relationship with Tim , Marina ambushes Jenny in the toilet and kisses her , and they start an affair , showing Jenny fighting her feelings and questioning her sexuality . Jenny begins to outright lie to Tim and everyone else about her infidelity . When Tim finds out about the affair , he forces Jenny to marry him . She later goes back to Marina , goes on a date with Dana Fairbanks ( Erin Daniels ) and briefly dates a much older woman , Robin ( Anne Ramsay ) . 
 In season two , Tim decides to move out and leave town - his faith and trust in Jenny - and humanity in general - destroyed by her infidelity and outright deception . Jenny becomes best friends with Shane , and invites her to move in . She begins a relationship with Shane 's ex @-@ girlfriend Carmen de la Pica Morales ( Sarah Shahi ) , but Carmen later goes back to Shane . Jenny starts having flashbacks of her childhood in which it is revealed she was sexually abused . Jenny starts writing another book and taking a college writing class to improve her fiction skills . Jenny 's teacher accuses her of being a non @-@ fiction writer because of her prose resembling Jenny 's past . Mark Wayland ( Eric Lively ) , a filmmaker who moves into the house to help pay their rent , starts spying on Jenny , Carmen and Shane , with hidden cameras . Jenny is hurt when the truth is revealed because she trusted him . Jenny becomes depressed and in the season finale she self @-@ harms by cutting herself with razor blades . 
 In season three , Jenny is sent away to a clinic in Illinois home town . There she meets Moira Sweeney ( Daniela Sea ) , who is transitioning into a man . They begin a relationship and return home . Max begins to take the first steps of his transition . Max 's hormone blockers result in his temper flaring ; he starts being slightly abusive to Jenny . Jenny later decides to end their relationship . She then writes a story about all her friends for The New Yorker . 
 In season four , the story later gets turned into a stage play , then a film titled Lez Girls . Marina briefly returns during the play , portraying Jenny 's character . Jenny realizes she is over Marina after being propositioned by her . Jenny becomes more mentally unbalanced when she adopts a dog to get close to a female veterinarian . The vet is a girlfriend of a columnist who gave Jenny 's story a bad review . Pretending to be distraught , Jenny has the dog put down . Jenny begins secretly dating the woman as part of her plan to ruin her girlfriend 's career . When Jenny is found out , she accused of being manipulative and evil . 
 In season five , while filming Lez Girls , she is promoted as the director . Jenny hires Adele Channing ( Malaya Rivera Drew ) as her personal assistant . Jenny then starts a relationship with the film 's biggest star , Niki Stevens ( Kate French ) . While on a camping trip , Jenny and Niki make a private sex tape . Adele then steals the tape and makes numerous copies . Niki , who is a closeted lesbian and needs to stay in the closet for the sake of her career , is shocked when Adele reveals her plans to send the tapes to the media if Jenny doesn 't hand the director 's job to her . She stands down and asks Niki to join her ; they split up when she doesn 't join her . Shane later sleeps with Niki , leaving Jenny heartbroken . 
 In season six , it is revealed that Jenny is dead . The series then reverts three months before the incident , picking up from the previous series finale . Shane 's ex @-@ girlfriend Molly Kroll ( Clementine Ford ) gives Jenny a letter of apology addressed to Shane . Jenny hides the letter so Shane will not find it . Tina defends Jenny after the original film reels of Lez Girls are stolen , preventing the film from being released . Jenny later starts a relationship with Shane . Jenny steals Alice <unk> 's ( <unk> Hailey ) ideas for a play which sparks a feud between the pair . Alice tries to convince everyone that the ideas were hers . Jenny keeps up the pretense and convinces everyone it is an original idea . Alice tries to break Shane and Jenny up to no avail . Jenny then reveals to Dylan Moreland ( Alexandra Hedison ) that Helena Peabody ( Rachel Shelley ) and the rest of their friends are setting her up to find out if she is in love with Helena or her money . Jenny starts teasing Max by buying him feminine gifts for his pregnancy . This alienates Shane and is worsened by her trust issues involving Shane 's fidelity . Shane sleeps with Niki once more and their relationship reaches a breaking point . Helena later finds out that Jenny revealed the truth to Dylan . This makes Helena desperate for revenge on her old friend . Tina and Shane later find Molly 's letter in the loft . Tina then finds the stolen originals of Lez Girls and she goes to confront Jenny . 
 Jenny spends her final days putting together a film of memories for Bette and Tina . The film contains friends past and present sharing their best moments . During the going @-@ away party held for Bette and Tina , who are planning on moving to New York , they watch the film and Jenny is found dead in the swimming pool in the back yard . It is assumed that she either fell or was pushed from the landing above the back steps , which is unfinished and lacks a proper railing . Because so many people have been offended , betrayed and hurt by Jenny , there are many suspects and they are interrogated . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In the book Blood Moon 's GT Gay and Lesbian Film , Darwin Porter brands Jenny " one of the most annoying , needy characters on television " and calls her a " lost damaged soul " . Fellow cast member <unk> Hailey has commented that Jenny is at her best when she is spiraling out of control . Hillary Frey of The New York Observer opined that Jenny provided " voyeuristic pleasure " for straight females in season one . She said she believed Jenny 's confusion to whom she should be with was plausible . Also adding the fact she gradually became self @-@ obsessed – yet still conveyed the " thrill and pleasure of a fresh sexual experience " , while portraying the sadness . 
 Jenny was criticized by Matthew Gilbert of The Boston Globe for her narcissistic tendencies . Kera <unk> of New York magazine stated that " Jenny @-@ bashing " became a spectator sport from her inception . She also described Jenny 's development as going through different stages stating : " Season 1 : Selfish Jenny , Season 2 : <unk> Jenny , Season 3 : Heartless Jenny , Season 4 : Vindictive Jenny , Season 5 : Bitchy and narcissistic Jenny , Season 6 : Dead Jenny . " New York magazine later praised Jenny stating : " We don 't condone Jenny 's narcissism , her prima @-@ donna @-@ ness , or her questionable writing skills . But she is highly entertaining — and more important , her polarizing personality exposes the people around her . " In 2009 by the time season six was on air , the magazine claimed that Jenny was one step away from a Lesbian backlash , joking : " If only she would sing an acoustic version of the show 's ear @-@ melting theme song intermittently during the next episode to ensure that the entire Sapphic nation hits the streets bearing torches and pitchforks , all calling her name . " 
 New York magazine also describe the series and how Jenny took on the whole character traits of the show : " Like Jenny , The L Word was , at any given moment , capricious , obnoxious , patronizing , fabulous , fun , sexy , non sequitur , overreaching , under @-@ reaching , annoying , and yes , unforgettable . Not one other character besides Jenny embodied the whole character of the show . " British lesbian magazine Diva call Jenny " the girl we love to hate . " They also opined that " poor old Jenny didn 't have much going for her from the start . " That after her failed romances with Tim and Marina , she " got all pretentious " when she became an author . They also branded her the most hated lesbian character since Joan Ferguson ( Maggie Kirkpatrick ) on Prisoner : Cell Block H , credited most of the hatred upscaling when she had her dog put down and praised Kirshner for rising to the challenge of playing her . 
 Jennifer Thomas of Pioneer Press compiled a list of 12 of the best TV characters of 2009 ; Jenny was number 7 on her list and stated : " Jenny is a rare combination of destruction , self @-@ destruction , naivety and insanity . You can 't help but want to strangle her , but then she goes all needy and fragile . " She also claimed that the season finale was a let @-@ down , but Jenny would have been happy that even in death she was the center of attention and meddling in her friends lives . 
 Thomas has also said : " Jenny has always been a complex , and fascinating character , who you occasionally want to slap and shake . ( Or , in the case of the dog , just , well , murder her . ) Without her , though , the show wouldn 't be half as interesting . Just when you think you 've seen every bit of crazy Jenny can dish out , she digs deep and finds some new neuroticism . She 's fragile , but she 's steel @-@ spined when it comes to accepting responsibility for the havoc she wreaks in her life and everyone else 's . " 
 Matthew Gilbert of the Boston Globe compiled his list of most annoying TV characters . Jenny came second on the list and he stated : " Wow . The gods of narcissism blessed Jenny <unk> . She was just too , too self @-@ centered . She sucked the life out of everyone who crossed her path . " He also opined that Kirshner 's portrayal of Jenny 's " vanity and chameleon @-@ like qualities " was perhaps too convincing . He perceived scriptwriters as eventually understanding the " profundity of Jenny 's annoying effect " , and decided to escalate it . Gilbert concluded that in early seasons , when writers wanted the audience 's sympathy with Jenny 's journey of self @-@ realization , he " wanted her to leave The Planet for good . " Regarding Jenny 's mental state , Lydia Martin from The Miami Herald quipped " ( Marina ) <unk> into The Planet just to fuck with Jenny 's head . As if Jenny 's head needed the encouragement " . 
 = 2012 Tour de France , Stage 11 to Stage 20 = 
 Stage 11 of the 2012 Tour de France was contested on 12 July and the race concluded with Stage 20 on 22 July . The second half of the race was situated entirely within France ; starting with a mountain stage from Albertville to La Toussuire @-@ Les Sybelles – incorporating two hors catégorie climbs during the stage – before the customary race @-@ concluding stage finish on the Champs @-@ Élysées in Paris . 
 Following his victory in the ninth stage individual time trial , Team Sky rider Bradley Wiggins held the lead into the second half of the race . He maintained his race lead throughout the second half of the race , holding a lead of 2 minutes and 5 seconds – transpiring from stage 9 – until the race 's final individual time trial , held on the penultimate day of the race . Wiggins won the stage by 1 minute and 16 seconds ahead of his team @-@ mate Chris Froome , and Wiggins ultimately held his lead into Paris the following day to win the race overall by 3 minutes and 21 seconds , to become the first rider from Great Britain to win a Grand Tour race . Froome finished second , while the final podium was completed by former Vuelta a España winner Vincenzo Nibali , riding for the Liquigas – Cannondale team , who was the only other rider to finish within 10 minutes of Wiggins ' final overall time . 
 Only Wiggins ' team @-@ mate Mark Cavendish was able to win more than one stage during the second half of the race , winning two of the final three stages including a fourth consecutive final stage victory in Paris . This victory allowed him to become the most prolific sprinter at the Tour de France with 23 stage victories , surpassing the record of 22 which had been held for 48 years by France 's André Darrigade . Three French riders – Pierre Rolland , Pierrick Fédrigo and Thomas Voeckler – each took a stage victory during the second half of the race , with Voeckler 's victory in the queen stage helping in part for him to become the eventual winner of the mountains classification . Other stage victories were taken by David Millar , André Greipel , Luis León Sánchez and Alejandro Valverde . 
 During the fourteenth stage of the race , Wiggins neutralised the peloton on the descent from the Mur de Péguère climb , after carpet tacks were found to be responsible for around thirty punctures on the climb itself . Among those delayed was the defending champion Cadel Evans , who suffered three punctures on the climb and had lost around two minutes before Wiggins called a truce in the main field , allowing the breakaway to finish the stage over eighteen minutes clear of the pack . Following the raid of the Cofidis team hotel during the first rest day , the second rest day was marked by a positive drugs test by RadioShack – Nissan rider Fränk Schleck , the third @-@ placed rider from the 2011 race . Schleck quit the race after traces of <unk> , a banned sulfonamide diuretic drug , were found in the A @-@ sample of his urine , and was later confirmed by the B @-@ sample . 
 = = Classification standings = = 
 = = Stage 11 = = 
 12 July 2012 — Albertville to La Toussuire @-@ Les Sybelles , 148 km ( 92 @.@ 0 mi ) 
 The stage was spent entirely in the Alps with two hors catégorie climbs – the Col de la Madeleine after 40 km ( 24 @.@ 9 mi ) and the Col de la Croix de Fer after 93 km ( 57 @.@ 8 mi ) ; both of which had summits at 2 @,@ 000 m ( 6 @,@ 562 ft ) or higher – before the finish at La Toussuire @-@ Les Sybelles . The Col de la Croix de Fer was the highest point reached in the Alps in the 2012 Tour , so the leader across the summit would win the Souvenir Henri Desgrange . The finish was a first @-@ category climb of 18 km ( 11 @.@ 2 mi ) at an average gradient of 6 @.@ 1 % . Much like the previous day , a large breakaway was formed after several different groups advanced clear of the main field as they approached the first climb of the day , at the Col de la Madeleine . 
 In total , there were 28 riders in the group at one point ; at the top of the climb , the pace picked up and the group splintered into several mini @-@ groups as Omega Pharma – Quick @-@ Step 's Peter Velits scored the maximum points on offer for the climb , followed closely by Astana rider Fredrik Kessiakoff . Velits and Kessiakoff pulled out a 45 @-@ second advantage on the descent , but eight riders eventually bridged the gap and rejoined the duo before the Col de la Croix de Fer . Team Europcar had two riders in the group , with Christophe Kern setting the pace for team @-@ mate Pierre Rolland , and the tempo was again splitting the group up . Back in the peloton , young rider classification leader Tejay van Garderen ( BMC Racing Team ) attacked on the climb , as the benchmark for a later move by his team @-@ mate Cadel Evans . They acquired a 30 @-@ second lead at one point before Team Sky brought Bradley Wiggins back up to them . Kessiakoff just bettered Rolland for the mountains points atop the Col de la Croix de Fer , with the peloton around two minutes behind . 
 The group containing Wiggins and other overall contenders dropped a minute further back on the early parts of the Col du Mollard , where the breakaway consisted of Velits , Rolland , Saxo Bank – Tinkoff Bank 's Chris Anker Sørensen and Robert Kišerlovski of Astana , with Movistar Team 's Vasil Kiryienka later joining up . Rolland crashed on the descent from the climb , having taken first place points over the summit , while Sørensen was in difficulty to stay with the lead . Liquigas – Cannondale rider Vincenzo Nibali tried to breach the peloton on two occasions on the final climb , catching up with Lotto – Belisol 's Jurgen Van den Broeck who had escaped with eighth stage winner , FDJ – BigMat 's Thibaut Pinot . Evans cracked on the climb , losing time to Wiggins , team @-@ mate Chris Froome and other contenders . Froome put Wiggins into difficulty at one point , but backed the pace down via his team radio . Up front , Rolland was the last remaining rider of the breakaway , and soloed to his second Tour stage win , and his team 's second stage win in a row . Pinot led the yellow jersey group across the line almost a minute down , while Evans lost almost 90 seconds on Wiggins , Froome and Nibali , who filled the top three places overall at the conclusion of the stage . 
 = = Stage 12 = = 
 13 July 2012 — Saint @-@ Jean @-@ de @-@ Maurienne to Annonay @-@ <unk> , 226 km ( 140 @.@ 4 mi ) 
 With a parcours of 226 km ( 140 @.@ 4 mi ) , the twelfth stage was the longest of the Tour ; the race left the Alps but only after a pair of first @-@ category climbs – the 1 @,@ 188 m ( 3 @,@ 898 ft ) Col du Grand Cucheron and the 1 @,@ 134 m ( 3 @,@ 720 ft ) Col du Granier – in the first 80 km ( 49 @.@ 7 mi ) , although there was also a third @-@ category climb of the Côte d <unk> within the final 20 km ( 12 @.@ 4 mi ) , before the finish in Annonay @-@ <unk> . As had been the case in the previous two stages , there was another large breakaway group that set the tempo outside of the peloton in the early running . At its maximum , the group contained nineteen riders , but it had been reduced to eleven by the time the group reached the foot of the opening climb , the Col du Grand Cucheron . 
 Robert Kišerlovski of Astana took the maximum points on offer for the climb , to help protect the lead of the classification , held by team @-@ mate Fredrik Kessiakoff . Cofidis rider David Moncoutié tried to bridge the gap to reach the lead group , but crashed heavily on the descent from the climb . He had to abandon the race with abrasions . Kišerlovski also took maximum points on the Col du Granier , which made Kessiakoff 's lead safe for another day . After reaching the mid @-@ stage feeding zone in Saint @-@ Joseph @-@ de @-@ Rivière , the lead group split and five riders – David Millar of Garmin – Sharp , Ag2r – La Mondiale rider Jean @-@ Christophe Péraud , Euskaltel – Euskadi 's Egoi Martínez , Kišerlovski and Cyril Gautier , looking to give Team Europcar a third win in a row – accelerated away to a near 13 @-@ minute lead at its maximum . With none of the riders being in overall contention , the peloton let the group go and decided not to chase them down before the finish . 
 None of the quintet attacked each other , and they remained as one into the final 5 km ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) of the stage . Kišerlovski played his hand first , launching an attack with 3 @.@ 5 km ( 2 @.@ 2 mi ) remaining , but Péraud closed down the move almost immediately ; a secondary move took Martínez and Gautier out of the equation for the stage victory . Péraud accelerated again and Millar latched onto his wheel with Kišerlovski unable to follow the pair . Millar took the front inside the final 1 km ( 0 @.@ 6 mi ) , but Péraud remained on his wheel until just before 200 m ( 660 ft ) to go ; he launched his attack , but Millar beat him to the line for his fourth individual stage victory at the Tour – his first since 2003 – and the fourth different British rider to take a stage win at the 2012 Tour . The peloton was led across the line almost eight minutes down by the top two in the points classification , Orica – GreenEDGE 's Matthew Goss and Liquigas – Cannondale 's Peter Sagan . Sagan protested the sprint finish of Goss , feeling that he had impeded him in the closing metres . Race officials agreed with Sagan and demoted Goss to seventh – helped in part by a one @-@ second time gap between them and the rest of the field – and penalised him 30 points in the classification , and 30 seconds overall . 
 = = Stage 13 = = 
 14 July 2012 — Saint @-@ Paul @-@ Trois @-@ Châteaux to Cap d 'Agde , 217 km ( 134 @.@ 8 mi ) 
 This transitional stage took the Tour to the Mediterranean Sea . The day 's only categorised climb over Mont @-@ Saint @-@ Clair at Sète and the wind off the sea were two potential disruptions to the race in the final 28 km ( 17 @.@ 4 mi ) of the stage . For the celebration of Bastille Day , the breakaway had extensive French representation , with five of the eight @-@ rider move – Cofidis rider Samuel Dumoulin , FDJ – BigMat 's Mathieu Ladagnous , Jimmy Engoulvent of Saur – Sojasun , Maxime Bouet ( Ag2r – La Mondiale ) and Jérôme Pineau , representing the Omega Pharma – Quick @-@ Step team – from the country . The group was rounded out by Pablo Urtasun of Euskaltel – Euskadi , Saxo Bank – Tinkoff Bank 's Michael Mørkøv and Argos – Shimano rider Roy Curvers . 
 The octet made their escape in the opening 20 km ( 12 @.@ 4 mi ) of the stage , and their advantage eventually stemmed to a maximum of almost 10 minutes at the 35 km ( 21 @.@ 7 mi ) mark , before Orica – GreenEDGE sent riders forward to the front of the peloton in order to bring the gap down . Urtasun led the group across the line at the stage 's intermediate sprint point in Mas @-@ de @-@ Londres , but behind , points classification leader Peter Sagan ( Liquigas – Cannondale ) was able to launch his sprint for the line before Orica – GreenEDGE 's sprinter Matthew Goss did so , and extended his lead in the standings as a result . Pineau looked to go clear with 65 km ( 40 @.@ 4 mi ) to go , but his move was anticipated by Mørkøv , before he attacked of his own accord . Mørkøv held a one @-@ minute advantage over his former breakaway companions all the way to the foot of the Mont @-@ Saint @-@ Clair , but the peloton were able to close the advantage to them all before the summit of the climb . 
 BMC Racing Team 's Cadel Evans and Lotto – Belisol rider Jurgen Van den Broeck both attacked on the Mont @-@ Saint @-@ Clair , and their accelerated pace ripped the peloton apart , with many riders falling off the back of the peloton . Around 25 riders remained in the lead group , with only Sagan and Van Den Broeck 's team @-@ mate André Greipel out of the sprinters making the group . Further moves came from Astana rider Alexander Vinokourov , Michael Albasini of Orica – GreenEDGE , and Rabobank 's Luis León Sánchez , but they were closed down by Lotto – Belisol – looking after Greipel for the finish – and Team Sky for race leader Bradley Wiggins . Wiggins led out team @-@ mate Edvald Boasson Hagen for the sprint , but Greipel launched his own off his wheel and managed to fend off a quick @-@ finishing Sagan to take his third stage win of the Tour by half a wheel , the first such feat by a German rider since Erik Zabel in 2001 . 
 = = Stage 14 = = 
 15 July 2012 — Limoux to Foix , 191 km ( 118 @.@ 7 mi ) 
 The race entered the lower Pyrenees with two first @-@ category climbs ; the 1 @,@ 517 m ( 4 @,@ 977 ft ) Port de <unk> and the Mur de Péguère , reaching an elevation of 1 @,@ 375 m ( 4 @,@ 511 ft ) . The Mur de Péguère was featuring for the first time in the Tour de France ; with sections of the climb in excess of 16 % . Small attacks set the course of the early running of the stage , with the field remaining as a whole for the first hour of racing after the attacks were closed down shortly after . It was not until a quarter of the way through the stage – some 50 km ( 31 @.@ 1 mi ) in – that a move was allowed to be established on the road , when eleven riders went clear including the points classification leader Peter Sagan of Liquigas – Cannondale , who was looking to extend his points advantage over his rivals André Greipel ( Lotto – Belisol ) and Orica – GreenEDGE rider Matthew Goss . 
 By the time that Sagan had crossed over the intermediate sprint line first , at Tarascon @-@ sur @-@ Ariège , the leaders ' advantage was already over thirteen minutes , and was increasing by the kilometre due to the wet conditions on the roads . At the Port de <unk> , the eleven riders were fifteen minutes clear when Cyril Gautier ( Team Europcar ) developed a problem with his bike and had to stop for a change of equipment , losing around 40 seconds to his ten companions . He would not bridge back to them , and ultimately lost fourteen minutes to them by the stage finish . Rabobank 's Luis León Sánchez attacked on the Mur de Péguère , with only Philippe Gilbert ( BMC Racing Team ) , Euskaltel – Euskadi rider Gorka Izagirre and Sandy Casar of FDJ – BigMat able to follow originally . Sagan later brought himself back up to the group , before Casar pulled a few seconds clear over the summit . 
 At the summit of the climb , carpet tacks were thrown onto the road causing as many as thirty riders to puncture , including Gilbert 's team @-@ mates Cadel Evans and Steve Cummings , while race leader Bradley Wiggins ( Team Sky ) changed his bike as a precaution . As a result , Wiggins called a temporary halt to the racing on the descent . At this time , Pierre Rolland ( Team Europcar ) attacked and gained a two @-@ minute margin over the peloton , but a combination of the tempo set by Lotto – Belisol and Liquigas – Cannondale , and Rolland realising the situation behind – later apologising for his actions – meant that he was brought back to the field , and they continued to slowly roll towards the finish in Foix . At the front , Sánchez attacked with around 11 @.@ 5 km ( 7 @.@ 1 mi ) remaining , and eventually soloed his way to a fourth career stage victory at the Tour . Sagan led home a group of four riders almost a minute behind , while the peloton eventually crossed the line over eighteen minutes behind Sánchez . 
 = = Stage 15 = = 
 16 July 2012 — <unk> to Pau , 158 @.@ 5 km ( 98 @.@ 5 mi ) 
 The stage ran through the foothills of the Pyrenees , in the Gers and Pyrénées @-@ Atlantiques departments . There were three minor climbs in the final third of the stage , which was expected to suit the remaining sprinters . Like the previous day , small attacks set the course of the early running of the stage , with the field remaining as a whole for the first hour of racing after the attacks were unsuccessful . The most prominent of these was a five @-@ rider move , involving Omega Pharma – Quick @-@ Step 's Bert <unk> , Garmin – Sharp rider David Millar , Andriy Hryvko of Astana , Rui Costa ( Movistar Team ) and Yukiya Arashiro , representing Team Europcar . The peloton did not allow them to gain an advantage of more than 30 seconds , and they were eventually brought back to the main field at the 60 km ( 37 @.@ 3 mi ) mark . 
 Another five @-@ rider group formed immediately thereafter , consisting of Christian Vande Velde ( Garmin – Sharp ) , Arashiro 's team @-@ mate Thomas Voeckler , FDJ – BigMat 's Pierrick Fédrigo , Cofidis rider Samuel Dumoulin and Dries Devenyns of Omega Pharma – Quick @-@ Step . Saxo Bank – Tinkoff Bank rider Nicki Sørensen chased the quintet down for around 20 km ( 12 @.@ 4 mi ) , and eventually made the group a sextet , after his team set the tempo in the main field for a while . The peloton had reduced the gap to the leaders to around five minutes at one point , but eventually decided to allow the breakaway to battle it out for stage honours . Voeckler took maximum points on all three categorised climbs prior to the closing 10 km ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) , before Sørensen launched the first sustained attacks prior to the finish . However , Fédrigo and Vande Velde gained some ground with their attack at 6 @.@ 5 km ( 4 @.@ 0 mi ) to go , and they contested the sprint in Pau ; Vande Velde tried to launch his sprint first , but Fédrigo saw the move and remained in front , to take his second stage win in Pau – after a previous victory in 2010 – and fourth of his career . The remaining members of the breakaway came in before the main field , with Lotto – Belisol 's André Greipel leading them home 11 ' 50 " down on Fédrigo . 
 = = Stage 16 = = 
 18 July 2012 — Pau to Bagnères @-@ de @-@ Luchon , 197 km ( 122 @.@ 4 mi ) 
 After the second and final rest day , the race entered the high mountains with the queen stage crossing two hors catégorie climbs – the Col d 'Aubisque and the Col du Tourmalet – followed by the first @-@ category climbs of the Col d 'Aspin and the Col de Peyresourde , completing the so @-@ called " Circle of Death " , before dropping down to the finish in Bagnères @-@ de @-@ Luchon . The first rider over the Tourmalet – the highest point reached in both the Pyrenees and the 2012 Tour as a whole at 2 @,@ 115 m ( 6 @,@ 939 ft ) – received the Souvenir Jacques Goddet . 
 Almost forty riders – around a quarter of the race 's peloton at the start of the stage – made it into the early breakaway after around 25 km ( 15 @.@ 5 mi ) , including three riders in the lower reaches of the top twenty placings overall , mountains classification leader Fredrik Kessiakoff ( Astana ) and stage @-@ winners Thomas Voeckler of Team Europcar and FDJ – BigMat rider Pierrick Fédrigo . Voeckler and Kessiakoff led the group over the top of the Col d 'Aubisque , with the group remaining together until the foot of the Col du Tourmalet . Here , the group started to fragment after Garmin – Sharp 's Dan Martin accelerated with Kessiakoff and Rabobank 's Laurens ten Dam in tow . BMC Racing Team rider George Hincapie , Chris Anker Sørensen of Saxo Bank – Tinkoff Bank and Saur – Sojasun 's Brice Feillu later joined the group up front , but only Voeckler and Feillu remained together at the top of the climb , where Voeckler further cut into Kessiakoff 's polka @-@ dot jersey lead . The peloton crossed the summit around ten minutes later . 
 Voeckler and Feillu had an advantage of almost two minutes at the bottom of the Col d 'Aspin , while Martin – on his own after being the last to be dropped by the French pairing out front – was joined by Hincapie and six other riders . With added pressure from Sørensen and RadioShack – Nissan rider Jens Voigt , Kessiakoff was dropped by the group , and aided the efforts for Voeckler to take the lead in the mountains classification . Back in the peloton , the tempo set by Liquigas – Cannondale and Team Sky was reducing the numbers in the group , and eventually , BMC Racing Team 's Cadel Evans lost contact on the climb . However , with team @-@ mates around him , he was able to rejoin the group before the final climb of the Col de Peyresourde . A third of the way up the climb , Voeckler left his companion Feillu behind , and set off on a solo attack . Evans again fell off the back of the group , as Vincenzo Nibali ( Liquigas – Cannondale ) decided to make a preliminary attack on his rivals , Team Sky 's Bradley Wiggins and Chris Froome . 
 Wiggins and Froome were able to make their way back up to Nibali , sandwiching him with Froome on the front and Wiggins at the back of the trio . Voeckler cemented his mountains classification lead by reaching the summit of the Col de Peyresourde first , with the remaining riders of the breakaway spread out between him and the group of Wiggins , Froome and Nibali . Sørensen trailed Voeckler by a minute @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half . Nibali attacked twice more on the steepest part of the climb , but Wiggins shadowed the move and kept himself up with Nibali . At the front , Voeckler descended towards the finish in Bagnères @-@ de @-@ Luchon with a 1 ' 40 " lead over Sørensen , and held the lead to the end for his second stage win of the race , and repeated his 2010 stage victory in the town . Sørensen remained 1 ' 40 " behind in second , while Euskaltel – Euskadi rider Gorka Izagirre bested Alexander Vinokourov ( Astana ) for third place . Nibali , Wiggins and Froome came in seven minutes after Voeckler , while Evans lost almost five minutes to the trio , falling from fourth to seventh in the general classification behind Lotto – Belisol rider Jurgen Van den Broeck , RadioShack – Nissan 's Haimar Zubeldia and his own team @-@ mate Tejay van Garderen . Cofidis rider Jan Ghyselinck finished four seconds outside the stage 's cutoff time , but he was given a reprieve by the <unk> to continue in the Tour , making him the new <unk> rouge . 
 = = Stage 17 = = 
 19 July 2012 — Bagnères @-@ de @-@ Luchon to Peyragudes , 143 @.@ 5 km ( 89 @.@ 2 mi ) 
 The final day in the mountains saw the race cross the first @-@ category Col de Menté and the second @-@ category Col des Ares before reaching the last hors catégorie climb of the Tour , the Port de Balès . The race then dropped down , before returning over the uncategorised Col de Peyresourde – crossing the summit for the second consecutive day – followed by a summit finish at the Peyragudes ski resort . With a scheduled parcours of 143 @.@ 5 km ( 89 @.@ 2 mi ) , the stage was the shortest of the mountain stages of the 2012 Tour . 
 Small attacks set the course of the early running of the stage , with the field remaining as a whole for the first half @-@ hour of racing after several attacks were closed down before a gap could be established . It was not until the Col de Menté that the early foundations of a breakaway were laid with the two mountains classification combatants , Team Europcar 's Thomas Voeckler and Fredrik Kessiakoff of Astana again battling it out for points ; Voeckler prevailed ahead of Kessiakoff . The two riders were also a part of a seven @-@ rider breakaway that formed on the descent from the climb . The group was also bolstered for a time by Liquigas – Cannondale rider Vincenzo Nibali , third place in the general classification behind Team Sky duo Bradley Wiggins and Chris Froome , but he eventually sat up from the group as the breakaway was not likely to be given an advantage if Nibali was in the group . 
 A ten @-@ rider chase group formed behind the leaders , and eventually joined up with them around halfway through the stage . Voeckler bettered Kessiakoff at the Côte de <unk> , to extend his lead in the classification ; the peloton were around three minutes behind , but closing gradually . Following a move by a pair of Euskaltel – Euskadi riders , Rui Costa ( Movistar Team ) attacked out of the group as a set @-@ up for his team leader Alejandro Valverde , who followed his move several kilometres later . Costa paced him for a time before Valverde went clear on his own , and built up a 35 @-@ second lead at the summit of the Port de Balès , while the peloton had closed by half a minute to trail him by around two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half minutes . The peloton caught the group of chasers including Voeckler , Omega Pharma – Quick @-@ Step rider Levi Leipheimer and Blel Kadri of Ag2r – La Mondiale , on the descent with only Valverde remaining ahead as they hit the Col de Peyresourde . 
 For the second ascent of the Col de Peyresourde during the race , the riders would take the climb in the opposite direction from what they had done on the previous day , before a slight descent and then the final climb to Peyragudes . Valverde held a lead of 1 ' 20 " at the top of the uncategorised pass , with only a handful of riders remaining with the group of the maillot jaune , including the top four in the general classification . Valverde was holding his own off the front , and the gap was fluctuating between 1 ' 20 " and 1 ' 30 " for several kilometres as they neared the summit , which came at the flamme rouge point . Lotto – Belisol 's Jurgen Van den Broeck tried to attack , but was pulled back by the Froome and Wiggins tandem , which then accelerated away from their rivals and set off after Valverde . Ultimately , they came up short due to Froome having to wait three times for Wiggins as the race leader was several metres behind his domestique on certain parts of the climb . Valverde achieved his fourth career stage victory at the Tour , nineteen seconds ahead of Froome and Wiggins , who in turn extended their advantage over the rest of the field . 
 = = Stage 18 = = 
 20 July 2012 — Blagnac to Brive @-@ la @-@ Gaillarde , 222 @.@ 5 km ( 138 @.@ 3 mi ) 
 Despite being ranked a " flat stage " , there were four ranked climbs during the day which had the potential to produce a successful break from the peloton . In the early kilometres of the stage , a group of six riders instigated the first breakaway of the day , but after the peloton allowed them to create an advantage on the roads , they were brought back to the confines of the peloton not long later . There was then an uneventful period in the action , with no major attacks going off the front , until the first categorised climb of the day , at the Côte de Saint @-@ Georges . 
 On the climb itself , Saxo Bank – Tinkoff Bank rider Nick Nuyens and Team Europcar 's Yukiya Arashiro attacked up the hill , before they were joined by fourteen other riders to create the second major breakaway of the day 's stage . The best @-@ placed rider amongst the group was Rui Costa of the Movistar Team – just under half an hour behind the race leader Bradley Wiggins of Team Sky – who was fresh from his set @-@ up work for team @-@ mate Alejandro Valverde the previous day . Around halfway through the stage , the advantage between the sixteen leaders and the main field reached its highest point of the day , at the 3 ' 30 " mark , before BMC Racing Team and Ag2r – La Mondiale set the tempo to start bringing the leaders back to the peloton . In the peloton , several riders fell to the ground after a dog ran into their path , slowing the pace as a whole . Among those involved was BMC Racing Team 's Philippe Gilbert , who had to be restrained when back on his feet . Liquigas – Cannondale sent their riders forward to set the pace on the front of the group in the hopes of setting Peter Sagan up for a fourth stage victory of the race , and the gap reduced under two minutes inside of 50 km ( 31 @.@ 1 mi ) remaining . 
 At the head of the race , Garmin – Sharp 's David Millar attacked on the Côte de Souillac , where moves from Arashiro and Wiggins ' team @-@ mate Edvald Boasson Hagen followed not long later . Five riders – Lotto – Belisol rider Adam Hansen , Alexander Vinokourov of Astana , Nuyens , Luca Paolini ( Team Katusha ) and FDJ – BigMat 's Jérémy Roy – came together at the bottom of the Côte de <unk> @-@ sur @-@ <unk> , before Nuyens and Roy were dropped on the climb . They were replaced in the group by Ag2r – La Mondiale 's Nicolas Roche , RadioShack – Nissan rider Andreas Klöden and Luis León Sánchez of Rabobank , with the six riders remaining together off the front into the finishing straight in Brive @-@ la @-@ Gaillarde . Roche and Sánchez attacked for the line , but both riders were usurped by the finish of Team Sky sprinter Mark Cavendish following a lead @-@ out from Boasson Hagen . Cavendish went around the outside of the pairing and took his 22nd Tour stage victory on the line , matching the tallies of Lance Armstrong , and André Darrigade for fourth place in the all @-@ time Tour stage wins list , and tying Darrigade 's record for victories by a sprinter . Orica – GreenEDGE 's Matthew Goss and Sagan also managed to get ahead of Sánchez and Roche in the closing stages , for second and third places respectively , but were around ten lengths behind Cavendish at the finish . 
 = = Stage 19 = = 
 21 July 2012 — <unk> to Chartres , 53 @.@ 5 km ( 33 @.@ 2 mi ) , ( ITT ) 
 The penultimate stage of the Tour was the final individual time trial with good roads into the centre of the city of Chartres . With other noted specialists within the time trial discipline having already abandoned the race , the top two riders in the general classification – Team Sky pairing Bradley Wiggins and Chris Froome – were expected to be the favourites for the stage , having finished first and second in the ninth stage time trial . As was customary of time trial stages , the riders set off in reverse order from where they were ranked in the general classification at the end of the previous stage . Thus , Jimmy Engoulvent of Saur – Sojasun , who , in 153rd place , trailed overall leader Wiggins by 3 hours , 49 minutes and 9 seconds , was the first rider to set off on the stage . 
 Engoulvent recorded a time of 1 hour , 12 minutes and 49 seconds for the course as he was first to reach the line ; but his lead was short @-@ lived as several minutes later , Cofidis rider Julien <unk> went round the course over two minutes quicker than the time of Engoulvent . Garmin – Sharp 's Johan Vansummeren was the first rider to record a time below 1 hour and 10 minutes with a time of 1 hour , 9 minutes and 24 seconds , before Argos – Shimano rider Patrick Gretsch recorded a time almost three minutes quicker , having passed the two riders that started directly before him – at one @-@ minute intervals – on the course , and another on the finish line . Gretsch 's time held for a considerable amount of time – around 2 hours – and was ultimately good enough for him to place sixth in the final stage results . It was not until the 88th rider to start the course that his time was beaten . Luis León Sánchez of Rabobank set the best time at each of the three intermediate time @-@ checks along the 53 @.@ 5 km ( 33 @.@ 2 mi ) parcours and eventually crossed the finish line in a time of 1 hour , 6 minutes and 3 seconds , to surpass Gretsch 's time by thirty @-@ eight seconds . 
 The Spanish national champion 's time held right into the final riders to take to the course , now at three @-@ minute intervals for the last 14 riders . BMC Racing Team 's Tejay van Garderen , the holder of the white jersey for the young rider classification leader , went beneath Sánchez 's time at the first split , but faded on the rest of the course and eventually finished 44 seconds outside of his time in third place . He had already passed his team @-@ mate Cadel Evans , who had started three minutes ahead , on course , and the Boulder , Colorado native later dedicated his performance to the victims of the shooting in nearby Aurora . Only Froome and Wiggins beat the time of van Garderen at the first time @-@ point , with Wiggins beating Froome by a dozen seconds ; Wiggins continued to extend his lead on course , holding a 54 @-@ second buffer at the second time @-@ check , and 1 ' 15 " at the third . Froome crossed the line in a time of 1 hour , 5 minutes and 29 seconds to beat Sánchez 's time by 34 seconds , but Wiggins achieved his second stage win of the race , adding one second to his advantage between the third time @-@ check and the finish ; punching the air as he crossed the finish line . The only change in positions for the general classification inside the top ten was Evans being passed for sixth place by RadioShack – Nissan 's Haimar Zubeldia – despite nearly hitting a barrier during his pass through the course – by a margin of eight seconds . 
 = = Stage 20 = = 
 22 July 2012 — Rambouillet to Paris ( Champs @-@ Élysées ) , 120 km ( 74 @.@ 6 mi ) 
 The Tour concluded with the now @-@ customary stage finish on the Champs @-@ Élysées in Paris . The stage had an easy start – with two fourth @-@ category climbs 5 km ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) apart , inside the first third of the stage – before eight high @-@ speed laps , followed by the finish , which was expected to result in a sprint for the line . In keeping with tradition , the final stage began at a slow pace , and was a largely ceremonial procession through the suburbs of Paris . Shortly after the riders reached the circuit in the centre of the city , racing began in earnest , and after various unsuccessful attempts , the main break was initiated by Jens Voigt ( RadioShack – Nissan ) and Lampre – ISD 's Danilo Hondo with around 40 km ( 24 @.@ 9 mi ) to go . 
 Hondo led the field across the final intermediate sprint point of the race , with Voigt just behind . Hondo did not remain out front however , as Voigt was eventually joined by ten other riders to form the breakaway , with their advantage eventually reaching a maximum of around thirty seconds in the closing stages . Hondo later crashed on the final lap , along with Ag2r – La Mondiale rider Mickaël Cherel , but both riders eventually remounted to finish the stage . As the peloton closed down the leaders ' advantage , mainly through the work of Team Sky , Liquigas – Cannondale and Saxo Bank – Tinkoff Bank , the breakaway lost members , until they were all caught with 3 km ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) remaining . The lead @-@ out train for Mark Cavendish ( Team Sky ) , held the lead of the race through the final corners , and he won the final stage for the fourth successive year , becoming the first incumbent world champion to win on the Champs @-@ Élysées . His 23rd stage victory allowed him to move into fourth place on the all @-@ time Tour stage wins list , while the leaders of the four classifications finished in the peloton to secure their victories , and the traditional prize @-@ giving was made shortly after the race . 
 = Ashland , Oregon = 
 Ashland is a city in Jackson County , in the State of Oregon . It lies along Interstate 5 approximately 16 mi ( 26 km ) north of the California border and near the south end of the Bear Creek Valley , an arm of the Rogue Valley . As of July 1 , 2013 , the city 's population was estimated to be 20 @,@ 713 . 
 The city is the home of Southern Oregon University ( <unk> ) and the Oregon Shakespeare Festival ( OSF ) . These are important to Ashland 's economy , which also depends on restaurants , galleries , and retail stores that cater to playgoers and other visitors . Lithia Park along Ashland Creek , historic buildings , and a paved intercity bike trail provide additional tourist attractions . 
 Ashland , originally called Ashland Mills , was named after Ashland County , Ohio , the original home of founder Abel Helman , and secondarily for Ashland , Kentucky , where other founders had family connections . Ashland has a mayor @-@ council government assisted by citizen committees . Historically , its liberal politics have differed , often sharply , with much of the rest of southwest Oregon . 
 = = History = = 
 Prior to the arrival of settlers in mid @-@ 19th century , the Shasta people lived in the valley along the creek approximately where Ashland is located . Early Hudson 's Bay Company hunters and trappers , following the Siskiyou Trail , passed through the site in the 1820s . In the late 1840s , settlers ( mostly American ) following the Applegate Trail began passing through the area . By the early 1850s , the Donation Land Act brought many white settlers into the Rogue Valley and into conflict with its native people . These often violent clashes continued until 1856 . 
 In 1851 , gold was discovered at Rich Gulch , a tributary of Jackson Creek , and a tent city developed on its banks , the area later known as Jacksonville . Settlers arrived in the Ashland area in January 1852 , including Robert B. <unk> , Sylvester Pease , Abel D Helman , Eber Emery , and others . Helman and <unk> filed the first donation land claims in Ashland . Helman and Emery built a sawmill along what they called Mill Creek ( later renamed Ashland Creek ) to turn timber into lumber for settlers . In 1854 , they and another settler , M. B. Morris , built a second mill , Ashland <unk> Mills , to grind local wheat into flour . The community around the mill became known as Ashland Mills . A post office was established in Ashland Mills in 1855 with Helman as postmaster . 
 During the 1860s and 1870s the community grew , establishing a school , churches , businesses , and a large employer , Ashland Woolen Mills , which produced clothing and blankets from local wool . In 1871 , the Post Office dropped " Mills " from Ashland 's name . In 1872 Reverend J. H. Skidmore opened a college , Ashland Academy , a predecessor of Southern Oregon University . 
 In 1887 , Portland , Oregon , and San Francisco , California , were joined by rail at Ashland . Until 1926 , when most rail service began taking a different route ( east through Klamath Falls to avoid the steep grade through the Siskiyou Mountains ) , Ashland thrived on rail trade of local products , including pears , peaches , and apples . 
 In 1908 , the Women 's Civic Improvement Club petitioned for the creation of a park — Ashland Canyon Park — along Ashland Creek . The discovery of lithia water near Emigrant Lake around the same time led to a plan to establish a mineral spa at the park . Voters approved bonds to pay for the project , which included piping the mineral water from its source to Ashland . The town engaged John McLaren , landscape architect of San Francisco 's Golden Gate Park , to design the park , renamed Lithia Springs Park , later shortened to Lithia Park . Although the park was popular , the mineral spa plans proved too expensive for local taxpayers and were abandoned in 1916 . Meanwhile , entrepreneurs took to bottling and selling mineral waters from the area 's springs . 
 During the Fourth of July celebration in 1935 , Angus L. <unk> arranged the first performances of what would become the Oregon Shakespeare Festival . The festival grew during the 20th century , and has become an award @-@ winning and internationally @-@ known regional theater company . 
 Many of Ashland 's historic buildings have been preserved and restored . The city has 48 individual structures and 2 historic districts ( the Ashland Railroad Addition District and the Downtown District ) on the National Register of Historic Places . The structures include the Enders Building ( home of the Columbia Hotel ) , which from 1910 to 1928 contained the largest mercantile establishment between Sacramento and Portland . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Ashland is at 1 @,@ 949 feet ( 594 m ) above sea level in the foothills of the Siskiyou and Cascade ranges , about 15 miles ( 24 km ) north of the California border on Interstate 5 ( I @-@ 5 ) . About 10 miles ( 16 km ) south of Ashland and 5 miles ( 8 km ) north of the California border is Siskiyou Summit , which at 4 @,@ 310 feet ( 1 @,@ 310 m ) is the highest point on I @-@ 5 . Ashland is about 12 miles ( 19 km ) south of Medford and about 300 miles ( 480 km ) south of Portland . According to the United States Census Bureau , the city has a total area of about 6 @.@ 6 square miles ( 17 @.@ 1 km2 ) , all land . 
 Ashland Creek and its tributaries begin on the flanks of Mount Ashland , at 7 @,@ 533 feet ( 2 @,@ 296 m ) above sea level in the Siskiyou Mountains south of the city . Upstream ( south ) of the city boundary , these streams flow mainly through the Rogue River – Siskiyou National Forest . The creek flows through the city to meet Bear Creek , which roughly parallels I @-@ 5 along the east side of Ashland . Bear Creek , one of many streams in the Rogue Valley , flows generally northwest to join the Rogue River near Gold Hill , and from there the Rogue River flows generally west to its mouth on the Pacific Ocean . Ashland and the Bear Creek Valley are part of the Rogue Valley . 
 Oregon Route 99 , running roughly parallel to I @-@ 5 , passes through downtown Ashland . Oregon Route 66 enters Ashland from the east and intersects Route 99 near the city center . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Ashland lies within Oregon 's southwest interior climate zone , in which all but the higher @-@ elevation sites are in the rain shadow of the Oregon Coast Range to the west . The largest urban areas in this zone in addition to Ashland are Medford and Grants Pass in the Rogue Valley , and Roseburg in the Umpqua River Valley further north . Although the mountain peaks in this zone receive up to 120 inches ( 3 @,@ 000 mm ) of precipitation a year , the urban areas and the valleys in which they lie generally get 20 inches ( 510 mm ) or less . This valley climate is particularly good for growing fruit , especially pears , and for producing other crops and farm goods such as hay , grain , poultry , and beef . 
 Cloud cover in nearby Medford varies from an average of 21 percent in July to 86 percent in December . On average , precipitation falls in Ashland on 114 days each year and totals about 20 inches ( 510 mm ) . The average annual snowfall is only 1 @.@ 4 inches ( 3 @.@ 6 cm ) . The average relative humidity , measured at 4 p.m. daily , is 47 percent in Medford , varying from 26 percent in July to 76 percent in December . According to the Köppen climate classification system , Ashland has a warm @-@ summer Mediterranean climate ( Csb ) . 
 The coolest month is December , with an average high temperature of 47 ° F ( 8 ° C ) , and the warmest month is July , with an average high of about 88 ° F ( 31 ° C ) . The highest temperature ever recorded in Ashland was 108 ° F ( 42 ° C ) , observed in August 1981 , and the record low of − 4 ° F ( − 20 ° C ) occurred in December 1972 . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 In the census of 2010 , there were 20 @,@ 078 people , 9 @,@ 409 households , and 4 @,@ 542 families residing in the city . The population density was 3 @,@ 047 inhabitants per square mile ( 1 @,@ 176 / km2 ) . There were 10 @,@ 455 housing units at an average density of 1 @,@ 587 per square mile ( 613 / km2 ) . The racial makeup of the city was about 90 % White , 1 % African American , 1 % Native American , 2 % Asian , 0 @.@ 3 % Pacific Islander , 1 @.@ 4 % from other races , and 4 % from two or more races . Hispanic or Latino of any race were about 5 % of the population . 
 There were 9 @,@ 409 households out of which about 21 % had children under the age of 18 living with them . About 34 % were married couples living together ; 10 % had a female householder with no husband present , about 4 % had a male householder with no wife present , and about 52 % were non @-@ families . About 38 % of all households were made up of individuals and 13 @.@ 5 % had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2 @.@ 03 and the average family size was 2 @.@ 63 . 
 The median age in the city was 42 @.@ 9 years . About 16 % of residents were under the age of 18 , and about 16 % were between the ages of 18 and 24 . Rounded to the nearest whole number , 21 % were from 25 to 44 years old ; 30 % were from 45 to 64 ; and 18 % were 65 years of age or older . The gender makeup of the city was about 46 % male and 54 % female . 
 In 2010 , the median income for a household in the city was $ 41 @,@ 334 , and the median income for a family was $ 58 @,@ 409 . Males had a median income of $ 50 @,@ 368 versus $ 34 @,@ 202 for females . The per capita income for the city was $ 28 @,@ 941 . About 21 % of the population and 13 % of families had incomes below the poverty line . Out of the total population , about 30 % of those under the age of 18 and 3 @.@ 5 % of those 65 and older were living below the poverty line . 
 = = Government = = 
 Ashland has a mayor – council government consisting of a mayor and six council members elected by the city 's voters to serve four @-@ year terms . John Stromberg , whose term ends in 2016 , is the current mayor . <unk> citizen committees assist the mayor and council in setting legislative goals . 
 Peter Buckley , a Democrat from Ashland , represents Ashland and all of Oregon House District 5 in the state legislature . As part of Oregon Senate District 3 , Ashland is represented by Democrat Alan Bates . At the federal level , Greg Walden , a Republican , speaks for Ashland and the rest of Oregon 's 2nd congressional district in the United States House of Representatives . Ron Wyden and Jeff Merkley , both Democrats , serve the state of Oregon in the United States Senate . 
 Historically , Ashland has been something of a political outlier in southwest Oregon . In the presidential election of 1860 , Ashland favored Abraham Lincoln while its neighbors strongly preferred pro @-@ slavery candidates . In the early 1900s , Ashland voters supported women 's suffrage and prohibition , generally out of step with the rest of the region . In more recent elections , liberal Ashland has supported tax levies and environmental regulations opposed by voters elsewhere in Jackson and nearby counties . Critics sometimes refer to the city as the People 's Republic of Ashland . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Income from tourism is important to Ashland 's economy . A large number of restaurants , galleries , and retail stores cater to thousands of visitors who attend plays each year at the Oregon Shakespeare Festival . In 2011 , the festival sold more than 390 @,@ 000 tickets to its theater productions . 
 The town 's largest employer is Southern Oregon University ( <unk> ) , which has a faculty and staff of more than 750 . In addition to the Oregon Shakespeare Festival and the university , health @-@ service providers make significant contributions to the economy . Businesses related to outdoor recreation , transportation , technology , and light manufacturing are also important . In 2010 , the Shakespeare Festival employed about 500 people , the hospital about 400 , the public schools about 300 , and the City of Ashland about 250 . The Bathroom Readers ' Press , which produces the Uncle John 's Bathroom Reader books , is based in Ashland and San Diego . <unk> , specializing in battery @-@ electric motorcycles , was based in Ashland but moved to Talent . 
 = = Arts and culture = = 
 The Oregon Shakespeare Festival has grown from a summer outdoor series in the 1930s to a season that stretches from February to October , incorporating Shakespearean and non @-@ Shakespearean plays at three theaters . The OSF has become the largest regional repertory theater in the United States . 
 The Oregon Cabaret Theater features musicals and comedy throughout the year . Opened in 1986 , the dinner theater occupies a former First Baptist Church built in Mission Revival style . The Ashland Independent Film Festival , which shows international and domestic films of almost every genre , takes place each April in the Varsity Theatre downtown . About 90 films are shown during the five days of the festival . In 2009 , Ashland was the setting for the movie version of Neil Gaiman 's Coraline . 
 The annual Ashland New Plays Festival ( <unk> ) is a nonprofit organization that encourages playwrights to develop new work through public readings . Each year , the <unk> holds an international competition that <unk> hundreds of submissions to four plays that are read to live audiences by professional actors during a five @-@ day festival in October . 
 = = = Museums and other points of interest = = = 
 The National Fish and Wildlife Forensics Laboratory in Ashland is the world 's only laboratory dedicated to solving crimes against wildlife . Using forensic science , experts at the laboratory help wildlife officers to investigate possible crimes against animals and to establish links between victims and suspects in cases that go to court . The laboratory has assisted the International Criminal Police Organization ( <unk> ) and foreign agencies concerned with the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species ( <unk> ) . 
 The Ashland City Band ( ACB ) was organized in the late 19th century as the Ashland Brass Band . The band used an octagonal gazebo @-@ style bandstand in Lithia Park until the Butler Memorial Band Shell was built in Lithia Park in 1946 . The ACB gives public concerts there each summer between June and August . 
 = = Parks = = 
 Lithia Park is a 93 @-@ acre ( 38 ha ) park , including 42 acres ( 17 ha ) on the National Register of Historic Places , that begins near the downtown shopping area and extends upstream along Ashland Creek near the center of the city . It includes two ponds , a Japanese garden , tennis courts , two public greens , a bandshell ( outdoor stage ) and miles of hiking trails . The name Lithia comes from natural mineral water found in the Ashland area . It has a strong mineral taste and slight effervescence , and the lithia water fountains found on the town plaza are frequently tasted by unsuspecting tourists ( often at the behest of residents or frequent visitors who use the fountains as a cheap , humorous Ashland initiation rite ) . 
 A hiking and biking path , the Bear Creek Greenway , begins in Ashland near the intersection of West Nevada Street with Helman Street , close to the confluence of Ashland Creek ( which flows through Lithia Park ) . with Bear Creek . The 25 @-@ mile ( 40 km ) path follows Bear Creek between Ashland and Central Point and passes through Talent , Phoenix , and Medford . 
 = = Education = = 
 Southern Oregon University , a public co @-@ ed four @-@ year university founded in 1926 , offers courses of study toward degrees in the liberal arts , science , business , and education . Students can focus on any of more than 30 major fields or enroll in programs such as Shakespeare Studies and other minors . With an enrollment of about 6 @,@ 200 undergraduates as of Fall 2014 , this urban university also offers graduate @-@ level programs on its 175 @-@ acre ( 71 ha ) campus . 
 About 57 percent of the university 's students are women , and about 43 percent are men . Their most popular major fields include those related to business , psychology , visual and performing arts , social sciences , and protective services such as law enforcement and firefighting . The student – faculty ratio in 2013 – 14 is 20 to 1 . Tuition in 2013 – 14 is $ 7 @,@ 863 per year for Oregon residents and $ 20 @,@ 238 for all others . 
 The Ashland School District oversees three elementary schools , one of which is a magnet school focused on science and the arts ; one middle school ; one high school ; and a community learning center . Ashland High School was ranked <unk> best among the nation 's public high schools and 15th best in Oregon by U.S. News & World Report as of 2013 . 
 = = Media = = 
 The Ashland Daily Tidings is published Monday through Saturday . The Mail Tribune , a morning daily published Monday through Sunday in Medford , also serves Ashland . Fifteen radio stations operate in the region around Ashland , including Jefferson Public Radio and <unk> , an independent non @-@ profit broadcasting at 89 @.@ 5 FM . A former student @-@ run radio station with the call letters <unk> and the nickname " Radio Free Ashland " shut down in February 2013 after 14 years of broadcasting . Rogue Valley Community Television , based at Southern Oregon University , serves Jackson and Josephine counties . Ashland has no commercial television stations , but nearby Medford has seven . 
 = = Infrastructure and public services = = 
 The Asante Ashland Community Hospital is a general medical and surgical hospital that is part of the Asante health network based in Medford . As of 2015 , it has 49 inpatient beds . 
 The Ashland Public Library building was expanded from the city 's original Carnegie library . In 2003 , the historic Carnegie portion of the library was restored . In 2006 , budget problems led to the closing in April 2007 of the Ashland Library and 14 others in Jackson County . The event , which lasted until October 2007 , was the largest library closure in U.S. history . Although some of its services are handled by a private company , Library Systems and Services , the Ashland branch remains part of the Jackson County network of public libraries . 
 Rogue Valley Transportation District ( <unk> ) Route 10 and Route 15 provides bus service to much of the city , both routes running every 30 minutes providing a combined service frequency of 15 minutes . Route 10 also provides service to Medford , where passengers can connect to any of the other six <unk> routes as well as to Southwest <unk> , a daily shuttle operated by Klamath Shuttle carrying passengers between Brookings and the Amtrak station in Klamath Falls . The Klamath Falls Amtrak Station serves the Coast Starlight long @-@ haul passenger train on track owned by the Union Pacific Railroad . Ashland Municipal Airport , with a 3 @,@ 600 @-@ foot ( 1 @,@ 100 m ) asphalt runway , offers general aviation services . Medford International Airport , 12 miles ( 19 km ) from Ashland , also serves the city . 
 The City of Ashland moved to improve local broadband Internet access in the late 1990s by creating the Ashland Fiber Network ( AFN ) and building a fiber optic ring inside the city boundaries . However , by 2006 the city faced difficulties servicing AFN 's debt load , which was approaching $ 15 @.@ 5 million . The city hired a new AFN director , Joe <unk> , who suggested scrapping cable television service while retaining the more profitable high @-@ speed Internet access . In October 2006 , the cable television service was transferred to a local company , Ashland Home Net , while the City retained both the infrastructure and the wholesale Internet business . 
