 = = Sister city = = 
 Ashland has one sister city : 
 Guanajuato , Mexico 
 = = Notable people = = 
 = Rockin ' Robin ( wrestler ) = 
 Robin Denise Smith ( born October 9 , 1964 ) , better known by her ring name Rockin ' Robin , is an American former professional wrestler . As the daughter of Aurelian " Grizzly " Smith , she is a second @-@ generation wrestler . Her brother Sam Houston and half @-@ brother Jake " The Snake " Roberts are also wrestlers . Smith worked for the World Wrestling Federation ( WWF ) in the 1980s . She held the WWF Women 's Championship from October 1988 until it was retired in 1990 . She then worked on the independent circuit . 
 = = Professional wrestling career = = 
 = = = World Wrestling Federation = = = 
 Smith grew up in a wrestling family and enjoyed going to wrestling shows , where she claims she and her siblings were treated like celebrities . Smith later decided to become a professional wrestler and trained , along with her sister @-@ in @-@ law <unk> Roberts ( known by her ring name Baby Doll ) , under Nelson Royal . During 1987 , Smith competed as Rockin ' Robin in Wild West Wrestling , where she feuded with Debbie Combs and Sue Green . When the WWF decided to restart their women 's division in the late 1980s , both women tried out for the company , but the role ultimately went to Smith . Smith , as Rockin ' Robin , debuted in the WWF in late 1987 . She competed at the first Survivor Series as a member of The Fabulous Moolah 's team . Throughout 1988 , she feuded with Sensational Sherri for the WWF Women 's Championship . 
 On October 7 , 1988 , she defeated Sensational Sherri , who had held the title for fifteen months prior , for the Women 's Championship in Paris . At the Royal Rumble in 1989 , she defended the title against Judy Martin . Smith defended the belt against Martin for the first six months of 1989 . In the meantime , at WrestleMania V , she sang " America the Beautiful " to open the show . Smith continued to defend the Women 's title against Martin throughout the summer of 1989 . She held the championship until 1990 , when she left the company . At that time , the title was retired by the WWF due to inactivity . Smith is still in possession of the title belt . The title remained inactive until 1993 . 
 = = = Independent circuit = = = 
 Unlike some former WWF wrestlers , Smith was able to continue using her ring name after leaving the company because she owned the rights to it . In 1990 , wrestler Hiro Matsuda , who had feuded with her father in the 1960s , picked Smith to tour for All Japan Women 's Pro Wrestling . In Japan , Smith teamed with Luna Vachon . The Japanese bookers gave the girls a positive review for their work with the company . 
 In the United States , Smith defeated Peggy Lee Leather for the Ladies Major League Wrestling 's International Championship . She still occasionally defended the WWF Women 's Championship , even though the title was officially declared vacant by the World Wrestling Federation . In May 1991 she defended the WWF Women 's Championship against " Japanese Women 's Champion " Madusa Miceli on a Great Lakes Wrestling Association event . On June 9 , 1991 , she defeated Candi Devine in Herb Abrams 's Universal Wrestling Federation to become the first UWF Women 's Champion at UWF Beach Brawl . She also competed in the Ladies Professional Wrestling Association ( LPWA ) , forming a tag team with Wendi Richter . She competed at LPWA 's only pay @-@ per @-@ view , LPWA Super Ladies Showdown . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Smith and her brother Sam Houston are the children of Aurelian " Grizzly " Smith and were born after his first marriage dissolved . Her half @-@ brother is Jake " The Snake " Roberts , who was born during their father 's first marriage . Robin and her brothers all wrestled in the WWF at the same time in the 1980s , but their relationship was never mentioned on @-@ screen at the request of Robin . Author and former National Wrestling Alliance president Howard Brody alleges in his book Swimming with Piranhas that Robin was a victim of sexual abuse at the hands of her father . According to Brody , Robin was removed from her father 's care when her mother discovered what had been happening . 
 After leaving the WWF in 1990 , Smith was married to a man named Harvey <unk> . <unk> was sentenced to 81 months in federal prison for 10 counts of filing false tax returns , identity theft and access device fraud . After divorcing , she moved to Louisiana and opened a telemarketing company that sold industrial chemicals and precious metals . Later , she opened a real estate appraisal business . During this time , Smith had a drinking problem but eventually was able to quit altogether . 
 In 2005 , Smith 's home and all of her belongings were destroyed by Hurricane Katrina . During the aftermath of the hurricane , she stayed with family in Baton Rouge , Louisiana . She now runs a real estate appraisal business in Hammond , Louisiana . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing moves 
 Bulldog 
 Signature moves 
 Crossbody , sometimes from the top rope 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 Cauliflower Alley Club 
 Women 's Wrestling Award ( 2011 ) 
 Great Lakes Wrestling Association 
 <unk> Women 's Championship ( 1 time , first ) 
 Ladies Major League Wrestling 
 <unk> International Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Universal Wrestling Federation 
 UWF Women 's World Championship ( 1 time ) 
 World Wrestling Federation 
 WWF Women 's Championship ( 1 time ) 
 = Confederate government of Kentucky = 
 The Confederate government of Kentucky was a shadow government established for the Commonwealth of Kentucky by a self @-@ constituted group of Confederate sympathizers during the American Civil War . The shadow government never replaced the elected government in Frankfort , which had strong Union sympathies . Neither was it able to gain the whole support of Kentucky 's citizens ; its jurisdiction extended only as far as Confederate battle lines in the Commonwealth . Nevertheless , the provisional government was recognized by the Confederate States of America , and Kentucky was admitted to the Confederacy on December 10 , 1861 . Kentucky was represented by the central star on the Confederate battle flag . 
 Bowling Green was designated the Confederate capital of Kentucky . Due to the military situation in the state , the provisional government was exiled and traveled with the Army of Tennessee for most of its existence . For a short time in the autumn of 1862 , the Confederate Army controlled Frankfort , the only time a Union capital was captured by Confederate forces . During this occupation , General Braxton Bragg attempted to install the provisional government as the permanent authority in the Commonwealth . However , Union General Don Carlos Buell ambushed the inauguration ceremony and drove the provisional government from the state for the final time . From that point forward , the government existed primarily on paper and was dissolved at the end of the war . 
 The provisional government elected two governors . George W. Johnson was elected at the Russellville Convention and served until his death at the Battle of Shiloh . Richard Hawes was elected to replace Johnson and served through the remainder of the war . 
 = = Background = = 
 Kentucky 's citizens were split regarding the issues central to the Civil War . The state had strong economic ties with Ohio River cities such as Pittsburgh and Cincinnati while at the same time sharing many cultural , social , and economic links with the South . Unionist traditions were strong throughout the Commonwealth 's history , especially in the east . With economic ties to both the North and the South , Kentucky had little to gain and much to lose from a war between the states . Additionally , many slaveholders felt that the best protection for slavery was within the Union . 
 The presidential election of 1860 showed Kentucky 's mixed sentiments when the state gave John Bell 45 % of the popular vote , John C. Breckinridge 36 % , Stephen Douglas 18 % , and Abraham Lincoln less than 1 % . Historian Allan Nevins interpreted the election results to mean that Kentuckians strongly opposed both secession and coercion against the secessionists . The majority coalition of Bell and Douglas supporters was seen as a solid moderate Unionist position that opposed precipitate action by extremists on either side . 
 The majority of Kentucky 's citizens believed the state should be a mediator between the North and South . On December 9 , 1860 , Kentucky Governor Beriah Magoffin sent a letter to the other slave state governors , suggesting that they come to an agreement with the North that would include strict enforcement of the Fugitive Slave Act , a division of common territories at the 37th parallel , a guarantee of free use of the Mississippi River , and a Southern veto over slave legislation . Magoffin proposed a conference of slave states , followed by a conference of all the states to secure the concessions . Because of the escalating pace of events , neither conference was held . 
 Governor Magoffin called a special session of the Kentucky General Assembly on December 27 , 1860 , to ask the legislators for a convention to decide the Commonwealth 's course in the sectional conflict . The Louisville Morning Courier on January 25 , 1861 articulated the position that the secessionists faced in the legislature , " Too much time has already been wasted . The historic moment once past , never returns . For us and for Kentucky , the time to act is NOW OR NEVER . " The Unionists , on the other hand , were unwilling to surrender the fate of the state to a convention that might " in a moment of excitement , adopt the extreme remedy of secession . " The Unionist position carried after many of the states rights ' legislators , opposing the idea of immediate secession , voted against the convention . The assembly did , however , send six delegates to a February 4 Peace Conference in Washington , D.C. , and asked Congress to call a national convention to consider potential resolutions to the secession crisis , including the Crittenden Compromise , proposed by Kentuckian John J. Crittenden . 
 As a result of the firing on Fort Sumter , President Lincoln sent a telegram to Governor Magoffin requesting that the Commonwealth supply four regiments as its share of the overall request of 75 @,@ 000 troops for the war . Magoffin , a Confederate sympathizer , replied , " President Lincoln , Washington , D.C. I will send not a man nor a dollar for the wicked purpose of subduing my sister Southern states . B. Magoffin " Both houses of the General Assembly met on May 7 and passed declarations of neutrality in the war , a position officially declared by Governor Magoffin on May 20 . 
 In a special congressional election held June 20 , Unionist candidates won nine of Kentucky 's ten congressional seats . Confederate sympathizers won only the Jackson Purchase region , which was economically linked to Tennessee by the Cumberland and Tennessee Rivers . Believing defeat at the polls was certain , many Southern <unk> had boycotted the election ; of the 125 @,@ 000 votes cast , Unionists captured close to 90 @,@ 000 . Confederate sympathizers were dealt a further blow in the August 5 election for state legislators . This election resulted in veto @-@ proof Unionist majorities of 76 – 24 in the House and 27 – 11 in the Senate . From then on , most of Magoffin 's vetoes to protect southern interests were overridden in the General Assembly . 
 Historian Wilson Porter Shortridge made the following analysis : 
 With secession no longer considered a viable option , the pro @-@ Confederate forces became the strongest supporters for neutrality . Unionists dismissed this as a front for a secessionist agenda . Unionists , on the other hand , struggled to find a way to move the large , moderate middle to a " definite and unqualified stand with the Washington government . " The maneuvering between the two reached a decisive point on September 3 when Confederate forces were ordered from Tennessee to the Kentucky towns of Hickman and Columbus . Union forces responded by occupying Paducah . 
 On September 11 , the legislature passed a resolution instructing Magoffin to order the Confederate forces ( but not the Union forces ) to leave the state . The Governor vetoed the resolution , but the General Assembly overrode his veto , and Magoffin gave the order . The next week , the assembly officially requested the assistance of the Union and asked the governor to call out the state militia to join the Federal forces . Magoffin also vetoed this request . Again the assembly overrode his veto and Magoffin acquiesced . 
 = = Formation = = 
 A pro @-@ Confederate peace meeting , with Breckinridge as a speaker , was scheduled for September 21 . Unionists feared the meeting would lead to actual military resistance , and dispatched troops from Camp Dick Robinson to disband the meeting and arrest Breckinridge . Breckinridge , as well as many other state leaders identified with the secessionists , fled the state . These leaders eventually served as the nucleus for a group that would create a shadow government for Kentucky . In his October 8 " Address to the People of Kentucky , " Breckinridge declared , " The United States no longer exists . The Union is dissolved . " 
 On October 29 , 1861 , 63 delegates representing 34 counties met at Russellville to discuss the formation of a Confederate government for the Commonwealth . Despite its defeats at the polls , this group believed that the Unionist government in Frankfort did not represent the will of the majority of Kentucky 's citizens . Trigg County 's Henry Burnett was elected chairman of the proceedings . Scott County farmer George W. Johnson chaired the committee that wrote the convention 's final report and introduced some of its key resolutions . The report called for a sovereignty convention to sever ties with the Federal government . Both Breckinridge and Johnson served on the Committee of Ten that arranged the convention . 
 On November 18 , 116 delegates from 68 counties met at the William Forst House in Russellville . Burnett was elected presiding officer . Fearing for the safety of the delegates , he first proposed postponing proceedings until January 8 , 1862 . Johnson convinced the majority of the delegates to continue . By the third day , the military situation was so tenuous that the entire convention had to be moved to a tower on the campus of Bethel Female College , a now @-@ defunct institution in Hopkinsville . 
 The first item was ratification of an ordinance of secession , which proceeded in short order . Next , being unable to flesh out a complete constitution and system of laws , the delegates voted that " the Constitution and laws of Kentucky , not inconsistent with the acts of this Convention , and the establishment of this Government , and the laws which may be enacted by the Governor and Council , shall be the laws of this state . " The delegates proposed a provisional government to consist of a legislative council of ten members ( one from each Kentucky congressional district ) ; a governor , who had the power to appoint judicial and other officials ; a treasurer ; and an auditor . The delegates designated Bowling Green ( then under the control of Confederate general Albert Sidney Johnston ) as the Confederate State capital , but had the foresight to provide for the government to meet anywhere deemed appropriate by the council and governor . The convention adopted a new state seal , an arm wearing mail with a star , extended from a circle of twelve other stars . 
 The convention unanimously elected Johnson as governor . Horatio F. <unk> was elected lieutenant governor , but soon fled to Mississippi to escape Federal authorities . Robert McKee , who had served as secretary of both conventions , was appointed secretary of state . Theodore Legrand Burnett was elected treasurer , but resigned on December 17 to accept a position in the Confederate Congress . He was replaced by Warren County native John Quincy Burnham . The position of auditor was first offered to former Congressman Richard Hawes , but Hawes declined to continue his military service under Humphrey Marshall . In his stead , the convention elected Josiah Pillsbury , also of Warren County . The legislative council elected Willis Benson Machen as its president . 
 On November 21 , the day following the convention , Johnson wrote Confederate president Jefferson Davis to request Kentucky 's admission to the Confederacy . Burnett , William Preston , and William E. Simms were chosen as the state 's commissioners to the Confederacy . For reasons unexplained by the delegates , Dr. Luke P. Blackburn , a native Kentuckian living in Mississippi , was invited to accompany the commissioners to Richmond , Virginia . Though Davis had reservations about circumvention of the elected General Assembly in forming the Confederate government , he concluded that Johnson 's request had merit , and on November 25 , recommended Kentucky for admission to the Confederacy . Kentucky was admitted to the Confederacy on December 10 , 1861 . 
 = = Activity = = 
 On November 26 , 1861 , Governor Johnson issued an address to the citizens of the Commonwealth blaming abolitionists for the breakup of the United States . He asserted his belief that the Union and Confederacy were forces of equal strength , and that the only solution to the war was a free trade agreement between the two sovereign nations . He further announced his willingness to resign as provisional governor if the Kentucky General Assembly would agree to cooperate with Governor Magoffin . Magoffin himself denounced the Russellville Convention and the provisional government , stressing the need to abide by the will of the majority of the Commonwealth 's citizens . 
 During the winter of 1861 , Johnson tried to assert the legitimacy of the fledgling government but its jurisdiction extended only as far as the area controlled by the Confederate Army . Johnson came short of raising the 46 @,@ 000 troops requested by the Confederate Congress . Efforts to levy taxes and to compel citizens to turn over their guns to the government were similarly unsuccessful . On January 3 , 1862 , Johnson requested a sum of $ 3 million ( $ 71 million as of 2016 ) from the Confederate Congress to meet the provisional government 's operating expenses . The Congress instead approved a sum of $ 2 million , the expenditure of which required approval of Secretary of War Judah P. Benjamin and President Davis . Much of the provisional government 's operating capital was probably provided by Kentucky congressman Eli Metcalfe Bruce , who made a fortune from varied economic activities throughout the war . 
 The council met on December 14 to appoint representatives to the Confederacy 's unicameral provisional congress . Those appointed would serve for only two months , as the provisional congress was replaced with a permanent bicameral legislature on February 17 , 1862 . Kentucky was entitled to two senators and 12 representatives in the permanent Confederate Congress . The usual day for general elections being passed , Governor Johnson and the legislative council set election day for Confederate Kentucky on January 22 . Voters were allowed to vote in whichever county they occupied on election day , and could cast a general ballot for all positions . In an election that saw military votes outnumber civilian ones , only four of the provisional legislators were elected to seats in the Confederate House of Representatives . One provisional legislator , Henry Burnett , was elected to the Confederate Senate . 
 The provisional government took other minor actions during the winter of 1861 . An act was passed to rename Wayne County to <unk> County in honor of Felix <unk> , who died at the Battle of Mill Springs . Local officials were appointed in areas controlled by Confederate forces , including many justices of the peace . When the Confederate government eventually disbanded , the legality of marriages performed by these justices was questioned , but eventually upheld . 
 = = = Withdrawal from Kentucky and death of Governor Johnson = = = 
 Following Ulysses S. Grant 's victory at the Battle of Fort Henry , General Johnston withdrew from Bowling Green into Tennessee on February 7 , 1862 . A week later , Governor Johnson and the provisional government followed . On March 12 , the New Orleans Picayune reported that " the capital of Kentucky [ is ] now being located in a Sibley tent . " 
 Governor Johnson , despite his presumptive official position , his age ( 50 ) , and a crippled arm , volunteered to serve under General John C. Breckinridge and Colonel Robert P. Trabue at the Battle of Shiloh . On April 7 , Johnson was severely wounded in the thigh and abdomen , and lay on the battlefield until the following day . Johnson was recognized by acquaintance and fellow Freemason , Alexander McDowell McCook , a Union general . Johnson died aboard the Union hospital ship Hannibal , and the provisional government of Kentucky was left leaderless . 
 = = = Richard Hawes as governor = = = 
 Prior to abandoning Bowling Green , Governor Johnson requested that Richard Hawes come to the city and help with the administration of the government , but Hawes was delayed due to a bout with typhoid fever . Following Johnson 's death , the provisional government elected Hawes , who was still recovering from his illness , as governor . Following his recovery , Hawes joined the government in Corinth , Mississippi , and took the oath of office on May 31 . 
 During the summer of 1862 , word began to spread through the Army of Tennessee that Generals Bragg and Edmund Kirby Smith were planning an invasion of Kentucky . The legislative council voted to endorse the invasion plan , and on August 27 , Governor Hawes was dispatched to Richmond to favorably recommend it to President Davis . Davis was non @-@ committal , but Bragg and Smith proceeded , nonetheless . 
 On August 30 , Smith commanded one of the most complete Confederate victories of the war against an inexperienced Union force at the Battle of Richmond . Bragg also won a decisive victory at the September 13 Battle of Munfordville , but the delay there cost him the larger prize of Louisville , which Don Carlos Buell moved to occupy on September 25 . Having lost Louisville , Bragg spread his troops into defensive postures in the central Kentucky cities of Bardstown , Shelbyville and Danville and waited for something to happen , a move that historian Kenneth W. Noe called a " stupendously illogical decision . " 
 Meanwhile , the leaders of Kentucky 's Confederate government had remained in Chattanooga , Tennessee , awaiting Governor Hawes ' return . They finally departed on September 18 , and caught up with Bragg and Smith in Lexington , Kentucky on October 2 . Bragg had been disappointed with the number of soldiers volunteering for Confederate service in Kentucky ; wagon loads of weapons that had been shipped to the Commonwealth to arm the expected enlistees remained unissued . Desiring to enforce the Confederate Conscription Act to boost recruitment , Bragg decided to install the provisional government in the recently captured state capital of Frankfort . On October 4 , 1862 , Hawes was inaugurated as governor by the Confederate legislative council . In the celebratory atmosphere of the inauguration ceremony , however , the Confederate forces let their guard down , and were ambushed and forced to retreat by Buell 's artillery . 
 = = Decline and dissolution = = 
 Following the Battle of Perryville , the provisional government left Kentucky for the final time . Displaced from their home state , members of the legislative council dispersed to places where they could make a living or be supported by relatives until Governor Hawes called them into session . Scant records show that on December 30 , 1862 , Hawes summoned the council , auditor , and treasurer to his location at Athens , Tennessee for a meeting on January 15 , 1863 . Hawes himself unsuccessfully lobbied President Davis to remove Hawes ' former superior , Humphrey Marshall , from command . On March 4 , Hawes told Davis by letter that " our cause is steadily on the increase " and assured him that another foray into the Commonwealth would produce better results than the first had . 
 The government 's financial woes also continued . Hawes was embarrassed to admit that neither he nor anyone else seemed to know what became of approximately $ 45 @,@ 000 that had been sent from Columbus to Memphis , Tennessee during the Confederate occupation of Kentucky . Another major blow was Davis ' 1864 decision not to allow Hawes to spend $ 1 million that had been secretly appropriated in August 1861 to help Kentucky maintain its neutrality . Davis reasoned that the money could not be spent for its intended purpose , since Kentucky had already been admitted to the Confederacy . 
 Late in the war , the provisional government existed mostly on paper . However , in the summer of 1864 , Colonel R. A. Alston of the Ninth Tennessee Cavalry requested Governor Hawes ' assistance in investigating crimes allegedly committed by Brigadier General John Hunt Morgan during his latest raid into Kentucky . Hawes never had to act on the request , however , as Morgan was suspended from command on August 10 and killed by Union troops on September 4 , 1864 . 
 There is no documentation detailing exactly when Kentucky 's provisional government ceased operation . It is assumed to have dissolved upon the conclusion of the Civil War . 
 = SMS Bayern = 
 SMS Bayern was the lead ship of the Bayern class of battleships in the German Kaiserliche Marine ( Imperial Navy ) . The vessel was launched in February 1915 and entered service in July 1916 , too late to take part in the Battle of Jutland . Her main armament consisted of eight 38 cm ( 15 in ) guns in four turrets , which was a significant improvement over the preceding König 's ten 30 @.@ 5 cm ( 12 inch ) guns . The ship was to have formed the nucleus for a fourth battle squadron in the High Seas Fleet , along with three of her sister ships . Of the other ships only one — Baden — was completed ; the other two were canceled later in the war when production requirements shifted to U @-@ boat construction . 
 Bayern was commissioned midway through the war , and had a limited service career . The first operation in which the ship took part was an abortive fleet advance into the North Sea on 18 – 19 August 1916 , a month after she had been commissioned . The ship also participated in Operation Albion in the Gulf of Riga , but shortly after the German attack began on 12 October 1917 , Bayern was mined and had to be withdrawn for repairs . She was interned with the majority of the High Seas Fleet in Scapa Flow in November 1918 following the end of World War I. On 21 June 1919 , Admiral Ludwig von Reuter ordered the fleet to be scuttled ; Bayern sank at 14 : 30 . In September 1934 , the ship was raised , towed to Rosyth , and scrapped . 
 = = Design = = 
 Bayern was 179 @.@ 4 m ( 588 ft 7 in ) long at the waterline , and an even 180 m ( 590 ft 7 in ) long overall . She had a beam of 30 m ( 98 ft 5 in ) and a draft of 9 @.@ 3 – 9 @.@ 4 m ( 30 ft 6 in – 30 ft 10 in ) Bayern displaced 28 @,@ 530 metric tons ( 28 @,@ 080 long tons ) at a normal displacement ; at full combat load , she displaced up to 32 @,@ 200 t ( 31 @,@ 700 long tons ) . Bayern was powered by three Parsons steam turbines rated at 34 @,@ 521 shaft horsepower ( 25 @,@ 742 kW ) and three oil @-@ fired and eleven coal @-@ fired Schulz @-@ Thornycroft boilers , and on trials achieved 55 @,@ 202 shaft horsepower ( 41 @,@ 164 kW ) ; she had a maximum speed of 22 knots ( 41 km / h ; 25 mph ) . The ship could carry up to 3 @,@ 400 t ( 3 @,@ 300 long tons ; 3 @,@ 700 short tons ) of coal and 620 t ( 610 long tons ; 680 short tons ) of fuel oil , which provided a maximum range of 5 @,@ 000 nmi ( 9 @,@ 300 km ; 5 @,@ 800 mi ) at a cruising speed of 12 kn ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . 
 The ship was the first German warship armed with eight 38 cm ( 15 in ) guns . The primary battery guns were arranged in four twin gun turrets : two superfiring turrets each fore and aft . Her secondary armament consisted of sixteen 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) guns , six 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 45 in ) guns and five 60 cm ( 23 @.@ 6 in ) underwater torpedo tubes , one in the bow and two on each beam . Upon commissioning , she carried a crew of 42 officers and 1 @,@ 129 enlisted men . The ship had an armored belt that was 170 – 350 mm ( 6 @.@ 7 – 13 @.@ 8 in ) thick and an armored deck that was 60 – 100 mm ( 2 @.@ 4 – 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick . Her forward conning tower had 400 mm ( 16 in ) sides , and the main battery turrets had 350 mm thick sides and 200 mm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) thick roofs . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Bayern was ordered with the provisional name " T " in 1912 , under the fourth and final Naval Law , which was passed that year . Work began at the Howaldtswerke Dockyard in Kiel under construction number 590 . The ship was laid down in 1913 and launched on 18 February 1915 . After fitting @-@ out and sea trials , the ship was commissioned on 15 July 1916 , a month and a half too late for her to participate in the Battle of Jutland . Bayern joined the III Battle Squadron of the High Seas Fleet upon her commissioning . The ship would have been available for the operation , but the ship 's crew , composed largely of the crew from the recently decommissioned battleship Lothringen , was given leave . She had cost the Imperial German Government 49 million Goldmarks . Bayern was later joined in service by one sister ship , Baden . Two other ships of this class , Sachsen and Württemberg , were canceled before they were completed . At the time of her commissioning , Bayern 's commander was Kapitän zur See ( Captain at Sea ) Max Hahn . Ernst Lindemann , who went on to command the battleship Bismarck during her only combat sortie in World War II , served aboard the ship as a wireless operator . On 25 May , Ludwig III of Bavaria , the last King of Bavaria , visited the ship . Bayern briefly served as the fleet flagship , from 7 to 16 August . 
 Admiral Reinhard Scheer planned a fleet advance for 18 – 19 August 1916 ; the operation consisted of a bombardment conducted by the I Scouting Group . This was an attempt to draw out and destroy Admiral David Beatty 's battlecruisers . As Moltke and Von der Tann were the only two German battlecruisers still in fighting condition , three dreadnoughts were assigned to the unit for the operation : Bayern and the two König @-@ class ships Markgraf and Grosser Kurfürst . Admiral Scheer and the rest of the High Seas Fleet , including 15 dreadnoughts , were to trail behind and provide cover . The British were aware of the German plans and sortied the Grand Fleet to meet them . By 14 : 35 , Scheer had been warned of the Grand Fleet 's approach and , unwilling to engage the whole of the Grand Fleet just 11 weeks after the close call at Jutland , turned his forces around and retreated to German ports . Another sortie into the North Sea followed on 18 – 20 October , and the German fleet again encountered no British naval forces . 
 = = = Operation Albion = = = 
 In early September 1917 , following the German conquest of the Russian port of Riga , the German navy decided to evict the Russian naval forces that still held the Gulf of Riga . To this end , the Admiralstab ( the Navy High Command ) planned an operation to seize the Baltic islands of Ösel , particularly the Russian gun batteries on the Sworbe peninsula . On 18 September , the order was issued for a joint Army @-@ Navy operation to capture Ösel and Moon islands ; the primary naval component consisted of the flagship Moltke and the III Battle Squadron of the High Seas Fleet . At this time , the V Division included the Bayern and four König @-@ class battleships . The VI Division consisted of the five Kaiser @-@ class battleships . Along with 9 light cruisers , 3 torpedo boat flotillas , and dozens of mine warfare ships , the entire force numbered some 300 ships , supported by over 100 aircraft and 6 zeppelins . The invasion force amounted to approximately 24 @,@ 600 officers and enlisted men . Opposing the Germans were the old Russian pre @-@ dreadnoughts Slava and Tsesarevich , the armored cruisers Bayan , Admiral Makarov , and Diana , 26 destroyers , and several torpedo boats and gunboats . The garrison on Ösel numbered some 14 @,@ 000 men . 
 The operation began on 12 October , when Bayern , along with Moltke and the four Königs , began firing on the Russian shore batteries at Tagga Bay . Simultaneously , the five Kaisers engaged the batteries on the Sworbe peninsula ; the objective was to secure the channel between Moon and Dagö islands , thus blocking the only escape route of the Russian ships in the gulf . Bayern 's role in the operation was cut short when she struck a naval mine at 5 : 07 while moving into her bombardment position at Pamerort . The mine explosion killed one Unteroffizier and six sailors , allowed 1 @,@ 000 metric tons ( 980 long tons ; 1 @,@ 100 short tons ) of water into the ship and caused the forecastle to sink by 2 m ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) . Despite the damage inflicted by the mine , Bayern engaged the naval battery at Cape Toffri on the southern tip of Hiiumaa . Bayern was released from her position at 14 : 00 . Preliminary repairs were made on 13 October in Tagga Bay . The temporary repairs proved ineffective , and Bayern had to be withdrawn to Kiel for repairs ; the return trip took 19 days . Repairs lasted from 3 November to 27 December , during which the forward torpedo tube room was stripped of its equipment and the torpedo ports were sealed . The room was then turned into an additional watertight compartment . Four 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) anti @-@ aircraft guns were also installed during the repairs . 
 On 16 October , two König @-@ class battleships and several smaller vessels were sent to engage the Russian battleships in the Gulf of Riga . The following day , König and Kronprinz engaged the Russian battleships — König dueled with Slava and Kronprinz fired on both Slava and the cruiser Bayan . The Russian vessels were hit dozens of times , until at 10 : 30 the Russian naval commander , Admiral Bakhirev , ordered their withdrawal . Slava had taken too much damage , and was unable to escape ; instead , she was scuttled and her crew was evacuated on a destroyer . By 20 October , the naval operations were effectively over ; the Russian fleet had been destroyed or forced to withdraw , and the German army held the islands in the gulf . 
 = = = Subsequent operations = = = 
 Following her return to the fleet , Bayern was assigned to security duties in the North Sea . Admiral Scheer had used light surface forces to attack British convoys to Norway beginning in late 1917 . As a result , the Royal Navy attached a squadron of battleships to protect the convoys , which presented Scheer with the possibility of destroying a detached squadron of the Grand Fleet . Scheer remarked that " A successful attack on such a convoy would not only result in the sinking of much tonnage , but would be a great military success , and would ... force the English to send more warships to the northern waters . " Scheer instituted strict wireless silence in preparation for the planned attack . This denied the British the ability to intercept and decrypt German signals , which had previously been a significant advantage . The operation called for Hipper 's battlecruisers to attack the convoy and its escorts on 23 April while the battleships of the High Seas Fleet stood by in support . 
 On 22 April , Bayern and the rest of the German fleet assembled in the Schillig Roads outside Wilhelmshaven and departed the following morning at 06 : 00 . Heavy fog forced the Germans to remain inside their defensive minefields for half an hour . Hipper 's forces were 60 nmi ( 110 km ; 69 mi ) west of <unk> , Norway , by 05 : 20 on 24 April . Despite the success in reaching the convoy route undetected , the operation failed due to faulty intelligence . Reports from U @-@ boats indicated to Scheer that the convoys sailed at the start and middle of each week , but a west @-@ bound convoy had left Bergen on Tuesday the 22nd and an east @-@ bound group left Methil , Scotland , on the 24th , a Thursday . As a result , there was no convoy for Hipper to attack . 
 The same day , one of Moltke 's screws slipped off , which caused serious damage to the power plant and allowed 2 @,@ 000 metric tons ( 2 @,@ 000 long tons ; 2 @,@ 200 short tons ) of water into the ship . Moltke was forced to break radio silence in order to inform Scheer of the ship 's condition , which alerted the Royal Navy to the High Seas Fleet 's activities . Beatty sortied with a force of 31 battleships and four battlecruisers , but was too late to intercept the retreating Germans . The Germans reached their defensive minefields early on 25 April , though approximately 40 nmi ( 74 km ; 46 mi ) off Helgoland Moltke was torpedoed by the submarine E42 . Moltke successfully returned to port . 
 = = = Fate = = = 
 From 23 September to early October , Bayern served as the flagship of the III Squadron , under Vizeadmiral ( Vice Admiral ) Hugo Kraft . Bayern was to have taken part in what would have amounted to the " death ride " of the High Seas Fleet shortly before the end of World War I. The bulk of the High Seas Fleet was to have sortied from its base in Wilhelmshaven to engage the British Grand Fleet . Scheer — by now the Großadmiral of the fleet — intended to inflict as much damage as possible on the British navy , in order to obtain a better bargaining position for Germany , whatever the cost to the fleet . 
 While the fleet was consolidating in Wilhelmshaven , war @-@ weary sailors began rioting . On 24 October 1918 , the order was given to sail from Wilhelmshaven . Starting on the night of 29 October , sailors on several battleships mutinied ; three ships from the III Squadron refused to weigh anchor , and acts of sabotage were committed on board the battleships Thüringen and Helgoland . The order to sail was rescinded in the face of this open revolt . In an attempt to suppress the mutiny , the battleship squadrons were dispersed . Bayern , along with the rest of the III Squadron , was sent to Kiel . 
 Following the capitulation of Germany in November 1918 , the majority of the High Seas Fleet was to be interned in the Royal Navy base in Scapa Flow . Bayern was listed as one of the ships to be handed over . On 21 November 1918 , the ships to be interned , under the command of Rear Admiral Ludwig von Reuter , sailed from their base in Germany for the last time . The fleet rendezvoused with the British light cruiser Cardiff , before meeting a flotilla of 370 British , American , and French warships for the voyage to Scapa Flow . 
 The fleet remained in captivity during the negotiations that ultimately produced the Versailles Treaty . Reuter believed that the British intended to seize the German ships on 21 June , which was the deadline for Germany to have signed the peace treaty . Unaware that the deadline had been extended to the 23rd , Reuter ordered his ships to be sunk . On the morning of 21 June , the British fleet left Scapa Flow to conduct training maneuvers ; at 11 : 20 Reuter transmitted the order to his ships . Bayern sank at 14 : 30 . The ship was raised on 1 September 1934 and was broken up the following year in Rosyth . The ship 's bell was eventually delivered to the German Federal Navy and is on display at Kiel <unk> . 
 = Sins of My Father ( song ) = 
 " Sins of My Father " is a song recorded by American recording artist Usher for his seventh studio album Looking 4 Myself ( 2012 ) . The song , a collaborative effort between Usher , Terry Lewis , Salaam Remi , and Rico Love , tells the story of a " tortured soul " in a " volatile " relationship . " Critics noted Usher 's relationship with ex @-@ wife Tameka Foster to be the basis of the song , which contains references to their children together . Usher himself added that the song itself is a " kind of testament " for the type of father he is . 
 " Sins of My Father " is a soul song that contains prominent blues , dub , Motown and reggae influences . It received universal acclaim from music critics , who cited it as a stand @-@ out track on Looking 4 Myself . Upon the release of Looking 4 Myself , the song debuted at number 62 on the South Korea Gaon International Chart , with sales of 5 @,@ 813 digital copies . 
 = = Writing and recording = = 
 " Sins of My Father " was written by Usher , Rico Love , Salaam Remi and Terry Lewis . The production of the song was helmed by Remi , with Love also serving as its co @-@ producer . Remi has previously produced songs such as " Made You Look " ( God 's Son , 2002 ) for American rapper Nas and " You Know I 'm No Good " ( Back to Black , 2006 ) for late English singer Amy Winehouse . 
 In an interview with SoulCulture , Usher told that the inspiration for writing " Sins of My Father " is about dealing with things that people can 't understand . He further stated that the past can bring people " down a road " because they are not aware of it . According to him , " The time spent with a father will teach you a certain understanding of live and how to cope and deal with things . The lack of a father being there can also teach you how to deal with life – and that ’ s what ' Sins Of The Father ' is about ... That statement was made because that ’ s something that I felt . " Usher added that the song itself is a " kind of testament " for the father he is . 
 Gleyder " Gee " Disla and Mark " Exit " Goodchild recorded " Sins of My Father " at Jungle City Studios in New York City , Doppler Studios in Atlanta , Glenwood Place Studios in Burbank and Instrument Zoo in Miami . Alex <unk> , Jacob Dennis , Max Unruh and Ramon Rivas served as recording assistants . It was mixed by Manny Marroquin at Larrabee Sound Studio in Universal City , while Chris Galland and Delbert Bowers served as a mixing assistant . The track 's producer Remi together with Vincent Henry and Czech Film Orchestra , provided the " Sins of My Father " instrumentation . 
 = = Composition and lyrical interpretation = = 
 " Sins of My Father " is a soul song with prominent blues , dub , Motown and reggae influences that runs for three minutes and 56 seconds . The song 's instrumentation consists of bass , keyboards , guitar , drums , horns , saxophone and strings which are played by the Czech Film Orchestra . According to Jim Farber of Daily News , " Sins of My Father " consists of " some of the sexy , retro shading " that can be seen in the Remi produced songs by Amy Winehouse . Popdust 's Andrew Unterberger commented that the track " sounds like a death rattle , a hypnotically low bass line slinking around some ominously shook maracas , a molasses @-@ slow drum loop , and by the end , even some John Barry @-@ cinematic @-@ style strings . " He further stated that " Sins of My Father " is a step " bluesier and evil @-@ er , sounding more from the legacy of Howlin ’ Wolf and Screamin ’ Jay Hawkins — not quite as guttural , but Ush [ er ] still uses all the tools at his disposal , even breaking out the fake voodoo accent , and more than gets the point across . " 
 Lyrically , " Sins of My Father " is about being a " tortured soul " in a " volatile " relationship . Trent Fitzgerald of PopCrush hinted at Foster to be the bases of the song . The narrator " believes that his bad relationship is karma for his father being a rolling stone . " " Sins of My Father " begins with Usher gasping " My sons , Keep them ... please forgive me . " Unterberger of Popdust concluded that the track gets more intense , as Usher sings in the song ’ s opening verse : " I think this woman went and put a hex on me / Oh now , why ’ d I let her go and put that sex on me ? " . The pre @-@ chorus features Usher yelping in falsetto : " But she didn ’ t make me pay for it with my money ! / <unk> ! ! ! " . According to Erika Ramirez of Billboard magazine , " Usher soulfully pays for his father 's promiscuous ways over melodic <unk> " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Sins of My Father " received universal acclaim from music critics . Nathan S. of DJBooth called the " openly autobiographical " song the most affecting track he has " done in years " . He concluded by stating : " I can 't think of any other artist of Usher 's status who would tie his cheating ways to an absent father , and for that he deserves some applause " . Eric Arredondo of Beats Per Minute stated that in " Sins of My Father " , Usher shows " more bite in his voice " than he has ever heard before , and that " it helps to make a song that is both fun and slightly sinister " . Natalie Shaw of BBC Music called " Sins of My Father " outstanding , commenting that Usher 's " slink here sounds sinister , for the first time , fearing he 'll fall under a demon woman 's deathly voodoo while slack , deep beats play out " . 
 Rap @-@ Up labelled " Sins of My Father " as one of their favorite songs on the album , alongside " Climax " , " Lemme See " and " Twisted " , while Trent Fitzgerald of PopCrush called " Sins of My Father " a " big standout " on the album . Ryan Hadfield of Consequence of Sound labelled " Sins of My Father " as an " essential track " of Looking 4 Myself and stated that , alongside " What Happened to U " , the song displays the same " vocal prowess " as the rest of the album , but is matched with " beats of higher sophistication which avers his earnest attempt to deviate from a traditional blend of R & B and hip @-@ hop " . According to Verse of SoulCulture " ' Sins Of My Father ' , with its reggae vibe meets Marvin Gaye or Curtis Mayfield sensibilities addressing family issues this is the sort of track we need to hear more of from our artists . " 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording and mixing 
 Recorded at Jungle City Studios , New York City ; Doppler Studios , Atlanta , Georgia ; Glenwood Place Studios , Burbank , California ; Instrument Zoo , Miami , Florida ; mixed at Larrabee Sound Studio , Universal City , California 
 Personnel 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Looking 4 Myself , RCA Records . 
 = = Charts = = 
 Upon the release of Looking 4 Myself , due to digital downloads , " Sins of My Father " charted in lower regions on the singles chart in South Korea . It debuted on the South Korea Gaon International Chart at number 62 on June 10 , 2012 , with sales of 5 @,@ 813 digital copies . 
 = North Island ( Houtman Abrolhos ) = 
 North Island is the northernmost island in the Houtman Abrolhos , a coral reef archipelago in the Indian Ocean off the coast of Mid West Western Australia . Located about 14 km ( 9 mi ) from the nearest island group , it is one of the largest islands in the Houtman Abrolhos , and one of the few to support dune systems . It has relatively diverse flora dominated by <unk> shrubs and fauna that includes the introduced tammar wallaby , around seven species of reptile , and about 15 resident bird species . 
 First recorded and surveyed in 1840 , North Island has been a seasonal camp for western rock lobster fishermen since the beginning of the 20th century , and this remains the principal focus of human activity on the island . There is also a small amount of tourism , though for the most part it is reserved as conservation habitat for vegetation communities and rare birds . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Discovery = = = 
 The earliest recorded sighting of North Island occurred in May 1840 , during the third survey voyage of HMS Beagle , commanded by John Clements Wickham . It was sighted from the peak of Flag Hill on East Wallabi Island in early May , explored on 22 May , and given its name due to " its relative position to the remainder of Houtman 's Abrolhos " . Before he left the island , Wickham left a letter in a bottle atop the highest hill , which he accordingly christened Record Hill . 
 A map of the island first appeared in 1845 on a British Admiralty chart entitled " The Houtman Rocks " . The following year , Wickham 's lieutenant , John Lort Stokes , published the first account of the island in his Discoveries in Australia . He observed : 
 " The island was about a mile across , and nearly circular . It was surrounded by a range of hills , with a flat in the centre , covered with coarse grass , where a great many quails were flushed , affording good sport , but not a single wallaby . " 
 = = = Development of industry and infrastructure = = = 
 A western rock lobster fishery developed on the island in the early 20th century . There are records of the island being used as a base for <unk> as early as 1902 , and for many years it was used as an anchorage by anglers . It was not until 1947 , however , that a seasonally inhabited permanent camp was established there . According to former <unk> Ron Bertelsen , the first camp was established by skippers George Barker and George Nelson and deckhand John Long , who relocated there when lobsters around Pigeon Island grew scarce . They camped at the southern end of North Island in a camp initially built from packing case timbers . A local carrier boat , the Betty Margaret , serviced the camp . From about 40 seasonal inhabitants in 1940 , the population grew to about 130 by 2003 . An airstrip was built in 1979 . 
 = = = Visits by naturalists = = = 
 A number of naturalists have visited the island , starting with the Percy Sladen Trust Expedition to the Abrolhos Islands in 1913 . This expedition spent little time on North Island , as shore collecting was not very successful there , and other islands appeared better suited to their work . Expedition members nevertheless published substantial information about the island , including a description of its physiography and a list of its vertebrates . 
 Australian ornithologist Dom <unk> visited the island in 1945 but left no published account . In 1959 , a group from the University of Western Australia 's Department of Zoology , accompanied by the English botanist Mary <unk> , travelled to the island ; a brief article on its physiography , vegetation and vertebrate fauna was published the following year by Glen Storr . More recent visitors have included P. R. Howden in 1974 , Robert Ivan Taylor Prince in 1976 , Ronald Eric Johnstone in 1981 and 1983 , Phillip Fuller in 1992 , and Judith Harvey and Vanda Longman in 1999 . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Nominally located at 28 ° 18 ′ 9 ″ S 113 ° 35 ′ 41 ″ E , North Island is an isolated island , separated from its nearest neighbours in the Wallabi Group by the 14 km ( 9 mi ) wide South Passage . Despite this separation , it is sometimes treated as part of that group . It is roughly diamond @-@ shaped and is approximately 2 km ( 1 1 ⁄ 4 mi ) long from south to north , and 1 1 ⁄ 2 km ( 1 mi ) from west to east , giving it an area of about 180 hectares ( 450 ac ) . 
 Two high points are named Record Hill and Latitude Hill . These are the only gazetted places on the island , although some other features have informal names : The most northerly and southerly point on the island have been called " North Point " and " South Point " respectively , and in 1960 a high point in the northwest corner of the island was referred to as " Northwest Hill " . 
 On the eastern side is a seasonally inhabited permanent fishers ' camp . There is an unnamed lighthouse on the western side , a trig point on the eastern side , and a gravel airstrip near the centre . 
 The island is surrounded by a coral reef flat . This extends about 1 1 ⁄ 2 km ( 1 mi ) to the west of the island , and over 3 km ( 2 mi ) to the north and south , but the reef margin lies quite close to the island on the eastern side . Most of the reef is not navigable , but a passage through the reef just north of the island is named Suda Bay Passage ; one just south of the island is named Barker Passage ; and there are a few breaks or channels on the eastern side of the island where boats may obtain shelter in bad weather . An area of reef immediately north of the island is named The Flat , and at the northern extreme of the reef is a breaker named The Big Breaker . About 200 m ( 660 ft ) west of the island is a small rock informally known as " Shag Rock " , but with no official name ; it differs from Shag Rock in the Wallabi Group further south . 
 Like the rest of the Houtman Abrolhos , North Island is Australian territory . It is a part of Western Australia , and falls within the boundaries of the federal Electoral Division of Durack and the state electoral district of Geraldton . It is part of the Houtman Abrolhos Nature Reserve , an A @-@ class reserve managed by Western Australia 's Department of Fisheries . 
 = = Geology and physiography = = 
 The basement of North Island is the Wallabi Limestone , a dense <unk> , coral limestone platform that underlies the entire Wallabi Group . Arising abruptly from a flat shelf , it is about 40 m ( 131 ft ) thick , and of Quaternary origin . Areas of reef that formed during the Eemian interglacial ( about 125 @,@ 000 years ago ) , when sea levels were higher than at present , are now emergent in places , and these form the basement of the group 's central platform islands , namely West Wallabi Island , East Wallabi Island and North Island . 
 North Island 's basement for the most part does not exceed 1 @.@ 5 m ( 4 ft 11 in ) in elevation . Much of it is capped by <unk> , and nearly all of it is covered with sand , but there are some exposed outcrops . The southern margin of the island , for example , takes the form of a low cliff , which is severely undercut by the sea in many places . 
 There are extensive dunes of unconsolidated Holocene sand along both the western and eastern sides of the island . The topography of these dunes varies with time : in 1913 , Dakin recorded the dunes as being a good deal higher in the east than in the west , but in 1960 Storr found the eastern dunes to be severely eroded , apparently because of a fire that burnt much of the island 's vegetation in 1935 . In the centre of the island is a low plain with a sinkhole in its southwest corner and a small salt lake near its northern edge . The soil in the centre of the plain is shallow loam , whereas the rim is deeper and composed largely of shell fragments . 
 = = Climate = = 
 An automatic weather station has been installed on the island since 1990 , and hourly measures of precipitation , air temperature , wind speed , wind direction , relative humidity and atmospheric pressure have been publicly available since then . This is the only weather station in the Houtman Abrolhos , so its data underlies climatic models of the island chain as a whole . Based on the data for North Island , the Houtman Abrolhos has been described as having a Mediterranean climate with warm , dry summers and cooler , wet winters . Mean temperatures range from 9 @.@ 3 to 19 @.@ 5 ° C ( 49 to 67 ° F ) in July , and from 19 @.@ 1 to 32 @.@ 4 ° C ( 66 to 90 ° F ) in February . This is a substantially smaller range than on the mainland : the summer temperature is typically a degree cooler , while winter temperatures are a good deal warmer . This is due to the influence of the ocean , in particular the Leeuwin Current . 
 Eighty @-@ six percent of the island 's rain falls between April and September ; on average there are 89 rain days , resulting in 469 mm ( 18 in ) of rain . The wettest month is June , when over 100 mm ( 4 in ) typically falls . In contrast , only about 70 mm ( 3 in ) can be expected to fall between October and March . 
 It is nearly always windy . During summer a high @-@ pressure ridge lies to the south , causing persistent winds from the southeast or southwest at speeds exceeding 17 kn ( 31 km / h ) almost half the time . During autumn and winter , the ridge moves north , increasing atmospheric pressure over the islands and creating variable winds . Winter tends to produce both the strongest gales and the most frequent periods of calm . In addition to these winds , there is daily pattern of land breezes in the morning , followed by the onset of south @-@ westerly sea breezes in the afternoon . This pattern is caused by temperature differences between the land and the ocean ; it is not as strong in the Houtman Abrolhos chain as on the mainland , but is present . 
 Three classes of storm have been identified in the region . Brief squalls may occur between December and April . A tropical cyclone occurs in the area about once in three years , between January and April ; these may generate extremely high wind speeds that are potentially destructive . During winter , extra @-@ tropical cyclones sometimes pass south of Geraldton , generating winter gales with gusts of up to 35 m / s ( 115 ft / s ) , the wind direction from the northwest initially , then gradually moving around to southerly . 
 = = Flora = = 
 Most of North Island is dominated by <unk> shrubs , generally less than a metre ( 3 ft ) high . The beach vegetation is largely <unk> <unk> ( beach spinifex ) , Salsola kali ( prickly saltwort ) , Atriplex cinerea ( grey saltbush ) and naturalised <unk> maritima ( sea rocket ) . Stable dunes are vegetated by Atriplex paludosa ( marsh saltbush ) , Scaevola crassifolia ( thick @-@ leaved fan @-@ flower ) , <unk> axillaris ( coastal daisy @-@ bush ) , Myoporum insulare ( blueberry tree ) and Exocarpos <unk> ( broom <unk> ) . Sheltered areas behind dunes support Salsola kali and Myoporum insulare and also <unk> <unk> ( nitre bush ) , the last of these being the only plant on the island to grow over 1 1 ⁄ 2 m ( 5 ft ) high . In areas where limestone is close to the surface , the vegetation consists of Pimelea <unk> ( shrubby rice @-@ flower ) , <unk> <unk> ( basket bush ) and <unk> preissii . 
 The rim of the central plain is vegetated by a dense shrubland of <unk> baccata ( berry saltbush ) , Atriplex paludosa and <unk> diffusa ( coast <unk> ) . Nearer the centre , the vegetation consists of <unk> pauciflora ( <unk> ) , <unk> <unk> and Tecticornia <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) , although T. <unk> is replaced by Tecticornia <unk> ( shrubby samphire ) where the soil is shallow . The most low @-@ lying area of the central plain , south of the salt lake , is water @-@ logged in winter ; it is vegetated by a dense mat of <unk> <unk> ( beaded samphire ) , Sporobolus <unk> ( marine couch ) and <unk> australis ( <unk> ) . 
 The dune , limestone and salt lake vegetation communities on North Island are considered to have high conservation significance . The dune and limestone communities have high biodiversity , are highly sensitive to disturbance and regenerate slowly . The salt lake community is considered significant because of the rarity of salt lakes on offshore islands . 
 According to a survey published in 2001 , the following vascular plants occur on North Island : 
 = = Fauna = = 
 = = = Mammals = = = 
 No land mammals are known to be native to North Island , but the Australian sea lion ( <unk> cinerea ) occasionally hauls out on the island 's beaches , and it has been suggested that the island once had a native population of tammar wallaby ( Macropus eugenii ) . 
 Stokes explicitly stated the tammar wallaby to be absent from North Island in 1840 , and it was not recorded by the Percy Sladen Trust Expedition in 1913 . It was apparently introduced to the island in the 1920s , as early fishermen reported seeing it between 1928 and 1930 . This introduction failed , possibly due to overgrazing . The species was not found by <unk> during his 1945 visit , nor by Storr in 1959 , but the latter found plenty of remains , mostly mandibles . Storr interpreted these remains as predating the 1920s introduction , suggesting that a native population of tammars became extinct on the island before 1840 . Albert Russell Main agreed , but the theory has not been accepted by later researchers . 
 In 1985 , five tammar wallabies were introduced onto North Island , and the population established successfully . Possible reasons for this success include the absence of the wallabies ' natural predator , the carpet python ( Morelia <unk> imbricata ) ; the availability of additional food and water from the fishers ' huts , which are occupied during the harshest time of the year ; and the presence of the air strip , which apparently provides additional food for them . By the 2000s , there were over 450 tammar wallabies on the island . The wallabies overgrazed and <unk> the native vegetation , particularly the area burnt in 1935 , thus reducing vegetation cover and causing a serious decline in populations of some plant species . In 2003 , island residents asked the Department of Conservation and Land Management ( CALM ; now the Department of Environment and Conservation ) for help in managing the issue . CALM staff visited the island in April and May of that year and produced a report recommending an investigation into controlling population levels by the use of implanted contraceptives . Exploration of this option began in 2005 , but in July 2007 the research was discontinued . Around 60 wallabies were removed to educational institutions for research purposes , and culling began . By February 2008 , the wallaby population had been reduced to around 25 individuals . 
 The only other mammal known to occur on the island is the naturalised house mouse ( Mus Musculus ) . Eight European rabbits ( Oryctolagus cuniculus ) were introduced in 1934 , and were found to be " exceedingly numerous " by 1945 , but by 1960 they were extinct , apparently from predation by feral cats . Neither rabbits nor cats are now reported as naturalised on the island . 
 = = = Reptiles = = = 
 Reptiles recorded on North Island include <unk> 's prickly gecko ( <unk> <unk> ) , the gecko <unk> marmoratus , the Jew lizard ( <unk> barbata ) , King 's skink ( <unk> kingii ) , the western limestone <unk> ( <unk> australis ) , the western worm <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) , the common dwarf skink ( <unk> <unk> ) , and the Abrolhos bearded dragon ( <unk> minor minima ) . The carpet python was reported as present on the island in very low numbers before 1960 , but it has never been observed there by naturalists , and is now absent . 
 The green turtle ( Chelonia mydas ) has been observed in large numbers near the shore , and it has been claimed that they breed on the island , but this has never been verified . If it is true , then North Island would be the species ' most southerly breeding site in Western Australia . 
 = = = Birds = = = 
 The birds most often mentioned in relation to North Island are the Abrolhos painted buttonquail ( Turnix varius <unk> ) , a rare subspecies of the widespread painted buttonquail ( Turnix varius ) known only from the Wallabi Group and protected under the Wildlife Conservation Act 1950 ; and the brush <unk> ( <unk> elegans ) , one of the most common birds on North Island , the mainland populations of which are decreasing . 
 Other birds known to breed on North Island include the osprey ( Pandion haliaetus cristatus ) , greater crested tern ( Thalasseus bergii ) , Caspian tern ( Hydroprogne caspia ) , silver gull ( Chroicocephalus novaehollandiae novaehollandiae ) , and welcome swallow ( <unk> <unk> ) . Birds commonly recorded as resident on the island but not recorded as breeding there include the Pacific reef heron ( Egretta sacra ) , white @-@ bellied sea eagle ( Haliaeetus leucogaster ) , red @-@ capped plover ( Charadrius <unk> ) , fairy tern ( Sterna nereis nereis ) , Australasian pipit ( <unk> <unk> australis ) and western silvereye ( Zosterops lateralis <unk> ) . The sooty oystercatcher ( Haematopus fuliginosus fuliginosus ) and white @-@ backed swallow ( <unk> <unk> ) have also rarely been observed as resident on the island . 
 The most common visitors to the island are the bar @-@ tailed godwit ( Limosa lapponica baueri ) , grey @-@ tailed <unk> ( Tringa brevipes ) , ruddy turnstone ( Arenaria <unk> <unk> ) , red @-@ necked stint ( Calidris ruficollis ) and curlew sandpiper ( Calidris ferruginea ) . Other observed visitors include the great cormorant ( <unk> carbo novaehollandiae ) , <unk> kestrel ( Falco <unk> <unk> ) , banded lapwing ( Vanellus tricolor ) , greater sand plover ( Charadrius <unk> ) , whimbrel ( Numenius phaeopus variegatus ) , greenshank ( Tringa <unk> ) , sanderling ( Calidris alba ) , willie wagtail ( Rhipidura leucophrys leucophrys ) and brown <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) . 
 North Island is part of the Houtman Abrolhos Important Bird Area , identified as such by BirdLife International because of its importance for supporting large numbers of breeding seabirds . 
 = = Human uses = = 
 The entire Houtman Abrolhos is protected by an A @-@ class nature reserve that is wholly vested in Western Australia 's Minister for Fisheries for purposes of " Conservation of Flora and Fauna , Tourism , and for Purposes Associated with the Fishing Industry " . 
 = = = Fishing industry = = = 
 North Island 's primary human use is as a seasonal camp for Western Rock Lobster fishers . During lobster season , which runs from 15 March to 30 June , North Island 's camp is occupied by about 130 fishers . The camp is serviced by a carrier boat , the North Islander , which visits the island every three days , bringing supplies and taking out the catch and any domestic waste . 
 = = = Conservation = = = 
 North Island is considered to have high conservation value with respect to its populations of brush <unk> and Abrolhos painted buttonquail , and its dune , limestone and salt lake vegetation communities . The potential existence of historically significant artefacts on Record Hill , namely the bottle left by Wickham and Stokes in 1840 , has not been assessed . 
 A 514 ha ( 1 @,@ 270 acres ) area of reef immediately south of North Island is designated a Reef Observation Area ( <unk> ) . Fishing is prohibited in this area , except for the use of lobster pots . One of four <unk> in the Houtman Abrolhos , these protected areas are intended to help conserve species of territorial fish that are fished elsewhere , and to provide divers with the opportunity to observe large populations that are not frightened by their approach . 
 = = = Tourism = = = 
 With extensive sand beaches , seabird breeding areas , and good dive sites in the Reef Observation Area to the south of the island , North Island is considered an attractive tourist site . However , all of the island 's limited anchorage and jetty space is occupied by commercial fishers , so landings from private or charter boats are possible only by prior arrangement . Moreover , visitors are not permitted to camp on the island . North Island accounts for about 3 @.@ 5 % of private recreational boat trips to the Houtman Abrolhos and about 1 % of commercial charter boat trips . The most recent tourism plan for the Houtman Abrolhos supports the continued use of North Island by private charter boats and the use of the airstrip for tourism purposes , but recommends against the establishment of a land @-@ based tourist site there . 
 = Presidential Council for Minority Rights = 
 The Presidential Council for Minority Rights ( PCMR ) is a non @-@ elected government body in Singapore established in 1970 , the main function of which is to scrutinize most of the bills passed by Parliament to ensure that they do not discriminate against any racial or religious community . If the Council feels that any provision in a bill amounts to a differentiating measure , it will report its findings to Parliament and refer the bill back to Parliament for reconsideration . The Council also examines subsidiary legislation and statutes in force on 9 January 1970 . One member of the PCMR is nominated by the Chairman to the Presidential Elections Committee , which is empowered to ensure that candidates for the office of President have the qualifications required by the Constitution . The President also appoints and dismisses the chairman and members of the Presidential Council for Religious Harmony ( " PCRH " ) , established by the Maintenance of Religious Harmony Act ( Cap . <unk> , 2001 Rev. Ed . ) , on the advice of the PCMR , and the PCMR is responsible for determining whether PCRH members who are not representatives of major religions in Singapore have distinguished themselves in public service or community relations in Singapore . 
 The Council is made up of its Chairman ( as of 6 November 2012 the Chief Justice of Singapore , Sundaresh Menon ) , up to ten permanent members who are appointed for life , and up to ten ordinary members who are appointed for a period of three years and may be re @-@ appointed . Appointments are made by the President on the advice of the Cabinet . If the President does not concur with Cabinet 's advice , he may veto appointments . However , he is required to consult the Council of Presidential Advisers ( " CPA " ) , and if the CPA does not concur with his view , Parliament may override his decision with a resolution passed with a two @-@ thirds majority vote . The President has no power to remove current PCMR members . 
 The Constitution only requires members of the Council to be Singapore citizens residing in Singapore who are at least 35 years old . There is no restriction on Cabinet ministers and members of political parties . Moreover , the Prime Minister may authorize any Minister , Minister of State or Parliamentary Secretary to attend Council meetings . It has been noted that this may have a chilling effect on the Council 's deliberations as such a guest might be the author or a vocal proponent of the legislation under scrutiny . On the other hand , it has been suggested that members with political affiliations can often make the biggest contribution towards the Council 's discussions . Another criticism of the PCMR 's composition is that having judges on the Council may lead to a conflict of interest as they may have to exercise judicial review over Acts of Parliament they have either endorsed or rejected previously . 
 All proceedings of the Council are conducted in private , and the Council is prohibited from hearing objectors or examining witnesses regarding any bill or law under consideration . Since its establishment , the PCMR has not found any legislation to contain differentiating measures . 
 = = Role = = 
 The Presidential Council for Minority Rights ( PCMR ) is a non @-@ elected body established in 1970 under Part VII of the Constitution of the Republic of Singapore to fulfil the roles of safeguarding minority rights and advising the Government and the Parliament of Singapore . Its general function , as articulated in the Constitution , is " to consider and report on such matters affecting persons of any racial or religious community in Singapore as may be referred to the Council by Parliament or the Government " . To fulfil its role as a safeguard against any parliamentary or executive propensity to majoritarian or sectarian politics , it may constrict the Government 's freedom to discriminate against racial and religious communities by obstructing the passage of new laws and regulations that it deems to contain such " differentiating measures " . 
 As a legislative review mechanism , it plays a " limited quasi Second Chamber " role . It has also been called " the closest body [ Singapore has ] to a Second Chamber for many years " . However , the Council has been criticized for lacking teeth to act as a real check on potential legislative abuses . As of 2009 , the PCMR had not issued an adverse report regarding any piece of legislation referred to it . Nevertheless , it forms part of the statutory framework for the People 's Action Party government 's internationally lauded efforts in managing minority issues in multiethnic Singapore . Former Deputy Prime Minister S. Jayakumar , formerly a member of the Council , has noted that the PCMR is also a symbol of the paramount importance placed on racial harmony in a world still rife with racial and communal conflict . 
 = = Origin = = 
 = = = The Wee Chong Jin Constitutional Commission = = = 
 On 18 January 1966 , shortly after Singapore 's independence , the President of Singapore appointed a Constitutional Commission helmed by Chief Justice Wee Chong Jin to consider how the rights of racial , linguistic , and religious minorities in the nascent nation should be protected . Singapore had just been ejected from Malaysia , and had experienced an extended period of racial and religious tension resulting from the Maria <unk> riots . This experience reinforced the need for a multiracial society based on equality among races . 
 The Commission , in its report on 27 August 1966 , found that such equality was best protected by giving minority rights equal footing with the fundamental liberties in the Constitution . In addition , it recommended a " Council of State " , an advisory body that would inform the Government of the effects its laws would have on minorities . This concept was based on the Kenyan Council of State which was established in 1958 during its phase of transition to African majority rule . The idea of an advisory body which could not significantly impede the legislative agenda was viewed by lawmakers as a promising innovation . In addition , the creation of an advisory council ensuring equal treatment in legislation was very much in line with the idea that , as citizens become increasingly aware of racial and religious issues , national growth will very much depend on an approach to such problems that is not fraught with religious and racial tensions . 
 Some of the recommendations for the new Council of State included the following : 
 Members of the Council were to be appointed after consultation with the Prime Minister , but at the President 's discretion . 
 No member should belong to a political party . 
 Membership would be assigned and renewed for a specified period of either three , six or nine years . 
 Proceedings should be held in public . 
 = = = Parliamentary debate on the Constitution ( Amendment ) Bill 1969 = = = 
 The Constitution ( Amendment ) Act 1969 was passed on 23 December 1969 to create the " Presidential Council " based heavily on the proposed Council of State . The amendment took effect on 9 January 1970 . This Council was subsequently renamed the Presidential Council for Minority Rights in 1973 . Although the proposal of the Commission was accepted by Parliament , it nonetheless made several changes that led to the substantial differences from the original proposal , including the following : 
 Appointments to the Council are made by the President on the advice of the Cabinet . 
 There are two categories members , namely , permanent and non @-@ permanent members , with the permanent members holding life tenure . 
 Members of Parliament ( MPs ) , including ministers , are not precluded from sitting in the Council and serving their terms in Parliament simultaneously . 
 Affiliation with a political party is not a bar to Council membership . 
 Supporters of the new body heralded the Presidential Council as a step forward in enhancing the country 's democratic spirit . Its establishment was seen as putting a limit on possible dictatorial measures in legislation , which is especially important in a one @-@ party dominated Parliament like Singapore 's . Even if the new Council 's powers were strictly limited to giving advice , this was justified on the basis that it would nevertheless serve to alert the public should the Government proceed to enact an Act which prejudices a class of minorities . Indeed , the Constitutional Commission had intended for the Council of State " to fix the attention of the public on any matter originating from Parliament which may adversely affect the interests of any minority group " . 
 = = Composition , appointment and term of office of members = = 
 = = = Composition = = = 
 The Presidential Council can consist of no more than 21 persons at any one time . The Council is made up of its Chairman , up to ten permanent members who are appointed for life , and up to ten ordinary members who are appointed for a period of three years and may be re @-@ appointed . The distinction between permanent and non @-@ permanent members was not one of the recommendations of the Constitutional Commission , and the Government did not adopt the Commission 's proposal that members should not belong to a political party . It has been suggested that this causes the PCMR 's composition to be " somewhat weighted in favour of the Government and to that extent <unk> from the concept of an uncommitted council of elders which sits as a watchdog over the rights of individuals " . 
 The Chairman is responsible for convening and presiding at all meetings of the Council , but whenever the office of Chairman is vacant , the Council may elect any member to act as Chairman . The Chairman has an original vote but not a casting vote . No fewer than eight members , including the Chairman or another member appointed to preside in his place , must convene in order for the Council to transact any business . Any motion in the Council fails in the event of a tie . 
 = = = Appointment and term of office = = = 
 The members of the Presidential Council are not elected , but appointed by the President on advice of the Cabinet . No public nomination process or vote is stipulated in the Constitution . The President , if he does not concur with the Cabinet , may veto the appointment . However , he is required to consult the Council of Presidential Advisers ( " CPA " ) , a constitutional body that advises the President on appointments of key public officials and matters relating to Singapore 's financial reserves . If he exercises his veto without the CPA 's concurrence , Parliament may overrule his decision with a resolution passed with a two @-@ thirds majority vote . The President has no power to remove current members . 
 Members of the Council must be Singapore citizens of at least 35 years of age residing in Singapore . Apart from these qualifications stated in the Constitution , there was an indication in the Parliamentary debates leading to the PCMR 's introduction that permanent members of the PCMR are very likely to be drawn from " men of distinction " who hold or have held high public appointments , such as former prime ministers , the Chief Justice , former chief justices , judges , the Speaker of the Parliament of Singapore , the Chairman of the Public Service Commission , the Attorney @-@ General and former permanent secretaries . Non @-@ permanent members will probably be mature citizens who have rendered distinguished public service , or are prominent members of their professions . 
 A member may be disqualified if he is found to be of unsound mind , if he becomes insolvent or is an undischarged bankrupt , if he is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment of not less than one year or a fine of not less than S $ 2 @,@ 000 , or if he has lost his Singaporean citizenship or declared himself allied to a foreign country . Any questions as to membership or disqualification are determined by a tribunal convened in secret that consists of a Supreme Court judge appointed by the Chief Justice and two members appointed by the Council . The Constitution does not stipulate any procedure for the removal of a member besides disqualification and the member 's own resignation . 
 = = = Current membership = = = 
 As of 1 April 2015 , there are 19 members on the PCMR , five of whom are permanent members . The Chairman is Chief Justice Sundaresh Menon ( who took over from former Chief Justice Chan Sek Keong who retired on 5 November 2012 ) , and prominent members include Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong , Attorney @-@ General V. K. Rajah , and the Roman Catholic Archbishop of Singapore William Goh . Former Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew was a permanent member of the Council until his death on 23 March 2015 . 
 = = = Issues = = = 
 The existence of permanent members ; the opacity of appointment ; and the inclusion of members of the Government , political parties , and their allies may mean that the PCMR could be used as a tool for the government of the day to remain in power despite its waning popularity in the future . 
 While the President may block certain appointments to the Council , he cannot remove a permanent member from his seat . In fact , it does not appear that any person has the power to do so . The door may be open for potential abuse with appointments based on some political agenda rather than merit . The counterpoint is that it is precisely those in power who are best placed to scrutinize bills for illegitimate differentiating measures , because " it is often those with political affiliations who can make the biggest contribution to the discussion ; if nothing else , from the folly and error of their past ways " . 
 The presence of judicial members on the Council may also pose additional problems . There is a possibility of conflict of interest for judges who sit as members of the Council if they find themselves having to review the very Acts of Parliament that they have either endorsed or rejected previously . This is exacerbated by the fact that the Council , in examining the legitimacy of Bills , plays a quasi @-@ judicial role . There may be confusion as regards the legality of a piece of legislation if , for example , it was initially condemned by the Council but enacted by the Government and later endorsed by the courts upon judicial review . When the potential conflict between the Chief Justice 's role as head of the judiciary and as Chairman of the Council was raised in 2010 by <unk> Muigai , the United Nations Special Rapporteur on Contemporary Forms of Racism , Racial Discrimination , Xenophobia and Related Tolerance , he was informed that the Chief Justice would recuse himself from any matter in which a conflict arose . 
 On the other hand , it has been suggested that the enactment of a statute by Parliament in the face of an adverse report by the PCMR should be taken as a " mere disagreement over the interpretation of the Constitution and thus should not foreclose judicial review " . However , this depends on whether the statute in question is a constitutional amendment or an ordinary Act of Parliament . Acts of Parliament may be disputed in court for their lack of compliance with the Constitution , but constitutional amendments may not be . 
 Further , scrutinizing legislation to determine if it contravenes fundamental liberties is traditionally the function of the judiciary . Even though the PCMR can potentially prevent an unconstitutional piece of legislation from coming into force , there is doubt as to whether the Council 's members have sufficient legal training to undertake the burdensome task . 
 = = Powers and functions = = 
 The PCMR may examine bills , subsidiary legislation , and written laws in force on 9 January 1970 for any " differentiating measure " , which is defined as any measure " which is , or is likely in its practical application to be , disadvantageous to persons of any racial or religious community and not equally disadvantageous to persons of other such communities , either directly by prejudicing persons of that community or indirectly by giving advantage to persons of another community " . All proceedings are conducted in private , and the Council is prohibited from hearing objectors or examining witnesses regarding any bill or law under consideration . 
 Such privacy means that the Council is denied even a modest " sanction " of publicity . Under the Constitutional Commission 's original proposal , the PCMR was meant to hold its meetings publicly in Parliament , and publish reports of such proceedings . These proposals were rejected on the ground that such publicity might have the adverse consequence of giving members a public forum at which to further their own agendas . E.W. Barker , the Minister for Law and National Development , commented in Parliament that having the discussions in private helps to ensure that they are conducted frankly and constructively , and not held with an eye on the press or with a view to scoring political points . 
 The validity of such measures to promote free discussion may be negated by Article 87 of the Constitution , which provides that any Minister , Minister of State or Parliamentary Secretary specially authorized by the Prime Minister may attend these private meetings . There may be a real chilling effect on the deliberations when a guest might well be the author or a vocal proponent of the legislation being scrutinized . 
 Moreover , the Council 's secrecy has been criticized as contrary to its status as a symbol of racial harmony in Singapore . The discharge of such a role requires that the PCMR projects an image of effectiveness , which the current requirement of secrecy arguably impedes . Secret discussions also prevent the public from being informed about controversial issues that may have arisen in the course of implementing new laws , especially those which may affect the rights of minorities . 
 = = = Bills = = = 
 The Speaker of Parliament is required to refer all bills , with some exceptions , to the PCMR for consideration immediately after the third reading of the bill in Parliament and obtain the Council 's report on it before the bill may be sent to the President for assent . 
 The Council must make its report to Parliament within 30 days of the passage of any bill that is referred to it , judging if any provisions of the Bill are " discriminatory or inconsistent with fundamental liberties " . However , if the bill is particularly complex or of great length , the Speaker has the discretion to extend the deadline upon application by the Chairman . If the Council fails to make a report within the given timeframe , it is " conclusively presumed " that the Council is satisfied that the bill is free from differentiating measures . 
 The referral of a bill only after its third reading means that Parliament will not have the opportunity of considering the Council 's views on the bill prior to the debate . The Wee Chong Jin Commission had advocated for the Council to consider each bill after it had been introduced during its second reading , on the presumption that the Council would express views that would benefit the debate on the bill . Additionally , since Parliament has already passed the bill , Parliament may consider it a " point of honour to maintain its original view ... whatever the merits of the Council 's objections " as they have already debated the bill and may decide to " stick to their original guns " . 
 If the Council does make an adverse report , Parliament may amend the bill to rid it of any differentiating measures before sending it back to the Council for inspection . The MP having charge of the bill may give two clear days ' notice of the amendments he or she proposes to move in Parliament to the provisions of the bill that were adversely reported upon by the Council . The bill then stands recommitted to a committee of the whole Parliament on those provisions , and the proposed amendments are considered . Parliament then resumes , and the MP having charge of the bill reports whether the amendments were agreed to by the committee . If so , the MP moves that the amended bill should be resubmitted to the Council . There is uncertainty as to whether the Council will have to make another report within any time limit , or if the bill will then be directly presented to the President for assent . 
 Alternatively , Parliament may effectively ignore the Council 's adverse report with a motion passed with an affirmative vote of two @-@ thirds of its members . Again , the MP in charge of the bill must give two clear days ' notice of his intention to move that the bill be presented to the President for assent despite the adverse report . Following a debate , MPs vote on the motion by taking a division . If Parliament rejects the adverse report in this way , Parliament may send the bill , notwithstanding any differentiating measures , to the President for assent . These overriding mechanisms against adverse reports present difficulties when seen in the light of Article 12 of the Constitution , which is meant to guarantee equal protection under the law to minorities without discrimination , since bills containing differentiating measures that are presented to the President for assent can be seen as " inconsistent with the fundamental liberties of the subject " . 
 = = = = Excluded types of bills = = = = 
 Three types of bills are expressly excluded from the scrutiny of the PCMR : 
 Money bills ; that is , bills which contains provisions dealing with public money , taxation , payments of debts or charges on public funds , grants of money to the Government , the raising or guaranteeing of loans , and any ancillary matters relating to such matters . 
 Bills that the Prime Minister certifies as affecting " the defence or security of Singapore , or which relate to the public safety , peace or good order of Singapore " . 
 Bills that the Prime Minister certifies to be so urgent that any delay in enactment would be detrimental to the public welfare . 
 It has been argued that such exemptions are too wide and may be open to abuse . For instance , it is up to the Speaker to determine whether any bill falls within the definition of a money bill , and once he has certified his opinion on the matter in writing , that is " conclusive for all purposes and shall not be open to question in any court " . Moreover , grounds upon which bills may be excluded such as " public safety " and " peace " , have been described as " nebulous " with potentially wide definitions that are open to abuse by the government in power . As regards a bill that has been enacted on a certificate of urgency and assented to by the President , the Speaker is required to send the Act of Parliament to the Council as soon as possible for its report , which is then presented to Parliament . However , the Constitution contains no provisions as to any steps that Parliament is required to take to amending the Act if an adverse report is made . 
 = = = Subsidiary legislation and certain written laws = = = 
 All new subsidiary legislation must be sent to the Council for scrutiny within 14 days of their publication in the Government Gazette . The Council is then required to make its report to the Speaker and the appropriate Minister within 30 days . However , unlike with bills , there is no provision to extend the original deadline . As with bills , tardiness in sending an adverse report results in a conclusive presumption that the Council finds no differentiating measures in the subsidiary legislation . Where the Council issues an adverse report , the Minister must revoke or amend the offending provision within six months of the report , unless Parliament passes a resolution confirming that provision . 
 The Council may also make a report on any written law in force on 9 January 1970 , but there is no constitutional provision that requires Parliament or the relevant Minister to act on it . 
 = = = Other functions of the Council and its members = = = 
 One of the members of the Presidential Elections Committee , which is the body empowered to ensure that candidates for the office of President have the qualifications required by the Constitution , is a member of the PCMR appointed to this post by the Chairman of the Council . 
 The Council also effectively decides the composition of the Presidential Council for Religious Harmony ( " PCRH " ) , established by the Maintenance of Religious Harmony Act . The President appoints the chairman and the members of the PCRH on the advice of the Council , and the Council is responsible for determining whether the members of the PCRH who are not representatives of major religions in Singapore have " distinguished themselves in public service or community relations in Singapore " . The President is also required to consult the Council before revoking the membership of any member of the PCRH . However , the President has the discretion to veto any appointment or revocation if he does not agree with the PCMR . 
 = = The PCMR as an " Upper Chamber " = = 
 The Singaporean Parliament is unicameral in nature , consisting of a single legislative body tasked with making laws . However , the notion of a second legislative chamber was considered on two separate occasions . In 1954 , a constitutional commission headed by Sir George William Rendel rejected a proposal for a second chamber composed solely of minority representatives , citing its unsuitability in a tiny state like Singapore and arguing that it might end up being unnecessarily bureaucratic . It also asserted that such an upper House might potentially be detrimental to social cohesion . This issue was also considered by the Wee Chong Jin Commission , which rejected it on similar grounds . 
 The PCMR 's power to review and block the passage of Bills is regarded by some as an indication of its potential as a second chamber . The Council 's functional design , however , makes it only a very weak legislative review mechanism . The Council has no power to investigate alleged breaches of minority rights . The general public has also no right of making their views or complaints known to the Chamber . In addition , the lack of a veto power means that currently the most the Council can do is delay the passage of bills and prompt further parliamentary deliberation of the bills in question . But it has yet to do even this much . On those occasions where the Council might have rightly drawn attention to differentiating measures in proposed Bills , the legislature has pre @-@ empted this by inserting " notwithstanding clauses " in the Constitution . Such clauses declare that laws that contravene a constitutional provision are nevertheless valid . 
 An alternative view is that it is not the formal structure of the Council – which in theory is capable of exercising judicial , legislative and review functions – but the presence of a practically single @-@ party Parliament that drastically undermines the PCMR 's powers , restricting it solely to an advisory capacity . This may not be the case if a strong Opposition exists in Parliament to obstruct the mustering of the required two @-@ thirds voting majority required to push through legislation without the endorsement of the Council . 
 Besides being criticized for its limited powers , there is also some concern that the Council 's responsibilities may go too far . By taking up the function of scrutinizing existing and prospective legislation for differentiating measures and inconsistencies with fundamental liberties , the Council may be encroaching on the functions of constitutional interpretation , which is traditionally the function of courts . Even though the Council has the additional advantage of identifying potentially unconstitutional legislation at an early stage , thereby preventing unnecessary litigation in the future , there is doubt as to the ability of the Council to take on such a task . Given that constitutional interpretation is traditionally the function of lawyers and the courts , the task may be best carried out by the legally trained members of the PCMR . 
 = = = Legislation = = = 
 Constitution of the Republic of Singapore ( 1999 Reprint ) . 
 Maintenance of Religious Harmony Act ( Cap . <unk> , 2001 Rev. Ed . ) ( " <unk> " ) . 
 Standing Orders of the Parliament of Singapore ( 2010 Ed . ) , archived from the original on 1 October 2011 . 
 = = = Other works = = = 
 Khoo , Francis Kah Siang ( 1969 ) , " [ The Presidential Council : ] Paper III " , Singapore Law Review 1 : 14 – 19 . 
 Mak , Andrew Yen @-@ Chen ( 1992 ) , " The Need for a Second Chamber in Singapore " , Singapore Law Review 13 : 109 – 131 . 
 Marshall , David S [ aul ] ( 1969 ) , " [ The Presidential Council : ] Paper II " , Singapore Law Review 1 : 9 – 13 . 
 Neo , Jaclyn Ling @-@ Chien ( 2009 ) , " The Protection of Minorities and the Constitution : A Judicious Balance ? " , in Thio , Li @-@ ann ; Tan , Kevin Y [ ew ] L [ ee ] , eds . , Evolution of a Revolution : Forty Years of the Singapore Constitution , Singapore : Routledge @-@ Cavendish , pp. 234 – 259 , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 415 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 Report of the Constitutional Commission , 1966 [ chairman : Wee Chong Jin C.J. ] , Singapore : Government Printer , 1966 , OCLC <unk> . 
 Tan , Kevin Y [ ew ] L [ ee ] ; Thio , Li @-@ ann ( 2010 ) , " The Legislature " , Constitutional Law in Malaysia and Singapore ( 3rd ed . ) , Singapore : LexisNexis , pp. 299 – 359 , ISBN 978 @-@ 981 @-@ 236 @-@ 795 @-@ 2 . 
 Tan , Seow Hon ( 1995 ) , " The Constitution as ' Comforter ' ? – An Assessment of the <unk> in Singapore 's Constitutional System " , Singapore Law Review 16 : 104 – 156 . 
 Thio , Su Mien ( 1969 ) , " [ The Presidential Council : ] Paper I " , Singapore Law Review 1 : 2 – 8 . 
 Wan , Wai Yee ( 1994 ) , " Recent Changes to the Westminster System of Government and Government Accountability " , Singapore Law Review 15 : 297 – 332 . 
 = = = Articles and websites = = = 
 De Cruz , Gerald ( 1969 ) , " [ The Presidential Council : ] Paper IV " , Singapore Law Review 1 : 20 – 25 . 
 Tan , Eugene ; Chan , Gary ( 25 September 2007 ) , " The Legislature " , The Singapore Legal System , <unk> , Singapore Academy of Law , archived from the original on 24 July 2011 , retrieved 30 September 2011 . 
 Tan , Yee Lin ( 31 October 2009 ) , The Presidential Council for Minority Rights , Singapore Infopedia , National Library Board , archived from the original on 28 September 2011 , retrieved 28 September 2011 . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Tommy Koh , ed . ( 2006 ) , " Presidential Council for Minority Rights " , Singapore : The Encyclopedia , Singapore : Editions Didier Millet in association with the National Heritage Board , p . 422 , ISBN 978 @-@ 981 @-@ <unk> @-@ 63 @-@ 2 , archived from the original on 11 May 2012 . 
 Report of the Select Committee on the Constitution ( Amendment ) Bill [ <unk> . 7 of 1969 ] , Singapore : Printed by Tan Boon Poh , Acting Government Printer , 1969 . 
 Tan , Kevin ( 1999 ) , " Parliament and the Making of Law in Singapore " , in Tan , Kevin Y [ ew ] L [ ee ] , ed . , The Singapore Legal System ( 2nd ed . ) , Singapore : Singapore University Press , pp. 123 – 159 , ISBN 978 @-@ 9971 @-@ 69 @-@ 213 @-@ 1 . 
 = Basil W. Duke = 
 Basil Wilson Duke ( May 28 , 1838 – September 16 , 1916 ) was a Confederate general officer during the American Civil War . His most noted service in the war was as second @-@ in @-@ command for his brother @-@ in @-@ law John Hunt Morgan ; Duke would later write a popular account of Morgan 's most famous raid : 1863 's Morgan 's Raid . He took over Morgan 's command after Morgan was shot by Union soldiers in 1864 . At the end of the war , Duke was among Confederate President Jefferson Davis 's bodyguards after his flight from Richmond , Virginia , through the Carolinas . 
 Duke 's lasting impact was as a historian and communicator of the Confederate experience . As a historian he helped to found the Filson Club Historical Society and started the preserving of the Shiloh battlefield . He wrote numerous books and magazine articles , most notably in the Southern Bivouac . When he died , he was one of the few high @-@ ranking Confederate officers still alive . Historian James A. Ramage said of Duke , " No Southerner was more dedicated to the Confederacy than General Basil W. Duke " . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Basil Wilson Duke was born in Scott County , Kentucky , on May 28 , 1838 ; the only child of Nathaniel W. Duke and his wife , the former Mary Pickett Currie . He was 5 feet 10 inches ( 1 @.@ 78 m ) , slightly @-@ built , with a resonant voice . A relative described him as " essentially a man of the 17th century , that century in half armor , torn between chivalry and realism " . 
 Duke 's parents died during his childhood : Mary , when Basil was eight , and Nathaniel when Basil was 11 ; save for an instance in his Reminiscences , he seldom mentioned them . He attended Georgetown College ( 1853 – 1854 ) and Centre College ( 1854 – 1855 ) , before studying law at Lexington , Kentucky 's Transylvania University . After graduating in 1858 , he went to St. Louis , Missouri in 1858 to practice law , as his older cousin , also named Basil Duke , was practicing law there , and there were already a multitude of lawyers in Lexington . 
 = = Civil War service = = 
 When the American Civil War started in 1861 , Duke was still in Missouri , where he helped in the initial forays for Missouri 's secession from the United States . ( Missouri would have both Federal and Confederate governments during the War . ) On January 7 , 1861 , he and four others created The Minute Men , a pro @-@ secession militia @-@ like organization , in response to many pro @-@ Northern politicians being recently elected in St. Louis . Duke quickly became the leader , despite being only 23 years old . He formed the organization into five companies and sought to acquire the federal arsenal in St. Louis for the secessionist movement . He made a habit of placing secessionist flags at prominent locations , looking to start fights with pro @-@ Union forces . He would eventually be indicted for arson and treason but managed to escape back into Kentucky . 
 Once back to Lexington , Kentucky , Duke married Henrietta Hunt Morgan , sister of John Hunt Morgan . Their wedding took place on June 19 , 1861 . Duke would return to Missouri to help Confederate forces in Missouri under the command of Brigadier General Thomas Hindman , but would eventually return to Kentucky at Brigadier General William J. Hardee 's insistence . By October 1861 , he had enlisted in his brother @-@ in @-@ law 's ( Morgan 's ) command and was subsequently elected Second Lieutenant . 
 Duke was twice wounded during the War . At the Battle of Shiloh , he was swinging his saber at a Union soldier when he was shot in the left shoulder by a Brown Bess musket . The bullet exited his right shoulder , barely missing the spine . After recuperating , he was promoted to lieutenant colonel and a few months later , to colonel . Duke 's second wound came at Elizabethtown , Kentucky 's Rolling Fork River during Morgan 's Christmas Raid of 1862 , when , on December 29 , he was hit by a shell fragment while leading the back guard as the rest of Morgan 's men crossed a stream ; his men initially assumed he was dead . 
 Duke was the principal trainer for mounted combat for Morgan 's Raiders and participated in Morgan 's audacious Ohio Raid , during which he was captured at the Battle of Buffington Island on July 19 , 1863 , while leading troops in a delaying tactic which allowed other Confederate forces either to escape across the Ohio River with Adam " Stovepipe " Johnson or to advance further into Ohio with Morgan , although shortly thereafter , he too was captured . Duke would remain in captivity until August 3 , 1864 , when he was exchanged . He could probably have escaped with Morgan and Thomas Hines but felt that to do so would hurt their chances , as Morgan was easily replaced in his cell by his brother , but no similar replacement as a temporary deception was there for Duke . 
 After Morgan was killed on September 4 , 1864 , Duke assumed command of Morgan 's forces and on September 15 , 1864 , was promoted to brigadier general and sent to Virginia . He was with Jefferson Davis shortly after the Confederate President fled Richmond . Duke was in the final Confederate war council at the Burt @-@ Stark Mansion in Abbeville , South Carolina , on May 2 , 1865 . Duke surrendered to Union officials on May 10 , 1865 , in Washington , Georgia . 
 As an officer , Duke 's way of " gently ordering " soldiers under his command allowed him to have friendly relations with his men . He loved fighting , was steadfast during difficult moments in conflicts , and was described as a " spit @-@ and @-@ polish " officer . 
 = = Postbellum = = 
 After the war , Duke moved to Louisville , Kentucky , in March 1868 , where he would live for most of his remaining life . He returned to practicing law later that year , with his primary client being the Louisville and Nashville Railroad . He served as their chief counsel and lobbyist , despite the L & N Railroad being a favorite victim of Morgan 's raiders during the war . He briefly served in the Kentucky General Assembly from 1869 to 1870 , resigning as he felt a conflict of interest being a lobbyist for the L & N. Duke also served as the Fifth Judicial District 's commonwealth attorney from 1875 to 1880 . 
 Duke became greatly involved in writing the history of the Civil War and related topics . He helped to found Louisville 's Filson Club ( now The Filson Historical Society ) in 1884 , writing many of their early papers . From 1885 to 1887 he edited the magazine Southern Bivouac . He also wrote three books : History of Morgan 's Cavalry ( 1867 ) , History of the Bank of Kentucky , 1792 @-@ 1895 ( 1895 ) , and Reminiscences of General Basil W. Duke ( a collection of various magazine articles he wrote ) ( 1911 ) . A prominent writer of the Southern experience , he neither advocated slavery , nor apologized for it ; although thinking it a good thing to have been abolished , he insisted that Northern claims of excessive abuse of slaves was exaggerated . 
 After 1900 , Duke began to withdraw from his public career . By 1903 he ceased doing work for the L & N. In 1904 he was appointed commissioner of Shiloh National Military Park by President Theodore Roosevelt , with whom he had become friendly after their having been introduced to each other at the Filson Club . Duke was devastated when , on October 20 , 1909 , his wife of fifty years , Henrietta , died of sudden heart failure . Afterward , he lived with his daughter Julia and her family in Louisville 's Cherokee Park . Prior to his death in 1916 , Duke had been one of the last surviving Confederate general officers . In his final years he spent much of his time handling requests made by those with questions about the Confederacy , even during the time that he was recovering from cataract surgery in 1914 . Two years later , during a visit to his daughter , Mary Currie , in Massachusetts , Duke underwent surgery in a New York City hospital , first , on September 1 , to have his right foot amputated and then , on September 11 , to have his right leg amputated at the knee . Five days later , on September 16 , 1916 , he died , one of the last surviving high @-@ ranking Confederate officers . Duke was buried beside his wife in front of the John Hunt Morgan grave in the Hunt family plot in Lexington Cemetery . In addition to his exploits as a Confederate commander , perhaps his lasting fame is as a master chronicler of Confederate military history . 
 = CFM International CFM56 = 
 The CFM International CFM56 ( U.S. military designation <unk> ) series is a family of high @-@ bypass turbofan aircraft engines made by CFM International ( CFMI ) , with a thrust range of 18 @,@ 500 to 34 @,@ 000 pounds @-@ force ( 82 to 150 kilonewtons ) . CFMI is a 50 – 50 joint @-@ owned company of SNECMA , France and GE Aviation ( GE ) , United States . Both companies are responsible for producing components and each has its own final assembly line . GE produces the high @-@ pressure compressor , combustor , and high @-@ pressure turbine , and SNECMA manufactures the fan , gearbox , exhaust and the low @-@ pressure turbine , and some components are made by <unk> of Italy . The engines are assembled by GE in <unk> , Ohio , and by SNECMA in <unk> in France . The completed engines are marketed by CFMI . Despite initial export restrictions , it is one of the most common turbofan aircraft engines in the world , in four major variants . 
 The CFM56 first ran in 1974 . In April 1979 , the joint venture had not received a single order in five years and was two weeks away from being dissolved . The program was saved when Delta Airlines , United Airlines , and Flying Tigers chose the CFM56 to re @-@ engine their DC @-@ 8s and shortly thereafter it was chosen to re @-@ engine the KC @-@ 135 Stratotanker fleet of the U.S. Air Force – still its biggest customer . The first engines entered service in 1982 . Several fan blade failure incidents were experienced during the CFM56 's early service , including one failure that was a cause of the Kegworth air disaster , and some engine variants experienced problems caused by flight through rain and hail . Both these issues were resolved with engine modifications . 
 As of June 2016 , as the most used high bypass turbofan , it achieved more than 800 million engine flight hours , and at a rate of one million flight hours every eight days it will achieve one billion flight hours by 2020 . It have more than 550 operators and more than 2 @,@ 400 CFM56 @-@ powered jet aircraft are in the air at any moment . It is known for its dependability : its average time on wing is 30 @,@ 000 hours before a first shop visit , with the current fleet record at 50 @,@ 000 hours . 
 As of July 2016 , 30 @,@ 000 engines have been built : 9 @,@ 860 CFM56 @-@ 5 engines for the Airbus <unk> and A340 @-@ 200 / 300 and more than 17 @,@ 300 CFM56 @-@ 3 / <unk> engines for the Boeing 737 Classic and <unk> . CFM plans to produce 1 @,@ 700 engines in 2016 , the highest production rate in the industry , and there are 3 @,@ 000 engines in backlog . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 Research into the next generation of commercial jet engines , high @-@ bypass ratio turbofans in the " 10 @-@ ton " ( 20 @,@ 000 lbf ; 89 kN ) thrust class , began in the late 1960s . SNECMA , who had mostly built military engines until then , was the first company to seek entrance into the market by searching for a partner with commercial experience to design and build an engine in this class . They considered Pratt & Whitney , Rolls @-@ Royce , and GE Aviation as potential partners , and after two company executives , Gerhard Neumann from GE and René <unk> from SNECMA , introduced themselves at the 1971 Paris Air Show a decision was made . The two companies saw mutual benefit in the collaboration and met several more times , fleshing out the basics of the joint project . 
 Pratt & Whitney dominated the commercial market at this point in time . GE needed an engine in this market class , and SNECMA had previous experience of working with them , collaborating on the production of the CF6 @-@ 50 turbofan for the Airbus A300 . Pratt & Whitney was considering upgrading their JT8D to compete in the same class as the CFM56 as a sole venture , while Rolls @-@ Royce dealt with financial issues that precluded them from starting new projects ; this situation caused GE to gain the title of best partner for the program . 
 A major reason for GE 's interest in the collaboration , rather than building a 10 @-@ ton engine on their own , was that the SNECMA project was the only source of development funds for an engine in this class at this particular time . GE was initially considering only contributing technology from its CF6 engine rather than its much more advanced F101 engine , developed for the B @-@ 1 Lancer supersonic bomber . The company was faced with a dilemma when the United States Air Force ( USAF ) announced its Advanced Medium STOL Transport ( AMST ) project in 1972 which included funding for the development of a 10 @-@ ton engine – either to build a " limited " technology 10 @-@ ton engine with SNECMA , or a similar engine with " advanced " technology on their own . Concerned that the company would be left with only the " limited " engine in its portfolio if it did not win the Air Force contract ( for which it was competing with Pratt & Whitney and a General Motors division with its " advanced " engine ) , GE decided to apply for an export license for the F101 core technology . 
 = = = Export issues = = = 
 GE applied for the export license in 1972 as their primary contribution to the 10 @-@ ton engine project . The United States Department of State 's Office of Munitions Control recommended the rejection of the application on national security grounds ; specifically because the core technology was an aspect of a strategic national defense system ( the B @-@ 1 bomber ) , it was built with Department of Defense ( and therefore American taxpayer ) money , and that exporting the technology to France would limit the number of American workers on the project . The official decision was made in a National Security Decision Memorandum signed by the National Security Advisor Henry Kissinger on 19 September 1972 . 
 While national security concerns were cited as the grounds for rejection , politics played an important role as well . The project , and the export issue associated with it , was considered so important that French President Georges Pompidou appealed directly to U.S. President Richard Nixon in 1971 to approve the deal , and Henry Kissinger brought the issue up with President Pompidou in a 1972 meeting . GE reportedly argued at the highest levels that having half of the market was better than having none of it , which they believed would happen if SNECMA pursued the engine on their own without GE 's contribution . Nixon administration officials feared that this project could be the beginning of the end of American aerospace leadership . 
 There was also speculation that the rejection may have been , in part , retaliation for French involvement in convincing the Swiss not to purchase American @-@ made A @-@ 7 Corsair II aircraft that had been competing against a French design , the Dassault Milan . In the end , the Swiss did not purchase either aircraft , opting for the Northrop F @-@ 5E Tiger II instead . 
 = = = = 1973 Nixon – Pompidou meeting = = = = 
 Despite the export license being rejected , both the French and GE continued to push the Nixon Administration for permission to export the F101 technology . Efforts continued throughout the months following the rejection , culminating in the engine becoming an agenda topic during the 1973 meeting of Presidents Nixon and Pompidou in Reykjavík . Discussions at this meeting resulted in an agreement that allowed the development of the CFM56 to proceed . Contemporary reports state that the agreement was based on assurances that the core of the engine , the part that GE was developing from the military F101 , would be built in the U.S. and then transported to France in order to protect the sensitive technologies . The joint venture also agreed to pay the U.S. an $ 80 million royalty fee ( calculated at $ 20 @,@ 000 per engine predicted to be built ) as repayment for the development money provided by the government for the F101 engine core . Documents declassified in 2007 revealed that a key aspect of the CFM56 export agreement was that the French government agreed not to seek tariffs against American aircraft being imported into Europe . 
 = = = CFM International = = = 
 With the export issue settled , GE and SNECMA finalized the agreement that formed CFM International ( CFMI ) , a 50 – 50 joint company that would be responsible for producing and marketing the 10 @-@ ton engine , the CFM56 . The venture was officially founded in 1974 . The two primary roles for CFMI were to manage the program between GE and SNECMA , and to market , sell and service the engine at a single point of contact for the customer . CFMI was made responsible for the day @-@ to @-@ day decision making for the project , while major decisions ( developing a new variant , for example ) required the go @-@ ahead from GE and SNECMA management . 
 The CFMI board of directors is currently split evenly between SNECMA and GE ( five members each ) . There are two vice presidents , one from each company , who support the President of CFMI . The president tends to be drawn from SNECMA and sits at CFMI 's headquarters near GE in Cincinnati , Ohio . 
 The work split between the two companies gave GE responsibility for the high @-@ pressure compressor ( HPC ) , the combustor , and the high @-@ pressure turbine ( HPT ) ; SNECMA was responsible for the fan , the low @-@ pressure compressor ( LPC ) , and the low @-@ pressure turbine ( LPT ) . SNECMA was also responsible for the initial airframe integration engineering , mostly involving the nacelle design , and was initially responsible for the gearbox , but shifted that work to GE when it became apparent that it would be more efficient for GE to assemble that component along with their other parts . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Overview = = = 
 Development work on the CFM56 began before CFMI was formally created . While work proceeded smoothly , the international arrangement led to unique working conditions . For example , both companies had assembly lines , some engines were assembled and tested in the U.S. and others in France . Engines assembled in France were subject to the initially strict export agreement , which meant that GE 's core was built in the U.S. , then shipped to the SNECMA plant in France where it was placed in a locked room into which even the President of SNECMA was not allowed . The SNECMA components ( the fore and aft sections of the engine ) were brought into the room , GE employees mounted them to the core , and then the assembled engine was taken out to be finished . 
 The first completed CFM56 engine first ran at GE in June 1974 with the second running in October 1974 . The second engine was then shipped to France and first ran there on 13 December 1974 . These first engines were considered " production hardware " as opposed to test examples and were designated as the CFM56 @-@ 2 , the first variant of the CFM56 . 
 The engine flew for the first time in February 1977 when it replaced one of the four Pratt & Whitney JT8D engines on the McDonnell Douglas YC @-@ 15 , an entrant in the Air Force 's Advanced Medium STOL Transport ( AMST ) competition . Soon after , the second CFM56 was mounted on a Sud Aviation Caravelle at the SNECMA flight test center in France . This engine had a slightly different configuration with a long bypass duct and mixed exhaust flow , rather than a short bypass duct with unmixed exhaust flow . It was the first to include a " Thrust Management System " to maintain engine trim . 
 = = = First customers = = = 
 After testing the engine for several years , both in the air and on the ground , CFMI searched for customers outside of a possible AMST contract . The main targets were re @-@ engine contracts for the Douglas DC @-@ 8 and the Boeing 707 airliners , including the related military tanker , the KC @-@ 135 Stratotanker . There was little initial interest in the engine , but Boeing realized that the CFM56 might be a solution to upcoming noise regulations . After announcing that a 707 would be configured with the CFM56 engine for flight tests in 1977 , Boeing officially offered the 707 @-@ 320 with the CFM56 engine as an option in 1978 . The new variant was listed as the 707 @-@ 700 . Due to limited interest from the airlines in a re @-@ engined 707 , Boeing ended the 707 @-@ 700 program in 1980 without selling any aircraft . Despite the lack of sales , having the commercial 707 available with the CFM56 helped the engine 's competitiveness for the KC @-@ 135 re @-@ engine contract . 
 = = = = KC @-@ 135R = = = = 
 Winning the contract to re @-@ engine the KC @-@ 135 tanker fleet for the USAF would be a huge boon to the CFM56 project ( with more than 600 aircraft available to re @-@ engine ) , and CFMI aggressively pursued that goal as soon as the Request For Proposals ( RFP ) was announced in 1977 . Like other aspects of the program , international politics played their part in this contract . In efforts to boost the CFM56 's chances versus its competitors , the Pratt & Whitney TF33 and an updated Pratt & Whitney JT8D , the French government announced in 1978 that they would upgrade their 11 KC @-@ <unk> with the CFM56 , providing one of the first orders for the engine . 
 The USAF announced the CFM56 as the winner of the re @-@ engine contract in January 1980 . Officials indicated that they were excited at the prospect of replacing the Pratt & Whitney J57 engines currently flying on the KC @-@ 135A aircraft , calling them " ... the noisiest , dirtiest , [ and ] most fuel inefficient powerplant still flying " at the time . The re @-@ engined aircraft was designated the KC @-@ 135R . The CFM56 brought many benefits to the KC @-@ 135 , decreasing takeoff distance by as much as 3 @,@ 500 ft ( 1 @,@ 100 m ) , decreasing overall fuel usage by 25 % , greatly reducing noise ( 24 dB lower ) and lowering total life cycle cost . With those benefits in mind , the United States Navy selected the CFM56 @-@ 2 to power their variant of the Boeing 707 , the E @-@ 6 Mercury , in 1982 . In 1984 the Royal Saudi Air Force selected the CFM56 @-@ 2 to power their E @-@ 3 Sentry aircraft ( also related to the 707 airframe ) . The CFM56 @-@ 2 @-@ powered E @-@ 3 also became the standard configuration for aircraft purchased by the British and French . 
 = = = = DC @-@ 8 = = = = 
 By the end of the 1970s , airlines were considering upgrading their aging Douglas DC @-@ 8 aircraft as an alternative to buying new quieter and more efficient aircraft . Following the French KC @-@ 135 order in 1978 , the April 1979 decision by United Airlines to upgrade 30 of their DC @-@ 8 @-@ 61 aircraft with the CFM56 @-@ 2 was important for securing the development of the CFM56 ; GE and SNECMA were two weeks away from freezing development had that order not materialized . This decision marked the first commercial purchase ( rather than government / military ) of the engine , and Delta Air Lines and Flying Tiger Line soon followed suit , giving the CFM56 a firm footing in both the military and commercial realms . 
 = = = = Boeing 737 = = = = 
 In the early 1980s Boeing selected the CFM56 @-@ 3 to exclusively power the Boeing 737 @-@ 300 variant . The 737 wings were closer to the ground than previous applications for the CFM56 , necessitating several modifications to the engine . The fan diameter was reduced , which reduced the bypass ratio , and the engine accessory gearbox was moved from the bottom of the engine ( the 6 o 'clock position ) to the 9 o 'clock position , giving the engine nacelle its distinctive flat @-@ bottomed shape . The overall thrust was also reduced , from 24 @,@ 000 to 20 @,@ 000 lbf ( 107 to 89 kN ) , mostly due to the reduction in bypass ratio . 
 Since the small initial launch order for twenty 737 @-@ 300s split between two airlines , over 5 @,@ 000 Boeing 737 aircraft had been delivered with CFM56 turbofans by April 2010 . 
 = = = Continued development = = = 
 = = = = Tech56 and Tech Insertion = = = = 
 In 1998 , CFMI launched the " Tech56 " development and demonstration program to create an engine for the new single @-@ aisle aircraft that were expected to be built by Airbus and Boeing . The program focused on developing a large number of new technologies for the theoretical future engine , not necessarily creating an all @-@ new design . When it became clear that Boeing and Airbus were not going to build all @-@ new aircraft to replace the 737 and A320 , CFMI decided to apply some of those Tech56 technologies to the CFM56 in the form of the " Tech Insertion " program which focused on three areas : fuel efficiency , maintenance costs and emissions . Launched in 2004 , the package included redesigned high @-@ pressure compressor blades , an improved combustor , and improved high- and low @-@ pressure turbine components which resulted in better fuel efficiency and lower nitrogen oxides ( NOx ) emissions . The new components also reduced engine wear , lowering maintenance costs by about 5 % . The engines entered service in 2007 , and all new CFM56 @-@ 5B and CFM56 @-@ 7B engines are being built with the Tech Insertion components . CFMI also offers the components as an upgrade kit for existing engines . 
 = = = = CFM56 @-@ 7B " Evolution " = = = = 
 In 2009 , CFMI announced the latest upgrade to the CFM56 engine , the " CFM56 @-@ 7B Evolution " or CFM56 @-@ <unk> . This upgrade , announced with improvements to Boeing 's 737 Next Generation , further enhances the high- and low @-@ pressure turbines with better aerodynamics , as well as improving engine cooling , and aims to reduce overall part count . CFMI expected the changes to result in a 4 % reduction in maintenance costs and a 1 % improvement in fuel consumption ( 2 % improvement including the airframe changes for the new 737 ) ; flight and ground tests completed in May 2010 revealed that the fuel burn improvement was better than expected at 1 @.@ 6 % . Following 450 hours of testing , the CFM56 @-@ <unk> engine was certified by FAA and EASA on 30 July 2010 and delivered since mid @-@ 2011 . 
 The CFM56 @-@ 5B / 3 PIP ( Performance Improvement Package ) engine include these new technologies and hardware changes to lower fuel burn and lower maintenance cost . Airbus A320s were to use this engine version starting in late 2011 . 
 = = = = LEAP = = = = 
 The LEAP is a new engine design based on and designed to replace the CFM56 series , with 16 % efficiency savings by using more composite materials and achieving higher bypass ratios of over 10 : 1 . LEAP is expected to enter service in 2016 . 
 = = Design = = 
 = = = Summary = = = 
 The CFM56 is a high @-@ bypass turbofan engine ( most of the air accelerated by the fan bypasses the core of the engine and is exhausted out of the fan case ) with several variants having bypass ratios ranging from 5 : 1 to 6 : 1 , generating 18 @,@ 500 to 34 @,@ 000 lbf ( 80 kN to 150 kN ) of thrust . The variants share a common design , but the details differ . The CFM56 is a two @-@ shaft ( or two @-@ spool ) engine , meaning that there are two rotating shafts , one high @-@ pressure and one low @-@ pressure . Each is powered by its own turbine section ( the high @-@ pressure and low @-@ pressure turbines , respectively ) . The fan and booster ( low @-@ pressure compressor ) evolved over the different iterations of the engine , as did the compressor , combustor and turbine sections . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Most variants of the CFM56 feature a single @-@ annular combustor . An annular combustor is a continuous ring where fuel is injected into the airflow and ignited , raising the pressure and temperature of the flow . Other types of combustors include can combustors , where each combustion chamber is separate , and <unk> which is a hybrid of the two . Fuel injection is regulated by a <unk> Unit ( <unk> ) , built by Honeywell . The <unk> regulates the amount of fuel delivered to the engine by means of an electrohydraulic servo valve that , in turn , drives a fuel metering valve , that provides information to the full authority digital engine controller ( FADEC ) . 
 In 1989 , CFMI began work on a new , double @-@ annular combustor . Instead of having just one combustion zone , the double @-@ annular combustor has a second combustion zone that is used at high thrust levels . This design lowers the emissions of both nitrogen oxides ( NOx ) and carbon dioxide ( CO2 ) . The first CFM56 engine with the double @-@ annular combustor entered service in 1995 , and the combustor is used on " Tech Insertion " CFM56 @-@ 5B and CFM56 @-@ 7B variants . 
 GE started developing and testing a new type of combustor called the Twin <unk> <unk> <unk> combustor , or " TAPS " , during the Tech 56 program . This design is similar to the double @-@ annular combustor in that it has two combustion zones ; this combustor " swirls " the flow , creating an ideal fuel – air mixture . This difference allows the combustor to generate much less NOx than other combustors . Tests on a CFM56 @-@ 7B engine demonstrated an improvement of 46 % over single @-@ annular combustors and 22 % over double @-@ annular combustors . The analytical tools developed for TAPS have also been used to improve other combustors , notably the single @-@ annular combustors in some CFM56 @-@ 5B and <unk> engines . 
 = = = Compressor = = = 
 The high @-@ pressure compressor @-@ HPC , that was at the center of the original export controversy , features nine stages in each variant of the CFM56 . The compressor stages have been developed from GE 's " <unk> / 9 core " ( namely a single @-@ turbine , nine @-@ compressor stage design ) which was designed in a compact core rotor . The small span of the compressor radius meant that the entire engine could be lighter and smaller , as the accessory units in the system ( bearings , oiling systems ) could be merged to the main fueling system running on aviation fuel . As design evolved HPC design improved through better airfoil design . As part of the Tech @-@ 56 improvement program CFMI has tested the new CFM @-@ 56 model with six @-@ stage high @-@ pressure compressor stages ( discs that make up the compressor system ) that was designed to deliver same pressure ratios ( pressure gain 30 ) similar to the old nine @-@ stages compressor design . The new one was not fully replacing the old one , but it offered an upgrade in HPC , thanks to improved blade dynamics , as a part of their " Tech Insertion " management plan from 2007 . 
 = = = Exhaust = = = 
 CFMI tested both a mixed and unmixed exhaust design at the beginning of development ; most variants of the engine have an unmixed exhaust nozzle . Only the high @-@ power CFM56 @-@ 5C , designed for the Airbus A340 , has a mixed @-@ flow exhaust nozzle . 
 GE and SNECMA also tested the effectiveness of chevrons on reducing jet noise . After examining configurations in the wind tunnel , CFMI chose to flight @-@ test chevrons built into the core exhaust nozzle . The chevrons reduced jet noise by 1 @.@ 3 perceived loudness decibels during takeoff conditions , and are now offered as an option with the CFM56 for the Airbus A321 . 
 = = = Fan and booster = = = 
 The CFM56 features a single @-@ stage fan , and most variants have a three @-@ stage booster on the low @-@ pressure shaft , with four stages in the <unk> and <unk> variants . The booster is also commonly called the " low @-@ pressure compressor " ( LPC ) as it sits on the low @-@ pressure shaft and compresses the flow initially before reaching the high @-@ pressure compressor . The original CFM56 @-@ 2 variant featured 44 tip @-@ shrouded fan blades , although the number of fan blades was reduced in later variants as wide @-@ chord blade technology developed , down to 22 blades in the latest variant , the CFM56 @-@ 7 . 
 The CFM56 fan features dovetailed fan blades which allows them to be replaced without removing the entire engine , and GE / SNECMA claim that the CFM56 was the first engine to have that capability . This attachment method is useful for circumstances where only a few fan blades need to be repaired or replaced , such as following bird strikes . 
 The fan diameter varies with the different models of the CFM56 , and that change has a direct impact on the engine performance . For example , the low @-@ pressure shaft rotates at the same speed for both the CFM56 @-@ 2 and the CFM56 @-@ 3 models ; the fan diameter is smaller on the -3 , which lowers the tip speed of the fan blades . The lower speed allows the fan blades to operate more efficiently ( 5 @.@ 5 % more in this case ) , which increases the overall fuel efficiency of the engine ( improving specific fuel consumption nearly 3 % ) . 
 = = = Reverse thrust = = = 
 The CFM56 is designed to support several reverse thrust systems which help slow and stop the aircraft after landing . The variants built for the Boeing 737 , the CFM56 @-@ 3 and the CFM56 @-@ 7 , use a cascade type of thrust reverser . This type of thrust reverse consists of sleeves that slide back to expose mesh @-@ like cascades and blocker doors that block the bypass air flow . The blocked bypass air is forced through the cascades , reducing the thrust of the engine and slowing the aircraft down . 
 The CFM56 also supports pivoting @-@ door type thrust reversers . This type is used on the CFM56 @-@ 5 engines that power many Airbus aircraft . They work by actuating a door that pivots down into the bypass duct , both blocking the bypass air and deflecting the flow outward , creating the reverse thrust . 
 = = = Turbine = = = 
 All variants of the CFM56 feature a single @-@ stage high @-@ pressure turbine ( HPT ) . In some variants , the HPT blades are " grown " from a single crystal superalloy , giving them high strength and creep resistance . The low @-@ pressure turbine ( LPT ) features four stages in most variants of the engine , but the CFM56 @-@ 5C has a five @-@ stage LPT . This change was implemented to drive the larger fan on this variant . Improvements to the turbine section were examined during the Tech56 program , and one development was an aerodynamically optimized low @-@ pressure turbine blade design , which would have used 20 % fewer blades for the whole low @-@ pressure turbine , saving weight . Some of those Tech56 improvements made their way into the Tech Insertion package , where the turbine section was updated . The turbine section was updated again in the " Evolution " upgrade . 
 The high @-@ pressure turbine stages in the CFM56 are internally cooled by air from the high @-@ pressure compressor . The air passes through internal channels in each blade and ejects at the leading and trailing edges . 
 = = Variants = = 
 = = = CFM56 @-@ 2 series = = = 
 The CFM56 @-@ 2 series is the original variant of the CFM56 . It is most widely used in military applications where it is known as the <unk> ; specifically in the KC @-@ 135 , the E @-@ 6 Mercury and some E @-@ 3 Sentry aircraft . The CFM56 @-@ 2 comprises a single @-@ stage fan with 44 blades , with a three @-@ stage LP compressor driven by a four @-@ stage LP turbine , and a nine @-@ stage HP compressor driven by a single @-@ stage HP turbine . The combustor is annular . 
 = = = CFM56 @-@ 3 series = = = 
 The first derivative of the CFM56 series , the CFM56 @-@ 3 is designed for Boeing 737 Classic series ( 737 @-@ 300 / -400 / <unk> ) , with static thrust ratings from 18 @,@ 500 to 23 @,@ 500 lbf ( 82 @.@ 3 to 105 kN ) . A " cropped fan " derivative of the -2 , the -3 engine has a smaller fan diameter at 60 in ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) but retains the original basic engine layout . The new fan is primarily derived from GE 's CF6 @-@ 80 turbofan rather than the CFM56 @-@ 2 , and the booster was redesigned to match the new fan . 
 A significant challenge for this series was achieving ground clearance for the wing @-@ mounted engine . This was overcome by reducing the intake fan diameter and relocating the gearbox and other accessories from beneath the engine to the sides . The resulting flattened nacelle bottom and intake lip yielded the distinctive appearance of the Boeing 737 with CFM56 engines . 
 = = = CFM56 @-@ 4 series = = = 
 The CFM56 @-@ 4 series was a proposed improved version of the CFM56 @-@ 2 designed for the Airbus A320 family of aircraft . Competing with the <unk> engine being developed by Rolls @-@ Royce , the -4 series was designed to produce 25 @,@ 000 lbf ( 110 kN ) and was to feature a new 68 in ( 1 @.@ 73 m ) fan , a new low @-@ pressure compressor and a full authority digital engine controller ( FADEC ) . Soon after the upgrade project was launched in 1984 , International Aero Engines offered their new V2500 engine for the A320 . CFMI realized that the CFM56 @-@ 4 did not compare favorably with the new engine and scrapped the project to begin working on the CFM56 @-@ 5 series . 
 = = = CFM56 @-@ 5 series = = = 
 The CFM56 @-@ 5 series is designed for the Airbus aircraft and has a very wide thrust rating of between 22 @,@ 000 and 34 @,@ 000 lbf ( 97 @.@ 9 and 151 kN ) . It has three distinct sub @-@ variants ; the CFM56 @-@ 5A , CFM56 @-@ 5B and CFM56 @-@ 5C , and differs from its Boeing @-@ fitted cousins by featuring a FADEC and incorporating further aerodynamic design improvements . 
 = = = = CFM56 @-@ 5A series = = = = 
 The CFM56 @-@ 5A series is the initial CFM56 @-@ 5 series , designed to power the short @-@ to @-@ medium range Airbus A320 family . Derived from the CFM56 @-@ 2 and CFM56 @-@ 3 families , the <unk> series produces thrusts between 22 @,@ 000 and 26 @,@ 500 lbf ( 98 kN and 118 kN ) . Aerodynamic improvements such as an updated fan , low @-@ pressure compressor , high @-@ pressure compressor and combustor make this variant 10 – 11 % more fuel efficient than its predecessors . 
 = = = = CFM56 @-@ 5B series = = = = 
 An improvement of the CFM56 @-@ 5A series , it was originally designed to power the A321 . With a thrust range between 22 @,@ 000 and 33 @,@ 000 lbf ( 98 kN and 147 kN ) it can power every model in the A320 family ( A318 / A319 / A320 / A321 ) and has superseded the CFM56 @-@ 5A series . Among the changes from the CFM56 @-@ 5A is the option of a double @-@ annular combustor that reduces emissions ( particularly NOx ) , a new fan in a longer fan case , and a new low @-@ pressure compressor with a fourth stage ( up from three in earlier variants ) . It is the most numerous engine supplied to Airbus . 
 = = = = CFM56 @-@ 5C series = = = = 
 With a thrust rating of between 31 @,@ 200 and 34 @,@ 000 lbf ( 139 kN and 151 kN ) , the CFM56 @-@ 5C series is the most powerful of the CFM56 family . It powers Airbus ' long @-@ range A340 @-@ 200 and -300 airliners , and entered service in 1993 . The major changes are a larger fan , a fifth low @-@ pressure turbine stage , and the same four @-@ stage low @-@ pressure compressor found in the <unk> variant . 
 Unlike every other variant of the CFM56 , the <unk> features a mixed @-@ exhaust nozzle , which offers slightly higher efficiency . 
 = = = CFM56 @-@ 7 series = = = 
 The CFM56 @-@ 7 powers the Boeing 737 Next Generation series ( 737 @-@ 600 / <unk> / <unk> / -900 ) . The CFM56 @-@ 7 first ran on 21 April 1995 is rated with takeoff thrust from 19 @,@ 500 to 27 @,@ 300 lbf ( 86 @.@ 7 kN to 121 kN ) . It has higher thrust ranges , improved efficiency , and lower maintenance costs than its predecessor , the CFM56 @-@ 3 series . It incorporates features from the CFM56 @-@ 5 series such as FADEC , double @-@ annular combustor ( as an option ) , and improved internal design . The basic mechanical arrangement is as the -3 series , but all aspects were aerodynamically improved from that model . For example , the improved wide @-@ chord fan blades allowed the total number of fan blades to be reduced from 38 to 24 . Other improvements came from material advances , such as the use of single @-@ crystal turbine blades in the high @-@ pressure turbine . 
 The CFM56 @-@ 7 @-@ powered 737 is granted 180 @-@ minute Extended @-@ Range , Twin @-@ Engine Operations ( ETOPS ) approval by the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration . It also powers the military versions of the Next @-@ Generation 737 , the C @-@ 40 Clipper , the P @-@ 8 Poseidon , and Boeing 737 AEW & C. 
 = = Reliability = = 
 The CFM56 have an in @-@ flight shutdown rate of 1 incident per 333 @,@ 333 hours . Record time on wing before the first shop visit was 30 @,@ 000 hours in 1996 , to 40 @,@ 729 hours in 2003 and 50 @,@ 000 hours in 2016 . 
 There have been several engine failures in the early service of the CFM56 family which were serious enough to either ground the fleet or require aspects of the engine to be redesigned . The engines have also suffered , periodically , from thrust instability events tentatively traced to Honeywell 's <unk> unit . 
 = = = Rain and hail ingestion = = = 
 There are several recorded incidents of CFM56 engines flaming out in heavy rain and / or hail conditions , beginning early in the CFM56 's career . In 1987 , a double flameout occurred in hail conditions ( the pilots managed to relight the engines ) , followed by the TACA Flight 110 incident in 1988 . Both CFM56 engines on the TACA 737 flamed out while passing through hail and heavy rain , and the crew was forced to land without engines on a grassy levee near New Orleans , Louisiana . CFMI modified the engines by adding a sensor to force the combustor to continuously ignite under these conditions . 
 In 2002 , Garuda Indonesia Flight 421 had to ditch in a river because of hail @-@ induced engine flameouts , killing a flight attendant and injuring dozens of passengers . Prior to this accident , there were several other incidents of single or dual flameouts due to these weather conditions . After three incidents through 1998 , CFMI made modifications to the engine to improve the way in which the engine handled hail ingestion . The major changes included a modification to the fan / booster splitter ( making it more difficult for hail to be ingested by the core of the engine ) and the use of an elliptical , rather than conical , spinner at the intake . These changes did not prevent the 2002 accident , and the investigation board found that the pilots did not follow the proper procedures for attempting to restart the engine , which contributed to the final result . Recommendations were made to better educate pilots on how to handle these conditions , as well as to revisit FAA rain and hail testing procedures . No further engine modifications were recommended . 
 = = = Fan blade failure = = = 
 One issue that led to accidents with the CFM56 @-@ 3C engine was the failure of fan blades . This mode of failure led to the Kegworth air disaster in 1989 , which killed 47 people and injured 74 more . After the fan blade failed , the pilots mistakenly shut down the wrong engine , resulting in the damaged engine failing completely when powered up for the final approach . Following the Kegworth accident , CFM56 engines fitted to a Dan @-@ Air 737 @-@ 400 and a British Midland 737 @-@ 400 suffered fan blade failures under similar conditions ; neither incident resulted in a crash or injuries . After the second incident , the 737 @-@ 400 fleet was grounded . 
 At the time it was not mandatory to flight test new variants of existing engines , and certification testing failed to reveal vibration modes that the fan experienced during the regularly performed power climbs at high altitude . Analysis revealed that the fan was being subjected to high @-@ cycle fatigue stresses worse than expected and also more severe than tested for certification ; these higher stresses caused the blade to fracture . Less than a month after grounding , the fleet was allowed to resume operations once the fan blades and fan disc were replaced and the electronic engine controls were modified to reduce maximum engine thrust to 22 @,@ 000 lbf ( 98 kN ) from 23 @,@ 500 lbf ( 105 kN ) . The redesigned fan blades were installed on all CFM56 @-@ <unk> and CFM56 @-@ <unk> engines , including over 1 @,@ 800 engines that had already been delivered to customers . 
 = = = Fuel flow problems = = = 
 Airlines have reported 32 events involving sudden instability of thrust , at various points during flight , including high thrust settings during climb to altitude . The problem has been long @-@ standing . In 1998 , two 737 pilots reported that their engine throttles suddenly increased to full thrust during flight . A very recent investigation has led to the tentative conclusion that the problem originates in the <unk> unit , and may involve an unacceptable level of fuel contamination ( with water , or particulate matter , including biodegradable material that create solids in the fuel ) , or overuse of <unk> to reduce bacterial growth . Boeing told Aviation Week and Space Technology that CFM International had revised its FADEC software . The new software " ' reduces the duration and degree of thrust @-@ instability events ' by cycling the FMV { fuel monitoring valve } and the <unk> ( electrohydraulic servo unit ) to clean the <unk> spool . " This software fix is not intended to be a definitive solution to the problem ; CFM claimed that no further reports have reached it after this change was made . 
 = = Applications = = 
 Airbus A320 family 
 Airbus A318 
 Airbus A340 
 Boeing 707 @-@ 700 ( prototype only ) 
 Boeing 737 Classic 
 Boeing 737 Next Generation 
 Boeing 737 AEW & C 
 Boeing C @-@ 40 Clipper 
 Boeing P @-@ 8 Poseidon 
 Boeing Business Jet 
 Boeing E @-@ 3D Sentry 
 Boeing E @-@ 6 Mercury 
 Boeing KC @-@ 135R Stratotanker 
 Boeing RC @-@ 135 
 Douglas DC @-@ 8 Super 70 
 = = Specifications ( CFM56 @-@ <unk> ) = = 
 Data from CFM International 
 = = = = General characteristics = = = = 
 Type : Twin @-@ spool , high @-@ bypass turbofan 
 Length : 98 @.@ 7 in ( 2 @.@ 5 m ) 
 Diameter : 61 in ( 1 @.@ 55 m ) ( fan ) 
 Dry weight : 5 @,@ 216 lb ( 2 @,@ 366 kg ) ( dry ) 
 = = = = Components = = = = 
 Compressor : Single @-@ stage fan , 3 @-@ stage low @-@ pressure compressor , 9 @-@ stage high @-@ pressure compressor 
 <unk> : annular 
 Turbine : Single @-@ stage high @-@ pressure turbine , 4 @-@ stage low @-@ pressure turbine 
 = = = = Performance = = = = 
 Maximum thrust : 19 @,@ 500 lbf ( 86 @.@ 7 kN ) 
 Overall pressure ratio : 32 @.@ 8 : 1 
 Bypass ratio : 5 @.@ 5 : 1 
 Air mass flow : 677 lb / s ( 307 kg / s ) 
 Thrust @-@ to @-@ weight ratio : 3 @.@ 7 : 1 
 = Jean Baptiste Point du Sable = 
 Jean Baptiste Point du Sable ( or Point de Sable , Point au Sable , Point Sable , Pointe DuSable ) ( before 1750 – August 28 , 1818 ) is regarded as the first permanent resident of what became Chicago , Illinois . Little is known of his life prior to the 1770s . In 1779 , he was living on the site of present @-@ day Michigan City , Indiana , when he was arrested by the British military on suspicion of being an American sympathizer in the American Revolutionary War . In the early 1780s he worked for the British lieutenant @-@ governor of Michilimackinac on an estate at what is now the city of St. Clair , Michigan , before moving to settle at the mouth of the Chicago River . He is first recorded living in Chicago in early 1790 , having apparently become established sometime earlier . He sold his property in Chicago in 1800 and moved to St. Charles , Missouri , where he died in 1818 . 
 Point du Sable has become known as the " Founder of Chicago " . In Chicago , a school , museum , harbor , park and bridge have been named , or renamed , in his honor ; and the place where he settled at the mouth of the Chicago River in the 1780s is recognized as a National Historic Landmark , now located in Pioneer Court . 
 = = Biography = = 
 There is no known record of Point du Sable 's life prior to the 1770s ; his birth year , place of birth , and parents are unknown , though he is known from contemporary sources to have been of African descent . Juliette Kinzie , another early pioneer of Chicago , Illinois , never met Point du Sable but stated in her 1856 memoir that he was " a native of St. Domingo " ( the island of Hispaniola ) . This became generally accepted by scholars as his place of birth . Historian Milo Milton Quaife , however , regarded Kinzie 's account of Point du Sable as " largely fictitious and wholly <unk> " . Quaife later put forward a theory that he was of French @-@ Canadian origin . A historical novel published in 1953 ( see below ) helped to popularize the commonly recited claim that he was born in 1745 in Saint @-@ Marc in Saint @-@ Domingue ( now Haiti ) . Point du Sable married a Potawatomi woman named <unk> ( Christianized to Catherine ) on October 27 , 1788 in a Catholic ceremony in Cahokia , an old French missionary town on the Mississippi River . , though they were likely married earlier in the 1770s in the Native American tradition . They had a son named Jean and a daughter named Susanne . 
 In a footnote to a poem titled Speech to the Western Indians , Arent DePeyster , British commandant at Fort Michilimackinac from 1774 to 1779 ( a former French fort in what was by then the British Quebec Territory ) , noted that " Baptist Point de <unk> " was " handsome " , " well educated " , and " settled in <unk> " . When he published this poem in 1813 , DePeyster presented it as a speech that he had made at the Indian village of <unk> ( now Harbor Springs , Michigan ) on July 4 , 1779 . This footnote has led many scholars to assume that Point du Sable had settled in Chicago by 1779 , however letters written by traders in the late 1770s suggest that Point du Sable was at this time settled at the mouth of Trail Creek ( Rivière du Chemin ) at what is now Michigan City , Indiana . In August 1779 , Point du Sable was arrested at Trail Creek by British troops and imprisoned briefly at Fort Michilimackinac . From the summer of 1780 until May 1784 , Point du Sable managed the Pinery , a tract of woodlands claimed by British Lt. Patrick Sinclair on the St. Clair River in eastern Michigan . Point du Sable and his family lived at a cabin at the mouth of the Pine River in what is now the city of St. Clair . 
 Point du Sable settled on the north bank of the Chicago River close to its mouth at some time in the 1780s . The earliest known record of Point du Sable living in Chicago is an entry that Hugh Heward made in his journal on May 10 , 1790 during a journey from Detroit across Michigan and through Illinois . Heward 's party stopped at Pointe du Sable 's house en route to the Chicago portage ; they swapped their canoe for a pirogue that belonged to Point du Sable , and they bought bread , flour and pork from him . <unk> <unk> , who visited Chicago in about 1794 , described Point du Sable as a large man who was a wealthy trader . In 1800 he sold his farm to John Kinzie 's frontman , Jean La Lime , for 6 @,@ 000 livres ; the bill of sale , which was rediscovered in 1913 in an archive in Detroit , outlined all of the property Point du Sable owned as well as many of his personal artifacts . This included a house , two barns , a horse drawn mill , a bakehouse , a poultry house , a dairy and a smokehouse . The house was a 22 @-@ by @-@ 40 @-@ foot ( 6 @.@ 7 m × 12 @.@ 2 m ) log cabin filled with fine furniture and paintings . 
 After Point du Sable sold his property in Chicago he moved to St. Charles , Missouri , where he was commissioned by the colonial governor to operate a ferry across the Missouri River . He died in 1818 , and was buried in St. Charles , in an unmarked grave in St. Charles Borromeo Cemetery . His entry in the parish burial register does not mention his origins , parents , or relatives , it simply describes him as <unk> ( French for black ) . The St. Charles Borromeo Cemetery was moved twice in the 19th century , and oral tradition and records of the Archdiocese of St. Louis suggested that Point du Sable 's remains were also moved . On October 12 , 1968 , the Illinois Sesquicentennial Commission erected a granite marker at the site believed to be Point du Sable 's grave in the third St. Charles Borromeo Cemetery . In 2002 an archaeological investigation of the grave site was initiated by the African Scientific Research Institute at the University of Illinois at Chicago . Researchers using a combination of ground penetrating radar surveys and excavation of a 9 @-@ by @-@ 9 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 7 m × 2 @.@ 7 m ) area did not find any evidence of any burials at the supposed grave site , leading the archaeologists to conclude that Point du Sable 's remains may not have been moved from one of the two previous cemeteries . 
 = = Theories and legends = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Though there is little historical evidence regarding Point du Sable 's life before the 1770s , there are a number of theories and legends that give accounts of his early life . Writing in 1933 , Milo Milton Quaife identified a French immigrant to Canada , Pierre Dandonneau , who acquired the title " Sieur de Sable " and whose descendants were known by both the names Dandonneau and Du Sable . Quaife was unable to find a direct link to Point du Sable , but identified descendants of Pierre Dandonneau living around the Great Lakes region in Detroit , Mackinac , and St Joseph , leading him to speculate that Point du Sable 's father was a member of this family , whilst his mother was a slave . In 1951 a pamphlet by Joseph <unk> , a native of Haiti , was published in which he claimed to be the great grandson of Point du Sable . Based on family recollections and tombstone inscriptions he claimed that Point du Sable was born in Saint @-@ Marc in Haiti , studied in France , returned to Haiti to deal coffee before traveling to French Louisiana . Historian and Point du Sable biographer John F. Swenson has called these claims " elaborate , undocumented assertions ... in a fanciful biography " . In 1953 Shirley Graham built on the work of Quaife and <unk> in a historical novel of Point du Sable that she described as " not accurate history nor pure fiction " , but rather " an imaginative interpretation of all the known facts " . This book presented Point du Sable as the son of the mate on a pirate ship , the Black Sea Gull , and a freed slave called Suzanne . Despite lack of evidence , and the continued debate about Point du Sable 's early life , parentage , and birthplace , this popular story is widely presented as being definitive . 
 = = = Peoria = = = 
 In 1815 a land claim that had been submitted by Nicholas Jarrot to the land commissioners at Kaskaskia , Illinois Territory was approved . In the claim Jarrot asserted that a " Jean Baptiste <unk> " had been " head of a family at Peoria in the year 1783 , and before and after that year " , and that he " had a house built and cultivated land between the Old Fort and the new settlement in the year 1780 " . This document has been taken by Quaife and other historians as evidence that Point du Sable lived at Peoria prior to his arrival at Chicago , however , records show that Point du Sable was living at the Pinery in Michigan in the early 1780s . In addition , the Kaskaskia land commissioners identified many fraudulent land claims , including two previously submitted in the name of Point du Sable . Nicholas Jarrot , the claimant , was involved in many fraudulent land claims , and Swenson suggests that this claim was also fraudulent , made without the knowledge of Point du Sable . Although apparently in conflict with some of the above information , some historical records contend that DuSable bought land in Peoria from <unk> in March 13 , 1773 and sold it to Isaac <unk> in 1783 when he moved to be the first " permanent " European resident of Chicago . 
 = = = Departure from Chicago = = = 
 Point du Sable left Chicago in 1800 . Point du Sable sold his property to John Kinzie and moved to Missouri , at that time part of French Louisiana . The reason for his departure is unknown . In her memoir , Juliette Kinzie suggested that " perhaps he was disgusted at not being elected to a similar dignity [ great chief ] by the <unk> . " In 1874 Nehemiah Matson elaborated on this story , claiming that Point du Sable was a slave from Virginia who had moved with his master to Lexington , Kentucky in 1790 . According to Matson , Point du Sable became a zealous Catholic in order to convince a Jesuit missionary to declare him chief of the local Native Americans , and left Chicago when the natives refused to accept him as their chief . Quaife dismisses both these stories as being fictional . 
 In her 1953 novel Graham suggests that Point du Sable left Chicago because he was angered with the United States government , which wanted him to buy the land on which he had lived and called his own for the previous two decades . The 1795 Treaty of Greenville and the subsequent westward migration of Indians away from the Chicago area might also have influenced his decision . 
 = = Legacy and honors = = 
 = = = Founder of Chicago = = = 
 Point du Sable is the earliest recorded resident of the settlement close to the mouth of the Chicago River that grew to become the city of Chicago . He is therefore widely regarded as the first permanent resident of Chicago and given the appellation " Founder of Chicago " . 
 The expedition headed by Louis Jolliet and Jacques Marquette in 1673 , though probably not the first Europeans to visit the area , are the first recorded to have crossed the Chicago Portage and travelled along the Chicago River . Marquette returned in 1674 , camped a few days near the mouth of the river , then moved on to the portage , where he stayed through the winter of 1674 – 75 . Joliet and Marquette did not report any Indians living near the Chicago River area at this time , though archaeologists have since discovered numerous Indian village sites elsewhere in the greater Chicago area . Two of La Salle 's men built a stockade at the portage in the winter of 1682 / 1683 . However , in 1697 Henri Tonti , Michel <unk> , and François de La Forêt received permission from Governor Frontenac to establish a fortified trading post at <unk> managed by Pierre de Liette , Tonti ’ s cousin , a Franco @-@ Italian , which lasted until <unk> De Liette kept a journal of his experiences living with the Illinois natives for those years he lived with them at the Chicago trading post . De Liette , describes in his writings the game of lacrosse played by the Indians on the extensive meadow behind these villages . In Chicago De Liette ran the trading post in partnership with François <unk> de La Forêt , Michel <unk> , and Henri de Tonti [ located probably near <unk> Tribune Tower ] which he had to close , leaving in 1705 after the king revoked his trading license . 
 The Mission of the Guardian Angel was somewhere in the vicinity of Chicago from 1696 until it was abandoned in around 1700 . The Fox Wars effectively closed the Chicago area to Europeans in the first part of the 18th century . The first non @-@ native to re @-@ settle in the area may have been a trader named Guillory , who might have had a trading @-@ post near Wolf Point on the Chicago River in around 1778 . After Point du Sable , Antoine <unk> is the next recorded resident of Chicago ; he claimed to have settled at the mouth of the Chicago River in July 1790 , a few months after Hugh Heward visited Point du Sable . 
 = = = Memorials = = = 
 By the 1850s , historians of Chicago recognized Point du Sable as the city 's earliest non @-@ native permanent settler . For a long time , however , the city did not honor him in the same manner as other pioneers . A plaque was erected by the city in 1913 at the corner of Kinzie and Pine Streets to commemorate his homestead . In the planning stages of the 1933 – 1934 Century of Progress International Exposition a number of African @-@ American groups campaigned for Point du Sable to be honored at the fair . At this time , few Chicagoans had even heard of Point du Sable and the fair 's organizers presented the 1803 construction of Fort Dearborn as the city 's historical beginning . The campaign was successful however , and a replica of Point du Sable 's cabin was presented as part of the " background of the history of Chicago . " 
 In 1965 a plaza called Pioneer Court was built on the site of Point du Sable 's homestead as part of the construction of the Equitable Life Assurance Society of America building . The Jean Baptiste Point Du Sable Homesite was designated as a National Historic Landmark on May 11 , 1976 , as a site deemed to have " exceptional value to the nation . " Pioneer Court is located at what is now 401 N. Michigan Avenue in the Near North Side of Chicago . In 2009 , the City of Chicago and a private donor erected there a large bronze bust of Point du Sable by Chicago @-@ born sculptor Erik <unk> . In February 2016 the bust was temporarily relocated to 400 N. Michigan Ave for the construction of a new Apple Store , but will return to its original location once construction is completed . In October 2010 , the Michigan Avenue Bridge was renamed DuSable Bridge in honor of Point du Sable . Previously a small street named De <unk> Street had been named after him . 
 A number of Chicago institutions have been named in honor of Point du Sable . DuSable High School opened in Bronzeville in 1934 . Today it is a building for three schools : Daniel Hale Williams Prep School of Medicine , the Bronzeville Scholastic Institute , and the DuSable Leadership Academy . Dr. Margaret Taylor @-@ Burroughs , a prominent African @-@ American artist and writer taught at the school for twenty @-@ three years . She and her husband co @-@ founded the DuSable Museum of African American History , located on Chicago 's South Side , which was renamed in honor of Point du Sable in 1968 . DuSable Harbor is located in the heart of downtown Chicago at the foot of Randolph Street , and DuSable Park is an urban park ( 3 @.@ 24 acres ( 13 @,@ 100 m2 ) ) in Chicago currently awaiting redevelopment . It was originally announced in 1987 by Mayor Harold Washington . The US Postal Service has also honored Point du Sable with the issue of a Black Heritage Series , 22 @-@ cent postage stamp on February 20 , 1987 . 
 = Olivia ( Fringe ) = 
 " Olivia " is the first episode of the third season of the American science fiction television series Fringe . The episode was co @-@ written by J. H. Wyman and Jeff Pinkner , and was directed by Joe Chappelle . The third season spent its time alternating between the prime and parallel universes , and " Olivia " was placed in the latter . This is indicated in the introduction of the episode , with the same red screen used in the last season 's finale , " Over There " . " Olivia " follows the cliffhanger left by the second season , in which Olivia Dunham is trapped in the parallel universe . The episode explores the consequences of Olivia 's abduction by Walternate , and her attempt to go back to the prime universe . 
 Though Fox was initially worried about an entire episode set in the other universe , they soon came to appreciate the storyline . The episode included the first appearances of guest actors Andre Royo and Amy Madigan , who would both appear in several later episodes . It first aired in the United States on Fox in September 23 , 2010 , receiving almost all positive reviews due to the combination of emotional storylines , suspense , action , and humor . Many thought it was a good indicator of what the rest of the season had to offer , while others appreciated the numerous popular culture references that set the two universes apart . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In the previous episode " Over There " , Olivia ( Anna Torv ) and Walter ( John Noble ) used Olivia 's ability to cross from the prime universe into the parallel one , where Walter 's son , Peter ( Joshua Jackson ) , was being kept . After dealing with their respective counterparts from the parallel universe , " Fauxlivia " ( Torv ) and Walternate ( Noble ) , Olivia and Walter were able to successfully free Peter . As they prepared to return to the prime universe , Walternate ordered Fauxlivia to take Olivia 's place , returning with Walter and Peter , both unaware of the swap . 
 Olivia is captured by Walternate 's forces , imprisoned in the government facility on Liberty Island and put through both physical and psychological treatments by Walternate to make her believe that she is really the Fauxlivia of the parallel universe . Olivia manages to escape the facility and make it to " <unk> " ( in the Other Side parallel universe , the island is spelled with only one " T " ) . She coerces a taxi driver named Henry ( Andre Royo ) to drive her to the Opera House where she believes she can return home , by threatening to harm his family , but by the time she arrives , an " Amber protocol " has been issued , sealing the building in " amber " , a substance that the Other Side Fringe Division deploys to envelop time fractures . She directs Henry to the address for Massive Dynamic , but finds the facility does not exist in this universe . As Henry goes to a gas station to fill his taxi , Olivia cries to herself in the station 's bathroom . 
 Meanwhile , the Fringe division is falsely told that their Olivia has escaped . Agent Lincoln Lee ( Seth Gabel ) , still needing hyperbaric treatment to regrow his skin after being burned , and Agent Charlie Francis ( Kirk Acevedo ) follow a tracking device on Henry 's taxi . When they arrive at the station , Olivia orders Henry to drive away , and manages to fire at a small valve on a gas tank , allowing the explosion to cover their trail . Walternate , watching the altercation on monitors , notes Olivia has gained the marksmanship ability that the alternate Olivia possesses , and begins to think the serum is working . Brandon ( Ryan McDonald ) theorizes in a later conversation that the rush of adrenaline effectively enhanced the potency of his chemical agents to brainwash Olivia . 
 Henry removes the tracker from his taxi , having become sympathetic towards Olivia . Olivia gives him an address to a " safe house " in a suburban area , and , once there , thanks him and allows him to go . However , Henry remains parked on a nearby street . In the home , Olivia discovers her mother Marilyn ( Amy Madigan ) , who , in the prime universe , had died when Olivia was a teenager . Olivia , seeing her mother and the memories of her mother , cries into her arms , as she is awash in Fauxlivia 's memories . By the time Charlie arrives , Olivia fully believes she is Fauxlivia , and after saying goodbye to her mother , returns willingly with Charlie to Fringe headquarters . Henry , after watching Charlie 's car pull away , drives off on his own . 
 The episode closes in the prime universe , where Peter explains the events of his time in the parallel universe to disinterested government agents . Meanwhile , Fauxlivia engages in idle chatter with Walter , nearly slipping and revealing her identity to him due to her lack of knowledge of the prime universe 's popular culture . When Peter leaves , he kisses Fauxlivia and the three leave to get dinner . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Olivia " was co @-@ written by co @-@ showrunners J. H. Wyman and Jeff Pinkner , and was directed by co @-@ executive producer Joe Chappelle . The producers revealed the episode title on June 30 , 2010 . After they began their search in mid @-@ June for a <unk> to sixty @-@ year @-@ old actress to play Olivia 's mother , Entertainment Weekly reported on July 2 that Amy Madigan had been cast as Marilyn Dunham for roughly four episodes , beginning with the season premiere . The character was described as " lovely and together " and deeply devoted to her daughter . Further reporting a week later revealed that The Wire actor Andre Royo had been cast for the season premiere as Henry Higgins , " a soulful taxi driver who is unexpectedly forced into a tense situation with Olivia " . Henry Higgins is also the name of a character in My Fair Lady . Even before " Olivia " aired , Royo 's guest appearance was extended to appear in a second episode . Guest actor Seth Gabel returned as the recurring character Lincoln Lee , and required four to five hours of make @-@ up in order to play a recovering burn victim . 
 Jeff Pinkner and J. H. Wyman decided to alternate the episodes between the prime and parallel universes because they " thought that the best way to really thoroughly tell these stories was to dive into them wholeheartedly ... [ in order to fully explore ] the journey that our heroine is on and then come back over here because [ Altlivia ] is embedded in our team , we have point of view characters in both universes and it seemed to us the perfect opportunity to really explore in a really thorough fulsome way the alternate universe " . Wyman elaborated that he felt fans " would really appreciate a mythology in two places " , and showing both universes " just presented itself in such a natural organic way to evolution in our storytelling " . Fox however was initially worried about the premise 's sustainability , and that an episode without Peter or Walter " wouldn 't feel like our show anymore , " to which Pinkner responded that " not unlike a show like Lost , Fringe has to constantly evolve , to move and grow and go forward , otherwise we 'll get bored , the cast will get bored , the audience will get bored " . After the first three episodes , both Fox and Warner Bros. became more favorable to the storyline . 
 When discussing the many differences between the prime and parallel universes in an interview , Pinkner explained that " one of the big themes of the show is how small choices that you make define you as a person and can change your life in large ways down the line " . Pinkner and the rest of the Fringe production team loved the opportunity to build an entire new world , and asked themselves what life would have been like in its most mundane forms , such as within daily routines . Pinkner thought it allowed them to create and explore many " what @-@ if " moments , such as if the September 11 attacks had occurred against the White House instead of the Twin Towers , or if the Statue of Liberty still possessed its shiny copper sheen . Pinkner elaborated in another interview that when the " perfectionist " crew were writing and constructing the parallel universe , they spent a lot of time on a high " level of attention and detail " that had all of the different departments and actors weighing in . Pinkner thought that because the parallel universe is effectively breaking down with " World War II " -like conditions , these " sort of tough times forge more noble , stronger people " . To better differentiate the two universes , the producers changed the color of the opening credit sequences by making the parallel universe red and the prime universe blue . As with the opening credits in " Peter " , the episodes featuring the parallel universe displayed certain fringe science words in that world , including wormholes , speciation , pandemics , and telepathy . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Many differences between the two universes were related to popular culture . A photograph of Fauxlivia wearing a gold medal in marksmanship is shown , proving that unlike the prime universe , the parallel universe has that particular event in their Olympic Games . The radio in Henry 's taxi can be heard mentioning former president John F. Kennedy is stepping down from his role as ambassador , proving that he was not assassinated . On that same taxi , Dogs is depicted to be a musical in the parallel universe New York City , instead of Cats . Their mail is delivered by the " U.S. Mail Service " with a different logo , instead of the United States Postal Service , and there are apparently daily flights to the moon . 
 Actor Tom Cruise is mentioned for " kick [ ing ] ass " on television , implying that he is not a movie star in the parallel universe . When Olivia reminds him she knows his identification information , Henry mentions a " Jedi mind trick " , a reference to Star Wars , which is one popular culture similarity the two universes seem to share . When searching for the headquarters of Massive Dynamic , Olivia instead finds a site entitled " Martin Luther King / Eldridge Cleaver Memorial Park " , which implies that King was also not assassinated , but instead developed a close relationship with Black Panther militant and Soul On Ice author Cleaver . The park sign also reads " We Have a Dream " , which is a slight deviation from King 's " I Have a Dream " speech , and suggests that he and Cleaver wrote it together . 
 As Olivia enters the park , she is passed by a man riding a penny @-@ farthing bicycle . As these have not been shown elsewhere , it does not seem likely that they are a common means of transportation in the alternate universe , but rather that this is a reference to The Prisoner , in which similar mind @-@ games were used against an agent being held prisoner . 
 In the prime universe , Fauxlivia tells Walter that she has not seen shoes like his <unk> ( a line of shoes from C & J Clark ) " in a while , " and asks if he is " bringing them back . " Walter responds by asking her , " Where did they go ? " indicating that they were also found in the alternate universe until some recent time ( within Olivia 's lifetime ) , but are no longer found there . 
 = = Reception = = 
 As with other Fringe episodes , Fox released a science lesson plan for grade school children focusing on the science seen in " Olivia " , with the intention of having " students learn about the types of hormones and how they are used to regulate various functions in an organism . " 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Olivia " premiered to 5 @.@ 83 million viewers in the United States , with a 2 @.@ 1 rating for viewers 18 – 49 . Fringe was down thirty percent from the previous season 's premiere , " A New Day in the Old Town " . Time shifted viewing gave the premiere a 44 % increase , as its 18 – 49 rating rose to 3 @.@ 1 . Out of all the network shows , this was the largest gain of the week . Time shifted viewing also increased the total number of viewers to 7 @.@ 837 million . Fringe faced tough competition during its timeslot from the high @-@ rated Grey 's Anatomy and CSI : Crime Scene Investigation . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The episode received critical acclaim . Ken Tucker from Entertainment Weekly expected a big event in the vein of the second season premiere , and was pleasantly surprised to find something different : " a beautifully emotional hour with suspense , humor , and kissing ... [ that was ] superb and surprising " . Josh Wigler of MTV wrote that Fringe " proved once again that it 's one of the most the most innovative , entertaining genre shows currently airing on television , " and he couldn 't wait for next week 's episode . Jason Hughes of TV Squad enjoyed the episode , and praised how " the show 's creators have come up with a crazy , but fun , way of " showing both universes every other episode . 
 <unk> Kelly Peters from Blast Magazine praised Anna Torv 's acting , because she " brings a sensitivity to Olivia 's character that is heart @-@ wrenching but so well integrated into her character that action scenes seem totally natural for her " . The standout for her however , was John Noble 's performance , as he played " lovable and brilliant " Walter and " chillingly conniving " Walternate , both of which makes him " an even more unforgettable character " as the audience sees what Walter could have been . A.V. Club 's Noel Murray graded the episode with an A- , writing that " the third season of Fringe opened tonight with one of the strongest , boldest episodes in the whole run of the series " . Murray especially praised the " well @-@ written , acted and photographed " taxi scenes between Olivia and Henry . The Los Angeles Times ' Andrew Hanson particularly enjoyed the nine @-@ minute opening , writing that he loved the episode because of three reasons : Olivia " kicked butt " and stayed a step ahead of Walternate , her struggles with identity , and all of the careful details put into the parallel universe . 
 After watching the first several episodes of season three , Aaron Riccio of Slant Magazine gave the show 3 @.@ 5 / 4 stars , and praised it for making a " huge , game @-@ changing step forward " . He continued that " Hard science meets soft comedy , and the results are consistently surprising and rarely disappointing . The solid mythology and high stakes keep the series moving as forward as quickly as FlashForward and The Event , but the dual tones of the two worlds offer considerably more breadth in the stories it tells ... [ " Olivia " was ] captivating television " . Robert Bianco from USA Today praised Torv , Noble , and Jackson 's performances . He however disliked the new plotline of two Olivias , explaining " It 's hard to fault the execution of the first two episodes , which skillfully set up Fringe 's two competing universes and two misplaced Olivias ... Yet well @-@ done isn 't the same as welcome . I 'm not giving up on the show , which was one of last year 's best . But I don 't want to spend weeks watching our Olivia suffer and their Olivia make Walter and Peter suffer . You have to give writers leeway to take you where they want to go — but at a certain point , commercial entertainment has to be entertaining , or there 's no reason to watch " . 
 = = = Awards and nomination = = = 
 Anna Torv submitted " Olivia " , along with the season three episodes " Entrada " , " Marionette " , and Bloodline " for consideration in the Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series category at the 63rd Primetime Emmy Awards . She failed to receive a nomination . 
 = Macabeemyrma = 
 Macabeemyrma is an extinct genus of bulldog ants in the subfamily Myrmeciinae containing the single species Macabeemyrma ovata , described in 2006 from Ypresian stage ( Early Eocene ) deposits of British Columbia , Canada . Only a single specimen is known ; a holotype queen found preserved as a compression fossil . The specimen had no wings and small portions of its legs and eyes were faintly preserved . It was a large ant , reaching 25 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) in length . This ants ' behaviour would have been similar to that of extant Myrmeciinae ants , such as foraging singly in search for arthropod prey and nesting in soil or in trees . Macabeemyrma shows similarities to extinct ants in the genus Ypresiomyrma , and to the living Nothomyrmecia macrops , but has not been conclusively assigned to any tribe , instead generally regarded as incertae sedis within Myrmeciinae . However , the sole specimen lacks definitive traits , and its classification in Myrmeciinae , and even its identity as an ant , has been challenged . 
 = = History and classification = = 
 Macabeemyrma ovata is known only from a single fossil specimen : a mostly complete adult queen , preserved as a compression fossil in fine @-@ grained shale . The shale is from fossiliferous outcrops at the McAbee Fossil Beds , part of an unnamed formation in the Kamloops group which outcrops east of Cache Creek in British Columbia , Canada . The holotype specimen was collected by an unknown person and donated to Thompson Rivers University in 2002 . The specimen was described by Bruce Archibald , Stefan Cover and Corrie Moreau of Harvard University 's Museum of Comparative Zoology , with their 2006 type description of the genus and species . The generic name Macabeemyrma is a toponym of the type locality at McAbee combined with the Greek myrmex , meaning " ant " . The specific epithet ovata , from the Latin " ovatus " meaning " egg shaped " , refers to the shape of the head capsule . 
 Archibald and colleagues originally classified Macabeemyrma as incertae sedis ( Latin for " of uncertain placement " ) within the ant subfamily Myrmeciinae , as it could not be confidently placed into any ant tribe . However , in a 2008 paper , Cesare Baroni Urbani of the University of Basel , Switzerland , noted that the specimen shares some traits found in other ant subfamilies and some wasps , and lacks key diagnostic traits ( synapomorphies ) of the ant family , Formicidae , and thus argued Macabeemyrma could only be confidently classified as incertae sedis within the order Hymenoptera . A subsequent report describing new fossil myrmecines accepted the classification of Archibald and colleagues without comment on the views of Baroni Urbani . 
 The following cladograms generated by Archibald and colleagues show two possible phylogenetic positions of Macabeemyrma among some ants of the subfamily Myrmeciinae ; the cladogram on the right included three additional extinct genera compared to that on the left . They suggest that Macabeemyrma ovata and other extinct ants such as Avitomyrmex and Ypresiomyrma may be closely related to the living Nothomyrmecia macrops . 
 = = Description = = 
 The overall body of the ant is poorly preserved and much of it is indistinct . Macabeemyrma ovata is about 25 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) long with a distinct elongated oval head capsule that is about <unk> longer than wide . The holotype is missing the wings and some portions of the legs while the eyes are very faintly preserved . It could not be confirmed whether its eyes were compound or not , but if it was to be confirmed they would share similar eye characteristics to Myrmecia . The exact shape of the mandibles cannot be properly determined , but they are elongated and not subtriangular which is normal for other members of Myrmeciinae except the genus Myrmecia . Its elongated head and mandibles distinguish this species from those in the genus Ypresiomyrma , which are otherwise thought to have a close phylogenetic relationship due to similarities . The waist consists of a single segment , and whether or not the ant has a sting cannot be fully determined due to the condition of the specimen collected . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Archibald and colleagues suggested the life habits of Macabeemyrma ovata may have been similar to extant Myrmeciinae ants . The ant is large with long legs and elongated mandibles . It presumably had large eyes that were used to hunt for prey and navigation , and the ant was possibly equipped with a sting . Colonies most likely nested in the soil like most other Myrmeciinae , but like some Myrmecia species it is possible they were an arboreal nesting species . Workers were solitary foragers , foraging on the ground or onto vegetation while preying on arthropods . Workers most likely did not recruit other ants to food sources or lay down pheromone trails . 
 = Irish Mercantile Marine during World War II = 
 The Irish Mercantile Marine during World War II continued essential overseas trade in the conflict , a period referred to as The Long Watch by Irish mariners . 
 Irish merchant shipping saw to it that vital imports continued to arrive and exports , mainly food supplies to Great Britain , were delivered . Irish ships sailed unarmed and usually alone , identifying themselves as neutrals with bright lights and by painting the Irish tricolour and <unk> in large letters on their sides and decks . Nonetheless twenty percent of seamen serving in Irish ships perished , victims of a war not their own : attacked by both sides , though predominantly by the Axis powers . Often , Allied convoys could not stop to pick up survivors , while Irish ships always answered SOS signals and stopped to rescue survivors , irrespective of which side they belonged to . Irish ships rescued 534 seamen . 
 At the outbreak of World War II , known as " The Emergency " , Ireland declared neutrality and became isolated as never before . Shipping had been neglected since the Irish War of Independence . Foreign ships , on which Ireland 's trade had hitherto depended , were less available ; neutral American ships would not enter the " war zone " . In his Saint Patrick 's Day address in 1940 , Taoiseach ( Prime Minister ) Éamon de Valera lamented : 
 " No country had ever been more effectively blockaded because of the activities of belligerents and our lack of ships ... " 
 Ireland was a net food exporter . The excess was shipped to Britain . The Irish Mercantile Marine ensured that Irish agricultural , and other , exports reached Britain , and that British coal arrived in Ireland . Some foods such as wheat , citric fruits and tea were imported . Ireland depended on , mainly , British tankers for petroleum . Initially Irish ships sailed in British convoys . In the light of experience they chose to sail alone , relying on their neutral markings . German respect for that neutrality varied from friendly to tragic . 
 " Cross @-@ channel " trade , between Ireland and Britain , was from both national perspectives , the most important Irish trade route . Irish ships crossed the Atlantic on a route defined by the Allies : a line from Fastnet Rock to the Azores and then along the line of latitude at 38 ° North . Ships on the " Lisbon @-@ run " , imported wheat and fruits from Spain and Portugal , as well as goods transhipped from the Americas . They followed the line of longitude at 12 ° West , while Allied convoys to Gibraltar were 20 ° West . 
 There were never more than 800 men , at any one time , serving on Irish ships in the war . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following independence in 1921 , there was no state encouragement to develop the mercantile marine . " Our new leaders seemed to turn their backs upon the sea and to ignore the fact that we are an island " . Each year the fleet declined . In 1923 , the merchant fleet consisted of 127 ships . This number dropped every year until 1939 when , at the start of World War II , the fleet numbered only 56 ships . Only 5 % of imports were carried on Irish flagged vessels . There were several reasons for this decline : a consequence of the war of independence , a policy of self @-@ sufficiency , the economic depression , the lack of investment and government neglect . Foreign ships , on which Ireland had hitherto depended , were withdrawn . " In the period April 1941 and June 1942 only seven such ships visited the country " . The war of independence ( 1919 – 1921 ) , and the civil war ( 1921 – 1922 ) which followed it , left the country in near economic collapse . There had been destruction of industry and infrastructure . Many industries relocated abroad . It was often cheaper to transport by sea , within Ireland , rather than using the poor road and rail networks . To take advantage of this commercial opportunity , new coasters were acquired in the 1930s , intended to ply between Irish ports . These ships would be invaluable once hostilities began . Many of these small coasters were lost , particularly on the " Lisbon run " , a voyage for which they were never intended . 
 The then Taoiseach ( Prime Minister ) Éamon de Valera advocated a policy of self @-@ sufficiency . Foreign imports were discouraged . " It was an important status symbol in the modern world for a country to produce her own goods and be self @-@ sufficient . " 
 The global economic depression of the early 1930s impacted upon Ireland less because of the partial recovery following the civil war and because industry was protected behind tariff barriers established in the Anglo @-@ Irish Trade War ( 1932 – 1938 ) . The need for extra sea capacity was readily met by British and other foreign ships . Foreign ships were used , rather than preserving the home fleet . Banks were reluctant to lend to Irish industry , preferring British government gilts . 
 Although there was state support for many industries , this did not extend to shipping . In 1933 de Valera 's government established the Turf Development Board , turf became Ireland 's primary source of fuel during the emergency years and was stockpiled as imported coal was in short supply . In 1935 civil servants in de Valera 's own department warned him of the consequences a war would have on the importation of fuel . He ignored that warning . Earlier , in 1926 the Ports and Harbours Tribunal was initiated . The tribunal received " abundant evidence " of " inefficient , uneconomic and extravagant management " . It submitted a report in 1930 with recommendations which were not implemented until after the war . The tribunal observed " the public generally do not , we fear , appreciate the importance of our harbours ... " . Vickers @-@ Armstrongs liquidated their subsidiary Vickers ( Ireland ) Ltd. on 15 November 1938 ; their Dublin Dockyard had ceased operation in 1937 . 
 On 2 September 1939 the " realisation dawned on Ireland that the country was surrounded by water and that the sea was of vital importance to her " . By this point , however , British wartime restrictions on shipping were already in place . Historian Bryce Evans has argued that the failure of Seán Lemass and others to establish an Irish mercantile marine in the 1930s would exacerbate Irish supply problems in the Second World War . 
 = = = Response = = = 
 Seán Lemass as Minister for Industry and Commerce , and later Minister for Supplies sought to address these issues . Many infant industries were developed in the 1930s behind a protective tariff barrier . ( This is the origin of the term " Tariff Jews " , Seán Lemass from 1932 helped Jewish entrepreneurs to set up manufacturing businesses ) These industries proved valuable in the war years . They reduced the need for imports , for example in 1931 over five million pairs of shoes were imported , by 1938 this had fallen to a quarter of a million pairs . Between 1931 and 1938 , Gross Industrial Output rose from £ 55 million to £ 90 million ; and Industrial Employment from 162 @,@ 000 to 217 @,@ 000 . In 1933 the government established the Industrial Credit Corporation to finance industry . In 1938 , Life <unk> were required to hold their reserves in Ireland , to make capital available for industry ; promptly five of the six UK providers closed , lodging their business with Irish Assurance . Private enterprises established included : Grain Importers Ltd . , Animal Feed <unk> Ltd . , Fuel Importers Ltd . , Oil and Fats Ltd . , Timber Importers Ltd . , and Tea Importers Ltd . Industry was encouraged , such as the plans for Irish National Refineries Ltd. to build an oil refinery . The former Vickers repair yard in Dublin port was reopened , in 1940 , by the Dublin Port and Docks Board . It repaired British and Irish ships . Semi @-@ state enterprises were established , including Irish Shipping in 1941 which purchased nine vessels and leased six more . 
 = = = War declared = = = 
 At the outbreak of the Second World War Ireland declared neutrality . There were a total of 56 Irish ships at the outbreak of World War II ; 15 more were purchased or leased in the conflict , and 16 were lost . Up to then most Irish @-@ registered ships had been flying the red ensign of the United Kingdom Merchant Navy . All were required by UK law to fly the Red Ensign , but some , such as the Wexford Steamship Company ships , had always travelled under the tricolour . With the outbreak of hostilities , choices were forced . The Irish government ordered all Irish ships to fly the tricolour . Some British ships were on the Irish register , such as the whalers which were Scottish @-@ owned ( Christian Salvesen Shipping ) but Irish @-@ registered in order to take advantage of the Irish whale quota . The six whale catchers and the two factory ships were pressed into British naval service , after their owners transferred them to the British registry . Some ships which could be described as British also choose the Tricolour . <unk> , which was registered as belonging to R McGowan of Tralee , was actually owned by Kelly Colliers of Belfast . Most of the crew had addresses in loyalist areas of Belfast . For six years they sailed under the tricolour . 
 The Belfast Steamship Company 's MV Munster which operated the Belfast to Liverpool route , ( both British ports ) flew the tricolour . But , no flag was a protection against mines ; Munster struck a mine approaching Liverpool and sank . There were over 200 passengers and 50 crew on board . A few hours later they were all rescued by the collier <unk> . Four were injured ; and one died later . The L & NWR ferries Cambria , Hibernia and Scotia were Irish @-@ registered and sailed between Dún Laoghaire and Holyhead , under the Red Ensign . Their British crews were taken aback when the tricolour was hoisted . They went on strike and refused to sail until the ships were transferred to the British registry and red ensign was restored . Scotia was sunk in the Dunkirk evacuation with the loss of 30 crew and 300 troops . Hibernia had a fortunate escape on the night of 20 December 1940 . She was berthing at Dún Laoghaire when a German bomber swooped down . All lights were extinguished . Bombs fell on the nearby Sandycove railway station . The GWR ferries operated the Rosslare to Fishguard route sailed under the red ensign . Thirty lives were lost when their Saint Patrick was bombed and sunk . The British and Irish Steam Packet Company had some of its ships on the British registry with others on the Irish registry . 
 = = Cargo = = 
 = = = Exports = = = 
 The main export was agricultural produce to Britain . In the First World War , Ireland 's food production increased to meet Britain 's needs ; a pattern which would be repeated for the Second World War . In 1916 there were 1 @,@ 735 @,@ 000 acres ( 702 @,@ 130 ha ) under plough , this increased to 2 @,@ 383 @,@ 000 acres ( 964 @,@ 370 ha ) in 1918 , and then fell back . By the start of the trade war in 1932 tillage had fallen to 1 @,@ 424 @,@ 000 acres ( 576 @,@ 270 ha ) . 
 The trade war between Ireland and Britain started in 1932 , in which Britain imposed a tax on Irish products . Cattle from the Irish Republic were taxed but cattle from Northern Ireland were not . So , cattle were smuggled across the border . In 1934 / 5 , about 100 @,@ 000 cattle were " exported " in this way . The Department of Supplies was " all in favour of the smuggling and urged that nothing should be done which might stop it " . By then , Britain was anxious to secure Irish food supplies before another world war . Survival in the looming war was the spur . There were a series of agreements from the " cattle @-@ coal pact " of 1935 to the Anglo @-@ Irish Trade Agreement of 1938 which ended the dispute , on terms favourable to Ireland . 
 Under the " cattle @-@ coal pact " , the British set up a central authority for the purchase of cattle , under John Maynard Keynes . The prices set before the war were attractive . As the war progressed , open market prices rose dramatically . Cattle from Northern Ireland fetched a better price , so smuggling , as practised in the trade war , resumed . In answer to the demand for food in World War II , the area under plough increased from 1 @,@ 492 @,@ 000 acres ( 603 @,@ 790 ha ) in 1939 to 2 @,@ 567 @,@ 000 acres ( 1 @,@ 038 @,@ 830 ha ) in 1944 . Studies are inconclusive on how vital Irish food exports were to Britain , due to the difficulties in accounting for the effect of smuggling , the unreliability of statistics , and wartime censorship . While Ireland 's food production was increasing , British food imports were falling ; for example the UK imported 1 @,@ 360 @,@ 000 tons of food in August 1941 , but only 674 @,@ 000 tons in August 1942 . 
 Before and during the second world war , Ireland was a net food exporter and the Irish people enjoyed a high calorie diet . ( Nonetheless the poor experienced real deprivation ) . Food was donated to war @-@ refugees in Spain . The nation did need to import certain foods , such as fruits , tea and wheat . Nearly half of Ireland 's wheat was imported from Canada . Domestic food production relied on imported fertilizer and imported animal feeding stuffs . In 1940 , 74 @,@ 000 tons of fertilizer were imported , only 7 @,@ 000 tons arrived in 1941 . Similarly 5 million tons of animal feed were imported in 1940 , falling to one million in 1941 and negligible quantities thereafter . 
 = = = Imports = = = 
 Although Ireland had a surplus of food , some foods were not grown in Ireland , as the climate was unsuitable . Only small plots of wheat were cultivated . A series of orders for compulsory tillage were enacted , with the threat that those who did not put their fields to wheat would have their land confiscated . In 1939 , 235 @,@ 000 acres ( 95 @,@ 100 ha ) of wheat were planted ; by 1945 this had increased to 662 @,@ 000 acres ( 267 @,@ 900 ha ) . Yet , a shortfall remained and imports were <unk> between smugglers and Customs were commonplace . In 1940 the infamous " Battle of <unk> " took place on the border of Leitrim and Fermanagh . Revenue crews from <unk> and <unk> intercepted over one hundred men with donkey loads of smuggled flour . Unwilling to part with their bounty , the smugglers used cudgels , boots , stones and fists in the ensuing struggle . Most of the flour was destroyed in the fray and some Revenue people were injured . 
 Early in 1942 , the Allies restricted wheat deliveries to Ireland . In return , the Irish threatened to withhold the export of Guinness beer . To the great annoyance of David Gray , the United States Ambassador to Ireland , Ireland received 30 @,@ 000 tons of wheat . Gray complained of a waste of " a vital necessity for what Americans regard at the best as a luxury and at worst a poison " . 
 By 1944 – 45 coal imports were only one @-@ third of those of 1938 @-@ 9 and supplies of oil had almost ceased . The production of town gas , manufactured from imported coal , was so adversely affected that regulations were brought in limiting its use , enforced by the " Glimmer Man " . Britain relaxed these restrictions from 19 July 1944 . 
 There were plans to build an oil refinery in Dublin . In the event , this refinery was not completed . Nonetheless seven oil tankers were built in Bremen @-@ Vegesack , Germany for Inver Tankers Ltd . Each 500 feet ( 150 m ) long and capable of carrying 500 tons were on the Irish register . Britain asked Ireland to requisition the tankers , The reply was that it was not Irish policy to requisition vessels , instead offering to transfer them to the British register . They were transferred on the 6th , war had been declared on the 3rd . 
 Two days after the transfer , on 11 September 1939 , while still flying the Irish tricolour , Inverliffey was sunk . In spite of Captain William Trowsdale 's protestation that they were Irish , U @-@ 38 said that they " were sorry " but they would sink Inverliffey as she was carrying petrol to England , considered contraband to the Germans . U @-@ 38 's next encounter with the Irish tricolour was less gallant . U @-@ 38 shelled the fishing trawler Leukos , all 11 crew were lost . Inver Tankers ' entire fleet was lost in the war . 
 = = U @-@ boat encounters = = 
 Vizeadmiral Karl Dönitz issued a standing order to U @-@ boats on 4 September 1940 , which defined belligerent , neutral and friendly powers . Neutral included " Ireland in particular " . The order concluded : " Ireland forbids the navigation of her territorial waters by warships under threat of internment . That prohibition is to be strictly observed out of consideration for the proper preservation of her neutrality . Signed , Dönitz " . However those orders did not always protect Irish ships . Wolf Jeschonnek , commander of U @-@ 607 was mildly reprimanded " An understandable mistake by an eager captain " for sinking Irish Oak . When U @-@ 46 sank <unk> on the Lisbon run , her commander recorded in his war diary " flying a British or Irish flag " . A supplement to Dönitz 's order found after U @-@ 260 was scuttled off Cork read : " for political reasons , Irish ships and also at times Irish convoys are not to be attacked within the blockade zone if they are seen to be such . However , there is no special obligation to determine neutrality in the blockade zone . " . 
 There were many encounters with U @-@ boats , some pleasant , others not so . On 16 March 1942 Irish Willow was stopped by U @-@ 753 , which signalled " Send master and ship 's papers " . As Capt Shanks hailed from Belfast and therefore legally a British subject , this was considered unwise . Chief Officer Harry Cullen and four crew rowed to the U @-@ boat . He said that his ( 39 @-@ year @-@ old ) captain was too elderly for the boat . He added that it would be Saint Patrick 's Day in the morning . They were treated to schnapps in the conning tower and given a bottle of cognac to bring back to Irish Willow . Later , Irish Willow performed a dangerous rescue of 47 British sailors from Empire Breeze . 
 On 20 March 1943 U @-@ 638 , commanded by Kapitänleutnant Heinrich Oskar <unk> stopped Irish Elm . Rough seas prevented Elm 's crew from pulling their rowboat alongside the submarine to present their papers , so the interview was conducted by shouting . In the course of the conversation , Elm 's Chief Officer Patrick Hennessy gave Dún Laoghaire as his home address . <unk> asked if " the strike was still on in Downey 's " , a pub near Dún Laoghaire harbour . ( The Downey 's strike started in March 1939 and lasted 14 years . ) 
 = = Convoys = = 
 The Irish and British authorities co @-@ operated in the chartering of ships . They made combined purchases of wheat , maize , sugar , animal feeds and petrol . At the start of the war , Irish ships joined convoys protected by the Royal Navy . The advantages were protection and cheaper insurance . These advantages were not borne out by experience . So they chose to sail alone . 
 The ability to insure ships , cargo , and crew has a significant impact on the profitability of shipping . Insurance of Irish ships in the ' Long Watch ' was problematic . One important aspect of this was that Irish ships usually didn 't travel in convoy and insurers such as Lloyd 's of London charged a higher premium to insure ships not in convoy . An example of the insurance problems faced , concerns the crew of City of Waterford . When this ship joined Convoy OG 74 , the lives of the crew were insured . The ship suffered a collision with the Dutch tugboat Thames , and sank . Waterford 's crew was rescued by HMS Deptford and then transferred to the rescue ship Walmer Castle . Walmer Castle was bombed two days later and five of City of Waterford 's survivors died . When their families made life insurance claims , they were refused , because at their time of death they were not crew of City of Waterford , but passengers of Walmer Castle . Later the Irish government introduced a compensation scheme for seamen lost or injured on Irish ships and Irish Shipping opened its own marine insurance subsidiary , which made a handsome profit . 
 Two Limerick Steamship Company ships , Lanahrone and Clonlara were part of the " nightmare convoy " OG 71 , which left Liverpool on 13 August 1941 . As merchant ships of a neutral country the Limerick ships had no blackout facilities , and the Master of the British Convoy Commodore 's ship , the liner Aguila , objected that this would make the convoy visible to the enemy at night . In an apparently vain attempt to make them less visible , the Vice Admiral who was Convoy Commodore positioned the two Irish ships in the centre of the convoy . On 19 August in separate attacks the Norwegian destroyer HNoMS Bath was drawn away from the convoy and sunk by U @-@ 204 , and three minutes later U @-@ 559 sank the British merchant ship Alva . Clonlara rescued 13 survivors from Alva . Two hours later U @-@ 201 sank the Commodore ship Aguila and the British cargo ship <unk> . Two days later U @-@ 564 sank Clonlara . The Flower @-@ class corvette HMS Campion rescued 13 survivors ( eight from Clonlara , five from Alva ) . Eight merchant ships , two naval escorts and over 400 lives were lost . 
 Five of the convoy 's surviving merchant ships reached Gibraltar ; 10 retreated to neutral Portugal . This was described as " a bitter act of surrender could ever come our way " . In Lisbon Lanahrone 's crew went on strike , which was resolved with extra life @-@ rafts and pay . The crew of Irish Poplar was waiting in Lisbon ; when the remnants of OG 71 limped in . The crew of Irish Poplar resolved to sail home alone . While City of Dublin brought Clonlara 's survivors to Cork , Lanahrone joined Convoy HG 73 . Nine of the 25 ships in that convoy were lost . These experiences and the inability of the Royal Navy to protect merchant ships had a most profound effect on all Irish Ships . Thereafter they were blacked out when sailing in Allied convoys . Ship @-@ owners , on the advice of their masters , decided not to sail their vessels in British convoys and by the early months of 1942 the practice had ceased . 
 Captain William Henderson of Irish Elm , returning from a transatlantic voyage reported " circled by two German bombers , probably Condors , they circled for a considerable time and inspected closely but didn 't molest . The incident had given the crew great confidence in the protection afforded by the neutral markings " . 
 = = Trade routes = = 
 = = = British routes = = = 
 This " cross @-@ channel " trade accounted for most of Ireland 's trade . The ships ranged , in age , from Dundalk built , two years before the start of the war , in 1937 to Brooklands built in 1859 . The most important vessels to Ireland were the ten colliers and to Britain the livestock carriers . Initially Germany respected the neutrality of Irish vessels , apologising for the first attack on the collier Kerry Head and paying compensation . Losses came from mines , rather than direct attacks . Meath suffered such a fate ; while she was being inspected by the British Naval Control Service , she was struck by a magnetic mine , drowning seven hundred cattle , and destroying both vessels . 
 In August 1940 Germany " required " Ireland to cease food exports to Britain . On 17 August 1940 , Germany declared a large area around Britain to be a " scene of warlike operations " . It was believed that attacks on Irish ships and the bombing of <unk> was to reinforce that message . Lord Haw @-@ Haw in a broadcast on German , threatened that Dundalk would be bombed if the export of cattle to Britain continued . On 24 July 1941 , George 's Quay , Dundalk was bombed . Nonetheless , the trade continued . 
 The first attack , after the German ultimatum , was against the schooner Lock Ryan , returning to Arklow . She was strafed and bombed by three German aircraft . Fortunately Lock Ryan 's cargo of china clay absorbed the blast and although badly damaged , she survived . Germany acknowledged the attack but refused to pay compensation for the damage as she was in " the blockaded area " , " through which the Irish had been offered free passage but on terms which were rejected " . There were many attacks on ships on the cross @-@ channel trade . In 1940 nine Irish ships were lost . That figure may be small compared with Allied losses , but it represents a larger proportion of the small Irish fleet . 
 There were restrictions on reporting attacks on ships . Frank Aiken , the government minister whose responsibilities included censorship , reverted this policy . His intention was to let Germany know that the Irish public know , and " they don 't like it " . There had been a British proposal for transshipment . William Warnock , the Irish chargé d 'affaires in Berlin told Germany that Ireland was refusing to <unk> British cargoes , while protesting against the attacks on Irish ships , and other neutral ships with Irish cargoes . Deliberate attacks on cross @-@ channel shipping ceased on 5 November 1941 , when the collier Glencree was strafed . There were attacks on other routes . Mines were a constant danger . 
 = = = The Iberian trade = = = 
 On November 1939 , Roosevelt signed the Fourth Neutrality Act forbidding American ships from entering the " war zone " , which was defined as a line drawn from Spain to Iceland . Cargoes intended for Ireland were shipped to Portugal . It was up to the Irish to fetch them from there . This route , known as the Iberian Trade or the Lisbon run . Setting sail from Ireland , the ships would carry agricultural products to the United Kingdom . There they would discharge their cargo , load up on fuel , pick up a British export ( often coal ) , and carry it to Portugal . In Portugal , usually Lisbon , Irish ships loaded the waiting American cargo , such as fertilizer or agricultural machinery . 
 Sometimes the cargo was not there : it may have been delayed , or lost at sea due to the war . In this case , the Irish captains would load a " cargo of opportunity " and bring it back to Ireland . This might be wheat or oranges ; on occasions , they even purchased their own cargo of coal . MV Kerlogue was fortunate to have a cargo of coal when two unidentified aircraft attacked her with cannon fire . The shells lodged in the coal , rather than piercing her hull . Britain denied involvement , but when the coal was discharged shell fragments of British manufacture were found . The attackers were de Havilland Mosquitos of the Polish squadron of the RAF . 
 The Cymric was not so fortunate , she vanished in the same waters without a trace . 
 The Lisbon run was undertaken by small coastal trading vessels , commonly called coasters , which were not designed for deep @-@ sea navigation . Small , and having low freeboard ( frequently around one foot ( 30 cm ) ) these ships were designed never to be out of sight of land , and to be able to make quickly to a harbour when the weather turned foul . Kerlogue has become the exemplar of the Irish Mercantile Marine in the Emergency . Only 335 gross register tons ( GRT ) and 142 feet ( 43 m ) long , Kerlogue was attacked by both sides and rescued both sides . Her rescue of 168 German sailors , given her size , was dramatic . From January 1941 , British authorities required Irish ships to visit a British port and obtain a " <unk> " . This visit sometimes proved fatal . It also added up to 1 @,@ 300 miles ( 2 @,@ 100 km ) to the voyage . A ship with a " <unk> " was given free passage through allied patrols and fuel , however they would be searched . Irish ships on the " Lisbon run " carried UK exports to Spain and Portugal . 
 = = = Atlantic routes = = = 
 Some British ships traded between Ireland and Britain . Other destinations were served by Irish and other neutral ships . Philip Noel @-@ Baker ( Churchill 's Parliamentary Secretary ) was able to tell the British parliament that " no United Kingdom or Allied ship has been lost while carrying a full cargo of goods either to or from Eire on an ocean voyage . " He added " a very high proportion of imports from overseas sources into Eire , and of such exports as are sent overseas from Eire , are already carried in ships on the Eire or on a neutral register . " and " The trade between Great Britain and Eire is of mutual benefit to both countries , and the risks to British seamen which it involves are small . " 
 In the economic depression , the Limerick Steamship Company sold both its ocean @-@ going ships , <unk> and <unk> . They were Ireland 's last ocean @-@ going ships . At the outbreak of hostilities Ireland did not have a ship designed to cross the Atlantic . British ships were not available . American ships would only travel to Portugal . Ireland depended on other neutrals . In 1940 a succession of these ships , from Norway , Greece , Argentina , and Finland , usually carrying wheat to Ireland , were lost . Soon many of these nations were no longer neutral . Ireland had to acquire its own fleet . Irish Shipping was formed . Irish Poplar was Irish Shipping 's first ship . It was acquired in Spain after it had been abandoned by its crew . Other ships were acquired from Palestine , Panama , Yugoslavia , and Chile . The Irish government minister Frank Aiken negotiated the bareboat chartering of two oil @-@ burning steamships from the United States Maritime Commission 's reserve fleet . They were both lost to U @-@ boats . Irish Oak was sunk in controversial circumstances by U @-@ 607 . All 33 crew of Irish Pine were lost when she was sunk by U @-@ 608 . Three ships were from Estonia , They were in Irish ports when Estonia was annexed by the Soviet Union . Their crews refused to return to the new Estonian SSR . The ships were sold to Irish Shipping . The SS <unk> ( <unk> ) was abandoned in Dingle Bay after being strafed on 1 December 1940 . She was salvaged by Fort Rannoch of the Irish Navy ; she was purchased and renamed Irish Beech . An Italian ship , Caterina <unk> had been trapped in Dublin since the outbreak of the war . After the fall of Italian Fascism she was chartered , repaired and renamed Irish Cedar . When the war was over , she returned to Naples with a cargo of food , a gift from Ireland to war @-@ ravaged Italy . Irish Hazel was bought on 17 June 1941 . She was 46 years old , and required extensive repairs . " She was fit for nothing but the scrap yard . " A British yard bid for , and won , the contract to renovate her . This work was completed in November 1943 . Even though the Irish government paid for her purchase and for the repairs she was requisitioned by the British Ministry of War Transport and renamed Empire Don . She was returned to Irish Shipping in 1945 . 
 The Irish Shipping fleet imported , across the Atlantic : 712 @,@ 000 tons of wheat , 178 @,@ 000 tons of coal , 63 @,@ 000 tons of phosphate ( for fertilizer ) , 24 @,@ 000 tons of tobacco , 19 @,@ 000 tons of newsprint , 10 @,@ 000 tons of timber and 105 @,@ 000 tons of assorted other cargo . Figures from the other shipping companies have not survived . 
 = = After the war = = 
 When the hostilities were over , on 16 May 1945 , Éamon de Valera , in his speech to the nation said : " To the men of our Mercantile Marine who faced all the perils of the ocean to bring us essential supplies , the nation is profoundly grateful . " The Ringsend area of Dublin has a long maritime tradition . When housing was being redeveloped in the 1970s , some streets were named after ships which were lost : <unk> Road , <unk> Grove , Cymric Road , <unk> Road , Pine Road , Leukos Road , <unk> Road and Clonlara Road . The " An Bonn <unk> <unk> " for " An <unk> <unk> @-@ <unk> " or in English : " Emergency Service Medal " of the " Mercantile Marine Service " , was awarded to all who had served six months , or longer , on an Irish @-@ registered ship in the Emergency . 
 On 24 September 2001 , a plinth and plaque , embossed with the Irish tricolour was erected to commemorate those crews lost on neutral Irish registered vessels in 1939 @-@ 45 . " a very significant gesture by our British friends towards recognising the debt of honour owed to all shipmates irrespective of nationality who lost their lives in the Second World War . " in the National Memorial Arboretum in England . 
 In Dublin , an annual commemoration , is held on the third Sunday of November . The Cork commemoration is held on the fourth Sunday of November in the former offices of the White Star Line . The Belfast commemoration is held on the second Sunday of May . 
 = = Publications = = 
 = 1948 FA Charity Shield = 
 The 1948 FA Charity Shield was the 26th Charity Shield , an annual English association football match played between the winners of the previous season 's Football League and FA Cup . It was the first edition held since the postponement of football during the Second World War . The match , held at Highbury on 6 October 1948 , was contested by Arsenal , champions of the 1947 – 48 Football League and Manchester United , who beat Blackpool in the final of the 1947 – 48 FA Cup . This was Arsenal 's eighth Charity Shield appearance to Manchester United 's third . 
 Watched by a crowd of over 30 @,@ 000 , Reg Lewis , Bryn Jones , and Ronnie Rooke each scored for the league champions inside the first 15 minutes . Manchester United responded by scoring twice before the half @-@ time break through Jack Rowley and Ronnie Burke . Lionel Smith 's own goal in the 53rd minute made the scoreline 4 – 3 , and though United 's attack were dominant in the second half , there were no further goals . Arsenal were awarded the Shield by A.V. Alexander , the Minister of Defence . Gate receipts for the match came to a total of £ 4 @,@ 300 . 
 = = Background = = 
 The FA Charity Shield was founded in 1908 as a successor to the Sheriff of London Charity Shield . It was a contest between the respective champions of the Football League and Southern League , and then by 1913 teams of amateur and professional players . In 1921 , it was played by the Football League champions and FA Cup winners for the first time . After a ten @-@ year absence due to the suspension of football during the Second World War , the Charity Shield made a return in 1948 . 
 Arsenal qualified for the 1948 FA Charity Shield as winners of the 1947 – 48 Football League First Division . It was the club 's sixth league title and striker Ronnie Rooke scored 33 goals in the campaign to become the division 's top goalscorer . The other Charity Shield place went to Manchester United who beat Blackpool to win the final of the 1947 – 48 FA Cup . Manchester United 's progress in the competition was unique as the club was drawn against teams from the First Division in every round . Their home ties were staged at three different grounds as Old Trafford was being repaired from the damage sustained in the Manchester Blitz . 
 This was Arsenal 's eighth Charity Shield appearance ; prior to the game they had won five Shields ( 1930 , 1931 , 1933 , 1934 , 1938 ) , and lost two ( 1935 , 1936 ) . By contrast Manchester United were undefeated in the Charity Shield ; the club won their previous two appearances , in 1908 and 1911 . Manchester United had beaten Arsenal 1 – 0 the last time the two clubs met at Highbury , for a league fixture on 30 August 1948 ; Charlie Mitten scored the only goal of the match . 
 = = Match = = 
 = = = Summary = = = 
 Arsenal began the quicker of the two teams . Inside a minute , a <unk> by Manchester United left back John Aston troubled his defence , and presented Reg Lewis and Rooke with shooting opportunities . After three minutes , Arsenal took the lead ; combination play from Jimmy Logie and Bryn Jones forced goalkeeper Jack Crompton out of his area , and ended with Jones hitting the ball high into an empty net . Lewis headed in Archie Macaulay 's cross from the right to double Arsenal 's lead , and the team scored their third almost immediately , when Rooke maneuvered past the United defence to shoot past Crompton . 
 United regrouped and scored immediately . Charging forward , John Anderson and Jack Rowley each shot wide , before Johnny Morris 's effort hit the post . The ball rebounded to Rowley , whose shot went in past goalkeeper George <unk> . United were in full ascendancy – " Anderson and Warner were winning the ball in mid @-@ field , and bringing it through to their forwards [ ... ] , making the Arsenal defence feel the strain , " so said The Times football correspondent . In the 35th minute however , Lewis scored his second goal of the match , beating Allenby Chilton to the ball first and going past Crompton . Five minutes before half @-@ time , United halved Arsenal 's lead – a well @-@ worked move started by Carey in his own half was finished off by Burke . 
 Arsenal struggled to regain fluency in the second half , as their opponents dominated play . In the 53rd minute , United scored to make it 4 – 3 ; Charlie Mitten 's flick in the area was diverted into the Arsenal net by Lionel Smith for an own goal . United fashioned further chances through Burke and Rowley , but for large periods of the second half the Arsenal defence stood firm . Jones ' headed goal was rule out for offside , after which the match descended into a contest between United 's attack and Arsenal 's defence . Jimmy Delaney came closest to equalising late on , when he darted forward and missed by inches . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 Source 
 = = Post @-@ match = = 
 A.V. Alexander , the Minister of Defence presented Arsenal with the Shield . Assessing the match the next day , Daily Express football correspondent John MacAdam wrote : " Charity begins at home , they say , and , by golly , it began at Highbury yesterday , for Arsenal were the luckiest team in the world to beat Manchester United 4 – 3 in the F.A. Charity Shield match between the winners of the League and the Cup . " The Times correspondent assessed , " Arsenal won because they sneaked a commanding lead of three goals , before Manchester had realised they were in London , " and concluded the piece with the sentence " It had been a game worthy of the occasion and of two fine clubs . " Gate receipts for the match totalled £ 4 @,@ 300 . 
 Manchester United ended the season as runners @-@ up to Portsmouth in the Football League First Division , and reached the semi @-@ final stage of the FA Cup . Arsenal progressed no further than the fourth round of the cup competition , and finished sixth in the league . The two clubs next faced each other in the Charity Shield in 1993 , when Manchester United won the inaugural Premier League title , and Arsenal were FA Cup winners in the 1992 – 93 season . 
 = Folie à Deux ( album ) = 
 Folie à Deux ( / <unk> ə <unk> / ; French for " A Madness Shared by Two " ) is the fourth studio album by American rock band Fall Out Boy . Produced by Neal Avron , the album was recorded from July to September 2008 at The Pass Studios and The Casita in Hollywood , California . As the follow @-@ up to the band 's commercially successful 2007 effort Infinity on High , it was released by Island Records on December 10 , 2008 , after the original November 4 release was postponed to avoid conflicts with the United States presidential election . Like the band 's two previous releases , Folie à Deux was musically composed by lead vocalist and guitarist Patrick Stump , with lyrics penned by bassist Pete Wentz . In regard to the writing process , the band considered Folie à Deux to be the band 's most collaborative record at the time . 
 The album was recorded in relative secrecy compared to the press that its predecessor possessed . The recording sessions inspired lyricism that related to decaying relationships , moral dilemmas , and societal shortcomings , many with a political edge . It is the first Fall Out Boy album with lyrics that are less autobiographical . The album 's style moved away from early emo power chords and toward a wider variation in genre . Fall Out Boy recruited several guest artists for Folie à Deux , as well as employing instruments and recording techniques previously unfamiliar to the group . To promote the album , the band launched a viral campaign based around a Big Brother @-@ type organization named " Citizens For Our Betterment " ( CFOB ) and embarked on an extensive tour schedule . 
 Folie à Deux was released in the United States on December 16 , 2008 , and received favorable reviews from most music critics , although fan opinions were mixed . Positive reviews focused on the creativity and various styles touched on , while the more negative reviews expressed concern that the record was overly indulgent . The album debuted at number eight on the US Billboard 200 chart with 149 @,@ 000 first week sales but was less commercially successful than Infinity on High . As of February 2013 Folie à Deux has sold 449 @,@ 000 copies in the US . It was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) after 500 @,@ 000 copies were shipped . The album spawned four singles . " I Don 't Care " , the first single , reached number 21 on the Billboard Hot 100 and was certified platinum . Folie à Deux was Fall Out Boy 's last studio album released before the band 's 2009 – 13 hiatus . 
 = = Background = = 
 Fall Out Boy began writing material for a possible successor shortly after the release of the 2007 album , Infinity on High . In March 2008 , the band attempted to enter the The Guinness Book of World Records for being the only musical act to perform in all seven continents in nine months , planning to perform in Antarctica for an audience of scientists . However , the group was unable to make the flight from Punta Arenas , Chile to Antarctica due to poor weather . Despite this unsuccessful attempt , the group felt energized from the experience and became inspired to write more music . This led to more material to sift through when the band decided to enter the studio . Fall Out Boy spent time during June 2008 formulating ideas at Avron 's home , where " three to four " song ideas were developed . Lead vocalist / guitarist Patrick Stump and bassist / lyricist Pete Wentz began turning these ideas into songs over the following month . Wentz explained that the process was the same as usual : " I 'll go over to Patrick 's house and he 'll kind of just sit there and play songs , and I 'll be like , ' Ah , that one 's awesome ! ' " 
 The band intended to work on new music sooner , but the release of its cover of Michael Jackson 's " Beat It " as a single stood in the way . The single " stalled out " the label , who wanted the band to film a music video for further promotion . Stump entered the studio with the intention of being less " self @-@ indulgent " , believing he dominated the band 's previous record . He wished to focus more on creating a cohesive album in which different sounds come together instead of featuring his vocals at the forefront . With the help of Neal Avron , who produced Fall Out Boy 's last two records , the quartet decided to simplify the music on Folie à Deux as opposed to the multi @-@ layered sound of Infinity on High . The band was interviewed about the album constantly before even a single note was recorded , leading to misconceptions about how the record would sound . The album was first rumored to consist of entirely acoustic folk music , while other sources later alleged it would delve into rap @-@ rock . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 The band members decided to keep publicity down during the album 's recording , as they were taken aback by such press surrounding Infinity on High . Stump entered the studio with music for almost 50 songs . Folie à Deux was intended to be very different from the previous three Fall Out Boy albums , which were all interconnected musically and thematically ; Stump described the new songs as " having a lot of freedom [ ... ] it 's our first just plain old record in a while . " However , the sessions proved to be difficult for the band . Stump called the making of the album " painful " , noting that he and Wentz quarreled over many issues , revealing " I threw something across the room over a major @-@ to @-@ minor progression . " On previous albums , guitarist Joe Trohman felt that he and drummer Andy Hurley did not have enough musical freedom and that Stump and Wentz exerted too much control over the group : " I felt , ' Man , this isn 't my band anymore . ' It 's no one 's fault , and I don 't want to make it seem that way . It was more of a complex I developed based off of stuff I was reading . It 's hard to hear , ' Joe and Andy are just along for the ride . ' " To amend the situation , Trohman sat down with Stump to communicate his concerns , which led to more collaboration on Folie à Deux . " It made me feel like I owned the songs a lot more . It made me really excited about contributing to Fall Out Boy and made me find my role in the band , " Trohman recalled . 
 The group purposely cut short the amount of time set aside for recording the album , and did not notify its label before beginning work on the record . The members hoped that these steps would bring them back to the days when they were a young , broke band who had to finish an album before the money ran out . " There was something really interesting about that creative process when we were starting out , " explained Stump . " The more time you have , the more potential you have for excess . " He felt that the process was reminiscent of the making of Take This to Your Grave because both albums were created using a " first @-@ thought , best @-@ thought " mentality : " I think we were trying to find what making a record that way would sound like now , but with four adult Fall Out Boys . " Trohman called the recording process " fun because [ it ] was so collaborative , " but difficult because it was rushed . 
 In September , the band was still finalizing cameos , recording with Brendon Urie of Panic ! at the Disco and Pharrell Williams . The band desired to work with Kanye West , but ran out of time . Pharrell laid down beats and Stump would add vocals and melodies for " <unk> " The collaboration with Elvis Costello in " What a Catch , Donnie " was spontaneous . The band sent Costello the song , and although he had been suffering from bronchitis , he decided to participate . Stump was particularly excited about the collaboration , as Hurley noted that " Elvis is Patrick 's favorite person on earth as a musician , singer and songwriter . " Wentz felt that cameos were necessary to portray the album 's messages , stating " More than anything , they serve the purpose of a character in a musical , where this character 's voice makes the most sense ... Certain lines need to be conveyed in certain ways . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 = = = Music = = = 
 On Folie à Deux , Fall Out Boy continued its pattern of musical experimentation that began on the band 's previous album , Infinity on High . Singer / guitarist Patrick Stump was once again the primary composer , and attempted to create compositions that echoed the themes discussed in Wentz 's lyrics . As the lyrical content shifted in new directions from the group 's previous works , the musical style employed by the other band members evolved as well . On this topic , Trohman commented " It 's not like we said , ' We want to push the envelope , ' It 's not that at all . We just wanted to try cooler things . The album still sounds like Fall Out Boy . It has big choruses . But you can 't do the same thing every record . " 
 The record contains more instruments not present in the band 's previous work , including synthesizers , sequenced drums , and strings . Critics noted similarities between the album and 1980s arena rock . Joey Rosen of Rolling Stone commented that " They further explore their funky side here : Stump is emerging as one of the world 's most unlikely blue @-@ eyed @-@ soul stars , breathing life into classic R & B chord progressions and flaunting his agile voice . " Trohman drew influence from Queen while creating guitar harmonies to match Stump 's vocals on the record , while his other styles were inspired by Metallica , Prince , and The Rolling Stones . He also employs a jazz guitar interlude on " <unk> " which has been likened to Steely Dan . 
 The pregap hidden track " <unk> " is an acoustic ballad influenced by Bob Dylan , written with the intention of helping Wentz ' son , Bronx Mowgli , fall asleep . Leah Greenblatt of Entertainment Weekly categorized the album 's opener , " Disloyal Order of Water Buffaloes " , as a " towering guitar anthem built on wedding @-@ march organs , thundering drums , and singer Patrick Stump 's limber vocals . " " Coffee 's for Closers " is similarly percussive and features drummer Andy Hurley drawing influence from marching band drumwork . The first single " I Don 't Care " has been described as " disco rockabilly " , and contains a repeating blues riff throughout the song ; Stump 's vocal performance on the track has been compared to John Lee Hooker . 
 " Headfirst Slide into Cooperstown on a Bad Bet " is an example of the album 's theme of contrasting moods , and " struts in on a massive drum line and crunching , processed guitars , gets amplified by a four @-@ piece horn section , then falls away to a simple , somber piano line " according to James Montgomery of MTV . The Elton John @-@ influenced " What a Catch , Donnie " is a piano @-@ driven ballad which features a string section in the background . As the song closes , it features Brendon Urie , Alexander DeLeon , Travie McCoy , Gabe Saporta , Elvis Costello and William Beckett singing parts of previous Fall Out Boy songs . According to Stump , the song contains lyrics that were important to the band and " gives us the chance for this record to come full circle " . The backing vocals in " America 's Suitehearts " have been compared to groups such as The Beatles . 
 = = = Lyrics = = = 
 Pete Wentz was once again the primary lyricist of the band during the production of the album . Stump said that Wentz " totally outdid himself on this record . He doesn 't even know how good his lyrics are here . " Wentz , despite many recent personal developments ( marriage to Ashlee Simpson , birth of his son , Bronx ) , desired to shift the focus away from himself and turn it outward onto the world . For the first time on a Fall Out Boy album , Folie is rarely autobiographical , as the band believed the format was " losing its luster " because " everyone was doing it . " The songs on the album explore decaying relationships , moral dilemmas , and societal shortcomings , as well as concepts such as trust , infidelity , responsibility , and commitment . Stump tagged Folie à Deux as a " message record " that takes aim at " the materialistic dance between any two parties obsessed with each other , whether it 's teenage girls and handbag makers , politicians and lobbyists or tabloids and stars . " Folie à Deux also dissects how self @-@ motivated American culture is , and many of the lyrics are intended to be satirical . While the album does contain political overtones , the band wanted to avoid being overt about these themes , leaving many lyrics open to interpretation for listeners . 
 Wentz referred to " I Don 't Care " as a " narcissist 's anthem " that addresses the current generation 's short attention span . Wentz further explored the subjects of narcissism and apathy in " ( Coffee 's for Closers ) " , as Stump explained , " The past decade has been totally about ' me . ' It 's totally about ' Oh , I 'm sad . I want this . I know somebody who knows this person . Me me me me me , ' so that 's what that song is about . " Additionally , " America 's Suitehearts " discusses society 's fixation with celebrities and the desire to let them do no wrong . " 27 " explores the hedonistic lifestyles common in rock and roll music . The title is a reference to the 27 Club , a group of influential musicians , including Janis Joplin , Kurt Cobain , and Jim Morrison , who all died at the age of 27 . Wentz felt that he was living a similarly dangerous lifestyle , and was " stoked " to make it to his 28th birthday . Stump added " There was a countdown clock and everything . I remember , our manager called me up on Pete 's 28th birthday and screamed , ' We made it ! ' " 
 = = Title and artwork = = 
 Folie à deux is a rare psychiatric syndrome in which symptoms of a delusional belief are transmitted from one individual to another . The same syndrome shared by more than two people may be called folie à trois , folie à quatre , folie en famille or even folie à plusieurs ( " madness of many " ) . Recent psychiatric classifications refer to the syndrome as dependency psychotic disorder or induced delusional disorder , although the research literature largely uses the original name . The disorder was first conceptualized in 19th century French psychiatry . In keeping with the record 's socially aware nature , the band felt that the term was relevant to the candidates in the 2008 U.S. presidential election . Stump further clarified the title 's meaning : " The irony is that people will probably mistake the title as something about romantic relationships in some way . And it 's our only record where that theme is not touched upon . " 
 On September 13 , 2008 , the album artwork was revealed on the band 's website . The cover of the album was painted by artist Luke Chueh . Wentz contacted Chueh and asked him to create the piece , to which the artist agreed . Chueh recalled of the situation , " They were great to work with , having given me full creative control over both the artwork and the final design of the [ sic ] cover . " Chueh used the title and underlying themes of the album as inspiration for the artwork . " The title of the album is Folie à Deux , and when considering this with the band 's popularity , I chose to focus on the idea of fandom , and how some people are willing to take their love / infatuation to levels that are obviously unhealthy . " Wentz currently owns the original painting . The disc 's liner notes contain pictures of the band members with blank pages next to them ; the group allowed fans to submit pictures they had drawn in the spaces and posted them to the band 's website . 
 = = Promotion and release = = 
 As the release of the new album approached , the band and its management found that they would have to navigate changes in the music industry , which Hurley described as " a completely different place . " Facing declining record sales , the lack of a proper outlet for exhibition of music videos , and the economic crisis , Hurley commented that " people are buying things they need to survive rather than records and concert tickets . " The group 's 2007 album Infinity on High sold one million copies , which was considered a disappointment compared to From Under the Cork Tree 's sales of three million . Trohman attributed this to " the same reason that nobody 's records are selling that well : there 's so much turmoil in the music industry , so much downsizing , and people are finding different ways to get their music more and more all the time . There 's very little we can do about that as a band . All we can do is try to make great music and hope it connects with people . " 
 = = = Citizens for Our Betterment and Welcome to the New Administration = = = 
 A viral campaign was launched by Pete Wentz on August 18 , 2008 , to promote the album . It was inspired by George Orwell 's novel Nineteen Eighty @-@ Four ( 1949 ) , and the autocratic , overbearing Big Brother organization . The campaign started when the website for Wentz 's Decaydance Records label was supposedly " hacked " by an organization called " Citizens for Our Betterment " ( CFOB ) . Clues were left in links and images on the website , and Wentz left clues on his personal blog . On August 19 , Wentz ' wife Ashlee Simpson was seen carrying a pamphlet for the organization , raising suspicion and sparking many rumors online . In the days that followed , new posts appeared on the Citizens For Our Betterment website and Wentz continued to blog , at times referring to November 4 , the same day as the 2008 U.S. presidential election . Meanwhile , another band , Copeland , launched its own viral campaign . As part of it , Copeland launched a similarly named site , <unk> , and spread links through various Fall Out Boy fan blogs to attract more people to the new website . 
 While this mixing of campaigns was done without the knowledge of the members of Fall Out Boy , Wentz did post an acknowledgement on August 22 , when CFOB again " hijacked " Decaydance Records website . Decaydance act The Cab began performing with " Citizens for Our Betterment " written on the group 's instruments . Finally , on August 26 , a blog post of a press release was made on the band 's <unk> page ; it announced Folie à Deux as the title of the upcoming album , due for release on November 4 . Wentz said of the endeavor " To me , this is not a marketing campaign . It is a way to cause excitement about your art and have people earn it and understand it ... I don 't believe the full campaign has begun , and I also believe people are taking over the ship in a truly viral way . It doesn 't hurt anyone , and hopefully it tells the story of the project better and makes it more appreciated . " 
 It also revealed that a mixtape , titled Welcome to the New Administration , was available for download for free on the <unk> website . The mixtape contained several snippets of new Fall Out Boy tracks , as well as new music from other bands such as Gym Class Heroes , Cobra Starship , and Panic ! at the Disco . However none of the titles were confirmed for Folie à Deux . It also featured a song titled " America 's Sweethearts " which was eventually confirmed for the album but with an alternate spelling , " America 's Suitehearts " . The band confirmed that it intended to release the mixtape in conjunction with the " Citizens " campaign , and felt that it was relevant to not only the themes of the album , but the 2008 election as well . Wentz explained " The whole campaign is part of the record and people can call it whatever they want , but the mixtape was part of that campaign , and we 'll see what happens from here ... In creating this autocratic organization , we created a democratic campaign , because people have made it go the direction they wanted it to go . " 
 = = = Release date change = = = 
 Initially , the album 's release date was reported to be November 4 , 2008 — meaning that it would coincide with the 2008 presidential election . Fall Out Boy later announced on October 13 , 2008 , that the early November date was in doubt , citing concerns over the planned election day tie @-@ in . The band stressed out and worked very hard on a tight deadline to get the album out on November 4 . While on a promotional tour in Spain , the band realized that things were " spinning out of control " , and , in a rushed @-@ out statement , explained : 
 Six months ago we thought it would be a fun idea to release our album on election day but this is not the election to be cute . We felt as though rather than making a commentary we were only riding the wave of the election . This seemed less and less like what we intended to do and more of a gimmick . It is now in the hands of our label to give us a new release date . It is our intent to get our record out this year and as soon as possible -- as we made sure to have it done in time for its original release . 
 Deciding to postpone the album release in a season in which artists Kanye West ( 808s & Heartbreak ) , Britney Spears ( Circus ) and Guns N ' Roses ( Chinese Democracy ) had already set release dates , the only one available was six weeks later than expected . It was soon announced that a new release date for Folie was December 16 , 2008 . Although December 16 was not an ideal date according to demographic marketing analysis , Stump said " we put our eight feet down [ and ] told our label it must come out this year . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 Folie à Deux has sold 449 @,@ 000 copies in the US to date February 2013 , but did not perform as well commercially as its predecessor , Infinity on High . It debuted at number eight on the US Billboard 200 chart with first week sales of 149 @,@ 000 copies during a highly competitive week with other big debuts , becoming Fall Out Boy 's third consecutive top ten album . This is in contrast to the band 's more successful previous effort which shifted 260 @,@ 000 copies in its opening week to debut at number one the chart . Folie spent two weeks within the top 20 out of its 22 chart weeks . It also entered Billboard 's Rock Albums and Alternative Albums charts at number three . With 39 @,@ 000 digital downloads as part of its sales totals in its debut week , the record opened at number one on Billboard Digital Albums chart , the band 's second number one album on that chart . Fall Out Boy was bested in the group 's chart debut by R & B singers Keyshia Cole — whose A Different Me landed at number two on sales of more than 321 @,@ 000 — and Jamie Foxx , whose Intuition logged 265 @,@ 000 for a number three debut . Taylor Swift 's Fearless reigned at number one during that week . Within two months of its release , Folie à Deux was certified Gold in the United States by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , denoting shipments of 500 @,@ 000 copies . 
 Outside the United States , the album was also less widely successful than Infinity on High but managed to reach the top 10 in Australia where it received a Platinum certification from the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for shipments of 70 @,@ 000 units . On the Australian chart , the record debuted and peaked at number nine and spent its first seven weeks within the top 20 out of its fifteen weeks in the top 40 . In the United Kingdom , the album spent six weeks on the UK Albums Chart and was later certified Silver by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) for the shipments of 60 @,@ 000 units . Folie logged 12 weeks on the New Zealand Albums Chart with a peak of 26 . The album also peaked at number twenty @-@ one on the Top Canadian Albums chart . 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 Three singles were released from the album : " I Don 't Care " , " America 's Suitehearts " and " What a Catch , Donnie " . As part of a new marketing ploy , Fall Out Boy released several songs on iTunes before the release of Folie à Deux . When purchased , the songs would go towards purchasing the entire album as part of the " Complete My Album " feature . The lead single , " I Don 't Care " was released on September 8 , 2008 , reaching a peak at number twenty @-@ one on the Billboard Hot 100 . It was certified Platinum by the RIAA for shipments of one million copies . In Australia , the song peaked at number twenty on the ARIA singles chart , being certified Gold by the ARIA , denoting shipments of 35 @,@ 000 units . The music video for the single was released on the internet on September 25 , but was pulled from iTunes and YouTube shortly after . Wentz wrote angrily on his blog , finding the video was full of product placement shots for Nokia phones . 
 " I Don 't Care " was followed by the digital release of " Headfirst Slide into Cooperstown on a Bad Bet " on October 7 , 2008 . It debuted and peaked at number 74 on the Hot 100 and on the Digital Songs chart at number 40 . It also reached the Canadian charts at number 64 . Contrary to popular misconception , the song was not an actual single , rather it was just a song posted online . The second digital song , " What a Catch , Donnie " , was released a short time later on October 15 , 2008 , charting at number 94 on the Hot 100 , number fifty @-@ three on Digital Songs and number ninety @-@ five in Canada week of November 1 . The release was followed by the Suave Suarez remix of " I Don 't Care " on November 4 . The third digital song , " America 's Suitehearts " ( later becoming the second radio single ) was also released digitally to iTunes on December 2 , 2008 . 
 " Headfirst Slide Into Cooperstown on a Bad Bet " , " What a Catch , Donnie " and " America 's Suitehearts " were digitally released before the album as part of iTunes ' " Complete My Album " feature . " America 's Suitehearts " was then commissioned as the album 's second single on January 12 , 2009 . As a single it reached number 78 on the Hot 100 , number 71 on Digital Songs week ending May 16 , 2009 , as well as peaking at number 30 on the Pop Songs chart on April 25 . In Australia , the song hit number 26 and logged in at number ninety @-@ seven in the UK . " Headfirst Slide into Cooperstown on a Bad Bet " impacted United States modern rock radio on June 15 , 2009 , while " What a Catch , Donnie " was later issued as Folie à Deux 's third and last single . However , neither re @-@ entered any charts . Music videos were created for each . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The album received generally positive reviews from music critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 73 , based on 21 reviews , which indicates " generally favorable reviews " . Dan Martin of NME gave the record a very positive review , calling a " defining statement " with the band 's " most stylistically <unk> @-@ but @-@ indisputably @-@ best songs yet . " He wrote , " We 're not saying it 's as good as genre watermarks American Idiot or The Black Parade . We 're just saying it comes close , " closing with calling it a " staggering achievement . " Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic rated the album four out of five stars and compared it to labelmate Panic ! at the Disco 's effort earlier in the year , Pretty . Odd . He wrote that " Fall Out Boy capture the Zeitgeist of the latter half of the 2000s better than any band : there 's so much going on in Folie à Deux , you either choose to take it all seriously or take none of it . Fall Out Boy make as much sense when heard either way . " Scott Heisel wrote for Alternative Press , commending the band for its " creativity , ingenuity and willingness to try just about anything . " He compared the meaning of the term folie à deux ( " a madness shared by two " ) to the two very distinct feelings expressed in the different sides of the record , calling the album a good representation of the band 's career . 
 Many critics commented on the album 's musical experimentation . Jody Rosen of Rolling Stone , in his review , stated that " the musical mix on Folie à Deux suggests a band with an advanced case of ADD , ricocheting between genres and eras , tempos and time signatures , often several times in a given song . " Spin 's David Marchese complimented the album 's forays into strange territories , calling tracks such as " I Don 't Care " and " What a Catch , Donnie " impressive . Rock Sound 's Faye Lewis also enjoyed the variety , calling the album " a non @-@ stop exotic cabaret for the ears , delivering a far @-@ reaching selection of songs that leap between a blend of catchy pop punk . " However , some critics felt that the band was excessive in its attempts to create a diverse work . Margaret Wappler of the Los Angeles Times believed that " Folie à Deux imagines itself in the stadium . [ ... ] It 's not that FOB can 't have grandiosity , but every stadium needs open air . " She called the album 's sounds a " pleasure bot of right @-@ now pop , adroitly programmed with crunchy ' 80s melodies , emo 's dark prowess and symphonies à la Sgt. Pepper 's , " while stating " For all the steps forward , Folie a Deux also seems to contain a microchip for its own destruction . " 
 Q called the album " a <unk> , hugely confident record that should see Fall Out Boy swiftly elevated into mainstream rock 's premier league , " and Blender called it " the brightest , <unk> , <unk> record Fall Out Boy have ever made . " Blender ranked Folie at number 10 on its 33 best albums of the year list . Jaimie Hodgson of The Observer complimented producer Neal Avron 's " squeaky clean " production . In a more negative review of the album , Jesse Cataldo of Slant wrote that " the band 's songs are catchy at heart , enjoyable in a trifling but substantial way , until they 're smeared with layer after layer of smarm , nullifying any chance of their music being consumed as a simple , empty pleasure . " Cataldo also expressed displeasure with Lil Wayne 's performance as well as production from Pharrell Williams , which he deemed a " promising concept [ ... ] quickly discarded " , summarizing that , " Folie à Deux seems to prove , if nothing else , that Fall Out Boy is good at masking their best qualities and pushing forward their most annoying ones . " 
 = = Tours and performances = = 
 The day before Folie à Deux arrived in stores ( December 15 ) , Fall Out Boy had planned on staging an impromptu concert in New York City 's Washington Square Park . However , the band did not obtain a permit to do so . Taking inspiration from Bob Dylan and similar folk singers from the 1960s , the group wanted to do something free and spontaneous as a gift to fans . The band and its management argued with the NYPD about allowing the show to go on . In the end , they were told that picking up any instruments would earn them a trip to jail , so the band instead led the audience in a sing @-@ along . Stump sang while Wentz and Trohman played air guitar and Hurley drummed on his knees . Stump later commented in an interview that " Those cops back there — and I have no problem with the cops , trust me — but those cops were like the Grinch . They just took all the presents . " 
 On January 20 , 2009 , Fall Out Boy performed at the ' Be the Change ' Youth Ball , which celebrated the inauguration of President Barack Obama . The group was invited to perform by Washington , D.C. mayor Adrian Fenty , who was also a fan of the band . At the ball , the band jokingly dedicated a performance of " Thnks fr th Mmrs " to former president George W. Bush . Upon meeting Obama , Wentz remarked " It 's mind @-@ blowing . It 's one of those things where it 's such an amazing experience — just being in his presence is amazing . " 
 To promote the album , Fall Out Boy embarked on the Believers Never Die Tour Part Deux , which included dates in the United States and Canada . The name of the tour was based on the band 's 2004 Believers Never Die Tour . In keeping with the political themes of Folie à Deux , the tour featured symbolic commentary on the current state of corporate America . The group began the sets with a " corporate retreat " in which the group performed in dress suits with policemen in riot gear playing drums by the side of the stage . Afterwards , the band would change to casual attire for the rest of the set . Wentz noted that the purpose of the formal dress was to demonstrate " how the rich rob the poor " , and encouraged fans to direct attention to poverty @-@ stricken nations such as Sri Lanka and the Democratic Republic of the Congo . 
 The supporting acts on the tour were Cobra Starship , All Time Low , Metro Station and Hey Monday . For five dates on the tour , Fall Out Boy brought along rapper 50 Cent . Wentz explained , " We 've been fans of [ him ] since we heard ' <unk> ' in 8 Mile . We 've wanted to do something with him for awhile [ sic ] , and having him out on the tour is gonna take the show to a whole new level . It 's exciting to bring two different genres together and give the fans a new experience " . The rapper had similar feelings about the situation : " This will be a major moment in music history . Joining forces with Fall Out Boy , one of the most dynamic rock bands in the industry , will be an exciting and historic event for rock and hip @-@ hop . " Due to the conflicting fan opinion regarding the album , concertgoers would " boo the band for performing numbers from the record in concert " , leaving Stump to describe touring in support of Folie as like " being the last act at the vaudeville show : We were rotten vegetable targets in Clandestine hoods . " " Some of us were miserable onstage , " said Trohman . " Others were just drunk . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All lyrics written by Pete Wentz , all music composed by Fall Out Boy . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = USAir Flight 405 = 
 USAir Flight 405 was a regularly scheduled domestic passenger flight between LaGuardia Airport in Queens , New York City , New York , and Cleveland , Ohio . On March 22 , 1992 , a USAir Fokker F28 , registration N485US , flying the route , crashed in poor weather in a partially inverted position in Flushing Bay , shortly after liftoff from LaGuardia . The undercarriage lifted off from the runway ; however , the airplane failed to gain lift , flying only several meters above the ground . The aircraft then veered off the runway and hit multiple obstructions before coming to rest in Flushing Bay , just beyond end of the runway . Of the 51 people on board , 27 were killed in the accident , including the captain and one of the cabin crew members . 
 A similar accident had happened 3 years before in 1989 , when Air Ontario Flight 1363 crashed shortly after takeoff at Dryden Regional Airport after ice had accumulated on the wings and airframe . Out of 69 passengers and crew , 24 were killed . 
 The subsequent investigation revealed that due to pilot error , inadequate deicing procedures at LaGuardia , and several lengthy delays , a large amount of ice had accumulated on the wings and airframe . This ice disrupted airflow over the jet , increasing drag and reducing lift , which prevented the jet from lifting off the <unk> National Transportation Safety Board ( NTSB ) concluded that the flight crew were unaware of the amount of ice that had built up after the jet was delayed by heavy ground traffic taxiing to the runway . The report also listed the fact that the aircraft had begun its takeoff rotation too early at a lower speed than was standard as a contributing factor to the accident . 
 Investigators also found that the deicing procedures at LaGuardia were substandard . While the jet encountered a delay of up to 35 minutes , they found that the deicing fluid that was being used at the airport , and by the majority of commercial airlines across the United States , was effective for only fifteen minutes . The accident led to a number of studies into the effect that ice has on aircraft , and several recommendations into prevention techniques . 
 = = Flight history = = 
 The jet involved in the accident was a Fokker F28 Series 4000 airplane manufactured in the Netherlands . A two @-@ engine , medium @-@ range jet , the Fokker F28 is designed for transporting up to 95 passengers . The particular jet involved in the accident was registered in the United States as N485US . It was first delivered to Piedmont Airlines in August 1986 , and was acquired by USAir — now named American Airlines — three years later in August 1989 when the two airlines merged . N485US had amassed a total of 12 @,@ 462 flying hours at the time of the accident . 
 Captain Wallace J. Majure II , 44 , who was fully qualified to pilot the F28 and four other commercial aircraft , had accumulated approximately 9 @,@ 820 total flying hours , of which 2 @,@ 200 hours were in the F28 . Majure was initially hired as an F28 first officer by Piedmont Airlines in 1985 . He was later reassigned to serve as a first officer and then a captain on a Boeing 737 , but finally returned to an F28 captain because of company cutbacks . The New York Times reported that : 
 Majure was a man who yearned to please his passengers , and if he made them happy then he also made his airline happy . He had often spoken to friends about how important it was for him to get travelers to their destinations on time and how proud he was of USAir 's on @-@ time record . All the same , he was also portrayed as a by @-@ the @-@ book , cautious pilot . 
 First Officer John Rachuba , 30 , was hired by Piedmont in 1989 . At the time of the accident , company records indicate that he had accumulated approximately 4 @,@ 507 flying hours , of which 29 hours were in the F28 . Rachuba held a flight engineer certificate with ratings for turbojet @-@ powered aircraft and an expired instructor certificate issued on August 16 , 1987 . He also held a Federal Aviation Administration ( FAA ) license for non @-@ federal control towers . Previously , he had served as a flight engineer on Boeing 737s and Boeing 727s . 
 The two flight attendants were Debra Andrews Taylor and Janice King . Janice King , who was seated in the aft <unk> , died in the crash . 
 = = Accident = = 
 = = = Poor weather , deicing , taxiing delays = = = 
 The aircraft took off from Jacksonville International Airport , Florida , several hours before the accident , although the departure from Jacksonville was delayed by poor weather over New York and the removal of the baggage of a passenger who decided not to board the jet . The instrument approach landing was uneventful and the jet was not significantly delayed while in the air waiting to land , however congestion on the taxiways at LaGuardia delayed the arrival of the aircraft at the gate . 
 One hour and six minutes behind schedule , the jet arrived at Gate B1 , where the pilot advised a ground mechanic that his airplane was " good to go . " The flight crew then disembarked the jet to use facilities in the terminal . The poor weather did not improve as the jet was deiced with Type I fluid , a heated 50 / 50 water / glycol mixture . Following the completion of this process , one of the two deicing trucks delayed the pushback of the jet when it experienced mechanical problems . The vehicle was immobilised for 20 minutes in such a position that it prevented the aircraft from taxiing to the runway following the flight crew 's return . 
 After the deicing truck was repaired , the pilot requested a second deicing , though the flight crew did not perform a walkaround of their airplane , and USAir procedures did not require them to do so . Following the second deicing , LaGuardia ground control granted Flight 405 permission to taxi to Runway 13 . The flight crew completed the pre @-@ flight checklist during the taxi . 
 Engine anti @-@ ice was turned on for the two engines during taxi . The captain announced to passengers that the flaps would remain up during taxi , and they should not be worried seeing them in the retracted position . He placed an empty coffee cup on the flap handle as a reminder of the position of the flaps , a procedure used by many flight crews . The captain told the first officer they would use standard USAir contaminated runway procedures that included the use of 18 degrees flaps , and also decided that they would take off with a reduced V1 speed of 110 knots . 
 Weather reports for LaGuardia showed that on the night of the accident , all taxiways were coated with a thin covering of snow . Runway 13 was also covered with a thin layer of wet snow , although it had been plowed , treated with urea and it had been sanded . 
 The first officer described the snowfall as " not heavy , no large flakes . " He told authorities that snow was sliding off the jet and the nose of the airplane was coated in a watery layer . He used a light positioned on the wing of his jet to check for signs of ice several times before they attempted to take off . Neither he or the pilot saw any evidence of contamination on the wing or on the black strip and therefore decided against a third deicing . He told investigators that he checked the wings " maybe 10 times , but at least 3 . " He said that he did not consider the snowfall heavy , and he did not recall any wind blowing the snow . The first officer stated that as they taxied , they looked back at the wings several times . Near the time of the takeoff , he said " looks good to me , black strip is clear . " 
 While taxiing , the flight discussed deicing procedures . The first officer suggested to the pilot that the aircraft ahead of them in the queue " might keep our wings clear for us . " The pilot replied that " it can cause us to re @-@ freeze too ... I don 't want to be very close to him . " Later , the first officer remarked " look at all that stuff . What is that ? " to which the pilot replied " sand I guess , urea sand . " 
 The pilot of a jet taxiing behind Flight 405 , Northwest Airlines Flight 517 , a Boeing 757 , stated that he had a good view of the top of Flight 405 's wing , and that there was just enough snow on the fuselage to " fuzzy " the USAir printing but that the wings appeared to be clear . He believed that the snow had " all but stopped " and was more concerned about the amount of vehicular traffic , such as sweepers and ploughs , than he was about the snowfall . The second officer of Trump Shuttle Flight 1541 , which had landed around the time Flight 405 was taxiing , said their Boeing 727 had " picked up a lot of snow quickly during my post @-@ landing walkaround , but by the finish it seemed to be more rain . " He described Flight 405 as a " fairly clean airplane . " He said that he could not comment on clear ice , but that the wings and fuselage were clear of snow . 
 The jet , already several hours behind schedule , then suffered further delays taxiing to the runway . The weather had created heavy ground traffic at LaGuardia , and it was reported that there were queues of aircraft waiting for permission for takeoff . Investigators estimated that the plane took between 25 and 45 minutes to taxi from the gate to the runway . 
 = = = Crash = = = 
 Following permission for takeoff from controllers , the flight crew initiated the takeoff procedure and the first officer made a callout of 80 knots , and , several seconds later , a V1 callout , followed shortly after by a VR callout . Approximately 2 @.@ 2 seconds after the VR callout , the nose gear left the ground . The final report read that " the first officer described the takeoff as normal through the rotation . He stated that no problem was evident with vibration , rate of acceleration , ambient noise , [ or ] directional control " . However , The New York Times reported that " several passengers sensed that [ the airplane ] was not going fast enough . " 
 The first officer said it was " just like we lost lift . " As the captain attempted to level the wings , the crew used right rudder to manoeuvre the aircraft back toward the ground and avoid the water below . The accident report found that " the first officer said that they seemed to agree that the airplane was not going to fly and that their control inputs were in unison . " Rachuba and Majure continued to try to hold the nose up to impact in a flat attitude , although Rachuba later stated that there were no " heavy control inputs . " The final report further noted that " first officer stated that he did not touch the power levers . " The first officer later told investigators that the flight crew 's primary focus was to find a safe place to land . 
 Just under five seconds after the undercarriage left the ground , the plane 's left wing scraped against the asphalt for 110 feet and the stick shaker activated . The crew received six stall warnings , before the jet began banking to the left , then to the right , and then to the left again , still only several meters above the ground . The aircraft struck two visual approach slope indicator posts , touched down again for approximately 100 feet , before lifting off again and striking an ILS beacon and a water pump house . 
 The left wing then separated from the body of the airplane , before the fuselage impacted with the edge of Flushing Bay and came to rest in a partially inverted position . Parts of the fuselage and cockpit were submerged in water . Confusion , disorientation , or entrapment most likely caused the drowning of passengers who otherwise sustained only minor injuries and injuries that were not life @-@ threatening . The final report read : 
 Prior to impact , passengers did not assume the brace position . When the airplane came to rest , many of the passengers in the forward portion of the cabin were upside down , others , who were upright were submerged in water over their heads . Some passengers tried to move from their seats while their seatbelts were still buckled , and other passengers had difficulty locating and releasing their seatbelt buckles because of disorientation . Following the accident , passengers reported fires in the forward left and aft portions of the airplane , including many small fires on the water . Passengers stated that they escaped through large holes in the cabin . The lead flight attendant and first officer escaped through a hole in the cabin floor near the flight attendant ’ s position . Several passengers reported assisting others out of the cabin and into the knee @-@ deep water . Many of them walked in the water to the dike , climbed up the wall and over an embankment , and slid down a steep hill to the runway . Others were assisted out of the water by ground personnel . 
 = = = Rescue attempts , medical operation = = = 
