 The tower cab coordinator on duty at the time of the accident stated that he saw a fireball emanating from the crash site following the accident . Upon seeing the flames , he sounded an alarm , alerting the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey Police , who responded . An investigation revealed that there were technical issues with an emergency telephone at LaGuardia , however it was found that these issues did not hinder the emergency response . 
 The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey Police Department initially sent four vehicles . Personnel in these vehicles reported that snow and fog hampered their visibility while heading to the crash site , and they could not see the destroyed aircraft . However , one member of the fire crew observed people standing on top of a dike near the crash site . Police divers also entered the water following the crash , although they found no @-@ one alive inside the jet or in the water . The fire @-@ fighters continued spraying the fire , and the incident commander estimated that they had the fire under control ten minutes after their arrival at the scene . The New York Times reported that : 
 The accident sent thick black smoke billowing above the airport as more than 200 emergency workers ... had to contend not only with blustery snow but the powerful icy current in Flushing Bay ... the tense drama of the rescue continued into the early hours , with fire @-@ fighters and police officers in water up to their shoulders and helicopters shining spotlights on the wreckage and an ice @-@ covered mound of earth at the end of the runway so slick the rescue workers needed metal ladders to walk across it . 
 The NTSB report on the accident noted , but did not criticise , the medical operation at the scene . It described how paramedics attended to those who were conscious with life @-@ threatening injuries , but did not make any attempts to resuscitate victims who appeared drowned or lacked vital signs because they believed that they could not be revived because they had succumbed to the cold salt water . It was estimated by the authorities who attended the scene of the crash that 15 ambulances responded to the accident site , all of which were used to transport the injured to hospitals , and that 40 additional ambulances were available near the site of the crash , but were not needed . 
 The report described the emergency response as " effective and contributed to the survivability of the airplane 's occupants . However , the response by the emergency medical services personnel was inadequately coordinated , and the ambulance response times to the hospitals were excessive . " The final report read : 
 ... a basic principle of triage is to treat victims having the most life @-@ threatening injuries first with available medical resources and to utilize limited medical personnel in a manner that will provide maximum effectiveness . However , the Safety Board is also aware that in recent years a number of victims of cold water drowning have been successfully resuscitated . They survived after periods of underwater , including sea water , as long as one hour or more . In view of these facts , the Safety Board believes that all emergency response organizations should review their emergency plans to include contingencies for applying cardiopulmonary resuscitation ( CPR ) techniques as soon as a sufficient number of trained personnel arrive to perform CPR , even during mass casualty / triage incidents , regardless of whether vital signs are present , especially if cold @-@ water immersion / near drowning is involved and where traumatic injuries do not indicate death . 
 = = Investigation = = 
 The NTSB sent a team to the crash site to investigate the accident . They concluded that , unknown to the crew , ice had collected on the wings , which disrupted airflow and reduced <unk> inquiry lasted just under one year . 
 = = = Buildup of ice = = = 
 The investigators suggested multiple reasons why the jet was unable to gain lift , but the accident report states there was no evidence to suggest corrosion on the wings . The airplane 's flight control systems was also examined and revealed no failure prior to impact . The report reads that " the evidence did not support improper wing configuration , airframe or system defects , or deployment of the speed brakes as reasons for the loss of aerodynamic efficiency . " The investigators also stated that the takeoff roll of the jet was not abnormal . The board came to the conclusion that ice had built up on the wings , and this had contributed largely to the accident . 
 When attempting to find out why ice was present on the wings of the jet , the board determined that the airplane had been properly cleared of ice and snow during the two deicing procedures at the gate . However , approximately 35 minutes elapsed between the second time that the aircraft was deiced and the initiation of takeoff during which the airplane was exposed to continuing precipitation in below freezing temperatures . The NTSB were unable to determine how much ice had built up on the wings following the second deicing , but considered it to be highly likely that " some contamination occurred in the 35 minutes following the second deicing and that this accumulation led to this accident . " 
 " The Safety Board views the evidence as conclusive that the primary factor in this accident was the reduced performance of the wing due to ice contamination . Therefore , the Safety Board evaluated the extent to which the decisions of , and procedures used by the flight crew could have contributed to the accident , " read the final report . Although , when the cockpit was examined , the engine anti @-@ ice switch was found in the ' OFF ' position , further investigations found that even slight pressure could move the switch , and the NTSB ruled this out as a contributing factor in the crash . Following the accident , USAir sent out a maintenance directive ordering engine anti @-@ ice switches to be changed on <unk> so they would lock into a selected position . 
 Investigators found that a flaw in the design of the F28 's wings made them extremely vulnerable to ice buildup . Because of the angle of the wings , even a very small amount of ice could have devastating effects . When the NTSB , in collaboration with Fokker , investigated the effect ice can have on an aircraft , they found that ice particles as small as 1 @-@ 2mm of a density of one particle per square centimeter can cause a loss of lift of over 20 % . A document written by Fokker before the accident detailed the effect of ice on the wing of an F28 warned that an " uncontrollable roll " would begin even with a small amount of ice on the wings . 
 = = = Errors by the flight crew = = = 
 The report found that the flight crew were aware that the poor weather was likely to cause ice buildup , however neither of them took any action to check the condition of the wing leading edge and upper surface . The aircraft was evaluated by ground crew and was deiced . After the mechanical failure of the deicing truck , the investigators reported that , as the captain requested another deice , there was an indication he was : 
 ... concerned about the continuing exposure to precipitation , and the request was prudent and in accordance with USAir guidance . Following the second deicing , the flight crew was most likely satisfied that the airplane was free of adhering contamination . The flight crew was not aware of the exact delay that they would encounter before takeoff and their decision to leave the gate was reasonable . After taxiing , when it became evident that they would be delayed for a prolonged period , conversations between the crew showed that they were aware of and probably concerned about the risk of <unk> frozen contamination on the wing . 
 They also found that USAir guidance and flight crew training was sufficient and should have alerted the flight crew to the risk of attempting a takeoff while they were unaware of the condition of the wing . USAir guidance to flight crews specifically stated that : 
 ... it is the captain 's responsibility to exercise caution prior to takeoff . If the elapsed time since deicing exceeds 20 minutes , careful examination of the surfaces should be conducted to detect the extent of accumulation [ of ice ] and to assure that the takeoff can be made safely and in compliance with existing [ regulations ] . 
 The final report read : 
 The Safety Board believes that the flight crew of Flight 405 should have taken more positive steps to assure a contamination @-@ free wing , such as entering the cabin to look at the wing from a closer range . Although the Safety Board acknowledges that the detection of minimal amounts of contamination , sufficient to cause aerodynamic performance problems , is difficult and may not be possible without a tactile inspection , an observation from the cabin would have improved the chance of seeing some contamination and might have prompted the flight crew to return to the gate . The Safety Board believes that the flight crew ’ s failure to take such precautions and the decision to attempt takeoff while unsure of wing cleanliness led to this accident and is a cause of it . 
 In a television interview , one of the NTSB investigators suggested that " the captain was faced with quite a problem . If he wanted to be deiced a third time , he would have had to get out of the line [ of jets waiting to take off ] and taxi all the way back to the parking area and meet up with a deicing truck again . That would have put him very , very late and it may have even caused the cancellation of the flight . " 
 The NTSB carried out tests to discover why the first officer was unable to see the ice buildup on the wing of the jet . When the sliding window of the cockpit was fully open , the first officer would have been able to see the outer eighty percent of the wing , including the black strip used to contrast the white surface of the wing so the flight crew can search for a build up of ice . When the sliding window was shut , as it was in the accident , it would be difficult to make out any details of the wing , and the black strip would have been distorted by the glass . They also found that the ice light made little difference to how much the first officer would have been able to see . 
 The investigators also requested that Fokker conduct a study of the effects of ice contamination and pilot technique on the F28 aircraft . The NTSB evaluated the data from the tests and found that the pilot initiated the rotation five knots earlier at 119 knots instead of the proper rotation speed of 124 knots . The data from Fokker was correlated with the cockpit voice recording and confirmed that the first officer called a rotation speed of 113 knots but the captain did not rotate until 119 knots . It was never established why the rotation was called and initiated earlier than was standard . 
 = = = Deicing procedures at LaGuardia = = = 
 Investigators also focused on deicing practices at LaGuardia . They found that the airport was using only Type I deicing fluid , not Type II . Type I fluids are used for the actual deicing of the jet , while Type II fluids are used for preventing buildup of ice . At the time of the accident , LaGuardia had prohibited the use of Type II deicing fluid because tests suggested that if it fell onto runways it reduced friction . Investigators noted the change had been made because of LaGuardia 's shorter runways and the fact that if an aircraft left the vicinity of the runway , it would come to rest in the cold water surrounding Runway 13 . The accident report , however , criticised the fact that the majority of the airplane operators in the United States relied only upon Type I fluids for protection , and they do not use Type II . The board stated that tests have shown that both Type I and Type II fluids do flow off the wings of a treated airplane in significant amounts during the initial takeoff ground run . The NTSB stated : 
 There are a number of views on the potential uses of Type I and II fluids . The use of Type I fluid raises concern because its holdover time is shorter than the holdover time for Type II fluid under certain conditions . Both fluids are under scrutiny for their environmental impacts , and it is uncertain if Type II fluid diminishes the runway coefficient of friction since the fluid rolls off the airplane during the takeoff roll . Also , the use of either type fluid may result in a temporary degradation in the airplane 's aerodynamic performance , a reduced stall margin , and an increase in drag . 
 = = = Safety card errors = = = 
 While it was not named as a cause of the accident , investigators also found that the passenger safety briefing cards in the airplane showed two types of galley service doors . However , only one door is installed on a particular F28 model at any one time . The examination also showed that the safety card did not show how to operate either of the two types of galley service doors in the emergency mode if the normal opening mode failed . However , the final report stated that this " did not contribute to the fatalities in the accident . " 
 = = = Conclusion = = = 
 The final report , published by the NTSB , cited the probable cause of the accident to be : 
 ... the failure of the airline industry and the Federal Aviation Administration to provide flight crews with procedures , requirements , and criteria compatible with departure delays in conditions conducive to airframe icing and the decision by the flight crew to take off without positive assurance that the airplane 's wings were free of ice accumulation after 35 minutes of exposure to precipitation following de @-@ icing . The ice contamination on the wings resulted in an aerodynamic stall and loss of control after lift @-@ off . Contributing to the cause of the accident were the inappropriate procedures used by , and inadequate coordination between , the flight crew that led to a takeoff rotation at a lower than prescribed air speed . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = NTSB recommendations = = = 
 The NTSB made several recommendations to the FAA , including requiring that " flight crew members and appropriate ground personnel responsible for the inspection of transport @-@ category airplanes for wing contamination receive specific periodic training that will illustrate what contamination looks like and feels like on a wing and the amount of contamination that is detectable under different light conditions " . They also ordered " airlines to establish a way to inform fight crews of the type of [ deicing ] fluid and mixture used , the current moisture accumulation rate , and the available holdover time . ” 
 With regard to the obstructions that the airplane collided with during the accident sequence , the NTSB ordered the modification or replacement of “ all pump houses adjacent to Runway 13 / 31 so that they are not obstructions to airplanes ” . They also ordered a study on the “ feasibility of building a <unk> ILS antenna array for LaGuardia Airport ” Further , they ordered a review of Fokker F28 @-@ 4000 passenger safety briefing cards " to ensure that they clearly and accurately depict the operation of the two types of forward cabin doors in both their normal and emergency modes and that they describe clearly and accurately how to remove the overwing emergency exit and cover . " 
 = = = Dryden report allegations = = = 
 The crash was featured on National Geographic Channel in an episode of the television program Mayday ( Air Crash Investigation / Air Emergency ) entitled Cold Case , where the accident was compared with Air Ontario Flight 1363 , which crashed in Dryden , Ontario , after the crew did not deice their jet . The program opened by saying that Canadian investigators were " stunned " to hear of the accident , as it mirrored the Air Ontario flight which had occurred three years earlier . 
 The report on the crash in Dryden criticised approaches to deicing . It made several points , including recommending the use of Type II deicing fluid rather than Type I , deicing trucks near the runway rather than at the gate , and that the crew should inspect their wings not only from the cockpit , but also the cabin . The report concluded that competitive pressures caused by commercial deregulation cut into safety standards and that many of the industry ’ s sloppy practices and questionable procedures were placing pilots in difficult situations . 
 The Honourable Virgil P. Moshansky , who investigated the crash in Dryden and wrote the report , appeared in the documentary , alleging that if the recommendations in his report had been followed , the USAir accident could have been prevented . Moshansky told the documentary that his report " probably sat on somebody 's [ at the FAA ] desk . " He said " when I first heard about it I thought , my God , it 's Dryden all over again ... certainly if they had followed the recommendations in my report , the F28 crash at LaGuardia could have been averted . " 
 Another investigator into the Air Ontario accident told the documentary that " after all of this work [ investigating the Dryden crash ] , after all of the efforts , to see it happen again was extremely frustrating . " The documentary focused largely on these allegations , while also reconstructing the Air Ontario flight and the USAir flight . However , it was reported that the FAA refuted Moshansky 's allegations , and they claim that they never received his report . 
 = = = International Conference on Airplane Ground Deicing = = = 
 Following the crash of Flight 405 and the Air Ontario accident in Dryden , the FAA began to research methods of improving deicing practices at airports to minimise the number of accidents caused by a buildup of ice . 
 Described by the FAA as a “ sharply focused effort ” , experts convened on May 28 and 29 , 1992 , in Reston , Virginia for the International Conference on Ground Deicing . At the conference , industry methods were discussed and agreed upon for actions that should be taken in the long term and short term . A report on the conference by the FAA read : 
 A better understanding of airplane ground deicing and anti @-@ icing issues is a crucial prerequisite to the implementation of feasible and effective safety improvements . To achieve this goal , the FAA sponsored a conference at which the international aviation community could exchange thoughts and offer recommendation on a variety of issues concerning safe winter operations . [ At the conference ] more than 750 participants discussed the problems posed by aircraft deicing and examined possible solutions . 
 It was reported that discussions over different types of deicing fluid were discussed , along with different deicing equipment and techniques . They also found that the pilot in command was the ultimate authority for take off decisions , but that all operators had to provide proper training and criteria for the pilot in command to base a proper decision on . 
 The conference concluded with an amendment to FAA regulations which air carriers operated under . The new regulations stated that airlines should put in place FAA @-@ approved ground deicing or anti @-@ icing procedures anytime weather conditions of ice , snow or frost prevailed . The new rules went into effect on November 1 , 1992 . 
 = = = Developments in deicing = = = 
 In the years that followed the accident , airlines started using Type IV deicing fluid , which is more effective than both Type I and Type II fluids . Type IV fluids stick to aircraft for up to two hours . Chicago O 'Hare International Airport was the first to introduce deicing facilities at the runway , something which has now become commonplace . 
 Aircraft themselves now have more sophisticated deicing systems that can be used on the ground and in the air . Many modern civil fixed wing transport aircraft , for example the Boeing 737 , use anti @-@ ice systems on the leading edge of wings , engine inlets and air data probes using warm air . This is bled from engines and is ducted into a cavity beneath the surface to be anti @-@ iced . The warm air heats the surface up to a few degrees above freezing , preventing ice from forming . The system may operate autonomously , switching on and off as the aircraft enters and leaves icing conditions . 
 Ground deicing technologies are also developing , and a newer technology is infrared deicing . This is the transmission of energy by means of electromagnetic waves or rays . Infrared is invisible and travels in straight lines from the heat source to surfaces and objects without significantly heating the space ( air ) it passes through . When infrared waves strike an object , they release their energy as heat . This heat is either absorbed or reflected by the cooler surface . Infrared energy is continually exchanged between " hot " and " cold " surfaces until all surfaces have reached the same temperature ( equilibrium ) . The colder the surfaces , the more effective the infrared transfer from the emitter . This heat transfer mechanism is substantially faster than conventional heat transfer modes used by conventional deicing ( convection and conduction ) due to the cooling effect of the air on the deicing fluid spray . 
 Aircraft deicing vehicles have also improved since the accident , usually consisting of a large tanker truck , containing the concentrated de @-@ icing fluid , with a water feed to dilute the fluid according to the ambient temperature . The vehicle also normally has a cherry picker crane , allowing the operator to spray the entire aircraft in as little time as possible ; an entire Boeing 737 can be treated in under 10 minutes by a single de @-@ icing vehicle . Airport runways are also deiced by sprayers fitted with long spraying arms . These arms are wide enough to cross the entire runway , and allow de @-@ icing of the entire airstrip to take place in a single pass , reducing the length of time that the runway is unavailable . 
 = = Notable passengers = = 
 Richard Lawson - film and television actor ( survived accident ) 
 = = = Similar accidents = = = 
 China Eastern Airlines Flight <unk> — crashed shortly after takeoff in 2004 after the jet collected a layer of frost overnight and was not deiced . 
 Air Florida Flight 90 — crashed in 1982 after ice built up on the airframe of the jet because of pilot error . 
 American Eagle Flight <unk> — crashed after flying into unforeseen icing conditions on October 31 , 1994 . 
 Arrow Air Flight 1285 — crashed attempting to take off from Gander , Newfoundland with contaminated wings in 1985 . 
 Colgan Air Flight <unk> crashed near Buffalo , NY due to icing conditions on February 12 , 2009 . 
 = No. 76 Wing RAAF = 
 No. 76 Wing was a Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) wing that operated during World War II . Initially based in Far North Queensland , its headquarters transferred to Darwin , Northern Territory , in September 1944 to take control of three PBY Catalina units : Nos. 20 , 42 , and 43 Squadrons . The prime task of these squadrons was minelaying in the South West Pacific theatre , and they conducted these operations as far afield as Java , Borneo , the Philippines , and China . As well as minelaying , No. 76 Wing 's Catalinas flew bombing , patrol , and transport missions , and dropped millions of propaganda leaflets in the closing months of the war . The wing headquarters disbanded in November 1945 . 
 = = History = = 
 No. 76 Wing headquarters was established at Townsville , Queensland , on 3 January 1944 , and moved to Cairns mid @-@ month . Led by Wing Commander Reginald Burrage , it transferred to Darwin , Northern Territory , in September to coordinate and control minelaying operations in the North @-@ Western Area by Nos. 20 , 42 , and 43 Squadrons . Each of the squadrons was equipped with PBY Catalina flying boats , nicknamed " Black Cats " ; No. 20 had been based in Cairns with No. 76 Wing headquarters , No. 42 had just been formed at Darwin in August , while No. 43 had been operating out of Darwin since March . Minelaying missions carried out by the RAAF over the past year had been credited with successfully disrupting enemy shipping for a much smaller outlay of operating hours than conventional bombing , and were thus considered profitable enough to dedicate a wing with three squadrons to furthering the work . Although the Catalinas were relatively slow and susceptible to enemy fighter attack , their loss rate was no more than one per 95 sorties . In addition to its flying squadrons , the wing controlled No. 2 Flying Boat Maintenance Unit , No. 11 Air Sea Rescue Flight , and No. 3 Mobile Torpedo Unit . All units were located in Darwin except No. 42 Squadron , which was based at Melville Bay . 
 The Catalina squadrons were expected to carry out a total of 100 missions per month from Darwin . In their first three weeks of operation from 13 September 1944 they accomplished 98 , mining targets in Celebes , Java , and Surabaya . In October , they were able to use the recently liberated island of Morotai as a forward base for operations against Balikpapan and Tarakan . On 14 December , No. 43 Squadron , augmented by Catalinas from No. 11 Squadron based at Rathmines , New South Wales , mined Manila Bay to keep Japanese shipping " bottled up " , thus supporting the Allied landing at Mindoro taking place the next day . Flying from Leyte , the 24 Catalinas successfully dropped 60 mines in the heavily defended target area for the loss of one of their number , and returned to base at the limit of their fuel reserves . 
 In the early part of 1945 , monsoonal weather in Darwin reduced the number of missions flown by No. 76 Wing . On the night of 5 / 6 April , three Catalinas kept watch on the Japanese cruiser Isuzu , which was subsequently struck by Allied bombers and sunk by submarines . During the month , the Catalinas mined Hong Kong harbour , as well as targets on the coast of mainland China , flying up to sixteen hours per mission . On 26 May , they undertook the RAAF 's most northerly operation during the Pacific War , against <unk> . The same month , Group Captain Stuart Campbell , former leader of No. 42 Squadron , took over command of the wing . In May – June , reinforced by a detachment from No. 11 Squadron , No. 76 Wing flew mining and bombing missions in support of the forthcoming Operation Oboe Six , the Battle of North Borneo , and Oboe Two , the Battle of Balikpapan . Before Oboe Six , while some of the Catalinas concentrated on mining the approaches to Surabaya harbour , others bombed airfields in Java and Celebes in concert with RAAF B @-@ 24 Liberators . The Catalinas and Liberators combined again in the lead @-@ up to Oboe Two to raid any Japanese airfields that could threaten Balikpapan , in some cases bombing the same target around the clock , the Catalinas by night and Liberators by day . 
 With the Allies ' decision to confine RAAF minelaying operations to areas south of China from June onwards , the number of worthwhile targets for the Catalinas was reduced . Sorties for the month were down to 58 , a number of which were carried out from Labuan against Banka Strait . The wing 's last minelaying missions of the war took place in July , again in the Banka Strait . In the final months before the Japanese surrender , the Catalinas also delivered propaganda leaflets around the Dutch East Indies and South China Sea , dropping over a million in June alone . No. 76 Wing and its squadrons remained at Darwin in the immediate aftermath of the war , conducting routine patrols , transporting supplies and medicine to prisoners @-@ of @-@ war in the South West Pacific , and assisting in the repatriation of Australian personnel . In November 1945 , under a reorganisation of RAAF units at Darwin , the wing headquarters was given orders to disband . It became non @-@ operational on 16 November and was officially dissolved five days later . No. 42 Squadron disbanded the same month , while Nos. 20 and 43 Squadrons transferred to Rathmines , where they disbanded in 1946 . 
 = Electric Mud = 
 Electric Mud is the fifth studio album by Muddy Waters , with Rotary Connection serving as his backing band . Released in 1968 , it imagines Muddy Waters as a psychedelic musician . Producer Marshall Chess suggested that Muddy Waters record experimental , psychedelic blues tracks with members of Rotary Connection in an attempt to revive the blues singer 's career . 
 The album peaked at # 127 on the Billboard Pop Albums chart . It was controversial for its fusion of electric blues with psychedelic elements , but was influential on psychedelic rock bands of the era . 
 = = Production = = 
 In 1967 , Marshall Chess formed Cadet Concept Records as a subsidiary of Chess Records . The label 's first release was the self @-@ titled debut album of the psychedelic band Rotary Connection , whose members Chess described as " the hottest , most avant garde rock guys in Chicago " . As a result of the album 's success , Chess felt that he could revive the career of bluesmen Muddy Waters and Howlin ' Wolf by recording two albums of experimental , psychedelic blues with members of Rotary Connection as the backing band for the singers , producing the albums Electric Mud and The Howlin ' Wolf Album . Chess hoped the new albums would sell well among fans of psychedelic rock bands influenced by Muddy Waters and Howlin ' Wolf . According to Muddy Waters , " Quite naturally , I like a good @-@ selling record . I was looking at it because I played for so many of these so @-@ called hippies that I thought probably I could reach them . " 
 In place of Muddy Waters ' regular musicians were Gene Barge , Pete Cosey , Roland Faulkner , Morris Jennings , Louis Satterfield , Charles Stepney and Phil Upchurch . Cosey , Upchurch and Jennings joked about calling the group " The Electric Niggers " . Marshall Chess liked the suggestion , but Leonard Chess refused to allow the name . 
 The album incorporates use of wah @-@ wah pedal and fuzzbox . Marshall Chess augmented the rhythm of Muddy Waters ' live band with the use of electric organ and saxophone . Blues purists criticized the album 's psychedelic sound . According to Marshall Chess , " It was never an attempt to make Muddy Waters a psychedelic artist ; it was a concept album like David Bowie being Ziggy Stardust . " Muddy Waters said of the album 's sound , " That guitar sounds just like a cat — meow — and the drums have a loping , busy beat . " 
 " I 'm Your Hoochie Coochie Man " incorporates free jazz influences , with Gene Barge performing a concert harp . Muddy Waters performs the vocals of " Let 's Spend the Night Together " , a cover of The Rolling Stones ' 1967 single , in gospel @-@ soul style with heavy influence from Cream 's Sunshine of Your Love . 
 According to Buddy Guy , " [ Muddy Waters couldn 't ] feel this psychedelic stuff at all ... and if the feeling is gone , that 's it . You can 't get too busy behind a singer . You 've got to let him sing it . " Muddy Waters ' previous albums replicated the sound of his live performances . Working with a studio band rather than his own was problematic for Muddy Waters , who could not perform material from the album live . He stated " What the hell do you have a record for if you can 't play the first time it 's out ? I 'm so sick of that ... If you 've got to have big amplifiers and wah @-@ <unk> and equipment to make you guitar say different things , well , hell , you can 't play no blues . " 
 The title of the album did not refer to the use of electric guitar , as Muddy Waters had played the instrument since he first signed to Chess Records . The use of the term " electric " is used in a psychedelic context . 
 = = Release = = 
 The Electric Mud album cover artwork was eclectic and reflected McKinley Morganfield 's fashion preferences during 1968 . The front cover of the original 33 RPM vinyl commercial release during 1968 in the USA featured two graphic versions ; a white background with black text , and a second , less known black background with white text . The back cover and inner gate fold artwork were identical in both versions , as was the small booklet of photos accompanying the release . Viewing of various Electric Mud album cover graphics can be found by searching Google 's Images <unk> capabilities . 
 On November 19 , 1996 , the album was reissued on compact disc by Chess Records . On November 22 , 2011 , Electric Mud and After the Rain were combined on a single compact disc by BGO Records . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Electric Mud sold 150 @,@ 000 copies within the first six weeks of release . Peaking at # 127 on the Billboard Pop Albums chart , it was Muddy Waters ' first album to hit on the Billboard and Cash Box charts . In a Rolling Stone feature , Pete Welding wrote , " ' Electric Mud ' does great disservice to one of the blues ' most important innovators , and prostitutes the contemporary styles to which his pioneering efforts have led . " Although American critics panned the album , it was better received in England . According to Marshall Chess , " It was the biggest Muddy Waters record we ever had at Chess , and it dropped instantly . The English accepted it ; they are more eccentric . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Muddy Waters recorded After the Rain the following year , incorporating elements of the sound of Electric Mud . According to Cosey , " I 'll never forget , as soon as I walked into the studio for the follow @-@ up and Muddy saw me , he threw his arms around me , said ' Hey , how you doing , boy , play some of that stuff you played on that last album . ' " Following strong criticism of the album , Muddy Waters claimed that he disliked the album and its sound , and that he did not consider the album to be blues . He stated , " Every time I go into Chess , [ they ] put some un @-@ blues players with me [ ... ] If you change my sound , then you gonna change the whole man . " In the biography The Mojo Man , Muddy Waters stated " That Electric Mud record was dogshit . But when it came out , it started selling like wild , but then they started sending them back . They said , ' This can 't be Muddy Waters with all this shit going on , all this wha @-@ wha and fuzztone . ' " 
 According to Robert Gordon in Can 't Be Satisfied : The Life and Times of Muddy Waters , the valet of Jimi Hendrix later told Pete Cosey that Hendrix would listen to " Herbert Harper 's Free Press News " for inspiration before performing . Led Zeppelin bassist John Paul Jones cited Electric Mud as the inspiration for the riff of " Black Dog " . Allmusic reviewer Richie Unterberger panned the album as being " crass " . 
 In Lost in the Grooves : <unk> 's Capricious Guide to the Music You Missed , Gene Sculatti wrote that " The rhythm seems to anticipate hip @-@ hop by three decades . " Chuck D stated that he had been introduced to Electric Mud by a member of Public Enemy , which sparked an interest in Muddy Waters ' earlier work , and in roots @-@ oriented blues . The documentary series The Blues , produced by Martin Scorsese , depicts the recording band for Electric Mud performing with Chuck D and members of The Roots . Cypress Hill samples " Tom Cat " , from this album , on the interlude " Ultraviolet Dreams " , from their self @-@ titled debut album , as does Natas on their song " See You In Hell " from the album N of tha World . The rock / funk @-@ oriented arrangement of " Mannish Boy " present on this album is sampled and featured prominently on the Gorillaz B @-@ side " Left Hand Suzuki Method " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = = Musicians = = = 
 Muddy Waters – vocal 
 Gene Barge – tenor saxophone , producer 
 Phil Upchurch – guitars 
 Roland Faulkner – guitars 
 Pete Cosey – guitars 
 Charles Stepney – organ , arranger , producer 
 Louis Satterfield – bass 
 Morris Jennings – drums 
 = = = Additional personnel = = = 
 Stu Black – engineer 
 Marshall Chess – producer 
 Meire Murakami – design 
 Bill Sharpe – cover design 
 Abner Spector – mixing 
 Vartan – art direction 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = Japanese aircraft carrier Sōryū = 
 Sōryū ( <unk> , Sōryū , meaning " Blue ( or Green ) Dragon " ) was an aircraft carrier built for the Imperial Japanese Navy ( IJN ) during the mid @-@ 1930s . A sister ship , Hiryū , was intended to follow Sōryū , but Hiryū 's design was heavily modified and she is often considered to be a separate class . Sōryū 's aircraft were employed in operations during the Second Sino @-@ Japanese War in the late 1930s and supported the Japanese invasion of French Indochina in mid @-@ 1940 . During the first months of the Pacific War , she took part in the attack on Pearl Harbor , the Battle of Wake Island , and supported the conquest of the Dutch East Indies . In February 1942 , her aircraft bombed Darwin , Australia , and she continued on to assist in the Dutch East Indies campaign . In April , Sōryū 's aircraft helped sink two British heavy cruisers and several merchant ships during the Indian Ocean raid . 
 After a brief refit , Sōryū and three other carriers of the 1st Air Fleet ( Kidō Butai ) participated in the Battle of Midway in June 1942 . After bombarding American forces on Midway Atoll , the carriers were attacked by aircraft from the island and the carriers Enterprise , Hornet , and Yorktown . Dive bombers from Yorktown crippled Sōryū and set her afire . Japanese destroyers rescued the survivors but the ship could not be salvaged and was ordered to be scuttled so as to allow her attendant destroyers to be released for further operations . She sank with the loss of 711 officers and enlisted men of the 1 @,@ 103 aboard . The loss of Sōryū and three other IJN carriers at Midway was a crucial strategic defeat for Japan and contributed significantly to the Allies ' ultimate victory in the Pacific . 
 = = Design = = 
 Sōryū was one of two large carriers approved for construction under the Imperial Japanese Navy 's 1931 – 32 Supplementary Program ( the other being her near @-@ sister Hiryū ) . In contrast to some earlier Japanese carriers , such as Akagi and Kaga , which were conversions of battlecruiser and battleship hulls respectively , Sōryū was designed from the keel up as an aircraft carrier and incorporated lessons learned from the light carrier Ryūjō . 
 The ship had a length of 227 @.@ 5 meters ( 746 ft 5 in ) overall , a beam of 21 @.@ 3 meters ( 69 ft 11 in ) and a draft of 7 @.@ 6 meters ( 24 ft 11 in ) . She displaced 16 @,@ 200 tonnes ( 15 @,@ 900 long tons ) at standard load and 19 @,@ 100 tonnes ( 18 @,@ 800 long tons ) at normal load . Her crew consisted of 1 @,@ 100 officers and enlisted men . 
 = = = Machinery = = = 
 Sōryū was fitted with four geared steam turbine sets with a total of 152 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 113 @,@ 000 kW ) , each driving one propeller shaft , using steam provided by eight Kampon water @-@ tube boilers . The turbines and boilers were the same as those used in the Mogami @-@ class cruisers . The ship 's power and slim , cruiser @-@ type hull , with a length @-@ to @-@ beam ratio of 10 : 1 , gave her a speed of 34 @.@ 5 knots ( 63 @.@ 9 km / h ; 39 @.@ 7 mph ) and made her the fastest carrier in the world at the time of her commissioning . Sōryū carried 3 @,@ 710 metric tons ( 3 @,@ 650 long tons ) of fuel oil , which gave her a range of 7 @,@ 750 nautical miles ( 14 @,@ 350 km ; 8 @,@ 920 mi ) at 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . The boiler uptakes were trunked together to the ship 's starboard side amidships and exhausted just below flight deck level through two funnels curved downwards . 
 = = = Flight deck and hangars = = = 
 The carrier 's 216 @.@ 9 @-@ meter ( 711 ft 7 in ) flight deck was 26 meters ( 85 ft 4 in ) wide and overhung her superstructure at both ends , supported by pairs of pillars . Sōryū 's island was built on a starboard @-@ side extension that protruded beyond the side of the hull so that it did not encroach on the width of the flight deck . Nine transverse arrestor wires were installed on the flight deck and could stop a 6 @,@ 000 kg ( 13 @,@ 000 lb ) aircraft . The flight deck was only 12 @.@ 8 meters ( 42 ft 0 in ) above the waterline and the ship 's designers kept this distance low by reducing the height of the hangars . The upper hangar was 171 @.@ 3 by 18 @.@ 3 metres ( 562 by 60 ft ) and had an approximate height of 4 @.@ 6 meters ( 15 ft 1 in ) ; the lower was 142 @.@ 3 by 18 @.@ 3 metres ( 467 by 60 ft ) and had an approximate height of 4 @.@ 3 meters ( 14 ft 1 in ) . Together they had an approximate total area of 5 @,@ 736 square metres ( 61 @,@ 742 sq ft ) . This caused problems in handling aircraft because the wings of a Nakajima B5N " Kate " torpedo bomber could neither be spread nor folded in the upper hangar . 
 Aircraft were transported between the hangars and the flight deck by three elevators , the forward one abreast the island on the centerline and the other two offset to starboard . The forward platform measured 16 by 11 @.@ 5 meters ( 52 ft 6 in × 37 ft 9 in ) , the middle one 11 @.@ 5 by 12 meters ( 37 ft 9 in × 39 ft 4 in ) , and the rear 11 @.@ 8 by 10 meters ( 38 ft 9 in × 32 ft 10 in ) . They were capable of transferring aircraft weighing up to 5 @,@ 000 kilograms ( 11 @,@ 000 lb ) . Sōryū had an aviation gasoline capacity of 570 @,@ 000 liters ( 130 @,@ 000 imp gal ; 150 @,@ 000 U.S. gal ) for her planned aircraft capacity of sixty @-@ three plus nine spares . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Sōryū 's primary anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) armament consisted of six twin @-@ gun mounts equipped with 40 @-@ caliber 12 @.@ 7 @-@ centimeter Type 89 dual @-@ purpose guns mounted on projecting sponsons , three on either side of the carrier 's hull . The guns had a range of 14 @,@ 700 meters ( 16 @,@ 100 yd ) , and a ceiling of 9 @,@ 440 meters ( 30 @,@ 970 ft ) at an elevation of + 90 degrees . Their maximum rate of fire was fourteen rounds a minute , but their sustained rate of fire was around eight rounds per minute . The ship was equipped with two Type 94 fire @-@ control directors to control the 12 @.@ 7 @-@ centimeter ( 5 @.@ 0 in ) guns , one for each side of the ship , although the starboard director on the island could control all of the Type 89 guns . 
 The ship 's light AA armament consisted of fourteen twin @-@ gun mounts for license @-@ built Hotchkiss 25 mm ( 1 in ) Type 96 AA guns . Three of these were sited on a platform just below the forward end of the flight deck . The gun was the standard Japanese light AA weapon during World War II , but it suffered from severe design shortcomings that rendered it largely ineffective . According to historian Mark Stille , the weapon had many faults including an inability to " handle high @-@ speed targets because it could not be trained or elevated fast enough by either hand or power , its sights were inadequate for high @-@ speed targets , it possessed excessive vibration and muzzle blast " . These guns had an effective range of 1 @,@ 500 – 3 @,@ 000 meters ( 1 @,@ 600 – 3 @,@ 300 yd ) , and a ceiling of 5 @,@ 500 meters ( 18 @,@ 000 ft ) at an elevation of + 85 degrees . The effective rate of fire was only between 110 and 120 rounds per minute because of the frequent need to change the 15 @-@ round magazines . The Type 96 guns were controlled by five Type 95 directors , two on each side and one in the bow . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 To save weight , Sōryū was minimally armored ; her waterline belt of 41 millimeters ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) of Ducol steel only protected the machinery spaces and the magazines . Comparable figures for Hiryu were 90 millimeters ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) over the machinery spaces and the aviation gasoline storage tanks increasing to 150 millimeters ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) over the magazines . Sōryū 's waterline belt was backed by an internal anti @-@ splinter bulkhead . The ship 's deck was only 25 mm thick over the machinery spaces and 55 millimeters ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) thick over the magazines and aviation gasoline storage tanks . 
 = = Construction and service = = 
 Following the Japanese ship @-@ naming conventions for aircraft carriers , Sōryū was named " Blue ( or Green ) Dragon " . The ship was laid down at the Kure Naval Arsenal on 20 November 1934 , launched on 21 December 1935 and commissioned on 29 January 1937 . She was assigned to the Second Carrier Division after commissioning . Her air group was initially intended to consist of eighteen Mitsubishi A5M ( " Claude " ) monoplane fighters , twenty @-@ seven Aichi D1A2 ( " Susie " ) Type 96 dive bombers , and twelve Yokosuka B4Y ( " Jean " ) Type 96 torpedo bombers , but the A5Ms were in short supply and Nakajima A4N1 biplanes were issued instead . On 25 April 1938 , nine A4Ns , eighteen <unk> , and nine <unk> transferred to Nanking to support forces advancing up the Yangtze River . The air group advanced with the successful Japanese offensive , despite the commitment by the Chinese of 150 aircraft of the Soviet Volunteer Group ; it was transferred to <unk> in early June and then to <unk> . Little is known of its operations there , but its primary role during this time was air defense . One fighter pilot of the group was killed after he shot down a Chinese aircraft . Leaving a few fighters and their pilots behind to serve as the nucleus of a new fighter unit , the air group returned to Sōryū on 10 July . The ship supported operations over Canton in September , but her aircraft saw no aerial combat . She returned home in December and spent most of the next year and a half training . 
 In September – October 1940 , the ship was based at Hainan Island to support the Japanese invasion of French Indochina . In February 1941 , Sōryū moved to Taiwan to reinforce the blockade of southern China . Two months later , the 2nd Carrier Division was assigned to the First Air Fleet , or Kido Butai , on 10 April . Sōryū 's air group was detached in mid @-@ July and transferred to Hainan Island to support the occupation of southern Indochina . Sōryū returned to Japan on 7 August and became flagship of the 2nd Division . She was relieved of that role on 22 September as she began a short refit that was completed on 24 October . The ship arrived at Kagoshima two days later and she resumed her former role as flagship of the Division . 
 = = = Pearl Harbor and subsequent operations = = = 
 In November 1941 the IJN 's Combined Fleet , under Admiral Isoroku Yamamoto , prepared to participate in Japan 's initiation of war with the United States by conducting a preemptive strike against the US Navy 's Pacific Fleet base at Pearl Harbor , Hawaii . On 22 November , Sōryū , commanded by Captain <unk> <unk> , and the rest of the Kido Butai under Vice Admiral Chuichi Nagumo , including six fleet carriers from the First , Second , and Fifth Carrier Divisions , assembled in Hitokappu Bay at Etorofu Island . The fleet departed Etorofu on 26 November and followed a course across the north @-@ central Pacific to avoid commercial shipping lanes . At this time Sōryū embarked 21 Mitsubishi A6M Zero fighters , 18 Aichi D3A " Val " dive bombers , and 18 Nakajima B5N torpedo bombers . From a position 230 nautical miles ( 430 km ; 260 mi ) north of Oahu , Sōryū and the other five carriers launched two waves of aircraft on the morning of 8 December 1941 ( Japan time ) . 
 In the first wave , eight of Sōryū 's B5Ns were supposed to attack the aircraft carriers that normally berthed on the northwest side of Ford Island , but none were in Pearl Harbor that day ; six B5Ns attacked the ships that were present , torpedoing the target ship Utah , causing her to capsize , and the elderly light cruiser Raleigh , damaging her . Two of the B5N pilots diverted to their secondary target , ships berthed alongside " 1010 Pier " , where the fleet flagship was usually moored . That battleship was in drydock and her position was occupied by the light cruiser Helena and the minelayer Oglala . One torpedo passed underneath Oglala and struck Helena in one of her engine rooms ; the other pilot rejected these targets and attacked the battleship California . Her other ten B5Ns were tasked to drop 800 @-@ kilogram ( 1 @,@ 800 lb ) armor @-@ piercing bombs on the battleships berthed on the southeast side of Ford Island ( " Battleship Row " ) and may have scored one or two hits on them . Her eight A6M Zeros strafed parked aircraft at Marine Corps Air Station Ewa , claiming twenty @-@ seven aircraft destroyed in addition to five aircraft shot down . 
 Sōryū 's second wave consisted of nine A6M Zeros and seventeen D3As . The former attacked Naval Air Station Kaneohe Bay , losing one Zero to American anti @-@ aircraft guns . On the return trip , the Zero pilots claimed to have shot down two American aircraft while losing two of their own . The D3As attacked various ships in Pearl Harbor , but it is not possible to identify which aircraft attacked which ship . Two of them were shot down during the attack . 
 While returning to Japan , Vice Admiral Chūichi Nagumo , commander of the First Air Fleet , ordered that Sōryū and Hiryū be detached on 16 December to attack the defenders of Wake Island who had already defeated the first Japanese attack on the island . The two carriers reached the vicinity of the island on 21 December and launched twenty @-@ nine D3As and two B5Ns , escorted by eighteen Zeros , to attack ground targets . They encountered no aerial opposition and launched thirty @-@ five B5Ns and six A6M Zeros the following day . They were intercepted by the two surviving Grumman F4F Wildcat fighters of Marine Fighter Squadron VMF @-@ 211 . The Wildcats shot down two B5Ns before they were shot down themselves by the Zeros . The garrison surrendered the next day after Japanese troops were landed . 
 The carriers arrived at Kure on 29 December . They were assigned to the Southern Force on 8 January 1942 and departed four days later for the Dutch East Indies . The ships supported the invasion of the Palau Islands and the Battle of Ambon , attacking Allied positions on the island on 23 January with fifty @-@ four aircraft . Four days later the carriers detached eighteen Zeros and nine D3As to operate from land bases in support of Japanese operations in the Battle of Borneo . On 30 January they destroyed two aircraft on the ground and shot down a Qantas Short Empire flying boat flying to Surabaya to pick up refugees . 
 Sōryū and Hiryū arrived at Palau on 28 January and waited for the arrival of the carriers Kaga and Akagi . All four carriers departed Palau on 15 February and launched air strikes against Darwin , Australia , four days later . Sōryū contributed eighteen B5Ns , eighteen D3As , and nine Zeros to the attack while flying Combat Air Patrols ( CAP ) over the carriers . Her aircraft attacked the ships in port and its facilities , sinking or setting on fire eight ships and causing three others to be beached lest they sink . The Zeros destroyed a single Consolidated PBY Catalina flying boat ; one D3A was lost . The Japanese aircraft spotted a ship on the return trip but had expended all their ordnance and had to be rearmed and refueled before they could attack the vessel . Several hours later , nine of Sōryū 's D3As located and bombed an American supply ship of 3 @,@ 200 gross register tons ( GRT ) , Don Isidro , hitting her five times but failing to sink her . Sōryū and the other carriers arrived at Staring Bay on Celebes Island on 21 February to resupply and rest before departing four days later to support the invasion of Java . On 1 March 1942 , the ship 's D3As damaged the destroyer USS Edsall badly enough for her to be caught and sunk by Japanese cruisers . Later that day the dive bombers sank the oil tanker USS Pecos . The four carriers launched an airstrike of 180 aircraft against <unk> on 5 March , sinking five small ships , damaging another nine badly enough that they had to be scuttled , and set the town on fire . Two days later they attacked Christmas Island before returning to Staring Bay on 11 March to resupply and train for the impending Indian Ocean raid . This raid was intended to secure newly conquered Burma , Malaya , and the Dutch East Indies against Allied attack by destroying base facilities and forces in the eastern Indian Ocean . 
 = = = Indian Ocean raid = = = 
 On 26 March 1942 , the five carriers of the First Air Fleet departed from Staring Bay ; they were spotted by a Catalina about 350 nautical miles ( 650 km ; 400 mi ) southeast of Ceylon on the morning of 4 April . Nagumo closed to within 120 nautical miles ( 220 km ; 140 mi ) of Colombo before launching an airstrike the next morning . Sōryū contributed eighteen B5Ns and nine Zeros to the force . The pilots of the latter aircraft claimed to have shot down a single Fairey Fulmar of 806 Naval Air Squadron , plus seven other fighters while losing one of their own . The D3As and B5Ns inflicted some damage to the port facilities , but a day 's warning had allowed most of the shipping in the harbor to be evacuated . Later that morning the British heavy cruisers Cornwall and Dorsetshire were spotted and Sōryū launched eighteen D3As . They were the first to attack and claimed to have made fourteen hits on the two ships , sinking both in combination with the dive bombers from the other carriers . 
 On 9 April , Sōryū contributed eighteen B5Ns , escorted by nine Zeros , to the attack on Trincomalee . Her B5Ns were the first to bomb the port and her fighters did not encounter any British fighters . Meanwhile , a floatplane from the battleship Haruna spotted the small aircraft carrier Hermes , escorted by the Australian destroyer Vampire , and every available D3A was launched to attack the ships . Sōryū contributed eighteen dive bombers , but they arrived too late and instead found three other ships further north . They sank the oil tanker British Sergeant and the Norwegian cargo ship <unk> before they were attacked by eight Fulmars of 803 and 806 Naval Air Squadrons . The Royal Navy pilots claimed three D3As shot down for the loss of a pair of Fulmars ; the Japanese actually lost four D3As with another five damaged . While this was going on , Akagi narrowly escaped damage when nine British Bristol Blenheim bombers from Ceylon penetrated the CAP and dropped their bombs from 11 @,@ 000 feet ( 3 @,@ 400 m ) . Sōryū had six Zeros aloft , along with fourteen more from the other carriers , and they collectively accounted for five of the British bombers for the loss of one of Hiryū 's Zeros . After launching the D3As that sank Hermes and the other ships , the First Air Fleet reversed course and headed southeast for the Malacca Strait before recovering their aircraft ; they then proceeded to Japan . 
 On 19 April , while transiting the Bashi Straits between Taiwan and Luzon en route to Japan , Akagi , Sōryū , and Hiryū were sent in pursuit of the American carriers Hornet and Enterprise , which had launched the Doolittle Raid against Tokyo . They found only empty ocean , for the American carriers had immediately departed the area to return to Hawaii . The carriers quickly abandoned the chase and dropped anchor at Hashirajima anchorage on 22 April . Having been engaged in constant operations for four and a half months , Sōryū , along with the other three carriers of the First and Second Carrier Divisions , was hurriedly refitted and replenished in preparation for the Combined Fleet 's next major operation , scheduled to begin one month hence . While at Hashirajima , Sōryū 's air group was based ashore at nearby <unk> , near Kagoshima , and conducted flight and weapons training with the other First Air Fleet carrier units . 
 = = = Midway = = = 
 Concerned by the US carrier strikes in the Marshall Islands , Lae @-@ Salamaua , and the Doolittle raids , Yamamoto was determined to force the US Navy into a showdown to eliminate the American carrier threat . He decided to invade and occupy Midway Island , an action that he was sure would draw out the American carriers . The Japanese codenamed the Midway invasion Operation MI . 
 On 25 May 1942 , Sōryū set out with the Combined Fleet 's carrier striking force in the company of Kaga , Akagi , and Hiryū , which constituted the First and Second Carrier Divisions , for the attack on Midway Island . Her aircraft complement consisted of eighteen Zeros , sixteen D3As , eighteen B5Ns , and two prototypes of the new Yokosuka D4Y dive bomber . Also aboard were three A6M Zeros of the 6th <unk> intended as a portion of the aerial garrison for Midway . 
 With the fleet positioned 250 nautical miles ( 460 km ; 290 mi ) northwest of Midway at dawn ( 04 : 45 local time ) on 4 June 1942 , Sōryū 's part in the 108 @-@ plane combined air raid was a strike on the airfield on Eastern Island with eighteen torpedo bombers escorted by nine Zeros . The air group suffered heavily during the attack ; a single B5N was shot down en route to the island , another was shot down by AA fire , two were forced to ditch near destroyers on the trip back and four were damaged beyond repair . The Japanese did not know that the US Navy had discovered their MI plan by breaking their cipher , and had prepared an ambush using its three available carriers , positioned northeast of Midway . 
 The carrier also contributed 3 Zeros to the total of eleven assigned to the initial combat air patrol ( CAP ) over the four carriers . By 07 : 00 the carrier had six fighters with the CAP that helped to defend the Kido Butai from the first US attackers from Midway Island at 07 : 10 . At this time , Nagumo 's carriers were attacked by six US Navy Grumman TBF Avengers from Torpedo Squadron 8 ( VT @-@ 8 ) that had been temporarily detached from the Hornet to Midway , and four United States Army Air Corps ( USAAC ) Martin B @-@ 26 Marauders , all carrying torpedoes . The Avengers went after Hiryū while the Marauders attacked Akagi . The thirty CAP Zeros in the air at this time , including the six from Sōryū , immediately attacked the American airplanes , shooting down five of the Avengers and two of the B @-@ 26s . The surviving aircraft dropped their torpedoes , but all missed . Sōryū launched three more Zeros to reinforce the CAP , at 07 : 10 . 
 At 07 : 15 Admiral Nagumo ordered the B5Ns on Kaga and Akagi rearmed with bombs for another attack on Midway itself . This process was limited by the number of ordnance carts ( used to handle the bombs and torpedoes ) and ordnance elevators , preventing torpedoes from being stowed <unk> until after all the bombs were moved up from their magazine , assembled , and mounted on the aircraft . The process normally took about an hour and a half ; more time would be required to bring the aircraft up to the flight deck , and to warm up and launch the strike group . Around 07 : 40 Nagumo reversed his order when he received a message from one of his scout aircraft that American warships had been spotted . Depleted of ammunition , the first six of Sōryū 's CAP Zeros landed aboard the carrier at 07 : 30 . 
 At 07 : 55 , the next American strike from Midway arrived in the form of sixteen Douglas SBD Dauntless bombers of Marine Scout Bomber Squadron ( VMSB @-@ 241 ) under Major Lofton R. Henderson . Sōryū 's three CAP fighters were among the nine still aloft that attacked Henderson 's planes , shooting down six of them as they executed a fruitless glide @-@ bombing attack on Hiryū . At roughly the same time , a dozen USAAC Boeing B @-@ 17 Flying Fortresses attacked the Japanese carriers , bombing from 20 @,@ 000 feet ( 6 @,@ 100 m ) . The high altitude of the B @-@ 17s gave the Japanese captains enough time to anticipate where the bombs would land and successfully maneuver their ships out of the impact area . Four B @-@ 17s attacked Sōryū , but they all missed . 
 The CAP defeated the next American air strike from Midway , shooting down three of the eleven Vought SB2U Vindicator dive bombers from VMSB @-@ 241 , which attacked the battleship Haruna unsuccessfully , starting at around 08 : 30 . Although all the American air strikes had thus far caused negligible damage , they kept the Japanese carrier forces off @-@ balance as Nagumo endeavored to prepare a response to news , received at 08 : 20 , of the sighting of American carrier forces to his northeast . Around 08 : 30 Sōryū launched one of her D4Ys on a mission to confirm the location of the American carriers . 
 Sōryū began recovering her Midway strike force at around 08 : 40 and finished shortly by 09 : 10 . The landed aircraft were quickly struck below , while the carriers ' crews began preparations to spot aircraft for the strike against the American carrier forces . The preparations were interrupted at 09 : 18 when the first American carrier aircraft to attack were sighted . These consisted of fifteen Douglas TBD Devastator torpedo bombers of VT @-@ 8 , led by Lieutenant Commander John C. Waldron from the Hornet . The three airborne CAP Zeros were landing aboard at 09 : 30 when the Americans unsuccessfully attempted a torpedo attack on Soryū , but three of the morning 's escort fighters were still airborne and joined the eighteen CAP fighters in destroying Waldron 's planes . All of the American planes were shot down , leaving George H. Gay , Jr . — the only surviving aviator — treading water . 
 Shortly afterwards , fourteen Devastators from Torpedo Squadron 6 ( VT @-@ 6 ) from the Enterprise , led by Lieutenant Commander Eugene E. Lindsey , attacked . Lindsey 's aircraft tried to sandwich Kaga , but the CAP , reinforced by three more Zeros launched by Sōryū at 09 : 45 , shot down all but four of the Devastators , and Kaga dodged the torpedoes . Sōryū launched another trio of CAP Zeros at 10 : 00 and another three at 10 : 15 after Torpedo Squadron 3 ( VT @-@ 3 ) from Yorktown was spotted . A Wildcat escorting VT @-@ 3 shot down one of her Zeros . 
 While VT @-@ 3 was still attacking Hiryū , American dive bombers arrived over the Japanese carriers almost undetected and began their dives . It was at this time , around 10 : 20 , that in the words of Jonathan Parshall and Anthony Tully , the " Japanese air defenses would finally and catastrophically fail " . At 10 : 25 , Sōryū was attacked by thirteen Dauntlesses from Bombing Squadron 2 ( VB @-@ 2 ) from the Yorktown . The carrier received three direct hits from 1000 lb ( 454 kg ) bombs : one penetrated to the lower hangar deck amidships , and the other two exploded in the upper hangar deck fore and aft . The hangars contained armed and fueled aircraft preparing for the upcoming strike , resulting in secondary explosions and rupturing the steam pipes in the boiler rooms . Within a very short time the fires on the ship were out of control . At 10 : 40 she stopped and her crew was ordered to abandon ship five minutes later . The destroyers Isokaze and Hamakaze rescued the survivors . Sōryū was still afloat and showed no signs of beginning to sink by early evening , so Isokaze was ordered to scuttle her with torpedoes so as to allow the destroyers to be used for possible operations that night . The destroyer reported at 19 : 15 that Sōryū had sunk at position 30 ° 38 ′ N 179 ° 13 ′ W. Losses were 711 crew of her complement of 1 @,@ 103 , including Captain <unk> , who chose to remain on board . This was the highest mortality percentage of all the Japanese carriers lost at Midway , due largely to the devastation in both hangar decks . 
 The loss of Sōryū and the three other IJN carriers at Midway , comprising two @-@ thirds of Japan 's total number of fleet carriers and the experienced core of the First Air Fleet , was a crucial strategic defeat and contributed significantly to the ultimate Allied victory . In an effort to conceal the defeat , the ship was not immediately removed from the Navy 's registry of ships , awaiting a " suitable opportunity " before finally being struck from the registry on 10 August 1942 . 
 = All Saints ' Church , Shuart = 
 All Saints ' Church , Shuart / <unk> / , in the north @-@ west of the Isle of Thanet , Kent , in the south @-@ east of England , was established in the Anglo @-@ Saxon period as a chapel of ease for the parish of St Mary 's Church , Reculver , which was centred on the north @-@ eastern corner of mainland Kent , adjacent to the island . The Isle of Thanet was then separated from the mainland by the sea , which formed a strait known as the Wantsum Channel . The last church on the site was demolished by the early 17th century , and there is nothing remaining above ground to show that a church once stood there . 
 The area of the Isle of Thanet where All Saints ' Church stood had been settled since the Bronze Age , and land in the west of the Isle of Thanet was given to Reculver in the 7th century . All Saints ' Church remained a chapel of ease for the parish of Reculver until the early 14th century , when the parish was broken up to form separate parishes for Herne and St Nicholas @-@ at @-@ Wade . The area served by All Saints ' was merged with that of St Nicholas @-@ at @-@ Wade , which became the centre of a new parish with All Saints ' as its chapel . The churches of All Saints and St Nicholas continued to have a junior relationship with the parish of Reculver , making annual payments to the church there . 
 All Saints ' originally consisted of a nave and chancel , to which a sanctuary was added in the first building phase . The church was extended on three occasions between the 10th and 14th centuries – a period of population growth – to include an aisled nave , a western tower and a northern chapel ; its windows featured stained glass . The church was abandoned in the 15th century , presumably because the parish could no longer support two churches . It was demolished , and virtually all of its masonry removed , some of which may have been used in improvements to the church of St Nicholas . The settlement of Shuart remained as an area of local administration into the 17th century , but it is now regarded as a deserted medieval village . There were no visible remains of All Saints ' Church by 1723 , although land there remained as glebe belonging to the parish of St Nicholas . The site of All Saints ' Church was excavated by archaeologists between 1978 and 1979 . The main structure had been robbed of its materials leaving only the foundations , from which the archaeologists were able to interpret the history of the building 's construction and its form . Among the foundations were discovered numerous stone carvings , floor tiles , remnants of stained glass , and several disturbed graves . 
 = = Origin = = 
 The place @-@ name " Shuart " is from the Anglo @-@ Saxon language and means a skirted , or cut @-@ off , piece of land . The earliest evidence of human settlement at Shuart dates to the Bronze Age ; a rectangular Bronze Age enclosure lies a little to the north of the site of All Saints ' Church , and a collection of objects from that period , known as the " Shuart Hoard " , was found south @-@ west of the site in the 1980s . Occupation continued through the Iron Age and Roman period . Structures , pottery and glass dating to these times have been found nearby , as well as human burials and cremations . 
 The site 's history in the Anglo @-@ Saxon period begins with the division of the Isle of Thanet into eastern and western parts during the 7th century . The division is attributed in medieval sources to the route taken by a tame female deer that was set free to run across the island by <unk> , founder and first abbess of the double monastery at Minster @-@ in @-@ Thanet , thereby marking out its endowment . The route was circuitous , beginning on the north side of the island at Westgate @-@ on @-@ Sea and ending on the south side at Sheriff 's Court , halfway between Minster @-@ in @-@ Thanet and Monkton , which are about 1 @.@ 75 miles ( 3 km ) apart . While land to the east of this route was given to <unk> for her monastery , which was in existence by 678 , land to the west , described broadly as <unk> , or " the western part of the island " , was given to the monastery at Reculver by King Hlothhere of Kent in 679 . This division of the island is apparent in Domesday Book , which was compiled in 1086 , and remained an important feature in the early 15th century , when it was included prominently in a map of the island drawn up by Thomas Elmham . According to Edward Hasted the division was still marked in 1800 by " a bank , or lynch , which goes quite across the island , and is commonly called St. Mildred 's lynch . " 
 The monastery at Reculver had been established in 669 , and developed as the centre of a " large estate , a manor and a parish " . By the early 9th century it had become " extremely wealthy " , but it then came under the control of the archbishops of Canterbury . By the 10th century the church and its estate appear to have fallen into royal hands , since King Eadred of England gave them in 949 to Christ Church , Canterbury , now known as Canterbury Cathedral . The Anglo @-@ Saxon charter recording the gift shows that the Reculver estate still included land in the west of the Isle of Thanet at that time . Two slightly earlier charters give a more complicated picture : in 943 , King Edmund I of England gave land at St Nicholas @-@ at @-@ Wade to a layman , and in the next year he gave the same layman land at Monkton , by means of a charter recording that land to the west and north of Monkton – evidently at Sarre – was nonetheless still regarded as belonging to Reculver , rather than to either the archbishop or the king . However , while King Edmund I 's mother Eadgifu gave lands in Kent , including Monkton , to Christ Church in 961 , all of the documents recording these transactions entered the Christ Church archive ; and , if the land that Christ Church acquired on the Isle of Thanet in the 10th century was the same as the " Liberty " shown on Thomas Elmham 's map from the early 15th century , then the site of All Saints ' Church , Shuart , must have been included . Neither Shuart nor St Nicholas @-@ at @-@ Wade are mentioned by name in Domesday Book ; but they may have been included in the entry for Reculver , which was then recorded as a hundred in its own right , and was held entirely by the archbishop of Canterbury , but for a portion held from him by a tenant . An analysis of the archbishop 's holdings in Domesday Book concludes that All Saints ' was among them . 
 = = Church and community = = 
 A church dedicated to All Saints was established at Shuart some time between 679 and the 10th century . Although the status of the church at Reculver as mother church for the area dates from the 7th century , and may have led to the establishment of a church at Shuart then , this chapel might equally have been a development in response to acquisition of land in the area by Christ Church , Canterbury , in the mid @-@ 900s . Examination of the building 's archaeological remains has failed to provide a more precise date , but a church stood at Shuart for about 100 years or more before the establishment of a nearby church at St Nicholas @-@ at @-@ Wade , since the earliest church there was " almost certainly built in the late 11th century " . 
 = = = First church = = = 
 The original church of All Saints was a rectangular building aligned on an east @-@ west axis , measuring 52 @.@ 5 feet ( 16 m ) by 15 @.@ 75 feet ( 5 m ) . It consisted of a western nave and an eastern chancel , with a sanctuary added to the eastern end of the chancel in the first phase of building . The chancel was about 16 @.@ 4 feet ( 5 m ) long , and the nave was small , taking up only about 9 @.@ 2 feet ( 3 m ) of the building 's overall length . They were connected by a recessed passageway about 9 @.@ 8 feet ( 3 m ) long but only about 8 @.@ 9 feet ( 3 m ) across at its narrowest , the foundations for which suggest a heavy structure , perhaps including a vaulted ceiling . The size of the community this church was originally built to serve is unknown , although Domesday Book records the presence of 90 villeins and 25 bordars in the manor of Reculver in 1086 , which included land on the Isle of Thanet , but consisted mainly of land in mainland Kent . Those numbers can be multiplied four or five times to account for dependents , since they only represent adult male heads of households ; Domesday Book does not say where in the manor they lived . 
 = = = Expansion = = = 
 A second phase of building was undertaken between the 10th and 11th centuries , in which the church was enlarged . The west wall was demolished , allowing the nave to be extended to the west by 16 @.@ 5 feet ( 5 m ) , and the passageway between it and the chancel was opened out and replaced with a lighter chancel arch . A third phase followed in the 12th century , when the nave was rebuilt as a much larger structure with north and south aisles , each lined by four columns , and measuring about 30 feet ( 9 m ) wide by 42 feet ( 13 m ) long . A tower about 16 @.@ 2 feet ( 5 m ) square was added to the western end of the church either at this time or in a fourth phase of building carried out in the 13th century . This fourth phase involved the installation of new windows featuring stained glass , especially at the eastern end of the nave , comparable to the grisaille glass still in the south transept of York Minster that dates from about 1240 . A chapel was also added to the north side of the church , measuring about 12 @.@ 5 feet ( 4 m ) wide by 29 @.@ 4 feet ( 9 m ) long , with an altar at its eastern end , and paved with tiles about 4 inches ( 10 cm ) square . Flemish floor tiles were also installed in the church , probably in the 15th century . 
 The expansion of the church coincided with a period of growth in the population of Reculver parish as a whole , which approximately doubled from that of 1086 to more than 1 @,@ 000 people by the late 13th century . The first record explicitly to mention All Saints ' dates from 1284 , when the community it served complained to the archbishop of Canterbury that the vicar of Reculver had failed to provide a chaplain to celebrate daily mass . In 1296 the archbishop settled a dispute concerning a duty to pay for repairs to the church , specifying that this was owed by owners of property on and around part of " North Street " . In 1310 Archbishop Robert Winchelsey of Canterbury established St Nicholas @-@ at @-@ Wade as a parish , with All Saints ' Church as its chapel , served by a vicar and an assistant priest . According to the document by which that was done , the parish of Reculver had served more than 1 @,@ 000 parishioners in the time of Winchelsey 's predecessor , and this population was " continually increasing " , to the extent that a single vicar for the whole parish was inadequate . While Thanet was then still an island separated from the rest of Kent by the Wantsum Channel , the new arrangement was also prompted by the inconvenience posed by the distance between these chapels on the Isle of Thanet and their mother church at Reculver . However , the document specified that the vicar of St Nicholas @-@ at @-@ Wade with All Saints ' had to pay £ <unk> ( £ 3 @.@ 17 ) annually to the vicar of Reculver " as a sign of subjection " . The vicar also had to go to Reculver " in procession " with his assistant priest and his parishioners every year on Whit Monday – the eighth day after Easter – as well as being present at Reculver for the Nativity of the Virgin Mary , the patron saint of Reculver , on 8 September . The visits to Reculver continued in the mid @-@ 16th century , when they were recorded by John Leland , and the parish of St Nicholas @-@ at @-@ Wade was still making annual payments to Reculver in the 19th century . Archbishop Winchelsey 's instructions also set out relative values for the parishes of Reculver and St Nicholas @-@ at @-@ Wade with All Saints ' , in allocating dues for taxes known as " clerical tenths " . Reculver was liable for <unk> ( <unk> ) , compared to St Nicholas @-@ at @-@ Wade with All Saints ' <unk> ( <unk> ) . The first vicar of St Nicholas @-@ at @-@ Wade with All Saints ' was named by Archbishop Winchelsey as Andrew de <unk> . 
 = = = Decline = = = 
 Thomas Elmham 's map of the Isle of Thanet , drawn in the early 15th century , shows the church with its tower , but a map of 1596 , which shows churches " as they actually appeared " , shows a church without a tower . Examination of the church 's foundations indicates that it was probably a ruin by the middle of the 15th century and was demolished , but was replaced by a smaller structure , without a tower , up to 20 years later . It may be that material from All Saints ' Church was used in the construction of a new clerestory for the nave of St Nicholas ' church in the late 15th century , and the medieval baptismal font now in Reculver 's parish church of St Mary the Virgin at Hillborough probably came from All Saints ' . By 1630 there was no church : in that year , the vicar and churchwardens of St Nicholas @-@ at @-@ Wade reported the existence of glebe of 1 @.@ 5 acres ( 1 ha ) called " <unk> close , in part of which <unk> stood the chapel of All Saints , or <unk> " ; and , in 1723 , antiquarian John Lewis wrote that the church was " now so entirely demolished , with all the fences around it , that there are no marks of either of them . " 
 The decline of All Saints ' Church and the community of Shuart may have begun with the Black Death of 1348 – 9 . Further , this decline coincides with the closing of the adjacent Wantsum Channel . This channel had been a preferred route for sea @-@ borne trade between England and continental Europe in medieval times , probably providing " a large part of the early prosperity of Kent " , besides supporting a local industry collecting salt , but it was progressively blocked by silt . While tax records of the 15th century show that the inhabitants of Shuart had then included men of the Cinque Port of Dover , shipping through the Wantsum Channel had ceased by about the end of the 15th century , and the northern section adjacent to Shuart was merely a creek by the middle of the 16th century . The abandonment of the church presumably arose through the cost of keeping two churches – All Saints and St Nicholas – in what had become a " remote , rural parish " . Shuart continued to be represented in tax records in the 17th century : in 1624 it was assessed as a " vill " at the rate of £ <unk> ( £ 4 @.@ 32 ) for the archaic taxes known as " fifteenths and tenths " – this rate had been fixed in 1334 , and may be compared with the rate for St Nicholas @-@ at @-@ Wade of £ <unk> ( £ 10 @.@ 35 ) – and Shuart appears as a borgh , or tithing , in records of the Hearth Tax for 1673 . However , the parish as a whole was in decline . In 1563 the parish of St Nicholas @-@ at @-@ Wade was the second smallest on the Isle of Thanet by number of households , having only 33 , and by 1800 there were " not ... near so many " . By 1723 the settlement of Shuart was a matter of historical record only ; John Lewis wrote then that " [ it ] seems as if anciently a Vill or Town belonged to [ the chapel of All Saints ] " , and the only building recorded by Lewis was a " good farm house " . The farmhouse was built in the late 17th century and still stands , but otherwise today Shuart is considered a deserted medieval village . 
 = = Excavation = = 
 The site of All Saints ' Church , Shuart , was recorded on Ordnance Survey maps in the 19th century , and was confirmed in the mid @-@ 20th century through aerial photography by Kenneth St Joseph . On the north side of a road between Shuart Farm and Nether Hale Farm , the site is on farmland now owned by St John 's College , Cambridge , and was excavated with the college 's permission by the Thanet Archaeological Unit between 1978 and 1979 . 
 The only surviving part of the main structure was its foundations of rammed chalk , which nonetheless allowed a construction history to be developed , but various elements of the structure were also found . These included mortar flooring , glazed floor tiles , green sandstone , Caen stone , Quarr stone from the Isle of Wight and stained glass . Among stone fragments were numerous carvings , including " two small delicately carved pieces of foliage which are certainly twelfth @-@ century work " . Fragments of mortar showing the imprint of barnacles were found among the rubble in the foundation trenches , indicating that some of the stone used in the structure had been fetched from the shoreline . A number of graves were also discovered , one of which had been covered by an unmarked stone , but they had been robbed and filled with rubble containing fragments of human bone . Two of the graves had been dug between the demolition of the church and the construction of a smaller , short @-@ lived replacement in the 15th century . While virtually all of the building 's structure had been robbed , presumably for use elsewhere , much of what remained had been destroyed by ploughing . 
 = Typhoon Chataan = 
 Typhoon Chataan , known in the Philippines as Typhoon Gloria , was the deadliest natural disaster in the history of Chuuk , a state in the Federated States of Micronesia ( FSM ) . The typhoon formed on June 28 , 2002 , near the FSM , and for several days it meandered while producing heavy rainfall across the region . On Chuuk , the highest 24 @-@ hour precipitation total was 506 mm ( 19 @.@ 9 in ) , which was greater than the average monthly total . The rain produced floods up to 1 @.@ 5 m ( 4 @.@ 9 ft ) deep , causing landslides across the island that killed 47 people . There was also one death on nearby Pohnpei , and damage in the FSM totaled over $ 100 million . 
 After affecting the FSM , Chataan began a northwest track as an intensifying typhoon . Its eye passed just north of Guam on July 4 , though the eyewall moved across the island and dropped heavy rainfall . Totals were highest in southern Guam , peaking at 536 mm ( 21 @.@ 1 in ) . Flooding and landslides from the storm severely damaged or destroyed 1 @,@ 994 houses . Damage on the island totaled $ 60 @.@ 5 million , and there were 23 injuries . The typhoon also affected Rota in the Northern Marianas Islands with gusty winds and light rainfall . Typhoon Chataan attained its peak intensity of 175 km / h ( 110 mph ) on July 8 . It weakened while turning to the north , and after diminishing to a tropical storm Chataan struck eastern Japan on July 10 . High rainfall , peaking at 509 mm ( 20 @.@ 0 in ) , flooded 10 @,@ 270 houses . Damage in Japan totaled about $ 500 million . 
 The name Chataan means " rainy day " in the Chamorro language , which is spoken on Guam . The Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration ( PAGASA ) named the storm Gloria while the typhoon was in the vicinity of the country . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On June 27 , 2002 , the monsoon trough spawned a tropical disturbance southwest of Pohnpei . The system rapidly organized that day , and at 2000 UTC the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) issued a tropical cyclone formation alert . Early on June 28 , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) classified the system as a tropical depression near the Mortlock Islands in the Federated States of Micronesia ; around the same time , the JTWC also initiated storm advisories . Early on June 29 , the JTWC upgraded the system to Tropical Storm 08W , and shortly thereafter the JMA named the system Tropical Storm Chataan . After moving northwestward , the storm turned to the east , resuming a northwest track on June 30 due to a subtropical ridge to the north . The track was erratic because the storm had not yet separated from the monsoon trough . By June 30 , Chataan had steadily strengthened to severe tropical storm status , with 10 @-@ minute maximum sustained winds of 95 km / h ( 60 mph ) . 
 Only July 1 , the system 's circulation became broad , with most of the convection located west of the center . The next day , Chataan briefly weakened to an intensity of 85 km / h ( 50 mph ) , although it began strengthening steadily on July 3 , when its center passed very near Weno in Chuck State in the FSM . At 1800 UTC that night , the JTWC upgraded Chataan to a typhoon , and about 24 hours later the JMA followed suit while the storm was approaching Guam from the southeast . At about 2130 UTC on July 4 , the eye of Chataan moved across northern Guam in about two hours , although the center of the eye passed north of the island . 
 After affecting Guam , Chataan continued toward the northwest and gradually intensified . At 0000 UTC on July 8 , the typhoon reached its peak intensity of 175 km / h ( 110 mph 10 @-@ minute sustained ) while located near the Japanese island of Okinotorishima . The JTWC assessed that Chataan had reached its peak intensity of 240 km / h ( 150 mph 1 @-@ minute sustained ) about six hours earlier ; on that basis , the agency classified the system as a super typhoon . On July 8 , Chataan turned toward the north around the subtropical ridge while maintaining its peak winds for about 18 hours . On July 9 the typhoon turned to the northeast , and late that day it weakened to a severe tropical storm . At around 1530 UTC on July 10 , Chataan made landfall on the Bōsō Peninsula in Honshu with winds of about 100 km / h ( 65 mph 10 @-@ minute sustained ) . The storm briefly moved offshore before making a second landfall on eastern Hokkaido at 1200 UTC on July 11 ; this marked the first occasion of a July landfall on the island in 28 years . A few hours later , Chataan became an extratropical cyclone in the Sea of Okhotsk , where the remnants stalled before dissipating on July 13 near Sakhalin . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 = = = Federated States of Micronesia = = = 
 While Chataan was in its formative stages and still tied to the monsoon trough , it produced a large area of heavy rainfall and strong winds that affected Pohnpei and Chuuk in the FSM . The storm passed very near Chuuk with wind gusts of 82 km / h ( 51 mph ) . In the day before Chataan affected the island , it dropped torrential rainfall due to its elongated structure and slow movement . Persistent winds from the larger monsoon trough generated high surf and tides of 0 @.@ 3 m ( 1 ft ) above normal across the region . The most significant effects were from the rainfall , peaking at 954 mm ( 37 @.@ 5 in ) at the Chuuk Weather Service Office over 13 days . The highest 24 @-@ hour total was 506 mm ( 19 @.@ 9 in ) on Weno Island , of which 361 mm ( 14 @.@ 2 in ) fell in 12 hours ; this was greater than the average monthly rainfall total for the station . 
 High winds downed power lines on Chuuk , while surf destroyed seawalls and buildings along the coast . The rains causes severe flooding across the island that reached 1 @.@ 5 m ( 4 @.@ 9 ft ) in some locations , triggering at least 30 mudslides that killed 47 people . This represented the deadliest natural disaster in the island 's recorded history . The landslides reached a depth of 4 @.@ 6 m ( 15 ft ) , which destroyed several homes made of tin and concrete . Many people were buried by the landslides or washed into the ocean . Saltwater flooding contaminated the groundwater and destroyed much of the island 's crops . Chataan damaged roads and bridges , and high winds downed power lines , which cut communications between islands . Across Chuuk , the storm destroyed about 1 @,@ 000 homes and left about 1 @,@ 000 people homeless . About 100 people were injured . 
 In nearby Pohnpei state , Chataan produced 72 km / h ( 45 mph ) winds in Nukuoro . The winds destroyed a house and a weather station . Rainfall on the atoll reached 457 mm ( 18 @.@ 0 in ) . High winds , surf , and rain also affected <unk> . Rough seas killed a person on Pohnpei . Crop damage in the country totaled $ 3 million , and overall property damage was estimated at $ 100 million , mostly on Chuuk . 
 = = = Guam = = = 
 Before Chataan affected Guam , officials canceled U.S. Independence Day festivities , and residents purchased storm supplies . Although the center of the eye did not strike Guam , the eyewall affected the entire island with strong winds and heavy rainfall . The highest sustained winds were estimated at 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) , with gusts to 167 km / h ( 104 mph ) at Andersen Air Force Base . Gusts were slightly higher at Apra Harbor , peaking at 170 km / h ( 106 mph ) , and gusts may have reached as high as 200 km / h ( 125 mph ) . Similar to its effects on Chuuk , Chataan dropped heavy rainfall on Guam , peaking at 536 mm ( 21 @.@ 1 in ) on Mount <unk> ; the same station reported 311 mm ( 12 @.@ 2 in ) in about three hours . The Weather Forecast Office on the island reported 265 mm ( 10 @.@ 4 in ) in a 24 hour period . The rains were less than 250 mm ( 10 in ) in northern Guam , and were highest in the mountainous southern region where the eye crossed . While moving across the island , Chataan produced a significant storm surge that peaked at about 3 @.@ 6 m ( 12 ft ) in <unk> . 
 High winds caused damage across Guam , mostly to roofs and to poorly built or wooden structures . A total of 1 @,@ 996 houses were severely damaged or destroyed . Better constructed homes fared well during the storm , and there was little window damage . The winds also downed power lines , leaving an island @-@ wide power outage . John F. Kennedy High School sustained damage to its football field and library . The most significant effects were from the heavy rainfall , resulting in landslides in some areas and causing rivers to flow at above @-@ normal rates ; 14 stations reported either record flow rates or peak crests , including an island @-@ wide peak crest of 8 @.@ 55 m ( 28 @.@ 06 ft ) at the mouth of the <unk> River . Two water gauges were destroyed during the storm . Swollen rivers damaged roads , washed away trees , and caused erosion . The storm flooding contaminated <unk> Lake , which provides water to the military base , for a few days . In addition , 34 of the island 's 110 water wells failed due to the storm . Flooding also destroyed a building and damaged the runway at Antonio B. Won Pat International Airport , and damaged a bridge near Inarajan . A few palm trees fell due to the soil being loosened , either from heavy rains or high waves . Some of the downed trees struck cars , but the winds were not strong enough to overturn any vehicles . In the higher elevations of Guam , some areas experienced heavy crop damage due to strong winds ; however , crop damage in general was less than expected , estimated at around $ 500 @,@ 000 . In Apra Harbor , high seas washed ashore or sank five boats , and a Navy barge spilled 397 @,@ 000 litres ( 105 @,@ 000 gallons ) of oil . Overall , Chataan caused about $ 60 million in property damage on Guam , and there were 23 injuries , none of them serious . 
 = = = Elsewhere = = = 
 North of Guam , Chataan affected Rota with 74 km / h ( 46 mph ) sustained winds and gusts to 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) at the island 's airport . Rainfall was much less than elsewhere in the typhoon 's path , and a 24 hour total of 38 @.@ 6 mm ( 1 @.@ 52 in ) was reported at Rota 's airport . The storm inflicted heavy damage to crops and fisheries , and 60 % of farmers reported a total loss . Chataan also damaged roads on the island , many due to fallen trees . Nine huts were destroyed , and damage was estimated at $ 2 @.@ 7 million . 
 Energy from the typhoon enhanced monsoonal moisture over the Philippines , in conjunction with Tropical Storm Nakri . The two storms contributed to heavy rainfall that triggered floods and landslides , which closed roads and highways . High waves killed three people after a boat overturned . The storm destroyed 566 houses and damaged another 2 @,@ 363 . A total of 31 @,@ 813 people evacuated to 184 government @-@ opened shelters . Officials canceled classes during the system ; several schools were used as temporary shelters . Damage totaled over $ 1 @.@ 5 million ( ₱ 64 million pesos ) , and the floods killed 58 people . 
 The last location Chataan affected was Japan . The typhoon forced the cancellation of 316 flights and 150 train trips . The expressway between Shizuoka and Tokyo was closed . At least 396 schools were closed in the country , and a baseball game between the Yokohama DeNA <unk> and the Yakult Swallows was canceled due to the inclement weather . Toyota temporarily closed most of its factories in the country . Heavy rainfall , peaking at 509 mm ( 20 @.@ 0 in ) in Gifu Prefecture , fell across Japan . The rains flooded 10 @,@ 270 houses in the country , resulting in evacuation orders for about 145 @,@ 000 people . The floods damaged roads in 338 locations , and at least 10 bridges were destroyed . About 15 @,@ 000 evacuees were in <unk> after a river exceeded its banks . High rainfall caused hundreds of landslides , two of which resulted in a death . Floods killed at least three people . Winds from the typhoon peaked at 97 km / h ( 60 mph ) at Hachijō @-@ jima . High winds in Sakai , Osaka damaged 20 houses . In Tokyo , the storm produced light winds and rains , despite passing within 102 km ( 63 mi ) . Chataan destroyed 21 homes and damaged 239 others to some degree . During its passage , the typhoon destroyed 258 @.@ 6 km2 ( 99 @.@ 8 sq mi ) of crops . The typhoon killed six people , left one person missing , and injured 30 others . Overall damage in Japan totaled about $ 500 million ( ¥ 59 billion 2002 JPY ) . During the storm , Yahoo ! Japan received a record 359 million views , mostly due to people checking the website 's weather section . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After Chataan affected Chuuk state , the island 's residents were in need of food , clothes and medicine . Only a few crops were not destroyed by the storm ; much of the breadfruit was stripped from the trees , and fruit not destroyed by the storm were damaged by parasites . In the days after the storm , the local Red Cross deployed about 100 volunteers to search for victims buried by landslides . However , rescue operations were hampered by persistent flooding after the storm . Initially the death toll was unknown , and it was feared that hundreds of people had been killed . Six people who were seriously injured on Chuuk were flown to The Queen 's Medical Center in Hawaii for treatment ; they were initially scheduled to fly to Guam Memorial Hospital , but the facility was full . About 2 @,@ 000 residents affected by the storm evacuated to government @-@ run shelters . The Red Cross shipped various relief supplies , including raincoats and water , to the affected areas . By July 4 , power systems were restored and the airport reopened . Although there was enough food in the immediate aftermath , the destruction of crops and cattle posed a long @-@ term food shortage . 
 On July 3 while Chataan was passing the region , the governor of Chuuk declared a state of emergency , requesting international assistance . On July 9 , the government of Japan sent $ 87 @,@ 000 ( ¥ 10 million ) worth of supplies to Micronesia , including 1 @,@ 000 blankets and 10 electric generators . Two days later , United States President George W. Bush declared the island as a disaster area . This was six days after FSM President Leo <unk> sent the disaster declaration to the US president , although <unk> had improperly filed the paperwork . Because the FSM is in a Compact of Free Association and not a U.S. state , the Federal Emergency Management Agency ( FEMA ) could not provide immediate assistance . During the delay , a group of doctors from Guam flew to Chuuk to provide medical assistance . On July 11 , the government of Israel sent $ 5 @,@ 000 worth of medicine to the FSM . The next day , the Caritas charity in Australia sent $ 20 @,@ 000 worth of water and food . Residents from elsewhere in the FSM sent clothes and food . The Australian government sent $ 10 @,@ 000 to replenish emergency supplies , and the International Red Cross released about $ 20 @,@ 000 for immediate relief . The government of China sent $ 30 @,@ 000 worth of aid . On July 30 , FEMA announced that residents and business owners in Chuuk could apply for individual assistance , including money for housing , repairing damage , and low @-@ interest loans . The declaration would not apply to outer islands in Chuuk , which did not sustain significant damage ; this is because FEMA only had funds to restore areas to how they were before the storm . Ultimately , FEMA provided 93 @,@ 000 l ( 25 @,@ 000 US gal ) of water , 1 @,@ 300 blankets , 45 @,@ 360 km ( 100 @,@ 000 lbs ) of rice , 11 @,@ 328 meals ready to eat , and various other supplies . In total , the agency allocated $ 10 @.@ 6 million , mostly in the form of individual assistance that provided money for purchasing lost supplies . FEMA ultimately sent just under $ 5 million to Chuuk after Chataan , as well as subsequent typhoons Pongsona and Lupit ; however , about $ 445 @,@ 000 of the funding was believed to have been misspent due to discrepancies discovered in an audit in 2006 . 
 In the days after the storm , thousands of people on Guam evacuated to the 15 government shelters set up in schools across the island ; the total reached 3 @,@ 947 people on July 10 . The governor of Guam declared a state of emergency after the storm , and on July 6 President Bush declared the island a major disaster area ; this allocated federal funding to assist in removing debris and other emergency services . A week later , the declaration was extended to include individual assistance for anyone who experienced damage from the storm . The <unk> Lake reservoir experienced excess silt deposit after excessive rainfall from Chataan , which prevented water distribution from the facility ; on July 19 – fifteen days after the typhoon 's landfall – water production resumed . Before the facility reopened , the Guam Waterworks Authority distributed water to the island at differing times of the day to ration the limited supply . However , by a month after the storm , residents were still required to boil water as a precaution . About five days after Chataan struck Guam , Typhoon Halong affected the island and caused further power outages . Some areas on the island remained without power for over a week , due to electric workers restoring the main transmission lines before fixing individual lines . By July 19 , 23 % of those who lost power still were without electricity , mostly in outlying areas . By that date , trash collection was restored , and government @-@ opened shelters were closed . Later in July , flooding washed debris from Chataan and clogged two rivers . The oil spill in Apra Harbor was cleaned at three of seven affected locations by August 19 . In the months after the storm , tourism decreased further after a decline that began after the September 11 attacks . Ultimately , FEMA provided $ 73 million in assistance to the territory , including $ 10 million in housing checks to 5 @,@ 947 people and $ 6 @.@ 5 million worth of food stamps for 79 @,@ 814 people . The agency provided $ 10 million for debris removal and rebuilding public buildings . In December 2002 , Typhoon Pongsona struck Guam and caused additional flooding and damage . On August 7 , President George W. Bush also declared Rota to be a disaster area , which provided funding for debris removal . 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 Because of the storm 's death toll and damage , the name Chataan became retired and was replaced with Matmo in 2004 . Countries in the World Meteorological Organization can request tropical cyclone names to be retired if a storm caused unusually heavy damage . With PAGASA , they retired the name Gloria and was replaced with Glenda in 2005 ; the agency sought to be apolitical after Gloria Macapagal @-@ Arroyo won a disputed presidential election in 2004 . 
 = Time ( xkcd ) = 
 " Time " is the <unk> strip of Randall Munroe 's webcomic xkcd . Beginning with a single frame published at midnight on March 25 , 2013 , the image was updated every 30 minutes until March 30 , 2013 , where it was updated periodically every hour for 118 days ( 123 days in total ) , ending on July 26 with a total of 3 @,@ 099 unique images . Each image represented a single frame in a larger story , essentially making the comic a video with an extremely low frame rate . 
 Referred to by Glen Tickle of <unk> as Munroe 's " magnum opus " , " Time " attracted significant attention and was well received online , and several projects , <unk> and web communities were built about it . In 2014 , it won the Hugo Award in the Best Graphic Story category . 
 = = Plot = = 
 " Time " begins with two stick figures , a woman and a man , building a sand castle complex on a beach . The woman notes that the sea ( visible on the right side of the frame ) is rising . After construction is completed , and after temporarily stopping the sea from eroding the castle away , the two decide to go on a journey to discover the cause behind the rising sea level . As they leave , the frames slowly fade to white , with the beginning of the destruction of the construction shown . 
 The two journey out , finding a river that they were unaware of ; the couple follow the river and make observations as they go . While resting under a tree , the man finds the remains of a campsite , discovering that the area they were in has been inhabited . Later , they find another campsite and massive , oddly shaped trees with markings on one . They find a decrepit boat they could use to cross the river , but continue up into the mountains . While climbing a small hill , the man sees a snake and tumbles down on the woman . Further on , they hear chirping in a tree , and pause briefly to observe a bird and its chick in a nest . While resting at a miniature river , the woman discovers that they are on the cliff of a large waterfall . After contemplating it , they decide to discover what the mountains are like . 
 They climb up and eventually reach a small abandoned house . While there , the man is attacked by a big cat , which the woman strikes away with a piece of wood . The man is unscathed , but the woman sustains a wound to her leg which they wrap with a flag brought from when they were creating the sand castle . Deciding that traveling in search of people towards the top of the mountain , where they see a structure , would be a better medical option than heading back home , they continue towards the mountaintops . As night falls , they rest in the wild . The man takes the first guard shift , and the stars in the night sky time lapse behind him . He wakes the woman to take his turn to sleep . When he eventually wakes up , the two characters press on with the intention of turning back if they do not find people . 
 They find a small structure , and from its top the woman spots people . As they leave the structure , they think upon their sand castle , wondering its fate . The screen flashes to a scene of a lone bucket floating on a body of water , then flashes back . After a bit more traveling , the characters make contact with three androgynous people wearing headgear . The woman attempts to communicate , but the native language of the people is incomprehensible . She shows them her wound , and they treat it with a paste . The group then beckon the man and woman to follow them into town . After receiving water , the man and woman sleep . The following morning , the man communicates with one of the locals by drawing pictures in the dirt . The local informs that the sea level is , in fact , rising , and that the two characters should follow and see someone to talk to . They rest while on the way , where the man and woman look over a map from one of the locals . They continue to a city , and a castle behind it . They are led to the natives ' leader , who , speaking the language of the protagonists poorly , explains the reason for the sea rising . She reveals that her people had erected a berm to keep what she calls " the planet 's mightiest river " at bay , which is presently days away from breaking through and flooding the man and woman 's home . She explains that the journey back to reach their home to warn the others living there would take too long and that they have no choice but to remain with the mountain people . Ignoring her , the man and woman flee and run back home , taking some of the mountain people 's provisions on the way out and guiding themselves with maps that the woman had stolen . 
 Upon returning home , the two characters attempt to coordinate an escape with their fellow people . A girl appears in a boat she constructed from wood used in the sand castle from the beginning of the story ; this causes the tribe to abandon their original plans and instead attempt to float up the river . After expanding the boat , the group loads onto it and sets sail . Soon they join the remaining members of their tribe , who had been in their own smaller boat . After a night of drifting , while the others are still asleep , the man and woman spot land . When they reach it , the story ends with the man and woman , last to depart , going into the new wilderness to explore it , with the boat seen bobbing in the water . The final five frames of the comic , in which the boat is bobbing on the water , are currently rotating in an undetermined pattern for the comic on the xkcd website . 
 = = Conception and development = = 
 Munroe described his reasons for creating " Time " in an interview with Rolling Stone , where he stated that he came up with the idea as he was pondering the space between animation and a daily comic , wanting to do something " in between " . In an interview with Computer Sweden , Munroe stated that he had never seen anyone attempt such a project before and that he " wanted to see if it would work . " Munroe noted that , in some cases , " things become more interesting if they are difficult to access , " such as in books that deliberately make the story more complicated . He hoped that , as people slowly got into it , the world and language would excite readers on a deeper level . According to Munroe , nothing like " Time " had been done before because it is difficult to reach people once every hour without a tool such as the Internet . 
 Following the ending of his story , comic creator Randall Munroe explained many of the story 's details and furthered its context in an article on Wired . He noted that " Time " is set 11 @,@ 000 years in the future , in a future civilization with humanity 's present civilization long extinct . It takes place in the basin of the Mediterranean Sea , which has largely evaporated following tectonic activity shutting it off from the Atlantic Ocean . This is modeled after a similar occurrence of this incident approximately 5 million years ago — the Messinian salinity crisis . The eventual flooding crisis at the end of the story is a supposed recurrence of the <unk> flood . Munroe reportedly researched the plants and wildlife of the region and added them into the comic , offering hints as to the story 's location . According to Munroe , " I got suggestions from botanists and herpetologists , and I had a file with details on every species the characters encountered or talked about , like dwarf palms , juniper trees , horned vipers , and sand boas " . 
 In the scene where the male and female sleep in shifts , a time lapse of stars in the night sky occupies the background . This was done with the help of astronomy software to render the night sky of the characters ' location , in their specific time , accounting for projected precession of the equinoxes and stellar motion over the next 11 @,@ 000 years . The starfield lacks the star Antares , as Munroe consulted with astronomer Phil Plait , who told him that the star may go supernova before the date in which " Time " is set . 
 = = = Language = = = 
 The language ( and the script it is written in ) that Munroe gave the characters native to the mountains was created with the help of a linguist , and has as of yet not been deciphered , although the meaning of some of the words and symbols has been deduced . Munroe has not given the language a name , but fans dubbed it " Beanish " , a name that was later picked up by the media . Munroe has opened the possibility of using the language in a future comic . 
 = = Publishing = = 
 The frames of " Time " were originally updated every 30 minutes ; however , after frame 240 , the updates became hourly . After frame 2440 , five frames appeared in very quick succession , showing a meteor shooting through the sky , but the updates then returned to hourly . The technical details about the comic 's publishing were described on an independent website as follows : 
 Inside the page is a script and it uses simple Ajax to download a new image every so often . The script is <unk> and so not easy to follow , but there are a number of programmers taking the time to figure it out . The request redirects server side to a new image and it is difficult or impossible to get at the future images ( they might not have been created yet ) but if you know the links you can get the previous images . This has resulted in a number of sites putting the frames together to produce either an animated gif or a pseudo video that downloads each frame in turn . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Time " was received well online , with Cory Doctorow of Boing Boing saying it was " coming along nicely " during publishing with an " astounding backstory " upon its conclusion . Wired 's Laura Hudson called the journey " epic " , and Glen Tickle of <unk> referred to the comic as Munroe 's " magnum opus " . Tasha Robinson from The A.V. Club said of the comic , " This is slow @-@ paced entertainment for a fast @-@ paced world , but it 's also the kind of nifty experiment that keeps people coming back to <unk> , which at its best isn 't a strip comic so much as an idea factory and a shared experience . " " Time " also got mentions from The Verge writer Jeff Blagdon and Washington Post blogger Andrea Peterson . On April 19 , 2014 , the comic was announced as a nominee for a Hugo Award in the Best Graphic Story category , and won the award in August 2014 . Doctorow accepted the award on behalf of Munroe , dressing as Munroe had drawn him in an earlier strip , " 1337 : Part 5 " . 
 The comic garnered " obsessive " attention from viewers on xkcd 's forum , with a discussion thread that exceeds 2 @,@ 000 pages and 90 @,@ 000 posts . Fans created a wiki specific to " Time " , and a glossary of invented terms to describe the comic . 
 = Railway stations in Cromer = 
 The fishing port and holiday resort of Cromer in the English county of Norfolk has had a rail service since 1877 . It was served by three railway stations for many years , and is now served by two . Cromer Beach station , which opened in 1887 , was renamed Cromer following the closure of the other early stations . 
 Cromer High , on the outskirts of the town , was opened in 1877 as the terminus of the Great Eastern Railway main line from London . It was followed in 1887 by Cromer Beach station , on the rural Midland and Great Northern Joint Railway ( M & GNJR ) . Cromer Links Halt railway station , on the little @-@ used and now closed Norfolk and Suffolk Joint Railway line to North Walsham via Overstrand and Mundesley , was opened in 1923 . 
 Following a reduction in traffic caused by Cromer 's decline in popularity as a holiday destination after World War II , and the closure of many Norfolk railway lines in the 1950s , a decision was made to concentrate all passenger traffic into a single station . Although Cromer High had far better facilities , it was inconveniently situated on the edge of the town . Therefore , all passenger services were diverted into Cromer Beach ( renamed Cromer ) and the other stations closed . Following growth of the town as a commuter town to Norwich , a new station called Roughton Road opened in 1985 , near the site of the former Cromer High . 
 = = Cromer railway station = = 
 Because the Midland and Great Northern Joint Railway ( M & GNJR ) line approached Cromer from the west , following the coastal clifftops , it avoided the steep escarpment which had prevented the earlier line from Norwich running all the way into the town . Consequently , it became possible to build a far more conveniently located station , near to the town centre and the beach . The station opened as Cromer Beach on 16 June 1887 and was renamed Cromer on 20 October 1969 , following the closure of Cromer High station in 1954 . 
 = = = Buildings = = = 
 To cater to the heavy leisure traffic at the end of the 19th century , Cromer Beach had a large station building in a half @-@ timbered style , and a large goods yard . The station originally included a bar , which was closed in 1966 . Following the introduction of conductor @-@ guard working , the ticket facilities were no longer needed and the building fell into disuse ; it was renovated and reopened as a public house in 1998 . A large supermarket was built on the site of the goods yards in 1991 . 
 Cromer is one of only two former M & GNJR stations to remain operational on Network Rail , the other being the neighbouring West <unk> . 
 = = = Services = = = 
 The station is currently served only by local services operated by ' Abellio Greater Anglia ' on the Bittern Line from Norwich to Sheringham . 
 There is generally an hourly service to Sheringham ( 8 minutes ) and to Norwich ( 55 minutes ) , with more frequent services during the morning and evening peak travel times . On Sundays , trains run every two hours to Sheringham and Norwich . In 1997 a single daily through train to and from London Liverpool Street to Sheringham via Cromer was introduced ; it was not heavily used and the service was consequently discontinued . All of these services are run by diesel multiple units Class 153 , 156 or occasionally 170 . 
 Because of its historical position as the terminus of the line from Melton Constable and Sheringham to the west , trains running via Cromer reverse direction on leaving the station . 
 The following services currently call at Cromer : 
 = = Former stations = = 
 = = = Cromer High railway station = = = 
 Cromer High railway station was the first station opened in Cromer , situated to the south on the outskirts of the town on a steep escarpment . Built initially by the short @-@ lived East Norfolk Railway , the station ( along with the line ) was incorporated into the Great Eastern Railway , who had operated the services from the beginning . It served as the terminus of Great Eastern Railway services from London and Norwich . Initially named Cromer on opening , it was renamed Cromer High on 27 September 1948 . 
 The station opened on 26 March 1877 . Because of steep gradients near the town , the station was built in open fields some distance from the town itself . The station resembled in design Chingford railway station , opened in 1878 , another GER branch line terminus . 
 = = = = Closure = = = = 
 On 23 July 1906 a connection was opened between the line to Cromer High and the Midland and Great Northern Joint Railway line between Melton Constable and Cromer Beach stations , allowing through trains from Norwich to run to Cromer Beach . As Cromer Beach was far more conveniently sited in the centre of the town , passenger numbers using Cromer High dropped substantially , although it remained in heavy usage as a freight depot . On 20 September 1954 passenger services ceased at Cromer High , with all traffic diverted to Cromer Beach ( renamed " Cromer " in 1969 ) . The station remained open as a freight terminus until 7 March 1960 , but was then closed completely and the station demolished . Despite the loss of passenger revenue , the bar attached to the station did not close until 1957 . Part of the station site has been redeveloped for housing , but much remains undeveloped ; although derelict and overgrown , the former station approach road is also still present . North Norfolk Council is considering converting the station into a site for the use of Travellers . 
 Cromer High station was situated a short distance away from the Cromer Tunnel , Norfolk 's only standard gauge railway tunnel , connecting the Sheringham and Mundesley lines . Although disused since services ceased in 1953 , the tunnel remains intact . 
 = = = Cromer Links Halt railway station = = = 
 Cromer Links Halt ( located at <unk> ) was a railway station on the outskirts of Cromer . It was on the now disused Norfolk and Suffolk Joint Railway line between Roughton Road Junction and Overstrand station . It opened on 9 July 1923 , only to close thirty years later on 7 April 1953 . 
 = = = = History = = = = 
 Opened as part of an attempt to encourage holiday traffic on the line , the halt primarily served golfers at the nearby Royal Cromer Golf Club . The station facilities were very basic , consisting of no more than a single wooden platform , which cost £ 170 to build , two wooden benches and running in board together with the obligatory oil lamps . No shelter was provided for passengers and the platform was constructed of sleepers and supported by wooden trestles . 
 The halt was approached from the road by a path leading up the embankment on which the railway ran . To the west , a bridge carried the line over <unk> Road from where it proceeded on another embankment before reaching Cromer Tunnel which was built by the Norfolk and Suffolk Joint Railway to take the line under the Great Eastern 's Cromer High to Norwich route . Although only 61 yards long , the tunnel is notable as being one of only two standard gauge tunnels anywhere in Norfolk , the other being Barsham Tunnel on the Wells @-@ on @-@ Sea branch . However , as Barsham Tunnel was opened out before 1912 , Cromer Tunnel is actually the only tunnel . 
 The line was served in general by around half a dozen trains each way between North Walsham , Mundesley and Cromer Beach . However , with no direct service to Norwich - the nearest city - the halt was little @-@ used , and closed in 1953 as part of a package of early rationalisation measures undertaken by British Railways after nationalisation , which also involved the closure of the line from Roughton Road Junction to Mundesley . The coastal line , although highly picturesque , carried little traffic and its closure made sound economic sense to British Railways . 
 = = = = Present day = = = = 
 Due to its wooden construction , virtually no trace of Cromer Links Halt has survived other than the gate to the approach path up the embankment , the rotting remains of which were said to be entangled in the undergrowth at the site of the station . 
 = = Roughton Road railway station = = 
 Roughton Road was opened on 20 May 1985 , to serve the new housing developments in the area . It is on the southern edge of Cromer , near the junction for the disused Cromer Tunnel leading to the former Norfolk and Suffolk Joint Railway line , about 200 yards ( 183 m ) from the site of the former Cromer High station . 
 = Cyclone Kamisy = 
 Cyclone Kamisy was considered the worst tropical cyclone to affect northern Madagascar since 1911 . A tropical disturbance formed near Diego Garcia on April 3 , 1984 and subsequently moved westward , intensifying into a moderate tropical storm two days later . Given the name Kamisy , the storm gradually intensified into an intense tropical cyclone by April 9 . Kamisy reached winds of 170 km / h ( 105 mph ) before making landfall in extreme northern Madagascar near Diego Suarez . It weakened upon entering the Mozambique Channel , but briefly re @-@ intensified on April 10 . That day while passing near Mayotte , the cyclone turned to the southeast , striking Madagascar again near Majunga . Kamisy quickly crossed the country . After emerging into the Indian Ocean off the east coast of Madagascar , the system reintensified into a moderate tropical storm before dissipating on April 16 . 
 In northern Madagascar , Kamisy produced wind gusts of 250 km / h ( 155 mph ) , which destroyed 80 % of the city of Diego Suarez . About 39 @,@ 000 people were left homeless in the area , and there were five deaths . In western Madagascar , the cyclone dropped 232 @.@ 2 mm ( 9 @.@ 14 in ) of rainfall in 24 hours in Majunga , which damaged rice fields in the region after causing widespread river flooding . Additionally , the storm destroyed about 80 % of Majunga . Throughout the country , Kamisy caused $ 250 million in damage and 68 deaths , with 215 people injured and 100 @,@ 000 left homeless . Fifteen people were killed and 30 others were injured in Mahajanga . Following the storm , emergency food and medical supplies were rushed into the nation . In addition to the impact to Madagascar , one death and severe damage was reported in the Comoros Islands , where all of the banana crop was destroyed . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Cyclone Kamisy originated from an area of convection that formed in early April . On April 3 , the system was assigned a Dvorak rating of <unk> and was respectively upgraded into a moderate tropical storm by the Météo @-@ France office on Reunion ( MFR ) . However , the storm was not classified by the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) until that evening . The storm initially tracked west @-@ southwest , but after briefly weakening into a tropical depression , Kamisy began to turn west . On April 5 , the storm was upgraded into a moderate tropical storm for the second time ; the JTWC followed suit and upgraded Kamisy into a tropical storm several hours later while located about 1 @,@ 000 km ( 620 mi ) west of Diego Garcia . 
 Kamisy steadily intensified and on April 6 , the JTWC reported that it attained hurricane @-@ force winds despite MFR estimating winds of 80 km / h ( 50 mph ) . Early on April 7 , however , Kamisy was upgraded into a severe tropical storm as it had earned a rating of <unk> on the Dvorak scale . Thereafter , the storm began to undergo rapid deepening . Later that day , the JTWC announced that Kamisy attained winds of 170 km / h ( 105 mph ) , equivalent to a mid @-@ level Category 2 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Wind Scale . Meanwhile , MFR upgraded the system into cyclone intensity . After briefly leveling off in intensity , the storm attained peak intensity of 170 km / h ( 105 mph ) later that day . Early on April 8 , the JTWC estimated that it reached its peak intensity of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) . Around this time , Kamisy was assigned a <unk> rating via the Dvorak technique . 
 After maintaining peak intensity for less than a day , it weakened slightly . On April 9 , the storm brushed the northern Madagascar coast as a severe tropical storm , though the JTWC suggested that <unk> was considerably stronger . However , the afternoon to storm emerged into the extreme northern Mozambique Channel , where it passed near Mayotte , with little change in strength . After sharply turning south @-@ southwest , Kamisy briefly regained tropical cyclone intensity , but resumed weakening as it approached the coast . While still a moderate tropical storm , it made landfall along the north @-@ central part of the nation on April 12 , near <unk> . At the time of landfall , the JTWC noted that Kamisy was a minimal hurricane . The storm quickly weakened overland and was a tropical depression by the time it had emerged into the Indian Ocean . Shortly thereafter , the storm restrengthened into a moderate tropical storm , but this trend was short @-@ lived . The JTWC downgraded Kamisy into a tropical depression at 0600 UTC on April 14 . The agency issued the last warning on the system the following day , even though MFR kept tracking the system until the morning hours of April 16 . At this time , Kamisy was located about 500 mi ( 805 km ) southwest of the southern tip of Madagascar . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = Madagascar = = = 
 Throughout Madagascar , a total of 68 casualties were reported and 100 @,@ 000 people were left homeless . Damage totaled to more than $ 250 million ( 1984 USD ) . Kamisy was considered the worst system to strike Madagascar since 1911 . According to Relief Web , 7 @,@ 000 buildings were at least partially destroyed , including 1 @,@ 020 schools and 450 hospitals . Approximately 215 people were injured due to the storm . Overall , Kamisy was the strongest storm to hit the nation between 1980 and 1993 . 
 In Diego Suarez , the storm caused significant damage , especially in residential areas . Warehouses , schools , and other public buildings suffered extensive damage . Throughout the city , 80 % of the buildings were damaged and the town was 85 % destroyed . Electrical and water supplies were cut in Diego Suarez . Nearby , in <unk> , a leprosarium , which housed 200 patients and their families , was damaged . The small village of <unk> was forced to move inland 100 m ( 330 ft ) . In Tamatave , a daily peak rainfall total of 294 mm ( 11 @.@ 6 in ) was measured , and 711 mm ( 28 @.@ 0 in ) fell in a six @-@ day period . Due to the rainfall , 70 % of the town 's population moved to high ground . In Antsiranana , 30 @,@ 000 of the 40 @,@ 000 inhabitants were left homeless and were left with little food or water . Throughout northern Madagascar , about 39 @,@ 000 people were left homeless in the area ; there were five deaths . 
 After making its second landfall , 80 % of the port of Mahajanga was destroyed , where 42 @,@ 120 people were reportedly homeless . Many neighborhoods of the town , whose population was 45 @,@ 000 , were completed washed away . Many rice fields in the region were destroyed due to widespread river flooding . In Mahajanga alone , 15 people were killed while 30 others were majorly hurt . Several schools throughout the city were destroyed . Winds greater than 112 mph ( 180 km / h ) were reported in <unk> as well . Elsewhere , the town of <unk> was also mostly destroyed . 
 = = = Elsewhere = = = 
 After making its first landfall , the storm struck Mayotte , in the Comoros island group , where severe damage was recorded . One death was also reported . Dozens of others were severely hurt . Around 25 @,@ 000 people were displaced . All of the banana and rice crop were destroyed by the storm in both Comoros and Seychelles . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Following the storm , emergency food and medical supplies were rushed into the nation . Due to Madagascar 's small budget , it did not have the resources to repair all the damage alone . Two French rescue mission , including one from Reunion , provided victims with food and medical assistance to Madagascar and Mayotte . Furthermore , the Malagasy Red Cross launched an appeal for blankets , clothes , tents , and medicine . The United States provided $ 25 @,@ 000 in cash and $ 15 @,@ 000 worth of other items . Moreover , Italy donated $ 41 @,@ 500 to Madagascar . Netherlands provided $ 65 @,@ 000 worth of supplies while the nations ' the League of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies decided to send a disaster team to the devastated area . The United Kingdom provided $ 74 @,@ 000 is cash ; France provided 2 @.@ 2 short tons ( 2 @.@ 0 t ) of medicine , 500 short tons ( 450 t ) , and 4 tents . The government asked for 60 @,@ 000 short tons ( 54 @,@ 000 t ) of rice , 5 @,@ 000 short tons ( 4 @,@ 500 t ) of flour , 200 short tons ( 180 t ) of edible oil , and 20 short tons ( 18 t ) of milk and canned food . Aside from food items , they also asked for 20 @,@ 000 short tons ( 18 @,@ 000 t ) of cement and 50 @,@ 000 packages of iron sheets . Additionally , the head of Minister of State , Foreign and Commonwealth Office intended to focus on the reconstruction of bridges and roads . A private consulting company was later hired to conduct a post @-@ storm assessment ; a training program was subsequently launched , which had a budget of $ 3 @.@ 5 million . The training program lasted until the 1985 – 86 South @-@ West Indian Ocean cyclone season , when Cyclone Honorinina devastated the nation . 
 Sailors from the US Navy 's warship USS Hector , were diverted to assist in the relief effort in Diego @-@ Suarez , between April 23 and May 1 , 1984 . The warship was the first American naval vessel to visit the port after Madagascar ’ s Government banned the superpowers including France and the United States from using it during the 1970s and were awarded two Humanitarian Service Medals . Amongst other assistance provided they restored the roof and power to the ports hospital and repaired the leprosarium at <unk> , near Diego @-@ Suarez . Two French naval vessels also supplied brought food , medicine and other emergency supplies to help with the aftermath of the cyclone . 
 = Agaricus bernardii = 
 Agaricus bernardii , commonly called the salt @-@ loving mushroom , is an agaric fungus in the family Agaricaceae . A short , squat mushroom , the thick stem is usually less than the diameter of the cap , which ranges from 5 – 15 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 – 5 @.@ 9 in ) . Found in Asia , Europe , North America , and New Zealand , it is a salt @-@ tolerant species that grows in salt marshes , dunes , and coastal grassland . The fungus produces fruit bodies ( mushrooms ) with convex to flattened caps up to 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) in diameter , atop thick stems up to 10 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) long . The cap surface is whitish to buff , and can develop scales or warts in age . Gills are initially pink before turning brown when the spores mature . The flesh turns reddish when it is cut or bruised . The mushroom somewhat resembles Agaricus bitorquis but it differs from that species by the reddish @-@ brown staining of cap and stem tissue , the nature of the ring on the stem , as well as its briny odor . An edible mushroom , it is stronger in flavor but similar to the store @-@ bought button mushrooms , Agaricus bisporus . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The species was first described by French mycologist Lucien Quélet as <unk> <unk> in 1879 , based on collections made in La Rochelle , a seaport on the Bay of Biscay ( France ) . Pier Andrea Saccardo transferred it to Agaricus in 1887 . Synonyms include <unk> bernardii , <unk> bernardii , Fungus bernardii , and Agaricus campestris subsp. bernardii . 
 The infrageneric ( below genus @-@ level ) classification of A. bernardii is not known with certainty . In his 1978 proposed classification , Paul Heinemann placed it in the subsection <unk> of the section Agaricus . Although the species has some similarities with species in the section <unk> based on the structure of its veil and its tendencies towards <unk> ( developing a red coloration ) , molecular analysis shows that it does not belong in this section . An earlier ( 1999 ) analysis suggested that it is closely related to the " Agaricus clade " , which contains A. <unk> , A. <unk> , A. bisporus , A. <unk> , A. bitorquis , and A. impudicus . In 1986 , Henri Romagnesi placed it in section <unk> ; Solomon Wasser demoted this to a subsection of <unk> in 1995 , and later provided molecular support for his decision . In addition to A. bernardii , species in Wasser 's concept of subsection <unk> include A. <unk> , A. <unk> , A. <unk> , A. <unk> , and A. <unk> . 
 The species was named after the original collector , G. Bernard . Agaricus bernardii is commonly known as the salt @-@ loving mushroom . 
 = = Description = = 
 Fruit bodies of Agaricus bernardii have caps that range in shape from convex to flattened , and reach a diameter of 5 – 15 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 – 5 @.@ 9 in ) . The cap surface is dry and smooth , with a white or buff color that can develop brownish spots in maturity . In age , the surface often forms scales or warts . The flesh is thick , firm , and stains reddish @-@ orange or reddish @-@ brown when cut , although this reaction can be slow to develop . Its odor ranges from mild to briny to pungent . The gills are free from attachment to the stem , and packed close together . Initially grayish @-@ pink to pinkish , they turn reddish @-@ brown and then chocolate brown as the spores mature . The stem is solid ( i.e. , not hollow ) , firm , and measures 4 – 10 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 – 3 @.@ 9 in ) long by 2 – 4 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 – 1 @.@ 6 in ) thick . A thick , white , rubbery partial veil covers the gills of the immature mushroom , and eventually remains as a ring on the middle of the stem . 
 Although the mushrooms sometimes have an odor that is briny or pungent ( " though not inappropriate " ) , they are edible and good . David Arora compares its taste to that of the closely related Agaricus bitorquis , " but a little chewier and sometimes with a slightly salty or briny taste . " 
 Agaricus bernardii mushrooms produce a dark brown spore print . The spores are smooth , broadly elliptical , and have dimensions of 6 – 7 @.@ 5 by 5 – 6 μm . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are four @-@ spored and club @-@ shaped , measuring 14 – 25 by 4 – 7 μm ; the sterigmata are 4 – 5 μm . Cheilocystidia ( cystidia on the gill edge ) are broadly club @-@ shaped to cylindrical , hyaline ( translucent ) , and measure 17 – 30 by 4 – 8 μm . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Agaricus bitorquis , also edible , has a similar appearance , but can be distinguished by its double ring , and the lack of a fishy or briny odor . Additionally , A. bitorquis does not stain reddish when cut , and usually does not have a scaly or warty cap . The Hungarian species A. <unk> , named for its similarity to A. bernardii , is distinguished from the latter by its smaller spores ( 6 @.@ 2 – 8 @.@ 2 by 5 @.@ 4 – 6 @.@ 2 μm ) and its club @-@ shaped cheilocystidia that measure 17 – 35 by 7 – 9 @.@ 5 μm . MycoBank , however , considers the two species to be conspecific . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Agaricus bernardii is a saprobic species . Its mushrooms fruit singly , scattered , or in groups on the ground . They grow in sandy soils , lawns , and in habitats with a high salt concentration , like along ocean coasts and salt marshes . Once primarily a maritime species , the fungus has spread inland to roadside verges where salt has been applied to de @-@ ice the roads . Fruit bodies sometimes form underground . Mushrooms can also grow in fairy rings , especially when in grasslands or pastures . A Czech study determined that the mushrooms will strongly bioaccumulate silver from contaminated soil . Although the average concentration of silver in the soil is typically less than 1 milligram per kilogram of soil , it can be significantly elevated near industrial sites such as mines and smelters . The concentration of silver in the caps — which reached levels of up to 544 mg per kg of mushroom tissue ( dry weight ) — was about twice that of the stems . 
 The species is found in Asia , Europe , North America ( including Mexico ) and New Zealand . 
 = Abraham Goldfaden = 
 Abraham Goldfaden Yiddish : <unk> <unk> ; ( born <unk> <unk> ; the Romanian spelling Avram Goldfaden is common ; 24 July 1840 in Starokostiantyniv – 9 January 1908 in New York City ) was a Russian @-@ born Jewish poet , playwright , stage director and actor in the languages Yiddish and Hebrew , author of some 40 plays . Goldfaden is considered the father of the Jewish modern theatre . 
 In 1876 he founded in Romania what is generally credited as the world 's first professional Yiddish @-@ language theater troupe . He was also responsible for the first Hebrew @-@ language play performed in the United States . The Avram Goldfaden Festival of Iaşi , Romania , is named and held in his honour . 
 Jacob Sternberg called him " the Prince Charming who woke up the lethargic Romanian Jewish culture . " <unk> Bercovici wrote of his works : " we find points in common with what we now call ' total theater ' . In many of his plays he alternates prose and verse , pantomime and dance , moments of acrobatics and some of <unk> , and even of spiritualism ... " 
 = = Early life = = 
 Goldfaden was born in <unk> ( Russia ; present day Ukraine ) . His birthdate is sometimes given as July 12 , following the " Old Style " calendar in use at that time in the Russian Empire . He attended a Jewish religious school ( a <unk> ) , but his middle @-@ class family was strongly associated with the Haskalah , the " Jewish Enlightenment , " and his father , a watchmaker , arranged that he receive private lessons in German and Russian . As a child , he is said to have appreciated and imitated the performances of wedding jesters and Brody singers to the degree that he acquired the nickname <unk> <unk> , " Abie the Jester . " In 1857 he began studies at the government @-@ run rabbinical school at Zhytomyr , from which he emerged in 1866 as a teacher and a poet ( with some experience in amateur theater ) , but he never led a congregation . 
 Goldfaden 's first published poem was called " Progress " ; his New York Times obituary described it as " a plea for Zionism years before that movement developed . " In 1865 he published his first book of poetry , <unk> u @-@ <unk> ( in Hebrew ) ; The Jewish Encyclopedia ( 1901 – 1906 ) says that " Goldfaden 's Hebrew poetry ... possesses considerable merit , but it has been eclipsed by his Yiddish poetry , which , for strength of expression and for depth of true Jewish feeling , remains unrivaled . " The first book of verse in Yiddish was published in 1866 , and in 1867 he took a job teaching in Simferopol . A year later , he moved on to Odessa ( in Ukraine ) , where he lived initially in his uncle 's house , where a cousin who was a good pianist helped him set some of his poems to music . 
 In Odessa , Goldfaden renewed his acquaintance with fellow Yiddish @-@ language writer <unk> Yoel <unk> , whom he knew from Zhytomyr and met Hebrew @-@ language poet <unk> Mordechai <unk> ( whose daughter Paulina would become Goldfaden 's wife ) and published poems in the newspaper Kol @-@ <unk> . He also wrote his first two plays , Die <unk> <unk> ( The Two Neighbors ) and Die <unk> <unk> ( Aunt Susie ) , included with some verses in a modestly successful 1869 book Die <unk> ( The Jewish Woman ) , which went through three editions in three years . At this time , he and Paulina were living mainly on his meagre teacher 's salary of 18 rubles a year , supplemented by giving private lessons and taking a job as a cashier in a hat shop . 
 In 1875 , Goldfaden headed for Munich , intending to study medicine . This did not work out , and he headed for Lvov / Lemberg in Galicia , where he again met up with <unk> , now editor of a weekly paper , <unk> or Der Alter <unk> ( which was well reputed , but was soon shut by the government ) . A year later , he moved on to <unk> in Bukovina , where he edited the Yiddish @-@ language daily Dos <unk> <unk> <unk> . The limits of the economic sense of this enterprise can be gauged from his inability to pay a registration fee of 3000 ducats . He tried unsuccessfully to operate the paper under a different name , but soon moved on to Iaşi on the invitation of Isaac Librescu ( 1850 – 1930 ) , a young wealthy <unk> activist interested in theatre . 
 = = Iaşi = = 
 Arriving in Iaşi ( Jassy ) in 1876 , Goldfaden was fortunate to be better known as a good poet — many of whose poems had been set to music and had become popular songs — than as a less @-@ than @-@ successful businessman . Nevertheless , when he sought funds from Isaac Librescu for another newspaper , Librescu was uninterested in that proposition . Librescu 's wife remarked that Yiddish @-@ language journalism was just a way to starve ; she suggested that there would be a lot more of a market for Yiddish @-@ language theater . Librescu offered Goldfaden 100 francs for a public recital of his songs in the garden of <unk> Mark , <unk> Pomul Verde ( " the Green Fruit @-@ Tree Garden " ) . 
 Instead of a simple recital , Goldfaden expanded the program into something of a vaudeville performance ; either this or an indoor performance he and his fellow performers gave later that year in Botoşani is generally counted as the first professional Yiddish theatre performance . However , in the circumstances , the designation of a single performance as " the first " may be nominal : Goldfaden 's first actor , Israel Grodner , was already singing Goldfaden 's songs ( and others ) in the salons of Iaşi ; also , in 1873 , Grodner sang in a concert in Odessa ( songs by Goldfaden , among others ) that apparently included significant improvised material between songs , although no actual script . 
 Although Goldfaden , by his own account , was familiar at this time with " practically all of Russian literature , " had plenty of exposure to Russian and Polish theater , and had even seen an African American tragedian , Ira Aldrich , performing Shakespeare , the performance at <unk> Pomul Verde was only a bit more of a play than Grodner had participated in three years earlier . The songs were strung together with a bit of character and plot and a good bit of improvisation . The performance by Goldfaden , Grodner , <unk> Goldstein , and possibly as many as three other men went over well . The first performance was either Di <unk> mitn <unk> ( Grandmother and Granddaughter ) or Dos <unk> <unk> ( The Bundle of sticks ) ; sources disagree . ( Some reports suggest that Goldfaden himself was a poor singer , or even a non @-@ singer and poor actor ; according to Bercovici , these reports stem from Goldfaden 's own self @-@ disparaging remarks or from his countenance as an old man in New York , but contemporary reports show him to have been a decent , though not earth @-@ shattering , actor and singer . ) 
 After that time , Goldfaden continued miscellaneous newspaper work , but the stage became his main focus . 
 As it happens , the famous Romanian poet Mihai Eminescu , then journalist , saw one of their Pomul Verde performances later that summer . He records in his review that the company had six players . ( A 1905 typographical error would turn this to a much @-@ cited sixteen , suggesting a grander beginning for Yiddish theater . ) He was impressed by the quality of the singing and acting , but found the pieces " without much dramatic interest . " [ Bercovici , 1998 , 58 ] His generally positive comments would seem to deserve to be taken seriously : Eminescu was known generally as " virulently antisemitic . " Eminescu appears to have seen four of Goldfaden 's early plays : a satiric musical revue Di velt a gan @-@ edn ( The World and Paradise ) , Der <unk> <unk> un der <unk> <unk> ( a dialogue between " an infatuated philosopher " and " an enlightened Hasid " ) , another musical revue Der <unk> mitn <unk> ( Father @-@ in @-@ law and Son @-@ in @-@ Law ) , and a comedy <unk> der <unk> un <unk> <unk> Sider ( Fishel the <unk> and His Servant Sider ) . 
 = = Searching for a theater = = 
 As the season for outdoor performances was coming to a close , Goldfaden tried and failed to rent an appropriate theater in Iaşi . A theater owner named Reicher , presumably Jewish himself , told him that " a troupe of Jewish singers " would be " too dirty . " Goldfaden , Grodner , and Goldstein headed first to Botoşani , where they lived in a garret and Goldfaden continued to churn out songs and plays . An initial successful performance of Di Rekruten ( The Recruits ) in an indoor theater ( " with loges ! " as Goldfaden wrote ) was followed by days of rain so torrential that no one would come out to the theater ; they pawned some possessions and left for Galaţi , which was to prove a bit more auspicious , with a successful three @-@ week run . 
 In Galaţi they acquired their first serious set designer , a <unk> known as Reb Moishe Bas . He had no formal artistic training , but he proved to be good at the job , and joined the troupe , as did Sara Segal , their first actress . She was not yet out of her teens . After seeing her perform in their Galaţi premiere , her mother objected to her unmarried daughter cavorting on a stage like that . Goldstein – who , unlike Goldfaden and Grodner , was single – promptly married her and she remained with the troupe . ( Besides being known as Sara Segal and Sofia Goldstein , she became best known as Sofia Karp , after a second marriage to actor Max Karp . ) 
 After the successful run in Galaţi came a less successful attempt in Brăila , but by now the company had honed its act and it was time to go to the capital , Bucharest . 
 = = Bucharest = = 
 As in Iaşi , Goldfaden arrived in Bucharest with his reputation already established . He and his players performed first in the early spring at the salon Lazăr <unk> on Calea <unk> ( <unk> Avenue , in the heart of the ghetto ) , then , once the weather turned warm , at the Jigniţa garden , a pleasant tree @-@ shaded beer garden on <unk> . Negru Vodă that up until then had drawn only a neighborhood crowd . He filled out his cast from the great pool of Jewish vocal talent : synagogue cantors . He also recruited two eminently respectable classically trained prima donnas , the sisters Margaretta and <unk> Schwartz . 
 Among the cantors in his casts that year were Lazăr Zuckermann ( also known as <unk> Zuckerman ; as a song @-@ and @-@ dance man , he would eventually follow Goldfaden to New York and have a long stage career ) , Moishe <unk> ( also known as Silberman ) , and <unk> <unk> , as well as the 18 @-@ year @-@ old <unk> Mogulescu ( Sigmund Mogulesko ) , who soon became a stage star . Orphaned by his teen years , Mogulescu had already made his way in the world as a singer – not only as a soloist in the Great Synagogue of Bucharest but also as a performer in cafes , at parties , with a visiting French operetta company , and even in a church choir . Before his voice changed , he had sung with Zuckerman , <unk> , and Moses Wald in the " Israelite Chorus , " performing at important ceremonies in the Jewish community . Mogulescu 's audition for Goldfaden was a scene from <unk> <unk> ( Mama 's Boy ) , which formed the basis later that year for Goldfaden 's light comedy <unk> , oder Die <unk> <unk> ( Shmendrik or The Comical Wedding ) , starring Mogulescu as the almost painfully clueless and hapless young man ( a role later famously played in New York and elsewhere by actress Molly <unk> ) . 
 This recruiting of cantors was not without controversy : Cantor Cuper ( also known as Kupfer ) , the head cantor of the Great Synagogue , considered it " impious " that cantors should perform in a secular setting , to crowds where both sexes mingled freely , keeping people up late so that they might not be on time for morning prayers . 
 While one may argue over which performance " started " Yiddish theater , by the end of that summer in Bucharest Yiddish theater was an established fact . The influx of Jewish merchants and middlemen to the city at the start of the Russo @-@ Turkish War had greatly expanded the audience ; among these new arrivals were Israel Rosenberg and Jacob Spivakovsky , the highly cultured scion of a wealthy Russian Jewish family , both of whom actually joined Goldfaden 's troupe , but soon left to found the first Yiddish theater troupe in Imperial Russia . 
 Goldfaden was churning out a repertoire – new songs , new plays , and translations of plays from Romanian , French , and other languages ( in the first two years , he wrote 22 plays , and would eventually write about 40 ) – and while he was not always able to retain the players in his company once they became stars in their own right , he continued for many years to recruit first @-@ rate talent , and his company became a de facto training ground for Yiddish theater . By the end of the year , others were writing Yiddish plays as well , such as Moses Horowitz with Der <unk> <unk> ( The <unk> Banker ) , or Grodner with Curve un <unk> ( Prostitute and Thief ) , and Yiddish theater had become big theater , with elaborate sets , duelling choruses , and extras to fill out crowd scenes . 
 Goldfaden was helped by Ion Ghica , then head of the Romanian National Theater to legally establish a " dramatic society " to handle administrative matters . From those papers , we know that the troupe at the Jigniţa included Moris Teich , Michel <unk> ( Glückman ) , Lazăr Zuckermann , Margareta Schwartz , Sofia <unk> , Aba Goldstein , and Clara Goldstein . We also know from similar papers that when Grodner and Mogulescu walked out on Goldfaden to start their own company , it included ( besides themselves ) Israel Rosenberg , Jacob Spivakovsky , P. <unk> , M. <unk> , <unk> Grodner , and Rosa Friedman . 
 Ion Ghica was a valuable ally for Yiddish theater in Bucharest . On several occasions he expressed his favorable view of the quality of acting , and even more of the technical aspects of the Yiddish theater . In 1881 , he obtained for the National Theater the costumes that had been used for a Yiddish pageant on the coronation of King Solomon , which had been timed in tribute to the actual coronation of Carol I of Romania . 
 = = Turning serious = = 
 While light comedy and satire might have established Yiddish theater as a commercially successful medium , it was Goldfaden 's higher aspirations for it that eventually earned him recognition as " the Yiddish Shakespeare . " As a man broadly read in several languages , he was acutely aware that there was no Eastern European Jewish tradition of dramatic literature – that his audience was used to seeking just " a good glass of <unk> and a song . " Years later , he would paraphrase the typical Yiddish <unk> of the time as saying to him : " We don 't go to the theater to make our head swim with sad things . We have enough troubles at home ... We go to the theater to cheer ourselves up . We pay up a coin and hope to be distracted , we want to laugh from the heart . " 
 Goldfaden wrote that this attitude put him " pure and simply at war with the public . " His stage was not to be merely " a masquerade " ; he continued : " No , brothers . If I have arrived at having a stage , I want it to be a school for you . In youth you didn 't have time to learn and cultivate yourself ... Laugh heartily if I amuse you with my jokes , while I , watching you , feel my heart crying . Then , brothers , I 'll give you a drama , a tragedy drawn from life , and you , too , shall cry – while my heart shall be glad . " Nonetheless , his " war with the public " was based on understanding that public . He would also write , " I wrote Di <unk> ( The Witch ) in Romania , where the populace – Jews as much as Romanians – believe strongly in witches . " Local superstitions and concerns always made good subject matter , and , as Bercovici remarks , however strong his inspirational and didactic intent , his historical pieces were always connected to contemporary concerns . 
 Even in the first couple of years of his company , Goldfaden did not shy away from serious themes : his rained @-@ out vaudeville in Botoşani had been Di Rekruten ( The Recruits ) , playing with the theme of the press gangs working the streets of that town to conscript young men into the army . Before the end of 1876 , Goldfaden had already translated Desolate Island by August von Kotzebue ; thus , a play by a German aristocrat and Russian spy became the first non @-@ comic play performed professionally in Yiddish . After his initial burst of mostly <unk> and light comedies ( although Shmendrik and The Two Kuni @-@ <unk> were reasonably sophisticated plays ) , Goldfaden would go on to write many serious Yiddish @-@ language plays on Jewish themes , perhaps the most famous being Shulamith , also from 1880 . Goldfaden himself suggested that this increasingly serious turn became possible because he had educated his audience . Nahma <unk> suggests that it may have had equally as much to do with the arrival in Romania , at the time of the Russo @-@ Turkish War , of Russian Jews who had been exposed to more sophisticated Russian language theater . Goldfaden 's strong turn toward almost uniformly serious subject matter roughly coincided with bringing his troupe to Odessa . 
 Goldfaden was both a theoretician and a practitioner of theater . That he was in no small measure a theoretician – for example , he was interested almost from the start in having set design seriously support the themes of his plays – relates to a key property of Yiddish theater at the time of its birth : in general , writes Bercovici , theory ran ahead of practice . Much of the Jewish community , Goldfaden included , were already familiar with contemporary theater in other languages . The initial itinerary of Goldfaden 's company – Iaşi , Botoşani , Galaţi , Brăila , Bucharest – could as easily have been the itinerary of a Romanian @-@ language troupe . Yiddish theater may have been seen from the outset as an expression of a Jewish national character , but the theatrical values of Goldfaden 's company were in many ways those of a good Romanian theater of the time . Also , Yiddish was a German dialect which became a well @-@ known language even among non @-@ Jews in Moldavia ( and Transylvania ) , an important language of commerce ; the fact that one of the first to write about Yiddish theater was Romania 's national poet , Mihai Eminescu , is testimony that interest in Yiddish theater went beyond the Jewish community . 
 Almost from the first , Yiddish theater drew a level of theater criticism comparable to any other European theater of its time . For example , Bercovici cites a " brochure " by one G. <unk> , published in 1877 , that described and gave critiques of all of Goldfaden 's plays of that year . <unk> speculated that the present day might be for Yiddish theater a moment comparable to the Elizabethan era for English theater . He discussed what a Yiddish theater ought to be , noted its many sources ( ranging from Purim plays to circus pantomime ) , and praised its incorporation of strong female roles . He also criticized where he saw weaknesses , noting how unconvincingly a male actor played the mother in Shmendrik , or remarking of the play Di <unk> kale ( The Mute Bride ) — a work that Goldfaden apparently wrote to accommodate a pretty , young actress who in the performance was too nervous to deliver her lines — that the only evidence of Goldfaden 's authorship was his name . 
 = = Russia = = 
 Goldfaden 's father wrote him to solicit the troupe to come to Odessa in Ukraine , which was then part of Imperial Russia . The timing was opportune : the end of the war meant that much of his best audience were now in Odessa rather than Bucharest ; Rosenberg had already quit Goldfaden 's troupe and was performing the <unk> repertoire in Odessa . 
 With a loan from Librescu , Goldfaden headed east with a group of 42 people , including performers , musicians , and their families . After the end of the Russo @-@ Turkish War he and his troupe travelled extensively through Imperial Russia , notably to Kharkov ( also in Ukraine ) , Moscow , and Saint Petersburg . Jacob Adler later described him at this time as " a bon vivant , " " a cavalier , " " as difficult to approach as an emperor . " He continued to turn out plays at a prolific pace , now mostly serious pieces such as Doctor Almasada , oder Die <unk> in Palermo ( Doctor Almasada , or The Jews of Palermo ) , Shulamith , and Bar Kokhba , the last being a rather dark operetta about Bar Kokhba 's revolt , written after the pogroms in Russia following the 1881 assassination of Czar Alexander II . 
 As it happens , a Frenchman named Victor Tissot happened to be in Berdichev when Goldfaden 's company was there . He saw two plays – Di Rekruten , first premiered in Botoşani , and the later Di <unk> ( Matches ) , a play of intrigue . Tissot 's account of what he saw gives an interesting picture of the theaters and audiences Goldfaden 's troupe encountered outside of the big cities . " Berdichev , " he begins , " has not one cafe , not one restaurant . Berdichev , which is a boring and sad city , nonetheless has a theatrical hall , a big building made of rough boards , where theater troupes passing through now and then put on a play . " Although there was a proper stage with a curtain , the cheap seats were bare benches , the more expensive ones were benches covered in red <unk> . Although there were many full beards , " there were no long <unk> , no skullcaps . " Some of the audience were quite poor , but these were assimilated Jews , basically secular . The audience also included Russian officers with their wives or girlfriends . 
 In Russia , Goldfaden and his troupe drew large audiences and were generally popular with progressive Jewish intellectuals , but slowly ran afoul of both the Czarist government and conservative elements in the Jewish community . Goldfaden was calling for change in the Jewish world : 
 Wake up my people 
 From your sleep , wake up 
 And believe no more in foolishness . 
 A call like this might be a bit ambiguous , but it was unsettling to those who were on the side of the status quo . Yiddish theater was banned in Russia starting September 14 , 1883 , as part of the anti @-@ Jewish reaction following the assassination of Czar Alexander II . Goldfaden and his troupe were left adrift in Saint Petersburg . They headed various directions , some to England , some to New York City , some to Poland , some to Romania . 
 = = The prophet adrift = = 
 While Yiddish theater continued successfully in various places , Goldfaden was not on the best terms at this time with Mogulescu . They had quarrelled ( and settled ) several times over rights to plays , and Mogulescu and his partner Moishe " Maurice " Finkel now dominated Yiddish theater in Romania , with about ten lesser companies competing as well . Mogulescu was a towering figure in Bucharest theater at this point , lauded on a level comparable to the actors of the National Theater , performing at times in Romanian as well as Yiddish , drawing an audience that went well beyond the Jewish community . 
 Goldfaden seems , in Bercovici 's words , to have lost " his theatrical elan " in this period . He briefly put together a theater company in 1886 in Warsaw , with no notable success . In 1887 he went to New York ( as did Mogulescu , independently ) . After extensive negotiations and great anticipation in the Yiddish @-@ language press in New York ( " Goldfaden in America , " read the headline in the January 11 , 1888 edition of the New Yorker Yiddishe <unk> Zaitung ) , he briefly took on the job of director of Mogulescu 's new " Rumanian Opera House " ; they parted ways again after the failure of their first play , whose production values were apparently not up to New York standards . Goldfaden attempted ( unsuccessfully ) to found a theater school , then headed in 1889 for Paris , rather low on funds . There he wrote some poetry , worked on a play that he didn 't finish at that time , and put together a theater company that never got to the point of putting on a play ( because the cashier made off with all of their funds [ Adler , 1999 , 262 commentary ] ) . In October 1889 he scraped together the money to get to Lvov , where his reputation as a poet again came to his rescue . 
 = = Lvov = = 
 Lvov was not exactly a dramatist 's dream . Leon <unk> described audiences bringing meals into the theater , rustling paper , treating the theater like a beer garden . He also quotes Jacob <unk> : " All in all , the Galician milieu was not favorable to Yiddish theater . The intellectuals were assimilated , but the masses were fanatically religious and they viewed Jewish ' comedians ' with disdain . " 
 Nonetheless , Iacob Ber <unk> , who owned a Yiddish theater there , was glad to have a figure of Goldfaden 's stature . Goldfaden completed the play he 'd started in Paris , Rabi Yoselman , oder Die <unk> fun <unk> ( " Rabbi Yoselman , or The Alsatian Decree " ) , in five acts and 23 scenes , based on the life of <unk> of <unk> . At this time he also wrote an operetta Rothschild and a semi @-@ autobiographical play called Mashiach Tzeiten ( Messiah Times ) that gave a less @-@ than @-@ optimistic view of America . 
 Kalman <unk> , an actor in Ber <unk> 's company , credited Goldfaden with greatly strengthening the caliber of performance in Lvov during his brief time there , reporting that Goldfaden worked with every actor on understanding his or her character , so as to ensure that the play was more than just a series of songs and effects , and was respected by all . 
 = = Bucharest = = 
 Buoyed by his success in Lvov , he returned to Bucharest in 1892 , as director of the Jigniţa theater . His new company again included Lazăr Zuckermann ; other players were Marcu ( Mordechai ) <unk> , and later Iacob <unk> , Carol <unk> , Malvina <unk> @-@ <unk> and her father H. <unk> . Among his notable plays from this period were Dos <unk> Gebot , oder Lo <unk> ( The Tenth Commandment , or Thou Shalt Not <unk> ) , Judas Maccabaeus , and Judith and <unk> and a translation of Johann Strauss 's Gypsy Baron . 
 However , it was not a propitious time to return to Romania . Yiddish theater had become a business there , with slickly written advertisements , coordinated performances in multiple cities using the same publicity materials , and cutthroat competition : on one occasion in 1895 , a young man named <unk> attended multiple performances of Goldfaden 's Story of Isaac , memorized it all ( including the songs ) , and took the whole package to Kalman Juvilier , who put on an unauthorized production in Iaşi . Such outright theft was possible because once Ion Ghica headed off on a diplomatic career , the National Theater , which was supposed to adjudicate issues like unauthorized performances of plays , was no longer paying much attention to Yiddish theater . ( Juvilier and Goldfaden finally reached an out @-@ of @-@ court settlement . ) 
 Cutthroat competition was nothing to what was to follow . The 1890s were a tough time for the Romanian economy , and a rising tide of anti @-@ Semitism made it an even tougher time for the Jews . One quarter of the Jewish population emigrated , with intellectuals particularly likely to leave , and those intellectuals who remained were more interested in politics than in theater : this was a period of social ferment , with Jewish socialists in Iaşi starting Der <unk> ( The <unk> ) . 
 Goldfaden left Romania in 1896 ; soon Juvilier 's was the only active Yiddish theater troupe in the country , and foreign troupes had almost entirely ceased coming to the country . Although <unk> , Horowitz , and <unk> kept writing , and occasionally managed to put on a play , it was not a good time for Yiddish theater – or any theater – in Romania , and would only become worse as the economy continued to decline . 
 Goldfaden wandered Europe as a poet and journalist . His plays continued to be performed in Europe and America , but rarely , if ever , did anyone send him royalties . His health deteriorated – a 1903 letter refers to asthma and spitting up blood – and he was running out of money . In 1903 , he wrote Jacob <unk> from Paris , authorizing him to sell his remaining possessions in Romania , clothes and all . This gave him the money to head once more to New York in 1904 . 
 = = New York City = = 
 In America , he again tried his hand at journalism , but a brief stint as editor of the New Yorker Yiddishe <unk> Zaitung resulted only in getting the paper suspended and landing himself a rather large fine . On March 31 , 1905 , he recited poetry at a benefit performance at Cooper Union to raise a pension for Yiddish poet <unk> <unk> , even worse off than himself because he had found himself unable to write since coming to America in 1889 . Shortly afterwards , he met a group of young people who had a Hebrew language association at the Dr. Herzl Zion Club , and wrote a Hebrew @-@ language play David ba @-@ <unk> ( David in the War ) , which they performed in March 1906 , the first Hebrew @-@ language play to be performed in America . Repeat performances in March 1907 and April 1908 drew successively larger crowds . 
 He also wrote the spoken portions of Ben Ami , loosely based on George Eliot 's Daniel Deronda . After Goldfaden 's former bit player Jacob Adler — by now the owner of a prominent New York Yiddish theater — optioned and ignored it , even accusing Goldfaden of being " senile , " it premiered successfully at rival Boris Thomashefsky 's People 's Theater December 25 , 1907 , with music by H. <unk> and lyrics by Mogulescu , who was by this time an international star . 
 Goldfaden died in New York City in 1908 . An estimated 75 @,@ 000 turned out for his funeral , joining the procession from the People 's Theater on Bowery to Washington Cemetery in Brooklyn . The number of mourners is given as 30 @,@ 000 in the entry for Goldfaden ( " <unk> , Avrom " ) , in the Cambridge Guide to Theatre ( Cambridge University Press , 1995 , p . 432 ) , signed by Nahma <unk> . The New York Times , calling him " both a poet and a prophet , " noted that " there was more evidence of genuine sympathy with and admiration for the man and his work than is likely to be manifested at the funeral of any poet now writing in the English language in this country . " 
 In November 2009 , Goldfaden was the subject of postage stamps issued jointly by Israel and Romania . 
 = = Zionism = = 
 Goldfaden had an on @-@ again off @-@ again relationship with Zionism . Some of his earliest poetry was Zionist avant la lettre and one of his last plays was written in Hebrew ; several of his plays were implicitly or explicitly Zionist ( Shulamith set in Jerusalem , Mashiach Tzeiten ? ! ending with its protagonists abandoning New York for Palestine ) ; he served as a delegate from Paris to the World Zionist Congress in 1900 . Still , he spent most of his life ( and set slightly more than half of his plays ) in the Pale of Settlement and in the adjoining Jewish areas in Romania , and when he left it was never to go to Palestine , but to cities such as New York , London or Paris . This might be understandable when the number of his potential Jewish spectators in Palestine in his time was very small . 
 = = Works = = 
 = = = Plays = = = 
 Sources disagree about the dates ( and even the names ) of some of Goldfaden 's plays . The titles here represent <unk> Yiddish > English transliteration , though other variants exist . 
 Di <unk> <unk> ( Aunt Susie ) wr . 1869 
 Di <unk> Sheynes ( The Two Neighbours ) wr . 1869 ( possibly the same as Di Sheynes 1877 
 <unk> <unk> ( <unk> , the Drunkard ) 1871 
 <unk> <unk> ( Anonymous Comedy ) 1876 
 Di Rekruten ( The Recruits ) 1876 , 1877 
 Dos <unk> Holtz ( The Bundle of Sticks ) 1876 
 <unk> der <unk> un <unk> <unk> Sider ( Fishel the <unk> and His Servant Sider ) 1876 
 Di Velt a Gan @-@ <unk> ( The World and Paradise ) 1876 
 Der <unk> <unk> un der <unk> <unk> ( The Infatuated Philosopher and the Enlightened Hasid ) 1876 
 Der <unk> mitn <unk> ( Father @-@ in @-@ Law and Son @-@ in @-@ Law ) 1876 
 Di <unk> mit dem <unk> ( The Grandmother and the Granddaughter ) 1876 , 1879 
 The Desolate Isle , Yiddish translation of a play by August von Kotzebue , 1876 
 Di <unk> oder <unk> di <unk> ( The Intrigue or <unk> Intrigued ) 1876 , 1877 
 A <unk> <unk> ( A Glass of Water ) 1877 
 <unk> @-@ mir un <unk> @-@ mir ( Leftovers ) 1877 
 Shmendrik , oder Di <unk> <unk> ( <unk> or The Comical Wedding ) 1877 , 1879 
 Shuster un <unk> ( Shoemaker and Tailor ) 1877 
 Di <unk> Kaleh , oder <unk> un <unk> ( The Capricious Bride or Pauper @-@ son and Hunger @-@ man ) 1877 presumably the same play as Di <unk> Kaleh @-@ <unk> ( The Capricious <unk> ) 1887 
 <unk> <unk> ( <unk> the Tailor ) 1877 
 Vos tut men ? ( What Did He Do ? ) 1877 
 Di <unk> Kaleh ( The Mute Bride ) 1877 , 1887 
 Di <unk> <unk> ( The Two Deaf Men ) 1877 
 Der <unk> <unk> ( The Purchased Sleep ) 1877 
 Di Sheynes ( The Neighbors ) 1877 
 <unk> un <unk> ( <unk> and <unk> ) 1877 
 Der Katar ( <unk> ) 1877 
 <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> , 1877 
 Di <unk> Sose ( Aunty Susie ) 1877 
 <unk> Kozak ( <unk> Cossack ) , 1877 
 Der <unk> ( The <unk> ) , 1877 
 Di Alte <unk> ( The Old Maid ) 1877 
 Di <unk> <unk> ( The Two Scatter @-@ Brains ) 1877 
 Di <unk> ( Matches ) 1877 
 Fir <unk> <unk> ( Four Porcelain Plates ) 1877 
 Der <unk> ( The Mirror ) 1877 
 <unk> , <unk> un Blind ( Deaf , Dumb and Blind ) 1878 
 Der <unk> , oder Todres <unk> ( The Liar , or , Todres , Blow ) ( or Todres the Trombonist ) 1878 
 Ni @-@ be @-@ ni @-@ me @-@ ni @-@ <unk> ( Not Me , Not You , Not Cock @-@ a @-@ Doodle @-@ Doo or Neither This , Nor That , nor <unk> ; Lulla Rosenfeld also gives the alternate title The Struggle of Culture with Fanaticism ) 1878 
 Der <unk> un der <unk> @-@ <unk> ( The Butcher and the Tinker ) 1878 
 Di <unk> ( The Sorceress , also known as The Witch of Botoşani ) 1878 , 1887 
 <unk> , 1878 
 Doy <unk> ( Two <unk> ) 1878 
 Di <unk> Kuni @-@ <unk> ( The Fanatic , or The Two Kuni @-@ <unk> ) 1880 
 <unk> <unk> ( The Winter of Death ) 1881 
 Shulamith ( Shulamith or The Daughter of Jerusalem ) wr . 1880 , 1881 
 Dos <unk> Gebot , oder Lo <unk> ( The Tenth Commandment , or Thou Shalt Not <unk> ) 1882 , 1887 
 Der <unk> ( <unk> ) 1882 
 Doktor Almasada , oder Di <unk> in Palermo ( Doctor Almasada , or The Jews of Palermo also known as Doctor <unk> , Doctor <unk> , Doctor <unk> ) 1880 , 1883 
 Bar Kokhba , 1883 , 1885 
 <unk> <unk> ( The Sacrifice of Isaac ) , 1891 
 Dos <unk> Gebot , oder <unk> <unk> ( The Fifth Commandment , or Honor Thy Father ) , 1892 
 Rabi Yoselman , oder Di <unk> fun <unk> ( Rabbi Yoselman , or The Alsatian Decree ) 1877 , 1892 
 Judas Maccabeus , 1892 
 Judith and Holofernes , 1892 
 Mashiach Tzeiten ? ! ( The Messianic Era ? ! ) 1891 1893 
 Yiddish translation of Johann Strauss 's Gypsy Baron 1894 
 <unk> <unk> ( Sodom and Gomorrah ) 1895 
 Di <unk> fun <unk> ( The Catastrophe in Brăila ) 1895 
 <unk> <unk> ( The Messenger of Justice ) 1897 
 David ba @-@ <unk> ( David in the War ) 1906 , in Hebrew 
 Ben Ami ( Son of My People ) 1907 , 1908 
 = = = Songs and poetry = = = 
 Goldfaden wrote hundreds of songs and poems . Among his most famous are : 
 " Der <unk> " ( " The Angel " ) 
 " <unk> mit <unk> " ( Raisins and Almonds ) 
 " <unk> , <unk> , un Rosh <unk> " ( " Sabbath , Festival , and New Moon " ) 
 " Tsu <unk> Geburtstag ! " ( " To Your Birthday ! " ) 
 = Ununpentium = 
 Ununpentium ( element symbol : Uup ) is the temporary name of a superheavy element that was first synthesized in 2003 by a joint team of Russian and American scientists at the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research ( JINR ) in Dubna , Russia . With the atomic number 115 in the periodic table the synthetic element is also known as element 115 , or eka @-@ bismuth . In December 2015 , it was recognized as one of four new elements by the Joint Working Party of international scientific bodies IUPAC and IUPAP . In June 2016 , the IUPAC suggested the element to be named moscovium / <unk> / ( element symbol : Mc ) , a name to be formally accepted by the end of 2016 . 
 Ununpentium is an extremely radioactive element ; its most stable known isotope , ununpentium @-@ 289 , has a half @-@ life of only 220 milliseconds . In the periodic table , it is a p @-@ block transactinide element . It is a member of the 7th period and is placed in group 15 as the heaviest pnictogen , although it has not been confirmed to behave as a heavier homologue of the pnictogen bismuth . Ununpentium is calculated to have some similar properties to its lighter homologues , nitrogen , phosphorus , arsenic , antimony , and bismuth , although it should also show several major differences from them . About 100 atoms of ununpentium have been observed to date , all of which have been shown to have mass numbers from 287 to 290 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Discovery = = = 
 The first synthesis of ununpentium succeeded in August 2003 at the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research ( JINR ) in Dubna , Russia , by a joint team of Russian and American scientists . Headed by Russian nuclear physicist Yuri Oganessian , the team included American scientists of the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory . The researchers on February 2 , 2004 , in Physical Review C that they bombarded americium @-@ 243 with calcium @-@ 48 ions to produce four atoms of ununpentium . These atoms decayed by emission of alpha @-@ particles to ununtrium in approximately 100 milliseconds . 
 243 
 95Am + 48 
 20Ca → 288 
 115Uup + 3 1 
 0n → 284 
 113Uut + α 
 243 
 95Am + 48 
 20Ca → 287 
 115Uup + 4 1 
 0n → 283 
 113Uut + α 
 The Dubna – Livermore collaboration strengthened their claim for the discoveries of ununpentium and ununtrium by conducting chemical experiments on the final decay product 268Db . None of the nuclides in this decay chain were previously known , so existing experimental data was not available to support their claim . In June 2004 , and December 2005 , the presence of a dubnium isotope was confirmed by extracting the final decay products , measuring spontaneous fission ( SF ) activities and using chemical identification techniques to confirm that they behave like a group 5 element ( as dubnium is known to be in group 5 of the periodic table ) . Both the half @-@ life and decay mode were confirmed for the proposed 268Db , lending support to the assignment of the parent nucleus to ununpentium . However , in 2011 , the IUPAC / IUPAP Joint Working Party ( JWP ) did not recognize the two elements as having been discovered , because current theory could not distinguish the chemical properties of group 4 and group 5 elements with sufficient confidence . Furthermore , the decay properties of all the nuclei in the decay chain of ununpentium had not been previously characterized before the Dubna experiments , a situation which the JWP generally considers " troublesome , but not necessarily exclusive " . 
 = = = Road to confirmation = = = 
 Two heavier isotopes of ununpentium , <unk> and <unk> , were discovered in 2009 – 2010 as daughters of the ununseptium isotopes 293Uus and 294Uus . The JINR also has future plans to study lighter isotopes of element 115 by replacing the americium @-@ 243 target with the lighter isotope americium @-@ 241 . 
 In 2011 , the Joint Working Party of international scientific bodies International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry ( IUPAC ) and International Union of Pure and Applied Physics ( IUPAP ) evaluated the 2004 and 2007 Dubna experiments , and concluded that they did not meet the criteria for discovery . Another evaluation of more recent experiments took place within the next few years , and a claim to the discovery of ununpentium was again put forward by Dubna . In August 2013 , a team of researchers at Lund University and at the Gesellschaft für Schwerionenforschung ( GSI ) in Darmstadt , Germany announced they had repeated the 2004 experiment , confirming Dubna 's findings . Further confirmation was published by the team at Berkeley in 2015 . 
 In December 2015 , the IUPAC / IUPAP Joint Working Party recognized the element 's discovery and assigned the priority to the Dubna @-@ Berkeley collaboration , giving them the right to suggest a permanent name for it . 
 = = = Naming = = = 
 Using Mendeleev 's nomenclature for unnamed and undiscovered elements , ununpentium is sometimes known as eka @-@ bismuth . In 1979 IUPAC recommended that the placeholder systematic element name ununpentium ( with the corresponding symbol of Uup ) be used until the discovery of the element is confirmed and a name is decided on . Although widely used in the chemical community on all levels , from chemistry classrooms to advanced textbooks , the recommendations are mostly ignored among scientists in the field , who call it " element 115 " , with the symbol of ( 115 ) or even simply 115 . 
 On 30 December 2015 , discovery of the element was recognized by the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry ( IUPAC ) . According to IUPAC recommendations , the discoverer ( s ) of a new element has the right to suggest a name . A suggested name was <unk> , after Paul Langevin . Later , the Dubna team mentioned the name moscovium several times as one among many possibilities , referring to the Moscow Oblast where Dubna is located . 
 In June 2016 , IUPAC endorsed the latter proposal to be formally accepted by the end of the year . 
 = = Predicted properties = = 
 = = = Nuclear stability and isotopes = = = 
 Ununpentium is expected to be in the middle of an island of stability centered on copernicium ( element 112 ) and flerovium ( element 114 ) : the reasons for the presence of this island , however , are still not well understood . Due to the expected high fission barriers , any nucleus within this island of stability exclusively decays by alpha decay and perhaps some electron capture and beta decay . Although the known isotopes of ununpentium do not actually have enough neutrons to be on the island of stability , they can be seen to approach the island as in general , the heavier isotopes are the longer @-@ lived ones . 
 The isotope 291Uup is especially interesting as it has only one neutron more than the heaviest known ununpentium isotope , <unk> . It could plausibly be synthesized as the daughter of ununseptium @-@ 295 , which in turn could be made from the reaction 249Bk ( 48Ca , 2n ) 295Uus . Calculations show that it may have a significant electron capture or positron emission decay mode in addition to alpha decaying and also have a relatively long half @-@ life of several seconds . This would produce 291Fl , <unk> , and finally 291Cn which is expected to be in the middle of the island of stability and have a half @-@ life of about 1200 years , affording the most likely hope of reaching the middle of the island using current technology . Possible drawbacks are that the cross section of the production reaction of 295Uus is expected to be low and the decay properties of superheavy nuclei this close to the line of beta stability are largely unexplored . 
 Other possibilities to synthesize nuclei on the island of stability include quasifission ( partial fusion followed by fission ) of a massive nucleus . Such nuclei tend to fission , expelling doubly magic or nearly doubly magic fragments such as calcium @-@ 40 , tin @-@ 132 , lead @-@ 208 , or bismuth @-@ 209 . Recently it has been shown that the multi @-@ nucleon transfer reactions in collisions of actinide nuclei ( such as uranium and curium ) might be used to synthesize the neutron @-@ rich superheavy nuclei located at the island of stability , although formation of the lighter elements nobelium or seaborgium is more favored . One last possibility to synthesize isotopes near the island is to use controlled nuclear explosions to create a neutron flux high enough to bypass the gaps of instability at 258 – 260Fm and at mass number 275 ( atomic numbers 104 to 108 ) , mimicking the r @-@ process in which the actinides were first produced in nature and the gap of instability around radon bypassed . Some such isotopes ( especially 291Cn and 293Cn ) may even have been synthesized in nature , but would have decayed away far too quickly ( with half @-@ lives of only thousands of years ) and be produced in far too small quantities ( about 10 − 12 the abundance of lead ) to be detectable as primordial nuclides today outside cosmic rays . 
 = = = Physical and atomic = = = 
 In the periodic table , ununpentium is a member of group 15 , the pnictogens , below nitrogen , phosphorus , arsenic , antimony , and bismuth . Every previous pnictogen has five electrons in its valence shell , forming a valence electron configuration of <unk> . In ununpentium 's case , the trend should be continued and the valence electron configuration is predicted to be <unk> ; therefore , ununpentium will behave similarly to its lighter congeners in many respects . However , notable differences are likely to arise ; a largely contributing effect is the spin – orbit ( SO ) interaction — the mutual interaction between the electrons ' motion and spin . It is especially strong for the superheavy elements , because their electrons move much faster than in lighter atoms , at velocities comparable to the speed of light . In relation to ununpentium atoms , it lowers the 7s and the 7p electron energy levels ( stabilizing the corresponding electrons ) , but two of the 7p electron energy levels are stabilized more than the other four . The stabilization of the 7s electrons is called the inert pair effect , and the effect " tearing " the 7p subshell into the more stabilized and the less stabilized parts is called subshell splitting . Computation chemists see the split as a change of the second ( azimuthal ) quantum number l from 1 to 1 ⁄ 2 and 3 ⁄ 2 for the more stabilized and less stabilized parts of the 7p subshell , respectively . For many theoretical purposes , the valence electron configuration may be represented to reflect the 7p subshell split as 7s27p2 
 1 / <unk> 
 3 / 2 . These effects cause ununpentium 's chemistry to be somewhat different from that of its lighter congeners . 
 The valence electrons of ununpentium fall into three subshells : 7s ( two electrons ) , 7p1 / 2 ( two electrons ) , and 7p3 / 2 ( one electron ) . The first two of these are relativistically stabilized and hence behave as inert pairs , while the last is relativistically destabilized and can easily participate in chemistry . ( The 6d electrons are not destabilized enough to participate chemically , although this may still be possible in the two previous elements ununtrium and flerovium . ) Thus , the + 1 oxidation state should be favored , like Tl + , and consistent with this the first ionization potential of ununpentium should be around 5 @.@ 58 eV , continuing the trend towards lower ionization potentials down the pnictogens . Ununpentium and ununtrium both have one electron outside a quasi @-@ closed shell configuration that can be delocalized in the metallic state : thus they should have similar melting and boiling points ( both melting around 400 ° C and boiling around 1100 ° C ) due to the strength of their metallic bonds being similar . Additionally , the predicted ionization potential , ionic radius ( 1 @.@ 5 Å for Uup + ; 1 @.@ 0 Å for Uup3 + ) , and polarizability of Uup + are expected to be more similar to Tl + than its true congener Bi3 + . Ununpentium should be a dense metal due to its high atomic weight , with a density around 13 @.@ 5 g / cm3 . The electron of the hydrogen @-@ like ununpentium atom ( oxidized so that it only has one electron , <unk> + ) is expected to move so fast that it has a mass 1 @.@ 82 times that of a stationary electron , due to relativistic effects . For comparison , the figures for hydrogen @-@ like bismuth and antimony are expected to be 1 @.@ 25 and 1 @.@ 077 respectively . 
 = = = Chemical = = = 
 Ununpentium is predicted to be the third member of the 7p series of chemical elements and the heaviest member of group 15 ( VA ) in the Periodic Table , below bismuth . In this group , each member is known to portray the group oxidation state of + 5 but with differing stability . For nitrogen , the + 5 state is mostly a formal explanation of molecules like <unk> : it is very difficult to have five covalent bonds to nitrogen due to the inability of the small nitrogen atom to accommodate five ligands . The + 5 state is well represented for the essentially non @-@ relativistic typical pnictogens phosphorus , arsenic , and antimony . However , for bismuth it becomes rare due to the relativistic stabilization of the 6s orbitals known as the inert pair effect , so that the 6s electrons are reluctant to bond chemically . It is expected that ununpentium will have an inert pair effect for both the 7s and the 7p1 / 2 electrons , as the binding energy of the lone 7p3 / 2 electron is noticeably lower than that of the 7p1 / 2 electrons . Nitrogen ( I ) and bismuth ( I ) are known but rare and ununpentium ( I ) is likely to show some unique properties , probably behaving more like thallium ( I ) than bismuth ( I ) . Because of spin @-@ orbit coupling , flerovium may display closed @-@ shell or noble gas @-@ like properties ; if this is the case , ununpentium will likely be typically monovalent as a result , since the cation Uup + will have the same electron configuration as flerovium , perhaps giving ununpentium some alkali metal character . However , the Uup3 + cation would behave like its true lighter homolog Bi3 + . The 7s electrons are too stabilized to be able to contribute chemically and hence the + 5 state should be impossible and ununpentium may be considered to have only three valence electrons . Ununpentium would be quite a reactive metal , with an oxidation potential of about 1 @.@ 5 V. 
 The chemistry of ununpentium in aqueous solution should essentially be that of the Uup + and Uup3 + ions . The former should be easily hydrolyzed and not be easily complexed with halides , cyanide , and ammonia . Ununpentium ( I ) hydroxide ( <unk> ) , carbonate ( <unk> ) , oxalate ( <unk> ) , and fluoride ( <unk> ) should be soluble in water ; the sulfide ( <unk> ) should be insoluble ; and the chloride ( <unk> ) , bromide ( <unk> ) , iodide ( <unk> ) , and thiocyanate ( <unk> ) should be only slightly soluble , so that adding excess hydrochloric acid would not noticeably affect the solubility of ununpentium ( I ) chloride . Uup3 + should be about as stable as <unk> + and hence should also be an important part of ununpentium chemistry , although its closest homolog among the elements should be its lighter congener Bi3 + . Ununpentium ( III ) fluoride ( <unk> ) and <unk> ( <unk> ) should be insoluble in water , similar to the corresponding bismuth compounds , while ununpentium ( III ) chloride ( <unk> ) , bromide ( <unk> ) , and iodide ( <unk> ) should be readily soluble and easily hydrolyzed to form oxyhalides such as <unk> and <unk> , again analogous to bismuth . Both ununpentium ( I ) and ununpentium ( III ) should be common oxidation states and their relative stability should depend greatly on what they are complexed with and the likelihood of hydrolysis . 
 = = Experimental chemistry = = 
 Unambiguous determination of the chemical characteristics of ununpentium has yet to have been established . In 2011 , experiments were conducted to create ununtrium , flerovium , and ununpentium isotopes in the reactions between calcium @-@ 48 projectiles and targets of americium @-@ 243 and plutonium @-@ 244 . However , the targets included lead and bismuth impurities and hence some isotopes of bismuth and polonium were generated in nucleon transfer reactions . This , while an unforeseen complication , could give information that would help in the future chemical investigation of the heavier homologs of bismuth and polonium , which are respectively ununpentium and livermorium . The produced nuclides bismuth @-@ 213 and polonium @-@ <unk> were transported as the hydrides <unk> and <unk> at 850 ° C through a quartz wool filter unit held with tantalum , showing that these hydrides were surprisingly thermally stable , although their heavier congeners UupH3 and LvH2 would be expected to be less thermally stable from simple extrapolation of periodic trends in the p @-@ block . Further calculations on the stability and electronic structure of <unk> , UupH3 , PoH2 , and LvH2 are needed before chemical investigations take place . However , ununpentium and livermorium are expected to be volatile enough as pure elements for them to be chemically investigated in the near future . The chief barrier to their chemical investigation at present is the lack of known isotopes of these elements which are long @-@ lived enough . 
 = Mario Golf : Toadstool Tour = 
 Mario Golf : Toadstool Tour , known in Japan as Mario Golf : Family Tour ( <unk> <unk> , Mario <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , is a 2003 sports game developed by Camelot Software Planning and published by Nintendo for the Nintendo GameCube . It is the sequel to the 1999 Nintendo 64 title Mario Golf , and is the second game in the Mario Golf series . It was released in North America on July 28 , 2003 , in Japan on September 5 , 2003 , and in the PAL region on June 18 , 2004 . 
 Toadstool Tour is a golf game featuring characters and elements from the Mario series . There are 16 playable characters in total , each with a set of golfing statistics defining their style of play . The game 's main mode involves the player competing in tournaments to obtain new features , although there are alternative modes consisting of training session and variations to the golf format . This includes " Ring Attack " , requiring the player to hit the ball through rings of varying sizes while remaining on or under par . Players can transfer characters between Mario Golf : Toadstool Tour and Mario Golf : Advance Tour using the Nintendo GameCube Game Boy Advance Cable . 
 Toadstool Tour received a positive reception from the media , gaining an aggregate score of 82 % from Game Rankings . In general , reviewers praised the game 's visuals , sound , and variety of courses , although a perceived lack of advancement from its predecessor was criticised . The game became part of the Player 's Choice label in 2004 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Toadstool Tour is a golf game incorporating characters , enemies , and themes from the Mario series . As a typical golf game , the player 's objective is to hit the ball into the hole using as few strokes as possible . Prior to the swing , the player chooses a club , a general direction and range for the ball to travel . During the swing , the player determines power by timing a button press for a marker to stop at the desired point on a power meter . At this point , the player can choose to influence the direction of the ball by applying spin . Players can alternate between auto and manual shots , with the latter providing the player with more control , albeit at a higher risk of a poor shot . Many of these gameplay aspects , such as spin , are affected by the 16 characters ' individual statistics . These relate to features such as control of the ball and the general height of the character 's shot , which determines how much the character 's play is affected by the wind . At varying stages in the " Character match " mode , characters have a chance to be upgraded into " Star characters " , which grants statistical enhancements . To achieve this , the player must defeat a computer @-@ designated artificial intelligence ( AI ) opponent with a character of their choice , awarding the AI character with the upgrade for use later by the player . The opportunities are only available once an envelope appears beside a character portrait in the selection screen . 
 There are seven courses in the game , with the later versions featuring more complex terrain and exotic features . The more advanced courses offer a higher frequency of difficult terrain and elevation , as in bunkers , which limit the accuracy and range of shots . There are also hazards such as lava pits and <unk> , which will incur a one @-@ shot penalty if landed on . Each course takes its name from a particular Mario feature , such as " Peach 's Castle Grounds " , which is themed in particular on the Mushroom Kingdom . This course includes themed hazards such as chain <unk> in bunkers , as well as warp pipes to change the location of the ball . 
 Toadstool Tour contains several gameplay modes and variants of golf , as well as the traditional stroke and match play . The player can choose to play the " Doubles " option in several modes , which allows two players to play alternate strokes as a team . " Coin attack " entails collecting several coins scattered on the course , while " Ring attack " requires the player to direct the ball through rings of varying locations , angles , and diameter while keeping on or under par . Some side games incorporate personal training for the player , such as the side games , which develops approaching , putting , shots , and birdie skills ( see types of shot ) . The main mode is " Tournament mode " , which involves the player competing against artificial intelligence opponents on each course to win trophies . The game features interactivity with the Game Boy Advance . Players can transfer characters between Mario Golf : Toadstool Tour and Mario Golf : Advance Tour . 
 = = Development = = 
 Toadstool Tour was developed by Camelot Software Planning , the same team responsible for the game 's predecessor , Mario Golf . During an interview with two Camelot developers , Hiroyuki and Shugo Takahashi , it was revealed that the game was developed simultaneously with the GameCube Mario Tennis title , Mario Power Tennis . According to the brothers , ideas and technology used for the development of Toadstool Tour was also used for Power Tennis . The game was displayed as a playable demonstration in the E3 convention of 2003 . Toadstool Tour became part of the Player 's Choice label in 2004 , which offers a reduced price to games that have sold more than one million copies . The music in Toadstool Tour was composed by Motoi Sakuraba , who has scored several other Mario Golf titles . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Toadstool Tour received a positive reaction from critics , although it was criticised for being too similar to its predecessor . Eurogamer 's Tom Bramwell commented that " Mario Golf hasn 't really grown much since its time on the N64 " , despite enjoying the game 's course design and " sense of fun " . Both GameSpot and IGN praised the game 's courses , although the later stages were preferred to the more basic initial courses . Electronic Gaming Monthly lauded the game 's physics evidenced by the use of wind , weather , and surface conditions . The game was often likened to the Tiger Woods PGA Tour games , which served as a criticism when Eurogamer noted the absence of events and player progression in the game 's single @-@ player mode . This point was shared by Jennifer Tsao of EGM , who wanted " a more compelling single @-@ player mode " that would offer a " golf pro who coaches me based on my swings " . 
 The game 's controls were generally well received , despite specific issues such as difficulties executing very short putts due to the game 's power meter . The accessibility of the controls in particular were lauded , although Camelot 's choice not to use the analogue swing present in many golf games was a common complaint . This specifically was compared to the analogue system present in Tiger Woods games , prompting Matt Casamassina to comment " going from Tiger Woods back to the mechanics of Mario Golf feels like going from car to horse " . The variety of modes available in Toadstool Tour was rated as " amazing " by GameSpot , who proceeded to commend the clarification provided by the game 's manual booklet and in @-@ game tutorial . Eurogamer also noted this by offering praise to " Ring attack " , but conversely rated " Coin attack " as " a bit shallow " . The game 's multiplayer offerings were highly regarded by most reviewers . 
 Many reviewers criticised Toadstool Tour 's use of camera , especially when the ball 's presented route would ignore obstacles . GameSpot otherwise welcomed the game 's visuals , however , arguing that the recurring Mario characters " never looked better " . IGN also lauded the graphics present in the full motion video and the rest of the game , as well as Toadstool Tour 's audio . Matt Casamassina acknowledged the characters ' voiced taunts , saying " the muttering , complaining Waluigi , never fails to bring a smile to our faces " . 
 Alex Trickett of BBC Sport gave it 85 % and stated , " If you like pure simulation stick with world number one Tiger Woods , but if you are ready for a <unk> round of golf , let your favourite Italian plumber come to the fore . " Likewise , Marc Saltzman of The Cincinnati Enquirer gave it four stars out of five and stated that , " One of the game 's greatest assets is its intuitive control scheme . Novice and seasoned players will be able to pick up and play with little trouble . There are customizable options for manual or automatic swing modes . " However , the only negative review came from Alex Porter of Maxim , who gave it a score of four out of ten , saying , " Golfing game standards like club selection , power meter , and control of <unk> and <unk> satisfy , but the sometimes @-@ clunky controls and confusing camera perspectives will leave you teed @-@ off . " 
 Toadstool Tour sold 1 @.@ 03 million units in North America as of December 27 , 2007 . 
 = Greenville Bridge = 
 The Greenville Bridge is a cable @-@ stayed bridge over the Mississippi River carrying US 82 and US 278 between Refuge , Mississippi and <unk> , Arkansas . When it opened in 2010 , it was the fourth longest cable @-@ stayed bridge in North America . 
 The Benjamin G. Humphreys Bridge , the first bridge to connect the two towns , had become functionally obsolete . Its narrow road had only two lanes with no shoulders . Because of its location near a sharp bend in the Mississippi River , the bridge had become a hazard to river traffic ; barges and towboats frequently collided with it . In 1994 , a study concluded that a new bridge was needed and the old one should be torn down . Construction was begun in 2001 and the new bridge opened in 2010 . In 2011 , the process of removing the old bridge began . 
 = = Description = = 
 Opened in 2010 , the Greenville Bridge carries US 82 / 278 over the Mississippi River between Refuge , Mississippi and <unk> , Arkansas . It is located 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) down river from the original bridge , built in 1940 . Designed by HNTB , it is a four @-@ lane cable @-@ stayed bridge with more than 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) of bridge deck straddled by two concrete towers 425 feet ( 130 m ) feet high and anchored by concrete piers planted 120 feet ( 37 m ) below the riverbed . It has four fans of strand steel cable connected to the top of the towers which support the deck . 
 Each of the bridge 's four lanes is 12 feet ( 4 m ) wide . The outside shoulders are 12 feet ( 4 m ) feet wide and the inside shoulder width is 8 feet ( 2 m ) . The bridge has a main span of 1 @,@ 378 feet ( 420 m ) . At the time of its opening , it was the fourth longest cable @-@ stayed bridge in North America . 
 Both the old and new bridges are geographically mostly in Arkansas , as the state lines were determined prior to the shift west of the Mississippi River . 
 = = History = = 
 The first Greenville Bridge was built by the company now known as HNTB and opened to much fanfare in 1940 as the " pathway to progress " for the Mississippi Delta . It was a through @-@ truss design and had a span of 840 feet ( 260 m ) . Until 1943 , this was the longest bridge for vehicles on the Mississippi River . Over time , the bridge supported increasing volumes of highway traffic and vehicles hitting the bridge . In the 1950s , an Air Force plane crashed into the bridge . Though the bridge remained structurally sound , it was becoming functionally obsolete . It had only two narrow highway lanes and no shoulders . An accident or the crossing of very large vehicles such as a large combine could force the bridge to close . 
 With river traffic increasing , damage from barge collisions increased . By 1972 , the Greenville Bridge was hit more times by barges than any other bridge on the Mississippi . The bridge was located close to a sharp bend in the Mississippi ; towboats and barges had difficulty making the sharp turn and regaining their course in time to avoid a collision with the bridge . Over the years , many have not been able to make the turn quickly and have hit it . The bridge had become a danger to river traffic . 
 A 1994 engineering study by the Mississippi Department of Transportation explored alternatives to upgrading the crossing of US 82 and issued a report that explored a four @-@ lane crossing at Greenville . It concluded the best of several alternatives it identified was to build a new bridge 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) downriver from the old one , and to remove the old bridge . Additional studies evaluated the type of bridge to build , and by 1995 the cable @-@ stayed bridge was chosen as the best design to fit the river and soil conditions , as well as providing sufficient clearance for river navigation . Engineering plans were completed in 1999 . 
 = = Construction = = 
 HNTB , of Kansas City , Missouri , was the designer and consulting engineer for both the new bridge as well as the original Benjamin G. Humphreys Bridge . The federal government provided $ 110 million to begin building the main part of the bridge consisting long spans supported by cables . The main superstructure construction began in December 2001 . Massman Construction Company in a joint venture with Traylor Brothers , Inc. received the contract to construct two large piers in the river ; these were built using both floating caissons and open caisson construction . The construction on the last main span section of the bridge was finished in April 2006 . 
 Building the approaches , including shorter spans of approach bridge work and structural support systems for the bridge , was the responsibility of each state . For both states , the approach bridges are constructed of a series of three span units , each unit 120 feet ( 37 m ) long . Construction of Arkansas ' 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 km ) mile approach of highway and bridge , costing $ 66 million , began in March 2006 ; Mississippi began its 1 @.@ 8 miles ( 2 @.@ 9 km ) approach in April , 2006 , costing almost $ 86 million . Hill Brothers Construction and Jensen Construction , in a joint venture with the Rasmussen Group , were awarded the contract for the eastern approach of US 82 in Greenville to the Mississippi River crossing . Hills Brothers Construction was awarded a $ 85 @.@ 9 million contract to work on the road deck of the Mississippi approach to the bridge , the concrete footings , and the substructure and superstructure of that portion . Austin Bridge and Road was awarded a $ 65 million contract to build Arkansas 's 4 @,@ 657 feet ( 1 @,@ 419 m ) of approach bridge and 3 @,@ 225 feet ( 983 m ) of connecting roadway which was completed in August 2009 . The remaining contract , to apply a latex surface to the bridge , add stripes , tie US 82 into the approaches , and dismantle the Humphreys Bridge , was awarded in January 2010 . 
 It took sixteen years from the initial developing stage begun in 1994 , until the Greenville Bridge opened to traffic on August 4 , 2010 . The entire cost of the bridge totaled $ 336 million . In 2011 , the massive process of removing the old bridge by cutting into small sections to be recycled was begun , and is expected to be completed by September 2012 . At times , the river has been closed to traffic to aid the demolition . The job is dangerous and at least two workers have died . 
 = Roman – Persian Wars = 
 The Roman – Persian Wars were a series of conflicts between states of the Greco @-@ Roman world and two successive Iranian empires : the Parthian and the Sassanid . Battles between the Parthian Empire and the Roman Republic began in 92 BC ; wars began under the late Republic , and continued through the Roman and Sassanid empires . They were ended by the Arab Muslim conquests , which defeated both the Sassanid and Byzantine East Roman empires shortly after the end of the last war between them . 
 Although warfare between the Romans and the Parthians / Sassanids lasted for seven centuries , the frontier remained largely stable . A game of tug of war ensued : towns , fortifications , and provinces were continually sacked , captured , destroyed , and traded . Neither side had the logistical strength or manpower to maintain such lengthy campaigns far from their borders , and thus neither could advance too far without risking stretching its frontiers too thin . Both sides did make conquests beyond the border , but in time the balance was almost always restored . The line of stalemate shifted in the 2nd century AD : it had run along the northern Euphrates ; the new line ran east , or later northeast , across Mesopotamia to the northern Tigris . There were also several substantial shifts further north , in Armenia and the Caucasus . 
 The expense of resources during the Roman – Persian Wars ultimately proved catastrophic for both empires . The prolonged and escalating warfare of the 6th and 7th centuries left them exhausted and vulnerable in the face of the sudden emergence and expansion of the Caliphate , whose forces invaded both empires only a few years after the end of the last Roman – Persian war . Benefiting from their weakened condition , the Arab Muslim armies swiftly conquered the entire Sassanid Empire , and deprived the Eastern Roman Empire of the territories of the Levant , the Caucasus , Egypt , and the rest of North Africa . Over the following centuries , some of the Eastern Roman Empire came under Muslim rule . As it stands , this was the longest conflict in human history , lasting approximately 721 years . 
 = = Historical background = = 
 According to James Howard @-@ Johnston , " from the third century BC to the early seventh century AD , the rival players [ in the East ] were grand polities with imperial pretensions , which had been able to establish and secure stable territories transcending regional divides " . The Romans and Parthians came into contact through their respective conquests of parts of the Seleucid Empire . During the 3rd century BC , the Parthians migrated from the Central Asian steppe into northern Iran . Although subdued for a time by the Seleucids , in the 2nd century BC they broke away , and established an independent state that steadily expanded at the expense of their former rulers , and through the course of the 3rd and early 1st century BC , they had conquered Persia , Mesopotamia , and Armenia . Ruled by the Arsacid dynasty , the Parthians fended off several Seleucid attempts to regain their lost territories , and established several eponymous branches in the Caucasus , namely the Arsacid dynasty of Armenia , the Arsacid dynasty of Iberia , and the Arsacid Dynasty of Caucasian Albania . Meanwhile , the Romans expelled the Seleucids from their territories in Anatolia in the early 2nd century BC , after defeating Antiochus III the Great at Thermopylae and Magnesia . Finally , in 64 BC Pompey conquered the remaining Seleucid territories in Syria , extinguishing their state and advancing the Roman eastern frontier to the Euphrates , where it met the territory of the Parthians . 
 = = Roman – Parthian Wars = = 
 = = = Roman Republic vs. Parthia = = = 
 Parthian enterprise in the West began in the time of Mithridates I and was revived by Mithridates II , who negotiated unsuccessfully with Lucius Cornelius Sulla for a Roman – Parthian alliance ( c . 105 BC ) . When Lucullus invaded Southern Armenia and led an attack against Tigranes in 69 BC , he corresponded with Phraates III to dissuade him from intervening . Although the Parthians remained neutral , Lucullus considered attacking them . In 66 – 65 BC , Pompey reached agreement with Phraates , and Roman – Parthian troops invaded Armenia , but a dispute soon arose over the Euphrates boundary . Finally , Phraates asserted his control over Mesopotamia , except for the western district of Osroene , which became a Roman dependency . 
 The Roman general Marcus Licinius Crassus led an invasion of Mesopotamia in 53 BC with catastrophic results ; he and his son Publius were killed at the Battle of Carrhae by the Parthians under General Surena ; this was the worst Roman defeat since the Battle of Cannae . The Parthians raided Syria the following year , and mounted a major invasion in 51 BC , but their army was caught in an ambush near <unk> by the Romans , and they were driven back . 
 The Parthians largely remained neutral during Caesar 's civil war , fought between forces supporting Julius Caesar and forces supporting Pompey and the traditional faction of the Roman Senate . However , they maintained relations with Pompey , and after his defeat and death , a force under Pacorus I assisted the Pompeian general Q. Caecilius Bassus , who was besieged at Apamea Valley by Caesarian forces . With the civil war over , Julius Caesar prepared a campaign against Parthia , but his assassination averted the war . The Parthians supported Brutus and Cassius during the ensuing Liberators ' civil war and sent a contingent to fight on their side at the Battle of Philippi in 42 BC . After the Liberators ' defeat , the Parthians invaded Roman territory in 40 BC in conjunction with the Roman Quintus Labienus , a former supporter of Brutus and Cassius . They swiftly overran the Roman province of Syria and advanced into Judaea , overthrowing the Roman client Hyrcanus II and installing his nephew Antigonus . For a moment , the whole of the Roman East seemed lost to the Parthians or about to fall into their hands . However , the conclusion of the second Roman civil war soon revived Roman strength in Asia . Mark Antony had sent Ventidius to oppose Labienus , who had invaded Anatolia . Soon Labienus was driven back to Syria by Roman forces , and , although reinforced by the Parthians , was defeated , taken prisoner , and killed . After suffering a further defeat near the Syrian Gates , the Parthians withdrew from Syria . They returned in 38 BC but were decisively defeated by Ventidius , and Pacorus was killed . In Judaea , Antigonus was ousted with Roman help by Herod in 37 BC . With Roman control of Syria and Judaea restored , Mark Antony led a huge army into Atropatene , but his siege train and its escort were isolated and wiped out , while his Armenian allies deserted . Failing to make progress against Parthian positions , the Romans withdrew with heavy casualties . Antony was again in Armenia in 33 BC to join with the Median king against Octavian and the Parthians . Other preoccupations obliged him to withdraw , and the whole region came under Parthian control . 
 = = = Roman Empire vs. Parthia = = = 
 With tensions between the two powers threatening renewed war , Octavian and Phraataces worked out a compromise in 1 AD . According to the agreement , Parthia undertook to withdraw its forces from Armenia and to recognize a de facto Roman protectorate there . Nonetheless , Roman – Persian rivalry over control and influence in Armenia continued unabated for the next several decades . The decision of the Parthian King Artabanus III to place his son on the vacant Armenian throne triggered a war with Rome in 36 AD , which ended when Artabanus III abandoned claims to a Parthian sphere of influence in Armenia . War erupted in 58 AD , after the Parthian King Vologases I forcibly installed his brother Tiridates on the Armenian throne . Roman forces overthrew Tiridates and replaced him with a Cappadocian prince , triggering an inconclusive war . This came to an end in 63 AD after the Romans agreed to allow Tiridates and his descendants to rule Armenia on condition that they receive the kingship from the Roman emperor . 
 A fresh series of conflicts began in the 2nd century AD , during which the Romans consistently held the upper hand over Parthia . The Emperor Trajan invaded Armenia and Mesopotamia during 114 and 115 and annexed them as Roman provinces . He captured the Parthian capital , Ctesiphon , before sailing downriver to the Persian Gulf . However , uprisings erupted in 115 AD in the occupied Parthian territories , while a major Jewish revolt broke out in Roman territory , severely stretching Roman military resources . Parthian forces attacked key Roman positions , and the Roman garrisons at Seleucia , Nisibis and Edessa were expelled by the local inhabitants . Trajan subdued the rebels in Mesopotamia , but having installed the Parthian prince Parthamaspates on the throne as a client ruler , he withdrew his armies and returned to Syria . Trajan died in 117 , before he was able to reorganize and consolidate Roman control over the Parthian provinces . 
 Trajan 's Parthian War initiated a " shift of emphasis in the ' grand strategy of the Roman empire ' " , but his successor , Hadrian , decided that it was in Rome 's interest to re @-@ establish the Euphrates as the limit of its direct control . Hadrian returned to the status quo ante , and surrendered the territories of Armenia , Mesopotamia , and Adiabene to their previous rulers and client @-@ kings . 
 War over Armenia broke out again in 161 , when Vologases IV defeated the Romans there , captured Edessa and ravaged Syria . In 163 a Roman counter @-@ attack under Statius Priscus defeated the Parthians in Armenia and installed a favored candidate on the Armenian throne . The following year Avidius Cassius invaded Mesopotamia , winning battles at Dura @-@ Europos and Seleucia and sacking Ctesiphon in 165 . An epidemic which was sweeping Parthia at the time , possibly of smallpox , spread to the Roman army and forced its withdrawal ; this was the origin of the Antonine Plague that raged for a generation throughout the Roman Empire . In 195 – 197 , a Roman offensive under the Emperor Septimius Severus led to Rome 's acquisition of northern Mesopotamia as far as the areas around Nisibis , Singara and the 2nd sacking of Ctesiphon . A final war against the Parthians was launched by the Emperor Caracalla , who sacked Arbela in 216 . After his assassination , his successor , Macrinus , was defeated by the Parthians near Nisibis . In exchange for peace , he was obliged to pay for the damage caused by Caracalla . 
 = = Roman – Sassanid Wars = = 
 = = = Early Roman – Sassanid conflicts = = = 
 Conflict resumed shortly after the overthrow of Parthian rule and Ardashir I 's foundation of the Sassanid Empire . Ardashir raided Mesopotamia and Syria in 230 and demanded the cession of all the former territories of the Achaemenid Empire . After fruitless negotiations , Alexander Severus set out against Ardashir in 232 and finally repulsed him . In 238 – 240 , towards the end of his reign , Ardashir attacked again , taking several cities in Syria and Mesopotamia , including Carrhae and Nisibis . 
 The struggle resumed and intensified under Ardashir 's successor Shapur I , who invaded Mesopotamia . His forces were defeated at a battle near <unk> in 243 and the Romans regained Carrhae and Nisibis . Encouraged by these victories , Roman Emperor Gordian III advanced down the Euphrates but was repelled near Ctesiphon at the Battle of <unk> in 244 . Gordian III was then killed , and successor Emperor Phillip the Arab hastily negotiated a peace settlement . With the Roman Empire debilitated by Germanic invasions and a series of short @-@ term emperors , Shapur I soon resumed his attacks . He conquered Armenia and killed its king , defeated the Romans at the Battle of <unk> in 253 , and sacked Antioch . Between 258 and 260 , Shapur captured Emperor Valerian after defeating his army at the Battle of Edessa . He advanced into Anatolia but was defeated by Roman forces there ; attacks from Odaenathus of Palmyra forced the Persians to withdraw from Roman territory , surrendering Armenia and Antioch . 
 The Emperor Carus launched a successful invasion of Persia in 283 , sacking the Sassanid capital Ctesiphon for the third time . The Romans probably would have extended their conquests had Carus not died in December of that year . 
 After a brief peace early in Diocletian 's reign , the Persians renewed hostilities when they invaded Armenia and defeated the Romans outside Carrhae in either 296 or 297 . However , Galerius crushed the Persians in the Battle of Satala in 298 , capturing the treasury and the royal harem , an utter disgrace for the Persian monarch . The resulting peace settlement gave the Romans control of the area between the Tigris and the Greater Zab . This was the most decisive Roman victory for many decades ; all the territories that had been lost , all the debatable lands , and control of Armenia lay in Roman hands . 
 The arrangements of 299 lasted until the mid @-@ 330s , when Shapur II began a series of offensives against the Romans . Despite a string of victories in battle , his campaigns achieved little lasting effect : three Persian sieges of Nisibis were repulsed , and while Shapur succeeded in taking Amida and Singara , both cities were soon regained by the Romans . Following a lull during the 350s while Shapur fought off nomad attacks on Persia 's northern frontier , he launched a new campaign in 359 and again captured Amida . This provoked a major offensive in 363 by the Roman Emperor Julian , who advanced down the Euphrates to Ctesiphon . Julian won the Battle of Ctesiphon but was unable to take the Persian capital and retreated along the Tigris . Harried by the Persians , Julian was killed in a skirmish . With the Roman army stuck on the eastern bank of the Euphrates , Julian 's successor Jovian made peace , agreeing to major concessions in exchange for safe passage out of Sassanid territory . The Romans surrendered their former possessions east of the Tigris , as well as Nisibis and Singara , and Shapur soon conquered Armenia . In 384 or 387 , a definitive peace treaty was signed by Shapur III and Theodosius I dividing Armenia between the two states . Meanwhile , the northern territories of the Roman Empire were invaded by Germanic , Alanic , and Hunnic peoples , while Persia 's northern borders were threatened first by a number of Hunnic peoples and then by the <unk> . With both empires preoccupied by these threats , a largely peaceful period followed , interrupted only by two brief wars , the first in 421 – 422 and the second in 440 . 
 = = Byzantine – Sassanid Wars = = 
 = = = Anastasian War = = = 
 War broke out when the Persian King Kavadh I attempted to gain financial support by force from the Byzantine Roman Emperor Anastasius I. In 502 AD , he quickly captured the unprepared city of Theodosiopolis and besieged Amida . The siege of the fortress @-@ city proved to be far more difficult than Kavadh expected ; the defenders repelled the Persian assaults for three months before they were beaten . In 503 , the Romans attempted an ultimately unsuccessful siege of the Persian @-@ held Amida while Kavadh invaded Osroene and laid siege to Edessa with the same results . Finally in 504 , the Romans gained control through the renewed investment of Amida , which led to the fall of the city . That year an armistice was reached as a result of an invasion of Armenia by the Huns from the Caucasus . Although the two powers negotiated , it was not until November 506 that a treaty was agreed to . In 505 , Anastasius ordered the building of a great fortified city at Dara . At the same time , the dilapidated fortifications were also upgraded at Edessa , <unk> and Amida . Although no further large @-@ scale conflict took place during Anastasius ' reign , tensions continued , especially while work proceeded at Dara . This was because the construction of new fortifications in the border zone by either empire had been prohibited by a treaty concluded some decades earlier . Anastasius pursued the project despite Persian objections , and the walls were completed by 507 – 508 . 
 = = = Iberian War = = = 
 In 524 – 525 AD , Kavadh proposed that Justin I adopt his son , Khosrau , but the negotiations soon broke down . Tensions between the two powers erupted into conflict when Caucasian Iberia under <unk> defected to the Romans in 524 – 525 . Overt Roman – Persian fighting had broken out in the Transcaucasus region and upper Mesopotamia by 526 – 527 . The early years of war favored the Persians : by 527 , the Iberian revolt had been crushed , a Roman offensive against Nisibis and <unk> in that year was unsuccessful , and forces trying to fortify <unk> and <unk> were prevented from doing so by Persian attacks . Attempting to remedy the deficiencies revealed by these Persian successes , the new Roman emperor , Justinian I , reorganized the eastern armies . 
 In 530 a major Persian offensive in Mesopotamia was defeated by Roman forces under Belisarius at Dara , while a second Persian thrust in the Caucasus was defeated by Sittas at Satala . Belisarius was defeated by Persian and Lakhmid forces at the Battle of Callinicum in 531 . In the same year the Romans gained some forts in Armenia , while the Persians had captured two forts in eastern Lazica . Immediately after the failure at Callinicum the Persians and Romans negotiated without success . The two sides re @-@ opened talks in spring 532 and finally signed the Eternal Peace in September 532 , which lasted less than eight years . Both powers agreed to return all occupied territories , and the Romans agreed to make a one @-@ time payment of 110 <unk> ( 11 @,@ 000 lb of gold ) . Iberia remained in Persian hands , and the Iberians who had left their country were given the choice of remaining in Roman territory or returning to their native land . 
 = = = Justinian vs. Khosrau I = = = 
 The Persians broke the " Treaty of Eternal Peace " in 540 AD , probably in response to the Roman reconquest of much of the former western empire , which had been facilitated by the cessation of war in the East . Khosrau I invaded and devastated Syria , extorting large sums of money from the cities of Syria and Mesopotamia , and systematically looting other cities including Antioch , whose population was deported to Persian territory . Belisarius , recalled from the campaigns in the West to deal with the Persian threat , waged an inconclusive campaign against Nisibis in 541 . Khosrau launched another offensive in Mesopotamia in 542 when he attempted to capture Sergiopolis . He soon withdrew in the face of an army under Belisarius , sacking the city of Callinicum en route . Attacks on a number of Roman cities were repulsed , and Persian forces were defeated at Dara . In 543 , the Romans launched an offensive against Dvin but were defeated by a small Persian force at <unk> . Khosrau besieged Edessa in 544 without success and was eventually bought off by the defenders . In the wake of the Persian retreat , Roman envoys proceeded to Ctesiphon for negotiations . A five @-@ year truce was agreed to in 545 , secured by Roman payments to the Persians . 
 Early in 548 , King Gubazes of Lazica , having found Persian protection oppressive , asked Justinian to restore the Roman protectorate . The emperor seized the chance , and in 548 – 549 combined Roman and Lazic forces won a series of victories against Persian armies , although they failed to take the key garrison of Petra . The city was finally subjugated in 551 , but in the same year a Persian offensive led by Mihr @-@ Mihroe occupied eastern Lazica . The truce that had been established in 545 was renewed outside Lazica for a further five years on condition that the Romans pay 2 @,@ 000 lb of gold each year . In Lazica the war dragged on inconclusively for several years , with neither side able to make any major gains . Khosrau , who now had to deal with the White Huns , renewed the truce in 557 , this time without excluding Lazica ; negotiations continued for a definite peace treaty . Finally , in 562 , the envoys of Justinian and Khosrau put together the Fifty @-@ Year Peace Treaty . The Persians agreed to evacuate Lazica and received an annual subsidy of 30 @,@ 000 nomismata ( solidi ) . Both sides agreed not to build new fortifications near the frontier and to ease restrictions on diplomacy and trade . 
 = = = War for the Caucasus = = = 
 War broke out again when Armenia and Iberia revolted against Sassanid rule in 571 AD , following clashes involving Roman and Persian proxies in Yemen and the Syrian desert , and after Roman negotiations for an alliance with the Turks against Persia . Justin II brought Armenia under his protection , while Roman troops under Justin 's cousin Marcian raided Arzanene and invaded Persian Mesopotamia , where they defeated local forces . Marcian 's sudden dismissal and the arrival of troops under Khosrau resulted in a ravaging of Syria , the failure of the Roman siege of Nisibis and the fall of Dara . At a cost of 45 @,@ 000 solidi , a one @-@ year truce in Mesopotamia ( eventually extended to five years ) was arranged , but in the Caucasus and on the desert frontiers the war continued . In 575 , Khosrau I attempted to combine aggression in Armenia with discussion of a permanent peace . He invaded Anatolia and sacked Sebasteia , but after a clash near Melitene the Persian army suffered heavy losses while fleeing across the Euphrates under Roman attack . 
 The Romans exploited Persian disarray as general Justinian invaded deep into Persian territory and raided Atropatene . Khosrau sought peace but abandoned this initiative after <unk> won a victory in Armenia , where Roman actions had alienated local inhabitants . In the spring of 578 the war in Mesopotamia resumed with Persian raids on Roman territory . The Roman general Maurice retaliated by raiding Persian Mesopotamia , capturing the stronghold of <unk> , and sacking Singara . Khosrau again opened peace negotiations but he died early in 579 and his successor Hormizd IV ( r . 578 @-@ 590 ) preferred to continue the war . 
 In 580 , Hormizd IV abolished the Caucasian Iberian monarchy , and turned Iberia into a Persian province ruled by a <unk> ( governor ) . During the 580s , the war continued inconclusively with victories on both sides . In 582 , Maurice won a battle at Constantia over Adarmahan and <unk> , who was killed , but the Roman general did not follow up his victory ; he had to hurry to Constantinople to pursue his imperial ambitions . Another Roman victory at Solachon in 586 likewise failed to break the stalemate . 
 The Persians captured Martyropolis through treachery in 589 , but that year the stalemate was shattered when the Persian general Bahram Chobin , having been dismissed and humiliated by Hormizd IV , raised a rebellion . Hormizd was overthrown in a palace coup in 590 and replaced by his son Khosrau II , but Bahram pressed on with his revolt regardless and the defeated Khosrau was soon forced to flee for safety to Roman territory , while Bahram took the throne as Bahram VI . With support from Maurice , Khosrau raised a rebellion against Bahram , and in 591 the combined forces of his supporters and the Romans restored Khosrau II to power . In exchange for their help , Khosrau not only returned Dara and Martyropolis but also agreed to cede the western half of Iberia and more than half of Persian Armenia to the Romans . 
 = = = Climax = = = 
 In 602 the Roman army campaigning in the Balkans mutinied under the leadership of Phocas , who succeeded in seizing the throne and then killed Maurice and his family . Khosrau II used the murder of his benefactor as a pretext for war . In the early years of the war the Persians enjoyed overwhelming and unprecedented success . They were aided by Khosrau 's use of a pretender claiming to be Maurice 's son , and by the revolt against Phocas led by the Roman general Narses . In 603 Khosrau defeated and killed the Roman general Germanus in Mesopotamia and laid siege to Dara . Despite the arrival of Roman reinforcements from Europe , he won another victory in 604 , while Dara fell after a nine @-@ month siege . Over the following years the Persians gradually overcame the fortress cities of Mesopotamia by siege , one after another . At the same time they won a string of victories in Armenia and systematically subdued the Roman garrisons in the Caucasus . 
 Heraclius deposed Phocas in 610 after sailing to Constantinople from Carthage . Around the same time , the Persians completed their conquest of Mesopotamia and the Caucasus , and in 611 they overran Syria and entered Anatolia , occupying Caesarea . Having expelled the Persians from Anatolia in 612 , Heraclius launched a major counter @-@ offensive in Syria in 613 . He was decisively defeated outside Antioch by Shahrbaraz and Shahin , and the Roman position collapsed . Over the following decade the Persians were able to conquer Palestine and Egypt and to devastate Anatolia . Meanwhile , the Avars and Slavs took advantage of the situation to overrun the Balkans , bringing the Roman Empire to the brink of destruction . 
 During these years , Heraclius strove to rebuild his army , slashing non @-@ military expenditures , devaluing the currency and melting down Church plate , with the backing of Patriarch Sergius , to raise the necessary funds to continue the war . In 622 , Heraclius left Constantinople , entrusting the city to Sergius and general Bonus as regents of his son . He assembled his forces in Asia Minor and , after conducting exercises to revive their morale , he launched a new counter @-@ offensive , which took on the character of a holy war . In the Caucasus he inflicted a defeat on an army led by a Persian @-@ allied Arab chief and then won a victory over the Persians under Shahrbaraz . Following a lull in 623 , while he negotiated a truce with the Avars , Heraclius resumed his campaigns in the East in 624 and routed an army led by Khosrau at <unk> in Atropatene . In 625 he defeated the generals Shahrbaraz , Shahin and Shahraplakan in Armenia , and in a surprise attack that winter he stormed Shahrbaraz 's headquarters and attacked his troops in their winter billets . Supported by a Persian army commanded by Shahrbaraz , together with the Avars and Slavs , the three unsuccessfully besieged Constantinople in 626 , while a second Persian army under Shahin suffered another crushing defeat at the hands of Heraclius ' brother Theodore . 
 Meanwhile , Heraclius formed an alliance with the Turks , who took advantage of the dwindling strength of the Persians to ravage their territories in the Caucasus . Late in 627 , Heraclius launched a winter offensive into Mesopotamia , where , despite the desertion of the Turkish contingent that had accompanied him , he defeated the Persians at the Battle of Nineveh . Continuing south along the Tigris , he sacked Khosrau 's great palace at Dastagird and was only prevented from attacking Ctesiphon by the destruction of the bridges on the Nahrawan Canal . Discredited by this series of disasters , Khosrau was overthrown and killed in a coup led by his son Kavadh II , who at once sued for peace , agreeing to withdraw from all occupied territories . Heraclius restored the True Cross to Jerusalem with a majestic ceremony in 629 . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The devastating impact of this last war , added to the cumulative effects of a century of almost continuous conflict , left both empires crippled . When Kavadh II died only months after coming to the throne , Persia was plunged into several years of dynastic turmoil and civil war . The Sassanids were further weakened by economic decline , heavy taxation from Khosrau II 's campaigns , religious unrest , and the increasing power of the provincial landholders . The Roman Empire was also severely affected , with its financial reserves exhausted by the war and the Balkans now largely in the hands of the Slavs . Additionally , Anatolia was devastated by repeated Persian invasions ; the Empire 's hold on its recently regained territories in the Caucasus , Syria , Mesopotamia , Palestine and Egypt was loosened by many years of Persian occupation . 
 Neither empire was given any chance to recover , as within a few years they were struck by the onslaught of the Arabs ( newly united by Islam ) , which , according to Howard @-@ Johnston , " can only be likened to a human tsunami " . According to George Liska , the " unnecessarily prolonged Byzantine – Persian conflict opened the way for Islam " . The Sassanid Empire rapidly fell to the Arab Muslim armies and was completely destroyed . During the Byzantine – Arab Wars , the exhausted Roman Empire 's recently regained eastern and southern provinces of Syria , Armenia , Egypt and North Africa were also lost , reducing the Empire to a territorial rump consisting of Anatolia and a scatter of islands and footholds in the Balkans and Italy . These remaining lands were thoroughly impoverished by frequent attacks , marking the transition from classical urban civilization to a more rural , medieval form of society . However , unlike Persia , the Roman Empire ultimately survived the Arab assault , holding onto its residual territories and decisively repulsing two Arab sieges of its capital in 674 – 678 and 717 – 718 . The Roman Empire also lost its territories in Crete and southern Italy to the Arabs in later conflicts , though these too were ultimately recovered . 
 = = Strategies and military tactics = = 
 When the Roman and Parthian Empires first collided in the 1st century BC , it appeared that Parthia had the potential to push its frontier to the Aegean and the Mediterranean . However , the Romans repulsed the great invasion of Syria and Anatolia by Pacorus and Labienus , and were gradually able to take advantage of the weaknesses of the Parthian military system , which , according to George Rawlinson , was adapted for national defense but ill @-@ suited for conquest . The Romans , on the other hand , were continually modifying and evolving their " grand strategy " from Trajan 's time onwards , and were by the time of Pacorus able to take the offensive against the Parthians . Like the Sassanids in the late 3rd and 4th centuries , the Parthians generally avoided any sustained defense of Mesopotamia against the Romans . However , the Iranian plateau never fell , as the Roman expeditions had always exhausted their offensive impetus by the time they reached lower Mesopotamia , and their extended line of communications through territory not sufficiently pacified exposed them to revolts and counterattacks . 
 From the 4th century AD onwards , the Persian Sassanids grew in strength and adopted the role of aggressor . They considered much of the land added to the Roman Empire in Parthian and early Sassanid times to rightfully belong to the Persian sphere . Everett Wheeler argues that " the Sassanids , administratively more centralized than the Parthians , formally organized defense of their territory , although they lacked a standing army until Khosrau I " . In general , the Romans regarded the Sassanids as a more serious threat than the Parthians , while the Sassanids regarded the Roman Empire as the enemy par excellence . 
 Militarily , the Sassanids continued the Parthians ' heavy dependence on the combination of light @-@ horse archers and cataphracts , the heavy armored cavalry provided by the aristocracy . They added a contingent of war elephants obtained from the Indus Valley , but their infantry quality was inferior to that of the Romans . The Persian heavy cavalry inflicted several defeats on the Roman foot @-@ soldiers , including those led by Crassus in 53 BC , Mark Antony in 36 BC , and Valerian in 260 AD . The need to counter this threat led to the introduction of <unk> into the Roman army ; as a result , heavily armed cavalry grew in importance in both the Roman and Persian armies after the 3rd century AD and until the end of the wars . The Romans had achieved and maintained a high degree of sophistication in siege warfare and had developed a range of siege machines . On the other hand , the Parthians were inept at besieging ; their cavalry armies were more suited to the hit @-@ and @-@ run tactics that destroyed Antony 's siege train in 36 BC . The situation changed with the rise of the Sassanids , when Rome encountered an enemy equally skilled in siegecraft , who made use of artillery , machines captured from the Romans , embankments , and siege towers . 
 Towards the end of the 1st century AD , Rome organized the protection of its eastern frontiers through a line of fortifications , the limes system , which lasted until the Muslim conquests of the 7th century after improvements by Diocletian . Like the Romans , the Sassanids constructed defensive walls opposite the territory of their opponents . According to R. N. Frye , it was under Shapur II that the Persian system was extended , probably in imitation of Diocletian 's construction of the limes of the Syrian and Mesopotamian frontiers of the Roman Empire . The Roman border units were known as limitanei , and they faced the Lakhmids in Iraq , who frequently aided the Persians in their contests with the Romans . Shapur intended a permanent defense force against other Arabs of the desert , especially those allied with Rome . Shapur also built a line of fortifications in the west on the model of the Roman system of limes , which impressed the Sassanids . 
 By the beginning of Sassanid rule , a number of buffer states existed between the empires . These were absorbed by the central state over time , and by the 7th century the last buffer state , the Arab Lakhmids of Al @-@ Hirah , was annexed to the Sassanid Empire . Frye notes that in the 3rd century AD such client states played an important role in Roman – Sassanid relations , but both empires gradually replaced them by an organized defense system run by the central government and based on the limes and the fortified frontier cities , such as Dara . Recent studies and assessments comparing the Sassanids and Parthians have reaffirmed the superiority of Sassanid siegecraft , military engineering , and organization , as well as ability to build defensive works . 
 = = Assessments = = 
 The Roman – Persian Wars have been characterized as " futile " and too " depressing and tedious to contemplate " . <unk> , Cassius Dio noted their " never @-@ ending cycle of armed confrontations " and observed that " it is shown by the facts themselves that [ Severus ' ] conquest has been a source of constant wars and great expense to us . For it yields very little and uses up vast sums ; and now that we have reached out to peoples who are neighbor of the Medes and the Parthians rather than of ourselves , we are always , one might say , fighting the battles of those peoples . " In the long series of wars between the two powers , the frontier in upper Mesopotamia remained more or less constant . Historians point out that the stability of the frontier over the centuries is remarkable , although Nisibis , Singara , Dara and other cities of upper Mesopotamia changed hands from time to time , and the possession of these frontier cities gave one empire a trade advantage over the other . As Frye states : 
 One has the impression that the blood spilled in the warfare between the two states brought as little real gain to one side or the other as the few meters of land gained at terrible cost in the trench warfare of the First World War . 
 Both sides attempted to justify their respective military goals in both active and reactive ways . The Roman quest for world domination was accompanied by a sense of mission and pride in Western civilization and by ambitions to become a guarantor of peace and order . Roman sources reveal long @-@ standing prejudices with regard to the Eastern powers ' customs , religious structures , languages , and forms of government . John F. Haldon underscores that " although the conflicts between Persia and East Rome revolved around issues of strategic control around the eastern frontier , yet there was always a religious @-@ ideological element present " . From the time of Constantine on , Roman emperors appointed themselves as the protectors of Christians of Persia . This attitude created intense suspicions of the loyalties of Christians living in Sassanid Iran and often led to Roman – Persian tensions or even military confrontations . A characteristic of the final phase of the conflict , when what had begun in 611 – 612 as a raid was soon transformed into a war of conquest , was the pre @-@ eminence of the Cross as a symbol of imperial victory and of the strongly religious element in the Roman imperial propaganda ; Heraclius himself cast Khosrau as the enemy of God , and authors of the 6th and 7th centuries were fiercely hostile to Persia . 
 = = Historiography = = 
 The sources for the history of Parthia and the wars with Rome are scant and scattered . The Parthians followed the Achaemenid tradition and favored oral historiography , which assured the corruption of their history once they had been vanquished . The main sources of this period are thus Roman ( Tacitus , Marius Maximus , and Justin ) and Greek historians ( Herodian , Cassius Dio and Plutarch ) . The 13th book of the Sibylline Oracles narrates the effects of the Roman – Persian Wars in Syria from the reign of Gordian III to the domination of the province by Odaenathus of Palmyra . With the end of Herodian 's record , all contemporary chronological narratives of Roman history are lost , until the narratives of Lactantius and Eusebius at the beginning of the 4th century , both from a Christian perspective . 
 The principal sources for the early Sassanid period are not contemporary . Among them the most important are the Greeks Agathias and Malalas , the Persians Tabari and Ferdowsi , the Armenian <unk> , and the Syriac Chronicles of Edessa and Arbela , most of whom depended on late Sassanid sources , especially <unk> @-@ <unk> . The Augustan History is neither contemporary nor reliable , but it is the chief narrative source for Severus and Carus . The trilingual ( Greek , Parthian , and Middle Persian ) inscriptions of Shapur are primary sources . These were isolated attempts at approaching written historiography however , and by the end of the 4th century AD , even the practice of carving rock reliefs and leaving short inscriptions was abandoned by the Sassanids . 
 For the period between 353 and 378 , there is an eyewitness source to the main events on the eastern frontier in the Res Gestae of Ammianus Marcellinus . For the events covering the period between the 4th and the 6th century , the works of <unk> , Zosimus , Priscus , and Zonaras are especially valuable . The single most important source for Justinian 's Persian wars up to 553 is Procopius . His continuators Agathias and Menander Protector offer many important details as well . Theophylact Simocatta is the main source for the reign of Maurice , while Theophanes , Chronicon Paschale and the poems of George of Pisidia are useful sources for the last Roman – Persian war . In addition to Byzantine sources , two Armenian historians , <unk> and Movses , contribute to the coherent narrative of Heraclius ' war and are regarded by Howard @-@ Johnston as " the most important of extant non @-@ Muslim sources " . 
 = 2000 – 01 S.L. Benfica season = 
 The 2000 – 01 season was Sport Lisboa e Benfica 's 97th season in existence , and the club 's 67th consecutive season in the Primeira Liga . It ran from 1 July 2000 to 30 June 2001 . Benfica competed domestically in the Primeira Liga and the Taça de Portugal . The club also participated in the UEFA Cup , by virtue of finishing third in that tournament the previous season . 
 The season is the worst in Benfica history since the start of the Primeira Liga during 1934 – 35 . The club switched managers two times . Jupp Heynckes was replaced by José Mourinho in September . Toni , who previously guided the club to a league title , took the reins in December . In the transfer market , young players like Marchena and Fernando Meira were brought in , and mixed with the experience of 31 year @-@ old , Pierre van Hooijdonk , who arrived to replace Nuno Gomes , were meant to improve the team competitiveness . However , the biggest event of the pre @-@ season was the release of João Pinto , the longest @-@ serving player on the club , and the incumbent captain . This decision was poorly received by the fans , who criticized Heynckes and the president for the move . Both would leave the club in the following months . In the league campaign , the team lacked balance year @-@ round and only briefly entered the league race , spending all but three weeks out the top three . Even the successful partnership of Pierre van Hooijdonk and João Tomás , with 36 goals between them , did not prevent the club from finishing in sixth place , 23 points behind winner Boavista . Consequently , Benfica missed out on UEFA competitions for the first time in 51 years ( since the 1959 – 60 season ) . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ season = = = 
 Preparations for a new Benfica season started in late @-@ May 2000 . Manager Jupp Heynckes remained for a second year , with more control this time in building up the squad . His choices caused immediate controversy , the biggest being the release of Benfica veteran João Pinto . Pinto was the incumbent team captain and the longest @-@ serving player , who had been at Benfica since the 1992 – 93 season . José Manuel Delgado of Record predicted a difficult season for the German manager : " ... he will have less tolerance from the fans than that offered to Artur Jorge ( three match days ) , or Manuel José ( four match days ) ... " He forwent internationals like Paulo Bento and Amaral , but indulged on Marchena , Meira and Van Hooijdonk . The last was intended to replace Nuno Gomes , who moved to Fiorentina after a successful run at Euro 2000 . All of this spending happened in spite of club @-@ wide financial difficulties , from missed salaries for Michael Thomas , to the basketball section of the club going months without pay . 
 The pre @-@ season started on 7 July , with a schedule of 8 games . It included a match celebrating the 50th anniversary of Olympique Lyon , and the Carlsberg Belfast Challenge against Linfield and Liverpool . Benfica ended the pre @-@ season on 11 August , with a draw against Aston Villa . 
 = = = August – October = = = 
 Benfica started their 2000 – 01 Primeira Liga campaign on the road in a Clássico match against FC Porto , on 19 August 2000 . João Marcelino stated that Porto " ... had some luck in the way they obtained their first goal ( shot from Alenichev deflected off <unk> and betrayed Enke ) ... " , allowing them to manage the lead until the end . Benfica 's first home game was against Beira @-@ Mar on 27 August . At ten minutes into the second half of that game , Maniche 's goal put Benfica up 3 – 0 , setting them up for victory . 
 September began for Benfica with a visit to Leiria . It was a hard @-@ fought match , in which referee José <unk> gave out twelve bookings . They narrowly escaped defeat when Chano scored in stoppage time . Benfica started their European season on 14 September in Sweden , with a 1 – 2 loss to host <unk> . Benfica won their second home game of the season , on 18 September , against Estrela da Amadora , thanks to two goals scored by Van Hooijdonk in consecutive minutes near the end of regulation time . In the post @-@ match interview , following weeks of fan pressure , club manager Heynckes lost his calm and proclaimed : " I can 't take this club anymore . If they want me gone , I 'll leave tomorrow . " He was immediately let go , and replaced with 37 @-@ year @-@ old José Mourinho . Former player Mozer joined him as assistant . It was Mourinho 's first time as manager , having previously worked only as an interpreter for Bobby Robson and Louis van Gaal . His first game as manager was on the road against Boavista , in which his team lost 0 – 1 to a goal from ex @-@ Benfica player Duda . The second leg of the UEFA Cup was a home game played on 28 September at the Estádio da Luz . It ended in a 2 – 2 draw and they were eliminated from the tournament – a result reminiscent of their 1997 – 98 season . 
 Benfica started October with a home game against Braga . The visitors took the lead in the first half , but João Tomás and Van Hooijdonk responded with a goal each , reversing the score in the second half . However , Braga went on to equalize with a last @-@ minute goal , costing Benfica two points . On 15 October , Benfica won its third league game of the season by defeating Belenenses one – nil behind Marchena 's goal . The team played Paços de Ferreira on the 21st , dropping two points in a 0 – 0 draw . Benfica played their last game of the month against Campomaiorense on the 29th , winning with a double from João Tomás , scored within a space of ten minutes from each other . They finished the month in seventh place on the league table , nine points behind leader Porto . 
 = = = November – February = = = 
 Benfica faced Marítimo in an away game at the beginning of November . They lost 0 – 3 , to a hat @-@ trick from Lagorio . Without a single road game victory , the team dropped to tenth in the league 's standings . They hosted Farense in the second week of November and won 2 – 1 . Van Hooijdonk and João Tomás scored a goal each , within a 4 @-@ minute interval just before the final whistle , to give their team the three points . On 18 November , Benfica played Vitória de Guimarães on the road . They took the lead near the end of the first half , with a goal from Chano . The second half saw three additional goals , all by João Tomás . It was their first win as visitors , and they climbed to sixth place in the standings . Benfica played their last game of the month , on the 26th , at the Taça de Portugal against Campomaiorense . This fourth round match was won thanks to a late goal by Sabry . 
 Benfica started December with a Derby de Lisboa game against Sporting . They won 3 – 0 , with a first half goal by Van Hooijdonk and two goals in a five @-@ minute span from João Tomás . Following the win , Mourinho requested a contract extension as a demonstration of faith in the work he had put in along with his assistant : " Me [ Mourinho ] and Mozer thought that the only way to end speculation and the constant threat of being sacked in the event of a bad result ... was renewing our contracts for another season . " Their proposal was not met . They parted ways with the club through an announcement in a press conference : " He [ President <unk> ] thought it was better not to accept our request . We understood that decision showed a lack of trust in our work , and that we should offer our resignation ... " Benfica immediately appointed Toni – a long @-@ time favourite of the President – as the new manager . On 10 December , Benfica played Alverca away from home . They opened the score sheet with a goal from João Tomás close to half @-@ time , but <unk> equalized . Later , <unk> put the <unk> side in the lead , resulting in the fourth loss in seven matches in away games for Benfica . In the last match of the year 2000 , Benfica met a struggling Gil Vicente , who were at the bottom of the Primeira Liga standings . Unable to unlock the 0 – 0 draw , the club suffered their eighth winless league game of the season . 
 Early in January , Benfica played away from home , at <unk> , in a fifth round match of the Taça de Portugal . They won 3 – 1 and progressed to the next knock @-@ out stage , where they would face Porto . Benfica resumed their league campaign on the 7th , visiting Salgueiros . They won their second away game , after Van Hooijdonk scored with nine minutes remaining on the clock . They went on to win their third match in a row on 13 January , with a 5 – 1 home @-@ game win against Desportivo Aves . Benfica took an early lead with a Van Hooijdonk goal in the 15th minute , and added two more in the first half , one by Carlitos and another from an own goal . The Dutch striker added two more goals to his tally in the second half . On 17 January , Benfica received Porto for the first of three consecutive games against them . The first game was part of the Taça de Portugal and ended in a 1 – 1 draw . Maniche scored the lone Benfica goal before Maric equalized for Porto . A rematch was held to settle the tie . Four days later , on Sunday , Benfica hosted Porto for a Portuguese league match . They defeated the visitors 2 – 1 , after a goal from Van Hooijdonk in the 81st minute . This win allowed the club to climb to fourth in the league 's standings – their best position all year . The last of three games saw Benfica succumb to a four @-@ nil loss in the rematch for the Portuguese Cup . Manuel Queiroz wrote : " ... A thrashing that did not transpire what really happened in the field , because Fernando Santos ' team – in the best performance of the season – completely demolished a Benfica that never entered the game ... " Benfica 's last game of the month was played on the road on the 29th , against the <unk> side , Beira @-@ Mar. The match ended with a 3 – 1 win for Benfica , after another double for Van Hooijdonk . João Tomás also got on the score sheet . 
 On 4 February , the team beat União de Leiria at home by 3 goals to 2 . Benfica took the lead with a goal from João Tomás . Roger and Van Hooijdonk increased their lead by two goals , until Nuno Valente settled the final score . With this win , Benfica climbed to second place the league , now only five points behind leader Boavista . On the 16th , Benfica played Estrela da Amadora away from home . The game ended with a 2 – 1 victory for Benfica . Along with Boavista 's loss in Braga , this further reduced Benfica 's separation from the league leader . Benfica played their last match of February on the 25th against Boavista . Benfica had an opportunity to take the top place in the league table with a victory in that game , but they were unsuccessful at breaking the 0 – 0 draw . Van Hooijdonk had the best chance in the 78th minute , but his attempt struck the goalpost . 
 = = = March – May = = = 
 Benfica began March with an away game in Braga . They lost 3 – 1 in their first league loss since December . They dropped to fourth place in the standings . On the following Saturday , Benfica visited Belenenses and lost for a second time in a row . A week later , Benfica received Paços de Ferreira at home . The match ended with a 3 – 2 win for the visitors and Benfica dropped to fifth place . They were now eleven points behind leader Boavista . In the last game of March , Benfica faced Campomaiorense on the road . With a 1 – 1 draw , the team avoided losing all of their matches in March . However , their need to get points was aggravated , especially if they wanted to qualify for the European competitions . 
 In April , Benfica opened at home against Marítimo , with a squad composed mainly of reserve players . A 3 – 0 win helped get closer to both Braga and Sporting in the standings . On 13 April , Benfica visited Faro . The match ended in a 2 – 2 draw despite a Benfica having a first @-@ half lead . Nine days later , Benfica played Vitória de Guimarães at home . A sole goal from Sabry in the 31st minute was enough to secure the team 's second win in April . Closing out the month , Benfica travelled to Alvalade for the second Derby de Lisboa of the season . The game ended in a 3 – 0 loss for Benfica . This was the Lions ' best result against Benfica since the 1986 – 87 season . 
 On 4 May , Benfica played Alverca at home , where they lost 0 – 2 , and in the writing of João Querido Manhã for Record , the fans " burst into protests at the end , after they lost patience with the errors , passivity and lack of talent of the whole team . " . On 13 May , Benfica went to <unk> Ribeiro Novo to face Gil Vicente . The game ended in a 3 – 0 defeat – their tenth loss within the league , matching their previous record in the 1996 – 97 season . As a result , the club was overtaken by Belenenses in the league table . A week later , Benfica played host to Salgueiros in Da Luz . A final score of 1 – 1 saved Benfica from a record fourth straight loss , and gave the Porto @-@ based side their first point all season against a top 7 team . Benfica played the last game of the season against Desportivo de Aves on the road . At one point in the game , the team was losing three @-@ nil , but managed to equalize and finish with a four @-@ all draw . Toni stated that " Everyone did not do their best to avoid that a historic club slipped into a position that is not accustomed . " Benfica finished in a record @-@ breaking sixth place after the 34 @-@ game season with a tally of 15 wins , 9 draws and 10 losses that , together , summed up to 54 points . They were ninth @-@ lowest league @-@ wide in goals conceded – 44 in all . On the plus side , they were fifth best in the league at goal @-@ scoring , with a total of 54 goals . Van Hooijdonk was the second most productive player in the Primeira Liga with 19 goals . 
 = = Results = = 
 Win Draw Loss Postponed 
 = = = Overall record = = = 
 = = = Primeira Liga = = = 
 = = = = League table = = = = 
 Source : <unk> 
 Rules for classification : 1st points , 2nd head @-@ to @-@ head , 3rd goals average ( C ) 
 = Champion ; ( R ) = 
 Relegated ; ( P ) 
 = Promoted ; ( E ) = 
 Eliminated ; ( O ) 
 = Play @-@ off winner ; ( A ) = 
 Advances to a further round . 
 Only applicable when the season is not finished : ( Q ) 
 = Qualified to the phase of tournament indicated ; ( TQ ) = 
 Qualified to tournament , but not yet to the particular phase indicated ; ( RQ ) 
 = Qualified to the relegation tournament indicated ; ( DQ ) = 
 Disqualified from tournament . 
 = = = = Results by round = = = = 
 Source : <unk> : A 
 = Away ; H = 
 Home . Result : D 
 = Draw ; L = 
 Loss ; W 
 = Win ; P = 
 Postponed . 
 = = = = Matches = = = = 
 = = = Taça de Portugal = = = 
 = = = UEFA Cup = = = 
 = = = = First round = = = = 
 = = = Friendlies = = = 
 = = Player statistics = = 
 The squad for the season consisted of the players listed in the tables below , as well as staff members Heynckes ( manager ) , Mourinho ( manager ) , Toni ( manager ) and Mozer ( assistant coach ) . 
 Note 1 : Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 Note 2 : Players with squad numbers marked ‡ joined the club during the 2000 – 01 season via transfer , with more details in the following section . 
 = = Transfers = = 
 = = = In = = = 
 = = = Out = = = 
 = = = Out by loan = = = 
 = Operation Ten @-@ Go = 
 Operation Ten @-@ Go ( <unk> ( <unk> ) or ja : <unk> ( <unk> ) , Ten @-@ gō <unk> ) was a Japanese naval operation plan in 1945 , consisting of four likely scenarios . Its first scenario , Operation Heaven One ( or Ten @-@ ichi @-@ <unk> ) became the last major Japanese naval operation in the Pacific Theater of World War II . The resulting engagement is also known as the Battle of the East China Sea . 
 In April 1945 , the Japanese battleship Yamato ( the heaviest battleship in the world ) , along with nine other Japanese warships , embarked from Japan on a deliberate suicide attack upon Allied forces engaged in the Battle of Okinawa . The Japanese force was attacked , stopped , and almost destroyed by United States carrier @-@ borne aircraft before reaching Okinawa . Yamato and five other Japanese warships were sunk . 
 The battle demonstrated U.S. air supremacy in the Pacific theater by this stage in the war and the vulnerability of surface ships without air cover to aerial attack . The battle also exhibited Japan 's willingness to sacrifice entire ships , even the pride of its fleet , in desperate kamikaze attacks aimed at slowing the Allied advance on the Japanese home islands . This extremism reportedly contributed to the US decision to employ nuclear weapons against the Japanese . 
 = = Background = = 
 By early 1945 , following the Solomon Islands campaign , the Battle of the Philippine Sea and the Battle of Leyte Gulf , the once formidable Imperial Japanese Navy 's Combined Fleet was reduced to just a handful of operational warships and a few remaining aircraft and aircrew . Most of the remaining Japanese warships in the Combined Fleet were stationed at ports in Japan , with most of the large ships at Kure , Hiroshima . 
 As a final step before the planned invasion of the Japanese home islands , Allied forces invaded Okinawa on 1 April 1945 . In March , in briefing Emperor Hirohito on Japan 's response to the expected Okinawan invasion , Japanese military leaders explained that the Japanese Imperial Army was planning extensive air attacks , including the use of kamikaze . The emperor then reportedly asked , " But what about the Navy ? What are they doing to assist in defending Okinawa ? Have we no more ships ? " Now feeling pressured by the emperor to also mount some kind of attack , Japan 's Navy commanders conceived a kamikaze @-@ type mission for their remaining operational large ships , which included the battleship Yamato . 
 The resulting plan — drafted under the direction of the Commander in Chief of the Combined Fleet , Admiral Toyoda Soemu — called for Yamato and her escorts to attack the U.S. fleet supporting the U.S. troops landing on the west of the island . Yamato and her escorts were to fight their way to Okinawa and then beach themselves between Higashi and <unk> and fight as shore batteries until they were destroyed . Once destroyed , the ship 's surviving crewmembers were supposed to abandon the ships and fight U.S. forces on land . Very little , if any , air cover could be provided for the ships , which would render them almost helpless to concentrated attacks from US carrier @-@ based aircraft . In preparation for executing the plan , the assigned ships left Kure for Tokuyama , Yamaguchi , off <unk> , Japan , on 29 March . However , despite obeying orders to prepare for the mission , Vice @-@ Admiral Seiichi Itō — commander of the Ten @-@ Go force — still refused to actually order his ships to carry it out , believing the plan to be futile and wasteful . 
 Other commanders of the Imperial Japanese Navy also had very negative feelings about the operation , believing that it was a waste of human life and fuel . Captain Atsushi Ōi — who commanded escort fleets — was critical as fuel and resources were diverted from his operation . As he was told that the aim of this operation was " the tradition and the glory of Navy , " he shouted : 
 This war is of our nation and why should the honor of our " surface fleet " be more respected ? Who cares about their glory ? Damn fools ! 
 ( " Surface fleet " refers to capital ships , especially battleships that " should have won the war " . ) 
 Vice Admiral Ryūnosuke Kusaka flew from Tokyo on 5 April to Tokuyama in a final attempt to convince the assembled commanders of the Combined Fleet — including Admiral Itō — to accept the plan . Upon first hearing of the proposed operation ( it had been kept secret from most of them ) , the Combined Fleet commanders and captains unanimously joined Admiral Itō in rejecting it for the same reasons that he had expressed . Admiral Kusaka then explained that the Navy 's attack would help divert U.S. aircraft away from the Army 's planned kamikaze attacks on the U.S. fleet at Okinawa . He also explained that Japan 's national leadership , including the emperor , were expecting the Navy to make their best effort to support the defense of Okinawa . 
 Upon hearing this , the Combined Fleet commanders relented and accepted the proposed plan . The ship 's crews were briefed on the nature of the mission and given the opportunity to stay behind if desired — none did . However , approximately 80 crew members who were new , sick , or infirm , were ordered off the ships . The ships ' crews now engaged in some last @-@ minute intense drills to prepare for the mission , mostly practicing damage @-@ control procedures . At midnight , the ships were fueled . Reportedly , in secret defiance of orders to provide the ships with only just enough fuel to reach Okinawa , the Tokuyama personnel actually gave Yamato and the other ships almost all of the remaining fuel in the port , although this probably still was not enough to allow the force to return to Japan from Okinawa . 
 = = Battle = = 
 At 16 : 00 on 6 April , Yamato , with Admiral Ito on board , the light cruiser Yahagi and eight destroyers departed Tokuyama to begin the mission . Two submarines — USS <unk> and <unk> — sighted the Japanese force as it proceeded south through Bungo Suido . Although they were unable to attack ( due to the ships ' speed ) , they did spend several hours shadowing the Japanese sortie and sending updates of its course to the U.S. fleet . The submarines ' messages , which were reportedly sent uncoded , were also picked up by radio operators on the Japanese ships . 
 At dawn on 7 April , the Japanese force passed the Ōsumi Peninsula into the open ocean heading south from Kyūshū toward Okinawa . They shifted into a defensive formation , with Yahagi leading Yamato and the eight destroyers deployed in a ring around the two larger ships , with each ship 1 @,@ 500 m ( 1 @,@ 600 yd ) from each other and proceeding at 20 kn ( 23 mph ; 37 km / h ) . One of the Japanese destroyers — Asashimo — developed engine trouble and turned back . U.S. reconnaissance aircraft began to shadow the main force of ships . At 10 : 00 , the Japanese force turned west to make it look like they were withdrawing , but at 11 : 30 , after being detected by two American PBM Mariner flying boats ( the Yamato fired a salvo with her 460 mm ( 18 @.@ 1 in ) bow guns using special " beehive shells " ( <unk> ( san @-@ shiki <unk> dan ) but could not prevent the two planes from shadowing the Japanese force ) , they turned back towards Okinawa . 
 Upon receiving contact reports early on 7 April , U.S. 5th Fleet commander Admiral Raymond Spruance ordered Task Force 54 , which consisted mostly of modernized Standard battleships under the command of Admiral Morton Deyo ( which were engaged in shore bombardment ) , to intercept and destroy the Japanese sortie . Deyo moved to execute his orders , but Vice Admiral Marc A. Mitscher , who commanded Task Force 58 ( TF 58 ) , preempted Spruance and Deyo by launching a massive air strike from his carriers , without informing Spruance until after the launches were completed . 
 Around 10 : 00 on 7 April , Task Groups 58 @.@ 1 and 58 @.@ 3 ( TG 58 @.@ 1 and 58 @.@ 3 ) began launching almost 400 aircraft in several waves from eight carriers ( TG 58 @.@ 1 : USS Hornet , Bennington , Belleau Wood , San Jacinto ; TG 58 @.@ 3 USS Essex , Bunker Hill , Hancock and Bataan ) that were located just east of Okinawa . The aircraft consisted of F6F Hellcat and F4U Corsair fighters , SB2C Helldiver dive bombers , and TBF Avenger torpedo bombers . After being informed of Mitscher 's launches , Spruance agreed that the airstrikes could go ahead as planned . As a contingency , Spruance ordered Admiral Deyo to assemble a force of six battleships ( USS Massachusetts , Indiana , New Jersey , South Dakota , Wisconsin , and Missouri ) , together with seven cruisers ( including the battlecruisers USS Alaska and Guam ) and 21 destroyers , and to prepare for a surface engagement with Yamato should the airstrikes prove unsuccessful . 
 Around 12 : 00 , the first American aircraft arrived over Yamato ; these were F6F Hellcat and F4U Corsair fighters , which were under orders to deal with any Japanese aircraft that might appear to defend the ships below . None did . 
 Since it soon became obvious that the Japanese force had no air cover , the U.S. aircraft were able to set up for their attacks without fear of opposition from Japanese aircraft . U.S. bomber and torpedo aircraft arriving over the Yamato group — after their two @-@ hour flight from Okinawa — were thus able to circle the Japanese ship formation just out of anti @-@ aircraft range in order to methodically set up their attacks on the warships below . The first wave of U.S. carrier planes were spotted by a Japanese lookout on the bridge at 12 : 32 . Two minutes later , Yamato opened fire with her 460 mm main batteries . The Japanese ships stopped zigzagging and increased speed to 24 kn ( 28 mph ; 44 km / h ) , beginning evasive maneuvers , and opened fire with their anti @-@ aircraft guns . Yamato carried almost 150 anti @-@ aircraft guns , including her massive 460 mm guns which could fire special " Common Type 3 " anti @-@ aircraft shells , known to the Japanese as " <unk> " . The U.S. torpedo airplanes mainly attacked from the port side so that if the torpedoes mainly hit from that side , it would increase the likelihood of the target ship capsizing . 
 At 12 : 46 , a torpedo hit Yahagi directly in her engine room , killing the entire engineering room crew and bringing her to a complete stop . Yahagi was hit by at least six more torpedoes and 12 bombs by succeeding waves of air attacks . The Japanese destroyer Isokaze attempted to come to Yahagi 's aid but was attacked and heavily damaged , and sank sometime later . Yahagi capsized and sank at 14 : 05 . 
 During the first attack wave , despite intensive evasive maneuvers that caused most of the bombs and torpedoes aimed at her to miss , Yamato was hit by two armor @-@ piercing bombs and one torpedo . Her speed was not affected , but one of the bombs started a fire aft of the superstructure that was not extinguished . Also , during the first attack wave , Japanese destroyers Hamakaze and Suzutsuki were heavily damaged and taken out of the battle . Hamakaze sank later . 
 At 13 : 00 exact , Yamato changed course to 180 degrees heading south . 
 Between 13 : 20 and 14 : 15 , the second and third waves of U.S. aircraft attacked , heavily concentrating on Yamato . During this time , Yamato was hit by at least eight torpedoes and up to 15 bombs . The bombs did extensive damage to the topside of the ship , including knocking out power to the gun directors and forcing the anti @-@ aircraft guns to be individually and manually aimed and fired , greatly reducing their effectiveness . The torpedo hits — almost all on the port side — caused Yamato to list enough that capsizing was now an imminent danger . The water damage @-@ control station had been destroyed by a bomb hit making it impossible to counter @-@ flood the specially designed spaces within the ship 's hull to counteract hull damage . At 13 : 33 , in a desperate attempt to keep the ship from capsizing , Yamato 's damage control team counter @-@ flooded both starboard engine and boiler rooms . This mitigated the danger but also drowned the several hundred crewmen manning those stations , who were given no notice that their compartments were about to fill with water . The loss of the starboard engines — plus the weight of the water — caused Yamato to slow to about 10 kn ( 12 mph ; 19 km / h ) . At that same moment , the Americans launched another 110 aircraft from Task Group 58 . Twenty Avengers made a new torpedo run from 60 degrees to port . Yamato started a sharp turn to port but three torpedoes ripped into her port side amidships , jamming her auxiliary rudder in position hard port . 
 With Yamato proceeding more slowly and therefore easier to target , U.S. torpedo aircraft concentrated on hitting her rudder and stern with torpedoes in order to affect her steering ability , which they succeeded in doing . At 14 : 02 , after being informed that the ship could no longer steer and was unavoidably sinking , Admiral Ito ordered the mission canceled , the crew to abandon ship , and for the remaining ships to begin rescuing survivors . Yamato communicated this message to the other surviving ships by signal flag because her radios had been destroyed . 
 At 14 : 05 , Yamato was stopped dead in the water and began to capsize . Admiral Ito and Captain <unk> refused to abandon her with the rest of the survivors . At 14 : 20 , Yamato capsized completely and began to sink ( 30 ° 22 ′ N 128 ° 04 ′ E ) . At 14 : 23 , she suddenly blew up with an explosion so large that it was reportedly heard and seen 200 km ( 110 nmi ; 120 mi ) away in Kagoshima and sent up a mushroom @-@ shaped cloud almost 20 @,@ 000 ft ( 6 @,@ 100 m ) into the air . Japanese survivor Yoshida Mitsuru said that her large explosion downed several U.S. planes observing her end . The explosion is believed to have occurred when the fires ignited by bomb hits reached the main magazines . 
 Attempting to make it back to port , Japanese destroyer Asashimo was bombed and sunk with all hands by U.S. aircraft . The Japanese destroyer Kasumi was also crippled by U.S. carrier aircraft attack during the battle and had to be scuttled by other , relatively undamaged Japanese destroyers . Suzutsuki — despite her bow being blown off — was able to make it to Sasebo , Japan , by steaming in reverse the entire way . 
 The remaining three less @-@ damaged Japanese destroyers ( Fuyutsuki , Yukikaze , and Hatsushimo ) were able to rescue 280 survivors from Yamato ( sources differ on the size of Yamato 's crew , giving it as between 2 @,@ 750 and 3 @,@ 300 men ) , plus 555 survivors from Yahagi ( out of a crew of 1 @,@ 000 ) and just over 800 survivors from Isokaze , Hamakaze , and Kasumi . Between 3 @,@ 700 and 4 @,@ 250 Japanese naval personnel perished in the battle . The ships took the survivors to Sasebo . 
 A total of 10 U.S. aircraft were shot down by anti @-@ aircraft fire from the Japanese ships ; some of the aircrews were rescued by seaplane or submarine . In total , the U.S. lost 12 men . Some of the Japanese survivors reported that U.S. fighter aircraft machine @-@ gunned Japanese survivors floating in the water . Japanese survivors also reported that U.S. aircraft temporarily halted their attacks on the Japanese destroyers during the time that the destroyers were busy picking up survivors from the water . 
 During the battle , the Japanese Army conducted an air attack on the U.S. naval fleet at Okinawa as promised , but they failed to sink any ships . Around 115 aircraft — many of them kamikaze — attacked the U.S. ships throughout the day of 7 April . Kamikaze aircraft hit Hancock , battleship USS Maryland , and destroyer USS Bennett , causing moderate damage to Hancock and Maryland and heavy damage to Bennett . About 100 of the Japanese aircraft were lost in the attack . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Ten @-@ Go was the last major Japanese naval operation of the war , and the remaining Japanese warships had little involvement in combat operations for the rest of the conflict . Suzutsuki was never repaired . <unk> was repaired but hit a U.S. air @-@ dropped mine at Moji , Japan , on 20 August 1945 , and was not subsequently repaired . Yukikaze survived the war almost undamaged . Hatsushimo hit a U.S. air @-@ dropped mine on 30 July 1945 , near Maizuru , Japan , and was the 129th , and last , Japanese destroyer sunk in the war . 
 Maryland was kept out of the war following the kamikaze attacks . 
 Okinawa was declared secure by Allied forces on 21 June 1945 , after an intense and costly battle . Japan surrendered in August 1945 , after being bombed twice with atomic weapons . The apparent willingness of Japan to sacrifice so many of its people using suicidal tactics such as Operation Ten @-@ Go and in the Battle of Okinawa reportedly was a factor in the American decision to employ atomic weapons against Japan . 
 The story of Operation Ten @-@ Go is revered to some degree in modern Japan as evidenced by appearances of the story in popular Japanese culture which usually portray the event as a brave , selfless , but futile , symbolic effort by the participating Japanese sailors to defend their homeland . One of the reasons the event may have such significance in Japanese culture is that the word Yamato was often used as a poetic name for Japan . Thus , the end of battleship Yamato could serve as a metaphor for the end of the Japanese empire . 
 = Indiana Jones and the Infernal Machine = 
 Indiana Jones and the Infernal Machine is a multi @-@ platform action @-@ adventure video game by LucasArts released in late 1999 . The first 3D installment in the series , its gameplay focuses on solving puzzles , fighting enemies , and various platforming sections . The story told is set between the events of Indiana Jones and the Iron Phoenix and Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull , and puts the eponymous protagonist , the adventurer Indiana Jones , against the Soviet Union . In a race for a mythological Babylonian power source , he joins forces with the Central Intelligence Agency and collects four pieces of the Infernal Machine , an ancient device that allegedly opens a portal to another dimension . 
 The title was designed , written , and directed by Hal Barwood who considered the Indiana Jones franchise a perfect fit for the action @-@ adventure genre . Initially developed for the Windows 95 and 98 operating systems , the game later received an enhanced Nintendo 64 port jointly developed with Factor 5 , as well as a 2D version for the Game Boy Color created by HotGen . Infernal Machine received generally favorable reviews , having been praised for its detailed storyline and sophisticated level designs , though widely criticized for its unwieldy control scheme . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Infernal Machine is an action @-@ adventure and , as such , features a hybrid of various gameplay mechanics . The player sees Indiana Jones from a third @-@ person perspective and controls him through 17 levels of a fully polygonal 3D world . A recurring element of Infernal Machine are platforming sections , for which a combination of running , jumping , climbing , and the use of the protagonist 's trademark bullwhip is required . Furthermore , several human , animal and supernatural enemies are encountered during the course of the game , which the player can fight off with numerous firearms , the aforementioned whip , and a machete . In addition to these obstacles , the game largely focuses on solving puzzles and discovering treasures . Some levels include vehicle @-@ themed portions such as rafting , jeep treks , and mine cart chases . The main objective of the game is to collect four machine parts in order to complete the titular Infernal Machine . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The story of the game is set in 1947 and depicts archaeologist and adventurer Indiana Jones returning to his digging career after his involvement in World War II . Sophia Hapgood , an old friend of Indiana and now a member of the Central Intelligence Agency , visits him at his dig site in the Canyonlands , and informs him that the Russians are excavating the ruins of Babylon . Led by Dr. Gennadi Volodnikov , a physicist interested in alternate dimensions , the Soviets ' supposed objective is to find a weapon more powerful than the atom bomb , giving them a decided advantage in the Cold War . 
 Sophia hires Indiana to investigate what exactly the Russians are searching for , and he travels to their dig site in the Kingdom of Iraq . There , he joins up with Sophia 's boss Simon Turner and finds out that Volodnikov is looking for the Babylonian god Marduk who lives on another plane called the <unk> . Deep in the ruins of the <unk> , Indiana translates some ancient tablets with cuneiform writing explaining the true story behind the Tower of Babel : 2600 years ago , King Nebuchadnezzar II was inspired by Marduk to build a great engine , but the frightened Babylonians tore the tower housing it down , leading four of the god 's disciples to escape with some parts of this " Infernal Machine " . 
 Indiana embarks on a journey to find these machine parts before the Soviets do , and eventually retrieves all four of them from a monastery in the mountains of the Kazakh Soviet Socialist Republic , an active volcano on Palawan in the Republic of the Philippines , an Olmec valley in United Mexican States , and a tomb near Meroë in the deserts of the Anglo @-@ Egyptian Sudan . He is then confronted by Volodnikov and Turner who both demand him to hand over the parts as they think they would not be safe with the other side . <unk> of his fellow Americans , but opting for the lesser evil , he gives the parts to Sophia and Turner . Volodnikov says that it was probably better this way , as Marduk would have his revenge on those who desecrated the machine . 
 Alarmed , Indiana travels back to the Room of the Tablets in Babylon , and finds a now @-@ opened gate leading even further into the ruins , to the core of the Infernal Machine . He catches up with Sophia and Turner , the latter of which intends to convince the other dimension to cooperate with the United States of America , and uses the machine parts to activate the engine . He then pushes the unwilling Sophia into a mystical cage as a means of sending her to the <unk> as an ambassador . Indiana sees no other way but to kill him to reclaim all parts and rescue her . However , the activated machine goes awry , and Indiana and Sophia are sucked into a portal that leads to the other dimension . There , he defeats the malevolent Marduk and frees Sophia from her cage . Having escaped back to Babylon , the team is greeted by Volodnikov , who is curious to find out if they encountered God on the other side , which Indiana denies . In the ensuing conversation , the Soviet doctor turns out to be a lot less extremist than assumed , and the three wander off into the sunrise in search of a good bottle of vodka . A bonus level sees Indiana return to the Peruvian temple from the opening of the film Raiders of the Lost Ark , and has him find another golden idol in a secret room . 
 = = Development = = 
 Infernal Machine project leader , designer and writer Hal Barwood always thought of Indiana Jones as an action hero . Based on this notion , he decided for the game to be an action @-@ adventure , as he was particularly fond of the genre and its use of 3D worlds . Barwood also considered the Nazis to be overused as villains in the series and so instead set the title in the Cold War era with Russians as the antagonists . Originally , UFOs were planned to be used as a plot device , though George Lucas vetoed the idea , still reserving it for a then undeveloped fourth movie . In lieu thereof , Barwood became interested in ancient technology like the Antikythera mechanism , conceived the Infernal Machine as the MacGuffin , and placed it in the biblical Tower of Babel , which is believed to be identical with the <unk> , a temple dedicated to the god Marduk . 
 Developed for Windows 95 and 98 , the game uses a modified version of the Sith engine adapted for a third @-@ person view by lead programmer Paul LeFevre . Eventually , lighting , collision , rendering and tools underwent drastic rewrites to the point that the code was renamed the Jones engine . The levels were principally designed by Steven Chen , and later conceptualized with illustrations by lead artist William Tiller . Multiplayer support was planned at the beginning of the development , but ultimately dropped because it turned out to be too complex to adequately test . Instead , more emphasis was put on the design of the single @-@ player campaign with its puzzles and exploring aspect . The team implemented a hint system to lead players in the right direction . Additionally , the score system from previous Indiana Jones games , the Indy Quotient , makes a return . Apart from John Williams ' " Raiders March " , the soundtrack was newly composed by Clint Bajakian and consists of about 130 original pieces . Dubbed European language versions of the fully voice @-@ acted game were released by THQ in Germany , Ubi Soft in France , Electronic Arts in Spain and CTO in Italy . 
 An intended PlayStation version was canceled early after the game 's announcement . However , a team of eight Factor 5 employees teamed up with artists , level designers and a programmer from LucasArts to port Infernal Machine to the Nintendo 64 . Development of this version commenced in early March 1999 and was finished in October 2000 . Over the course of these 19 months , several improvements were made to the game , such as enhanced real @-@ time lighting , controls , camera and particle systems , as well as added lock @-@ on targeting and assigning items to three of the C buttons of the Nintendo 64 controller . Furthermore , the N64 version has some new musical pieces composed by Chris Hülsbeck , and employs sequenced music as opposed to the prerecorded audio from the PC original . The port was only released in North America and was exclusive to the Blockbuster chain of stores and the LucasArts Company Store . Electronic Arts planned to release it in Europe , but the title then saw a change of publisher to THQ . Originally scheduled for March 2001 , the PAL version became subject to continuous monthly delays and was eventually canceled in September . A 2D version of Infernal Machine with top @-@ down perspective gameplay was developed for the Game Boy Color by HotGen . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The PC version of Infernal Machine received generally favorable reviews with an average score of 73 @.@ 60 percent at GameRankings . Although some critics found it to be too similar to Tomb Raider , the game was noted for setting itself apart from the aforementioned series due to being based on the Indiana Jones franchise , and relying more heavily on puzzle @-@ solving . IGN commended the game for its intricate and intriguing storyline . Eurogamer shared the opinion and stated the plot to be " excellently woven " , enhancing the feel of " being part of a big blockbuster movie " . Computer and Video Games , Eurogamer , and IGN also praised Infernal Machine for its levels , calling them " excellently designed " and including " some of the most brilliant layouts [ ... ] seen in a game of this type " . While IGN thought the variety of puzzles provided was sufficient and applauded the inclusion of a hint system , GameSpot found many of the puzzles in the game to focus too heavily on platforming and went on to state that they become " quite repetitive - even predictable " after the first few levels . The most criticized aspect of the PC game across the majority of reviews , however , are the controls . Eurogamer described them as " infuriating at times " , mostly due to their faulty collision detection when performing certain actions . GameSpot thought the control system was too jerky , unresponsive , and unnecessarily slow because of delays between the moves . 
 The graphics , while low on polygons , were received well for its detailed textures and the diverse locations presented . Eurogamer called Infernal Machine " one of the best looking third person adventures " , and applauded the in @-@ engine cutscenes , claiming them to be " bordering on film quality at times " . GameSpot said the graphics were " not exactly cutting edge " , but " generally quite good " due to the " fairly smooth and convincing " animations . IGN praised the environments for having " a lot more personality than the Tomb Raider series " . Eurogamer called some of the locations " simply stunning " , and GameSpot found the levels to be " aesthetically well designed because of convincing architecture and wall decorations " . Furthermore , the soundtrack was stated by IGN to be " one of the best features of the game " , based on its adding to the dramatic impact along the way . They applauded the voice recording for being " crisp and clean " , though were disappointed with the sparsity of musical tracks and environmental sound effects . Allgame was impressed with the weapon effects and the foreign @-@ language voice overs for the Soviet soldiers , while Computer and Video Games considered the lack of Harrison Ford as Indiana Jones ' voice disappointing , though understandable given his high salary . Eurogamer found the comments of the playable character to become annoying after a while , but were impressed with the ambient sounds and music , claiming the latter to be " ace stuff " , " further enhancing the motion picture feeling of the game " . 
 Despite its enhancements , the Nintendo 64 version fared about as well with critics as the PC original , yielding 70 @.@ 99 percent at GameRankings and a Metacritic score of 75 out of 100 points . The control scheme of the port was well received by IGN for the addition of C button item management and Z @-@ targeting , both inspired by Ocarina of Time . Though they still considered the controls " slow " and " a little clunky " , they commended them for being " more intuitive , tighter , speedier , and all around more balanced " than those of the PC version . GameSpot did not share these sentiments and stated the adaption of the keyboard controls to the console controller to be " rather clunky and unintuitive " . IGN was impressed with the texture work and lighting , and found the title to be " one of the prettiest " on the Nintendo 64 , even more so by employing the Expansion Pak to achieve high @-@ resolution graphics . However , the graphics received criticism for its " wooden " character animations , occasional frame rate drops , and bugs such as pop @-@ ups and faulty texture placement . IGN remarked that the sound was superior to the PC version 's , while GameSpot thought it was about on par with the port 's above @-@ average graphics . Additionally , GameSpot criticized the Nintendo 64 version for the many bugs and <unk> , a problem uncommon for console releases . 
 HotGen 's Game Boy Color version received an average score of 73 @.@ 80 percent at GameRankings . It was panned by GameSpot for its backtracking , missing puzzle hints , and lack of plot development , but lauded for its clean animations and sound effects . Allgame was disappointed with the instruction manual being mandatory to understand the game 's mostly non @-@ existent plot , and criticized the decision to make the player restart a level upon dying , as well as the password system , calling it " annoying " . Nintendo Power compared it to the N64 version saying it , " has almost as much depth as the recent N64 game and far fewer control problems . " But describing it more as a puzzle game . " You 'll find all the areas that were in the N64 game , but each location has been recreated with its own challenge on GBC . " 
 = Robin Starveling = 
 Robin Starveling is a character in William Shakespeare 's A Midsummer Night 's Dream ( 1596 ) , one of the Rude Mechanicals of Athens who plays the part of Moonshine in their performance of Pyramus and Thisbe . His part is often considered one of the more humorous in the play , as he uses a lantern in a failed attempt to portray Moonshine and is wittily derided by his audience . Scholars have argued that his amateur performance communicates many of the problems Shakespeare would have been familiar with in the theatre : heckling , lack of adequate props , and amateur acting abilities . 
 = = Role in the play = = 
 In A Midsummer Night 's Dream , Theseus , the Duke of Athens , is preparing to marry Hippolyta . Peter Quince decides to entertain her and hires a group of actors nicknamed the Rude Mechanicals to perform Pyramus and Thisbe , a love story . Robin is one of the Rude Mechanicals , the tailor , who gathers with his colleagues to prepare their production . Robin at first is told to play the part of Thisbe 's mother , but Peter Quince points out that a love story needs moonlight shining on the lovers to have any real effect on the audience . After Nick Bottom suggests looking in the almanac for a time when the Moon might shine on their performance , the players apparently decide that they will just have Robin act as Moonshine . Robin 's role as Moonshine in The Mechanical 's performance of Pyramus and Thisbe before Theseus ' court is often highlighted by scholars as among the funnier parts of the play . Although the court makes fun of all the players , Starveling is mocked the most by Hippolyta , who is very vocal in her opinion that his attempt to be moonshine is a ridiculous failure , although very humorous . He is also the only mechanical to be cut off in his monologue as opposed to being mocked afterwards , causing him to <unk> and summarize his lines rather than giving them . This summary is usually played angrily or irritably , but has also been performed as the climax of Starveling 's potential stage fright . Starveling is the member of the group that seems to be afraid of just about anything . Starveling is the most ambiguous in taking sides in the power struggle between Bottom and Quince . While Snout affirms whatever Quince says and Flute always looks to Bottom for the final word on something ( Snug is too slow to be bothered ) , Starveling seems to try to agree completely with both , as impossible as it is to do so . 
 = = Context = = 
 " Starveling " is a word for a thin or poor person lacking food . " Robin " may have connections to two of Queen Elizabeth 's suitors , Robert Dudley , Earl of Leicester , and Robert Devereux , 2nd Earl of Essex . Elizabeth 's pet name for both of these men was " Robin " , leading scholars to believe that Robin Starveling may be a satiric creation of Shakespeare 's in their honour ( or dishonour ) . Another suitor , Duke François ( " Francis " ) Hercule Alençon , may have similar connections with Francis Flute . It may also be a nod to the fact that tailors of the time were usually poor and skinny . Ironically in the 1935 Max Reinhardt film , he was played by the chubby , jovial Otis Harlan . 
