 = = Analysis = = 
 Shakespeare constantly reflects on the problem of synecdoche in his plays , a rhetorical term meaning " the part representing the whole " . For example , in Henry V , Shakespeare 's has the Prologue beg forgiveness of the audience for attempting to portray an entire army with a few men , and for portraying so great a man as the King with a feeble actor . Shakespeare explores these same problems through Robin Starveling . The Mechanicals ' decision to use Robin as moonlight in place of actual moonlight delves into the problem of synecdoche , of trying to represent something greater than yourself . Robin 's standing there , attempting to be moonshine , does not make him so , even if he is holding a lantern to represent at least a part of the Moon . Similarly , Shakespeare seems to be arguing that no representation of anything in a play can really be completely real or truthful , no matter how hard its players may try . Rather than begging forgiveness of the viewer , he is exaggerating the problem for their entertainment . 
 The deriding reactions of the members of the upper class watching Robin and his colleagues ' performance would have been familiar to even the more professional actors in Shakespeare 's day . Some scholars have seen in Theseus ' words about the performance a note of sympathy and pleading the cause of the actor : " For never anything can be amiss / when <unk> and duty tender it ... " 
 = Backlash ( 2003 ) = 
 Backlash ( 2003 ) was the fifth annual Backlash professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view event produced by the World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) . It was presented by Castrol GTX , and took place on April 27 , 2003 , at the Worcester Centrum in Worcester , Massachusetts and starred talent from the promotion 's Raw and SmackDown ! brands . 
 The main event and featured match of the Raw brand was the encounter of Goldberg and The Rock , where Goldberg , in his first WWE Pay @-@ Per @-@ View , defeated Rock by pinfall , following a spear and a Jackhammer . The featured match on the undercard was a WWE Championship match from the SmackDown ! brand , between John Cena and the reigning champion , Brock Lesnar , where Lesnar defeated Cena by pinfall after an F @-@ 5 . The other predominant match on the undercard was a six @-@ man tag team match from the Raw brand , between the team of Triple H , Ric Flair , and Chris Jericho facing Shawn Michaels , Kevin Nash , and Booker T. Triple H , Flair , and Jericho won the match by pinfall , after Triple H hit Nash with a sledgehammer . The predominant undercard match from the SmackDown ! brand was the encounter of The Big Show and Rey Mysterio , where Big Show pinned Mysterio after a chokeslam . 
 The event grossed US $ 450 @,@ 000 with 10 @,@ 000 ticket sales and had a 0 @.@ 67 buyrate . Following the event , Goldberg began a feud with Chris Jericho . At Bad Blood , Goldberg defeated Jericho via pinfall after a Jackhammer . Brock Lesnar began a storyline with The Big Show over the WWE Championship . At Judgment Day , Lesnar defeated The Big Show in a Stretcher match to retain the WWE Championship . Triple H engaged in a storyline with Kevin Nash over the World Heavyweight Championship . At Judgment Day , Nash defeated Triple H via disqualification ; due to WWE regulations , Triple H retained the championship . 
 = = Background = = 
 The main event at Backlash was the encounter of Goldberg and The Rock ; the main feud from the Raw brand heading into the event . The feud began on the March 31 , 2003 episode of Raw , where The Rock held a segment entitled The Rock Appreciation Night , a segment intended to promote his win against Steve Austin at WrestleMania XIX . During the segment , The Rock discussed the list of people he has beaten in his career including Steve Austin , wondering who would challenge him next into a match . Goldberg then made his WWE debut , as he came down to the ring and stated that he would be The Rock 's next challenge . After the confrontation , Goldberg speared The Rock . The following week on Raw , Goldberg and The Rock had another confrontation , where Goldberg provoked The Rock into answering his challenge , but The Rock refused . The Rock finally accepted Goldberg 's challenge on the April 14 , 2003 episode of Raw via satellite . The week before Backlash , the feud intensified as The Rock held another segment entitled The Rock Concert , where he mocked Goldberg with Gillberg , a wrestler whose gimmick was to parody Goldberg . Later into the segment , Goldberg appeared from the audience and entered the ring , only to have The Rock execute a Rock Bottom on him . 
 The predominant match at Backlash was a WWE Championship match between John Cena and the reigning champion , Brock Lesnar ; the main feud from the SmackDown ! brand heading into the event . Their feud began on February 13 on SmackDown ! , when Lesnar and Cena last fought , which ended with Lesnar almost ending Cena 's career by using the F @-@ 5 to propel his leg into a ring post . At WrestleMania XIX , Lesnar challenged for the WWE title held by then @-@ champion Kurt Angle . Toward the end of the match , Lesnar botched a shooting star press when he underestimated the distance , slamming his head into Angle 's side and ribcage . This stunned Lesnar and forced Angle to improvise the finish of the match . Lesnar then capitalized and regained the WWE title . On the April 3 , 2003 episode of SmackDown ! , then @-@ General Manager , Stephanie McMahon announced a WWE Championship tournament , where the winner would receive a WWE Championship match at Backlash against Lesnar . John Cena was involved in the tournament , where he defeated Chris Benoit in the finals on the April 17 , 2003 episode of SmackDown ! to earn a WWE Championship match at Backlash . The week before Backlash , the feud intensified during a main event match involving Lesnar and A @-@ Train , where Cena interfered by breaking a pinfall attempt by Lesnar . After the match , Cena hit Lesnar with his trademark chain and the WWE Championship title belt . 
 The main match on the undercard from the Raw brand , was a Six @-@ man tag team match involving the team of Triple H , Ric Flair , and Chris Jericho facing Shawn Michaels , Kevin Nash , and Booker T. The feud began on the March 31 , 2003 episode of Raw , in a backstage segment , where Booker T was being medically attended following his title match with Triple H at WrestleMania XIX , as Flair came into the scene to confront and taunt Booker T. Later that night , Jericho cut a promo , where he complained that he should have won his match against Michaels at WrestleMania XIX . After the promo , Booker T defeated Jericho via disqualification after Flair interfered in the match and attacked Booker T. Afterwards , Triple H came down to the ring , where he , Jericho , and Flair attacked Booker T simultaneously . The attack caused Michaels to come down to the ring to help Booker T to no avail , as Jericho locked Michaels in the Walls of Jericho and Triple H locked Booker T in an Indian deathlock . The following week on Raw , Nash entered the feud during a main event tag team match between the team of Triple H and Jericho facing Michaels and Booker T. After Booker T pinned Triple H to earn the victory for his team , Flair came into the ring and attacked Booker T , followed by Jericho attacking Michaels with a steel chair . The attack led to the return of Nash , who had been sidelined with an injury , who attacked Jericho and Flair . After the turn of events , Triple H prepared to hit Nash with a sledgehammer , only to retreat the ring soon afterwards . The week later , Nash said that he wanted Shawn and Hunter to be friends again , only for Triple H to tell him that they should side together , as Shawn turned on Nash at 1994 . Triple H and Flair fought against Booker T and the Hurricane and lost thanks to Shawn Michaels . Jericho then attacked Shawn and Nash came to the rescue , but accidentally hit Booker with the Sledgehammer . The feud intensified during the week before Backlash , during a main event World Heavyweight Championship match between Booker T , and the reigning champion , Triple H , with Michaels as the special guest referee . During the match , Michaels superkicked Triple H , resulting in Flair and Jericho coming into the ring and attacking Michaels and Booker T. Nash then came down to the ring , where he dispersed Jericho and Flair . He also helped Michaels and Triple H back to their feet , only to receive a low blow by Triple H. 
 The main match on the undercard from the SmackDown ! brand , was the encounter of The Big Show and Rey Mysterio . The feud began on the April 17 , 2003 episode of SmackDown ! , during a tag team match pitting Mysterio and Tajiri against The Big Show and A @-@ Train . The Big Show and A @-@ Train won the match via pinfall . After the match , however , Tajiri sprayed green mist into A @-@ Train 's face , while Mysterio delivered a 619 on The Big Show , which caused him to collapse onto the floor . After the match in a backstage segment , The Big Show appeared frustrated with Mysterio for being embarrassed by him . The feud escalated during the week before Backlash , during a match between The Big Show and Tajiri . After The Big Show performed a chokeslam on Tajiri , Mysterio came down to the ring and distracted The Big Show , which caused The Big Show to chase Mysterio at ringside , resulting in Tajiri winning the match via countout . 
 = = Event = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ show = = = 
 Before the event aired live on pay @-@ per @-@ view , Scott Steiner defeated Rico in a match on Sunday Night Heat , which aired on TNN . 
 = = = Main card = = = 
 The first match of the event on the main card was a tag team match for the Tag Team Championship , between Los Guerreros ( Eddie and Chavo Guerrero ) and the reigning champions , Team Angle ( Shelton Benjamin and Charlie Haas ) . The match began as Team Angle gained early advantage over Los Guerreros , after they performed a leapfrog stun gun on Eddie . After the double team , Benjamin and Haas prevented Eddie from tagging Chavo into the match for a period of time , but Chavo was eventually tagged into the match , where he gained the advantage over Haas . While Chavo was the legal wrestler in the match , Eddie illegally entered the ring and hit a frog splash on Haas , only for an unsuccessful pin attempt by Chavo . After the pin attempt , Eddie and Benjamin fought onto ringside , where Benjamin tripped Chavo , who was in the ring about to perform a suplex on Haas . The situation caused Haas to land on Chavo into a pin cover . Benjamin held Chavo 's leg down , preventing him from kicking out . This allowed Team Angle to retain the Tag Team Championship . 
 The second match of the event was Sean O 'Haire ( with Roddy Piper ) versus Rikishi . O ' Haire gained the early advantage , as he clotheslined Rikishi down to the ring mat . Soon afterwards , Rikishi was able to retaliate , as he attacked O 'Haire in the ring corner , which led to a stink face attempt . The turn of events led to the attempted interference of Piper , who tried to hit Rikishi with a coconut . Rikishi , however , grabbed the coconut and broke it over Piper 's head . The distraction allowed O ' Haire to perform the Prophecy on Rikishi , into a pinfall . 
 The third match of the event was a Tag team match for the World Tag Team Championship between The Dudley Boyz ( Bubba Ray and D @-@ Von Dudley ) and the reigning champions , Kane and Rob Van Dam , with Chief Morley as the special guest referee . The match began with Kane and Van Dam in control of the match , after Kane performed a spinebuster on Bubba Ray . D @-@ Von , though , gained the advantage after delivering a sidewalk slam onto Van Dam . Later in the match , Kane regained control , which proceeded into a chokeslam attempt on Bubba Ray . Morley , however , gave Kane a low blow . Afterwards , Lance Storm attempted to interfere in the match on Kane and Van Dam 's behalf , to no avail , which proceeded with a 3 @-@ D from The Dudley Boyz onto Morley , thus knocking out the official of the match . The distraction by Morley and Storm allowed Kane to successfully deliver a chokeslam , followed by a Five @-@ Star Frog Splash onto Bubba , into a pinfall officiated by a new referee . Therefore , Kane and Van Dam retained the World Tag Team Championship . 
 The fourth match of the event was for the Women 's Championship , where Jazz , who was accompanied by Theodore Long , faced the reigning champion , Trish Stratus . As part of the storyline , Stratus came into the match with injured ribs and was advised not to wrestle by doctors , but was forced to wrestle by Raw General Manager , Eric Bischoff . Both women wrestled a back and forth match , until Stratus gained the advantage over Jazz by performing a Stratusfaction ( springboard bulldog ) on her . During the pin attempt , Long threw his shoe onto Stratus 's head , causing the pin to be broken . The ending of the match saw Stratus attempting to perform a springboard sunset flip on Jazz , only for Jazz to counter it by sitting on her while grabbing the middle rope for the pinfall to become the new Women 's Champion . 
 The fifth match of the night was The Big Show versus Rey Mysterio . Throughout the match , Mysterio used his quickness against The Big Show 's size advantage , including performing three <unk> on The Big Show . During the third 619 , Mysterio attempted a West Coast Pop , yet , The Big Show was able to catch Mysterio in mid @-@ air , reversing the move into a chokeslam for the pinfall . After the match , Mysterio was placed on a stretcher by EMTs . The Big Show picked up the stretcher with Mysterio still on it and slammed it against the ring post , similar to swinging a baseball bat . 
 The sixth match was for the WWE Championship between John Cena and the reigning champion , Brock Lesnar . Lesnar gained the early advantage over Cena by performing a suplex and hitting Cena 's head on the commentators ' broadcast table . Cena , however , retaliated as he threw Lesnar into the steel ring steps , which caused him to bleed from the head . Lesnar then delivered a spinebuster onto Cena , regaining control of the match . After a spear from Lesnar which sent Cena into the ring corner , Cena attempted to push Lesnar into the referee to no avail . The distraction , however , allowed Cena to hit a low blow on Lesnar . Subsequently , Cena attempted to hit Lesnar with a steel chain , though , the referee confiscated the chain before he used it on Lesnar . The situation allowed Lesnar to perform the F @-@ 5 on Cena into pinfall to retain the WWE Championship . 
 The featured ( and final ) match on the main card , was a six @-@ man tag team match between the team of Triple H , Ric Flair , and Chris Jericho facing the team of Shawn Michaels , Kevin Nash , and Booker T. The team of Triple H took the early advantage , after Triple H illegally entered the ring and performed a Pedigree on Michaels . Michaels ' team , however , took control of the match when Nash was tagged in and attacked all three opposers . As Nash wrestled Jericho , Booker T performed the scissors kick on Flair , which proceeded into Nash and Triple H brawling at ringside , Jericho and Booker T brawling at ringside , and Flair and Michaels wrestling in the ring . As Flair and Michaels wrestled , Flair was able to lock in the figure @-@ four leg lock , while Jericho illegally entered the match and performed a <unk> on Michaels , who was locked in the hold . Nash , who continued to brawl with Triple H at ringside , noticed the turn of events and entered the ring where he delivered a Jackknife Powerbomb on Jericho and threw Flair onto the referee . As the referee was knocked down , Triple H hit Nash with a sledgehammer and pinned him , earning the victory for himself , Flair , and Jericho . 
 = = = Main event = = = 
 The main event of the night was Goldberg versus The Rock . Early into the match , The Rock taunted Goldberg at ringside to avoid wrestling him . As The Rock returned into the ring , Goldberg performed the Rock Bottom , The Rock 's signature maneuver , on him , gaining the early advantage . Goldberg proceeded into hitting The Rock with a spear , but he dodged the spear , resulting in Goldberg hitting the steel ring post . The Rock took advantage over the situation , as he locked Goldberg in a sharpshooter . Goldberg broke the hold by grabbing the ring ropes and performed a successful spear on The Rock . The Rock , though , was able to perform a spinebuster , Rock Bottom , and People 's Elbow on Goldberg into an unsuccessful pinfall attempt . Afterwards , Goldberg delivered two spears and a Jackhammer into a pinfall . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After Backlash , The Rock left WWE to focus on his acting career , as he filmed Walking Tall , a film co @-@ produced by WWE Films , released later in 2003 . As The Rock left WWE , Goldberg began a feud against Chris Jericho on the April 28 , 2003 episode of Raw , during Jericho 's first episode of the Highlight Reel , an interview show , where Goldberg was the guest . During the segment , Jericho stated that no one wanted Goldberg in WWE , sparking a feud between the two wrestlers . Less than a month later , on the May 12 , 2003 episode of Raw , a mystery assailant attempted to run over Goldberg with a limousine . The following week on Raw , Co @-@ Raw General Manager Steve Austin interrogated several Raw superstars to find out who was the assailant . One of the interrogated was Lance Storm , who admitted that he was guilty . Austin then forced Storm into a match with Goldberg , who defeated Storm via pinfall . After the match , Goldberg forced Storm to admit that Jericho was the superstar who conspired Storm into running him over . On the May 26 , 2003 episode of Raw , Goldberg yet again was a guest on the Highlight Reel , where Jericho and Goldberg agreed to a match at Bad Blood . At Bad Blood , Goldberg defeated Jericho via pinfall , after a Jackhammer . 
 Brock Lesnar engaged in a feud against The Big Show over the WWE Championship . The feud began on the May 1 , 2003 episode of SmackDown ! , where Lesnar cut an in @-@ ring promo against Big Show , stating that he was a coward for defeating Rey Mysterio at Backlash . The Big Show later appeared on the stage , where he challenged Lesnar into a WWE Championship match . The following week on SmackDown ! , it was announced that The Big Show would face Lesnar for the WWE Championship at Judgment Day in a Stretcher match . Later that night , the feud escalated during a Handicap match between Chris Benoit and the team of The Big Show and A @-@ Train . Benoit lost via pinfall ; after the match , Benoit was double @-@ teamed by The Big Show and A @-@ Train . The double @-@ team caused Lesnar to come and assist Benoit to no avail , as The Big Show performed a chokeslam on Lesnar . At Judgment Day , Lesnar defeated The Big Show in the Stretcher match to retain the WWE Championship . 
 Brock Lesnar and John Cena would not have another match until Lesnar 's unexpected WWE return in 2012 on the episode of Raw the day after John Cena lost to The Rock at WrestleMania . Lesnar would start a feud with Cena culminating in an Extreme Rules match at its eponymous pay @-@ per @-@ view Extreme Rules . By this point , it was likely that no one had remembered Cena 's previous feud with Lesnar , as the WWE had seen multiple other matches between Lesnar and Cena in a time when Lesnar had been more dominant and more brutally aggressive than in his previous WWE run . Upon his return to the WWE , Lesnar had realigned himself with Paul Heyman and had established his character as " The Beast Incarnate " rather than the " Next Big Thing . " In 2014 , Cena and Lesnar had a rematch , this time for Cena 's WWE World Heavyweight Championship , a unification of the WWE and World Heavyweight championships at WWE 's Tables , Ladders , & Chairs pay @-@ per @-@ view in 2013 . Lesnar had obliterated Cena with 16 German <unk> and a pinfall to win the WWE World Heavyweight Championship . He would retain his championship against Cena after a disqualification loss at the Night of Champions pay @-@ per @-@ view the next month and was not scheduled to reappear on television until January 2015 , the month in which he successfully defended the title in a triple threat match between Cena and Seth Rollins at that month 's Royal Rumble show . He would eventually lose the title to Rollins , who used his title contract opportunity at WrestleMania , challenging Lesnar to a match right then and there . Nonetheless , Lesnar has been once again on the road to the WWE Championship , occasionally having run @-@ ins with John Cena . 
 The aftermath of the six @-@ man tag team match from Backlash , was a feud over the World Heavyweight Championship between Kevin Nash and the reigning champion , Triple H. The feud began on the April 28 , 2003 episode of Raw , during a tag team match for the World Tag Team Championship involving Triple H and Ric Flair facing the reigning champions , Kane and Rob Van Dam . As Triple H attempted a pinfall on Rob Van Dam , Nash came down to the ring and chased Triple H to the backstage area with a sledgehammer . Triple H then ran towards a limousine , where Nash smashed the windows with the sledgehammer and threw it into the limousine , as it drove off with Triple H. The following week on Raw , Co @-@ Raw General Managers , Austin and Eric Bischoff announced a World Heavyweight Championship match between Nash and Triple H at Judgment Day . At Judgment Day , Triple H was disqualified to retain the World Heavyweight Championship . 
 = = Results = = 
 The tournament to determine the number one contender for the WWE Championship match was held between April 1 and April 15 , 2003 . The tournament brackets were : 
 = The Grove ( Maple Grove , Minnesota ) = 
 The Grove is a lifestyle center in Maple Grove , Minnesota , a suburb of the Twin Cities . The shopping mall opened in August 2005 and consists of 538 @,@ 000 square feet ( 50 @,@ 000 m2 ) of retail space , with an additional 600 @,@ 000 square feet ( 56 @,@ 000 m2 ) of medical space . The center contains nearly 30 retail tenants and is anchored by Haskell 's Liquor , Home Depot , North Memorial Medical Center , Slumberland Furniture , and Super Target . The Grove also contains a medical campus , Maple Grove Hospital . 
 Since its opening in 2005 , the shopping center has dealt with constant vacancy rates , despite the urbanization of Maple Grove and its surrounding communities . Many of the center 's tenants are vacant , but vacancy rates have decreased over the years . The center was originally developed and managed by Ryan Companies US , Inc . , but was acquired by Hempel Properties in January 2016 for $ 19 @.@ 2 million . Currently , the center features national chains , including Chipotle Mexican Grill , Great Clips , and Subway . 
 = = History = = 
 During development in the early 2000s , the center took up nearly 200 acres of space previously used as farmland . Ryan Companies US , Inc. funded the project , which included the construction of a medical campus and several retail options . Upon completion in August 2005 , over 20 retail tenants had been constructed with the majority of them being vacant . Several national retailers announced interest in the center , including Super Target , which announced plans to close their other Maple Grove location . OfficeMax opened a location in 2007 , but closed in November 2014 after merging with Office Depot , Inc .. Following the closure , only 14 stores remained open at the center . 
 Throughout the years , several expansions of the property have taken place . Aldi , a discount supermarket , expressed interest in The Grove in 2011 , before purchasing a <unk> in October of the same year . Ryan Companies funded a second expansion of the medical building in 2014 ; the new building , located on the south side of the property , contained 41 @,@ 810 square feet ( 3 @,@ 900 m2 ) of rentable medical space . Despite owning the center for nearly a decade , Ryan Companies sold The Grove among other shopping centers to Hempel Properties on January 5 , 2016 , in hopes of " rais [ ing ] the occupancy levels " for several properties . 
 = = Design = = 
 According to the center 's developer , the site was " designed to replicate a picturesque village center " , complete with a " walkable shopping lifestyle " and " clocktower " . The Grove 's infrastructure contains several pedestrian trails , parklands , and wetlands , mixed with retail and office space . The architecture of The Grove includes heavy use of windows , similar to that of other office buildings in the Maple Grove community . 
 = Oxygen toxicity = 
 Oxygen toxicity is a condition resulting from the harmful effects of breathing molecular oxygen ( O 
 2 ) at increased partial pressures . It is also known as oxygen toxicity syndrome , oxygen intoxication , and oxygen poisoning . Historically , the central nervous system condition was called the Paul Bert effect , and the pulmonary condition the Lorrain Smith effect , after the researchers who pioneered its discovery and description in the late 19th century . Severe cases can result in cell damage and death , with effects most often seen in the central nervous system , lungs and eyes . Oxygen toxicity is a concern for underwater divers , those on high concentrations of supplemental oxygen ( particularly premature babies ) , and those undergoing hyperbaric oxygen therapy . 
 The result of breathing increased partial pressures of oxygen is hyperoxia , an excess of oxygen in body tissues . The body is affected in different ways depending on the type of exposure . Central nervous system toxicity is caused by short exposure to high partial pressures of oxygen at greater than atmospheric pressure . Pulmonary and ocular toxicity result from longer exposure to increased oxygen levels at normal pressure . Symptoms may include disorientation , breathing problems , and vision changes such as myopia . Prolonged exposure to above @-@ normal oxygen partial pressures , or shorter exposures to very high partial pressures , can cause oxidative damage to cell membranes , collapse of the alveoli in the lungs , retinal detachment , and seizures . Oxygen toxicity is managed by reducing the exposure to increased oxygen levels . Studies show that , in the long term , a robust recovery from most types of oxygen toxicity is possible . 
 Protocols for avoidance of the effects of hyperoxia exist in fields where oxygen is breathed at higher @-@ than @-@ normal partial pressures , including underwater diving using compressed breathing gases , hyperbaric medicine , neonatal care and human spaceflight . These protocols have resulted in the increasing rarity of seizures due to oxygen toxicity , with pulmonary and ocular damage being mainly confined to the problems of managing premature infants . 
 In recent years , oxygen has become available for recreational use in oxygen bars . The US Food and Drug Administration has warned those suffering from problems such as heart or lung disease not to use oxygen bars . Scuba divers use breathing gases containing up to 100 % oxygen , and should have specific training in using such gases . 
 = = Classification = = 
 The effects of oxygen toxicity may be classified by the organs affected , producing three principal forms : 
 Central nervous system , characterised by convulsions followed by unconsciousness , occurring under hyperbaric conditions ; 
 Pulmonary ( lungs ) , characterised by difficulty in breathing and pain within the chest , occurring when breathing increased pressures of oxygen for extended periods ; 
 Ocular ( <unk> conditions ) , characterised by alterations to the eyes , occurring when breathing increased pressures of oxygen for extended periods . 
 Central nervous system oxygen toxicity can cause seizures , brief periods of rigidity followed by convulsions and unconsciousness , and is of concern to divers who encounter greater than atmospheric pressures . Pulmonary oxygen toxicity results in damage to the lungs , causing pain and difficulty in breathing . Oxidative damage to the eye may lead to myopia or partial detachment of the retina . Pulmonary and ocular damage are most likely to occur when supplemental oxygen is administered as part of a treatment , particularly to newborn infants , but are also a concern during hyperbaric oxygen therapy . 
 Oxidative damage may occur in any cell in the body but the effects on the three most susceptible organs will be the primary concern . It may also be implicated in damage to red blood cells ( haemolysis ) , the liver , heart , endocrine glands ( adrenal glands , gonads , and thyroid ) , or kidneys , and general damage to cells . 
 In unusual circumstances , effects on other tissues may be observed : it is suspected that during spaceflight , high oxygen concentrations may contribute to bone damage . <unk> can also indirectly cause carbon dioxide narcosis in patients with lung ailments such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or with central respiratory depression . <unk> of atmospheric air at atmospheric pressures does not cause oxygen toxicity , because sea @-@ level air has a partial pressure of oxygen of 0 @.@ 21 bar ( 21 kPa ) whereas toxicity does not occur below 0 @.@ 3 bar ( 30 kPa ) . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 = = = Central nervous system = = = 
 Central nervous system oxygen toxicity manifests as symptoms such as visual changes ( especially tunnel vision ) , ringing in the ears ( tinnitus ) , nausea , twitching ( especially of the face ) , behavioural changes ( irritability , anxiety , confusion ) , and dizziness . This may be followed by a tonic – clonic seizure consisting of two phases : intense muscle contraction occurs for several seconds ( tonic phase ) ; followed by rapid spasms of alternate muscle relaxation and contraction producing convulsive jerking ( clonic phase ) . The seizure ends with a period of unconsciousness ( the postictal state ) . The onset of seizure depends upon the partial pressure of oxygen in the breathing gas and exposure duration . However , exposure time before onset is unpredictable , as tests have shown a wide variation , both amongst individuals , and in the same individual from day to day . In addition , many external factors , such as underwater immersion , exposure to cold , and exercise will decrease the time to onset of central nervous system symptoms . Decrease of tolerance is closely linked to retention of carbon dioxide . Other factors , such as darkness and caffeine , increase tolerance in test animals , but these effects have not been proven in humans . 
 = = = Lungs = = = 
 Pulmonary toxicity symptoms result from an inflammation that starts in the airways leading to the lungs and then spreads into the lungs ( tracheobronchial tree ) . The symptoms appear in the upper chest region ( <unk> and <unk> regions ) . This begins as a mild tickle on inhalation and progresses to frequent coughing . If breathing increased partial pressures of oxygen continues , patients experience a mild burning on inhalation along with uncontrollable coughing and occasional shortness of breath ( dyspnoea ) . Physical findings related to pulmonary toxicity have included bubbling sounds heard through a stethoscope ( bubbling rales ) , fever , and increased blood flow to the lining of the nose ( <unk> of the nasal mucosa ) . X @-@ rays of the lungs show little change in the short term , but extended exposure leads to increasing diffuse shadowing throughout both lungs . Pulmonary function measurements are reduced , as noted by a reduction in the amount of air that the lungs can hold ( vital capacity ) and changes in expiratory function and lung elasticity . Tests in animals have indicated a variation in tolerance similar to that found in central nervous system toxicity , as well as significant variations between species . When the exposure to oxygen above 0 @.@ 5 bar ( 50 kPa ) is intermittent , it permits the lungs to recover and delays the onset of toxicity . 
 = = = Eyes = = = 
 In premature babies , signs of damage to the eye ( retinopathy of prematurity , or ROP ) are observed via an ophthalmoscope as a demarcation between the vascularised and non @-@ vascularised regions of an infant 's retina . The degree of this demarcation is used to designate four stages : ( I ) the demarcation is a line ; ( II ) the demarcation becomes a ridge ; ( III ) growth of new blood vessels occurs around the ridge ; ( IV ) the retina begins to detach from the inner wall of the eye ( choroid ) . 
 = = Causes = = 
 Oxygen toxicity is caused by exposure to oxygen at partial pressures greater than those to which the body is normally exposed . This occurs in three principal settings : underwater diving , hyperbaric oxygen therapy , and the provision of supplemental oxygen , particularly to premature infants . In each case , the risk factors are markedly different . 
 = = = Central nervous system toxicity = = = 
 Exposures , from minutes to a few hours , to partial pressures of oxygen above 1 @.@ 6 bars ( 160 kPa ) — about eight times normal atmospheric partial pressure — are usually associated with central nervous system oxygen toxicity and are most likely to occur among patients undergoing hyperbaric oxygen therapy and divers . Since sea level atmospheric pressure is about 1 bar ( 100 kPa ) , central nervous system toxicity can only occur under hyperbaric conditions , where ambient pressure is above normal . Divers breathing air at depths beyond 60 m ( 200 ft ) face an increasing risk of an oxygen toxicity " hit " ( seizure ) . Divers breathing a gas mixture enriched with oxygen , such as nitrox , can similarly suffer a seizure at shallower depths , should they descend below the maximum operating depth allowed for the mixture . 
 = = = Lung toxicity = = = 
 The lungs and the remainder of the respiratory tract are exposed to the highest concentration of oxygen in the human body and are therefore the first organs to show toxicity . Pulmonary toxicity occurs only with exposure to partial pressures of oxygen greater than 0 @.@ 5 bar ( 50 kPa ) , corresponding to an oxygen fraction of 50 % at normal atmospheric pressure . The earliest signs of pulmonary toxicity begin with evidence of <unk> , or inflammation of the upper airways , after an asymptomatic period between 4 and 22 hours at greater than 95 % oxygen , with some studies suggesting symptoms usually begin after approximately 14 hours at this level of oxygen . 
 At partial pressures of oxygen of 2 to 3 bar ( 200 to 300 kPa ) — 100 % oxygen at 2 to 3 times atmospheric pressure — these symptoms may begin as early as 3 hours after exposure to oxygen . Experiments on rats breathing oxygen at pressures between 1 and 3 bars ( 100 and 300 kPa ) suggest that pulmonary manifestations of oxygen toxicity may not be the same for <unk> conditions as they are for hyperbaric conditions . Evidence of decline in lung function as measured by pulmonary function testing can occur as quickly as 24 hours of continuous exposure to 100 % oxygen , with evidence of diffuse alveolar damage and the onset of acute respiratory distress syndrome usually occurring after 48 hours on 100 % oxygen . Breathing 100 % oxygen also eventually leads to collapse of the alveoli ( atelectasis ) , while — at the same partial pressure of oxygen — the presence of significant partial pressures of inert gases , typically nitrogen , will prevent this effect . 
 <unk> newborns are known to be at higher risk for bronchopulmonary dysplasia with extended exposure to high concentrations of oxygen . Other groups at higher risk for oxygen toxicity are patients on mechanical ventilation with exposure to levels of oxygen greater than 50 % , and patients exposed to chemicals that increase risk for oxygen toxicity such the chemotherapeutic agent bleomycin . Therefore , current guidelines for patients on mechanical ventilation in intensive care recommends keeping oxygen concentration less than 60 % . Likewise , divers who undergo treatment of decompression sickness are at increased risk of oxygen toxicity as treatment entails exposure to long periods of oxygen breathing under hyperbaric conditions , in addition to any oxygen exposure during the dive . 
 = = = Eye toxicity = = = 
 Prolonged exposure to high inspired fractions of oxygen causes damage to the retina . Damage to the developing eye of infants exposed to high oxygen fraction at normal pressure has a different mechanism and effect from the eye damage experienced by adult divers under hyperbaric conditions . <unk> may be a contributing factor for the disorder called <unk> <unk> or retinopathy of prematurity ( ROP ) in infants . In preterm infants , the retina is often not fully vascularised . Retinopathy of prematurity occurs when the development of the retinal vasculature is arrested and then proceeds abnormally . Associated with the growth of these new vessels is fibrous tissue ( scar tissue ) that may contract to cause retinal detachment . Supplemental oxygen exposure , while a risk factor , is not the main risk factor for development of this disease . Restricting supplemental oxygen use does not necessarily reduce the rate of retinopathy of prematurity , and may raise the risk of hypoxia @-@ related systemic complications . 
 <unk> myopia has occurred in closed circuit oxygen rebreather divers with prolonged exposures . It also occurs frequently in those undergoing repeated hyperbaric oxygen therapy . This is due to an increase in the refractive power of the lens , since axial length and <unk> readings do not reveal a corneal or length basis for a myopic shift . It is usually reversible with time . 
 = = Mechanism = = 
 The biochemical basis for the toxicity of oxygen is the partial reduction of oxygen by one or two electrons to form reactive oxygen species , which are natural by @-@ products of the normal metabolism of oxygen and have important roles in cell signalling . One species produced by the body , the superoxide anion ( O 
 2 − ) , is possibly involved in iron acquisition . Higher than normal concentrations of oxygen lead to increased levels of reactive oxygen species . Oxygen is necessary for cell metabolism , and the blood supplies it to all parts of the body . When oxygen is breathed at high partial pressures , a <unk> condition will rapidly spread , with the most vascularised tissues being most vulnerable . During times of environmental stress , levels of reactive oxygen species can increase dramatically , which can damage cell structures and produce oxidative stress . 
 While all the reaction mechanisms of these species within the body are not yet fully understood , one of the most reactive products of oxidative stress is the hydroxyl radical ( · OH ) , which can initiate a damaging chain reaction of lipid peroxidation in the unsaturated lipids within cell membranes . High concentrations of oxygen also increase the formation of other free radicals , such as nitric oxide , peroxynitrite , and <unk> , which harm DNA and other biomolecules . Although the body has many antioxidant systems such as glutathione that guard against oxidative stress , these systems are eventually overwhelmed at very high concentrations of free oxygen , and the rate of cell damage exceeds the capacity of the systems that prevent or repair it . Cell damage and cell death then result . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 Diagnosis of central nervous system oxygen toxicity in divers prior to seizure is difficult as the symptoms of visual disturbance , ear problems , dizziness , confusion and nausea can be due to many factors common to the underwater environment such as narcosis , congestion and coldness . However , these symptoms may be helpful in diagnosing the first stages of oxygen toxicity in patients undergoing hyperbaric oxygen therapy . In either case , unless there is a prior history of epilepsy or tests indicate hypoglycaemia , a seizure occurring in the setting of breathing oxygen at partial pressures greater than 1 @.@ 4 bar ( 140 kPa ) suggests a diagnosis of oxygen toxicity . 
 Diagnosis of bronchopulmonary dysplasia in newborn infants with breathing difficulties is difficult in the first few weeks . However , if the infant 's breathing does not improve during this time , blood tests and x @-@ rays may be used to confirm bronchopulmonary dysplasia . In addition , an echocardiogram can help to eliminate other possible causes such as congenital heart defects or pulmonary arterial hypertension . 
 The diagnosis of retinopathy of prematurity in infants is typically suggested by the clinical setting . Prematurity , low birth weight and a history of oxygen exposure are the principal indicators , while no hereditary factors have been shown to yield a pattern . 
 = = Prevention = = 
 The prevention of oxygen toxicity depends entirely on the setting . Both underwater and in space , proper precautions can eliminate the most pernicious effects . Premature infants commonly require supplemental oxygen to treat complications of preterm birth . In this case prevention of bronchopulmonary dysplasia and retinopathy of prematurity must be carried out without compromising a supply of oxygen adequate to preserve the infant 's life . 
 = = = Underwater = = = 
 Oxygen toxicity is a catastrophic hazard in diving , because a seizure results in near certain death by drowning . The seizure may occur suddenly and with no warning symptoms . The effects are sudden convulsions and unconsciousness , during which victims can lose their regulator and drown . One of the advantages of a full @-@ face diving mask is prevention of regulator loss in the event of a seizure . As there is an increased risk of central nervous system oxygen toxicity on deep dives , long dives and dives where oxygen @-@ rich breathing gases are used , divers are taught to calculate a maximum operating depth for oxygen @-@ rich breathing gases , and cylinders containing such mixtures must be clearly marked with that depth . 
 In some diver training courses for these types of diving , divers are taught to plan and monitor what is called the oxygen clock of their dives . This is a notional alarm clock , which ticks more quickly at increased oxygen pressure and is set to activate at the maximum single exposure limit recommended in the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Diving Manual . For the following partial pressures of oxygen the limits are : 45 minutes at 1 @.@ 6 bar ( 160 kPa ) , 120 minutes at 1 @.@ 5 bar ( 150 kPa ) , 150 minutes at 1 @.@ 4 bar ( 140 kPa ) , 180 minutes at 1 @.@ 3 bar ( 130 kPa ) and 210 minutes at 1 @.@ 2 bar ( 120 kPa ) , but it is impossible to predict with any reliability whether or when toxicity symptoms will occur . Many nitrox @-@ capable dive computers calculate an oxygen loading and can track it across multiple dives . The aim is to avoid activating the alarm by reducing the partial pressure of oxygen in the breathing gas or by reducing the time spent breathing gas of greater oxygen partial pressure . As the partial pressure of oxygen increases with the fraction of oxygen in the breathing gas and the depth of the dive , the diver obtains more time on the oxygen clock by diving at a shallower depth , by breathing a less oxygen @-@ rich gas , or by shortening the duration of exposure to oxygen @-@ rich gases . 
 Diving below 56 m ( 184 ft ) on air would expose a diver to increasing danger of oxygen toxicity as the partial pressure of oxygen exceeds 1 @.@ 4 bar ( 140 kPa ) , so a gas mixture must be used which contains less than 21 % oxygen ( a hypoxic mixture ) . Increasing the proportion of nitrogen is not viable , since it would produce a strongly narcotic mixture . However , helium is not narcotic , and a usable mixture may be blended either by completely replacing nitrogen with helium ( the resulting mix is called heliox ) , or by replacing part of the nitrogen with helium , producing a trimix . 
 Pulmonary oxygen toxicity is an entirely avoidable event while diving . The limited duration and naturally intermittent nature of most diving makes this a relatively rare ( and even then , reversible ) complication for divers . Established guidelines enable divers to calculate when they are at risk of pulmonary toxicity . 
 = = = Hyperbaric setting = = = 
 The presence of a fever or a history of seizure is a relative contraindication to hyperbaric oxygen treatment . The schedules used for treatment of decompression illness allow for periods of breathing air rather than 100 % oxygen ( oxygen breaks ) to reduce the chance of seizure or lung damage . The U.S. Navy uses treatment tables based on periods alternating between 100 % oxygen and air . For example , USN table 6 requires 75 minutes ( three periods of 20 minutes oxygen / 5 minutes air ) at an ambient pressure of 2 @.@ 8 standard atmospheres ( 280 kPa ) , equivalent to a depth of 18 metres ( 60 ft ) . This is followed by a slow reduction in pressure to 1 @.@ 9 atm ( 190 kPa ) over 30 minutes on oxygen . The patient then remains at that pressure for a further 150 minutes , consisting of two periods of 15 minutes air / 60 minutes oxygen , before the pressure is reduced to atmospheric over 30 minutes on oxygen . 
 Vitamin E and selenium were proposed and later rejected as a potential method of protection against pulmonary oxygen toxicity . There is however some experimental evidence in rats that vitamin E and selenium aid in preventing in vivo lipid peroxidation and free radical damage , and therefore prevent retinal changes following repetitive hyperbaric oxygen exposures . 
 = = = <unk> setting = = = 
 Bronchopulmonary dysplasia is reversible in the early stages by use of break periods on lower pressures of oxygen , but it may eventually result in irreversible lung injury if allowed to progress to severe damage . One or two days of exposure without oxygen breaks are needed to cause such damage . 
 Retinopathy of prematurity is largely preventable by screening . Current guidelines require that all babies of less than 32 weeks gestational age or having a birth weight less than 1 @.@ 5 kg ( 3 @.@ 3 lb ) should be screened for retinopathy of prematurity at least every two weeks . The National Cooperative Study in 1954 showed a causal link between supplemental oxygen and retinopathy of prematurity , but subsequent curtailment of supplemental oxygen caused an increase in infant mortality . To balance the risks of hypoxia and retinopathy of prematurity , modern protocols now require monitoring of blood oxygen levels in premature infants receiving oxygen . 
 = = = <unk> setting = = = 
 In low @-@ pressure environments oxygen toxicity may be avoided since the toxicity is caused by high partial pressure of oxygen , not merely by high oxygen fraction . This is illustrated by modern pure oxygen use in spacesuits , which must operate at low pressure ( also historically , very high percentage oxygen and lower than normal atmospheric pressure was used in early spacecraft , for example , the Gemini and Apollo spacecraft ) . In such applications as extra @-@ vehicular activity , high @-@ fraction oxygen is non @-@ toxic , even at breathing mixture fractions approaching 100 % , because the oxygen partial pressure is not allowed to chronically exceed 0 @.@ 3 bar ( 4 @.@ 4 psi ) . 
 = = Management = = 
 During hyperbaric oxygen therapy , the patient will usually breathe 100 % oxygen from a mask while inside a hyperbaric chamber pressurised with air to about 2 @.@ 8 bar ( 280 kPa ) . Seizures during the therapy are managed by removing the mask from the patient , thereby dropping the partial pressure of oxygen inspired below 0 @.@ 6 bar ( 60 kPa ) . 
 A seizure underwater requires that the diver be brought to the surface as soon as practicable . Although for many years the recommendation has been not to raise the diver during the seizure itself , owing to the danger of arterial gas embolism ( AGE ) , there is some evidence that the glottis does not fully obstruct the airway . This has led to the current recommendation by the Diving Committee of the Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society that a diver should be raised during the seizure 's clonic ( convulsive ) phase if the regulator is not in the diver 's mouth – as the danger of drowning is then greater than that of AGE – but the ascent should be delayed until the end of the clonic phase otherwise . Rescuers ensure that their own safety is not compromised during the convulsive phase . They then ensure that where the victim 's air supply is established it is maintained , and carry out a controlled buoyant lift . Lifting an unconscious body is taught by most diver training agencies . Upon reaching the surface , emergency services are always contacted as there is a possibility of further complications requiring medical attention . The U.S. Navy has procedures for completing the decompression stops where a recompression chamber is not immediately available . 
 The occurrence of symptoms of bronchopulmonary dysplasia or acute respiratory distress syndrome is treated by lowering the fraction of oxygen administered , along with a reduction in the periods of exposure and an increase in the break periods where normal air is supplied . Where supplemental oxygen is required for treatment of another disease ( particularly in infants ) , a ventilator may be needed to ensure that the lung tissue remains inflated . Reductions in pressure and exposure will be made progressively , and medications such as bronchodilators and pulmonary surfactants may be used . 
 Retinopathy of prematurity may regress spontaneously , but should the disease progress beyond a threshold ( defined as five contiguous or eight cumulative hours of stage 3 retinopathy of prematurity ) , both <unk> and laser surgery have been shown to reduce the risk of blindness as an outcome . Where the disease has progressed further , techniques such as scleral buckling and <unk> surgery may assist in re @-@ attaching the retina . 
 = = Prognosis = = 
 Although the convulsions caused by central nervous system oxygen toxicity may lead to incidental injury to the victim , it remained uncertain for many years whether damage to the nervous system following the seizure could occur and several studies searched for evidence of such damage . An overview of these studies by <unk> in 2004 concluded that following removal of breathing gas containing high fractions of oxygen , no long @-@ term neurological damage from the seizure remains . 
 The majority of infants who have survived following an incidence of bronchopulmonary dysplasia will eventually recover near @-@ normal lung function , since lungs continue to grow during the first 5 – 7 years and the damage caused by bronchopulmonary dysplasia is to some extent reversible ( even in adults ) . However , they are likely be more susceptible to respiratory infections for the rest of their lives and the severity of later infections is often greater than that in their peers . 
 Retinopathy of prematurity ( ROP ) in infants frequently regresses without intervention and eyesight may be normal in later years . Where the disease has progressed to the stages requiring surgery , the outcomes are generally good for the treatment of stage 3 ROP , but are much worse for the later stages . Although surgery is usually successful in restoring the anatomy of the eye , damage to the nervous system by the progression of the disease leads to comparatively poorer results in restoring vision . The presence of other complicating diseases also reduces the likelihood of a favourable outcome . 
 = = Epidemiology = = 
 The incidence of central nervous system toxicity among divers has decreased since the Second World War , as protocols have developed to limit exposure and partial pressure of oxygen inspired . In 1947 , Donald recommended limiting the depth allowed for breathing pure oxygen to 7 @.@ 6 m ( 25 ft ) , which equates to an oxygen partial pressure of 1 @.@ 8 bar ( 180 kPa ) . Over time this limit has been reduced , until today a limit of 1 @.@ 4 bar ( 140 kPa ) during a recreational dive and 1 @.@ 6 bar ( 160 kPa ) during shallow decompression stops is generally recommended . Oxygen toxicity has now become a rare occurrence other than when caused by equipment malfunction and human error . Historically , the U.S. Navy has refined its Navy Diving Manual Tables to reduce oxygen toxicity incidents . Between 1995 and 1999 , reports showed 405 surface @-@ supported dives using the helium – oxygen tables ; of these , oxygen toxicity symptoms were observed on 6 dives ( 1 @.@ 5 % ) . As a result , the U.S. Navy in 2000 modified the schedules and conducted field tests of 150 dives , none of which produced symptoms of oxygen toxicity . Revised tables were published in 2001 . 
 The variability in tolerance and other variable factors such as workload have resulted in the U.S. Navy abandoning screening for oxygen tolerance . Of the 6 @,@ 250 oxygen @-@ tolerance tests performed between 1976 and 1997 , only 6 episodes of oxygen toxicity were observed ( 0 @.@ 1 % ) . 
 Central nervous system oxygen toxicity among patients undergoing hyperbaric oxygen therapy is rare , and is influenced by a number of a factors : individual sensitivity and treatment protocol ; and probably therapy indication and equipment used . A study by <unk> in 1996 reported 16 incidents out of a population of 107 @,@ 264 patients ( 0 @.@ 015 % ) , while Hampson and Atik in 2003 found a rate of 0 @.@ 03 % . <unk> , Ay and <unk> , in a summary of 36 @,@ 500 patient treatments between 1996 and 2003 , reported only 3 oxygen toxicity incidents , giving a rate of 0 @.@ 008 % . A later review of over 80 @,@ 000 patient treatments revealed an even lower rate : 0 @.@ 0024 % . The reduction in incidence may be partly due to use of a mask ( rather than a hood ) to deliver oxygen . 
 Bronchopulmonary dysplasia is among the most common complications of prematurely born infants and its incidence has grown as the survival of extremely premature infants has increased . Nevertheless , the severity has decreased as better management of supplemental oxygen has resulted in the disease now being related mainly to factors other than hyperoxia . 
 In 1997 a summary of studies of neonatal intensive care units in industrialised countries showed that up to 60 % of low birth weight babies developed retinopathy of prematurity , which rose to 72 % in extremely low birth weight babies , defined as less than 1 kg ( 2 @.@ 2 lb ) at birth . However , severe outcomes are much less frequent : for very low birth weight babies — those less than 1 @.@ 5 kg ( 3 @.@ 3 lb ) at birth — the incidence of blindness was found to be no more than 8 % . 
 = = History = = 
 Central nervous system toxicity was first described by Paul Bert in 1878 . He showed that oxygen was toxic to insects , arachnids , myriapods , molluscs , earthworms , fungi , germinating seeds , birds , and other animals . Central nervous system toxicity may be referred to as the " Paul Bert effect " . 
 Pulmonary oxygen toxicity was first described by J. Lorrain Smith in 1899 when he noted central nervous system toxicity and discovered in experiments in mice and birds that 0 @.@ 43 bar ( 43 kPa ) had no effect but 0 @.@ 75 bar ( 75 kPa ) of oxygen was a pulmonary irritant . Pulmonary toxicity may be referred to as the " Lorrain Smith effect " . The first recorded human exposure was undertaken in 1910 by Bornstein when two men breathed oxygen at 2 @.@ 8 bar ( 280 kPa ) for 30 minutes while he went on to 48 minutes with no symptoms . In 1912 , Bornstein developed cramps in his hands and legs while breathing oxygen at 2 @.@ 8 bar ( 280 kPa ) for 51 minutes . Smith then went on to show that intermittent exposure to a breathing gas with less oxygen permitted the lungs to recover and delayed the onset of pulmonary toxicity . 
 Albert R. Behnke et al. in 1935 were the first to observe visual field contraction ( tunnel vision ) on dives between 1 @.@ 0 bar ( 100 kPa ) and 4 @.@ 1 bar ( 410 kPa ) . During World War II , Donald and Yarbrough et al. performed over 2 @,@ 000 experiments on oxygen toxicity to support the initial use of closed circuit oxygen rebreathers . Naval divers in the early years of oxygen rebreather diving developed a mythology about a monster called " Oxygen Pete " , who lurked in the bottom of the Admiralty Experimental Diving Unit " wet pot " ( a water @-@ filled hyperbaric chamber ) to catch unwary divers . They called having an oxygen toxicity attack " getting a Pete " . 
 In the decade following World War II , Lambertsen et al. made further discoveries on the effects of breathing oxygen under pressure and methods of prevention . Their work on intermittent exposures for extension of oxygen tolerance and on a model for prediction of pulmonary oxygen toxicity based on pulmonary function are key documents in the development of standard operating procedures when breathing increased pressures of oxygen . Lambertsen 's work showing the effect of carbon dioxide in decreasing time to onset of central nervous system symptoms has influenced work from current exposure guidelines to future breathing apparatus design . 
 Retinopathy of prematurity was not observed before World War II , but with the availability of supplemental oxygen in the decade following , it rapidly became one of the principal causes of infant blindness in developed countries . By 1960 the use of oxygen had become identified as a risk factor and its administration restricted . The resulting fall in retinopathy of prematurity was accompanied by a rise in infant mortality and hypoxia @-@ related complications . Since then , more sophisticated monitoring and diagnosis have established protocols for oxygen use which aim to balance between hypoxic conditions and problems of retinopathy of prematurity . 
 Bronchopulmonary dysplasia was first described by Northway in 1967 , who outlined the conditions that would lead to the diagnosis . This was later expanded by <unk> and in 1988 by Shennan , who suggested the need for supplemental oxygen at 36 weeks could predict long @-@ term outcomes . Nevertheless , <unk> et al. in 1998 concluded that radiographic evidence was the most accurate predictor of long @-@ term effects . 
 <unk> et al. in 1986 and 1995 showed that darkness and caffeine would delay the onset of changes to brain electrical activity in rats . In the years since , research on central nervous system toxicity has centred on methods of prevention and safe extension of tolerance . Sensitivity to central nervous system oxygen toxicity has been shown to be affected by factors such as circadian rhythm , drugs , age , and gender . In 1988 , Hamilton et al. wrote procedures for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration to establish oxygen exposure limits for habitat operations . Even today , models for the prediction of pulmonary oxygen toxicity do not explain all the results of exposure to high partial pressures of oxygen . 
 = = Society and culture = = 
 Recreational scuba divers commonly breathe nitrox containing up to 40 % oxygen , while technical divers use pure oxygen or nitrox containing up to 80 % oxygen . Divers who breathe oxygen fractions greater than of air ( 21 % ) need to be trained in the dangers of oxygen toxicity and how to prevent them . In order to buy nitrox , a diver has to show evidence of such qualification . 
 Since the late 1990s the recreational use of oxygen has been promoted by oxygen bars , where customers breathe oxygen through a nasal cannula . Claims have been made that this reduces stress , increases energy , and lessens the effects of hangovers and headaches , despite the lack of any scientific evidence to support them . There are also devices on sale that offer " oxygen massage " and " oxygen detoxification " with claims of removing body toxins and reducing body fat . The American Lung Association has stated " there is no evidence that oxygen at the low flow levels used in bars can be dangerous to a normal person 's health " , but the U.S. Center for Drug Evaluation and Research cautions that people with heart or lung disease need their supplementary oxygen carefully regulated and should not use oxygen bars . 
 Victorian society had a fascination for the rapidly expanding field of science . In " Dr. Ox 's Experiment " , a short story written by Jules Verne in 1872 , the eponymous doctor uses electrolysis of water to separate oxygen and hydrogen . He then pumps the pure oxygen throughout the town of Quiquendone , causing the normally tranquil inhabitants and their animals to become aggressive and plants to grow rapidly . An explosion of the hydrogen and oxygen in Dr Ox 's factory brings his experiment to an end . Verne summarised his story by explaining that the effects of oxygen described in the tale were his own invention . There is also a brief episode of oxygen intoxication in his " From the Earth to the Moon " . 
 = William Garnett Braithwaite = 
 Brigadier General William Garnett Braithwaite , CB , CMG , DSO ( 21 October 1870 – 15 October 1937 ) was a British Army officer who participated in the Boer War and the First World War . 
 Born in England in 1870 , he joined the British Army in 1891 . He served with the Royal Welsh Fusiliers during the Boer War , during which he received the Distinguished Service Order . After the war he was an instructor at the Royal Military College . In 1911 , he went to New Zealand on secondment to help with the training and administration of the New Zealand Military Forces . Following the outbreak of the First World War , he served as a staff officer in the New Zealand Expeditionary Force . He commanded the New Zealand Division 's 2nd Infantry Brigade for nearly two years on the Western Front and on occasion was acting commander of the division . In December 1917 , he was medically evacuated to England . After a period of rest , he returned to military duty with the British Army , and ended the war in command of the 16th Infantry Brigade . He retired from the army in 1925 and died in 1937 at the age of 66 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Braithwaite was born in Kendal , Westmorland , England on 21 October 1870 . After completing his schooling at Marlborough College , he attended the Royal Military College at Sandhurst before joining the British Army in 1891 . 
 = = Military career = = 
 Braithwaite was commissioned in the Royal Welsh Fusiliers as a second lieutenant 23 May 1891 . He was promoted to lieutenant on 16 May 1894 , and to captain on 19 July 1899 . From late 1899 to 1902 , Braithwaite fought in the Boer War . As well as being appointed to the Distinguished Service Order ( DSO ) , he was mentioned in despatches three times for his service in South Africa . At the closing of the war he returned to the United Kingdom in March 1902 , and was appointed adjutant of the 3rd ( Volunteer ) Battalion of his regiment . He was later assigned to the Royal Military College for a period of time as an instructor . 
 In 1911 , now a major , he was seconded to the New Zealand Military Forces under the command of the then Major General Alexander Godley . Braithwaite was appointed General Staff Officer for the Auckland Military District and later promoted to temporary lieutenant colonel , Godley 's Chief of General Staff . At the time , Godley was restructuring the New Zealand Military Forces and creating a Territorial Force to replace the inadequate Volunteer Force . Braithwaite assisted in the establishment of the Territorial Force and was responsible for staff organisation and training . His initial three @-@ year appointment was to expire in July 1914 but earlier that year was extended a further 12 months following a request from the New Zealand government . 
 = = = First World War = = = 
 Braithwaite volunteered for the New Zealand Expeditionary Force ( NZEF ) following the outbreak of the First World War in August 1914 . He left for the Middle East as the staff officer responsible for the operational planning of the NZEF . His wife , Gwendolen , whom he married in 1901 , and the couple 's three children also left New Zealand but to live in England . 
 = = = = Gallipoli Campaign = = = = 
 Following a period of training with the NZEF in Egypt , Braithwaite served as a staff officer in Godley 's headquarters . Godley was not only commander of the NZEF but also the New Zealand and Australian Division during the Gallipoli Campaign which commenced in April 1915 . Braithwaite fulfilled his duties well and was twice mentioned in despatches for his work during the August offensive . He took ill the next month and required evacuation for medical treatment . He returned to duty in October and the following month took over temporary command of the New Zealand Infantry Brigade when its nominal commander , Brigadier General Francis Johnston , went on sick leave . After the withdrawal of the Allied forces from Gallipoli , Braithwaite returned with the surviving elements of the NZEF to Egypt . He was appointed a Companion of the Order of St Michael and St George for his work during the Gallipoli Campaign . 
 In December 1915 Braithwaite was promoted temporary brigadier general ( his temporary rank of lieutenant colonel was made substantive at the same time ) and took command of the newly formed New Zealand ( Rifle ) Brigade . The brigade consisted of only two battalions at this stage but would be brought up to strength with the arrival of its 3rd and 4th Battalions in March 1916 . During this time Braithwaite oversaw the training of his new command . However , within a few months , he was appointed commander of the 2nd Infantry Brigade , one of the three brigades of the newly formed New Zealand Division . 
 = = = = Western Front = = = = 
 The New Zealand Division moved to the Western Front in April 1916 . Braithwaite had a brief period in command of the division while its commander , Major General Andrew Russell , was on leave . During the division 's first major engagement , the Somme Offensive , Braithwaite led his brigade in the Battle of Flers @-@ Courcelette in which it incurred over 700 casualties during the capture of its key objective , the Switch Line . A few days later he planned and directed a successful nighttime attempt by the strongest battalion of his brigade to seize the neighbouring high ground at what was known as Goose Alley . After the battle , Russell assessed Braithwaite as the best performed of his brigade commanders . 
 In June 1917 , Braithwaite was promoted to colonel , although he remained a temporary brigadier general . His brigade had a central role in the Battle of Messines and was able to achieve its objectives with minimal casualties . However , heavy losses were incurred by his brigade later in the year during the First Battle of Passchendaele on 12 October . After his initial attack faltered and came to a halt , Braithwaite protested orders from Russell later that day to resume the attack , 2nd Infantry Brigade having suffered heavy casualties for the gain of little ground . When it became apparent to Russell that flanking units had not achieved their objectives , the orders were cancelled . 
 Braithwaite had a further period in command of the division while Russell was on sick leave in late October and in early December led his brigade in attacks on Polderhoek Chateau . The brigade suffered heavy losses and the attack was regarded as a failure . At this stage of the war , Braithwaite was one of the longest serving brigade commanders of the NZEF . Worn down by stresses of command , his health was so poor it forced his evacuation to England . 
 Following a period of convalescence , Braithwaite , rather than rejoining the New Zealand Division , resumed service in the British Army with his parent unit , the Royal Welsh Fusiliers . A popular commander amongst the New Zealanders , rumours circulated in the division that his return to the British Army was due to his refusal to continue with the 12 October 1917 attack at Passchendaele . Braithwaite returned to the front in February 1918 as a staff officer in a British Corps and was made a Companion of the Order of the Bath in June 1918 . In October 1918 , he was placed in command of the 16th Infantry Brigade when its previous commander , Brigadier General Henry Walker , was wounded in an artillery barrage , and led it through to the armistice . During the course of the First World War he had been mentioned in despatches six times . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Braithwaite remained in the British Army after the war and commanded a brigade in the British Army of the Rhine . While stationed in Germany , he wrote a foreword for one of the regimental histories of the NZEF . He relinquished his temporary rank of brigadier general in 1920 , and reverted to his substantive rank of colonel to take up a brigade command in the Territorial Force . He eventually retired from the British Army in November 1925 , with the honorary rank of brigadier general . He died in Camberley , Surrey , on 15 October 1937 , survived by his wife and children . Braithwaite Street in the Wellington suburb of Karori is named for him . 
 = Charles May ( Canadian politician ) = 
 Charles May ( June 30 , 1858 – March 1 , 1932 ) was Canadian contractor and politician . He served on the Edmonton City Council and later as Mayor of Edmonton from 1905 to 1906 . 
 A native of what would become the province of Ontario , May moved to Manitoba soon after completing education in his hometown . In Manitoba , he would take to briefly farming , before entering into the construction industry , which he would establish prominence in . After doing work for the railway , he would move to Winnipeg where he would join a contracting firm and become involved in the construction of many buildings . After moving west and living briefly in Carberry , Manitoba , May came to Edmonton in 1902 . 
 In Edmonton he would rise to be one of the city 's most prominent contractors , constructing many of the city 's landmark buildings , as well as houses for its prominent residents . Long interested in municipal affairs , he entered civic politics with his election to the Edmonton Town Council in 1903 . After an aldermanic term that saw the inclusion of Alberta as a province in Canada , in 1905 he was elected as mayor of the newly incorporated city ; during his term he would oversee many improvements and advances to the city . Retiring after one term in office and returning to his contracting firm , he would eventually leave Edmonton in 1922 for Vancouver where he would live for 10 years leading up to his death in 1932 . An active community man , May also founded and oversaw many local organizations . A Liberal in politics , he is remembered as a progressive mayor whose policies helped the accelerate development of city of Edmonton . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 May was born in Wellington County , Canada West in 1858 , to John and Helen ( née <unk> ) May . Both of his parents were immigrants who had come to Canada early in their lives , his father originally from County Londonderry , Ireland , was a veteran of the 1837 Upper Canada Rebellion , and his mother a native of Aberdeenshire , Scotland . Charles attended and completed public schooling in Wellington County , and around 1871 the May family relocated to Paisley , Ontario . Upon the death of his father shortly thereafter , May was tasked with the responsibilities of heading and providing for his family , along with a brother , Thomas . 
 In 1880 , after the closing of his father 's estate and sale his father 's property , he moved west to homestead and farm at Manitoba , in the Little Saskatchewan district , near <unk> . A few years later , he had come to the realization that farming was not an efficient means of business for him ; his farm had been situated in an area that was so far removed from a town that travel to deliver his products had been cumbersome . He then gained employment as a carpenter and builder with the Manitoba and North Western Railway , where he was tasked with building rail bridges and stations . He would later move to Winnipeg where he continued working in his field . He would join the contracting firm of Murray & <unk> , serving as foreman on various projects , including the building of the Manitoba Hotel . After some 13 years , he went to Carberry , Manitoba where he continued contracting , this time also entering the furniture business . In 1902 , he would also be involved in the construction of the Union Bank building there . 
 = = Career in Edmonton = = 
 Later in 1902 , May once again moved , this time further west to the town of Edmonton , in the North @-@ West Territory . Upon his arrival there , he would purchase several lots of land on which he would construct a series of cottages , houses and terraces that he would later sell . In Edmonton , he would establish himself as a prominent contractor , building many notable early buildings of the town , and later city . He partnered with Charles W. Sharpe and established the May @-@ Sharpe Construction company . With his firm , buildings he was involved in constructing included the town 's first Canadian Northern Railway station , a post office , the Bank of Montreal , Merchants ' Bank and Bank of Commerce buildings , the Hudson 's Bay Company store , the first provincial penitentiary building , and the residences of city notables Richard Secord , Frank Oliver and Edward Ainslie Braithwaite . He was also involved in the construction of the Clover Bar railway bridge , for which he set the concrete piers and foundation , as well as the Land Titles Building in Regina , Saskatchewan . From 1909 to 1912 , May would also construct the still @-@ standing <unk> mansion , atop the North Saskatchewan River Valley as well as assist in the construction of McDougall United Church . The <unk> mansion construction however would bankrupt him and force him to move to a cottage on <unk> Island on Cooking Lake , beside the present day Edmonton / Cooking Lake Water Aerodrome in Strathcona County , until his debts were settled . In 1921 , he did work at Fort Smith , Northwest Territories , as superintendent of the Windsor Transportation Company . 
 = = = Civic politics = = = 
 Keenly interested in the well @-@ being of citizens and affairs related to the development of the growing town , he was nominated for and eventually elected to Edmonton Town Council as an alderman in 1903 , finishing first of nine candidates , with 421 votes . His term was to last two years , but was truncated by a year by Edmonton 's incorporation as a city , which meant that the entire city council was elected afresh in the 1904 election . In that election he was again elected to a two @-@ year term , finishing first of seventeen candidates , but this time resigned one year into his term in order to run for mayor in the 1905 election . May 's time on council included the time in which Alberta was incorporated as a province ; as an alderman he voiced his support for a lavish celebration to be in Edmonton , which was to be the capital city of the new province . While sitting on council , he also voted against a proposed bylaw that would have permitted suffrage for women in civic elections ; he had initially voted in favour of the law , but had later reconsidered and reversed his vote , effectively killing the bill . The vote previously had been in favour of the bill , by a margin of one vote . 
 As the popular choice leading into the election , he handily defeated fellow councillor Arthur Cushing by a count of 627 votes to 355 , and thus became mayor of Edmonton . He served in this capacity for one term of one year , but did not seek re @-@ election in 1906 and retired from political life thereafter . It was during May 's term as mayor in which the municipal foundations of Edmonton were set ; he oversaw the purchase of the road maintenance equipment , the city 's first telephone system as well as the upgrade of the street car system to steel rails and posts , purchase of land for municipal use , paving of roads , and negotiations for the establishment of a manufacturing plant in the city . He also travelled to Toronto to lobby for a new union railway station in Edmonton to be constructed for use by the Grand Trunk , Canadian Northern and Canadian Pacific Railways . It was also during May 's term which the Alberta Legislature Building would first open its doors , which he would participate in its opening ceremonies . In 1911 , he would be named a returning officer for Edmonton , in charge of overseeing the Canadian federal election , 1911 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 May was active with the Masonic Order , the Presbyterian Church , and the Liberal Party of Alberta . He also was a member of the Edmonton Exhibition Association , Old Timers ' Association as well as a director and manager with the Alberta Lumber Company , founder and president of the Edmonton Kennel Club , and one of the founders of a local contractors ' association . In 1906 , May was involved in the planning of the first provincial fair in Alberta . May married Ann Galbraith at Saugeen , Ontario in 1882 ; they would have two children and remain married until she died suddenly in 1897 . He remarried in 1901 , to Margaret Henderson with whom he had three additional children . One son , Norman was killed in an accident while working on the Grand Trunk Railway in Wolf Creek , Alberta . 
 Charles May was also the uncle of famed aviator and flying ace Wop May , the latter being a son of his brother , Alexander <unk> May . Alexander May was a former mayor of Carberry , Manitoba , postmaster of Edmonton , as well as an unsuccessful Liberal Candidate in the Canadian federal election , 1917 , in the riding of Edmonton East . 
 = = = Death and legacy = = = 
 He moved to Vancouver , British Columbia in 1922 , and following a long period of illness , he died of stomach cancer there on March 1 , 1932 , aged 73 . He was survived by his wife , a daughter and four sons . <unk> May later died in 1949 . Regarded as a progressive and energetic mayor , upon his death , the Edmonton Bulletin noted regarding his mayoral term that " his progressive and constructive policies did much to advance the progress of Edmonton " . The 1912 publication , History of the province of Alberta , praised May 's stern and ambitious personality , stating that " in the most adverse circumstances [ he ] endured with fortitude " . 
 = Pike Place Fish Market = 
 The Pike Place Fish Market , founded in 1930 , is an open air fish market located in Seattle , Washington 's Pike Place Market , at the corner of Pike Street and Pike Place . It is known for their tradition of fishmongers throwing fish that customers have purchased , before they are wrapped . After nearing bankruptcy in 1986 , the fish market owner and employees decided to become " world famous " , changing their way of doing business by introducing their flying fish , games , and customer performances . Four years later , they were featured repeatedly in the national media and television shows . The store is now a popular tourist destination in Seattle , attracting up to 10 @,@ 000 daily visitors , and is often billed as world @-@ famous . 
 = = History = = 
 The Pike Place Fish Market was purchased in 1965 by John Yokoyama , a former employee of the fish market , who bought the store to make enough money on an owner 's salary to afford the car payments on his new Buick Riviera . Initially , Pike Place Fish Market was unknown outside of the Seattle area , but Yokoyama and his staff decided to change that in a meeting with a business coach in 1986 . Prior to the meeting , the Pike Place Fish Market was near to bankruptcy , and the consultant , Jim Bergquist , was helping them to conceive of ways to save the business . A fish market employee at the meeting suggested that they not only save the business , but make it " world famous " , with the ideas for the business ' flying and thrown fish , games with customers , and staff attitudes of always enjoying their work , so that customers would as well . In an interview , Yokoyama stated , " We took a stand that we were going to become world famous . We just said it and it became so . " 
 Four years later , in 1990 , Ted Turner 's Goodwill Games were held in Seattle . News crews at the Pike Place Market discovered the fish market and its performances with customers , and they filmed them . Soon afterwards , the fish market appeared on Good Morning America , leading to the business and its employees being filmed by various film crews , and being featured in numerous magazines . Now , during the summer tourist season , the fishmongers will perform now in front of as many as 10 @,@ 000 visitors daily . The success of the business has been cited to its human resources and employee attitudes . The employees of the fish market will often speak to businesses , civic groups , and schools on ways to be successful , and has led to their being featured in motivational books . 
 A popular feature at the Pike Place Fish Market is the monkfish , which sometimes , thanks to a hidden line , is made to " snap " at customers . In 1991 , CNN named the Pike Place Fish Market as one of the three most fun places to work in America . 
 = = Flying fish = = 
 The Pike Place Fish Market is best known for their habit of hurling customers ' orders across the shopping area . A typical routine will involve a customer ordering a fish , with their fishmongers in orange rubber overalls and boots calling out the order , which is loudly shouted back by all the other staff , at which point the original fishmonger will throw the customer 's fish behind the counter for wrapping . Initially , the shouted repeating of the ordered fish began as a prank on one employee , but was enjoyed by customers , so it became a tradition . While working , the staff continually yell to each other and chant in unison while they throw ordered fish . At times , the fish market staff will throw a foam fish into the crowd to scare bystanders , or select a customer from the crowds to participate in the fish toss . Above the areas in which they throw fish , the market hangs a sign that reads , " Caution : Low Flying Fish " . 
 = = Films , books and popular culture = = 
 In 1998 , the Pike Place Fish Market was the subject of a documentary film and accompanying book , FISH ! Philosophy . The Pike Place Fish Market has also been the setting for several best @-@ selling corporate training videos , the aforementioned FISH ! , and also FISH ! Sticks , which have been used by firms such as Enterprise Rent @-@ A @-@ Car , Sprint Nextel , Southwest Airlines , Sainsbury 's , Saturn , and Scottish and Southern Energy , for employee training . The Pike Place Fish Market has been featured in a variety of television shows and commercials . These include a Spike Lee Levis jeans commercial ; MTV 's The Real World ; NBC 's Frasier , and ABC 's Good Morning America . In films , they have appeared in Free Willy . Reference to the Pike Place Fish Market is also made by American hip hop duo Macklemore & Ryan Lewis in their 2015 single " Downtown " featuring Eric <unk> , Melle Mel , Kool Moe Dee and Grandmaster Caz . 
 = Great French Wine Blight = 
 The Great French Wine Blight was a severe blight of the mid @-@ 19th century that destroyed many of the vineyards in France and laid waste to the wine industry . It was caused by an aphid ( the actual genus of the aphid is still debated , although it is largely considered to have been a species of <unk> <unk> , commonly known as grape phylloxera ) that originated in North America and was carried across the Atlantic in the late 1850s . While France is considered to have been worst affected , the blight also did a great deal of damage to vineyards in other European countries . 
 How the Phylloxera aphid was introduced to Europe remains debated : American vines had been taken to Europe many times before , for reasons including experimentation and trials in grafting , without consideration of the possibility of the introduction of pestilence . While the Phylloxera was thought to have arrived around 1858 , it was first recorded in France in 1863 , near the former province of Languedoc . It is argued by some that the introduction of such pests as phylloxera was only a problem after the invention of steamships , which allowed a faster journey across the ocean , and consequently allowed durable pests , such as the Phylloxera , to survive . 
 Eventually , following Jules @-@ Émile Planchon 's discovery of the Phylloxera as the cause of the blight , and Charles Valentine Riley 's confirmation of Planchon 's theory , Leo Laliman and Gaston Bazille , two French wine growers , proposed that the European vines be grafted to the resistant American rootstock that were not susceptible to the Phylloxera . While many of the French wine growers disliked this idea , many found themselves with no other option . The method proved to be an effective remedy . The " Reconstitution " ( as it was termed ) of the many vineyards that had been lost was a slow process , but eventually the wine industry in France was able to return to relative normality . 
 = = Background = = 
 The aphid that was the central source of the damage in France was first noted following the growing of the European vine Vitis vinifera by French colonists in Florida , in the 16th century . These plantations were a failure , and later experiments with related species of vine also failed , although the reason for these failures appears to have been a mystery to the French colonists . It is known today that it was a species of North American grape phylloxera that caused these early vineyards to fail ; the venom injected by the Phylloxera causes a disease that is quickly fatal to the European varieties of vine . The aphids initially went unnoticed by the colonists , despite their great numbers , and the pressure to successfully start a vineyard in America at the time . 
 It became common knowledge among the settlers that their European vines , of the <unk> variety , simply would not grow in American soil , and they resorted to growing native American plants , and established plantations of these native vines . Exceptions did exist ; vinifera plantations were well @-@ established in California before the aphids found their way there . 
 = = = Phylloxera = = = 
 There have been several theories proposed for why the phylloxera was ignored as the possible cause of the disease that resulted in the failure of so many vineyards , most of which involve the feeding behaviour of the insect , and the way it attacks the roots . The proboscis of the grape phylloxera has both a venom canal from which it injects its deadly venom and a feeding tube through which it takes in vine sap and nutrients . As the toxin from the venom corrodes the root structure of a vine , the sap pressure falls and , as a result , the Phylloxera quickly withdraws its feeding tube and searches for another source of food . Thus , anyone digging up a diseased and dying vine will not find Phylloxera clinging to the roots of the plant . 
 = = = Journey to Europe = = = 
 For a few centuries , Europeans had experimented with American vines and plants in their soil , and many varieties were imported from America without regulation , disregarding the possibility of pest transfer , and related problems . Jules @-@ Emile Planchon , a French biologist , who identified the Phylloxera in the 1860s , maintained that this transfer of American vines and plants into Europe greatly increased between roughly 1858 and 1862 , and this is how the Phylloxera was accidentally introduced to Europe around 1860 , although the aphid did not enter France until around 1863 . It is believed that the advent of steamships was a factor as well , as the ships were faster , and the Phylloxera were able to survive the quicker ocean voyage . 
 = = The blight = = 
 = = = Initial appearance = = = 
 The first known documented instance of an attack by the Phylloxera in France was in the village of Pujaut in the department of Gard of the former province of Languedoc , in 1863 . The wine makers there did not notice the aphids , just as the French colonists in America had not , but they noted the mysterious blight that was damaging their vines . The only description of the disease that was given by these wine growers was that it ' reminded them distressingly of " consumption " ' ( tuberculosis ) . The blight quickly spread throughout France , but it was several years before the cause of the disease was determined . 
 = = = Damage = = = 
 Over 40 % of French grape vines and vineyards were devastated over a 15 @-@ year period , from the late 1850s to the mid @-@ 1870s . The French economy was badly hit by the blight ; many businesses were lost , and wages in the wine industry were cut to less than half . There was also a noticeable trend of migration to , among other places , Algiers and America . The production of cheap raisins and sugar wines caused problems for the domestic industry that threatened to persist even after the blight itself . The damage to the French economy , is estimated to have been slightly over 10 billion Francs . 
 = = = Discovery = = = 
 Research into identifying the cause of the disease began in 1868 , when grape growers in Roquemaure , near Pujaut , asked the agricultural society in Montpellier for help . To investigate the disease , the society appointed a committee consisting of botanist Jules Émile Planchon , local grower Felix <unk> , and the society 's president , Gaston Bazille , among others . <unk> soon noticed that the roots of dying vines were infested with " lice " , which were sucking sap from the plants . The committee named the new insect <unk> <unk> . Planchon consulted French entomologists Victor Antoine Signoret and Jules Lichtenstein ( Planchon 's brother @-@ in @-@ law ) . Signoret suggested renaming the insect Phylloxera <unk> , due to its similarity to Phylloxera quercus , which afflicted oak leaves . In 1869 , English entomologist John Obadiah Westwood suggested that an insect that had afflicted grape leaves in England circa 1863 was the same insect afflicting grape vines ' roots in France . Also in 1869 , Lichtenstein suggested that the French insect was an American " vine louse " that had been identified in 1855 by the American entomologist Asa Fitch , which he 'd named <unk> <unk> . However , there was a problem with these suggestions : French grape lice were known to infest only a vine 's roots , whereas American grape lice were known to infest only its leaves . The British @-@ born American entomologist Charles Valentine Riley had been following news of the outbreak in France . He sent Signoret specimens of American grape lice , which Signoret concluded — in 1870 , while besieged in Paris during the Franco @-@ Prussian War — were indeed identical to French grape lice . Meanwhile , Planchon and Lichtenstein had found vines with afflicted leaves ; lice that were transferred from those leaves to the roots of healthy vines attached themselves to the vines ' roots as other French grape lice did . Also in 1870 , Riley discovered that American grape lice wintered on American grape vines ' roots , which the insects damaged , albeit less than in the case of French vines . Using American grape vines and American grape lice , Riley also repeated Planchon and Lichtenstein 's experiment , with similar results . Thus the identity of the French and American grape lice was proved . Nevertheless , for another three years , a powerful majority in France argued that Phylloxera was not the cause of vine disease ; instead , vines that were already sickly became infested with Phylloxera . Thus , in their opinion , Phylloxera was merely a consequence of the " true " disease , which remained to be found . Regardless , Riley had discovered American grape varieties that were especially resistant to Phylloxera , and by 1871 , French farmers began to import them and graft French vines onto the American rootstock . ( Leo Laliman had suggested importing American vines as early as 1869 , but French farmers were reluctant to abandon their traditional varieties . Gaston Bazille then proposed grafting traditional French vines onto American rootstock . ) However , importation of American vines did not entirely solve the problem : some American grape varieties struggled in France 's chalky soils and succumbed to Phylloxera . By trial and error , American vines were found that could tolerate chalky soils . Meanwhile , entomologists worked to unravel the strange life cycle of Phylloxera , a project that was completed in 1874 . 
 = = = Solution = = = 
 Many growers resorted to their own methods in attempt to resolve the issue . Chemicals and pesticides were used to no avail . In desperation , some growers positioned toads under each vine , and others allowed their poultry to roam free in the hope they would eat the insects . None of these methods were successful . 
 After Charles Valentine Riley , Missouri 's state <unk> , confirmed Planchon 's theory , Leo Laliman and Gaston Bazille , two French wine growers , both suggested the possibility that if vinifera vines could be combined , by means of grafting , with the aphid @-@ resistant American vines , then the problem might be solved . Thomas Volney Munson was consulted and provided native Texan rootstocks for grafting . Because of Munson 's role , the French government in 1888 sent a delegation to Denison to confer on him the French Legion of Honor Chevalier du Mérite Agricole . 
 The method was tested , and proved a success . The process was colloquially termed " reconstitution " by French wine growers . The cure for the disease caused a great division in the wine industry : some , who became known as the " chemists " , rejected the grafting solution and persisted with the use of pesticides and chemicals . Those who became <unk> were known as " <unk> " , or " wood merchants " . Following the demonstrated success of grafting in the 1870s and 1880s the immense task of " reconstituting " the majority of France 's vineyards began . 
 = = = = Prize = = = = 
 The French government had offered over 320 @,@ 000 Francs as a reward to whoever could discover a cure for the blight . Having reportedly been the first to suggest the possibility of using the resistant American rootstock , Leo Laliman tried to claim the money , but the French government refused to award it , with the rationale that he had not cured the blight , but rather stopped it from occurring . However , there may have been other reasons for the government denying Laliman the prize : he was mistrusted by several notable parties , and he was thought by many to have originally introduced the pest . 
 = = Present day = = 
 There is still no remedy , as such , for the Phylloxera , or the disease it brings with it , and it still poses a substantial threat to any vineyard not planted with grafted rootstock . In fact , there is only one European grape vine known to be resistant to the Phylloxera , the <unk> vine , which grows on the volcanic Greek island of Santorini ; however there is speculation that the actual source of this resistance may arise from the volcanic ash in which the vines grow , and not from the vine itself . 
 The events of the Great Wine Blight , and the need for European @-@ American grafting has given rise to a debate that remains unresolved today : whether self @-@ rooted vines produce better wine than those that are grafted . 
 There still exist some vines which have been neither grafted nor destroyed by phylloxera , including some owned by Bollinger . 
 = Hurricane Fabian = 
 Hurricane Fabian was a powerful Cape Verde @-@ type hurricane that hit Bermuda in early September during the 2003 Atlantic hurricane season . Fabian , the sixth named storm , fourth hurricane , and first major hurricane of the season , developed from a tropical wave in the tropical Atlantic Ocean on August 25 . It moved west @-@ northwestward under the influence of the subtropical ridge to its north , and steadily strengthened in an area of warm water temperatures and light wind shear . The hurricane attained a peak intensity of 145 mph ( 230 km / h ) on September 1 , and it slowly weakened as it turned northward . On September 5 , Fabian made a direct hit on Bermuda with wind speeds of over 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) . After passing the island , the hurricane turned to the northeast , and became extratropical on September 8 . 
 Fabian was the strongest hurricane to hit Bermuda since Hurricane Arlene in 1963 . It was both the most damaging and the first hurricane to cause a death on the island since 1926 . The hurricane 's powerful winds resulted in moderate damage and destroyed roofs throughout the island . A strong storm surge associated with the hurricane killed four people crossing a causeway on Bermuda , temporarily closing the only link between two islands . The endangered Bermuda petrel , better known as the <unk> , was threatened by the hurricane , which destroyed ten nests , although volunteer work transported the species to a safer location . Strong swells resulted in damage in northern Puerto Rico and the Dominican Republic , and also caused four people to drown along the United States ' Atlantic coast . In all , Fabian caused around US $ 300 million in damage and eight deaths . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On August 25 , a tropical wave emerged off the coast of Africa . Tracking westward , the wave developed convection over its center , and conducive conditions allowed it to develop further . The system passed through the Cape Verde islands later that day as convection steadily weakened . Early on August 27 , convection again increased and consolidated near the center , and later that day the wave developed into Tropical Depression Ten while located 420 miles ( 675 km ) west of the Cape Verde islands . Moving westward into an area of warm waters and low vertical shear , the depression steadily intensified , and was named Tropical Storm Fabian on August 28 as convection increased and banding features became more prominent . 
 Banding features and outflow continued to develop as a ring of convection formed around the center of Fabian , and on August 30 , the storm intensified into a hurricane while gradually slowing its motion to the west @-@ northwest . As banding features and outflow became better defined , an eye developed in the center of the deepest convection . Fabian quickly strengthened and attained major hurricane status late that day . Deep convection became very concentric around the 11 @.@ 5 mile ( 18 @.@ 5 km ) wide eye , and the hurricane reached winds of 125 mph ( 205 km / h ) early on August 31 . At this time , the deepest convection near the eye degraded in appearance , and Fabian temporarily stopped its strengthening trend . Later that day , the eye became distinct again within a perfectly round area of deep convection . Outflow continued to expand in all directions , and Fabian intensified into a Category 4 hurricane late on August 31 . Thunderstorm activity near the eyewall became more intense , and the cloud tops in the eyewall became much cooler ; simultaneously , outflow away from the eye became much more symmetrical , both signs of an intensifying tropical cyclone . Fabian reached its peak intensity of 145 mph ( 230 km / h ) on September 1 while located 345 miles ( 555 km ) east of the northern Lesser Antilles . 
 After maintaining its peak intensity for 12 hours Fabian degraded due to internal fluctuations , and began to weaken . The hurricane turned to the northwest on September 2 in response to a weakness in the subtropical ridge , a break caused by a mid @-@ level circulation over the southwest Atlantic Ocean . After fading back to a Category 3 hurricane , Fabian re @-@ intensified on September 4 , and regained Category 4 status for a short time . The hurricane weakened again as it accelerated northward towards Bermuda , a motion due to an approaching mid @-@ level trough . As small pockets of dry air became entrained in the eyewall , Fabian weakened slightly , passing just 14 miles ( 23 km ) west of Bermuda on September 5 as a 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) Category 3 hurricane . The eastern portion of the eyewall moved over the island , resulting in a direct hit ; however , as the center did not move over the island , Fabian did not make landfall . After passing the island , the hurricane accelerated northeastward , and weakened to a 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) Category 2 hurricane on September 7 . Steady weakening occurred as the hurricane moved into an area of increasing wind shear , drier air , and progressively cooler waters . On September 8 , while located 680 miles ( 1095 km ) east @-@ northeast of Cape Race , Newfoundland , Fabian transitioned into an extratropical storm , with no deep convection remaining near the center . The extratropical remnant turned to the north on September 9 , and on September 10 it merged with another extratropical storm while located between southern Greenland and Iceland . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Several days prior to Fabian striking Bermuda , computer models forecast a ridge of high pressure forcing the hurricane to the west of the island by 200 miles ( 320 km ) . Not expected to be a direct threat , a meteorologist at the Bermuda Weather Service expected gusty winds and potentially heavy rainfall . Each successive advisory brought the hurricane steadily closer to Bermuda , and 35 hours before Fabian made its closest approach , the Bermuda Weather Service issued a hurricane watch for the island . When a track near Bermuda became more certain , a hurricane warning was issued for the island , approximately 29 hours before Fabian made a direct hit on the island . 
 The Bermuda Electric Light Company recommended Bermuda residents to buy hurricane supplies such as candles , batteries , and non @-@ perishable foods , to fill bathtubs and extra containers with water , and fill gasoline tanks for automobiles . In preparation , residents formed long lines at gas stations , banks , and supermarkets . All government offices and many businesses closed on the day prior to the hurricane hitting . All schools were closed , while all flights in and out of the island were canceled . Officials opened emergency shelters , and recommended 2 @,@ 000 low @-@ lying residents to evacuate ; a hotel on the south shore of the island was evacuated as well . Several cruise ships expected to remain on the island departed early to avoid the hurricane . Local insurance companies on Bermuda experienced a great increase in business , as residents renewed lapsed policies or signed up for new policies for homes or businesses , though marine policies were stopped several days before the hurricane struck . The arrival of Fabian forced the cancellation or delay of several sports events , including a cricket match , a football game , and a dinghy race . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Throughout its path , Fabian killed 8 people and caused US $ 300 million in damages , primarily in Bermuda . 
 = = = Caribbean = = = 
 The hurricane produced storm surge damage in Antigua and Barbuda , where some boats were lightly damaged . Strong swells and high tides produced large waves on the north coast of Puerto Rico , washing out beaches in various locations . Waves knocked out a 10 ft ( 3 m ) portion of a construction site in Ocean Park , resulting in US $ 30 thousand in damage . In the Dominican Republic , the hurricane produced waves of up to 8 ft ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) in height . Due to the waves and gusty winds , boats were advised to stay at port . Several families had to be evacuated in Nagua when rough seas flooded their homes . 
 = = = Bermuda = = = 
 Hurricane Fabian produced a 10 @-@ minute average wind speed of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) , while a peak wind gust of 164 mph ( 264 km / h ) occurred at Bermuda Harbour Radio . The strongest of the winds lasted approximately three to four hours , and while the eastern portion of the eyewall moved over the island , winds decreased to 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) . Large waves battered the southern portion of the island for several days , reaching heights of 25 to 35 feet ( 7 to 10 m ) at the worst of the hurricane , and upon passing the island , the hurricane produced a storm surge exceeding 11 feet ( 3 m ) in height . Due to its fast motion , rainfall totals rose to only 1 @.@ 82 inches ( 46 @.@ 2 mm ) . There were several unofficial reports of tornadoes as well . Strong rip currents from the hurricane persisted for several days prior to Fabian passing the island ; two swimmers were caught in the currents and relied on lifeguard assistance to return to shore . As a result , rip tide warnings were posted for the island . 
 Strong waves caused extensive damage to the coastline , especially on the southern portion of Bermuda . The strong waves broke a boat from its moorings at Spanish Point . Not wanting to lose the ship , the owner , accompanied with two people , tried to save the vessel . One fell overboard before climbing aboard the boat . The three ventured the vessel through tornadoes and 20 @-@ foot ( 6 m ) waves , which dropped several feet of water in the ship ; however , ultimately they safely arrived at Hamilton Harbour . Five charter boats capsized from the waves , while several others crashed against reefs . Strong waves collapsed a sea wall in Hamilton , causing traffic jams for one day until it was fixed . 
 The winds downed numerous power lines , causing 78 % of the island 's 32 @,@ 031 power customers to experience power outages . The strong winds damaged or destroyed the roofs of numerous buildings on Bermuda . One of the areas lightest hit was around a hotel outside of Hamilton , which experienced no power outages or blown out windows , while one of the harder hit areas was Warwick . There , one resident noted , " Too many homes have lost roofs to count " . One house was entirely destroyed on Rec View Hill , while an unconfirmed tornado destroyed much of the roof of a house in Devonshire . The hurricane destroyed a restaurant in Southampton and also damaged stands and roofs at sports facilities . Strong winds from the hurricane damaged several landmark buildings , including the House of Assembly and the City Hall , both in Hamilton , and the former military headquarters in St. George 's . 
 Bermuda International Airport sustained $ 15 million in damages , primarily to buildings and roadways which were washed away by the storm surge . The runway escaped major damage , however , and the airport re @-@ opened the following day for emergency relief flights . Confronting the damages in the storm 's aftermath , Airport General Manager James Howes was quoted by the news media as saying , " My heart sank when I first saw the Airport that morning . There was tons of debris everywhere and all the fire alarms and security alarms were going off . There was this din of bells and horns - it was like a war zone " . Commercial airline service was suspended for three days due to heavy damage to the Terminal Building , which was flooded with 3 ft ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) of seawater . The airport 's ILS and radar were also damaged . 
 The hurricane also affected the Bermuda Weather Service , as 8 ft ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) waves destroyed recording equipment . The winds severely damaged the island 's major hotels , closing five for extended periods to repair damage . One hotel that remained open experienced damage to 25 % of its rooms . The strong winds uprooted hundreds of trees along the island 's golf courses , though little damage was reported at most courses . One course experienced significant damage at its club house , temporarily closing it . 
 The strong winds blew down hundreds of trees , caused severe damage to vegetation , and destroyed many of the island 's indigenous plants . The hurricane washed away large sections of the nesting island for the endangered Bermuda petrel and destroyed 10 of the 70 active nests . The endangered birds were not on the island , though local residents quickly gathered to restore their habitat . Strong waves resulted in severe coastal erosion , and at one beach , the lack of sand destroyed a natural cove . The Natural Arches , a set of eroded stones resembling an arch that was popular in photographs , was destroyed by the waves . The powerful winds knocked coconuts of off several trees and scattered them across the ground . 
 The storm surge from the hurricane stranded one vehicle with three police officers and another with a resident on the causeway between St. George 's Parish and St. David 's Island . After a fire truck failed in its attempt to rescue them , powerful waves washed the vehicles into Castle Harbour . The United States Coast Guard and Bermuda police divers mounted a full @-@ scale search for the missing people during the worst of the storm . The strong winds and emotional issues of searching for colleagues made the search difficult . Ultimately , the vehicles and one dead body were recovered , with the others remaining missing , presumably dead . Another vehicle was on the causeway as the two cars became stranded , though the driver was able to safely cross . High winds and surf tore off the causeway 's side walls and greatly damaged the structure , temporarily closing it to automobile traffic . 
 As most people were well @-@ prepared , these were the only four deaths on the island . In addition , nine people sought medical attention for minor injuries . Damage on Bermuda totaled to US $ 300 million , reportedly the worst to affect the area since 1926 . 
 = = = Atlantic coast = = = 
 Swells from the hurricane produced rip currents and heavy surf along the eastern North Carolina coastline . One man drowned near Cape Hatteras from the rip currents . Fabian produced moderate surfing conditions along the East Coast of the United States , primarily from Georgia to North Carolina . Three deaths were reported in the north Atlantic when a ship , The Pacific Attitude , sank south of Newfoundland in the Grand Banks due to strong waves of over 60 feet ( 20 m ) in height . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Blocked roads initially caused delays to crews from the Bermuda Electric Light Company ( BELCO ) , which were attempting to restore power to the island . Of high priority among the places to be restored were the hospital , as well as hotels to accommodate tourists who remained on the island through the storm . By the second day after the storm passed the island , power was restored to 11 @,@ 000 residents . Power on Bermuda was restored to all customers within three weeks of the hurricane , but the electricity supply distribution system was greatly weakened . This resulted in a rehabilitation plan implemented in October 2003 . Days after the hurricane passed , moisture from Tropical Storm Henri resulted in thunderstorms and heavy rainfall ; this hindered recovery efforts , but did not cause any reported damage . Lack of power caused interruptions to communications . While an emergency broadcast station was installed and tested prior the hurricane , the hurricane caused a problem to the system 's back @-@ up generator . The causeway in Bermuda remained closed for several days after the hurricane as road crews made temporary repairs . Upon being opened three days after the storm , traffic was limited to one lane of the original two . However , the causeway had to be closed in the event of rain , winds exceeding 30 mph ( 48 km / h ) , and at night . The bridge was fully repaired by early November 2003 . 
 In the days after the storm , people provided assistance for each other , especially for the elderly . Three days after the storm , for example , a radio station DJ announced a name for an elderly person in need , and within minutes someone would call to provide for their needs . Residents cleared smaller roads from debris with chainsaws , which in turn helped the power companies to make repairs quickly . As a result of damage on their homes , dozens of people stayed in five shelters or undamaged hotels . Residents purchased large quantities of gasoline in the days after Fabian , some of whom bought over US $ 500 worth . Officials assured there was no shortage , but requested drivers to conserve gas . XL Capital Ltd. shipped 250 tarpaulins , 10 electric generators , and rope supply to the island . The UK government offered help to the island with two Royal Navy ships with supplies such as tents , dried foods , and blankets . Premier Alex Scott declined the offer , believing the island could withstand on its own . World Vision also offered assistance with blankets , tents , and other supplies , while two United States companies offered to send generators . Bermuda Electric Light received aid from the Caribbean Electric Organization , which sent over 20 electricians to repair power lines . 
 Initially , the time for the destroyed vegetation on Bermuda to regrow was estimated to take decades . To help , the South Carolina Maritime Heritage Foundation , with support from a Boy Scout troop and nearby nurseries , delivered 1 @,@ 000 boxwood plants to the island . Following the damage to the Bermuda petrel 's habitat , Bermuda 's Department of Conservation carried out a translocation program , which involved moving the habitat to Nonsuch Island . That island , a long @-@ standing nature preserve , was much higher and safer for the birds , and by two years after the hurricane the population numbers were higher than before the storm . 
 Shortly after the hurricane , the American home improvement franchise This Old House , unaware of the limited extent of damage , decided to do a hurricane repair story . Upon realising that there would be little to nothing available for the Ask This Old House to repair , it was decided instead to do a renovation of an 1805 home in St. George 's . It was only the second time that the franchise had worked outside of the United States . 
 A memorial to the four <unk> whose lives were claimed by Hurricane Fabian was subsequently erected near the Causeway 's east end by the airport , where the 10th anniversary of their deaths was remembered by government officials in September 2013 . The onslaught of Hurricane Gonzalo in October 2014 prompted a catastrophe modeller to revisit Fabian 's destruction , concluding that had it struck in 2014 , it would have caused around $ 650 million in damage . 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 Due to the damage and deaths on Bermuda , the name Fabian was retired in the spring of 2004 and will never again be used for an Atlantic hurricane . As a result , the Bermuda Weather Service allowed residents to suggest a replacement name , with the only rule being the name had to be a male name beginning with the letter " F " , able to be easily pronounced , and not currently in use . The service received a list of over 30 names , including Forrest and Frodo , after the character in The Lord of the Rings . The Bermuda Weather Service sent three names to the World Meteorological Organization ; Fred , Ford , and Flynn . The World Meteorological Organization ultimately replaced Fabian with Fred to be on the list for the 2009 season . Fabian is one of only three tropical cyclones to have its name retired without making landfall anywhere , with the others being Klaus in 1990 and Erika in 2015 . 
 = Mount Kenya = 
 Mount Kenya is the highest mountain in Kenya and the second @-@ highest in Africa , after Kilimanjaro . The highest peaks of the mountain are Batian ( 5 @,@ 199 metres ( 17 @,@ 057 ft ) ) , Nelion ( 5 @,@ 188 metres ( 17 @,@ 021 ft ) ) and Point Lenana ( 4 @,@ 985 metres ( 16 @,@ 355 ft ) ) . Mount Kenya is located in central Kenya , about 16 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 10 @.@ 3 mi ) south of the equator , around 150 kilometres ( 93 mi ) north @-@ northeast of the capital Nairobi . Mount Kenya is the source of the name of the Republic of Kenya . 
 Mount Kenya is a stratovolcano created approximately 3 million years after the opening of the East African rift . Before glaciation , it was 7 @,@ 000 m ( 23 @,@ 000 ft ) high . It was covered by an ice cap for thousands of years . This has resulted in very eroded slopes and numerous valleys radiating from the centre . There are currently 11 small glaciers . The forested slopes are an important source of water for much of Kenya . 
 There are several vegetation bands from the base to the summit . The lower slopes are covered by different types of forest . Many alpine species are endemic to Mount Kenya , such as the giant <unk> and senecios and a local subspecies of rock hyrax . An area of 715 km2 ( 276 sq mi ) around the centre of the mountain was designated a National Park and listed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1997 . The park receives over 16 @,@ 000 visitors per year . 
 = = Mount Kenya National Park = = 
 Mount Kenya National Park , established in 1949 , protects the region surrounding the mountain . Currently the national park is within the forest reserve which encircles it . In April 1978 the area was designated a UNESCO Biosphere Reserve . The national park and the forest reserve , combined , became a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1997 . 
 The Government of Kenya had four reasons for creating a national park on and around Mount Kenya . These were the importance of tourism for the local and national economies , preserve an area of great scenic beauty , conserve the biodiversity within the park and to preserve the water catchment for the surrounding area . 
 Kenya ’ s government has announced a project to discourage animals from straying into small holdings surrounding the Park and devastating crops . The project will see the Park enclosed by an electric fence with five electrified strands and is expected to be completed by 2014 . The fence will discharge an electric shock , but is not dangerous to humans or animals . 
 = = Local culture = = 
 The main ethnic groups living around Mount Kenya are Kikuyu , Ameru , Embu and Maasai . The first three are closely related . They all see the mountain as an important aspect of their cultures . All these cultures arrived in the Mount Kenya area in the last several hundred years . 
 = = = Kikuyu = = = 
 The Kikuyu live on the southern and western sides of the mountain . They are agriculturalists , and make use of the highly fertile volcanic soil on the lower slopes . They believe that God , Ngai or Mwene Nyaga , lived on Mount Kenya when he came down from the sky . They believe that the mountain is Ngai 's throne on earth . It is the place where <unk> , the father of the tribe , used to meet with God . Thus according to the Kikuyu records , <unk> is the first person on Earth to ascend the mountain . ' Mwene Nyaga ' in Kikuyu language can also translate as the " Owner of the crown " where ' Mwene ' translates to ' owner ' , and ' Nyaga ' to Crown . The snow ( in Kikuyu : Ira ) caps of the mountain symbolically represent a crown on God 's habitation and thus the crown @-@ <unk> reference . ' Nyaga ' can also translate to ' Ostrich ' . In this context , God is seen to be the owner of that very rare bird the Ostrich . 
 Kikuyu used to build their houses with the doors facing the mountain . The Kikuyu name for Mount Kenya is <unk> Nyaga ( <unk> ) , which literally translates to that which has the Nyaga - crown and therefore the locally accepted connotation ' God 's Resting Place ' or ' Where God Lives ' , referring to Mwene Nyaga . 
 = = = Embu = = = 
 The Embu people live to the south @-@ east of Mount Kenya , and believe that the mountain is God 's home ( the Embu word for God is Ngai or Mwene <unk> ) . The mountain is sacred , and they build their houses with the doors facing towards it . The Embu people are closely related to the Ameru and <unk> people . The <unk> and <unk> are the settlers of the southeast side of the mountain . 
 = = = Ameru = = = 
 The Ameru occupy the east and north slopes of the mountain . They are generally agricultural and also keep livestock and occupy what is among the most fertile land in Kenya . The Meru God <unk> was from the skies . Their name for Mt . Kenya is <unk> , which means ' mountain with white features ' . Mt . Kenya features a lot in the Ameru folklore and songs . 
 = = = Maasai = = = 
 The Maasai are semi @-@ nomadic people , who use the land to the north of the mountain to graze their cattle . They believe that their ancestors came down from the mountain at the beginning of time . The Maasai name for Mount Kenya is Ol <unk> Keri , which means ' mountain of stripes ' , referring to the dark shades as observed from the surrounding plains . At least one Maasai prayer refers to Mount Kenya : 
 God bless our children , let them be like the olive tree of <unk> , let them grow and expand , let them be like Ngong Hills like Mt . Kenya , like Mt . Kilimanjaro and multiply in number . 
 = = Geology = = 
 Mount Kenya is a stratovolcano that was active in the Plio @-@ Pleistocene . The original crater was probably over 6 @,@ 000 m ( 19 @,@ 700 ft ) high ; higher than Kilimanjaro . Since it became extinct there have been two major periods of glaciation , which are shown by two main rings of moraines below the glaciers . The lowest moraine is found at around 3 @,@ 300 m ( 10 @,@ 800 ft ) . Today the glaciers reach no lower than 4 @,@ 650 m ( 15 @,@ 260 ft ) . After studying the moraines , Gregory put forward the theory that at one time the whole summit of the mountain was covered with an ice cap , and it was this that eroded the peaks to how they are today . 
 The lower slopes of the mountain have never been glaciated . They are now mainly cultivated and forested . They are distinguished by steep @-@ sided V @-@ shaped valleys with many tributaries . Higher up the mountain , in the area that is now moorland , the valleys become U @-@ shaped and shallower with flatter bottoms . These were created by glaciation . 
 When Mount Kenya was active there was some satellite activity . The north @-@ eastern side of the mountain has many old volcanic plugs and craters . The largest of these , Ithanguni , even had its own ice cap when the main peaks were covered in ice . This can be seen by the smoothed summit of the peak . Circular hills with steep sides are also frequent in this area , which are probably the remains of small plugged vents . However , as the remaining mountain is roughly symmetrical , most of the activity must have occurred at the central plug . 
 The rocks that form Mount Kenya are mainly basalts , rhomb <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . <unk> was first reported by Gregory in 1900 following his study of the geology of Mount Kenya . 
 The geology of the Mount Kenya area was first proposed to the Western Community by Joseph Thomson in 1883 . He saw the mountain from the nearby Laikipia Plateau and wrote that it was an extinct volcano with the plug exposed . However , as he had only seen the mountain from a distance his description was not widely believed in Europe , particularly after 1887 when Teleki and von Höhnel ascended the mountain and described what they considered to be the crater . In 1893 Gregory 's expedition reached the Lewis Glacier at 5 @,@ 000 m ( 16 @,@ 400 ft ) . He confirmed that the volcano was extinct and that there were glaciers present . The first thorough survey by Europeans was not undertaken until 1966 . 
 = = Peaks = = 
 The peaks of Mount Kenya are almost all from a volcanic origin . The majority of the peaks are located near the centre of the mountain . These peaks have an Alpine appearance due to their craggy nature . Typically of Alpine terrain , the highest peaks and gendarmes occur at the intersection of ridges . The central peaks only have a few mosses , lichens and small alpine plants growing in rock crevices . Further away from the central peaks , the volcanic plugs are covered in volcanic ash and soils . The vegetation growing on these peaks is typical for their vegetation band . 
 The highest peaks are Batian ( 5 @,@ 199 metres ( 17 @,@ 057 ft ) ) , Nelion ( 5 @,@ 188 m ( 17 @,@ 021 ft ) ) and Pt Lenana ( 4 @,@ 985 m ( 16 @,@ 355 ft ) ) . Batian and Nelion are within 250 m ( 270 yd ) of each other , separated by the Gate of the Mists gap ( 5 @,@ 144 metres ( 16 @,@ 877 ft ) ) . Coryndon Peak ( 4 @,@ 960 m ( 16 @,@ 273 ft ) ) is the next highest , but unlike the previous peaks it does not form a part of the central plug . 
 Other peaks around the central plug include Pt <unk> ( 4 @,@ 957 m ( 16 @,@ 263 ft ) ) , Pt Dutton ( 4 @,@ 885 m ( 16 @,@ 027 ft ) ) , Pt John ( 4 @,@ 883 m ( 16 @,@ 020 ft ) ) , Pt John Minor ( 4 @,@ 875 m ( 15 @,@ 994 ft ) ) , Krapf <unk> ( 4 @,@ 800 m ( 15 @,@ 748 ft ) ) , Pt Peter ( 4 @,@ 757 m ( 15 @,@ 607 ft ) ) , Pt Slade ( 4 @,@ 750 m ( 15 @,@ 584 ft ) ) and Midget Peak ( 4 @,@ 700 m ( 15 @,@ 420 ft ) ) . All of these have a steep pyramidal form . 
 Significant craggy outlying peaks include Terere ( 4 @,@ 714 m ( 15 @,@ 466 ft ) ) and Sendeyo ( 4 @,@ 704 m ( 15 @,@ 433 ft ) ) which form a pair of twin peaks to the north of the main plug . Together , they form a large parasitic plug . Other notable peaks include The Hat ( 4 @,@ 639 m ( 15 @,@ 220 ft ) ) , Delamere Peak , Macmillan Peak and <unk> . 
 = = Glaciers = = 
 The glaciers on Mount Kenya are retreating rapidly . The Mountain Club of Kenya in Nairobi has photographs showing the mountain when it was first climbed in 1899 , and again more recently ; the retreat of the glaciers is very evident . Descriptions of ascents of several of the peaks advise on the use of crampons , but this is true only in some cases and at higher heights . Every year there is less new snow accumulating in winter than melting on summer , even on the Lewis Glacier ( the largest of them ) in winter , so there is no formation of new ice . It is predicted to be less than 30 years before there will no longer be ice on Mount Kenya . Glacial retreat and disappearance can be caused by change in temperature trends , or by change in precipitation trends . 
 The glacier names are ( clockwise from the north ) : 
 Northey , Krapf , Gregory , Lewis , Diamond , Darwin , Forel , Heim , Tyndall , Cesar , Josef . 
 The area of glaciers on the mountain was measured in the 1980s , and recorded as about 0 @.@ 7 km2 ( 0 @.@ 27 sq mi ) . This is far smaller than the first observations , made in the 1890s . 
 = = = <unk> landforms = = = 
 Although Mount Kenya is on the equator the freezing nightly temperatures result in periglacial landforms . There is permafrost a few centimetres ( inches ) below the surface . Patterned ground is present at 3 @,@ 400 m ( 11 @,@ 155 ft ) to the west of <unk> Hill . These mounds grow because of the repeated freezing and thawing of the ground drawing in more water . There are <unk> present around 4 @,@ 000 m ( 13 @,@ 123 ft ) where the ground has cracked to form hexagons . <unk> occurs when the night temperatures freeze the soil before it thaws again in the morning . This daily expansion and contraction of the soil prevents the establishment of vegetation . 
 = = Rivers = = 
 Mount Kenya is the main water catchment area for two large rivers in Kenya ; the Tana , the largest river in Kenya , and the Ewaso Ng <unk> North . The Mount Kenya ecosystem provides water directly for over 2 million people . The rivers on Mount Kenya have been named after the villages on the slopes of the mountain that they flow close to . The <unk> River is the district boundary between Meru and Embu . Mount Kenya is a major water tower for the Tana river which in 1988 supplied 80 % of Kenya 's electricity using a series of seven hydroelectric <unk> and dams . 
 The density of streams is very high , especially on the lower slopes which have never been glaciated . The ice cap which used to cover the mountain during the Pliocene eroded large U @-@ shaped valleys which tend to only have one large stream . Where the original shape of the shield volcano is still preserved , there have been millions of years for streams to erode the hillside . This area is therefore characterised by frequent deep fluvial V @-@ shaped valleys . The gradual transition from glaciated to fluvial valley can be clearly observed . 
 Rivers which start on Mount Kenya are the tributaries of two large Kenyan rivers : the Tana and the Ewaso Ng 'iro rivers . A lot of Mount Kenyan rivers flow into the Sagana which itself is a tributary of the Tana , which it joins at the <unk> Reservoir . The rivers in the northern part of the mountain , such as the <unk> , Naru Moru , Nanyuki , <unk> , Sirimon flow into the Ewaso Ng 'iro . The rivers to the south @-@ west , such as the <unk> and Nairobi flow into the Sagana and then into the Tana . The remaining rivers to the south and east , such as the <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> , flow directly into the Tana . 
 = = Natural history = = 
 Mount Kenya has several altitudinal ecological zones , between the savanna surrounding the mountain to the nival zone by the glaciers . Each zone has a dominant species of vegetation . Many of the species found higher up the mountain are endemic , either to Mount Kenya or East Africa . 
 There are also differences within the zones , depending on the side of the mountain and aspect of the slope . The south @-@ east is much wetter than the north , so species more dependent on moisture are able to grow . Some species , such as bamboo , are limited to certain aspects of the mountain because of the amount of moisture . 
 = = = Zones = = = 
 The climate of Mount Kenya changes considerably with altitude , forming belts of community types . Around the base of the mountain is fertile farmland . The tribes living around the mountain have cultivated this cool relatively moist area for centuries . 
 Mount Kenya is surrounded by forests . The vegetation in the forests depend on rainfall , and the species present differ greatly between the northern and southern slopes . As time has passed the trees on the edge of the forest have been logged and the farmland has encroached further up the fertile slopes of the mountain . 
 Above the forest is a belt of bamboo . This zone is almost continuous , but is restricted to small isolated bunches in the north because of low rainfall . The bamboo is natural , and does not require forest disturbance . Tracks are common through the bamboo . Bamboo suppresses other vegetation , so it is uncommon to find trees or other plants here . 
 Above the bamboo is the timberline forest . The trees here are often smaller than the trees in the forests lower down the mountain . The forest here is more intact , because it is less accessible and better protected . 
 When the trees can no longer grow the vegetation changes into heathland and chaparral , at around 3 @,@ 000 m ( 9 @,@ 800 ft ) . <unk> is found in the wetter areas , on the west side of Mount Kenya , and is dominated by giant heathers . Chaparral is found in the drier areas and grasses are more <unk> and bush fires still occur . 
 As the altitude increases the temperature fluctuations become extreme and the air becomes thinner and drier . This region is known as the Afro @-@ alpine zone . The environment here is isolated , with the only similar area nearby being the <unk> , which are 80 km ( 50 mi ) away . Many of the species here are endemic , with adaptations to the cold and fluctuating temperatures . Typical plants here include giant <unk> ( senecios ) and giant <unk> . 
 The region where the glaciers have recently retreated from is nival zone . It is the area that plants have not yet been able to colonise . 
 = = = Flora = = = 
 The flora found on Mount Kenya varies with altitude , aspect and exposure . As the altitude increases , the plants have to be more specialised , with adaptations to strong sunlight with ultraviolet , lower mean temperatures and freezing night temperatures . 
 Plants in the Afro @-@ alpine zone have overcome these difficulties in several ways . One adaptation is known as the giant rosette , which is exhibited by giant <unk> , giant <unk> and giant thistle ( <unk> ) , which use bud leaves to protect their buds from freezing . Giant rosette senecios form single @-@ aged stands that drive community structure over decades . 
 Many plant species in the Afro @-@ alpine zone of Mount Kenya are giant versions of lowland ( or temperate ) relatives . However , nearer the nival zone the plants decrease in size again . 
 = = = Fauna = = = 
 The majority of animals live lower down on the slopes of Mount Kenya . Here there is more vegetation and the climate is less extreme . Various species of monkeys , several antelopes , tree hyrax , porcupines and some larger animals such as elephant and buffalo all live in the forest . Predators found here include hyena and leopard , and occasionally lion . 
 There are fewer mammals found at high altitudes on Mount Kenya . The Mount Kenya hyrax and common duiker are able to live here , and are important to the ecosystem . Some smaller mammals , such as the groove @-@ toothed rat , can live here by burrowing into the giant senecios and using their thick stem of dead leaves as insulation . The Mount Kenya mole @-@ rat <unk> rex occurs at high altitudes , living in visible mounds . Leopards are resident in the alpine zone . 
 Other mammal species are only occasional visitors . Remains of elephants , monkeys and bongo have been found high in the alpine zone , and other sightings are remembered in names such as Simba Tarn ( <unk> means lion in Swahili ) . 
 Several bird species live in the Afro @-@ alpine zone , including sunbirds , alpine chats and starlings and the raptors , augur buzzard , lammergeier and Verreaux 's eagle , the latter of which specializes in hunting hyraxes . Birds are important in this ecosystem as pollinators . 
 = = Climate = = 
 The climate of Mount Kenya has played a critical role in the development of the mountain , influencing the topography and ecology amongst other factors . It has a typical equatorial mountain climate which Hedberg described as winter every night and summer every day . Mount Kenya is home to one of the Global Atmosphere Watch 's atmospheric monitoring stations . 
 = = = Seasons = = = 
 The year is divided into two distinct wet seasons and two distinct dry seasons which mirror the wet and dry seasons in the Kenyan lowlands . As Mount Kenya ranges in height from 1 @,@ 374 m ( 4 @,@ 508 ft ) to 5 @,@ 199 m ( 17 @,@ 057 ft ) the climate varies considerably over the mountain and has different zones of influence . The lower , south eastern slopes are the wettest as the predominant weather system comes from the Indian ocean . This rainfall supports dense montane forest on these slopes . High on the mountain most of the precipitation falls as snow . Combined , these water sources feed 11 glaciers . 
 The current climate on Mount Kenya is wet , but drier than it has been in the past . The temperatures span a wide range , which diminishes with altitude . In the lower alpine zone temperature usually do not go below 12 ° C ( 54 ° F ) . Snow and rain are common from March to December , but especially in the two wet seasons . The wet seasons combined account for 5 / 6 of the annual precipitation . The monsoon , which controls the wet and dry seasons , means that most of the year there are south @-@ easterly winds , but during January and February the dominant wind direction is north @-@ easterly . 
 Mount Kenya , like most locations in the tropics , has two wet seasons and two dry seasons as a result of the monsoon . From mid @-@ March to June the heavy rain season , known as the long rains , brings approximately half of the annual rainfall on the mountain . This is followed by the wetter of the two dry seasons which lasts until September . October to December are the short rains when the mountain receives approximately a third of its rainfall total . Finally from December to mid @-@ March is the drier dry season when the mountain experiences the least rain . 
 = = = Daily pattern = = = 
 During the dry season the mountain almost always follows the same daily weather pattern . Large daily temperature fluctuations occur which led Hedberg to exclaim winter every night and summer every day . There is variation in minimum and maximum temperatures day to day , but the standard deviation of the mean hourly pattern is small . 
 A typical day is clear and cool in the morning with low humidity . The mountain is in direct sunlight which causes the temperatures to rise quickly with the warmest temperatures occurring between 0900 and 1200 . This corresponds to a maximum in the pressure , usually around 10 am . Low on the mountain , between 2 @,@ 400 m ( 7 @,@ 874 ft ) and 3 @,@ 900 m ( 12 @,@ 795 ft ) , clouds begin to form over the western forest zone , due to moist air from Lake Victoria . The <unk> winds caused by warm rising air gradually bring these clouds to the summit region in the afternoon . Around 1500 there is a minimum in sunlight and a maximum in humidity causing the actual and perceived temperature to drop . At 1600 there is a minimum in the pressure . This daily cover of cloud protects the glaciers on the south @-@ west of the mountain which would otherwise get direct sun every day , enhancing their melt . The upwelling cloud eventually reaches the dry easterly air streams and dissipates , leading to a clear sky by 5 pm . There is another maximum of temperature associated with this . 
 Being an equatorial mountain the daylight hours are constant with twelve @-@ hour days . Sunrise is about 0530 with the sun setting at 1730 . Over the course of the year there is a one @-@ minute difference between the shortest and longest days . At night , the sky is usually clear with katabatic winds blowing down the valleys . Above the lower alpine zone there is usually frost every night . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = European sighting = = = 
 The first European to report seeing Mount Kenya was Dr Johann Ludwig Krapf , a German missionary , from Kitui in 1849 , a town 160 km ( 100 mi ) away from the mountain . The sighting was made on 3 December 1849 , a year after the discovery of Kilimanjaro . 
 Krapf was told by people of the Embu tribe that lived around the mountain that they did not ascend high enough on the mountain because of the intense cold and the white matter that rolled down the mountains with a loud noise . This led him to infer that glaciers existed on the mountain . It was Krapf who gave the mountain the name " Kenya " , but the derivation of this is not known with certainty ( see the various local names below , some of which are similar ) . 
 Krapf also noted that the rivers flowing from Mount Kenya , and other mountains in the area , were continuously flowing . This was very different from the other rivers in the area , which swelled up in the wet season and completely dried up after the rainy season had ended . As the streams flowed even in the driest seasons he concluded that there must be a source of water up on the mountain , in the form of glaciers . He believed the mountain to be the source of the White Nile . 
 In 1851 Krapf returned to Kitui . He travelled 65 kilometres ( 40 mi ) closer to the mountain , but did not see it again . In 1877 Hildebrandt was in the Kitui area and heard stories about the mountain , but also did not see it . Since there were no confirmations to back up Krapf 's claim people began to be suspicious . 
 Eventually , in 1883 , Joseph Thomson passed close by the west side of the mountain and confirmed Krapf 's claim . He diverted his expedition and reached 1 @,@ 737 m ( 5 @,@ 700 ft ) up the slopes of the mountain but had to retreat because of trouble with local people . However , the first European exploration high onto the mountain was achieved in 1887 by Count Samuel Teleki . He managed to reach 4 @,@ 350 m ( 14 @,@ 270 ft ) on the south western slopes . On this expedition Teleki mistakenly believed he had found the crater of a volcano . 
 In 1892 , Teleki and von Höhnel returned to the eastern side , but were unable to get through the forest . 
 Finally , in 1893 , an expedition managed to ascend Mount Kenya as far as the glaciers . This expedition was traveling from the coast to Lake <unk> in the Rift Valley , and was led by Dr John W Gregory , a British geologist . They managed to ascend the mountain to around 4 @,@ 730 m ( 15 @,@ 520 ft ) , and spent several hours on the Lewis Glacier with their guide . On his return to Britain , Gregory published papers and a narrative account of his achievements . 
 George Kolb , a German physician , made expeditions in 1894 and 1896 and was the first to reach the moorlands on the east side of the mountain . More exploration occurred after 1899 when the Uganda Railway was completed as far as the future site of Nairobi . 
 = = = Mackinder 's expedition = = = 
 On 28 July 1899 , Sir Halford John Mackinder set out from the site of Nairobi on an expedition to Mount Kenya . The members of the expedition consisted of 6 Europeans , 66 <unk> , 2 Maasai guides , and 96 Kikuyu . The Europeans were Campbell B. <unk> , second in command and photographer ; Douglas Saunders , botanist ; C F <unk> , taxidermist ; Cesar Ollier , guide ; and Josef Brocherel , guide and porter . The expedition made it as far as the mountain , but encountered many difficulties on the way . The country they passed through was full of plague and famine . Many Kikuyu porters tried to desert with women from the villages , and others stole from the villages , which made the chiefs very hostile towards the expedition . When they reached the base camp on 18 August , they could not find any food , had two of their party killed by the local people , and eventually had to send Saunders to Naivasha to get help from Captain Gorges , the Government Officer there . 
 Mackinder pushed on up the mountain , and established a camp at 3 @,@ 142 m ( 10 @,@ 310 ft ) in the Höhnel Valley . He made his first attempt on the summit on 30 August with Ollier and Brocherel up the south east face , but they had to retreat when they were within 100 m ( 110 yd ) of the summit of Nelion due to nightfall . 
 On 5 September , <unk> , Ollier , and Brocherel made a circuit of the main peaks looking for an easier route to the summit . They could not find one . On 11 September Ollier and Brocherel made an ascent of the Darwin Glacier , but were forced to retreat due to a blizzard . 
 When Saunders returned from Naivasha with the relief party , Mackinder had another attempt at the summit with Ollier and Brocherel . They traversed the Lewis Glacier and climbed the south east face of Nelion . They spent the night near the gendarme , and traversed the snowfield at the head of the Darwin Glacier at dawn before cutting steps up the Diamond Glacier . They reached the summit of Batian at noon on 13 September , and descended by the same route . 
 = = = 1900 – 1930 = = = 
 After the first ascent of Mount Kenya there were fewer expeditions there for a while . The majority of the exploration until after the First World War was by settlers in Kenya , who were not on scientific expeditions . A Church of Scotland mission was set up in Chogoria , and several Scottish missionaries ascended to the peaks , including Rev Dr. J. W. Arthur , G. Dennis and A. R. Barlow . There were other ascents , but none succeeded in summitting Batian or Nelion . 
 New approach routes were cleared through the forest , which made access to the peaks area far easier . In 1920 , Arthur and Sir Fowell Buxton tried to cut a route in from the south , and other routes came in from Nanyuki in the north , but the most commonly used was the route from the Chogoria mission in the east , built by Ernest Carr . Carr is also credited with building <unk> and Top Huts . 
 On 6 January 1929 the first ascent of Nelion was made by Percy Wyn @-@ Harris and Eric Shipton . They climbed the Normal Route , then descended to the Gate of Mists before ascending Batian . On 8 January they <unk> , this time with G. A. Sommerfelt , and in December Shipton made another ascent with R. E. G. Russell . They also made the first ascent of Point John . During this year the Mountain Club of East Africa was formed . 
 At the end of July 1930 , Shipton and Bill Tilman made the first traverse of the peaks . They ascended by the West Ridge of Batian , traversed the Gate of Mists to Nelion , and descended the Normal Route . During this trip , Shipton and Tilman made first ascents of several other peaks , including Point Peter , Point Dutton , Midget Peak , Point Pigott and either Terere or Sendeyo . 
 = = = 1931 to present day = = = 
 In the early 1930s there were several visits to the moorlands around Mount Kenya , with fewer as far as the peaks . Raymond Hook and Humphrey Slade ascended to map the mountain , and stocked several of the streams with trout . By 1938 there had been several more ascents of Nelion . In February , Miss C Carroll and <unk> <unk> became the first woman and African respectively to ascend Nelion , in an expedition with Noel Symington , author of The Night Climbers of Cambridge , and on 5 March Miss Una Cameron became the first woman to ascend Batian . 
 During the Second World War there was another drop in ascents of the mountain . The most remarkable ascent during this period was by three Italians who were being held in a British POW camp at the base of the mountain in Nanyuki . They escaped from camp to climb the mountain 's third peak , Point Lenana , before " escaping " back into camp . Felice <unk> , the team leader , retold his story in the book No Picnic on Mount Kenya ( 1946 ) . 
 In 1949 the Mountain Club of Kenya split from the Mountain Club of East Africa , and the area above 3 @,@ 400 m ( 11 @,@ 150 ft ) was designated a National Park . A road was built from Naro Moru to the moorlands , allowing easier access . 
 Many new routes were climbed on Batian and Nelion in the next three decades , and in October 1959 the Mountain Club of Kenya produced their first guide to Mount Kenya and Kilimanjaro . On Kenyan independence in 1963 , <unk> <unk> raised the Kenyan flag at the top of the mountain . He died in 2007 and was given a heroic funeral attended by Kenyan president Mwai Kibaki . In the early 1970s the Mount Kenya National Park Mountain Rescue Team was formed , and by the end of the 1970s all major routes on the peaks had been climbed . 
 On 19 July 2003 , a South African registered aircraft , carrying 12 passengers and two crew , crashed into Mount Kenya at Point Lenana ; nobody survived . This was not the first aircraft lost on the mountain ; there is also the wreckage of at least one helicopter that crashed before 1972 . 
 In March 2012 a massive fire raged on Mount Kenya , devouring thousands of hectares of ancient forests and endangered wildlife . 
 = = Mountaineering = = 
 = = = Climbing routes = = = 
 Most of the peaks on Mount Kenya have been summited . The majority of these involve rock climbing as the easiest route , although some only require a scramble or a walk . The highest peak that can be ascended without climbing is Point Lenana , 4 @,@ 985 m ( 16 @,@ 355 ft ) . The majority of the 15 @,@ 000 visitors to the national park each year climb this peak . In contrast , approximately 200 people summit Nelion and 50 summit Batian , the two highest peaks . 
 When ascended directly , Batian is usually climbed via the North Face Standard Route , UIAA grade IV + ( or 5 @.@ 6 + YDS ) . It was first ascended on 31 July 1944 by Firmin and Hicks . The route is usually climbed in two days . The Normal Route is the most climbed route up Nelion , and thence across to Batian . It was first climbed by Shipton and Wyn @-@ Harris on 6 January 1929 . It is possible to traverse between the two peaks , via the Gates of Mist , but this often involves spending a night in the Howell hut on top of Nelion . There is a bolted abseil descent route off Nelion . 
 Mount Kenya 's climbing seasons are a result of its location only 20 km ( 12 mi ) from the equator . During the northern summer the rock routes on the north side of the peak are in good summer condition , while at the same time the ice routes on the south side of the peak are prime shape . The situation is reversed during the southern summer . The two seasons are separated by several months of rainy season before and after , during which climbing conditions are generally unfavorable . 
 Mount Kenya is home to several good ice routes , the two most famous being the Diamond Couloir and the Ice Window route . Snow and ice levels on the mountain have been retreating at an accelerated rate in recent years , making these climbs increasingly difficult and dangerous . The Diamond Couloir , a steep ice <unk> fed by the fusion of the upper Diamond Glacier and pioneered in 1975 by Yvon Chouinard and Michael Covington , was once climbable in summer or winter but now is virtually <unk> in summer conditions and is seldom deemed in climbable condition even in winter . Last climbing reports describe the route very difficult , especially in the lower section . The route has changed into a modern ice climb with a very difficult 60m first pitch , starting with 8m of overhanging M7 dry tooling , followed by 50m of USA Grade V ice and by others 6 pitches of moderate climbing on good ice and finally one pitch of water ice USA Grade IV + ice at the headwall before getting to the Upper Diamond Glacier . 
 The satellite peaks around the mountain also provide good climbs . These can be climbed in Alpine style and vary in difficulty from a scramble to climbing at UIAA grade VI . They are useful for acclimatisation before climbing the higher peaks and as ascents in their own right . 
 = = = Walking routes = = = 
 There are eight walking routes up to the main peaks . Starting clockwise from the north these are the : Meru , Chogoria , <unk> , Naro Moru , <unk> , Sirimon and <unk> Routes . Of these Chogoria , Naro Moru and Sirimon are used most frequently and therefore have staffed gates . The other routes require special permission from the Kenya Wildlife Service to use . 
 The Chogoria route leads from Chogoria town up to the peaks circuit path . It heads through the forest to the south @-@ east of the mountain to the moorland , with views over areas such as Ithanguni and the Giant 's Billiards Table before following the Gorges Valley past the Temple and up to Simba Col below Point Lenana . The Mountain Club of Kenya claims that Ithanguni and the Giant 's Billiards Table offer some of the best hillwalking in Kenya . 
 The Naro Moru route is taken by many of the trekkers who try to reach Point Lenana . It can be ascended in only 3 days and has bunkhouses at each camp . The route starts at Naro Moru town to the west of the mountain and climbs towards Mackinder 's Camp before joining the Peak Circuit Path . The terrain is usually good , although one section is called the Vertical Bog . 
 The Sirimon route approaches Mount Kenya from the north @-@ west . The path splits on the moorlands , with the more frequently used fork following the Mackinder Valley and the quieter route traversing into the <unk> North Valley . The paths rejoin at Shipton 's Cave just below Shipton 's Camp on the Peak Circuit Path . 
 The Peak Circuit Path is a path around the main peaks , with a distance of about 10 kilometres ( 6 mi ) and height gain and loss of over 2 @,@ 000 metres ( 6 @,@ 600 ft ) . It can be walked in one day , but more commonly takes two or three . It can also be used to join different ascent and descent routes . The route does not require technical climbing . 
 = = = Accommodation = = = 
 Accommodation on Mount Kenya ranges from very basic to luxurious . The more luxurious lodges are found on the lower slopes , in and around the forest . These lodges have hotel @-@ style accommodation , often with log fires and hot running water . Many offer guided walks and other activities such as fishing and birdwatching . The huts higher on the mountain are more basic . Most have several <unk> with beds , and also offer somewhere to rest , cook and eat . Some also have running water . A few huts are very basic bothies only offering a space to sleep that is sheltered from the weather . Beds in the huts can be reserved at the park gates . Camping is allowed anywhere in the National Park , but is most encouraged around the huts to limit environmental impact . It is possible for campers to use the communal spaces in the huts for no extra fee . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The origin of the name Kenya is not clear , but perhaps linked to the Kikuyu , Embu and Kamba words <unk> , <unk> and <unk> which mean " God 's resting place " in all three languages . 
 In the 19th Century , the German explorer , Ludwig Krapf , recorded the name as both <unk> and <unk> believed by some to be a corruption of the Kamba version . Others however say that this was on the contrary a very precise notation of the correct African pronunciation / <unk> / . In any case , the name was for a long time pronounced by colonial @-@ heritage Europeans as / <unk> / . The European pronunciation has been abandoned in modern times , in favor of the African version . 
 = = = Names of peaks = = = 
 The peaks of Mount Kenya have been given names from three different sources . Firstly , several Maasai chieftains have been commemorated , with names such as Batian , Nelion and Lenana . They commemorate <unk> , a Maasai <unk> ( Medicine Man ) , <unk> , his brother , and Lenana and Sendeyo , his sons . Terere is named after another Maasai headman . 
 The second type of names that were given to peaks are after European climbers and explorers . Some examples of this are Shipton , Sommerfelt , Tilman , Dutton and Arthur . 
 The remaining names are after well @-@ known Kenyan personalities , with the exception of John and Peter , which were named by the missionary Arthur after two disciples . There is a group of four peaks to the east of the main peaks named after European settlers ; Coryndon , Grigg , Delamere and McMillan . 
 = = Additional reading = = 
 <unk> , F. ( 1953 ) . No Picnic on Mount Kenya . Lyons Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 724 @-@ 6 . 
 Best , Nicholas ( 2014 ) . Point Lenana . Thistle Publishing / Kindle Single . 
 de <unk> , Vivienne ( 1935 ) . Speak to the Earth . W W Norton and Co Inc . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 556 @-@ 9 . 
 Fadiman J. ( 1993 ) . When We Began , There Were <unk> An Oral History from Mount Kenya . University of California Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 520 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . Retrieved 28 June 2011 . 
 Kenyatta , J. ( 1962 ) . Facing Mount Kenya . Vintage Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 394 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . 
 Mahaney , W.C. ( 1990 ) . Ice on the Equator . Ellison Bay , Wisconsin , U.S.A : Wm Caxton Ltd . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 19 @-@ 4 . A full survey of the long glacial and periglacial reconstructive history of Mt . Kenya , its geological and environmental settings , sequences of paleosols ( ancient soils ) and their significance in understanding the multiplicity of glaciations . 
 = Scotland in the Early Middle Ages = 
 Scotland in the early Middle Ages , between the end of Roman authority in southern and central Britain from around 400 and the rise of the kingdom of Alba in 900 , was divided into a series of kingdoms . Of these the four most important to emerge were the Picts , the Scots of Dál Riata , the Britons of Alt Clut and the Anglian kingdom of Bernicia . After the arrival of the Vikings in the late 8th century , Scandinavian rulers and colonies were established along parts of the coasts and in the islands . In the 9th century the Scots and Picts were combined under the House of Alpin to form a single kingdom which formed the basis of the kingdom of Scotland . 
 Scotland has an extensive coastline and large areas of difficult terrain and poor agricultural land . In this period more land became marginal due to climate change . This resulted in relatively light settlement , particularly in the interior and Highlands . Northern Britain lacked urban centres and settlements were based on farmsteads and around fortified positions such as brochs , with mixed @-@ farming largely based on self @-@ sufficiency . In this period , changes in settlement and colonisation meant that the Pictish and Brythonic languages began to be subsumed by Gaelic , English , and , at the end of the period , by Old Norse . Life expectancy was relatively low , leading to a young population , with a ruling aristocracy , freemen , and relatively large numbers of slaves . Kingship was multi @-@ layered , with different kings surrounded by their war bands that made up the most important elements of armed forces , who engaged in both low @-@ level raiding and occasional longer @-@ range , major campaigns . 
 One key event during the period was the expansion of Christianity from the margins of Scotland , becoming the religion of many inhabitants . Initially influenced by the Celtic tradition originating from what is now Ireland , by the end of the era it had become integrated into the organisational structures of the Catholic Church . This period produced some highly distinctive monumental and ornamental art , culminating in the development of the Insular art style , common across Britain and Ireland . The most impressive structures included nucleated hill forts and , after the introduction of Christianity , churches and monasteries . The period also saw the beginnings of Scottish literature in British , Old English , Gaelic and Latin languages . 
 = = History = = 
 By the time of Bede and Adomnán , in the late seventh century and early eighth century , four major circles of influence had emerged in northern Britain . In the east were the Picts , whose kingdoms eventually stretched from the river Forth to Shetland . In the west were the Gaelic ( Goidelic ) -speaking people of Dál Riata with their royal fortress at Dunadd in Argyll , with close links with the island of Ireland , from which they brought with them the name Scots , originally a term used to describe the inhabitants of Ireland . In the south was the British ( Brythonic ) Kingdom of Alt Clut , descendants of the peoples of the Roman @-@ influenced kingdoms of " The Old North " . Finally , there were the English or " Angles " , Germanic invaders who had overrun much of southern Britain and held the Kingdom of Bernicia ( later the northern part of Northumbria ) , in the south @-@ east , and who brought with them Old English . 
 = = = Picts = = = 
 The confederation of Pictish tribes that developed north of the Firth of Forth may have stretched up as far as Orkney . It probably developed out of the tribes of the <unk> ( whose name continued to be used for at least part of the confederation ) , perhaps as a response to the pressure exerted by the presence of the Romans to the south . They first appear in Roman records at the end of the 3rd century as the picti ( the painted people : possibly a reference to their habit of tattooing their bodies ) when Roman forces campaigned against them . The first identifiable king of the Picts , who seems to have exerted a superior and wide @-@ ranging authority , was Bridei mac Maelchon ( r. c . 550 – 84 ) . His power was based in the kingdom of <unk> , and his base was at the fort of Craig Phadrig , near modern Inverness . After his death , leadership seems to have shifted to the Fortriu , whose lands were centred on Strathearn and Menteith and who raided along the eastern coast into modern England . Christian missionaries from Iona appear to have begun the conversion of the Picts to Christianity from 563 . 
 In the 7th century , the Picts acquired Bridei map Beli ( 671 – 693 ) as a king , perhaps imposed by the kingdom of Alt Clut , where his father Beli I and then his brother Eugein I ruled . At this point the Anglo @-@ Saxon kingdom of Bernicia was expanding northwards and the Picts were probably tributary to them until , in 685 , Bridei defeated them at the Battle of Dunnichen in Angus , killing their king , Ecgfrith . In the reign of Óengus mac Fergusa ( 729 – 761 ) , the Picts appear to have reached the height of their influence , defeating the forces of Dál Riata ( and probably making them a tributary ) , invading Alt Clut and Northumbria , and making the first known peace treaties with the English . Succeeding Pictish kings may have been able to dominate Dál Riata , with Caustantín mac Fergusa ( 793 – 820 ) perhaps placing his son Domnall on the throne from 811 . 
 = = = Dál Riata = = = 
 The Gaelic overkingdom of Dál Riata was on the western coast of modern Scotland , with some territory on the northern coasts of Ireland . It probably ruled from the fortress of Dunadd , now near Kilmartin in Argyll and Bute . In the late 6th and early 7th centuries , it encompassed roughly what is now Argyll and Bute and Lochaber in Scotland , and also County Antrim in Ireland . Dál Riata is commonly viewed as having been an Irish Gaelic colony in Scotland , although some archaeologists have recently argued against this . The inhabitants of Dál Riata are often referred to as Scots , from Latin <unk> , a name used by Latin writers for the inhabitants of Ireland . Its original meaning is uncertain , but it later refers to Gaelic @-@ speakers , whether from Ireland or elsewhere . 
 In 563 , a mission from Ireland under St. Columba founded the monastery of Iona off the west coast of Scotland , and probably began the conversion of the region to Christianity . The kingdom reached its height under Áedán mac Gabráin ( r . 574 – 608 ) , but its expansion was checked at the Battle of Degsastan in 603 by Æthelfrith of Northumbria . Serious defeats in Ireland and Scotland in the time of Domnall Brecc ( d . 642 ) ended Dál Riata 's golden age , and the kingdom became a client of Northumbria , then a subject to the Picts . There is disagreement over the fate of the kingdom from the late 8th century onwards . Some scholars argue that Dál Riata underwent a revival under king Áed Find ( 736 – 78 ) , before the arrival of the Vikings . 
 = = = Alt Clut = = = 
 Alt Clut ( named after the Brythonic name for Dumbarton Rock , the Medieval capital of the Strathclyde region ) may have had its origins with the Damnonii people of Ptolemy 's Geographia . Two kings are known from near contemporary sources in this early period . The first is <unk> or Ceretic ( <unk> ) , known as the recipient of a letter from Saint Patrick , and stated by a 7th @-@ century biographer to have been king of the Height of the Clyde , Dumbarton Rock , placing him in the second half of the 5th century . From Patrick 's letter it is clear that Ceretic was a Christian , and it is likely that the ruling class of the area were also Christians , at least in name . His descendant Rhydderch Hael is named in Adomnán 's Life of Saint Columba . 
 After 600 , information on the Britons of Alt Clut becomes more common in the sources . In 642 , led by Eugein son of Beli , they defeated the men of Dál Riata and killed Domnall Brecc , grandson of Áedán , at Strathcarron . The kingdom suffered a number of attacks from the Picts under Óengus , and later the Picts ' Northumbrian allies between 744 and 756 . They lost the region of Kyle in the south @-@ west of modern Scotland to Northumbria , and the last attack may have forced the king <unk> III to submit to his neighbours . After this , little is heard of Alt Clut or its kings until Alt Clut was burnt and probably destroyed in 780 , although by whom and what in what circumstances is not known , Historians have traditionally identified Alt Clut with the later Kingdom of Strathclyde , but J. E. Fraser points to the fact there is no contemporary evidence that the heartland of Alt Clut was in Clydesdale and the Kingdom of Strathclyde may have arisen after Alt Clut 's decline . 
 = = = Bernicia = = = 
 The Brythonic successor states of what is now the modern Anglo @-@ Scottish border region are referred to by Welsh scholars as part of Yr Hen Ogledd ( " The Old North " ) . This included the kingdoms of Bryneich , which may have had its capital at modern Bamburgh in Northumberland , and Gododdin , centred on Din Eidyn ( perhaps what is now Edinburgh ) and stretching across modern Lothian . Some " Angles " may have been employed as mercenaries along Hadrian 's Wall during the late Roman period . Others are thought to have migrated north ( by sea ) from Deira ( Old English : <unk> or Dere ) in the early 6th century . At some point the Angles took control of Bryneich , which became the Anglo @-@ Saxon kingdom of Bernicia ( Old English : <unk> ) . The first Anglo @-@ Saxon king in the historical record is Ida , who is said to have obtained the throne around 547 . Around 600 , the Gododdin raised a force of about 300 men to assault the Anglo @-@ Saxon stronghold of Catraeth , perhaps Catterick , North Yorkshire . The battle , which ended disastrously for the Britons , was memorialised in the poem Y Gododdin . 
 Ida 's grandson , Æthelfrith , united Deira with his own kingdom , killing its king Æthelric to form Northumbria around 604 . <unk> 's son returned to rule both kingdoms after Æthelfrith had been defeated and killed by the East Anglians in 616 , presumably bringing with him the Christianity to which he had converted while in exile . After his defeat and death at the hands of the Welsh and Mercians at the Battle of Hatfield Chase on 12 October 633 , Northumbria again was divided into two kingdoms under pagan kings . Oswald ( r . 634 – 42 ) , ( another son of Æthelfrith ) defeated the Welsh and appears to have been recognised by both Bernicians and Deirans as king of a united Northumbria . He had converted to Christianity while in exile in Dál Riata and looked to Iona for missionaries , rather than to Canterbury . The island monastery of Lindisfarne was founded in 635 by the Irish monk Saint Aidan , who had been sent from Iona at the request of King Oswald . It became the seat of the Bishop of Lindisfarne , which stretched across Northumbria . In 638 Edinburgh was attacked by the English and at this point , or soon after , the Gododdin territories in Lothian and around Stirling came under the rule of Bernicia . After Oswald 's death fighting the Mercians , the two kingdoms were divided again , with Deira possibly having sub @-@ kings under Bernician authority , but from this point the English kings were Christian and after the Synod of Whitby in 664 , the Northumbrian kings accepted the primacy of Canterbury and Rome . In the late 7th century , the Northumbrians extended their influence north of the Forth , until they were defeated by the Picts at the Battle of Nechtansmere in 685 . 
 = = = Vikings and the Kingdom of Alba = = = 
 The balance between rival kingdoms was transformed in 793 when ferocious Viking raids began on monasteries like Iona and Lindisfarne , creating fear and confusion across the kingdoms of North Britain . Orkney , Shetland and the Western Isles eventually fell to the Norsemen . The king of Fortriu , Eógan mac Óengusa , and the king of Dál Riata , Áed mac Boanta , were among the dead after a major defeat to the Vikings in 839 . A mixture of Viking and Gaelic Irish settlement into south @-@ west Scotland produced the Gall @-@ Gaidel , the Norse Irish , from which the region gets the modern name Galloway . Sometime in the 9th century , the beleaguered kingdom of Dál Riata lost the Hebrides to the Vikings , when Ketil Flatnose is said to have founded the Kingdom of the Isles . These threats may have speeded a long term process of gaelicisation of the Pictish kingdoms , which adopted Gaelic language and customs . There was also a merger of the Gaelic and Pictish crowns , although historians debate whether it was a Pictish takeover of Dál Riata , or the other way around . This culminated in the rise of Cínaed mac Ailpín ( Kenneth MacAlpin ) in the 840s , which brought to power the House of Alpin , who became the leaders of a combined Gaelic @-@ Pictish kingdom . In 867 the Vikings seized Northumbria , forming the Kingdom of York ; three years later they stormed the Briton fortress of Dumbarton and subsequently conquered much of England except for a reduced Kingdom of Wessex , leaving the new combined Pictish and Gaelic kingdom almost encircled . 
 The immediate descendants of Cináed were styled either as King of the Picts or King of Fortriu . They were ousted in 878 when Áed mac Cináeda was killed by Giric mac <unk> , but returned again on Giric 's death in 889 . When Cínaed 's eventual successor Domnall mac Causantín died at Dunnottar in 900 , he was the first man to be recorded as rí Alban ( i.e. King of Alba ) . Such an apparent innovation in the Gaelic chronicles is occasionally taken to spell the birth of Scotland , but there is nothing extant from or about his reign that might confirm this . Known in Gaelic as " Alba " , in Latin as " Scotia " , and in English as " Scotland " , his kingdom was the nucleus from which the Scottish kingdom would expand as the Viking influence waned , just as in the south the Kingdom of Wessex expanded to become the Kingdom of England . 
 = = Geography = = 
 = = = Physical geography = = = 
 Modern Scotland is half the size England and Wales in area , but with its many inlets , islands and inland lochs , it has roughly the same amount of coastline at 4 @,@ 000 miles . Only a fifth of Scotland is less than 60 metres above sea level . Its east Atlantic position means that it has very heavy rainfall : today about 700 cm ( 276 in ) per year in the east and over 1 @,@ 000 cm ( 394 in ) in the west . This encouraged the spread of blanket peat bog , the acidity of which , combined with high level of wind and salt spray , made most of the islands treeless . The existence of hills , mountains , quicksands and marshes made internal communication and conquest extremely difficult and may have contributed to the fragmented nature of political power . The early Middle Ages was a period of climate deterioration , with a drop in temperature and an increase in rainfall , resulting in more land becoming unproductive . 
 = = = Settlement = = = 
 Roman influence beyond Hadrian 's Wall does not appear to have had a major impact on settlement patterns , with Iron Age hill forts and promontory forts continuing to be occupied through the early Medieval period . These often had defences of dry stone or timber laced walls , sometimes with a palisade . The large numbers of these forts has been taken to suggest peripatetic monarchies and aristocracies , moving around their domains to control and administer them . In the Northern and Western Isles the sites of Iron Age Brochs and wheel houses continued to be occupied , but were gradually replaced with less imposing cellular houses . There are a handful of major timber halls in the south , comparable to those excavated in Anglo @-@ Saxon England and dated to the 7th century . In the areas of Scandinavian settlement in the islands and along the coast a lack of timber meant that native materials had to be adopted for house building , often combining layers of stone with turf . 
 Place @-@ name evidence , particularly the use of the prefix " pit " , meaning land or a field , suggests that the heaviest areas of Pictish settlement were in modern Fife , Perthshire , Angus , Aberdeen and around the Moray Firth , although later Gaelic migration may have erased some Pictish names from the record . Early Gaelic settlement appears to have been in the regions of the western mainland of Scotland between Cowal and Ardnamurchan , and the adjacent islands , later extending up the West coast in the 8th century . There is place name and archaeological evidence of Anglian settlement in south @-@ east Scotland reaching into West Lothian , and to a lesser extent into south @-@ western Scotland . Later Norse settlement was probably most extensive in Orkney and Shetland , with lighter settlement in the western islands , particularly the Hebrides and on the mainland in Caithness , stretching along fertile river valleys through Sutherland and into Ross . There was also extensive Viking settlement in Bernicia , the Northern part of Northumbria , which stretched into the modern Borders and Lowlands . 
 = = = Language = = = 
 This period saw dramatic changes in the geography of language . Modern linguists divide the Celtic languages into two major groups , the P @-@ Celtic , from which Welsh , Breton and Cornish derive and the Q @-@ Celtic , from which comes Irish , Manx and Gaelic . The Pictish language remains enigmatic , since the Picts had no written script of their own and all that survives are place names and some isolated inscriptions in Irish ogham script . Most modern linguists accept that , although the nature and unity of Pictish language is unclear , it belonged to the former group . Historical sources , as well as place name evidence , indicate the ways in which the Pictish language in the north and Cumbric languages in the south were overlaid and replaced by Gaelic , English and later Norse in this period . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Lacking the urban centres created under the Romans in the rest of Britain , the economy of Scotland in the early Middle Ages was overwhelmingly agricultural . Without significant transport links and wider markets , most farms had to produce a self @-@ sufficient diet of meat , dairy products and cereals , supplemented by hunter @-@ gathering . Limited archaeological evidence indicates that throughout Northern Britain farming was based around a single homestead or a small cluster of three or four homes , each probably containing a nuclear family , with relationships likely to be common among neighbouring houses and settlements , reflecting the partition of land through inheritance . Farming became based around a system that distinguished between the infield around the settlement , where crops were grown every year and the outfield , further away and where crops were grown and then left fallow in different years , in a system that would continue until the 18th century . The evidence of bones indicates that cattle were by far the most important domesticated animal , followed by pigs , sheep and goats , while domesticated fowl were rare . Imported goods found in archaeological sites of the period include ceramics and glass , while many sites indicate iron and precious metal working . 
 = = Demography = = 
 There are almost no written sources from which to re @-@ construct the demography of early Medieval Scotland . Estimates have been made of a population of 10 @,@ 000 inhabitants in Dál Riata and 80 – 100 @,@ 000 for Pictland . It is likely that the 5th and 6th centuries saw higher mortality rates due to the appearance of bubonic plague , which may have reduced net population . The known conditions have been taken to suggest it was a high fertility , high mortality society , similar to many developing countries in the modern world , with a relatively young demographic profile , and perhaps early childbearing , and large numbers of children for women . This would have meant that there were a relatively small proportion of available workers to the number of mouths to feed . This would have made it difficult to produce a surplus that would allow demographic growth and more complex societies to develop . 
 = = Society = = 
 The primary unit of social organisation in Germanic and Celtic Europe was the kin group . The mention of descent through the female line in the ruling families of the Picts in later sources and the recurrence of leaders clearly from outside of Pictish society , has led to the conclusion that their system of descent was matrilineal . However , this has been challenged by a number of historians who argue that the clear evidence of awareness of descent through the male line suggests that this more likely to indicate a bilateral system of descent , where descent was counted through both male and female lines . 
 Scattered evidence , including the records in Irish annals and the images of warriors like those depicted on the Pictish stone slabs at Aberlemno , Forfarshire and Hilton of <unk> in Easter Ross , suggest that in Northern Britain , as in Anglo @-@ Saxon England , society was dominated by a military aristocracy , whose status was dependent in a large part on their ability and willingness to fight . Below the level of the aristocracy it is assumed that there were non @-@ noble freemen , working their own small farms or holding lands as free tenants . There are no surviving law codes from Scotland in this period , but codes in Ireland and Wales indicate that freemen had the right to bear arms , represent themselves in law and to receive compensation for murdered kinsmen . 
 Indications are that society in North Britain contained relatively large numbers of slaves , often taken in war and raids , or bought , as St. Patrick indicated the Picts were doing from the Britons in Southern Scotland . Slavery probably reached relatively far down in society , with most rural households containing some slaves . Because they were taken relatively young and were usually racially indistinguishable from their masters , many slaves would have been more integrated into their societies of capture than their societies of origin , in terms of both culture and language . Living and working beside their owners they in practice may have become members of a household without the inconvenience of the partible inheritance rights that divided estates . Where there is better evidence from England and elsewhere , it was common for such slaves who survived to middle age to gain their freedom , with such freedmen often remaining clients of the families of their former masters . 
 = = Kingship = = 
 In the early Medieval period , British kingship was not inherited in a direct line from previous kings , as would be the case in the late Middle Ages . There were instead a number of candidates for kingship , who usually needed to be a member of a particular dynasty and to claim descent from a particular ancestor . Kingship could be multi @-@ layered and very fluid . The Pictish kings of Fortriu were probably acting as overlords of other Pictish kings for much of this period and occasionally were able to assert an overlordship over non @-@ Pictish kings , but occasionally themselves had to acknowledge the overlordship of external rulers , both Anglian and British . Such relationships may have placed obligations to pay tribute or to supply armed forces . After a victory , sub @-@ kings may have received rewards in return for this service . Interaction with and intermarriage into the ruling families of subject kingdoms may have opened the way to absorption of such sub @-@ kingdoms and , although there might be later <unk> of these mergers , it is likely that a complex process by which kingship was gradually monopolised by a handful of the most powerful dynasties was taking place . 
 The primary role of the king was to act as a war leader , reflected in the very small number of minority or female reigning monarchs in the period . Kings organised the defence of their people 's lands , property and persons and negotiated with other kings to secure these things . If they failed to do so , the settlements might be raided , destroyed or annexed , and the populations killed or taken into slavery . Kings also engaged in the low level warfare of raiding and the more ambitious full @-@ scale warfare that led to conflicts of large armies and alliances , and which could be undertaken over relatively large distances , such as the expedition to Orkney by Dál Riata in 581 or the Northumbrian attack on Ireland in 684 . 
 Kingship had its ritual aspects . The kings of Dál Riata were inaugurated by putting their foot in a footprint carved in stone , signifying that they would follow in the footsteps of their predecessors . The kingship of the unified kingdom of Alba had Scone and its sacred stone at the heart of its coronation ceremony , which historians presume was inherited from Pictish practices . Iona , the early centre of Scottish Christianity , became the burial site of the early kings of Scotland until the eleventh century , when the House of Canmore adopted Dunfermline near Scone . 
 = = Warfare = = 
 At the most basic level , a king 's power rested on the existence of his bodyguard or war @-@ band . In the British language , this was called the teulu , as in teulu <unk> ( the " War @-@ band of Deira " ) . In Latin the word is either comitatus or tutores , or even familia ; tutores is the most common word in this period , and derives for the Latin verb <unk> , meaning " defend , preserve from danger " . The war @-@ band functioned as an extension of the ruler 's legal person , and was the core of the larger armies that were mobilised from time to time for campaigns of significant size . In peace @-@ time , the war @-@ band 's activity was centred on the " Great Hall " . Here , in both Germanic and Celtic cultures , the feasting , drinking and other forms of male bonding that kept up the war @-@ band 's integrity would take place . In the epic poem Beowulf , the war @-@ band was said to sleep in the Great Hall after the lord had retired to his adjacent bedchamber . It is not likely that any war @-@ band in the period exceeded 120 – 150 men , as no hall structure having a capacity larger than this has been found by archaeologists in northern Britain . Pictish stones , like that at Aberlemno in Angus , show mounted and foot warriors with swords , spears , bows , helmets and shields . The large number of hill forts in Scotland may have made open battle less important than in Anglo @-@ Saxon England and the relatively high proportion of kings who are recorded as dying in fires or drowning suggest that sieges were a more important part of warfare in Northern Britain . 
 Sea power may also have been important . Irish annals record an attack by the Picts on Orkney in 682 , which must have necessitated a large naval force : they also lost 150 ships in a disaster in 729 . Ships were also vital in the amphibious warfare in the Highlands and Islands and from the seventh century the Senchus fer n @-@ Alban indicates that Dál Riata had a ship @-@ muster system that obliged groups of households to produce a total of 177 ships and 2 @,@ 478 men . The same source mentions the first recorded naval battle around the British Isles in 719 and eight naval expeditions between 568 and 733 . The only vessels to survive from this period are dugout canoes , but images from the period suggest that there may have been skin boats ( similar to the Irish <unk> ) and larger oared vessels . The Viking raids and invasions of the British Isles were based on superior <unk> . The key to their success , was a graceful , long , narrow , light , wooden boat with a shallow draft hull designed for speed . This shallow draft allowed navigation in waters only 3 feet ( 1 m ) deep and permitted beach landings , while its light weight enabled it to be carried over portages . Longships were also double @-@ ended , the symmetrical bow and stern allowing the ship to reverse direction quickly without having to turn around . 
 = = Religion = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ Christian religion = = = 
 Very little is known about religion in Scotland before the arrival of Christianity . The lack of native written sources among the Picts means that it can only be judged from parallels elsewhere , occasional surviving archaeological evidence and hostile accounts of later Christian writers . It is generally presumed to have resembled Celtic polytheism . The names of more than two hundred Celtic deities have been noted , some of which , like Lugh , The Dagda and The Morrigan , come from later Irish mythology , whilst others , like <unk> , Taranis and Cernunnos , come from evidence from Gaul . The Celtic pagans constructed temples and shrines to venerate these gods , something they did through votive offerings and performing sacrifices , possibly including human sacrifice . According to Greek and Roman accounts , in Gaul , Britain and Ireland , there was a priestly caste of " magico @-@ religious specialists " known as the druids , although very little is definitely known about them . Irish legends about the origin of the Picts and stories from the life of St. Ninian , associate the Picts with druids . The Picts are also associated with " demon " worship and one story concerning St Columba has him exorcising a demon from a well in Pictland , suggesting that the worship of well spirits was a feature of Pictish paganism . Roman mentions of the worship of the Goddess Minerva at wells and a Pictish stone associated with a well near Dunvegan Castle on Skye have been taken to support this case . 
 = = = Early Christianisation = = = 
 The roots of Christianity in Scotland can probably be found among the soldiers and ordinary Roman citizens in the vicinity of Hadrian 's Wall . The archaeology of the Roman period indicates that the northern parts of the Roman province of Britannia were among the most Christianised in the island . Chi @-@ Rho inscriptions and Christian grave @-@ slabs have been found on the wall from the 4th century , and from the same period the <unk> shrines ( known as <unk> ) which existed along Hadrian 's Wall were attacked and destroyed , presumably by Christians . After the departure of the Romans it is generally presumed that Christianity would have survived among the <unk> enclaves such as Strathclyde , but retreated as the pagan Anglo @-@ Saxons advanced , with their gods Tiw , Woden , Thor and <unk> , all of whom gave their names to days of the week , and <unk> , whose name was appropriated for the spring festival of Easter . While British Christians continued to practice inhumation without grave goods , the pagan Anglo @-@ Saxons are visible in the archaeological record from their practice of cremation and burial in urns , accompanied by extensive grave goods , perhaps designed to accompany the dead to the afterlife . However , despite growing evidence of Anglian settlement in southern Scotland , only one such grave has been found , at Dalmeny in East Lothian . 
 The growth of Christianity in Scotland has been traditionally seen as dependent on Irish @-@ Scots " Celtic " missionaries and to a lesser extent those from Rome and England . Celtic Christianity had its origins in the conversion of Ireland from late Roman Britain associated with St. Patrick in the 5th century . In the 6th century , monks from Ireland were operating on the British mainland . St Ninian is the figure associated with a monastery founded at Whithorn in what is now Galloway , although it is generally accepted that Ninian may be a later construct . St Columba left Ireland and founded the monastery at Iona off the West Coast of Scotland in 563 and from there carried out missions to the Scots of Dál Riata and the Picts . It seems likely that both the Scots and Picts had already begun to convert to Christianity before this period . Saint Patrick referred in a letter to " apostate Picts " , suggesting that they had previously been Christian , while the poem Y Gododdin , set in the early 6th century does not remark on the Picts as pagans . Conversion of the Pictish élite seems likely to have run over a considerable period , beginning in the 5th century and not complete until the 7th . 
 Among the key indicators of Christianisation are long @-@ cist cemeteries that generally indicate Christian burials due to their East @-@ West orientation , although this correlation has been challenged by recent research . These burials are found between the end of the Roman era and the 7th century , after which point they become rarer . They are concentrated strongly in eastern Scotland south of the Tay , in Angus , the Mearns , Lothian and the Borders . It is generally accepted among scholars that place @-@ name element eccles- , from the Brythonic word for church , represents evidence of the British church of the Roman and immediate post @-@ Roman period , most of which are located in the south @-@ west , south and east . About a dozen inscribed stones of the 5th and 6th centuries , beginning with the so @-@ called Latinus stone of Whithorn , dating to c . 450 , indicate Christianity through their dedications and are spread across southern Scotland . 
 = = = Celtic Christianity = = = 
 Celtic Christianity differed in some in respects from that based on Rome , most importantly on the issues of how Easter was calculated and the method of tonsure , but there were also differences in the rites of ordination , baptism and in the liturgy . Celtic Christianity was heavily based on monasticism . Monasteries differed significantly from those on the continent , and were often an isolated collection of wooden huts surrounded by a wall . Because much of the Celtic world lacked the urban centres of the Roman world , bishoprics were often attached to abbeys . In the 5th , 6th and 7th centuries , Irish monks established monastic institutions in parts of modern @-@ day Scotland . Monks from Iona , under St. Aidan , then founded the See of Lindisfarne in Anglian Northumbria . The part of southern Scotland dominated by the Anglians in this period had a Bishopric established at Abercorn in West Lothian , and it is presumed that it would have adopted the leadership of Rome after the Synod of Whitby in 663 , until the Battle of Dunnichen in 685 , when the Bishop and his followers were ejected . By this time the Roman system of calculating Easter and other reforms had already been adopted in much of Ireland . The Picts accepted the reforms of Rome under Nechtan mac Der @-@ Ilei around 710 . The followers of Celtic traditions retreated to Iona and then to <unk> and the Western isles remained an outpost of Celtic practice for some time . Celtic Christianity continued to influence religion in England and across Europe into the late Middle Ages as part of the Hiberno @-@ Scottish mission , spreading Christianity , monasteries , art and theological ideas across the continent . 
 = = = Viking paganism = = = 
 The Viking occupation of the islands and coastal regions of modern Scotland brought a return to pagan worship in those areas . Norse paganism had some of the same gods as had been worshipped by the Anglo @-@ Saxons before their conversion and is thought to have been focused around a series of cults , involving gods , ancestors and spirits , with calendric and life cycle rituals often involving forms of sacrifice . The paganism of the ruling Norse elite can be seen in goods found in 10th century graves in Shetland , Orkney and Caithness . There is no contemporary account of the conversion of the Vikings in Scotland to Christianity . Historians have traditionally pointed to a process of conversion to Christianity among Viking colonies in Britain dated to the late 10th century , for which later accounts indicate that Viking earls accepted Christianity . However , there is evidence that conversion had begun before this point . There are a large number of isles called Pabbay or Papa in the Western and Northern Isles , which may indicate a " hermit 's " or " priest 's isle " from this period . Changes in patterns of grave goods and Viking place names using -kirk also suggest that the Christianity had begun to spread before the official conversion . Later documentary evidence suggests that there was a Bishop operating in Orkney in the mid @-@ 9th century and more recently uncovered archaeological evidence , including explicitly Christian forms such as stone crosses , suggest that Christian practice may have survived the Viking take over in parts of Orkney and Shetland and that the process of conversion may have begun before Christianity was officially accepted by Viking leaders . The continuity of Scottish Christianity may also explain the relatively rapid way in which Norse settlers were later assimilated into the religion . 
 = = Art = = 
 From the 5th to the mid @-@ 9th centuries the art of the Picts is primarily known through stone sculpture , and a smaller number of pieces of metalwork , often of very high quality . After the conversion of the Picts and the cultural assimilation of Pictish culture into that of the Scots and Angles , elements of Pictish art became incorporated into the style known as Insular art , which was common over Britain and Ireland and became highly influential in continental Europe and contributed to the development of Romanesque styles . 
 = = = Pictish stones = = = 
 About 250 Pictish stones survive and have been assigned by scholars to three classes . Class I stones are those thought to date to the period up to the 7th century and are the most numerous group . The stones are largely unshaped and include incised symbols of animals including fish and the Pictish beast , everyday objects such as mirrors , combs and tuning forks and abstract symbols defined by names including V @-@ rod , double disc and Z @-@ rod . They are found between from the Firth of Forth to Shetland . The greatest concentrations are in Sutherland , around modern Inverness and Aberdeen . Good examples include the Dunrobin ( Sutherland ) and Aberlemno stones ( Angus ) . Class II stones are carefully shaped slabs dating after the arrival of Christianity in the 8th and 9th centuries , with a cross on one face and a wide range of symbols on the reverse . In smaller numbers than Class I stones , they predominate in southern Pictland , in Perth , Angus and Fife . Good examples include Glamis 2 , which contains a finely executed Celtic cross on the main face with two opposing male figures , a centaur , cauldron , deer head and a triple disc symbol and <unk> , Angus , which shows a high @-@ prowed Pictish boat with oarsmen and a figure facing forward in the prow . Class III stones are thought to overlap chronologically with Class II stones . Most are elaborately shaped and incised cross @-@ slabs , some with figurative scenes , but lacking idiomatic Pictish symbols . They are widely distributed but predominate in the southern Pictish areas . 
 = = = Pictish metalwork = = = 
 Metalwork has found throughout Pictland ; the Picts appear to have had a considerable amount of silver available , probably from raiding further south , or the payment of subsidies to keep them from doing so . The very large hoard of late Roman <unk> found at Traprain Law may have originated in either way . The largest hoard of early Pictish metalwork was found in 1819 at Norrie 's Law in Fife , but unfortunately much was dispersed and melted down . Over ten heavy silver chains , some over 0 @.@ 5 metres ( 2 ft ) long , have been found from this period ; the double @-@ linked Whitecleuch Chain is one of only two that have a penannular ring , with symbol decoration including enamel , which shows how these were probably used as " choker " necklaces . The St Ninian 's Isle Treasure contains perhaps the best collection of Pictish forms . 
 = = = Irish @-@ Scots art = = = 
 The kingdom of Dál Riata has been seen as a cross @-@ roads between the artistic styles of the Picts and those of Ireland , with which the Scots settlers in what is now Argyll kept close contacts . This can be seen in representations found in excavations of the fortress of Dunadd , which combine Pictish and Irish elements . This included extensive evidence for the production of high status jewellery and moulds from the 7th century that indicate the production of pieces similar to the Hunterston brooch , found in Ayrshire , but with elements that suggest Irish origins . These and other finds , including a trumpet spiral decorated hanging bowl disc and a stamped animal decoration ( or <unk> ) , perhaps from a bucket or drinking horn , indicate the ways in which Dál Riata was one of the locations where the Insular style was developed . In the 8th and 9th centuries the Pictish elite adopted true penannular brooches with lobed terminals from Ireland . Some older Irish pseudo @-@ penannular brooches were adapted to the Pictish style , for example the Breadalbane Brooch ( British Museum ) . The 8th century Monymusk Reliquary has elements of Pictish and Irish style . 
 = = = Insular art = = = 
 Insular art , or Hiberno @-@ Saxon art , is the name given to the common style produced in Scotland , Britain and Anglo @-@ Saxon England from the 7th century , with the combining of Celtic and Anglo @-@ Saxon forms . Surviving examples of Insular art are found in metalwork , carving , but mainly in illuminated manuscripts . Surfaces are highly decorated with intricate patterning , with no attempt to give an impression of depth , volume or recession . The best examples include the Book of Kells , Lindisfarne Gospels , Book of Durrow . Carpet pages are a characteristic feature of Insular manuscripts , although <unk> initials ( an Insular invention ) , canon tables and figurative miniatures , especially Evangelist portraits , are also common . The finest era of the style was brought to an end by the disruption to monastic centres and aristocratic life of the Viking raids in the late 8th century . The influence of Insular art affected all subsequent European Medieval art , especially in the decorative elements of Romanesque and Gothic manuscripts . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 For the period after the departure of the Romans there is evidence of a series of new forts , often smaller " nucleated " constructions compared with those from the Iron Age , sometimes utilising major geographical features , as at Edinburgh and Dunbarton . All the northern British peoples utilised different forms of fort and the determining factors in construction were local terrain , building materials , and politico @-@ military needs . The first identifiable king of the Picts , Bridei mac Maelchon had his base at the fort of Craig Phadrig near modern Inverness . The Gaelic overkingdom of Dál Riata was probably ruled from the fortress of Dunadd now near Kilmartin in Argyll and Bute . The introduction of Christianity into Scotland from Ireland from the sixth century , led to the construction of the first churches . These may originally have been wooden , like that excavated at Whithorn , but most of those for which evidence survives from this era are basic masonry @-@ built churches , beginning on the west coast and islands and spreading south and east . 
 Early chapels tended to have square @-@ ended converging walls , similar to Irish chapels of this period . Medieval parish church architecture in Scotland was typically much less elaborate than in England , with many churches remaining simple oblongs , without transepts and aisles , and often without towers . In the Highlands they were often even simpler , many built of rubble masonry and sometimes indistinguishable from the outside from houses or farm buildings . Monasteries also differed significantly from those on the continent , and were often an isolated collection of wooden huts surrounded by a wall . At <unk> an Naoimh in the Inner Hebrides there are huts , a chapel , refectory , guest house , barns and other buildings . Most of these were made of timber and wattle construction and probably thatched with heather and turves . They were later rebuilt in stone , with underground cells and circular " beehive " huts like those used in Ireland . Similar sites have been excavated on Bute , Orkney and Shetland . From the eighth century more sophisticated buildings emerged . 
 = = Literature = = 
 Much of the earliest Welsh literature was actually composed in or near the country now called Scotland , although only written down in Wales much later . These include The Gododdin , considered the earliest surviving verse from Scotland , which is attributed to the bard Aneirin , said to have been resident in Gododdin in the 6th century , and the Battle of Gwen Ystrad attributed to Taliesin , traditionally thought to be a bard at the court of Rheged in roughly the same period . There are also religious works in Gaelic including the Elegy for St Columba by <unk> Forgaill ( c . 597 ) and " In Praise of St Columba " by Beccan mac <unk> of Rum ( c . 677 ) . In Latin they include a " Prayer for Protection " ( attributed to St <unk> ) ( c. mid @-@ 6th century ) and Altus <unk> ( " The High Creator " , attributed to St Columba ) ( c . 597 ) . In Old English there is The Dream of the Rood , from which lines are found on the Ruthwell Cross , making it the only surviving fragment of Northumbrian Old English from early Medieval Scotland . 
 = Leod = 
 Leod ( Scottish Gaelic : <unk> ; Old Norse : Ljótr ) ( c . 1200 – 1280 ) is considered the eponymous ancestor and founder of Clan MacLeod and Clan MacLeod of Lewis . Almost nothing is known about him and he does not appear in any contemporary records . Tradition dating to the late 18th century made him a son of Olaf the Black who was King of Man ( r . 1225 – 1237 ) . Heraldic evidence , dating to the late 17th century , is considered to be the earliest evidence of descent from Olaf the Black . However , in recent years , this traditional lineage has been challenged and is no longer considered fact by historians . 
 According to Clan MacLeod tradition , Leod inherited some of his lands from a foster father , who was a sheriff of the Hebridean island of Skye ; other lands he inherited from his father @-@ in @-@ law , who was also a lord on Skye . MacLeod tradition also states that Leod was the father of four sons and two daughters . Two of these sons founded the two main branches of MacLeods ; branches which exist to this day — Tormod ( from whom the MacLeods of Harris and Dunvegan descend ) and Torquil ( from whom the MacLeods of Lewis descend ) . The traditional belief that Torquil was a son has also been challenged ; the current understanding is that he was a great @-@ grandson of Leod . In recent years , the DNA evidence of men bearing surnames equating to MacLeod has revealed that a certain proportion share a common ancestor — an ancestor considered to have been the clan 's founder . 
 = = Traditional ancestry = = 
 According to MacLeod tradition , Leod is the eponymous ancestor of the clan . However , little to nothing is known about this man ; he does not appear in any contemporary records . The earliest historical record of a MacLeod chief occurs almost a century after he is thought to have flourished — when the names of " <unk> , son to <unk> M <unk> " , and that of " <unk> M <unk> " , appear in a royal charter during the reign of David II , King of Scots ( r . 1329 – 1371 ) . Until quite recently , Leod has generally been considered to have been the son of Olaf the Black , King of Mann and the Isles ( r . 1225 – 1237 ) . 
 This traditional ancestry may be traced to the late 17th century when a chief adopted the designation of " McOlaus " and another was the first MacLeod to incorporate the royal Manx arms into MacLeod heraldry . In a document dating to 1630 , Iain Mòr MacLeod of Dunvegan ( chief 1626 – 1649 ) appears as " John McOlaus of <unk> " — McOlaus representing <unk> . This chief 's son , Iain Breac ( chief 1664 – 1693 ) , is the first MacLeod to have incorporated the Manx triskelion into his coat of arms . The triskelion was borne in the arms of the kings of Mann and the Isles as far back as the 13th century . The earliest known arms borne by the MacLeods of Harris and Dunvegan ( pictured top @-@ right ) are , however , quite different the royal Manx arms . These earliest MacLeod arms date to the mid 15th century ; recorded in a leading European armorial known as the Armorial de Berry . Accordingly , it has been suggested that these points show that 17th century belief of a descent from Olaf was not one of long standing . 
 There are various other points which cast serious doubt on Leod 's traditional ancestry . In 1265 , Magnus , King of Mann , the last king of this Manx dynasty died . Later in 1275 , Magnus 's illegitimate son , Godfrey died while leading a revolt . At least two women later came forward with claims for the kingdom — yet Leod and his sons did not . According to <unk> Sellar , it is hard to believe that a descendant of the royal line would not have put forward a claim . Another point put forward is that the MacLeods did not adopt the royal names of the 13th century Manx dynasty — names such as Godfrey ( Old Norse : Guðrøðr ; Gaelic : Gofraid ) , Ranald ( Old Norse Rögnvaldr ; Gaelic : Raghnall ) , Olaf ( Old Norse Óláfr ; Gaelic Amlaíb ) , and Harald ( Old Norse Haraldr ; Gaelic Aralt ) . Sellar illustrated his point by noting the royal names adopted by the descendants of Somerled ( <unk> ) and his wife Ragnhild , daughter of Olaf the Red ( grandfather of Olaf the Black ) . 
 In the 17th century , George Mackenzie , 1st Earl of Cromartie wrote a history of the Mackenzies , which included a genealogy of the MacLeods of Lewis ( from whom he was also descended ) . Cromartie 's genealogy listed Leod as a son of Harald , son of Godred Donn . Later genealogies , however , made Leod a son of Olaf the Black — genealogies found in Sir Robert Douglas of Glenbervie 's Baronage of Scotland , of 1798 ; and the Bannatyne manuscript , which dates to about 1830 . In the Baronage of Scotland , Glenbervie stated that he had obtained information from the MacLeods of Dunvegan which was allegedly based upon information found within the mediaeval Chronicles of Mann and William Camden 's 17th century Britannia — however , neither of these two works make any mention of Leod at all . In 1977 , historian William Matheson rejected the traditional descent from Olaf the Black on the basis that it is unsupported by any facts whatsoever , and that it is also contradicted by earlier Gaelic @-@ language genealogies which may be more authentic . 
 = = = Traditional genealogies reconsidered = = = 
 In recent years , several historians have noted that within the Gaelic @-@ language genealogies and praise @-@ poetry concerning the MacLeods , Leod 's great @-@ grandfather 's name appears to equate to the Old Norse Ölvir , <unk> ; rather than the Old Norse Óláfr . There are considered to be four significant Gaelic @-@ language genealogies which concern Leod 's ancestry . These pedigree roughly agree with one another in the three generations after Leod . The greatest similarity between these genealogies are the names of Leod 's great @-@ grandfather , variously spelt <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , and <unk> <unk> . Taking into account variances in spelling , these names are now considered to represent the literary Gaelic <unk> , and the vernacular Gaelic <unk> ; both which are in turn forms of Ölvir . 
 Matheson proposed that when Camden published his Britannia which included an account of the kings of Mann , genealogists saw the Latin Olavus ( a Latin form of the Old Norse Óláfr ) and concluded that it represented the Gaelic name <unk> , <unk> . However , the Scottish Gaelic form of Olaf , Olavus , Olaus , Óláfr , is in fact Amhlaoibh , and the more modern <unk> . Matheson further proposed that Leod 's father 's name also equates to Ölvir . So in Matheson 's opinion , genealogists mistakenly attached Leod 's father and great @-@ grandfather to the Manx king Olaf the Black and his own grandfather , Olaf the Red . While Matheson 's identification of the name of Leod 's grandfather is now accepted , Sellar later disagreed with him on the name of Leod 's father ; proposing instead that it was more likely the Gaelic name <unk> — a name which appears on one of the four Gaelic @-@ language genealogies . 
 Leod 's name is represented in Scottish Gaelic as <unk> . This name is a Gaelic form of the Old Norse Ljótr , meaning " ugly " . Matheson stated that this Norse name was rare in both Scandinavia and Iceland . He noted that in Scotland it was peculiar to the MacLeods , though it is almost never used within the clan . Matheson speculated that Leod 's great @-@ grandfather would have likely flourished at about the same time as Olvir Rosta was supposedly exiled to the Outer Hebrides . Matheson went even father and proposed that Leod 's great @-@ grandfather was in fact Olvir Rosta — a character from the mediaeval Orkneyinga saga . Matheson noted that while the name Ljótr is rare , Olvir Rosta 's maternal grandfather appears in the saga as Ljótr <unk> ( ' Ljótr Villain ' ) . In Matheson 's opinion , since the Gaelic @-@ language genealogies are inconsistent in the generations further back than Leod 's great @-@ grandfather , this may show that the man was a newcomer in the area . Sellar , however , rejected Matheson 's proposal , commenting that such evidence was entirely circumstantial . Sellar stated that Olvir was not such a rare name ; also , Olvir Rosta 's genealogy and family within the saga ( see above right ) has no similarity with that recorded in the Gaelic @-@ language genealogies relevant to Leod . 
 In contrast to Matheson 's opinion about the name Ljótr , the 20th @-@ century historian A. Morrison was of the opinion that the name may not be as rare as some people have thought . Morrison noted that the 19th century antiquary <unk> Thomas considered another saga character to be an eponymous ancestor of the MacLeods — this character was Ljótólfr , who would have lived on Lewis about a century before Leod 's time . Morrison considered it possible that Leod 's name could have ultimately originated from that of Ljótólfr 's ; however , while he considered it possible that Ljótólfr could have been an ancestor of Leod , he did not think it could have been in the male @-@ line . 
 = = Leod in clan tradition = = 
 = = = Clans Mackenzie , and Ross = = = 
 The first earl of Cromartie 's 17th century genealogical account of the MacLeods relates how Leod ( " <unk> " ) was a son of Harald , son of Godred Donn . When the Isle of Man passed into the possession of the Scots , Alexander III granted Lewis , Harris , Waternish , and Minginish to Harald . Leod later succeeded his father to the lands as his father 's only son . Cromartie 's account also states how Leod 's wife was Adama , daughter of Fearchar , Earl of Ross . However , according to Sellar , there is no record of a son of Harald named Leod , nor is there any record of a daughter of Fearchar named Adama . Sellar also noted that there is no record of the grant of lands by Alexander III . Sellar went so far as to state that Leod 's wife , father , and the grant , were nothing but figments of Cromartie 's imagination . The manuscript history of the Rosses of <unk> also notes Leod . This account , according to the 19th @-@ century historian W.F. Skene , is older than that of Cromartie 's . The manuscript states that a King of Denmark had three sons who came to the north of Scotland — Gwine , <unk> , and Leandres . Gwine conquered the <unk> of Caithness ; <unk> conquered Lewis , and was the progenitor of the MacLeods ; and Leandres conquered " <unk> be the <unk> " . Skene stated that Gwine likely was meant to refer to the eponymous ancestor of the Clan Gunn , and that Leandres refers to the <unk> whom " Clan Andres , or old Rosses " took their name . 
 = = = Clan MacLeod = = = 
 According to an account of MacLeod tradition written in 1797 for the clan 's chief , Olaf the Black had three sons by his third wife , Christina , daughter of the Earl of Ross — Gunn , from whom descended Clan Gunn ; Leandres , from whom descended Clan Leandres in Ross ; and Leod . The tradition goes on to say that Leod was fostered by " Pol , son of Bok " , sheriff of Skye . This Pol then gave Leod the island of Harris ; later Leod married a daughter of " <unk> <unk> " and , in consequence , received Dunvegan and all the Skye estates which the MacLeods held in later times . In the Bannatyne manuscript , the sheriff is called " Paal Baccas " , and is stated to have owned the isle of Harris , as well as the following lands on Skye : Sleat , Trotternish , Waternish , and Snizort . The manuscript states that he had a natural son , but named Leod his heir . The " Pol , son of Bok " and " Paal Baccas " of MacLeod tradition are considered to be identical with the historical Páll , son of <unk> , who is mentioned within the Chronicles of Mann as a loyal ally of Olaf the Black . The Bannatyne manuscript states that Paal Baccas was killed in 1231 ; after which Leod peacefully succeeded to his possessions . 
 The Bannatyne manuscript is the main authority for information on the early chiefs of Clan MacLeod . It states that the first seven chiefs of Clan MacLeod were buried at Iona . The choir of Iona Abbey , for the most part , dates from the early 16th century . Within the centre of the choir there is a large stone which once contained a monumental brass , traditionally said to have been a MacLeod . The stone formed a matrix which at one time contained the brass inlay ( tradition states it was a silver inlay ) . It is the largest carved stone on the island , measuring 7 feet 9 @.@ 25 inches ( 2 @.@ 37 m ) by 3 feet 10 inches ( 1 @.@ 17 m ) . The early 20th @-@ century clan historian R.C. MacLeod speculated that perhaps Leod and five of his successors were buried beneath — however , in his opinion the fourth chief , Iain <unk> , was buried elsewhere . In fact , the stone may actually mark the tomb of a MacLean , rather than that of a MacLeod . 
 = = = Issue = = = 
 According to MacLeod tradition , Leod had two sons — Tormod and Torquil . The tradition is that Tormod was the ancestor of the MacLeods of Harris and Dunvegan ( the chiefs of Clan MacLeod ) , and Torquil was the ancestor of the MacLeods of Lewis . The Bannatyne manuscript does not specifically state which son was the elder , and subsequently there has been debate over which branch was more ' senior ' in descent . In the late 20th century , Matheson called into question this tradition of brothers , and his work was followed up by other historians . The current view of historians is that the two were not brothers at all ; but that Torquil was actually the grandson of Tormod . 
 The Bannatyne manuscript also names two other sons ; however , Matheson considered the manuscript to be of dubious authority , since it is the only source for these names . It lists Leod 's third son as John , stating that John followed Bruce to Ireland . The manuscript continues that in Ireland he acquired considerable estates in Galway and was knighted ; although he was the principal man of his name there , his descendants were known not as MacLeods , but as <unk> . The manuscript states that his daughter , and heiress , married Maurice , 2nd Lord of Kerry . According to MacLeod , the statement about John following Bruce to Ireland is a mistake , since John 's daughter couldn 't have married later than 1285 . Bruce was , however , born in 1275 , and did not go to Ireland until 1306 . Leod 's fourth son is listed by the manuscript as being Olaus . The account states that this Olaus was the reputed ancestor of the <unk> , or Fullarton family , which originated on the Isle of Arran and that this family traced its ancestry from Lewis , or <unk> , son of Olaus , son of Leod . 
 The manuscript also states that Leod also had two daughters . Again , the manuscript is the only source for the existence of these offspring and does not mention their names . It states that one of the daughters married Fergus of Galloway ; while the other married John , Lord of Mull . It is unknown who these men could have been . 
 = = DNA and the founder of Clan MacLeod = = 
 In about 2004 , a DNA project attempted to uncover the genetic origin of Clan MacLeod . The project studied the Y @-@ DNA of about 400 men who bore surnames which equate to MacLeod . The study 's findings showed that 32 % of the men tested had a common ancestor in the male line ; and that this ancestor lived about 1 @,@ 000 years ago . This particular group was by far the largest group of related men . In consequence , the project concluded that this group 's common ancestor , though he might have lived further back in time than Leod , is the genetic founder of the clan . In 2011 , the results of a much smaller study were published . Of a sample of 45 men with the surname MacLeod , 47 % were found to share a common ancestor in the male line ( the remaining 53 % of the sample contained 9 different genetic male line lineages ) . The genetic marker of the 47 % <unk> was found to be the <unk> branch of Haplogroup R1b . This marker is found not only the Western Isles , but also in Orkney , Shetland , England , Norway , and Sweden . In consequence , the study concluded that the genetic origin of Clan MacLeod likely lies in Scandinavia . 
 = Shuffle ! = 
 Shuffle ! ( <unk> ! , <unk> ! ) is a Japanese visual novel developed by Navel . It was originally released as an adult game for Microsoft Windows on January 30 , 2004 . It was subsequently followed by an all @-@ ages release for the PlayStation 2 ( PS2 ) and an expanded adult release for Windows . The Windows version was localized in English by MangaGamer in 2009 . The gameplay in Shuffle ! follows a branching plot line which offers pre @-@ determined scenarios and courses of interaction and focuses on the appeal of the female main characters . Shuffle ! has been re @-@ made into an expanded version called Shuffle ! Essence + . It has expanded routes for the original five main heroines as well as new routes for six other characters . Shuffle ! also has three spin @-@ off sequels : Tick ! Tack ! , Really ? Really ! and Shuffle ! Love Rainbow . 
 Shuffle ! has made several transitions to other media . There have been two manga series based on the visual novel . The first was serialized in Kadokawa Shoten 's magazine Comptiq between December 2003 and 2006 . The second was a comic anthology published by Kadokawa Shoten between July 2004 and December 2005 . Two anime adaptations were produced by the animation studio Asread . The first anime was twenty @-@ four episodes in length and was broadcast in Japan between July 2005 and January 2006 . The second series was a twelve @-@ episode <unk> and was broadcast between January and March 2007 . Seven light novels , two fanbooks , nine drama CDs , and seven radio drama CDs adaptations have also been produced . 
 The visual novel was well received whereas the first anime adaptation received mixed reviews . Across the national semi @-@ monthly ranking of bishōjo games in amount sold in Japan , the limited edition of Shuffle ! premiered in second place at the time of its release and remained in the top 50 for an additional three and a half @-@ months . The normal edition premiered in ninth place at the time of its release and remained in the top 50 for an additional three half @-@ months . Critics of the anime series were divided between whether or not the anime series set itself apart from other series in the harem genre and as to the quality of its audio and visual aspects . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The gameplay mostly consists of reading and listening to the conversations provided . Every now and then , a " Please Select Your Destiny " event will occur , giving the player multiple choices on how to respond . The choices selected determine who will be Rin 's destined love ; depending on which route the player takes , there will be between 8 and 12 multiple @-@ choice questions . At a certain point in the visual novel , a translucent image of the destined character appears when the day changes indicating who Rin has fallen in love with after which the multiple @-@ choice events become almost nonexistent . Near the end of the game , two sex scenes will occur . After some more conversation the visual novel ends . After the visual novel has been completed at least once , players can view CG ( computer graphics ) artwork they have observed , skip to scenes or endings for characters they have viewed , and listen to music they have heard in the game . 
 The PlayStation 2 version varies from the PC version as all the sex scenes are removed and the player may follow two new storylines : Mayumi Thyme 's and Kareha 's . Additionally , Kareha 's younger sister Tsubomi makes her first appearance in the PS2 version during Kareha 's path . 
 Shuffle ! Essence + allows the player to follow the storylines of seven heroines , including four new storylines : Tsubomi 's , Sakura Yae 's , Nadeshiko <unk> 's and Daisy 's . In Daisy 's path , Erica <unk> makes her first appearance as a secondary character and Ruri Matsuri appears as the second main heroine , but she does not have any sex scenes . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting and themes = = = 
 The story takes place in a fictional universe where humans live in harmony with gods , resembling humans with slightly pointed ears , and devils ( demons in the English dub of the anime ) , who have more prominently pointed ears . Despite their respective positive and negative connotations , both races are equally kind and good @-@ natured . Ten years prior to the story , the gateway between the worlds of the gods and devils were opened , and since then , people from all races have been immigrating between the worlds . The characters attend the multi @-@ racial high school , National Verbena Academy ( <unk> , <unk> Gakuen ) in <unk> @-@ chō ( <unk> , lit . Sunshine Town ) . This is so humans , gods and devils can interact and learn to live together in harmony with mutual understanding rather than hatred , fear and ignorance . Also , due to dimensional tears ( unknown why or how they appear ) some members of each race had been transported to one of the other worlds where they married and had children . This is how some of the students with mixed lineage are able to be older than the gateway to the human world like Mayumi Thyme , whose human parent had fallen into the world of the Devils through one of those tears years before the gateway to the Human world had been opened , or Asa 's mother , Ama Shigure , who somehow was transported from the world of the Devils to the Human world . 
 Shuffle ! contains a leitmotif of allusions to flowers . All of the characters ' names are references to flowers in some way , mostly genera of flowering plants . 
 = = = Main characters = = = 
 The protagonist and player character of Shuffle ! is Rin <unk> , a normal seventeen @-@ year @-@ old second @-@ year high school student and the male protagonist to the series . Since a young age , he has placed the well @-@ being of others before his own and dislikes seeing people in sorrow . Since he lost his parents in his childhood , he has been living with Kaede Fuyou , a life envied by many of his classmates . One of the heroines of Shuffle ! , Kaede believes it her duty in life is to take care of Rin , which she takes upon herself in order to atone for her treatment of him in the past and bears a one @-@ sided love towards Rin . Kaede appears again as the heroine in Really ? Really ! , a sequel to Shuffle ! , that continues from Kaede 's ending in Shuffle ! . In middle school , the two meet and later befriend Asa Shigure , another heroine of Shuffle ! who is in her third @-@ year of high school . While she has a weak constitution , she makes up for it with her energetic tomboy personality and is an excellent cook . She has a habit of slapping Rin on his back . 
 At the onset of the story , two girls who Rin had met once during his childhood come to his school as transfer students and began living as his next door neighbours . Lisianthus , a heroine of Shuffle ! , is an energetic and enthusiastic person who is able to start a conversation with anyone . She comes to the human world as a possible marriage candidate for Rin and as the daughter of the Lord of Gods , thankful for his kindness to her in the past . Similarly , Nerine , who is also a heroine , is a reserved girl with a beautiful voice and a capable user of magic . She also comes to the human world to be a marriage candidate for Rin as the daughter of the Lord of Devils . Nerine appears again as a heroine in Navel 's game , Tick ! Tack ! , which continues from Nerine 's ending . Soon after the two daughters come to his school , Rin meets Primula , a strange , soft @-@ spoken girl who often carries a stuffed cat around . 
 There are two new storylines that are available in the PlayStation 2 version of the game . Mayumi Thyme is a heterochromia @-@ eyed girl who is half @-@ devil and half @-@ human . She is Rin 's classmate and is always searching for news . She takes pride in her smallest bust size , a fact often made fun of by Rin and Itsuki , claiming them to be a rarity sought after by a select group of men . Kareha is of the god race and is Asa 's friend and classmate who enjoys making sweets and taking on related part @-@ time jobs . Whenever she sees something romantic or cute , she has a habit of saying " Ma Ma Maa ! " and starts to daydream , losing awareness of her surroundings . 
 In Shuffle ! Essence + , there are four new storylines available in the game . Tsubomi is Kareha 's younger sister , and like Kareha , she has a tendency to space out when she see something romantic or cute . Her catchphrase is " Kya ! Kya ! Kya ! " . She 's the same age as Primula , so they easily become friends . Sakura is Rin 's and Kaede 's childhood friend , they know each other since elementary school . That 's why she knows about Rin 's and Kaede 's tragic past . Nadeshiko is Rin 's homeroom teacher . She 's quite self @-@ confident , firmly stepping on the ground , single , attractive and is frequently the victim of pickup lines , including from the Lord of Devils and Itsuki . It appears she has some martial arts training ( being able to slice a bottle with her bare hand ) . She has a habit of dealing out very strong punishments such as writing 100 @-@ page reports and dragging a tire around the track for minor offenses . However when it comes speak about romantic relationship or cuteness she can become shy , specially when someone speaks so about her . Daisy is Sia 's cousin . When they were kids they used to play a lot together , but because of some circumstances between their fathers both of them stopped playing together . Daisy remember the precious for her time she spend with Lisianthus , but Sia seems to forgotten the old days , when they were together . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 The storyline of Shuffle ! follows the life of Rin <unk> , a normal seventeen @-@ year @-@ old second @-@ year high school student who finds himself sought after by a variety of girls . Eight years prior to the onset of the story , he lost his parents in a car accident that also took the life of Kaede Fuyou 's mother . From that point onwards , he began living with her . At around the same time he lost his parents , he met Lisianthus and Nerine at different times who each were accompanying their fathers on a diplomatic business in the human world . Each girl became lost after wandering through the human world . During that time , Rin befriended each girl after playing with them for a day . As a result of his kindness , Rin finds himself as the potential marriage candidate for both Lisianthus and Nerine , the daughters of the king of the gods and king of the demon worlds , who recently transfer to Rin 's school at the onset of the story . 
 = = Development = = 
 Shuffle ! is the first project developed by the visual novel developer Navel , and is the first title in the series . Shuffle ! ' s development team was largely composed of members involved with Basil 's Cherry Petals Fall Like Teardrops . The scenarios were written by Baria Ago , who had previously been in charge of writing the scenario for Cherry Petals Fall Like Teardrops and Long Cube . Art direction and character design was split between Aoi Nishimata , who had previously illustrated Cherry Petals Fall Like Teardrops , and Hiro Suzuhira . The music for the game was composed by Nachtmusik . The opening video was produced by Iris Motion Graphics . 
 The Limited Edition was released on January 30 , 2004 and came with a special artbook featuring original drawings of the cast by twelve guest artists and a special edition box . The Normal Edition was released on February 27 , 2004 on one DVD instead of three CDs and came with an original <unk> & <unk> keychain . The Standard Edition was released on December 17 , 2004 on one DVD . An Anniversary Edition was released on November 22 , 2007 and comes with a phone card of Sia and <unk> . The PlayStation 2 version Shuffle ! On the Stage was released in two versions on October 20 , 2005 : the regular version including the game and the DX version that included a 12 cm figure of Lisianthus , a Shuffle ! On the Stage Mix soundtrack CD , and a cell phone cleaner . The development of a PC port of Shuffle ! On the Stage titled Shuffle ! Essence + was announced on May 9 , 2008 and released on October 30 , 2009 . 
 MangaGamer released an uncensored , English translation of the visual novel on August 15 , 2009 . It is available for download only with no physical release , and as the servers are in Europe , the payment is listed in euros . On April 26 , 2013 , MangaGamer released an English translation of its sequel Tick ! Tack ! . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 = = = Manga = = = 
 Written by and illustrated by Shiroi Kusaka , a manga adaptation of Shuffle ! titled Shuffle ! Days in the Bloom [ sic ] was first serialized monthly in Comptiq in December 2003 , a month before the release of the visual novel , until its conclusion in December 2006 . The twenty @-@ six chapters were then compiled by Kadokawa Shoten into six tankōbon volumes , which were later released from August 8 , 2004 to January 10 , 2007 . A second manga series , a comic anthology titled Shuffle ! Comic à la Carte ( SHUFFLE ! コミックアラカルト ) written by Comptiq 's Editorial Department , was published across five tankōbon volumes by Kadokawa Shoten between July 8 , 2004 and December 10 , 2005 . The cover illustrations were provided by Aoi Nishimata and Hiro Suzuhira . 
 = = = Audio dramas = = = 
 A total of nine drama CD adaptations were released by Lantis for Shuffle ! between 2004 and 2007 . Five CDs were released monthly between May 26 , 2004 and September 23 , 2004 , with each focused upon one of the five heroines of PC version of Shuffle ! . Each drama CD contains between four to five tracks . For the PlayStation 2 version , an additional two CDs were released on February 22 , 2006 and May 24 , 2006 , respectively , each focusing on Mayumi Thyme and Kareha , the two new heroines . For the second anime adaptation , Shuffle ! Memories , two additional drama CDs were released on July 25 , 2007 and October 24 , 2007 , focusing on Kaede Fuyou and Lisianthus , respectively . Three drama CDs appeared on the weekly Oricon albums chart of which the drama CD released for Shuffle ! On the Stage focused on Kareha ranked the highest , peaking at # 216 and remaining on the chart for one week . 
 A radio drama series titled Shuffle ! <unk> : Verbena Academy Broadcasting Department began broadcasting weekly in September 2005 , was hosted by Lisianthus and Nerine , and voiced by their respective voice actors . It was later released monthly by Lantis on five CDs between October 5 , 2005 and February 8 , 2006 . A shortened anthology of their tracks was then collected across a two @-@ CD compilation titled Shuffle ! <unk> : Verbena Academy Broadcasting Department Petit released by Lantis on April 5 , 2006 and June 7 , 2006 . Two of these releases charted on the weekly Oricon albums chart of which the compilation ranked the highest , peaking # 130 and remaining on the chart for one week . 
 = = = Books and publications = = = 
 A series of seven character novels was published monthly by Kadokawa Shoten between June 8 , 2004 and January 10 , 2006 each focusing on each of seven heroines of Shuffle ! , including the two introduced in the PlayStation 2 version . Each of the novels were written by <unk> Ogata and <unk> by Shiroi Kusaka with cover illustrations provided by Aoi Nishimata and Hiro Suzuhira . 
 A book titled " Shuffle ! First Fanbook " ( SHUFFLE ! <unk> ) ( ISBN 978 @-@ 4 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 ) was published by <unk> on January 22 , 2004 containing a series of illustrations , character introductions , and a CD containing wallpapers and various messages voiced by each of the five main heroines of Shuffle ! . Enterbrain published a fifty @-@ eight @-@ page book with a CD <unk> titled " Shuffle ! Visual Fanbook " ( SHUFFLE ! <unk> ) in Tech Gian on June 9 , 2004 . It included detailed story explanations , seventy @-@ eight illustrations for Shuffle ! , a specially drawn A3 poster , and a interviews with the creators . <unk> also published another book titled " Shuffle ! Official Illustrations and Production Materials Collection " ( SHUFFLE ! <unk> ・ <unk> ) ( ISBN 978 @-@ 4 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 ) on July 10 , 2004 collecting the computer graphics used in the game , production sketches , and information on character and world secrets . A book titled " Shuffle ! On the Stage Official Visual Guide " ( SHUFFLE ! ON THE <unk> <unk> ) ( ISBN 978 @-@ 4 @-@ 04 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 ) was released by Kadokawa Shoten on December 22 , 2005 . The book contained all the production sketches , concept art , and interviews with staff relating to the PS2 version of the visual novel compiled by Comptiq . Kadokawa Shoten released an additional book on April 10 , 2006 titled " Shuffle ! Anime Complete Album " ( SHUFFLE ! <unk> ) ( ISBN 978 @-@ 4 @-@ 04 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 ) providing an introduction to the production of the anime adaptation of the visual novel , a detailed plot overview , and interviews with staff involved in the anime . 
 = = = Anime = = = 
 Naoto Hosoda directed a 24 @-@ episode anime adaptation of Shuffle ! that was produced by Asread . A special prologue DVD was released on May 27 , 2005 . It was broadcast in Japan on WOWOW between July 7 , 2005 and January 5 , 2006 . The anime combines elements from all of the characters ' paths from the game into one plot , although it differs from the game by adding some elements , such as the idol clubs formed around Sia , Nerine , and Kaede , and removing others , such as the H @-@ scenes . The anime 's opening theme is " You " by Yuria , and the ending theme is " Innocence " by Miyuki Hashimoto . The series was released across twelve Region 2 DVD compilation volumes in Japan . 
 On January 1 , 2007 , Funimation Entertainment announced licensing the anime adaptation of Shuffle ! for English @-@ language dubbed release . Funimation released the series across six Region 1 DVD compilation volumes between February 26 , 2008 and September 9 , 2008 . The sixth DVD volume featured an artbox and Lisianthus ' " god " panties . Funimation later released a DVD boxset on March 31 , 2009 compiling all the six DVD volumes . 
 The game was again adapted by Asread into a 12 @-@ episode anime series titled Shuffle ! Memories directed by Naoto Hosoda and written by Masashi Suzuki . It was broadcast on Chiba TV and TV Saitama between January 6 and March 25 , 2007 . It is a recap of the original Shuffle ! anime , rearranging scenes from the original series into individual character specific episodes , and contains very little original content aside from the last episode . It features 13 pieces of theme music performed by Yuria , Miyuki Hashimoto , and the respective voice actors for the five heroines of Shuffle ! . It was released across seven region 2 DVD compilation volumes in Japan . 
 = = = Merchandise = = = 
 Kadokawa Shoten also released five boxsets , one for each of the five heroines of the PC version of Shuffle ! , between September 10 , 2005 and December 10 , 2005 . Each boxset was compiled by Comptiq and contained a book , clothed <unk> figurines , drama CDs , and mousepad released for the visual novel , first anime adaptation , and manga adaptation for their respective characters . 
 = = Music = = 
 The visual novel features two pieces of theme music . The PC version features " Mirage Lullaby " as its opening theme . The PS2 version features " Original ! " as the opening theme . Both versions of the visual novel feature " Scramble ! " as the ending theme . Each song was performed by Yuria . Both versions also feature " In the Sky " as the ending theme to the Nerine 's path . 
 Several music albums for the novel and its adaptations have been released between 2004 and 2007 by Lantis . The game 's original soundtrack was released in February 2004 containing two @-@ discs with track thirty @-@ one total tracks consisting of background music , the theme songs , and bonus remixes of the opening theme . Following a month after the release of the series of five drama CDs for the PC version of the game , Lantis released an album in October 2004 containing elven tracks of character image songs , some of which were featured in the drama CD series , each performed by their respective voice actor . A remix album titled <unk> followed in June 2005 released by Lantis containing eleven tracks of remixes of the opening theme for the PC version of the game by several artists . Two maxi singles containing the theme music used in the first anime adaptation titled " You " and " Innocence " were released in August 2005 . In November 2005 , a month after the initial release of the PS2 version of the game , was released its opening maxi single " Original ! " . A remix album titled Re @-@ mix Album Composition Eleven containing eleven remixes by various artists followed in December 2005 . An album titled Character Vocal Album was released in March 2006 containing thirteen new character image songs for many of the characters of the PS2 version of the game . In April 2007 , a month after the conclusion of the second anime adaptation of the game Shuffle ! Memories , an album titled Shuffle ! Memories Character Song Collection was released containing twelve tracks of character songs performed by their respective voice actors . The original soundtrack for the second adaptation of the game was released in May 2007 . 
 Most of the singles and albums ranked on Oricon charts with the highest ranking album being Shuffle ! Memories Character Song Collection at 104th , and the highest ranking single being " Original ! " , the opening theme for Shuffle ! On the Stage PS2 game , at 32nd . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Shuffle ! had much pre @-@ sale hype as the development team was largely composed of former members of <unk> , including Hiro Suzuhira and Aoi Nishimata , the illustrators for Shuffle ! . Shuffle ! was released at around the same time as Fate / stay night , a highly anticipated visual novel by Type @-@ Moon . The limited edition of Shuffle ! was the second highest @-@ selling computer game for the last two weeks of January 2004 the top 50 best @-@ selling Bishōjo games semi @-@ monthly sales chart in Japan , behind Fate / stay night . It then ranked 18th and 50th in February before dropping off the chart in the first two weeks of March at 40th . The regular edition of the PC version of Shuffle ! premiered at 9th in the chart in the last two weeks of February . It then ranked 5th and 40th in March , before its last appearance at 49th in the first half of April . Shuffle ! On the Stage was released on October 20 , 2005 and sold well ( for a visual novel ) during its first week , selling 29 @,@ 732 copies by October 23 . 
 Getchu.com hosts a yearly voting poll called the " Getchu.com Bishōjo Game Ranking " where game users vote online for the best games of the previous year in several different categories . For the 2004 ranking , the categories were : overall , scenario , theme songs , background music , visuals , gameplay system , and heroines . Out of the seven , Shuffle ! ranked in four . The game was voted 8th best overall , 11th best for its scenario , and 14th best for its gameplay system . Asa Shigure ranked as the 14th most popular heroine with Kaede Fuyou ranking 15th . 
 = = = Anime = = = 
 Shuffle ! the anime television series received mixed reviews from critics . Theron Martin of Anime News Network described the anime as although " genuinely enjoyable " , often " alternating between brazen stupidity , lame jokes , and disgusting sweetness " criticizing it as being a typical harem anime that offered little new content . Helen Ellingwood of Active Anime disagreed stating that Shuffle ! contained what she described as the most important ingredient , which sets it apart from other harem anime : " heart " . Anime News Network 's Carlo Santos agreed with Martin 's assessment , agreeing with the show 's lack of novelty and stating that the highlight of the anime is its comedy , but that its romance is " slowly running the series into the ground . " However , D. F. Smith of IGN stated that it actually does well against other harem anime as it " may be ridiculous , exploitative , a simultaneous affront to good sense and good taste , but at least it 's good for a chuckle or two " . Smith criticized the ending for lacking " intensity " ; however , Ellingwood praised it for showing the consequences of avoiding which heroine the protagonist would choose to love , unlike harem anime she had prior . 
 Ellingwood praised the animation quality as " high quality " with " wonderfully lush and vibrant color schemes " used for the character designs . Smith agreed , describing the anime as " colorful " and " sharply @-@ drawn " , however in the last few episodes as having darkened the scenes a little excessively . However , Martin criticized the " mediocre " animation noting the " bland " appearance of characters as uncharacteristic of harem anime . Santos stated that the animation was " sloppy " for the secondary characters , however praised the high quality and detail of the artwork . Although Ellingwood described the score as " energetic and pleasing " , Smith stated that the music " tends to stick to the background " . Martin expressed a similar view stating that the soundtrack " does little to spruce up the production " , although he described the opening theme " You " as " a strong , energetic J @-@ rock number worth listening to independently " and as " unquestioningly " the highlight of the soundtrack . On the other hand , Santos described the theme music and at times the music selection as " show [ ing ] absolutely no originality " but the background music as " surprisingly listenable " and at times " so evocative that it conveys the scene better than the story and characters do . " 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 A 3D virtual world called Ai Sp @ ce was developed by the video game developer Headlock where users can interact with bishōjo game heroines from Shuffle ! , Clannad , and Da Capo II . Released in October 2008 , the world recreates each game franchise on its own virtual island which are linked with a central Akihabara Island where users can interact , bridging the gap between the separate franchises . Users are able to create a customizable avatar to represent themselves in the game , along with choosing one game heroine to live with , which is referred to as a character doll , or chara @-@ doll for short . The user and chara @-@ doll reside together on one of the three in @-@ game " islands " depending on which franchise the heroine is from , which includes a house with furniture and clothes that can be purchased . The chara @-@ dolls can also be customizable in that they can develop a unique personality for each user . 
 = Cripple Creek miners ' strike of 1894 = 
 The Cripple Creek miners ' strike of 1894 was a five @-@ month strike by the Western Federation of Miners ( WFM ) in Cripple Creek , Colorado , USA . It resulted in a victory for the union and was followed in 1903 by the Colorado Labor Wars . It is notable for being the only time in United States history when a state militia was called out ( May / June 1894 ) in support of striking workers . 
 The strike was characterized by firefights and use of dynamite , and ended after a standoff between the Colorado state militia and a private force working for owners of the mines . In the years after the strike , the WFM 's popularity and power increased significantly through the region . 
 = = Causes of the strike = = 
 At the end of the 19th century , Cripple Creek was the largest town in the gold @-@ mining district that included the towns of Altman , Anaconda , <unk> , Goldfield , Elkton , Independence and Victor , about 20 miles from Colorado Springs on the southwest side of Pikes Peak . Surface gold was discovered in the area in 1891 , and within three years more than 150 mines were operating there . 
 The Panic of 1893 caused the price of silver to crash ; the gold price , however , remained fixed , as the United States was on the gold standard . The influx of silver miners into the gold mines caused a lowering of wages . Mine owners demanded longer hours for less pay , and assigned miners to riskier work . 
 In January 1894 , Cripple Creek mine owners J. J. Hagerman , David Moffat and Eben Smith , who together employed one @-@ third of the area 's miners , announced a lengthening of the work @-@ day to ten hours ( from eight ) , with no change to the daily wage of $ 3 @.@ 00 per day . When workers protested , the owners agreed to employ the miners for eight hours a day – but at a wage of only $ 2 @.@ 50 . 
 Not long before this dispute , miners at Cripple Creek had formed the Free Coinage Union . Once the new changes went into effect , they affiliated with the Western Federation of Miners , and became Local 19 . The union was based in Altman , and had chapters in Anaconda , Cripple Creek and Victor . 
 On February 1 , 1894 , the mine owners began implementing the 10 @-@ hour day . Union president John Calderwood issued a notice a week later demanding that the mine owners reinstate the eight @-@ hour day at the $ 3 @.@ 00 wage . When the owners did not respond , the nascent union struck on February 7 . Portland , Pikes Peak , Gold Dollar and a few smaller mines immediately agreed to the eight @-@ hour day and remained open , but larger mines held out . 
 = = Events of the strike = = 
 The strike had an immediate effect . By the end of February , every smelter in Colorado was either closed or running part @-@ time . At the beginning of March , the Gold King and Granite mines gave in and resumed the eight @-@ hour day . 
 Mine owners still holding out for the 10 @-@ hour day soon attempted to re @-@ open their mines . On March 14 , they obtained a court injunction ordering the miners not to interfere with the operation of their mines , and brought in a number of strikebreakers . The WFM initially attempted to persuade these men to join the union and strike , but when they were unsuccessful , the union resorted to threats and violence . These tactics succeeded in keeping the non @-@ union miners away . 
 On March 16 , an armed group of miners ambushed and captured six sheriff 's deputies en route to the Victor mine . Shots were fired , and the miners and deputies engaged in a fistfight , in which two of the deputies received minor injuries . An Altman judge , a member of the WFM , charged the deputies with carrying concealed weapons and disturbing the peace , then released them . 
 = = = Involvement of the state militia = = = 
 After the assault on his deputies , El Paso County Sheriff <unk> Bowers wired the governor and requested the intervention of the state militia ( predecessor to the Colorado National Guard ) . Governor Davis H. Waite , a 67 @-@ year @-@ old Populist , dispatched 300 troops to the area on March 18 under the command of Adjutant General T.J. Tarsney . Tarsney found the area tense but quiet . Union president Calderwood assured him that union members would cooperate with his operations , even surrendering for arrest if requested . Convinced that Bowers had exaggerated the extent of the chaos in the region , Tarsney recommended the withdrawal of troops ; Waite concurred . The state militia left Cripple Creek on March 20 . 
 In response to the recall of the state militia , the mine owners closed the mines . Bowers arrested Calderwood , 18 other miners , and the mayor and town marshal of Altman ( who had supported the miners ) . They were taken to Colorado Springs and quickly tried on several different charges , but found not guilty . Meanwhile , outbursts of violence , such as stone @-@ throwing and fights between union miners and scabs , increased in frequency . Stores and warehouses were broken into , and guns and ammunition stolen . 
 In early May , the mine owners met with representatives of the WFM in Colorado Springs in an attempt to end the strike . The owners offered to return to the eight @-@ hour day , but at a daily wage of only $ 2 @.@ 75 . The union rejected the offer and talks broke down . 
 = = = Mine owners raise a private army = = = 
 Shortly after negotiations with the union ended , the mine owners met secretly with Sheriff Bowers in Colorado Springs . They told Bowers they intended to bring in hundreds of nonunion workers , and asked if he would be able to protect such a large force of men . Bowers said he could not , for the county lacked the financial resources to pay and arm more than a few deputies . The mine owners offered to subsidize an initial force of a hundred or so men . Bowers agreed , and immediately began recruiting ex @-@ police and ex @-@ firefighters from Denver . 
 News of the mine owners ' meeting with Bowers soon leaked out , and the miners organized and armed themselves in response . Calderwood was leaving on a tour of the WFM locals in Colorado to raise funds for the Cripple Creek strike , and so appointed Junius J. Johnson , a former U.S. Army officer , to take over strike operations . Johnson immediately established a camp atop Bull Hill , which overlooked the town of Altman . He ordered that fortifications be built , a commissary stocked and the miners be drilled in maneuvers . 
 On May 24 , the strikers seized the Strong mine on Battle Mountain , which overlooked the town of Victor . The next day , at about 9 am , 125 deputies arrived in Altman and set up camp at the base of Bull Hill . As they started to march toward the strikers ' camp , miners at the Strong mine blew up the <unk> , hurling the structure more than 300 feet into the air . A few moments later , the steam boiler was also dynamited , showering the deputies with timber , iron and cable . The deputies fled to the rail station and left town . 
 A celebration broke out among the miners , who broke into liquor warehouses and saloons . That night , some of the miners loaded a flatcar with dynamite and attempted to roll it toward the deputies ' camp . It overturned short of its goal and killed a cow . Other miners wanted to blow up every mine in the region , but Johnson quickly discouraged them . Frustrated , several drunken miners then stole a work train and steamed into Victor . They caught up with the group of fleeing deputies , and a gun battle broke out . One deputy and one miner died , a man on each side was wounded , and six strikers were captured by the deputies . The miners subsequently captured three officials of the Strong mine who had been present when the <unk> was blown up . A formal prisoner exchange later freed all prisoners on both sides . 
 Calderwood returned during the night and restored calm . He asked saloons to close , and he imprisoned several miners who had instigated outbursts of violence . 
 On May 26 , mine owners met again with Sheriff Bowers in Colorado City . The owners agreed to provide more funding to allow the sheriff to raise 1 @,@ 200 additional deputies . Bowers quickly recruited men from all over the state , and established a camp for them in the town of Divide , about 12 miles away from Cripple Creek . 
 = = = Waite intervenes = = = 
 Warned about the size of the force Bowers was raising , Gov. Waite interceded again in the strike . He issued a proclamation on May 27 in which he called on the miners to disband their encampment on Bull Hill . In a development unparalleled in American labor history , he also declared the force of 1 @,@ 200 deputies to be illegal and ordered the group disbanded . He also ordered the state militia to be on the alert for a possible move on Cripple Creek . On May 28 , the governor visited the miners , who authorized Waite to negotiate on their behalf . 
 An initial meeting on May 30 nearly ended in disaster . Waite and several local civic leaders called union president Calderwood and mine owners Hagerman and Moffat to a conference in a meeting hall on the campus of Colorado College in Colorado Springs . Talks were under way and proceeding well when a mob of local citizens attempted to storm the building . Blaming Calderwood and Waite for the violence in Cripple Creek , they intended to lynch both men . As a local judge distracted the mob , Calderwood and Waite escaped out a rear door and onto the governor 's waiting train . 
 Negotiations resumed in Denver on June 2 , and the parties reached an agreement on June 4 . The agreement provided for resumption of the $ 3 @.@ 00 @-@ per @-@ day wage and the eight @-@ hour day . The mine owners agreed not to retaliate against or prosecute any miner who had taken part in the strike , and the miners agreed not to discriminate against or harass any nonunion worker who remained employed in the mines . 
 = = = The state militia returns = = = 
 With 1 @,@ 300 deputies still in Cripple Creek , Sheriff Bowers was unable to control the private army he had created . On June 5 , the deputies moved into Altman , perhaps as a prelude to storming Bull Hill . The deputies cut the telegraph and telephone wires leading out of town , and imprisoned a number of reporters . Concerned that the paramilitary force might get out of hand , Waite again dispatched the state militia , this time under the command of General E.J. Brooks . 
 When Colorado state troops arrived in Cripple Creek early on the morning of June 6 , more violence had already broken out . The deputies were exchanging gunfire with the miners on Bull Hill . Gen. Brooks quickly moved his troops from the train station to the foot of Bull Hill . As Sheriff Bowers and Gen. Brooks began to argue about what course of action to take next , the deputies took advantage of the lull and attempted to charge the miners . The miners sounded the whistle at the Victor mine , alerting Gen. Brooks . Soldiers of the state militia quickly intercepted the deputies and stopped their advance . Brooks ordered his men to occupy the top of Bull Hill , and the miners offered no resistance . 
 The deputies turned their attention to Cripple Creek itself . They arrested and imprisoned hundreds of citizens without cause . Many inhabitants of the town were seized on the street or pulled from their homes , then clubbed , kicked or beaten . The deputies formed a gauntlet and forced townspeople to pass through it , spitting , slapping and kicking them . With Bull Hill in his possession , Gen. Brooks began detaining the deputies . By nightfall , Brooks had seized the town and corralled all of Bowers ' men . 
 Waite threatened to declare martial law , but the mine owners refused to disband their deputy force . Gen. Brooks then threatened to keep his troops in the region for another 30 days . Faced with the prospect of paying for a paramilitary force which could only sit on its hands , the owners agreed to disband it . The deputies , which Gen. Brooks had dispatched via rail to Colorado Springs , began dispersing on June 11 . The Waite agreement became operative the same day , and the miners returned to work . 
 Union president Calderwood and 300 other miners were arrested and charged with a variety of crimes . Only four miners were convicted of any charges , and were quickly pardoned by the sympathetic populist governor . 
 = = Impact of the strike = = 
 The Cripple Creek strike was a major victory for the miners ' union . The Western Federation of Miners used the success of the strike to organize almost every worker in the Cripple Creek region – including waitresses , laundry workers , bartenders and newsboys – into 54 local unions . The WFM flourished in the Cripple Creek area for almost a decade , even helping to elect most county officials ( including the new sheriff ) . 
 The Cripple Creek strike also transformed the Western Federation of Miners enormously as a political entity . The year @-@ old union , weak and penniless before the strike , became widely admired among miners throughout the West . Thousands of workers joined the union over the next few years . Politicians and labor officials throughout the country became steady allies of the union , and the WFM became a political force throughout much of the Rocky Mountain West . 
 But the WFM 's success at Cripple Creek also created a significant backlash . The WFM was forever tarred as a dangerous and violent organization in the eyes of employers . Never again would the WFM have in a local strike the level of public support it enjoyed at Cripple Creek in 1894 . Indeed , when the union struck the Cripple Creek mines again in 1898 , its public support ended after violence broke out . During another strike in 1903 – 4 , whose violent significance earned it the name Colorado Labor Wars , the union went up against the power of the employers and the state combined . 
 The union 's success also altered the course of Colorado politics . Colorado citizens blamed Waite for protecting the miners ' union and encouraging violence and anarchy . The backlash led to Waite 's defeat at the polls in November 1894 and the election of Republican Albert McIntire . The Populist movement in Colorado never recovered . 
 The Cripple Creek strike of 1894 also hardened the attitudes of mine owners . Under Gov. McIntire , the government of Colorado formed a political alliance with the mine owners . Mine owners increasingly turned to the Thiel Detective Service Company and Pinkerton National Detective Agency for spies , increased the use of strikebreakers , and implemented the lockout and blacklist as a means of controlling union members . Whenever these tools proved ineffective , the state government stepped in to support the mine owners . When the WFM struck the Leadville mines in 1896 , Gov. McIntire called out the state militia against the union and broke the WFM 's power in Colorado . 
 The Cripple Creek backlash indirectly influenced the direction of American labor history . The collapse of the 1896 Leadville strike caused the WFM to sever its relationship with the American Federation of Labor and to turn strongly to the left politically . After the Colorado Labor Wars , the WFM was instrumental in launching the Industrial Workers of the World ( IWW ) in 1905 . Although the IWW 's heyday was short @-@ lived , the union was symbolically important and the ideals embodied by it continue to deeply influence the American labor movement to this day . 
 = Chester ( TTC ) = 
 Chester is a subway station on the Bloor – Danforth line in Toronto , Ontario , Canada . The station is located on Chester Avenue just north of Danforth Avenue . It opened in 1966 as one of the original stations of this subway line . The Toronto Parking Authority operates a public parking lot across Chester Avenue opposite the subway entrance . 
 = = History = = 
 Chester station was opened on February 25 , 1966 , along with the rest of the first phase of the Bloor @-@ Danforth line which operated between Keele and Woodbine stations . 
 Following the design style set by the stations of the Bloor @-@ Danforth line , Chester station uses a two colour theme with the station 's name in the Toronto Subway Font . In keeping with the style , Chester 's colours match the ' opposing ' stations on the western half of the subway line : the trim tiles are blue and complement Lansdowne station , while the light green main tiles complement the original tile colour for Dufferin station . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 Chester station has one entrance which is located on Chester Avenue just north of Danforth Avenue . A walkway leads to the station from a nearby street to allow access to the station from the west side . The nearby communities that are served by this station are Greektown , Withrow Park , Riverdale , and Broadview North . In addition to serving these communities , Chester station is commonly used to access local street festivals such as the Taste of the Danforth . 
 Although the station is rated as high priority in the requirement for a second exit , Chester is the only one left on the east end of the Bloor @-@ Danforth line where design work and consultation has yet to be done . 
 The Gateway Newsstand kiosk at the station , which had been vacant for over six years , was reopened on May 8 , 2015 as " The Artist Newsstand " by a group of local artists led by Jess Dobkin . Along with the usual offerings of newspapers , magazines and drinks , The Artist Newsstand is a performance and gallery space for artists as well as being staffed by artists , as a way of funding their work . A $ 4000 Kickstarter campaign was launched to fund the renovation of the kiosk , with the campaign successfully raising $ 4 @,@ 931 . The Artist Newsstand will operate in the space for one year . 
 = = Service = = 
 Chester station is served by the Bloor @-@ Danforth line which operates between Kennedy and Kipling stations . The station was designed to be serviced with side platforms as it mainly serves the surrounding <unk> . As it is the only station in the system that is not connected to a regular bus or streetcar route it is one of the least used subway stations in Toronto . The 300 Bloor @-@ Danforth Night and 303 Don Mills Night Bus operates on Danforth from 1 : 30 @-@ 5 : 30 a.m. after the line is shut down for nightly maintenance . 
 = On Translating Beowulf = 
 " On Translating Beowulf " is an essay by J. R. R. Tolkien which discusses the difficulties faced by anyone attempting to translate the Old English heroic @-@ elegiac poem Beowulf into modern English . It was first published in 1940 as a preface contributed by Tolkien to a translation of Old English poetry ; it was first published as an essay under its current name in the 1983 collection The Monsters and the Critics , and Other Essays . 
 In the essay , Tolkien explains the difficulty of translating individual words from Old English , noting that a word like <unk> ( ' large ' , ' strong ' , ' supernaturally powerful ' ) cannot readily be translated by the same word in each case . He notes the problem of translating poetic kennings such as <unk> ( ' flood @-@ timber ' , i.e. ' ship ' ) and that the language chosen by the poet was already archaic at that moment . He explains that such terms had echoes and connotations of another world , an " <unk> magic " . 
 The essay describes Old English metre , with each line in two opposed halves . The stressed syllables in each half contained <unk> sounds in six possible patterns , which Tolkien illustrates using modern English . Rhyme is used only for special effects , such as to imitate waves beating on a shore . The essay ends with the observation that the whole poem is itself in two opposed halves , covering " Youth + Age ; he rose – fell . " 
 Critics note that Tolkien attempted and sometimes failed to follow the rules he laid down in the essay in his own alliterative verse , in his own translations , and indeed in his narrative fiction such as Lord of the Rings . 
 = = Literary context = = 
 J.R.R. Tolkien contributed " On Translating Beowulf " as a preface entitled " <unk> Remarks on Prose Translation of ' Beowulf ' " to the 1940 edition of C.L. Wrenn 's book Beowulf and the <unk> Fragment , A Translation into Modern English Prose , which had first been published in 1911 by John R. Clark Hall . Tolkien , the Rawlinson and Bosworth Professor of Anglo @-@ Saxon at the University of Oxford , had himself attempted a prose translation of Beowulf , but abandoned it , dissatisfied ; it was published posthumously , edited by his son Christopher Tolkien as Beowulf : A Translation and Commentary in 2014 . 
 The preface was published under the title " On Translating Beowulf " in 1983 ( and in subsequent editions ) , as one of the essays in The Monsters and the Critics , and Other Essays , also edited by Christopher Tolkien . 
 = = Essay = = 
 The essay is divided into the following sections ( which are arranged hierarchically but not numbered in the original ) : 
 = = = On Translation and Words = = = 
 Tolkien comments on the risk of using a translation as a substitute for study with grammar and dictionary , calling it an abuse , and writing that 
 On the strength of a nodding acquaintance of this sort ( it may be supposed ) , one famous critic informed his public that Beowulf was ' only small beer ' . Yet if beer at all , it is a drink dark and bitter : a solemn funeral @-@ ale with the taste of death . 
 He notes that a readable translation cannot always translate an Old English ( OE ) word the same way ; thus <unk> is rendered ' stalwart ' , ' broad ' , ' huge ' , and ' mighty ' , correctly in each case to fit the context , but losing the clue to the word 's special meaning , " not ' large ' but ' enlarged ' " . The word implies , in fact , supernatural or superhuman power , like Beowulf 's gift from God of " thirtyfold strength " . And this is just an example , Tolkien points out , of a minor challenge to the translator . 
 A second issue ( in his view ) is the compactness of Old English words , which often have no modern equivalents , and phrases which are " inevitably weakened even in prose by transference to our looser modern language " . 
 Another problem is posed by the kennings , which Tolkien calls " poetical devices , ... descriptive compounds " . He gives the example of <unk> ( ' flood @-@ timber ' ) for ' ship ' ; some phrase like ' wave @-@ borne timbers ' is " an attempt to unfold , at the risk of dissipating it , the briefly flashed picture " . 
 Tolkien mocks " oddities " like " ten <unk> <unk> together " ( for Beowulf line 2846 , in Clark Hall 's unrevised version ) as " reminiscent of the ' two tired toads that tried to trot to Tutbury ' " . He does not approve , either , of choosing needlessly colloquial words : " Too often notables , visitors and subalterns appeared instead of the more fitting , and indeed more literally accurate , counsellors , strangers , and young knights . " 
 Further , he points out that the language used by the Beowulf poet was already archaic , and the choice of words was at the time recognisably poetic . Tolkien gives as an example <unk> , which meant both ' bear ' and ' warrior ' , but only in heroic poetry could it be used to mean ' man ' . He advises the translator to prefer ' striking ' and ' smiting ' , and to avoid " hitting and whacking " . But on the other hand , he criticises William Morris for using the dead and unintelligible ' <unk> ' for OE <unk> ( ' freemen ' , ' people ' ; cf German <unk> ) , even if antiquarians feel that the word ought to have survived . Tolkien does not accept the etymological fallacy either : mod means ' pride ' , not ' mood ' ; burg is ' stronghold ' , not ' borough ' , even though the modern word derives from the old one . 
 Some terms present special problems ; the Beowulf poet uses at least ten synonyms for the word ' man ' , from <unk> ( as in werewolf , a man @-@ wolf ) and <unk> to <unk> and mann ; Tolkien writes that in heroic verse there were over 25 terms that could at a stretch be used to mean ' man ' , including words like eorl ( a nobleman , like ' earl ' ) ; <unk> ( a young man , like ' knight ' ) ; <unk> ( a servant , like <unk> ) ; or <unk> ( a warrior ) . He argues that the translator need not avoid words from the Middle Ages that might suggest the age of chivalry : better the world of King Arthur than " Red Indians " , and in the case of words for armour and weapons , there is no choice . 
 In the case of compound words , Tolkien observes that the translator has to 
 hesitate between simply naming the thing denoted ( so ' harp ' 1065 , for gomen @-@ wudu ' play @-@ wood ' ) , and resolving the combination into a phrase . The former method retains the compactness of the original but loses its colour ; the latter retains the colour , but even if it does not falsify or exaggerate it , it loosens and weakens the texture . Choice between the evils will vary with occasions . " 
 Tolkien concludes the section by warning the translator that even the most well @-@ worn kennings had not lost their meaning and connotations . Whereas , he argues , the Old English word <unk> , meaning ' lord ' ( which derives from it ) was all that was left of the antique <unk> ( which originally meant ' bread @-@ keeper ' , ' loaf @-@ guard ' ) in daily speech , the poetic phrases used in verse retained echoes of another world : 
 He who in those days said and who heard <unk> ' flesh @-@ raiment ' , ban @-@ hus ' bone @-@ house ' , <unk> @-@ loca ' heart @-@ prison ' , thought of the soul shut in the body , as the frail body itself is <unk> in armour , or as a bird in a narrow cage , or steam pent in a cauldron . ... The poet who spoke these words saw in his thought the brave men of old walking under the vault of heaven upon the island earth [ <unk> ] beleaguered by the <unk> Seas [ <unk> ] and the outer darkness , enduring with stern courage the brief days of life [ <unk> <unk> ] , until the hour of fate [ <unk> ] when all things should perish , <unk> and <unk> <unk> . But he did not say all this fully or explicitly . And therein lies the <unk> magic of ancient English verse for those who have ears to hear : profound feeling , and poignant vision , filled with the beauty and mortality of the world , are aroused by brief phrases , light touches , short words resounding like harp @-@ strings sharply plucked . 
 = = = On Metre = = = 
 Tolkien states that he is going to give an account of Old English metre using modern English , bringing out " the ancestral kinship of the two languages , as well as the differences between them " . 
 = = = = Metre = = = = 
 Tolkien explains that each line of Old English poetry had two opposed halves , groups of words which had six possible patterns of stress , such as ' falling @-@ falling ' , like 
 <unk> in | <unk> . 
 4 <unk> 1 4 .... 1 
 where 4 means a full lift ( maximum stress ) and 1 is the lowest dip in stress . 
 A clashing pattern would be like 
 on <unk> | <unk> . 
 1 <unk> 4 4 <unk> 1 
 Tolkien emphasises that these are still the patterns found everywhere in modern English ; poetry differs from prose , he argues , in that the poet clears away everything else , so " these patterns stand opposed to each other . " 
 He then provides " a free version of Beowulf 210 @-@ 228 in this metre . The passage should be read slowly , but naturally : that is with the stresses and tones required solely by the sense . " The first few lines , which as Tolkien says are a free ( non @-@ literal ) translation of the Old English , run : 
 = = = = Variations = = = = 
 In this section Tolkien describes variations on the basic patterns . For example , dips ( between lifts ) were usually monosyllabic , but the number of syllables was not limited by Old English metre , so a series of weak syllables was permitted in a half @-@ line . Other variations included breaking a lift into two syllables , the first short but stressed , the second weak , with for instance ' <unk> ' in place of ' boat ' . 
 = = = = Alliteration = = = = 
 Tolkien states that calling Old English verse alliterative is a misnomer for two reasons . Firstly it is not fundamental to the metre , which would work without it . Secondly , it does not depend on letters , as in modern English alliteration , but on sounds . Old English alliteration , then , is an " agreement of the stressed elements in beginning with the same consonant , or in beginning with no consonant . " Further , all words starting with any stressed vowel are considered to alliterate : he gives the example of ' old ' <unk> with ' eager ' . 
 = = = = = Arrangement = = = = = 
 Tolkien lays down three rules of Old English alliteration . " One full lift in each half @-@ line must alliterate . " In the second half @-@ line , only the first lift may alliterate : the second must not . In the first half @-@ line , both lifts can alliterate ; the stronger one must do so . He notes that these rules force the second half @-@ line to have its stronger lift first , so lines tend to fall away at the end , contrasting with a " rise in intensity " at the start of the next line . 
 = = = = = Function = = = = = 
 Tolkien states that " The main metrical function of alliteration is to link the two separate and balanced patterns together into a complete line " , so it has to be as early in the second half @-@ line as possible . It also quickens and relieves heavy patterns ( which had double alliteration ) . 
 Rhyme is used only " gratuitously , and for special effects . " Here he gives an example from Beowulf itself , lines 212 @-@ 213 : ' <unk> <unk> | | <unk> <unk> <unk> ' ( waves wound | | sea against sand ) , where ' <unk> ' actually rhymes ( internally ) with ' <unk> ' . Tolkien explains : " [ here ] the special effect ( breakers are beating on the shore ) may be regarded as deliberate . " His version of this captures the rhyme and the alliteration , as well as the meaning : 
 Tolkien ends the essay with an analysis of lines 210 @-@ 228 of Beowulf , providing the original text , marked up with stresses and his metrical patterns for each half @-@ line , as well as a literal translation with poetical words underlined . He notes that there are three words for boat and for wave , five for men , four for sea : in each case some are poetical , some normal . 
 He also notes that sentences generally stop in the middle of a line , so " sense @-@ break and metrical break are usually opposed . " He notes too that significant elements in second half @-@ lines are often " caught up and re @-@ echoed or elaborated " , giving a characteristic ' parallelism ' to Beowulf . This is seen , he argues , not just in such small details , but in the parallel arrangement of narrative , descriptive and speech passages ; in the use of separate passages describing incidents of strife between Swedes and Geats ; and at the largest scale , in the fact that the whole poem 
 itself is like a line of its own verse written large , a balance of two great blocks , A + B ; or like two of its parallel sentences with a single subject but no expressed conjunction . Youth + Age ; he rose – fell . It may not be , at large or in detail , fluid or musical , but it is strong to stand : tough builder 's work of true stone . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Mark F. Hall , examining Tolkien 's own use of alliterative verse , writes that Tolkien notes that " the Beowulf poet likely was consciously using archaic and literary words " , and compares this to Tolkien 's own practice in poems such as " The Lay of the Children of Húrin " , where , Hall thinks , Tolkien 's words could be applied to his own verse : " Its manner and conventions , and its metre , are unlike those of modern English verse . Also it is preserved fragmentarily and by chance , and has only in recent times been <unk> and interpreted , without the aid of any tradition or gloss " . Hall further comments that in ' Lays of Beleriand ' , Tolkien failed to heed his own warning against archaism , as he uses the word " weird " archaically to mean ' fate ' ( OE ' wyrd ' ) , and speculates that this may have been a reaction against the " rigidity and formality of translating authentic Anglo @-@ Saxon literature . " 
 The Green Man Review comments that Tolkien 's " emphasis as a translator was on selecting the word that best fit the tone of the poem . He defends the Beowulf poet 's use of high sounding language that was anachronistic even in [ the poet 's ] time . He also uses the works of earlier translators of Beowulf to give hilarious examples of what to avoid when translating an ancient text . " The reviewer concludes that together with " The Monsters and the Critics " , the essays are " strangely prescient . With a little tweaking , they could easily serve as a defense of The Lord of the Rings against charges that its high sounding language was at variance with the ' juvenile ' plot . " 
 The fantasy and science fiction author Alexa Chipman writes that while Tolkien was " firmly against any prose translation of Beowulf , as it is , at heart , a poem " , he agreed that " if one is trying to read the original , having a translation of it handy can sometimes be of assistance " . She recalls her own Beowulf studies with " a huge stack of dictionary and grammar books " , and draws attention to Tolkien 's comment that " Perhaps the most important function of any translation used by a student is to provide not a model for imitation , but an exercise for correction . " 
 The same comment , on the function of any translation , is cited by Hugh Magennis in his book Translating Beowulf : Modern Versions in English Verse , along with Tolkien 's opening remark that translating a poem into " plain prose " , " a work of skilled and close @-@ wrought metre ( to say no more ) needs defence . " Magennis writes that Tolkien " goes on to provide such a defence " by insisting that " Clark Hall " was offered not to enable people to judge the original poem or to substitute for it , but " to provide an aid to study . " He also cites Tolkien 's insistence that " the Modern English of prose Beowulf translations should be ' harmonious ' and should avoid ' colloquialism and false modernity ' . " Magennis argues that 
 This conviction provides the rationale for an elevated register incorporating archaizing features , such as he finds in Wrenn 's ' Clark Hall ' : ' If you wish to translate , not rewrite Beowulf ' , declares Tolkien , ' your language must be literary and traditional : not because it is now a long while since the poem was made , or because it speaks of things that have since become ancient ; but because the diction of Beowulf was poetical , archaic , artificial ( if you will ) , in the day that the poem was made . ' Here Tolkien does argue for literary correspondence between source and translation : the translation is doing more than conveying ( to revert to an earlier quotation from Tolkien ) ' the matter of the poem , and furnishing the professional student with the material and guidance necessary for the early stages of his study of the original ' ; it is doing so in an appropriate style that suggests qualities of the Old English . 
 The academic Philip Mitchell comments that " The entire essay is worth serious study " and notes that among other points made by Tolkien , " Anglo @-@ Saxon verse is not attempting to offer puzzles but an aesthetic of compression in a slow meter of balance . " 
 In his thesis , Peter <unk> writes that Tolkien is preoccupied with " structural juxtapositions " in " Beowulf : The Monsters and the Critics " and " On Translating Beowulf " . In these essays , <unk> argues , Tolkien talks about concepts of balance and opposition , and indeed ends the essay on translation with a synecdoche , a " structural vision of the whole capable of being glimpsed in the smallest part " in the passage ( quoted above ) where Tolkien talks about the " two great blocks , A + B " . He points out that Tolkien makes use of the concept in the composition of his fictional work The Lord of the Rings . 
 The translator Ross Smith comments that while Tolkien was cautious about publishing his translations of Beowulf , " he was quite willing to explain the approach that in his opinion should be taken towards such a monolithic task . " Smith points out that , unlike publishing a prose or verse translation , explaining his translation criteria did not expose Tolkien to aesthetic criticism . Smith remarks that Tolkien is " somewhat disdainful " of Clark Hall 's version , such things being useful as study @-@ guides and little else ; putting Old English poetry into modern English prose inevitably creates something " dull and flat " , so Tolkien much prefers versions that try to preserve the original 's rhyme and metre . Smith notes that the same opinion can be found in Tolkien 's essay " Sir Gawain and the Green Knight " . 
 = United States v. Washington = 
 United States v. Washington , 384 F. Supp . 312 ( W.D. Wash . 1974 ) , aff 'd , 520 F.2d 676 ( 9th Cir . 1975 ) , commonly known as the Boldt Decision ( from the name of the trial court judge , George Hugo Boldt ) , was a 1974 case heard in the United States District Court for the Western District of Washington and the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit . It reaffirmed the reserved right of American Indian tribes in the State of Washington to act alongside the state as co @-@ managers of salmon and other fish , and to continue harvesting them in accordance with the various treaties that the United States had signed with the tribes . The tribes of Washington had ceded their land to the United States but had reserved the right to fish as they had always done , including fishing at their traditional locations that were off the designated reservations . 
 Over time , the state of Washington had infringed on the treaty rights of the tribes despite losing a series of court cases on the issue . Those cases provided the Indians a right of access through private property to their fishing locations , and said that the state could neither charge Indians a fee to fish nor discriminate against the tribes in the method of fishing allowed . Those cases also provided for the Indians ' rights to a fair and equitable share of the harvest . The Boldt decision further defined that reserved right , holding that the tribes were entitled to half the fish harvest each year . 
 In 1975 the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals upheld Judge Boldt 's ruling . The U.S. Supreme Court declined to hear the case . After the state refused to enforce the court order , Judge Boldt ordered the United States Coast Guard and federal law enforcement agencies to enforce his rulings . On July 2 , 1979 , the Supreme Court rejected a collateral attack on the case , largely endorsing Judge Boldt 's ruling and the opinion of the Ninth Circuit . In Washington v. Washington State Commercial Passenger Fishing Vessel Ass 'n , Justice John Paul Stevens wrote that " [ b ] oth sides have a right , secured by treaty , to take a fair share of the available fish . " The Supreme Court also endorsed Boldt 's orders to enforce his rulings by the use of federal law enforcement assets and the Coast Guard . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = History of tribal fishing = = = 
 The American Indians of the Pacific Northwest had long depended on the salmon harvest , a resource which allowed them to become the wealthiest North American tribes . The salmon harvest for the Columbia River basin was estimated at 43 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 pounds ( 20 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 kg ) annually , which not only provided sufficient salmon for the tribes ' needs , but also enough to trade with others . By the 1840s , tribes were trading salmon to the Hudson Bay Company which shipped the fish to New York , Great Britain , and other locations around the world . 
 = = = Treaties = = = 
 In the 1850s , the United States government entered into a series of treaties with the American Indian tribes of the Pacific Northwest . In the Treaty of Olympia , territorial governor Isaac I. Stevens agreed that the tribes had rights including : 
