 " The right of taking fish at all usual and accustomed grounds and stations is secured to said Indians in common with all citizens of the Territory , and of erecting temporary houses for the purpose of curing the same ; together with the privilege of hunting , gathering roots and berries , and pasturing their horses on all open and unclaimed lands . Provided , however , That they shall not take shell @-@ fish from any beds staked or cultivated by citizens ; and provided , also , that they shall alter all stallions not intended for breeding , and keep up and confine the stallions themselves . " 
 Other agreements with area tribes included the treaties of Medicine Creek , Point Elliott , Neah Bay , and Point No Point . All of these had similar language on the rights of the Indians to fish outside the reservation . While the tribes agreed to part with their land , they insisted on protecting their fishing rights throughout the Washington territory . 
 = = = Post @-@ treaty history = = = 
 Initially , the federal government honored its treaties with the tribes , but with increasing numbers of white settlers moving into the area , the settlers began to infringe upon the fishing rights of the native tribes . By 1883 , whites had established more than forty salmon canneries . In 1894 , there were three canneries in the Puget Sound area ; by 1905 there were twenty @-@ four . The whites also began to use new techniques that prevented a significant portion of the salmon from reaching the tribal fishing areas . When Washington Territory became a state in 1889 , the legislature passed " laws to curtail tribal fishing in the name of ' conservation ' but what some scholars described as being designed to protect white fisheries " . The state legislature , by 1897 , had banned the use of weirs , which were customarily used by Indians . The tribes turned to the courts for enforcement of their rights under the treaties . 
 = = = = United States v. Taylor = = = = 
 In one of the earliest of these enforcement cases , decided in 1887 , the United States Indian Agent and several members of the Yakima tribe filed suit in territorial court to enforce their right of access to off @-@ reservation fishing locations . Frank Taylor , a non @-@ Indian settler , had obtained land from the United States and had fenced off the land , preventing access by the Yakima to their traditional fishing locations . Although the trial court ruled in Taylor 's favor , the Supreme Court of the Territory of Washington reversed and held that the tribe had reserved its own rights to fish , thereby creating an easement or an equitable servitude of the land that was not extinguished when Taylor obtained title . 
 = = = = United States v. Winans = = = = 
 Within ten years , another case arose , which dealt with fishing rights at Celilo Falls , a traditional Indian fishing location . Two brothers , <unk> and Audubon Winans , owned property on both sides of the Columbia River and obtained licenses from the state of Washington to operate four fish wheels . The wheels prevented a significant number of salmon from passing the location . Additionally , the Winans prohibited anyone , whether an Indian with treaty rights or otherwise , from crossing their land to get to the falls . 
 The United States Attorney for Washington then filed a suit to enforce the treaty rights of the tribe . The trial court held that the property rights of the Winans allowed them to exclude others from the property , including the Indians . In 1905 , the United States Supreme Court reversed that decision , holding that the tribe had reserved fishing rights when they ceded the property to the United States . Since the tribes had the right to fish reserved in the treaties , the federal government and subsequent owners had no greater property rights than were granted by the treaties . 
 = = = = <unk> Bros. Co. v. United States = = = = 
 In 1914 , the United States sued again , this time against the <unk> Brothers Company which had prevented Yakima Indians including Sam Williams from fishing on the Oregon side of the Columbia River near the Celilo Falls . After the United States sued on behalf of Williams , the United States District Court in Oregon issued an injunction which the Supreme Court affirmed , again holding that the treaties created a servitude that ran with the land . This decision was significant in that it expanded the hunting and fishing rights outside the territory ceded by the tribes when it was shown that the tribe used the area for hunting and fishing . 
 = = = State attempts to regulate Indian fishing = = = 
 = = = = Tulee v. Washington = = = = 
 In Tulee v. Washington , the United States Supreme Court once again ruled on the treaty rights of the Yakima tribe . In 1939 , Sampson Tulee , a Yakima , was arrested for fishing without a state fishing license . The United States government immediately filed for a writ of habeas corpus on Tulee 's behalf , which was denied on procedural grounds because he had not yet been tried in state court and had not exhausted his appeals . Tulee was convicted in state court , which was upheld by the Washington Supreme Court on the grounds that the state 's sovereignty allowed it to impose a fee on Indians who were fishing outside the reservation . The United States Supreme Court reversed , stating " we are of the opinion that the state is without power to charge the <unk> a fee for fishing " . 
 = = = = The Puyallup cases = = = = 
 Following the Tulee decision , there were three United States Supreme Court decisions involving the Puyallup tribe . The first was Puyallup Tribe v. Department of Game of Washington , ( Puyallup I ) which involved a state ban on the use of nets to catch steelhead trout and salmon . Despite the ban , the tribes continued to use nets based on their treaty rights . Justice William Douglas delivered the opinion of the Court which said that the treaty did not prevent state regulations that were reasonable and necessary under a fish conservation scheme , provided the regulation was not discriminatory . 
 After being remanded to determine if the regulations were not discriminatory , the case returned to the United States Supreme Court in Department of Game of Washington v. Puyallup Tribe ( <unk> II ) . Again , Justice Douglas wrote the opinion for the Court , but this time he struck down the state restrictions as discriminatory . Douglas noted that the restrictions for catching steelhead trout with nets had remained , and was a method used only by the Indians , whereas hook and line fishing was allowed but was used only by non @-@ Indians . As such , the effect of the regulation allocated all of the steelhead trout fishing to sport anglers , and none to the tribes . 
 The third case , Puyallup Tribe , Inc. v. Department of Game of Washington ( Puyallup III ) , was decided in 1977 . Members of the Puyallup Tribe filed suit , arguing that under the doctrine of sovereign immunity , Washington state courts lacked jurisdiction to regulate fishing activities on tribal reservations . Writing for a majority of the Court , Justice John Paul Stevens held that , despite the tribe 's sovereign immunity , the state could regulate the harvest of steelhead trout in the portion of the river that ran through the Puyallup Reservation as long as the state could base its decision and apportionment on conservation grounds . 
 = = = = The Belloni decision = = = = 
 One year after the Puyallup I decision , Judge Robert C. Belloni issued an order in <unk> v. Smith , a treaty fishing case involving the Yakima tribe and the state of Oregon . In this case , Oregon had discriminated against the Indians in favor of sports and commercial fishermen , allocating almost nothing to the tribes at the headwaters of the river . Oregon argued that the treaties only gave the Indians the same rights as every other citizen , and Belloni noted that " [ s ] uch a reading would not seem unreasonable if all history , anthropology , biology , prior case law and the intention of the parties to the treaty were to be ignored " . Belloni also found that : 
 The state may regulate fishing by non @-@ Indians to achieve a wide variety of management or " conservation " objectives . Its selection of regulations to achieve these objectives is limited only by its own organic law and the standards of reasonableness required by the Fourteenth Amendment . But when it is regulating the federal right of Indians to take fish at their usual and accustomed places it does not have the same latitude in prescribing the management objectives and the regulatory means of achieving them . The state may not qualify the federal right by subordinating it to some other state objective or policy . It may use its police power only to the extent necessary to prevent the exercise of that right in a manner that will imperil the continued existence of the fish resource . 
 Belloni issued a final ruling that the tribes were entitled to a fair and equitable portion of the fish harvest . The court retained continuing jurisdiction , and his order was not appealed . 
 = = U.S. District Court ( Boldt decision ) = = 
 = = = Issue = = = 
 Although the Belloni decision established the rights of the Indians to exercise their treaty fishing rights , the states of Oregon and Washington continued to arrest Indians for violations of state law and regulations that infringed on those rights . In September 1970 , the United States Attorney filed an action in the United States District Court for the Western District of Washington alleging that the state of Washington had infringed on the treaty rights of the Hoh , Makah , <unk> , Nisqually , Puyallup , Quileute , and <unk> tribes . Later , the Lummi , Quinault , Sauk @-@ Suiattle , <unk> Island , Stillaguamish , Upper Skagit , and Yakima tribes intervened in the case . Defendants were the state of Washington , the Washington Department of Fisheries , the Washington Game Commission , and the Washington Reef Net Owners Association . 
 = = = Trial = = = 
 The first phase of the case took three years , mainly in preparation for trial . During the trial , Boldt heard testimony from about fifty witnesses and admitted 350 exhibits . The evidence showed that the state had shut down many sites used by Indians for net fishing while allowing commercial net fishing elsewhere on the same run . At most , the tribes took only about two percent ( 2 % ) of the total harvest . There was no evidence presented by the state that showed any detrimental actions by Indians toward the harvest . Both expert testimony and cultural testimony was presented , with tribal members relating the oral history dealing with the treaties and fishing rights . Additionally , Boldt found that the tribe 's witnesses were more credible than those of the state , finding that the tribe 's expert witnesses were " exceptionally well researched " . 
 = = = Holding = = = 
 The court held that , when the tribes conveyed millions of acres of land in Washington State through a series of treaties signed in 1854 and 1855 , they reserved the right to continue fishing . The court looked at the minutes of the treaty negotiations to interpret the meaning of the treaty language " in common with " as the United States described it to the Tribes , holding that the United States intended for there to be an equal sharing of the fish resource between the Tribes and the settlers . As the court stated , the phrase means " sharing equally the opportunity to take fish ... therefore , <unk> fishermen shall have the opportunity to take up to 50 % of the harvestable number of fish ... and treaty right fishermen shall have the opportunity to take up to the same percentage " . The formula used by Boldt gave the tribes forty @-@ three percent ( 43 % ) of the Puget Sound harvest , which was equivalent to eighteen percent ( 18 % ) of the statewide harvest . The order required the state to limit the amount of fish taken by non @-@ Indian commercial fishermen , causing a drop in their income from about $ 15 @,@ 000 – 20 @,@ 000 to $ 500 @-@ 2 @,@ 000 . 
 Furthermore , the court also held the state could regulate the Indians ' exercise of their treaty rights , but only to ensure the " perpetuation of a run or of a species of fish " . To regulate the Indians , the state must be able to show that conservation could not be achieved by regulating only the non @-@ Indians , must not discriminate against the Indians , and must use appropriate due process . 
 = = Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals = = 
 = = = Opinion of the court = = = 
 After the District Court issued its ruling , both sides submitted appeals to the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit . Washington argued that the district court had no power to invalidate state fishing regulations , while the tribes argued " the state may not regulate their fishing activities at treaty locations for any reason " . Writing for a majority of the court , Circuit Court Judge Herbert Choy affirmed Judge Boldt 's opinion " in all respects " , but clarified that Judge Boldt 's " equitable apportionment " of harvestable fish did not apply to " fish caught by non @-@ Washington citizens outside the state 's jurisdiction " . 
 In his majority opinion , Judge Choy emphasized that states may not enact regulations that are " in conflict with treaties in force between the United States and the Indian nations " . Consequently , he concluded that the treaties signed in the 1850s expressly preempted Washington 's regulations and that non @-@ Indians had " only a limited right to fish at treaty places . " Judge Choy also emphasized that the tribes were " entitled to an equitable apportionment of the opportunity to fish in order to safeguard their federal treaty rights " and that the Ninth Circuit should grant the district court a " great amount of discretion as a court of equity " when apportioning rights to fisheries . He held that the district court 's apportionment " was well within its discretion " , but clarified that tribes were not entitled to compensation for " unanticipated heavy fishing " that occurred off Washington 's coast . Judge Choy also clarified that the district court 's equitable remedy should attempt to minimize hardships for white reef net fishermen . 
 = = = Concurrence = = = 
 District court judge James M. Burns , sitting by designation , wrote a separate concurring opinion in which he criticized the " recalcitrance of Washington State officials " in their management of the state 's fisheries . Judge Burns argued that Washington 's recalcitrance forced Judge Boldt to act as " perpetual <unk> " and noted that he " deplore [ d ] " situations in which district court judges are forced to act as " enduring managers of the fisheries , forests , and highways " . In his concluding remarks , Judge Burns argued that Washington 's responsibility to manage its natural resources " should neither escape notice nor be forgotten . " 
 = = = Certiorari denied = = = 
 After the Ninth Circuit issued its ruling in the direct appeal , the case was remanded to the district court for further proceedings . Washington submitted an appeal to the Supreme Court of the United States , but the Supreme Court denied the state 's petition for certiorari and subsequent petition for rehearing . Despite these rulings , the parties in the original case continued to litigate issues relating to apportionment of the fisheries and subsequent rulings have been issued as recently as May 2015 . 
 = = Subsequent developments = = 
 = = = Legal = = = 
 = = = = Collateral attacks = = = = 
 After Boldt 's decision , the Washington Department of Fisheries issued new regulations in compliance with the decision . The Puget Sound <unk> Association and the Washington State Commercial Passenger Fishing Vessel Association both filed lawsuits in state court to block the new regulations . These private concerns won at both the trial court and at the Washington Supreme Court . Washington Attorney General Slade Gorton , representing the state of Washington , supported the position of the private concerns and opposed the position of the United States and the tribes . The United States Supreme Court granted certiorari and vacated the decision of the Washington Supreme Court . 
 Justice John Paul Stevens announced the decision of the Court , which upheld Judge Boldt 's order and overturned the rulings of the state courts . Stevens made it explicitly clear that Boldt could issue the orders he did , stating " [ t ] he federal court unquestionably has the power to enter the various orders that state official and private parties have chosen to ignore , and even to displace local enforcement of those orders if necessary to remedy the violations of federal law found by the court . " 
 = = = = Court supervision = = = = 
 When the state would not enforce his order to reduce the catch of non @-@ Indian commercial fishermen , Boldt took direct action , placing the matter under federal supervision . The United States Coast Guard and the National Marine Fisheries Service were ordered to enforce the ruling and soon had boats in the water confronting violators . Some of the protesters rammed Coast Guard boats and at least one member of the Coast Guard was shot . Those whom the officers caught breaking the court 's orders were taken before federal magistrates and fined for contempt , and the illegal fishing as a protest stopped . The United States District Court continued to exercise jurisdiction over the matter , determining traditional fishing locations and compiling major orders of the court . 
 = = = = Phase II = = = = 
 The case continued to have issues brought up before the district court . In what became known as " Phase II " , District Judge William H. Orrick , Jr. heard the issues presented by the United States on behalf of the tribes . Following the hearing , Orrick enjoined the state of Washington from damaging the fishes ' habitat , and included hatchery @-@ raised fish in the allocation to Indians . The state of Washington appealed the decision to the Ninth Circuit , which affirmed in part and reversed in part , allowing the hatchery fish to remain in the allocation , but leaving the habitat issue open . 
 = = = = Culvert case <unk> = = = = 
 In 2001 , twenty @-@ one northwest Washington tribes , joined by the United States filed a Request for Determination in U.S. District Court , asking the court to find that the State of Washington has a treaty @-@ based duty to preserve fish runs and habitat sufficiently for the tribes to earn a “ moderate living , ” and sought to compel the state to repair or replace culverts that impede salmon migration . On August 22 , 2007 , the district court issued a summary judgment order , holding that while culverts impeding <unk> fish migration are not the only factor diminishing their upstream habitat , in building and maintaining culverts that impede salmon migration , Washington State had diminished the size of salmon runs within the case area and thereby violated its obligation under the Stevens Treaties . On March 29 , 2013 , the court issued an injunction ordering the state to significantly increase the effort for removing state @-@ owned culverts that block habitat for salmon and steelhead , and to replace the state @-@ owned culverts that have the greatest adverse impact on the habitat of <unk> fish by 2030 . 
 The State of Washington appealed the district court ’ s decision to the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals . On June 27 , 2016 , a three judge panel of the Ninth Circuit affirmed the district court ’ s decision and upheld the injunction . Washington State has estimated it will need to fix an average of 30 to 40 culverts a year to comply with the injunction . 
 = = = Public response = = = 
 Scholars consider the Boldt decision to be a landmark case in American Indian law , in the area of cooperative management of resources , for Indian treaty rights , internationally for aboriginal treaty rights , and tribal civil rights . 
 The decision caused an immediate negative reaction from some citizens of Washington . Bumper stickers reading " Can Judge Boldt , Not Salmon " appeared , and Boldt was hung in effigy at the federal courthouse . Non @-@ Indian commercial fishermen ignored the ruling and the state was reluctant ( or at times refused ) to enforce the law . By 1978 , Congressman John E. Cunningham tried to get a bill passed to abrogate the treaties , to break up Indian holdings , and stop giving the tribes " special consideration " , but the effort failed . In 1984 , Washington voters passed an initiative ending " special rights " for Indians , but the state refused to enforce it as being preempted by federal law . 
 United States v. Washington was a landmark case in terms of Native American civil rights and evoked strong emotions . According to former U.S. Representative Lloyd <unk> of Everett , " the fishing issue was to Washington state what busing was to the East " for African Americans during the Civil Rights Movement . 
 = = = Tribal developments = = = 
 The tribes involved benefited greatly from the decision . Prior to Boldt 's ruling , Indians collected less than five percent ( 5 % ) of the harvest , but by 1984 , they were collecting forty @-@ nine percent ( 49 % ) . Tribal members became successful commercial fishermen , even expanding to marine fishing as far away as Alaska . The tribes became co @-@ managers of the fisheries along with the state , hiring fish biologists and staff to carry out those duties . The Makah tribe , based on the terms of the Neah Bay Treaty and the Boldt decision , took their first California gray whale in over seventy years in 1999 . Following a lawsuit by various animal rights activists , the tribe was allocated the right to take up to five whales a year for the 2001 and 2002 seasons . 
 = Kurt Vonnegut = 
 Kurt Vonnegut Jr . ( / <unk> / ; November 11 , 1922 – April 11 , 2007 ) was an American author . In a career spanning over 50 years , Vonnegut published fourteen novels , three short story collections , five plays , and five works of non @-@ fiction . He is most famous for his darkly satirical , best @-@ selling novel Slaughterhouse @-@ Five ( 1969 ) . 
 Born and raised in Indianapolis , Indiana , Vonnegut attended Cornell University , but dropped out in January 1943 and enlisted in the United States Army . He was deployed to Europe to fight in World War II , and was captured by the Germans during the Battle of the Bulge . He was interned in Dresden and survived the Allied bombing of the city by taking refuge in a meat locker of the slaughterhouse where he was imprisoned . After the war , Vonnegut married Jane Marie Cox , with whom he had three children . He later adopted his sister 's three sons , after she died of cancer and her husband died in a train accident . 
 Vonnegut published his first novel , Player Piano , in 1952 . The novel was reviewed positively , but was not commercially successful . In the nearly twenty years that followed , Vonnegut published several novels that were only marginally successful , such as Cat 's Cradle ( 1963 ) and God Bless You , Mr. Rosewater ( 1964 ) . Vonnegut 's magnum opus , however , was his immediately successful sixth novel , Slaughterhouse @-@ Five . The book 's antiwar sentiment resonated with its readers amidst the ongoing Vietnam War , and its reviews were generally positive . After its release , Slaughterhouse @-@ Five went to the top of The New York Times Best Seller list , thrusting Vonnegut into fame . He was invited to give speeches , lectures , and commencement addresses around the country and received many awards and honors . 
 Later in his career , Vonnegut published several autobiographical essays and short @-@ story collections , including Fates Worse Than Death ( 1991 ) , and A Man Without a Country ( 2005 ) . After his death , he was hailed as a morbidly comical commentator on the society in which he lived , and as one of the most important contemporary writers . Vonnegut 's son Mark published a compilation of his father 's unpublished compositions , titled Armageddon in Retrospect . Numerous scholarly works have examined Vonnegut 's writing and humor . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Family and early life = = = 
 Kurt Vonnegut Jr. was born on November 11 , 1922 in Indianapolis , Indiana . He was the youngest of three children of Kurt Vonnegut Sr. and his wife Edith ( née Lieber ) . His older siblings were Bernard ( born 1914 ) and Alice ( born 1917 ) . Vonnegut was descended from German immigrants who settled in the United States in the mid @-@ 19th century ; his patrilineal great @-@ grandfather , Clemens Vonnegut of Westphalia , Germany , settled in Indianapolis and founded the Vonnegut Hardware Company . Kurt 's father , and his father before him , Bernard , were architects ; the architecture firm under Kurt Sr. designed such buildings as Das Deutsche Haus ( now called " The Athenæum " ) , the Indiana headquarters of the Bell Telephone Company , and the Fletcher Trust Building . Vonnegut 's mother was born into Indianapolis high society , as her family , the <unk> , were among the wealthiest in the city , their fortune derived from ownership of a successful brewery . 
 Although both of Vonnegut 's parents were fluent German speakers , the ill feeling toward that country during and after World War I caused the <unk> to abandon the culture to show their American patriotism . Thus , they never taught their youngest son German or introduced him to German literature and tradition , leaving him feeling " ignorant and rootless " . Vonnegut later credited Ida Young , his family 's African @-@ American cook and housekeeper for the first ten years of his life , for raising him and giving him values . " [ She ] gave me decent moral instruction and was exceedingly nice to me . So she was as great an influence on me as anybody . " Vonnegut described Young as " humane and wise " , adding that " the compassionate , forgiving aspects of [ his ] beliefs " came from her . 
 The financial security and social prosperity that the <unk> once enjoyed were destroyed in a matter of years . The <unk> 's brewery was closed in 1921 after the advent of Prohibition in the United States . When the Great Depression hit , few people could afford to build , causing clients at Kurt Sr. ' s architectural firm to become scarce . Vonnegut 's brother and sister had finished their primary and secondary educations in private schools , but Vonnegut was placed in a public school , called Public School No. 43 , now known as the James Whitcomb Riley School . He was not bothered by this , but both his parents were affected deeply by their economic misfortune . His father withdrew from normal life and became what Vonnegut called a " dreamy artist " . His mother became depressed , withdrawn , bitter , and abusive . She labored to regain the family 's wealth and status , and Vonnegut said she expressed hatred " as corrosive as hydrochloric acid " for her husband . Edith Vonnegut forayed into writing and tried to sell short stories to magazines like Collier 's and The Saturday Evening Post with no success . 
 = = = High school and Cornell = = = 
 Vonnegut enrolled at Shortridge High School in Indianapolis in 1936 . While there , he played clarinet in the school band and became an editor for the Tuesday edition of the school newspaper , The Shortridge Echo . Vonnegut said his tenure with the Echo allowed him to write for a large audience — his fellow students — rather than for a teacher , an experience he said was " fun and easy " . " It just turned out that I could write better than a lot of other people " , Vonnegut observed . " Each person has something he can do easily and can 't imagine why everybody else has so much trouble doing it . " For him , that was writing . 
 After graduating from Shortridge in 1940 , Vonnegut enrolled at Cornell University in Ithaca , New York . He wanted to study the humanities or become an architect like his father , but his father and brother , a scientist , urged him to study a " useful " discipline . As a result , Vonnegut majored in biochemistry , but he had little proficiency in the area and was indifferent towards his studies . As his father had been a member at MIT , Vonnegut was entitled to join the Delta Upsilon fraternity , and did . He overcame stiff competition for a place at the university 's independent newspaper , The Cornell Daily Sun , first serving as a staff writer , then as an editor . By the end of his freshman year , he was writing a column titled " Innocents Abroad " which reused jokes from other publications . He later penned a piece , " Well All Right " , focusing on pacifism , a cause he strongly supported , arguing against U.S. intervention in World War II . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 The attack on Pearl Harbor brought the U.S. into the war . Vonnegut was a member of Reserve Officers ' Training Corps , but poor grades and a satirical article in Cornell 's newspaper cost him his place there . He was placed on academic probation in May 1942 and dropped out the following January . No longer eligible for a student deferment , he faced likely conscription into United States Army . Instead of waiting to be drafted , he enlisted in the army and in March 1943 reported to Fort Bragg , North Carolina , for basic training . Vonnegut was trained to fire and maintain howitzers , a type of artillery , and later received instruction in mechanical engineering at the Carnegie Institute of Technology and the University of Tennessee as part of the Army Specialized Training Program ( ASTP ) . In early 1944 , the ASTP was canceled due to the Army 's need for soldiers to support the D @-@ Day invasion , and Vonnegut was ordered to an infantry battalion at Camp Atterbury , south of Indianapolis in Edinburgh , Indiana , where he trained as a scout . He lived so close to his home that he was " able to sleep in [ his ] own bedroom and use the family car on weekends " . On May 14 , 1944 , Vonnegut returned home on leave for Mother 's Day weekend to discover that his mother had committed suicide the previous night by overdosing on sleeping pills . 
 Three months following his mother 's suicide , Vonnegut was sent to Europe as an intelligence scout with the ill fated 106th Infantry Division . In December 1944 , he fought in the Battle of the Bulge , the final German offensive of the war . During the battle , the 106th Infantry Division , which had only recently reached the front and was assigned to a " quiet " sector due to its inexperience , was overrun by advancing German armored forces . The result was that over 500 members of the division were killed and over 6 @,@ 000 were captured . 
 On December 22 , Vonnegut was captured with about fifty other American soldiers . Vonnegut was taken by boxcar to a prison camp south of Dresden , in Saxony . During the journey , the Royal Air Force bombed the prisoner trains and killed about 150 men . Vonnegut was sent to Dresden , the " first fancy city [ he had ] ever seen " . He lived in a slaughterhouse when he got to the city , and worked in a factory that made malt syrup for pregnant women . Vonnegut recalled the sirens going off whenever another city was bombed . The Germans did not expect Dresden to get bombed , Vonnegut said . " There were very few air @-@ raid shelters in town and no war industries , just cigarette factories , hospitals , clarinet factories . " 
 On February 13 , 1945 , Dresden became the target of Allied forces . In the hours and days that followed , the Allies engaged in a fierce firebombing of the city . The offensive subsided on February 15 , leaving tens of thousands dead . Vonnegut marveled at the level of both the destruction in Dresden and the secrecy that attended it . He had survived by taking refuge in a meat locker three stories underground . " It was cool there , with cadavers hanging all around " , Vonnegut said . " When we came up the city was gone ... They burnt the whole damn town down . " Vonnegut and other American prisoners were put to work immediately after the bombing , excavating bodies from the rubble . He described the activity as a " terribly elaborate Easter @-@ egg hunt " . 
 The American prisoners of war were evacuated on foot to the border of Saxony and Czechoslovakia after General George S. Patton captured Leipzig . With the captives abandoned by their guards , Vonnegut reached a prisoner @-@ of @-@ war repatriation camp in Le Havre , France , before the end of May 1945 , with the aid of the Soviets . He returned to the United States and continued to serve in the Army , stationed at Fort Riley , Kansas , typing discharge papers for other soldiers . Soon after he was awarded a Purple Heart about which he remarked " I myself was awarded my country 's second @-@ lowest decoration , a Purple Heart for frost @-@ bite . " He was discharged from the U.S. Army and returned to Indianapolis . 
 = = = Marriage and early employment = = = 
 After he returned to the United States , 22 @-@ year @-@ old Vonnegut married Jane Marie Cox , his high school girlfriend and classmate since kindergarten , on September 1 , 1945 . The pair relocated to Chicago , where Vonnegut enrolled in the University of Chicago as a graduate anthropology student , courtesy of the G.I. Bill , and worked for the Chicago City News Bureau at night . Jane accepted a scholarship from the university to study Russian at a graduate level . Neither of them finished their degrees . Jane dropped out of the school after becoming pregnant with the couple 's first child , Mark ( born May 1947 ) , and after Kurt 's master 's thesis , which analyzed the Ghost Dance religious movement among Native Americans , was unanimously rejected , he left the university without his degree . 
 General Electric ( GE ) hired Vonnegut as a publicist for the company 's Schenectady , New York research laboratory . The job had required a college education , and , despite dropping out of his program , Vonnegut lied that he had a master 's in anthropology from the University of Chicago . Kurt 's brother Bernard had worked at GE since 1945 , contributing significantly to an iodine @-@ based cloud seeding project . In 1949 , Kurt and Jane had a daughter named Edith . Still working for GE , Vonnegut had his first piece , titled " Report on the Barnhouse Effect " , published in the February 11 , 1950 issue of Collier 's , for which he received $ 750 . Vonnegut wrote another story , after being coached by the fiction editor at Collier 's , Knox Burger , and again sold it to the magazine , this time for $ 950 . Burger suggested he quit GE , a course he had contemplated before . Vonnegut moved with his family to Cape Cod , Massachusetts to write full @-@ time , and left GE in 1951 . 
 = = = First novel = = = 
 On Cape Cod , Vonnegut made most of his money writing pieces for magazines such as Collier 's , The Saturday Evening Post , and Cosmopolitan . He also did a stint as an English teacher , wrote copy for an advertising agency , and opened the first American Saab dealership , which eventually failed . In 1952 , Vonnegut 's first novel , Player Piano , was published by Scribner 's . The novel has a post @-@ third world war setting , in which factory workers have been replaced by machines . 
 Player Piano draws upon Vonnegut 's experience as a young executive at GE . He satirizes the drive to climb the corporate ladder , one that in Player Piano is rapidly disappearing as automation increases , putting even executives out of work . His central character , Paul Proteus , has an ambitious wife , a backstabbing assistant , and a feeling of sympathy for the poor . Sent by his boss , Kroner , as a double agent among the poor ( who have all the material goods they want , but little sense of purpose ) , he leads them in a machine @-@ smashing , museum @-@ burning revolution . Player Piano expresses Vonnegut 's opposition to McCarthyism , something made clear when the Ghost Shirts , the revolutionary organization Paul penetrates and eventually leads , is referred to by one character as " fellow travelers " . 
 In Player Piano , Vonnegut originates many of the techniques he would use in his later works . The comic , heavy @-@ drinking Shah of <unk> , an outsider to this dystopian corporate United States , is able to ask many questions that an insider would not think to ask , or would cause offense by doing so . For example , when taken to see the artificially intelligent supercomputer <unk> , the Shah asks it " what are people for ? " and receives no answer . Speaking for Vonnegut , he dismisses it as a " false god " . This type of alien visitor would recur throughout Vonnegut 's literature . 
 The New York Times writer and critic Granville Hicks gave the novel a positive review , comparing it to Aldous Huxley 's Brave New World . Hicks called Vonnegut a " sharp @-@ eyed satirist " . None of the reviewers considered the novel particularly important . Several editions were printed — one by Bantam with the title Utopia 14 , and another by the Doubleday Science Fiction Book Club — whereby Vonnegut gained the repute of a science fiction writer , a genre held in disdain by writers at that time . He defended the genre , and deplored a perceived sentiment that " no one can simultaneously be a respectable writer and understand how a refrigerator works . " 
 = = = Struggling writer = = = 
 After Player Piano , Vonnegut continued to sell short stories to various magazines . In 1954 the couple had a third child , Nanette . With a growing family and no financially successful novels yet , Vonnegut 's short stories sustained the family . In 1958 , his sister , Alice , died of cancer two days after her husband , James <unk> Adams , was killed in a train accident . Vonnegut adopted Alice 's three young sons — James , Steven , and Kurt , aged fourteen , eleven , and nine respectively . 
 Grappling with family challenges , Vonnegut continued to write , publishing novels vastly dissimilar in terms of plot . The Sirens of Titan ( 1959 ) features a Martian invasion of Earth , as experienced by a bored billionaire , Malachi Constant . He meets Winston Rumfoord , an aristocratic space traveler , who is virtually omniscient but stuck in a time warp that allows him to appear on Earth every 59 days . The billionaire learns that his actions and the events of all of history are determined by a race of robotic aliens from the planet <unk> , who need a replacement part that can only be produced by an advanced civilization in order to repair their spaceship and return home — human history has been manipulated to produce it . Some human structures , such as the Kremlin , are coded signals from the aliens to their ship as to how long it may expect to wait for the repair to take place . Reviewers were uncertain what to think of the book , with one comparing it to Offenbach 's opera The Tales of Hoffmann . 
 Rumfoord , who is based on Franklin D. Roosevelt , also physically resembles the former president . Rumfoord is described , " he put a cigarette in a long , bone cigarette holder , lighted it . He thrust out his jaw . The cigarette holder pointed straight up . " William Rodney Allen , in his guide to Vonnegut 's works , stated that Rumfoord foreshadowed the fictional political figures who would play major roles in God Bless You , Mr. Rosewater and Jailbird . 
 Mother Night , published in 1961 , received little attention at the time of its publication . Howard W. Campbell Jr . , Vonnegut 's protagonist , is an American who goes to Nazi Germany during the war as a double agent for the U.S. Office of Strategic Services , and rises to the regime 's highest ranks as a radio propagandist . After the war , the spy agency refuses to clear his name and he is eventually imprisoned by the Israelis in the same cell block as Adolf Eichmann , and later commits suicide . Vonnegut wrote in a foreword to a later edition , " we are what we pretend to be , so we must be careful about what we pretend to be " . Literary critic Lawrence <unk> considered the novel , like Mark Twain 's Adventures of Huckleberry Finn , to illustrate the tendency for " impersonators to get carried away by their impersonations , to become what they impersonate and therefore to live in a world of illusion " . 
 Also published in 1961 was Vonnegut 's short story , " Harrison Bergeron " , set in a dystopic future where all are equal , even if that means disfiguring beautiful people and forcing the strong or intelligent to wear devices that negate their advantages . Fourteen @-@ year @-@ old Harrison is a genius and athlete forced to wear record @-@ level " handicaps " and imprisoned for attempting to overthrow the government . He escapes to a television studio , tears away his handicaps , and frees a ballerina from her lead weights . As they dance , they are killed by the Handicapper General , Diana Moon <unk> . Vonnegut , in a later letter , suggested that " Harrison Bergeron " might have sprung from his envy and self @-@ pity as a high school misfit . In his 1976 biography of Vonnegut , Stanley <unk> suggested that the short story shows " in any leveling process , what really is lost , according to Vonnegut , is beauty , grace , and wisdom " . Darryl <unk> , in his 1998 journal article on " Harrison Bergeron " , theorized that the story was a satire on American Cold War misunderstandings of communism and socialism . 
 With Cat 's Cradle ( 1963 ) , Allen wrote , " Vonnegut hit full stride for the first time " . The narrator , John , intends to write of Dr. Felix <unk> , one of the fictional fathers of the atomic bomb , seeking to cover the scientist 's human side . <unk> , in addition to the bomb , has developed another threat to mankind , ice @-@ 9 , solid water stable at room temperature , and if a particle of it is dropped in water , all of it becomes ice @-@ 9 . Much of the second half of the book is spent on the fictional Caribbean island of San Lorenzo , where John explores a religion called Bokononism , whose holy books ( excerpts from which are quoted ) , give the novel the moral core science does not supply . After the oceans are converted to ice @-@ 9 , wiping out most of humankind , John wanders the frozen surface , seeking to have himself and his story survive . 
 Vonnegut based the title character of God Bless You , Mr. Rosewater ( 1964 ) , on an accountant he knew on Cape Cod , who specialized in clients in trouble and often had to comfort them . Eliot Rosewater , the wealthy son of a Republican senator , seeks to atone for his wartime shooting of noncombatant firefighters by serving in a volunteer fire department , and by giving away money to those in trouble or need . Stress from a battle for control of his charitable foundation pushes him over the edge , and he is placed in a mental hospital by a dishonest lawyer . He recovers , and ends the financial battle by declaring the children of his county to be his heirs . Allen deemed God Bless You , Mr. Rosewater more " a cry from the heart than a novel under its author 's full intellectual control " , that reflected family and emotional stresses Vonnegut was going through at the time . 
 = = = Slaughterhouse @-@ Five = = = 
 After spending much of two years at the writer 's workshop at the University of Iowa , teaching one course each term , Vonnegut was awarded a Guggenheim Fellowship for research in Germany . By the time he won it , in March 1967 , he was becoming a well @-@ known writer . He used the funds to travel in Eastern Europe , including to Dresden , where he found many prominent buildings still in ruins . At the time of the bombing , Vonnegut had not appreciated the sheer scale of destruction in Dresden ; his enlightenment came only slowly as information dribbled out , and based on early figures came to believe that 135 @,@ 000 had died there . 
 Vonnegut had been writing about his war experiences at Dresden ever since he returned from the war , but had never been able to write anything acceptable to himself or his publishers — Chapter 1 of Slaughterhouse @-@ Five tells of his difficulties . Released in 1969 , the novel rocketed Vonnegut to fame . It tells of the life of Billy Pilgrim , who like Vonnegut was born in 1922 and survives the bombing of Dresden . The story is told in a non @-@ linear fashion , with many of the story 's climaxes — Billy 's death in 1976 , his kidnapping by aliens from the planet <unk> nine years earlier , and the execution of Billy 's friend Edgar Derby in the ashes of Dresden for stealing a teapot — disclosed in the story 's first pages . In 1970 , he was also a correspondent in Biafra during the Nigerian Civil War . Slaughterhouse @-@ Five received generally positive reviews , with Michael Crichton writing in The New Republic , " he writes about the most excruciatingly painful things . His novels have attacked our deepest fears of automation and the bomb , our deepest political guilts , our fiercest hatreds and loves . No one else writes books on these subjects ; they are inaccessible to normal novelists . " The book went immediately to the top of The New York Times Best Seller list . Vonnegut 's earlier works had appealed strongly to many college students , and the antiwar message of Slaughterhouse Five resonated with a generation marked by the Vietnam War . He later stated that the loss of confidence in government that Vietnam caused finally allowed for an honest conversation regarding events like Dresden . 
 = = = Later career and events = = = 
 After Slaughterhouse @-@ Five was published , Vonnegut embraced the fame and financial security that attended its release . He was hailed as a hero of the burgeoning anti @-@ war movement in the United States , was invited to speak at numerous rallies , and gave college commencement addresses around the country . In addition to lecturing on creative writing at Harvard University , Vonnegut taught at the City University of New York , where he was dubbed a Distinguished Professor of English Prose . He was later elected vice president of the National Institute of Arts and Letters , and given honorary degrees by , among others , Indiana University and Bennington College . Vonnegut also wrote a play called Happy Birthday , Wanda June , which opened on October 7 , 1970 at New York 's Theatre de Lys . Receiving mixed reviews , it closed on March 14 , 1971 . In 1972 , Universal Pictures adapted Slaughterhouse @-@ Five into a film which the author said was " flawless " . 
 Meanwhile , Vonnegut 's personal life was disintegrating . His wife Jane had embraced Christianity , which was contrary to Vonnegut 's atheistic beliefs , and with five of their six children having left home , Vonnegut said the two were forced to find " other sorts of seemingly important work to do . " The couple battled over their differing beliefs until Vonnegut moved from their Cape Cod home to New York in 1971 . Vonnegut called the disagreements " painful " , and said the resulting split was a " terrible , unavoidable accident that we were ill @-@ equipped to understand . " The couple divorced and they remained friends until Jane 's death in late 1986 . Beyond his marriage , he was deeply affected when his son Mark suffered a mental breakdown in 1972 , which exacerbated Vonnegut 's chronic depression , and led him to take Ritalin . When he stopped taking the drug in the mid @-@ 1970s , he began to see a psychologist weekly . 
 Vonnegut 's difficulties materialized in numerous ways ; most distinctly though , was the painfully slow progress he was making on his next novel , the darkly comical Breakfast of Champions . In 1971 , Vonnegut stopped writing the novel altogether . When it was finally released in 1973 , it was panned critically . In Thomas S. Hischak 's book American Literature on Stage and Screen , Breakfast of Champions was called " funny and outlandish " , but reviewers noted that it " lacks substance and seems to be an exercise in literary playfulness . " Vonnegut 's 1976 novel Slapstick , which meditates on the relationship between him and his sister ( Alice ) , met a similar fate . In The New York Times 's review of Slapstick , Christopher Lehmann @-@ Haupt said Vonnegut " seems to be putting less effort into [ storytelling ] than ever before " , and that " it still seems as if he has given up storytelling after all . " At times , Vonnegut was disgruntled by the personal nature of his detractors ' complaints . 
 In 1979 , Vonnegut married Jill <unk> , a photographer whom he met while she was working on a series about writers in the early 1970s . With Jill , he adopted a daughter , Lily , when the baby was three days old . In subsequent years , his popularity resurged as he published several satirical books , including Jailbird ( 1979 ) , Deadeye Dick ( 1982 ) , Galápagos ( 1985 ) , Bluebeard ( 1987 ) , and Hocus Pocus ( 1990 ) . In 1986 , Vonnegut was seen by a younger generation when he played himself in Rodney Dangerfield 's film Back to School . The last of Vonnegut 's fourteen novels , Timequake ( 1997 ) , was , as University of Detroit history professor and Vonnegut biographer Gregory Sumner said , " a reflection of an aging man facing mortality and testimony to an embattled faith in the resilience of human awareness and agency . " Vonnegut 's final book , a collection of essays entitled A Man Without a Country ( 2005 ) , became a best @-@ seller . 
 = = = Death and legacy = = = 
 In a 2006 Rolling Stone interview , Vonnegut sardonically stated that he would sue the Brown & Williamson tobacco company , the maker of the Pall Mall @-@ branded cigarettes he had been smoking since he was twelve or fourteen years old , for false advertising . " And do you know why ? " he said . " Because I 'm 83 years old . The lying bastards ! On the package Brown & Williamson promised to kill me . " He died on the night of April 11 , 2007 in Manhattan , as a result of brain injuries incurred several weeks prior from a fall at his New York brownstone home . His death was reported by his wife Jill . Vonnegut was 84 years old . At the time of his death , Vonnegut had written fourteen novels , three short story collections , five plays and five non @-@ fiction books . A book composed of Vonnegut 's unpublished pieces , Armageddon in Retrospect , was compiled and posthumously published by Vonnegut 's son Mark in 2008 . 
 When asked about the impact Vonnegut had on his work , author Josip <unk> stated that he has " much to learn from Vonnegut — how to compress things and yet not compromise them , how to <unk> into history , quote from various historical accounts , and not stifle the narrative . The ease with which he writes is sheerly masterly , Mozartian . " Los Angeles Times columnist Gregory Rodriguez said that the author will " rightly be remembered as a darkly humorous social critic and the premier novelist of the counterculture " , and The New York Times 's <unk> Smith dubbed Vonnegut the " counterculture 's novelist . " 
 Kurt Vonnegut has inspired numerous posthumous tributes and works . In 2008 , the Kurt Vonnegut Society was established , and in November 2010 , the Kurt Vonnegut Memorial Library was opened in Vonnegut 's hometown of Indianapolis . The Library of America published a compendium of Vonnegut 's compositions between 1963 and 1973 the following April , and another compendium of his earlier works in 2012 . Late 2011 saw the release of two Vonnegut biographies , Gregory Sumner 's <unk> in Time and Charles J. Shields 's And So It Goes . Shields 's biography of Vonnegut created some controversy . According to The Guardian , the book portrays Vonnegut as distant , cruel and nasty . " Cruel , nasty and scary are the adjectives commonly used to describe him by the friends , colleagues , and relatives Shields quotes " , said The Daily Beast 's Wendy Smith . " Towards the end he was very feeble , very depressed and almost morose " , said Jerome <unk> of the University of Northern Iowa , who has examined Vonnegut in depth . 
 Vonnegut 's works have evoked ire on several occasions . His most prominent novel , Slaughterhouse @-@ Five , has been objected to or removed at various institutions in at least eighteen instances . In the case of Island Trees School District v. Pico , the United States Supreme Court ruled that a school district 's ban on Slaughterhouse @-@ Five — which the board had called " anti @-@ American , anti @-@ Christian , anti @-@ Semitic , and just plain filthy " — and eight other novels was unconstitutional . When a school board in Republic , Missouri decided to withdraw Vonnegut 's novel from its libraries , the Kurt Vonnegut Memorial Library offered a free copy to all the students of the district . 
 Tally , writing in 2013 , suggests that Vonnegut has only recently become the subject of serious study rather than fan adulation , and much is yet to be written about him . " The time for scholars to say ' Here 's why Vonnegut is worth reading ' has definitively ended , thank goodness . We know he 's worth reading . Now tell us things we don 't know . " Todd F. Davis notes that Vonnegut 's work is kept alive by his loyal readers , who have " significant influence as they continue to purchase Vonnegut 's work , passing it on to subsequent generations and keeping his entire canon in print — an impressive list of more than twenty books that [ Dell Publishing ] has continued to refurbish and hawk with new cover designs . " Donald E. Morse notes that Vonnegut , " is now firmly , if somewhat controversially , ensconced in the American and world literary canon as well as in high school , college and graduate curricula " . Tally writes of Vonnegut 's work : 
 Vonnegut 's 14 novels , while each does its own thing , together are nevertheless experiments in the same overall project . Experimenting with the form of the American novel itself , Vonnegut engages in a broadly modernist attempt to apprehend and depict the fragmented , unstable , and distressing <unk> of postmodern American experience ... That he does not actually succeed in representing the shifting <unk> of that social experience is beside the point . What matters is the attempt , and the recognition that ... we must try to map this unstable and perilous terrain , even if we know in advance that our efforts are doomed . 
 The Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame inducted Vonnegut posthumously in 2015 . 
 = = Views = = 
 = = = War = = = 
 In 2011 , NPR wrote , " Kurt Vonnegut 's blend of anti @-@ war sentiment and satire made him one of the most popular writers of the 1960s . " Vonnegut stated in a 1987 interview that , " my own feeling is that civilization ended in World War I , and we 're still trying to recover from that " , and that he wanted to write war @-@ focused works without glamorizing war itself . Vonnegut had not intended to publish again , but his anger against the George W. Bush administration led him to write A Man Without a Country . 
 Slaughterhouse @-@ Five is the Vonnegut novel best known for its antiwar themes , but the author expressed his beliefs in ways beyond the depiction of the destruction of Dresden . He has one character , Mary O 'Hare , opine that " wars were partly encouraged by books and movies " , made by " Frank Sinatra or John Wayne or some of those other glamorous , war @-@ loving , dirty old men " . Vonnegut made a number of comparisons between Dresden and the bombing of Hiroshima in Slaughterhouse @-@ Five and wrote in Palm Sunday ( 1991 ) that " I learned how vile that religion of mine could be when the atomic bomb was dropped on Hiroshima " . 
 Nuclear war , or at least deployed nuclear arms , is mentioned in almost all of Vonnegut 's novels . In Player Piano , the computer <unk> is given control of the nuclear arsenal , and is charged with deciding whether to use high @-@ explosive or nuclear arms . In Cat 's Cradle , John 's original purpose in setting pen to paper is to write an account of what prominent Americans had been doing as Hiroshima was bombed . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 Kurt Vonnegut was an atheist and a humanist , serving as the honorary president of the American Humanist Association . In an interview for Playboy , he stated that his forebears who came to the United States did not believe in God , and he learned his atheism from his parents . Like his great @-@ grandfather Clemens , Vonnegut was a freethinker . Vonnegut went to a Unitarian church several times , but with little consistency . In his autobiographical work Palm Sunday , Vonnegut says he is a " Christian worshipping agnostic . " He also talked about Jesus ' Sermon on the Mount , and the Beatitudes , and made these biblical ideologies part of his own doctrine . Vonnegut laced a number of his speeches with religion @-@ focused rhetoric , and was prone to using such expressions as " God forbid " and " thank God " . 
 Vonnegut would often talk about religion , in his novels and elsewhere . In God Bless You , Dr. Kevorkian , Vonnegut goes to Heaven after he is euthanized by Dr. Jack Kevorkian . Once in Heaven , Vonnegut interviews twenty @-@ one deceased celebrities , including Isaac Asimov , William Shakespeare , and Kilgore Trout — the last a fictional character from several of his novels . Vonnegut 's works are filled with characters founding new faiths , and religion often serves as a major plot device , for example in Player Piano , The Sirens of Titan and Cat 's Cradle . In The Sirens of Titan , Rumfoord proclaims The Church of God the Utterly Indifferent . Slaughterhouse @-@ Five sees Billy Pilgrim , lacking religion himself , nevertheless become a chaplain 's assistant in the military and display a large crucifix on his bedroom wall . In Cat 's Cradle , Vonnegut invented the religion of Bokononism . 
 Vonnegut had a deep dislike for the Christian religion , often reminding his readers of the bloody history of the Crusades and other religion @-@ inspired violence . He despised the televangelists of the late 20th century , feeling that their thinking was narrow @-@ minded . Realizing that humans need a moral code by which to live , he greatly admired Christ 's Sermon on the Mount , and there are a string of references to it across his works . In Palm Sunday , he writes , " The Sermon on the Mount suggests a <unk> that can never waver or fade . " Vonnegut , in his 1991 book Fates Worse than Death , suggests that during the Reagan administration , " anything that sounded like the Sermon on the Mount was socialistic or communistic , and therefore anti @-@ American " . Vonnegut did not however disdain those who seek the comfort of religion , hailing church associations as a type of extended family . 
 = = = Politics = = = 
 Vonnegut did not particularly sympathize with liberalism or conservatism , and mused on the specious simplicity of American politics . " If you want to take my guns away from me , and you 're all for murdering fetuses , and love it when homosexuals marry each other [ ... ] you 're a liberal . If you are against those perversions and for the rich , you 're a conservative . What could be simpler ? " Regarding political parties , Vonnegut said , " The two real political parties in America are the Winners and the Losers . The people don ’ t acknowledge this . They claim membership in two imaginary parties , the Republicans and the Democrats , instead . " 
 Vonnegut disregarded more mainstream political ideologies in favor of socialism , which he thought could provide a valuable substitute for what he saw as social Darwinism and a spirit of " survival of the fittest " in American society , believing that " socialism would be a good for the common man " . Vonnegut would often return to a quote by socialist and five @-@ time presidential candidate Eugene V. Debs , who went to prison for his beliefs : " As long as there is a lower class , I am in it . As long as there is a criminal element , I 'm of it . As long as there is a soul in prison , I am not free . " Vonnegut expressed disappointment that communism and socialism seemed to be unsavory topics to the average American , and believed that they may offer beneficial substitutes to contemporary social and economic systems . 
 = = Writing = = 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 Vonnegut 's writing was inspired by an eclectic mix of sources . When he was younger , Vonnegut stated that he read works of pulp fiction , science fiction , fantasy , and action @-@ adventure . He also read the Classics , like those of Aristophanes . Aristophanes , like Vonnegut , wrote humorous critiques of contemporary society . Vonnegut 's life and work also share similarities with that of Adventures of Huckleberry Finn writer Mark Twain . Both shared pessimistic outlooks on humanity , and a skeptical take on religion , and , as Vonnegut put it , were both " associated with the enemy in a major war " , as Twain briefly enlisted in the South 's cause during the American Civil War , and Vonnegut 's German name and ancestry connected him with the United States ' enemy in both world wars . 
 Vonnegut called George Orwell his favorite writer , and admitted that he tried to emulate Orwell . " I like his concern for the poor , I like his socialism , I like his simplicity " , Vonnegut said . Vonnegut also said that Orwell 's Nineteen Eighty @-@ Four , and Brave New World by Aldous Huxley , heavily influenced his debut novel , Player Piano , in 1952 . Vonnegut commented that Robert Louis Stevenson 's stories were emblems of thoughtfully put together works that he tried to mimic in his own compositions . Vonnegut also hailed playwright and socialist George Bernard Shaw as " a hero of [ his ] " , and an " enormous influence . " Within his own family , Vonnegut stated that his mother , Edith , had the greatest influence on him . " [ M ] y mother thought she might make a new fortune by writing for the slick magazines . She took short @-@ story courses at night . She studied magazines the way gamblers study racing forms . " 
 Early on in his career , Vonnegut decided to model his style after Henry David Thoreau , who wrote as if from the perspective of a child , allowing Thoreau 's works to be more widely comprehensible . Using a youthful narrative voice allowed Vonnegut to deliver concepts in a modest and straightforward way . Other influences on Vonnegut include The War of the Worlds author H. G. Wells , and satirist Jonathan Swift . Vonnegut credited newspaper magnate H. L. Mencken for inspiring him to become a journalist . 
 = = = Style and technique = = = 
 In his book Popular Contemporary Writers , Michael D. Sharp describes Vonnegut 's linguistic style as straightforward ; his sentences concise , his language simple , his paragraphs brief , and his ordinary tone conversational . Vonnegut uses this style to convey normally complex subject matter in a way that is intelligible to a large audience . He credited his time as a journalist for his ability , pointing to his work with the Chicago City News Bureau , which required him to convey stories in telephone conversations . Vonnegut 's compositions are also laced with distinct references to his own life , notably in Slaughterhouse @-@ Five and Slapstick . 
 Vonnegut believed that ideas , and the convincing communication of those ideas to the reader , were vital to literary art . He did not always sugarcoat his points : much of Player Piano leads up to the moment when Paul , on trial and hooked up to a lie detector , is asked to tell a falsehood , and states , " every new piece of scientific knowledge is a good thing for humanity " . Robert T. Tally Jr . , in his volume on Vonnegut 's novels , wrote , " rather than tearing down and destroying the icons of twentieth @-@ century , middle @-@ class American life , Vonnegut gently reveals their basic <unk> . " Vonnegut did not simply propose utopian solutions to the ills of American society , but showed how such schemes would not allow ordinary people to live lives free from want and anxiety . The large artificial families that the U.S. population is formed into in Slapstick soon serve as an excuse for tribalism , with people giving no help to those not part of their group , and with the extended family 's place in the social hierarchy becoming vital . 
 In the introduction to their essay " Kurt Vonnegut and Humor " , Tally and Peter C. <unk> suggest that Vonnegut was not a " black humorist " , but a " frustrated idealist " who used " comic parables " to teach the reader absurd , bitter or hopeless truths , with his grim witticisms serving to make the reader laugh rather than cry . " Vonnegut makes sense through humor , which is , in the author 's view , as valid a means of mapping this crazy world as any other strategies . " Vonnegut resented being called a black humorist , feeling that , as with many literary labels , it allows readers to disregard aspects of a writer 's work that do not fit the label 's stereotype . 
 Vonnegut 's works have , at various times , been labeled science fiction , satire and postmodern . He also resisted such labels , but his works do contain common tropes that are often associated with those genres . In several of his books , Vonnegut imagines alien societies and civilizations , as is common in works of science fiction , but unlike conventional science fiction , Vonnegut does this to emphasize or exaggerate absurdities and idiosyncrasies in our own world . Furthermore , Vonnegut often <unk> the problems that plague societies , as is done in satirical works . However , literary theorist Robert Scholes noted in <unk> and Metafiction that Vonnegut " reject [ s ] the traditional satirist 's faith in the efficacy of satire as a reforming instrument . [ He has ] a more subtle faith in the humanizing value of laughter . " 
 Examples of postmodernism may also be found in Vonnegut 's works . Postmodernism often entails a response to the theory that the truths of the world will be discovered through science . <unk> contend that truth is subjective , rather than objective , as it is biased towards each individual 's beliefs and outlook on the world . They often use unreliable , first @-@ person narration , and narrative fragmentation . One critic has argued that Vonnegut ’ s most famous novel , Slaughterhouse @-@ Five , features a so @-@ called metafictional , Janus @-@ headed outlook insofar as the novel seeks to represent actual historical events while , at the same time , <unk> the very notion of doing exactly that at the same time . While Vonnegut does use these elements , e.g. fragmentation and metafictional elements , in some of his works , he more distinctly focuses on the peril posed by individuals who find subjective truths , mistake them for objective truths , then proceed to impose these truths on others . 
 = = = Themes = = = 
 Vonnegut was a vocal critic of the society in which he lived , and this was reflected in his writings . Several key social themes recur in Vonnegut 's works , such as wealth , the lack of it , and its unequal distribution among a society . In The Sirens of Titan , the novel 's protagonist , Malachi Constant , is exiled to one of Saturn 's moons , Titan , as a result of his vast wealth , which has made him arrogant and wayward . In God Bless You , Mr. Rosewater , readers may find it difficult to determine whether the rich or the poor are in worse circumstances as the lives of both group 's members are ruled by their wealth or their poverty . Further , in Hocus Pocus , the protagonist is named Eugene Debs Hartke , a homage to the famed socialist Eugene V. Debs and Vonnegut 's socialist views . In Kurt Vonnegut : A Critical Companion , Thomas F. Marvin states : " Vonnegut points out that , left unchecked , capitalism will erode the democratic foundations of the United States . " Marvin suggests that Vonnegut 's works demonstrate what happens when a " hereditary aristocracy " develops , where wealth is inherited along familial lines : the ability of poor Americans to overcome their situations is greatly or completely diminished . Vonnegut also often laments social Darwinism , and a " survival of the fittest " view of society . He points out that social Darwinism leads to a society that condemns its poor for their own misfortune , and fails to help them out of their poverty because " they deserve their fate " . Vonnegut also confronts the idea of free will in a number of his pieces . In Slaughterhouse @-@ Five and Timequake the characters have no choice in what they do ; in Breakfast of Champions , a character believes that he has everyone 's free will ; and in Cat 's Cradle , Bokononism views free will as heretical . 
 The majority of Vonnegut 's characters are estranged from their actual families and seek to build replacement or extended families . For example , the engineers in Player Piano called their manager 's spouse " Mom " . In Cat 's Cradle , Vonnegut devises two separate methods for loneliness to be combated : A " <unk> " , which is a group of individuals appointed by God to do his will , and a " <unk> " , defined by Marvin as a " meaningless association of people , such as a fraternal group or a nation " . Similarly , in Slapstick , the U.S. government codifies that all Americans are a part of large extended families . 
 Fear of the loss of one 's purpose in life is a theme in Vonnegut 's works . The Great Depression forced Vonnegut to witness the devastation many people felt when they lost their jobs , and while at General Electric , Vonnegut witnessed machines being built to take the place of human labor . He confronts these things in his works through references to the growing use of automation and its effects on human society . This is most starkly represented in his first novel , Player Piano , where many Americans are left purposeless and unable to find work as machines replace human workers . Loss of purpose is also depicted in Galápagos , where a florist rages at her spouse for creating a robot able to do her job , and in Timequake , where an architect kills himself when replaced by computer software . 
 Suicide by fire is another common theme in Vonnegut 's works ; the author often returns to the theory that " many people are not fond of life . " He uses this as an explanation for why humans have so severely damaged their environments , and made devices such as nuclear weapons that can make their creators extinct . In Deadeye Dick , Vonnegut features the neutron bomb , designed to kill people , but leave buildings and structures untouched . He also uses this theme to demonstrate the recklessness of those who put powerful , apocalypse @-@ inducing devices at the disposal of politicians . 
 " What is the point of life ? " is a question Vonnegut often pondered in his works . When one of Vonnegut 's characters , Kilgore Trout , finds the question " What is the purpose of life ? " written in a bathroom , his response is , " To be the eyes and ears and conscience of the Creator of the Universe , you fool . " Trout 's theory is curious seeing that Vonnegut was an atheist , and thus for him , there is no Creator to report back to . Marvin comments that , " [ a ] s Trout chronicles one meaningless life after another , readers are left to wonder how a compassionate creator could stand by and do nothing while such reports come in . " In the epigraph to Bluebeard , Vonnegut quotes his son Mark , and gives an answer to what he believes is the meaning of life : " We are here to help each other get through this thing , whatever it is . " 
 = = Works = = 
 The following is an account of Vonnegut 's major works . Unless otherwise cited , this list is taken from Thomas F. Marvin 's 2002 book Kurt Vonnegut : A Critical Companion ( date in brackets is the date the work was first published ) : 
 = Ryan Johansen = 
 Ryan Johansen ( born July 31 , 1992 ) is a Canadian professional ice hockey centre currently playing for the Nashville Predators of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . Growing up , he played minor hockey in the Greater Vancouver area until joining the junior ranks with the Penticton Vees of the British Columbia Hockey League ( BCHL ) for one season . In 2009 – 10 , he moved to the major junior level with the Portland Winterhawks of the Western Hockey League ( WHL ) . After his first WHL season , he was selected fourth overall by the Blue Jackets in the 2010 NHL Entry Draft . Internationally , he has competed for the Canadian national junior team at the 2011 World Junior Ice Hockey Championships , where he earned a silver medal and was named to the Tournament All @-@ Star Team . In 2015 , he participated in the 2015 NHL Skills Competition and was named the 2015 NHL All Star Game MVP . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Amateur = = = 
 Johansen was drafted into the Western Hockey League ( WHL ) 150th overall by the Portland Winterhawks in the 2007 Bantam Draft . Having been offered an athletic scholarship to play with Northeastern University , he opted to play for the Penticton Vees of the British Columbia Hockey League ( BCHL ) in 2008 – 09 to protect his eligibility for the National Collegiate Athletics Association ( NCAA ) . He appeared in 42 games for the Vees as a 16 @-@ year @-@ old , scoring five goals and 12 assists . 
 Convinced of his ability , the Winterhawks persuaded Johansen to forego university and join their club for the 2009 – 10 WHL season . In Portland , he joined a line with fellow 2010 NHL Entry Draft prospects Nino Niederreiter and Brad Ross . He finished the year with 25 goals and 69 points in 71 games , second among league rookies behind Kevin Connauton and second in team scoring , behind Chris Francis . Helping the Winterhawks make the playoffs one year after finishing last in the WHL , they advanced to the second round . Johansen added 18 points in 13 games , ninth in league scoring and first among rookies , despite playing in only two of four playoff rounds . 
 Johansen rapidly climbed prospect charts for the 2010 NHL Draft , starting the year as a potential second round selection , before rising to 16th among North American skaters when the NHL Central Scouting Bureau ( CSB ) released its mid @-@ season ranking . Johansen 's coach with Penticton noted that , as one of the younger players of his draft class , his skill was often overlooked . NHL scouts praised his speed , playmaking ability and vision on the ice but believed he needed to show more consistency and physicality . He has been compared to Ottawa Senators centre Jason Spezza , while Johansen has said he tries to model his game after San Jose Sharks centre Joe Thornton . He finished the season as the tenth ranked skater according to Central Scouting and was projected to be a top 20 pick , perhaps as high as top 10 . With the fourth overall pick in the 2010 NHL Draft , Johansen was chosen by the Columbus Blue Jackets . 
 A couple of months after his draft , Johansen signed with Columbus to a three @-@ year , entry @-@ level contract on September 9 , 2010 . With a base salary of $ 900 @,@ 000 , the deal could reach $ 1 @.@ 975 million per year if he achieves all his bonus incentives . Attending his first NHL training camp that month , he did not make the Blue Jackets roster and was returned to Portland on October 2 for another year of junior hockey . Back in the WHL , Johansen was chosen to represent the league at the 2010 Subway Super Series , a six @-@ game exhibition tournament featuring all @-@ stars from the Canadian Hockey League ( CHL ) against Russian junior players . He completed the 2010 – 11 season improving to 92 points ( 40 goals and 52 assists ) in 63 games , ranking seventh among league scorers . 
 = = = = Professional = = = = 
 Joining the Blue Jackets ' training camp for a second year , Johansen made the opening lineup for the 2011 – 12 season . He made his NHL debut on October 7 , 2011 , registering 8 minutes and 46 seconds of ice time in a 3 – 2 loss to the Nashville Predators . He registered his first NHL point , an assist on a Kris Russell goal , in a 4 – 3 loss to the Ottawa Senators on October 22 . Three days later , he scored his first NHL goal against Ty Conklin of the Detroit Red Wings . Banking the puck off of Conklin 's skate from behind the goal line , the milestone came on the power play and was the game @-@ winner . He also added an assist to help Columbus to their first win of the season , a 4 – 1 victory . After playing in his ninth game of the season , having recorded two goals and two assists in that span , Johansen was notified by Blue Jackets head coach Scott Arniel that he would remain with the team and not be returned to junior . 
 Due to the NHL 's decision to lock out the players at the start of the 2012 – 13 season until a new collective bargaining agreement could be reached , Johansen was reassigned to the Blue Jackets ' American Hockey League ( AHL ) affiliate , the Springfield Falcons . On February 24 , 2013 , Johansen was re @-@ called by the Blue Jackets for the remainder of the season , which began on January 19 after an agreement was reached . In the 2013 – 14 season , Johansen had a breakout year , scoring 33 goals and 30 assists for a total of 63 points , a career high . He is the third Blue Jacket in franchise history to post 30 goals or more in one season . 
 During the 2015 – 16 season , on January 6 , 2016 , Johansen was traded by the Blue Jackets to the Nashville Predators in exchange for Seth Jones . 
 = = International play = = 
 Johansen was invited to take part in the Canadian national junior team 's selection camp in August and December 2011 . He was later named to the squad , competing in the 2011 IIHF World U20 Championship , held in Buffalo , New York . Making his international debut against Russia , he scored his first goal for Canada in a 5 – 3 win . In the quarterfinal against Switzerland , he was named the player of the game , having scored his second goal of the tournament . He scored again in the semifinal against the United States to help Canada advance to the gold medal game , where they were defeated 5 – 3 by Russia . Johansen finished with three goals and nine points , third in team scoring behind Brayden Schenn and Ryan Ellis , and was named to the Tournament All @-@ Star Team . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Johansen was born in Vancouver , British Columbia , to Randall and Rosalind Johansen . He has a younger brother , Lucas , who plays for the Kelowna Rockets in the Western Hockey League . He played his first years of minor hockey with the Vancouver Thunderbirds organization until his family moved to the suburb of Port Moody . The relocation meant giving up playing for triple @-@ A teams in Vancouver and diminished exposure to scouts . Nonetheless , he played in Port Moody at the double @-@ A level through to bantam ( age 13 – 14 level ) , including a peewee ( age 11 – 12 ) provincial championship . In 2007 – 08 , he played with the Vancouver North East Chiefs of the British Columbia Major Midget League . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = Awards = = 
 = Wings for My Flight = 
 Wings for My Flight : The Peregrine Falcons of Chimney Rock is a 1991 book by American wildlife biologist Marcy Cottrell Houle . The book focuses on Houle 's efforts to save the then @-@ endangered peregrine falcons from extinction . By 1975 , peregrine falcons had been reduced to 324 pairs in North America , primarily as a result of DDT , a widely used pesticide . DDT inhibited the production of calcium and caused eggs to thin and break during incubation . Recovery efforts for the peregrine have been successful : DDT was banned by the U.S. in 1972 and efforts to breed and train peregrine falcons in captivity to later release to the wild were effective . In 1999 , the peregrine falcon was removed from the U.S. Endangered Species list . 
 After graduating from Colorado College in the 1970s , Houle was employed by the Colorado Division of Wildlife and assigned to Chimney Rock , a prominent rock formation where one of the last pairs of peregrine falcons had been discovered . Wings for My Flight documents Houle 's observations of the Chimney Rock peregrine falcons , as well as the Chimney Rock community , in the summer of 1975 . To protect the falcons , Houle had to halt a million @-@ dollar project turn ancient Anasazi ruins in the area into a tourist attraction and faced opposition and harassment by the Chimney Rock community as a result . The community eventually showed concern for Houle , however , after her trailer was broken into and vandalized . 
 Wings for My Flight was originally published in hardcover by Addison @-@ Wesley in 1991 . The book was republished in 1999 by Pruett Publishing with a foreword by Robert Michael Pyle and a new preface and epilogue by Houle . The book was updated again in 2014 and republished by the University of New Mexico Press with photographs and a preface by Houle touching upon the recovery of the peregrine falcon . In May 1996 , the children 's magazine Cricket published a short story written by Houle titled " Albert " , adapted from Wings for My Flight . Reception to Wings for My Flight has generally been positive . In 1991 , the book co @-@ received the Oregon Book Award , which promotes literature by Oregon @-@ based authors . Wings for My Flight was also awarded a Christopher Award for books in 1992 , which recognizes works that " affirm the highest values of the human spirit " . The Library Journal described it as " well @-@ crafted and compelling " , while the Los Angeles Times referred to it as " heartfelt " , although " naive and overdrawn at times " . 
 = = Background = = 
 Marcy Cottrell Houle wrote Wings for My Flight in the several decades following a major decline in the peregrine falcon population , which occurred between 1950 and 1970 . During the 1930s and 1940s , an estimated 1000 breeding pairs of peregrine falcons inhabited the western United States and Mexico , coupled with 500 pairs in the eastern U.S. By the 1970s , no peregrine falcons were discovered east of the Rocky Mountains , and in the west , peregrine falcon populations had declined by 80 to 90 percent . By 1975 , the year in which the events of Wings for My Flight take place , only 324 pairs of peregrine falcons were known to reside in North America , with only seven pairs in the Rocky Mountains region , and one at Chimney Rock National Monument in southwestern Colorado . 
 During the peregrine falcon decline , Houle studied biology at Colorado College in Colorado Springs . The institution 's block scheduling system meant that Houle had fewer classes each day , allowing her to travel frequently to experience various ecosystems in addition to her academic studies . Upon leaving college , Houle began working for the Colorado Division of Wildlife , and her first field assignment was to observe peregrine falcon activity along the Rocky Mountains for four summers , two of which were spent at Chimney Rock . Following her experience with the peregrine falcons , Houle had to decide whether to continue pursuing wildlife biology or to commit instead to her passion of writing . Wings for My Flight combined both of Houle 's interests ; it recounted her observations of the peregrines as well as her interaction with the community at Chimney Rock during her first summer there . 
 The peregrine falcon became an endangered species primarily due to the use of organochlorine pesticides , especially DDT , the breakdown of which lowered estrogen levels in the female peregrine bloodstream and inhibited the production of calcium , causing eggs to grow thinner by up to 20 percent . Since peregrine falcons lay their eggs on rocky ledges rather than nests , the thinned shells break under the stress of both the rocky ledge and the weight of the parents during incubation . Following 1970 , recovery efforts for the peregrine falcon population have been successful . The agricultural use of DDT was banned in the United States in 1972 , and recovery teams in the eastern United States were successful in breeding and training peregrines in captivity to later release to the wild , a procedure called hacking . In 1999 , the peregrine falcon was removed from the U.S. Endangered Species list . 
 = = Content summary = = 
 The events of Wings for My Flight take place throughout 1975 . Marcy Cottrell Houle ( then " Marcy Cottrell " ) , a 21 @-@ year @-@ old wildlife biologist , is sent by her supervisor , Barry Layne , to the U.S. Forest Service office near Chimney Rock in Colorado , where a pair of peregrine falcons reside . The pair is one of only seven pairs remaining in the Rocky Mountains region . Mr. Preston Fitch , an administrator involved with the peregrine falcon project , criticizes Houle for her lack of experience in the field upon meeting her . Nevertheless , Mr. Fitch introduces Houle to Chimney Rock . He explains that the Forest Service spent more than half a million dollars building a road which led to Chimney Rock ; work on the road had to be discontinued upon discovery of the falcons . Further , the Chimney Rock area is home to 250 Anasazi ruins dated between 900 and 1100 . The Chimney Rock community had been planning a million @-@ dollar development to build a tourist attraction for the ruins . Houle spends several weeks with the peregrine falcons , recording her observations in her notebook . In spite of her initial attempt at maintaining an impersonal relationship with the falcons , Houle names the female peregrine " Jenny " and the male " King Arthur " . In the middle of June , after Houle had spent several days of making field observations alone and with limited equipment , Mr. Fitch introduces Houle to her teammate , Alex Porter . He also provides them with a garbage truck for transportation . 
 Meanwhile , Houle faces indignation and harassment from the residents of the Chimney Rock community , who view her presence as impeding the progress of the construction of a tourist attraction for the Anasazi ruins . At one point , Maurice Richards , a high @-@ ranking official of the Colorado Division of Wildlife , attempts to host a picnic on an area restricted for the peregrines . When Houle forces him to leave , Richards threatens to fire her . Later , the female peregrine , Jenny , disappears and never returns . A local resident claims she was shot and killed by a member of the Chimney Rock <unk> a result of Jenny 's disappearance , King Arthur spends several days ignoring the hatchlings . After this period of " grief " , King Arthur begins to raise the young falcons singlehandedly . Following this , Houle discovers that of five nestlings hatched by the pair , only two received enough food to survive . Houle names the surviving pair of nestlings " Bold Leopold " and " Albert " after their distinct personalities ; Leopold was more courageous and was always the first to try new things , such as flying , whereas Albert was more hesitant . In spite of all the attempts to intimidate her , the people of Chimney Rock eventually sympathize with Houle after her trailer , containing valuable field equipment as well as personal items , is broken into and vandalized . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 Wings for My Flight was first published in 1991 in hardcover by Addison @-@ Wesley . Houle later wrote a short story titled " Albert " that was adapted from Wings for My Flight , focusing on Albert and Leopold 's first attempts at flying . The story was published in the May 1996 issue of the children 's magazine Cricket . Wings for My Flight was republished , this time in paperback , in 1999 by Pruett Publishing . This edition included a foreword by Robert Michael Pyle and a new preface and epilogue by Houle . In 2014 , the book was updated and republished again by University of New Mexico Press . The updated edition contained photographs of the Chimney Rock landscape , as well as a preface by Houle that addressed the recovery of the peregrine falcon population since the book was first published in 1991 . Houle highlighted the 1972 agricultural prohibition of DDT , which was the chemical primarily responsible for the peregrine decline ; the Endangered Species Act of 1973 , which allowed the pursuit of wildlife conservation to take precedence over land issues ; and successful attempts to raise peregrines in captivity and later release them to the wild . While writing the book , Houle changed the names of various people and places , explaining the choice by saying " I felt more comfortable changing the names because I worked for so long with those people , it was impossible to be honest about them if I named them " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Wings for My Flight was generally well received . In 1991 , the book received the Oregon Book Award for literary nonfiction , co @-@ receiving the award with My Country , My Right to Serve by Mary Ann Humphrey . The Oregon Book Award , presented annually by Literary Arts , a non @-@ profit organization that promotes literature , intends to recognize the works of Oregon @-@ based authors in a variety of literary genres . Additionally , in 1992 , the book received a Christopher Award , which is presented annually by The Christophers , a non @-@ profit Christian inspirational group , and recognizes creators of books , motion pictures , and television specials that " affirm the highest values of the human spirit " . 
 Dolores and Roger Flaherty wrote a positive review in the Chicago Sun @-@ Times , noting how " Houle blends elements of adventure , romance , humor and pathos in the story of her rookie summer as a wildlife biologist . Along the way she offers vivid descriptions of her skydiving subjects and the seductive beauty of the wilderness . " David M. Schwartz , in the May 1992 edition of Smithsonian , praised Houle 's prose in Wings for My Flight , and wrote that the story is " told with a charming simplicity in fewer than 200 pages " . Schwartz also praised Houle for including her notational system for documenting field observations , stating that it " opens a window on field biology " . Writing in the Library Journal , Henry T. Armistead referred to the book as " well crafted and compelling , a dramatization of the classic conflict between the legitimate interests of conservationists and developers " , and , " highly recommended on several levels , as science , sociology , or a story " . Andrew <unk> , a professor of history and environmental studies at Fort Lewis College , noted in The Durango Herald the significance of Houle 's efforts to prevent " inappropriate development " at Chimney Rock , which was proclaimed a U.S. National Monument by President Barack Obama in 2012 . " Wings for My Flight is a personal story " , wrote <unk> , " but also a chronicle of environmental success . Without a doubt , peregrines saved Chimney Rock for the rest of us . " 
 <unk> writer Paul De Witte wrote a mixed review in The Record ( now the Waterloo Region Record ) , writing that although the book " will certainly find its audience , its Disneyesque sensibilities will kill its broader appeal . The topics of wildlife conservation and global ecological accountability warrant a depth that the author seems unwilling to give her book . " Kirkus Reviews referred to the book as " an enlightening cautionary take " and " a charmingly personal account " , but also as " loosely organized and occasionally sparse on detail " . John Wilkes , in the Los Angeles Times , wrote , " Although naive and overdrawn at times , this heartfelt tale will bring tears and smiles to even the most stubbornly objective reader . " Donna Mitchell , writing in The Wilson Bulletin ( now The Wilson Journal of Ornithology ) , wrote that Houle 's interpretation of the falcons ' behavior is excessively " anthropomorphic " , but also that " Ms. Houle 's perseverance and dedication to the protection of the Peregrine Falcon is admirable and an incentive not only to young biologists just getting started but to those of us who get a little more than discouraged with the struggle to protect endangered species and their habitats . " 
 = Shin Megami Tensei : Strange Journey = 
 Shin Megami Tensei : Strange Journey ( Japanese : 真 ・ 女神転生 <unk> <unk> ) is a role @-@ playing video game developed by Atlus and Lancarse for the Nintendo DS . It was published by Atlus in 2009 in Japan , and in 2010 in North America . It is the fourth entry in the Shin Megami Tensei series , which forms the core of the Megami Tensei franchise . The story follows a special task force sent by the United Nations to investigate the Schwarzwelt , a spatial distortion that appears in Antarctica and threatens to engulf the world . Players take control of an unnamed protagonist , navigating the environments of the Schwarzwelt in first @-@ person . Combat involves the player and recruited demons fighting against various enemies , with the protagonist having the option of talking with and recruiting enemies . 
 The game originated from the team 's wish to develop a large @-@ scale role @-@ playing game for the DS . Many of the main staff had worked on previous Megami Tensei titles in some capacity , including producer and designer Kazuma Kaneko , director Eiji Ishida , writer Shogo Isogai , and composer Shoji Meguro . The setting in Antarctica was chosen to appeal to an overseas audience . Alongside the new setting , the game featured multiple science fiction elements new to the series , taking inspiration from films such as Damnation Alley and The Thing . For the music , Meguro used grander musical styles than his previous works , incorporating choir music using a special synthesizer . Reception of the game has been generally positive for its story and gameplay , but many disliked its first @-@ person navigation . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Shin Megami Tensei : Strange Journey is a role @-@ playing game in which players control the main protagonist , who can be named by the player . The environments within the Schwarzwelt are seen and navigated from a first @-@ person perspective : the 3D environment is displayed on the top screen of the Nintendo DS , while a 2D map is displayed on the bottom screen . <unk> environments are automatically mapped out , with highlights being placed for unopened containers and doorways . These environments contain traps including pits , shifting floors , and floor tiles which damage the protagonist if stepped on . Alongside the main story quests , human non @-@ playable characters and demons within the Schwarzwelt unlock side quests which yielded rewards upon completion . During the game , the protagonist 's <unk> suit can be upgraded to open new pathways , enabling entry into new areas for story progression , as well as new parts of previously explored areas . 
 During exploration , the player enters battle through both story @-@ based boss battles and random encounters with standard enemies . Combat is turn @-@ based , with enemies facing against a four @-@ member party made up of the protagonist and three chosen demons . Combat is governed by a derivative of the Press Turn system used in Shin Megami Tensei : Nocturne : in Strange Journey , the relevant system is called the Demon Co @-@ op System . If either combatant group hits their opponent with a Critical Attack or strikes their weak point , any allied demon of the attacker 's aliment will follow up with an unblockable attack which deals high damage . 
 As well as fighting demons , the protagonist can negotiate with them in a variety of ways : demons can be bribed , scared away , or recruited depending on responses given during conversation . After they are recruited , different demons can be fused together to create new demons . The new demon inherits skills from its parents , and some demons can only be obtained through fusion . The game includes 300 recruitable demons , all of which take inspiration from various world mythologies including Welsh , Egyptian , Norse , and Christian . Two main alignments govern the way demons must be approached : one that represents light , neutral and dark alignments ; and one representing law , neutral and chaos alignments . The choices made in the story also effect how demons respond to player commands , and whether they will remain loyal . As with earlier titles , a Moon Phase divided into eight segments dictates how demons will behave . When the Moon is full , demons will refuse to talk . Fused demons can be shared between players using thirty @-@ two character passwords generated when a new demon is fused . These passwords can be traded between different players . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Setting and characters = = = 
 The setting and events of Strange Journey are unrelated to any other entry in the Shin Megami Tensei series . The game is set in the early 21st century on the continent of Antarctica . During the game 's opening , a massive atomic collapse occurs at the South Pole , causing the creation of the Schwarzwelt ( <unk> , <unk> , German for " Black World " ) , a black void which swallows anything it touches and threatens to engulf the Earth . The space within the Schwarzwelt is occupied by spaces representing the many vices of humanity , acting as a critique of them . The main bases are special amphibious vehicles : Red Sprite No. 1 , the protagonist 's vehicle , Blue Jet No. 2 , Elves No. 3 , and Gigantic No. 4 . 
 The central cast are part of a special task force created by the United Nations to investigate and neutralize the Schwarzwelt . Players take control of a nameless member of the task force ( Japanese in the original and American in the localization ) . Alongside the main protagonist , there are three main crew members on the Red Sprite : Commander Gore ( <unk> , Goa @-@ <unk> ) , the crew 's leader ; Jimenez ( <unk> , <unk> ) , an experienced American soldier who seeks rewards for his work ; and Zelenin ( <unk> , <unk> ) , a knowledgeable Russian scientist . Other characters include Arthur ( <unk> , <unk> ) , the Red Sprite 's AI computer ; the angel <unk> ( <unk> , <unk> ) , who represents the forces of God ; Mem Aleph ( <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) , a primordial mother goddess who controls the demons of the Schwarzwelt ; and Louisa Ferre ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) , an avatar of Lucifer who watches the protagonist 's actions . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 As the expansion of the Schwarzwelt is threatening to destroy Earth , the United Nations send in multiple teams , led by Gore , to investigate and eradicate the phenomenon . During their attempt to enter the Schwarzwelt , all ships but the Red Sprite are destroyed . During their missions , the crew is helped by Arthur , who gradually accumulates knowledge of the Schwarzwelt and developers a personality . During an early mission within the Schwarzwelt , Gore is killed . As the protagonist and members of the Red Sprite 's crew explore the regions of the Schwarzwelt , they slowly uncover the truth behind its existence . In ancient times , humans were controlled by the forces of God . His rule over them was broken when the Mother Goddess Mem Aleph destroyed him , breaking his hold on Earth . Residing within the Schwarzwelt , Mem Aleph saw humans abusing Earth 's environment and consequently corrupting her dimension . Determined to remove those humans responsible for the corruption and return the world to its ancient state , Mem Aleph unleashed the Schwarzwelt . The remaining forces of God , mainly represented by <unk> , intend to use the Schwarzwelt to spread their influence across the world , removing free will to create a united utopia . Key items are the Cosmic Eggs , objects created by Mem Aleph that can reshape the world when combined by the core of the Schwarzwelt . 
 Zelenin and Jimenez respectively side with Law and Chaos , while a resurrected Gore becomes Neutral . Depending on the choices made during the game , the protagonist has the choice of allying with either Law , Chaos or following a Neutral route and continuing with the original mission . If he sides with Law , the protagonist and Zelenin defeat Mem Aleph and use the Cosmic Eggs to create a World of Law , with Zelenin worshiped as a channel to God for humanity , which is forced to surrender its free will . If he sides with Chaos , he and Jimenez help Mem Aleph and defeat Zelenin , using the Eggs to fulfill the Schwarzwelt 's original purpose and create a world where humans and demons live together in a primal world where only the strong survive . In both the Law and Chaos routes , Arthur chooses to destroy his new personality to save the protagonist after the Red Sprite is damaged by Gore . If the protagonist rejects Law and Chaos , Gore transmits the necessary information for the destruction of the Schwarzwelt to him before truly dying . After defeating Zelenin , Jimenez and Mem Aleph , the protagonist and surviving crew escape in the Red Sprite while Arthur sacrifices himself to ensure the destruction of the Schwarzwelt , although there is a chance of it reappearing if humanity continues its abuse of the Earth . 
 = = Development = = 
 Strange Journey originated during talks among Atlus staff about creating a large @-@ scale role @-@ playing game using a small development team . Kazuma Kaneko suggested a Shin Megami Tensei game for the Nintendo DS . There were two main reasons for developing the game for this platform : Kaneko felt that the portable design fitted in well with Shin Megami Tensei gameplay philosophies , fellow role @-@ playing game Etrian Odyssey had been a commercial success , it had the biggest install base among their target audience , and its nature as a portable game meant people could concentrate more on the game when knowing that they could end their play session with ease . The game 's title was originally going to be Shin Megami Tensei IV , but due to the game 's setting , it was decided to give it its own subtitle . The original inspiration behind it was the event horizon as associated with black holes . An early subtitle was " Strange Horizon " , but this had been used in a previous unspecified video game setting . After Kaneko watched Amazing Journey : The Story of The Who , he and <unk> agreed on the title Strange Journey . Despite lacking a numeral , it is still a mainline entry in the Shin Megami Tensei series . 
 The game was co @-@ developed by Atlus and Lancarse , the developers of the Etrian Odyssey series . Strange Journey ran on a modified version of the engine used in the original Etrian Odyssey . The Atlus staff were made up of many veterans of the Megami Tensei series : Kaneko was producer , and character and demon designer ; Ishida made his debut as a director after being chief designer for Shin Megami Tensei : Nocturne ; and the scenario 's main writer was Shogo Isogai , who had worked on Shin Megami Tensei II , Shin Megami Tensei If ... , and Nocturne . The gameplay was kept firmly within the traditions of the Megami Tensei series , while evolving and sometimes changing them . For example , the fusion system was re @-@ designed to keep the game fast @-@ paced , and former restrictions on skill inheritance were loosened to encourage experimentation . In contrast , the ability to fine @-@ tune the main character 's stats was removed . The battle system design and programming were both handled by Lancarse . The battle system was designed to provide ease of player , while aspects of demon alignment directly tied to the game 's moral alignment system . The <unk> suit , which was tied into many of the game 's systems , was designed around the concept of a spacesuit that included crucial software with which new demons could become visible and new areas could be explored . The multiplayer feature was originally conceived as players having contests between their demons , but this was decided against as it did not fit the game 's atmosphere . Instead , the concept of demon exchanges was designed . <unk> were chosen over Wi @-@ fi functions as it would make password exchanges through internet forums easier . 
 From the outset , the game was designed with an overseas release in mind . Among the early ideas created for the title was for it to be set in New York City , inspired by John Carpenter 's 1981 film Escape from New York . This was vetoed as it would not offer much variety in its cast . To enable an international cast , it was decided to set the game in Antarctica . This choice of setting was also made to depict the danger posed by the Schwarzwelt on a worldwide scale . This setting differed greatly from previous Shin Megami Tensei games , which had taken place in Tokyo . It was also chosen as the North Pole had no widespread landmass , making it an impractical setting . When developing the character drama , the team took inspiration from another film by Carpenter , 1982 's The Thing . The moral alignment system , a staple in earlier Shin Megami Tensei entries , was reintroduced for Strange Journey to help players experience the game 's themes . The central cast acted as both a microcosm of humanity and representation of the game 's alignments . Due to the setting , the characters had to be members of a Special Forces group , as opposed to previous protagonists who had been average people . The game includes a larger presence of science fiction elements than in previous Shin Megami Tensei games . Various elements within the game were inspired by science fiction movies : the Red Sprite was inspired by the main vehicle from the 1977 film Damnation Alley , and some equipment was inspired by James Cameron 's 1986 film Aliens . The characters ' firearms were all modeled after real @-@ life guns . Elaborating on how the science fiction elements complemented rather than clashed with the mystical elements of Shin Megami Tensei , Kaneko stated that he felt that the series had always had elements of those two genres merging , commenting that some people saw a web URL as something like a magical incantation and referencing a quote from Arthur C. Clark about technology becoming so advanced that it looked like magic . 
 = = Music = = 
 The music was composed and arranged by Shoji Meguro , whose previous work for the series included Revelations : Persona and Nocturne . In contrast to his previous work on the Persona series , Meguro did not use contemporary musical elements . Instead , he created a more mature experience to reflect the game 's story and setting . To achieve this , he used militaristic orchestration , Gregorian choir , and minimalistic ambiance . The choir sounds were created using <unk> Quantum Leap Symphonic Choir , a synthesizer which could realistically simulate a choir . An exception was the " Sorrow " theme , for which he primarily used a piano melody . For the game 's " chaos " theme , he used musical elements similar to those in Nocturne . So as to get as much music as possible on the game cartridge , Meguro used CRI Middleware 's Kyuseishu Sound Streamer compression algorithm . 
 Shin Megami Tensei : Strange Journey Original <unk> released on November 18 , 2009 as a single CD release under the catalog number COCX @-@ <unk> . It was published by Nippon Columbia . A bonus soundtrack containing music from the game was included with launch copies of the game in North America . After the game 's release , it was discovered that the bonus disc had a manufacturing defect that made it unplayable . Once the issue was raised , Atlus and its manufacturing partner moved to enable players to receive free replacements . Reviews of the original soundtrack release have been positive , with reviewers noting its change in style compared to previous Megami Tensei games . 
 = = Release = = 
 Strange Journey released on October 8 , 2009 in Japan , and March 23 , 2010 in North America . The first information on a new title in the series appeared in the form of a teaser site created on July 16 , 2009 for the Japanese Atlus website , depicting Earth with a large hole in the bottom . Using the page 's source code and locating an unused graphic , it was deciphered the game 's title was Strange Journey and confirmed it to be a Megami Tensei title . A week later , Atlus officially announced the game for the DS , clearing up a rumor among fans that the title was an entry in the Persona series . 
 The game 's North American release , along with a release window , was announced in November 2009 . For its release , the ESRB rated the game " M for Mature " . This made the game the tenth game for a Nintendo DS game to earn the rating . Alongside the bonus CD , Atlus revealed a mini @-@ poster exclusive to GameStop customers who purchased the game through street stores and online . After release , Atlus USA gave away exclusive demon passwords to fans to unlock otherwise inaccessible demons during gameplay . 
 The localization was handled by Atlus USA , led by project editor Nich Maragos , and project lead Yu Namba . During translation , the team had a mixed experience translating the katakana names . While names such as " Williams " were easy , names such as " <unk> " , a demon based on a Scandinavian forest spirit , proved a challenge and required specific research on the name 's origins . Some of the localization choices were made due to the team 's knowledge of Ishida 's enthusiasm for western culture . They also needed to create varied speaking styles for the various demons , from Archaic English to a more modern vernacular , which proved a time @-@ consuming process . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Strange Journey sold 97 @,@ 000 units in its first week in Japan , coming in third on the Japanese sales charts behind Pokémon HeartGold and SoulSilver and Wii Fit Plus . Ultimately , the game sold lower than expected : Atlus expected the game to sell 170 @,@ 000 copies , but actual sales by November had only reached 152 @,@ 000 copies . 
 The game has had a positive reception , earning scores of 80 % and 80 / 100 respectively from aggregate sites GameRankings and Metacritic . Famitsu gave the game a score of 36 points out of 40 , noted by IGN as being the highest score given by the magazine to a Shin Megami Tensei game up to that time . In their review , Famitsu praised the game 's consistent balancing present throughout the game as well as commenting that while the player is having fun exploring , there is always a constant tension around . They also praised the demon combination system by saying that it was " the greatest asset the game has -- they give you better results the more you use them " as they allowed the battles to remain fresh and new . Famitsu also noted that " The tutorial is helpful , and the mission goals are clear enough that you 're never really lost . " 
 Charles Onyett of IGN called the game 's plot " interesting " and " well @-@ developed " , concluding that there is a " surprising amount of personality in the game " . Andrew Fitch , in his review on 1UP.com , commented that the game 's story is the " same kooky MegaTen narrative fans have come to expect " , but that fans will miss the voice acting of the Persona games . Lark Anderson of GameSpot agreed , calling the plot " excessively preachy " . Phil Kollar of Game Informer said that the game " numerous troubling means of highlighting the tension between technology and nature " . Heidi Kemps , writing for GamePro , called it " a refreshingly thoughtful experience compared to most Japanese RPG plots , but it 's not for the easily offended " . Eurogamer 's Matt Edwards called the story " isn 't particularly original but is nonetheless absorbing " . 
 Speaking of the gameplay , Fitch called it a combination of " classically engrossing MegaTen and Etrian Odyssey " , noting that the " same sense of exploration 's still there , but there 's also a meatier plot pulling you along " . Kemps called the dungeon exploration " exciting " , but found the lack of help with demon fusion detracted from the experience . Edwards was generally positive about the battle system , which he called " an easy @-@ to @-@ understand , turn @-@ based set @-@ up " . Anderson found the gameplay dated , particularly citing the dungeon design and negotiation system , citing the former as being too repetitive to be interesting . Onyett called the combat " standard " , but praised the demon fusion and negotiation mechanics . Kollar said that the Demon Co @-@ op attack system made the game more approachable than previous Shin Megami Tensei series , but found that exploration could become tedious . 
 = Toyah Battersby = 
 Toyah Battersby is a fictional character from the British soap opera Coronation Street , played by Georgia Taylor . Toyah and her family were introduced to the serial by executive producer Brian Park in a bid to increase falling ratings . Actress and singer Toyah Willcox gave the producers permission to name the youngest member of the Battersby family after herself , since the character was said to be born during the height of her career . Taylor originally auditioned for the part of Zoe Tattersall , but was cast as Toyah instead . The role marked her acting debut . She made her first screen appearance during the episode broadcast on 4 July 1997 . 
 Toyah was portrayed as cocky , naive , too trusting and occasionally needing to be " a bit more clued up " about things . Taylor called Toyah a decent person and someone who was loyal to her friends and family . Taylor initially disliked Toyah 's image , particularly her make @-@ up and clothes , which were too revealing . Toyah 's first major storyline saw her abducted by a stranger . At the time , Taylor said it was one of the hardest storylines she had to film and the Independent Television Commission believed it should have carried a warning before it was broadcast . A few months later , Toyah became the show 's first female character to be involved in a storyline surrounding the subject of under @-@ age sex . The storyline was criticised by watchdogs , but Taylor defended it , calling it educational . 
 Toyah began a relationship with Spider Nugent ( Martin Hancock ) in 1999 , which lasted until Hancock 's departure in July 2000 . The following year , the character was the focus of one of Coronation Street 's most controversial storylines , which saw her beaten and raped by Phil Simmonds ( Jack Deam ) . The storyline marked the first time in forty years that the show had included a rape . The storyline was criticised by some former Coronation Street cast members , who thought the producers were using the subject of rape to boost ratings . Taylor decided to leave the show in July 2002 and her character departed on @-@ screen the following year . Toyah was well received by critics and Taylor received the Best Young Actor accolade at the Inside Soap Awards and Best Dramatic Performance at The British Soap Awards . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 Toyah and her family move into 5 Coronation Street and soon upset the neighbours with their bad behaviour , most notably Curly Watts ( Kevin Kennedy ) . Toyah and her stepsister Leanne ( Jane Danson ) steal from the local newsagent and indulge in some under @-@ age drinking . Toyah develops a crush on Spider Nugent ( Martin Hancock ) and turns vegetarian to impress him . She also asks him to help save a turkey from being slaughtered for Christmas . After arguing with her mother , Janice ( Vicky Entwistle ) , and step @-@ father , Les ( Bruce Jones ) , Toyah runs away to London to find her biological father , Ronnie . However , Toyah comes across Neil Flynn ( Tim <unk> ) , who initially pretends to be her father and abducts her . Neil takes Toyah to some woods , but while he is distracted , Toyah manages to escape and she is soon found by Janice and Les . 
 Toyah gets a job at Roy 's Rolls , the local café , and begins dating Philip " Dobber " Dobson ( John Donnelly ) . Dobber is a bad influence on Toyah , persuading her to steal from the café and threatening to break up with her if she did not have sex with him . Toyah loses her virginity to Dobber , but she eventually sees through him and they break up . With the help of former teacher Ken Barlow ( William Roache ) , Toyah begins to improve her grades and even wins a writing competition . While spending the night watching a lunar eclipse together , Toyah and Spider have sex . They soon begin a relationship and live together at Emily Bishop 's ( Eileen Derbyshire ) house until she asks them to leave . Toyah and Spider then find themselves a bedsit . Toyah gets a second job as a barmaid at The Rovers Return . She and Spider start to drift apart and when Spider asks her to go to India with him , she turns him down . Spider then leaves Weatherfield alone . Toyah later has a one @-@ night stand with Andy McDonald ( Nicholas Cochrane ) . 
 After a night out with Sam Kingston ( Scott Wright ) , Toyah decides to walk the short distance home alone . She is soon set upon by an unseen assailant , who beats and rapes her . Toyah is found by Jason Grimshaw ( Ryan Thomas ) , who takes her home . Janice initially believes Toyah has been robbed and is shocked when Toyah tells her she was raped . Toyah recounts her story to the police after undergoing an examination at the hospital . Several male residents come under suspicion , particularly Peter Barlow ( Chris Gascoyne ) , but they are ruled out by DNA tests . Toyah struggles to deal with what has happened to her and she develops agoraphobia . While being comforted at home by her friend Phil Simmonds ( Jack Deam ) , Toyah recognises his voice as he calls out her name and realises that he is her rapist . Phil becomes aware that she knows and prevents her from escaping . Toyah 's screams are heard by Peter , who breaks the door down and knocks Phil unconscious . Phil is found guilty of rape and sent to prison . 
 Toyah has a brief romance with Sam . She also moves into a flat with Fiz Brown ( Jennie McAlpine ) and Maria Sutherland ( Samia <unk> ) . While on holiday in Blackpool , Toyah meets Goran <unk> ( Matt Zarb ) , an illegal immigrant . After a few dates , Goran proposes to Toyah , but she turns him down . Toyah starts dating her college tutor John <unk> ( Paul Warriner ) . She is initially reluctant to introduce him to her flatmates and when she does , they are surprised to see that he is a lot older than Toyah . John asks Toyah to move in with him and she agrees . When Toyah argues with Fiz about not liking John , Fiz reveals that he and Maria had sex , resulting in Maria becoming pregnant . Toyah confronts Maria , who gives her the impression that John forced himself on her . Remembering her rape , Toyah attacks John in front of his class . When he calms her down , Toyah breaks up with him . Toyah decides to leave Weatherfield . She reunites with Spider and they move to London . 
 = = Creation and casting = = 
 The four @-@ strong Battersby family was created and introduced to Coronation Street in a bid to increase falling ratings . News of the family 's arrival came days after the series producer , Brian Park , axed three regular characters . He stated " The <unk> are an exciting injection of fresh blood . They follow in the great tradition of the <unk> and Duckworths , balancing the mix of comedy and drama for which Coronation Street is justly renowned . " Actress and singer Toyah Willcox gave the producers permission to name the youngest member of the family after herself , since the character was born in 1982 at the height of her career . Willcox later regretted her decision . 
 Actress Georgia Taylor was cast as Toyah and the role marked her acting debut . Taylor was studying for her A @-@ levels when she originally auditioned for the part of Zoe Tattersall . She was unsuccessful , so she then auditioned for Toyah and won the role . Of her casting , she explained " When I got the call to say that I 'd got the part I just sat there open @-@ mouthed , hugging my best friend . I could barely believe it . It is all very different than being on stage – it 's not quite so intense because your audience isn 't right there in front of you . But it 's a very different type of satisfaction , working much faster with storylines and characters developing all the time . " At the time of her casting , Taylor was two years older than the character she portrayed . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Characterisation = = = 
 A month before she made her debut on @-@ screen , Toyah was described as being Janice 's ( Vicky Entwistle ) fourteen @-@ year @-@ old illegitimate daughter , who would become " the scourge of every Weatherfield Comprehensive teacher " . During an interview with the Daily Record 's Polly Graham , Taylor stated " Toyah 's gobby and cocky and makes her parents ' life a misery . But it 's brilliant playing her , it 's more fun than playing somebody nice . " Graham explained that both Toyah and her stepsister , Leanne ( Jane Danson ) were well known to the police for under @-@ age drinking and burglary . Taylor said that she hated her character 's clothes , as they were too revealing for her . She explained " In the beginning , the clothes that Toyah wore were terrible . I was very conscious of my bum hanging out from these tiny mini @-@ skirts . There are a lot of girls who wear those tarty skirts , but I never felt comfortable in that sort of thing . " Taylor also disliked Toyah 's make @-@ up , which was initially bright pink lipstick , a lot of black eyeliner and no foundation . 
 Toyah 's image eventually began to change and she became more aware of the way she looked when she got a boyfriend and started college . Toyah also took extra English lessons from Ken Barlow ( William Roache ) in a bid to better herself . Taylor later commented that her character got on her nerves due to her naivety . She also thought that Toyah had a romantic view of love , was too trusting and occasionally needed to be " a bit more clued up " . The actress added that Toyah was " a very decent person " , who was loyal to her friends . Digital Spy 's Kris Green described Toyah as " the more mellow of the <unk> " and thought that was due to Les ( Bruce Jones ) not being her biological father . The Daily Mirror 's Charlie Catchpole commented that Toyah went " from lumpy , sulky schoolgirl to confident , radiant young woman " . 
 = = = Abduction = = = 
 Following an argument with Janice and Les , Toyah ran away to London to find her real father , Ronnie . However , she was " led on " by Neil Flynn ( Tim <unk> ) , a stranger pretending to be Ronnie , and was later abducted by him . Taylor said the storyline was one of the hardest she had to film : " In the story , I come down to London to track down my real father and things go badly wrong . Toyah hitchhikes all the way and just leaves herself so wide open . She is so naive and trusting and open to being used and abused . " The storyline was filmed on location in the city of London in early August . An hour long episode focusing on Janice and Les ' search for Toyah was broadcast a month later . 
 Jones , who played Les , revealed that the runaway storyline was tough on him and he began crying when he read the script . He continued " The four of us in the Battersby family read our scripts together to work out how we are going to play our parts . On this occasion , all four of us were sobbing . It is not like a normal Coronation Street story , it 's more like a Taggart or a Cracker . " Jones thought the " scrapes " that Toyah found herself in were frightening and hoped that if the storyline could stop one teenager from running away from home , then it would be worthwhile . The storyline attracted the attention of the Independent Television Commission , who believed that the episode featuring Toyah 's abduction should have carried a warning before it was broadcast . 
 = = = Under @-@ age sex = = = 
 In October 1998 , Toyah became the first female Coronation Street character to be involved in a storyline surrounding the subject of under @-@ age sex . Toyah , who was sixteen at the time , had a holiday romance with Philip " Dobber " Dobson ( John Donnelly ) . She quickly introduced him to her parents and was prepared to do anything for him , like stealing from the local café . When Dobber asked Toyah to have sex with him , she agreed , despite knowing that she should wait . Toyah was scared that if she said no , Dobber would break up with her . Toyah was persuaded to lose her virginity to Dobber in the back of his car . The storyline was branded " controversial " and " shocking " , while watchdogs stated that it sent out the wrong ideas to young schoolgirls . Taylor defended the storyline and her character , saying " We have taken a strong moral line and are not promoting teenage sex . It 's quite the opposite . Toyah 's actions should be a lesson for other girls not to fall into the same trap . It was an educational storyline , and I feel it was done in a responsible way . " 
 The actress went on to explain that the storyline showed how Toyah regretted her actions and that young female viewers could learn from her mistake . She added " Anyone watching can see Dobber is just using Toyah and I hope the message gets across to other girls not to fall into the same trap . " Toyah did not use protection with Dobber , so her sister , Leanne , persuaded her to go to the doctor for the morning @-@ after pill . Taylor praised Leanne for being Toyah 's " conscience and the voice of common sense " . She thought that Leanne had given her good and responsible advice on how to deal with what happened . The Daily Record 's John Millar agreed with Taylor and wrote that the storyline was " building to a stark warning for the millions of teenagers tuning into the Street . " Millar believed at no time did the viewers get the impression that Toyah was doing something " admirable " and proclaimed that Toyah was " the sort of girl who needs care and affection , which explains why the poor soul was coaxed into losing her virginity after a holiday romance convinced her that she was in love . " 
 = = = Relationship with Spider Nugent = = = 
 Five months after moving onto Coronation Street , Toyah developed a crush on her neighbour , Spider Nugent ( Martin Hancock ) , and even turned vegetarian to try and impress him . Hancock told All About Soap 's Hilary Kingsley that Spider initially saw Toyah as " a chubby schoolgirl , a pesky brat who had a crush on him . " However , when she listened to his issues and helped him with his battles against the local supermarket and the council , Spider began to admire her instead . Hancock explained " She was so efficient and hard @-@ working that she became a friend . And then , over the summer , it hit him , " <unk> ! She 's turned out nice ! " While Spider and Toyah watched the 1999 solar eclipse together , they ended up having sex for the first time . Hancock observed that both Spider and Toyah were overcome by the excitement to the point that there was " an explosion of lust . " However , in the morning , Spider was torn about what had happened . He admired Toyah , but knew that if they became a couple , it would cause a lot of problems , particularly as there was a ten @-@ year age gap between them . Taylor explained that she was happy that her character was getting together with Spider , although their scenes together often took place in the " <unk> " of locations . 
 Spider decided to " dodge his responsibilities " and began staying away from Toyah , who was not happy about it as she wanted them to make a commitment . Spider eventually changed his mind and Hancock commented " The fact is that he really fancies Toyah , and he figures that he may as well be hung for a sheep as a goat . " The actor reckoned that Spider and Toyah brought out the best in each other . Spider and Toyah soon began a proper relationship and briefly lived together . However , when Spider announced that he wanted to settle down and buy a house with Toyah , the couple realised that they had started to drift apart . Spider thought that if they got a mortgage together it would help save the relationship , but Toyah did not want that at all . When Spider was offered a promotion , he realised that he did not want to work for the DSS anymore and quit . He then told Toyah that he had bought them tickets to India so that they could go and " find themselves . " However , Toyah insisted that she did not want to leave Weatherfield . Nicole Carmichael from Inside Soap wrote that while Spider did not want to lose Toyah , he felt that he could not stay and soon departed . 
 = = = Rape = = = 
 In April 2001 , Toyah was the focus of one of Coronation Street 's most controversial storylines . After enjoying a night out with her friend Sam Kingston ( Scott Wright ) , Toyah was raped , beaten and left for dead in an alleyway by an unknown assailant as she walked home alone . The storyline began during a special 45 @-@ minute episode that was broadcast during the Easter weekend . It marked the first time in forty years that Coronation Street had included a rape . Viewers saw Toyah being grabbed by her attacker , but not the actual act of rape . Instead Toyah 's " bruised body " was found by Jason Grimshaw ( Ryan Thomas ) just as he set out for an early morning run . Jason took a " traumatised " Toyah back to her house , where she told her mother what had happened . Toyah then had to repeat the story to the police and revealed that she did not know who raped her because she was semi @-@ conscious during the attack . Toyah underwent an examination and counselling at the local hospital . The scenes were shot at the St Mary 's Hospital Sexual Assault Centre in Manchester , where the writers spent four months researching victim 's experiences and working with the clinical director and the staff to get the scenario right . 
 The storyline was criticised by some former Coronation Street cast members , who believed the producers were using the subject of rape to gain higher ratings than rival soap opera EastEnders . Taylor defended the storyline and hoped that it would help other women who had been attacked to seek help . She stated " The main focus of the storyline is the psychological effect that the attack has on Toyah . There are many women out there who have been raped or sexually assaulted and we owe it to them to make sure that the story @-@ line is handled sensitively and accurately . There is no denying that rape is a sensitive and controversial storyline . But I have put my heart and soul into it trying to portray it accurately and I only hope that women who have experienced it will think I have given it justice . " A show spokesperson commented that the storyline would be " handled sensitively " and that it would not become " a whodunnit " . Some of the male residents came under suspicion and were forced to give DNA samples . Peter Barlow ( Chris Gascoyne ) briefly became the prime suspect , but DNA soon eliminated him from enquires . 
 Toyah was aware that her attacker knew her as she remembered him calling her name , but could not put a name to the voice . She also struggled to deal with her " physical and emotional scars " and soon developed agoraphobia . Toyah found support from her mother and neighbour Charlie Ramsden ( Clare McGlinn ) , who revealed that she had once been raped . Taylor told Inside Soap 's Allison Maund that Charlie 's advice really helped Toyah to start getting back on her feet . However , the process was hampered when Toyah received an anonymous phone call , which left her feeling " extremely frightened " . The phone call sparked " a terrifying event " in which Toyah 's rapist was finally revealed to be her friend Phil Simmonds ( Jack Deam ) . When Phil came round to comfort Toyah , she recognised his voice as he called out her name and realised that he was her rapist . While Toyah tried to escape , Phil grabbed her and held her hostage . Toyah 's screams were heard by Peter , who broke the door down and knocked Phil unconscious . A show spokesperson commented that Toyah would be left to worry about whether Phil would deny the rape and be convicted . 
 A couple of months later , Toyah received a letter from Phil asking her to visit him in prison and in return he would plead guilty to raping her . Until the letter arrived , Toyah had been piecing her life back together by getting her job back at the Rovers and starting a romance with Sam . Of how Toyah felt about the letter , Taylor told Adrian Lobb from Inside Soap , " By the time Toyah gets the letter , she has grown a little stronger . But it comes as a complete surprise . Toyah doesn 't trust Phil , obviously , and she thinks he 's playing games . While part of her wants to confront him about the attack , there 's another side of her that wants to let it go , and just leave it to the courts to deal with him . " Toyah agreed to Phil 's request to visit him and Taylor said that Toyah believed that seeing Phil in person would help her to come to terms with what happened . When Toyah came face to face with Phil , her first thought was how pathetic he looked . When Phil tried to make excuses for what he had done , Toyah did not feel any pity and told him to plead guilty , which he agreed to do . Toyah left the prison feeling " tearful , but triumphant " and Taylor commented that while she would never fully recover from her ordeal , Toyah was determined to look towards the future . 
 = = = Departure = = = 
 On 30 July 2002 , Neil Wilkes from Digital Spy reported that Taylor had quit Coronation Street after five years . Wilkes revealed that her contract would expire in October that year , but the actress had chosen to stay with the serial beyond that to give the writers time to come up with a storyline for her character 's departure . Series producer Kieran Roberts added that he was sorry to see Taylor go , but understood her decision to move on . Taylor later explained that she chose to leave because she and the writers struggled to come up with storylines for Toyah . She told the Liverpool Echo 's Janet Tansley " I was asked where she would go from there and couldn 't think what she could do . If I couldn 't see a future for her , I couldn 't play her . " Taylor filmed her final scenes on 3 January 2003 . 
 Despite a rumour that Toyah would become a victim of serial killer Richard Hillman ( Brian Capron ) , the producers decided that she needed " a fiery fling " before she left . Therefore , Toyah 's last storylines saw her embark on " a passionate affair " with her university tutor John <unk> ( Paul Warriner ) . However , the relationship quickly turned into a love triangle when John had an affair with Toyah 's flatmate Maria Sutherland ( Samia <unk> ) . When Toyah discovered the affair , she decided to leave the Street and made her on @-@ screen exit in February 2003 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In 1998 , Taylor earned the Best Young Actor accolade at the Inside Soap Awards . In 2001 , Taylor won Best Dramatic Performance at The British Soap Awards . She was also nominated for Most Popular Actress at the 7th National Television Awards . At the Inside Soap Awards , Taylor earned a Best Actress nomination , while Toyah 's rape was nominated in the Most Dramatic Storyline category . 
 The People 's Gavin Blyth and Jon Clarke stated that Toyah and Leanne were " rough , tough and make other streetwise teenagers look like they are fresh out of nursery . " The characters were credited with increasing the show 's ratings from 13 million to 19 million viewers . When Toyah met Dobber , the Daily Mirror 's Tony Purnell commented " If anyone was going to find Mr Wrong on holiday it was Toyah Battersby . " John Millar from the Daily Record wrote " The Street should be congratulated if the plight of Toyah Battersby – a brilliant performance by young Georgia Taylor , by the way – means just one schoolgirl says no to her lusting boyfriend . " 
 An Inside Soap columnist observed that during the controversy over whether the show was right to run a storyline about rape , Taylor 's " magnificent " portrayal of a rape victim seemed to have been forgotten . The Daily Mirror 's Tony Stewart also praised Taylor 's performance throughout the storyline , saying it was " so heart @-@ achingly convincing " . Stewart also wrote that Toyah 's attack was " a chilling reminder of how brutal life can be " . Stewart 's colleague , Sue Crawford , branded Toyah a " disaster magnet " . In June 2011 , Rachel Tarley from the Metro included Toyah 's rape in her list of the top 10 most controversial soap storylines . 
 Lorna Cooper , editor for MSN TV , included Toyah in a feature about soap 's forgotten characters . Cooper said Toyah " didn 't have the best of luck during her 1997 – 2003 stint on Coronation Street . " A writer for Virgin Media quipped " Wayward teen Toyah rampaged through The Street in the 1990s . She fell for eco @-@ warrior Spider but her life fell apart after she was raped by evil Phil Simmonds . She then followed Spider to London . " In November 2012 , Paul Millar from Digital Spy stated " Toyah Battersby was one of Coronation Street 's best @-@ loved characters – certainly the best @-@ loved Battersby – during the time in which she graced the cobbles . " 
 = Legacy of Leonid Brezhnev = 
 The full understanding of the history of the late Soviet Union and of its successor , the Russian Federation , requires the assessment of the legacy of Leonid Brezhnev , the third General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union ( CPSU ) and twice Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet . Leonid Brezhnev was the leader of the CPSU from 1964 until his death in 1982 , whose eighteen @-@ year reign was recognised as the time of social and economic stagnation in the late Soviet Union . 
 Despite his failures in domestic reforms , his foreign affairs and defence policies consolidated the position of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics ( USSR ) as a superpower . His popularity among the citizenry waned during his last years , and the Soviet people 's belief in communism and Marxism – Leninism slowly withered away but support still continued to be evident , even on the eve of his death . Following his death , political wrangling led to harsh criticism of both him and his family . Mikhail Gorbachev , the last Soviet leader , drew support from communists and the Soviet population by criticising Brezhnev 's rule , and referred to his rule as the " Era of Stagnation " . 
 Aside from the socio @-@ economic stagnation Brezhnev left to the nation , there was also a heritage of political and personal values . When Brezhnev died he left behind a gerontocracy , a group of leaders who were significantly older than most of the adult population . Historians have largely agreed that Brezhnev 's reign was one primarily of stagnation . However , in a poll taken in 2006 , 61 percent of the people polled viewed the Brezhnev era as good for Russia . 
 = = Immediate legacy = = 
 When Leonid Brezhnev died on 10 November 1982 Yuri Andropov was elected chairman of the committee in charge of managing his funeral . According to Time magazine Brezhnev 's death was mourned by the majority of Soviet citizens . First World commentators saw this as proof that Andropov would become Brezhnev 's successor as general secretary . The political corruption which had grown considerably during Brezhnev 's tenure had become a major problem to the Soviet Union 's economic development by the 1980s . In response Andropov initiated a nationwide anti @-@ corruption campaign . Andropov believed that the Soviet economy would possibly recover if the Soviet Government was able to increase social discipline amongst workers . Brezhnev 's regime was also criticised for ideological <unk> and self @-@ indulgence . The gerontocracy established by Brezhnev was slowly phased out by Andropov , and new recruits were appointed to the Party " centre " , such as future Premier Nikolai Ryzhkov and Chief Ideologue Yegor Ligachev . Soviet foreign policy had also gone awry during Brezhnev 's last years , and by June 1982 , just before his death , Ronald Reagan classified the Soviet Union as an " Evil Empire " . This hardline diplomatic stance did not wither away before Mikhail Gorbachev initiated the " New Thinking " . Support for Marxism – Leninism continued to be evident amongst the Soviet people , however , its base of support slowly withered during the Brezhnev Era . The Soviet people still remained wary of such concepts as liberal democracy and multi @-@ party systems , and because of it , Marxism – Leninism remained the leading belief in the country . Due to the large military buildup of the 1960s the Soviet Union was able to consolidate itself as a superpower during Brezhnev 's rule . 
 Brezhnev 's family , Yuri , Galina and Yuri Churbanov , were investigated and all , with the exception of Galina , were arrested on charges of political corruption during Mikhail Gorbachev 's administration . Churbanov , Brezhnev 's son @-@ in @-@ law , was sentenced to twelve years in prison on charges of large @-@ scale embezzlement and corruption . By December 1988 Churbanov had been stripped of all state honours , and sent to a labour camp . Galina , along with the rest of Brezhnev 's family , lost all their state privileges . The city of Brezhnev reverted to its old name <unk> <unk> , and a group within the Soviet leadership wanted to rename all towns , street , factories and institutions bearing Brezhnev 's name . This was actually carried through by the authorities in December 1988 when the Soviet Government issued a decree which stated all town , streets , factories , institutions and the like bearing Brezhnev 's and Konstantin Chernenko 's were to revert to their former name . According to his grandson Andrei Brezhnev , the very name Brezhnev had become a curse for the family , and several family members had been forced out of their jobs and their friends had deserted them . Brezhnev , who had inflated his role in World War II , was rescinded the Order of Victory on 21 September 1989 in a Supreme Soviet convocation . 
 During the Gorbachev Era , Brezhnev 's rule was considered less successful than that of Joseph Stalin ; in an opinion measurement poll only 7 percent chose the Brezhnev Era as good , while 10 percent picked the Stalin Era as good . Following the dissolution of the Soviet Union and Boris Yeltsin 's subsequent market reforms , many Russians viewed the Brezhnev era with nostalgia ; they missed the stability of that era which had subsequently been lost during the Gorbachev and Yeltsin eras . 
 = = Historical assessments = = 
 Historians have expressed criticism for Brezhnev and his rule . The scholarly literature dealing with him is scarce and , with the exception of the period immediately after his death , overwhelmingly negative . Very little has been written about Brezhnev in English , and even Russian literature . According to Mark <unk> and Edwin Bacon , the authors behind Brezhnev Reconsidered , Brezhnev had attracted little attention from the media due to a consensus of his rule that was formed shortly after his death ; literally that his rule was one primarily of stagnation . When Mikhail Gorbachev , the last Soviet leader , initiated perestroika he blamed the degradation of the Soviet economic and political system on Brezhnev , and called his rule the " Era of Stagnation " . Gorbachev claimed that Brezhnev followed " a fierce neo @-@ Stalinist line " , although in a later statement Gorbachev made assurances that Brezhnev was not as bad as he was made out to be , saying , " Brezhnev was nothing like the cartoon figure that is made of him now " . 
 British historian Robert Service wrote in his book , Russia : From <unk> to the Twenty @-@ First Century , that " When he [ Brezhnev ] succeeded Khrushchev , he was still a vigorous politician who expected to make the Party and government work more effectively . He had not been inactive ; he had not been entirely inflexible . But his General Secretaryship had turned into a ceremonial reign that had brought communism into its deepest contempt since 1917 . " He added that it was " hard to feel very sorry for Brezhnev " ; his socio @-@ economic policies had sent the country into an Era of Stagnation from which his successors were never able to fully recover . Talal <unk> states in his book Russia and the Middle East : Towards A New Foreign Policy that " Brezhnev 's legacy , generally unaffected by his weak successors ( Yuri Andropov and Konstantin Chernenko ) , was entanglement in Afghanistan , tension with China and Japan , as well as the prospect of a new dimension to the arms race with the United States in the form of the Strategic Defence Initiative ( Star Wars ) . " According to historian David <unk> in his book The Soviet Union under Gorbachev : Prospects for Reform " Brezhnev left his successors a Soviet Union suffering from a host of domestic and foreign problems " . The biggest obstacle , according to <unk> , was the weakness of the economy which had undermined Soviet influence outside its borders considerably during the late Brezhnev due to its relative technological backwardness . 
 The author of The Soviet Paradox : External Expansion , Internal Decline Seweryn Bialer has a more mixed assessment of Brezhnev 's reign . Bialer notes that the era was a time of " lost opportunities " , but admits that the economic growth during Brezhnev 's first years weakened " the rationale for radical reform " . However , as Bialer notes in his book , even the gerontocracy which Brezhnev himself had created were disillusioned with Brezhnev 's leadership when he died in 1982 . In his book Russia 's Transformation : Snapshots of a Crumbling System Robert Vincent Daniels argues that Brezhnev " gave the country stability , if nothing else , even though it was the stability of the police state " , and that his domestic and external policies tried to ensure the " status quo " . Daniels believes that Brezhnev 's reign can be separated into two parts , the first , starting in 1964 and ending in 1975 conforms to a " status quo leadership , building the economy , pursuing détente , and maintaining political equilibrium at home " . The second phase , which began in 1975 , was exactly the opposite ; the economy stopped growing , the collective leadership ended with Nikolai Podgorny 's removal , Brezhnev developed a cult of personality and the Soviet Union itself started to stagnate . Historians Jiří <unk> and Frank <unk> noted in their book Gorbachev 's New Thinking and Third World Conflicts that Brezhnev 's legacy was a " mixture of achievements and failures in both domestic and foreign policy " . However , they argue that by the time of his death his failures had become severe chronic systematic problems . Brezhnev 's main achievements , according to <unk> and <unk> , was his foreign and defence policies , however , with the economy in decline these achievements were not durable in the long @-@ run . They also note that the Soviet Union was able to consolidate itself as a superpower , which in turn increased their influence in non @-@ communist Third World countries . 
 On a positive note , Ian Thatcher argues that " [ r ] ather than deserving a reputation as the most vilified of all Soviet leaders , Brezhnev should be praised as one of the most successful exponents of the art of Soviet politics . " He argues that Brezhnev was a good politician within the framework of the Soviet political system . Dmitry <unk> said " Brezhnev wasn ’ t a minus for the history of our country , he was a huge plus , He laid a foundation for the country ’ s economics and agriculture . " Archie Brown wrote in his book , The Rise & Fall of Communism , that " From the point of view of Communist rulers , the Brezhnev era was in many ways successful . " Brown adds that the Soviet Union reached " rough parity with the United States " militarily by the early 1970s , and became a superpower in the military sense of the world . According to Brown " The Brezhnev era was a time when tens of millions of Soviet citizens lived a peaceful and predictable life than hitherto " and where " Most people did not live in fear of the KGB . " 
 = = Opinion polls = = 
 Brezhnev has fared well in Russian opinion polls when compared to his successors and predecessors . However , in the West he is most commonly remembered for starting the economic stagnation which triggered the dissolution of the Soviet Union . A 2000 poll by VTsIOM asked various Russians the question " Was a given period more positive or more negative for the country ? " . 36 percent of the people polled viewed Brezhnev 's tenure as more positive than negative . His predecessor , Nikita Khrushchev trailed close behind him , earning 33 percent . A poll by the Public Opinion Fund ( VTsIOM ) in September 1999 similarly chose the Brezhnev period as the time in the 20th century when " ordinary people lived best " , having a clear majority of 51 to 10 . In a similar poll done in 1994 , Brezhnev garnered a majority of only 36 to 16 . According to a 2006 Public Opinion Fund poll , 61 percent of the Russian people viewed the Brezhnev era as good for the country . A poll by the VTsIOM in 2007 showed that the majority of Russians would choose to live during the Brezhnev era over any other period of 20th @-@ century Russian history . Researchers have noted a surge in Brezhnev 's popularity , along with other communist rulers , during and in the aftermath of the Russian financial crisis of 1998 , which is well remembered by many Russians for plunging many into poverty . When comparing these two periods , Brezhnev 's USSR is best remembered for stability in prices and income by the Russians and not the socio @-@ economic stagnation for which he is remembered in the West . 
 = Percheron = 
 The Percheron is a breed of draft horse that originated in the <unk> river valley in western France , part of the former Perche province from which the breed takes its name . Usually gray or black in color , Percherons are well muscled , and known for their intelligence and willingness to work . Although their exact origins are unknown , the ancestors of the breed were present in the valley by the 17th century . They were originally bred for use as war horses . Over time , they began to be used for pulling stagecoaches and later for agriculture and hauling heavy goods . In the late 18th and early 19th centuries , Arabian blood was added to the breed . Exports of Percherons from France to the United States and other countries rose exponentially in the late 19th century , and the first purely Percheron stud book was created in France in 1883 . 
 Before World War I , thousands of Percherons were shipped from France to the United States , but after the war began , an embargo stopped shipping . The breed was used extensively in Europe during the war , with some horses being shipped from the US back to France to help in the war effort . Beginning in 1918 , Percherons began to be bred in Great Britain , and in 1918 the British Percheron Horse Society was formed . After a series of name and studbook ownership changes , the current US Percheron registry was created in 1934 . In the 1930s , Percherons accounted for 70 percent of the draft horse population in the United States , but their numbers declined substantially after World War II . However , the population began to recover and as of 2009 , around 2 @,@ 500 horses were registered annually in the United States alone . The breed is still used extensively for draft work , and in France they are used for food . They have been crossed with several light horse breeds to produce horses for range work and competition . Purebred Percherons are used for forestry work and pulling carriages , as well as work under saddle , including competition in English riding disciplines such as show jumping . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 The ideal size for the Percheron varies between countries . In France , height ranges from 15 @.@ 1 to 18 @.@ 1 hands ( 61 to 73 inches , 155 to 185 cm ) and weight from 1 @,@ 100 to 2 @,@ 600 pounds ( 500 to 1 @,@ 200 kg ) . Percherons in the United States generally stand between 16 @.@ 2 and 17 @.@ 3 hands ( 66 and 71 inches , 168 and 180 cm ) , with a range of 15 and 19 hands ( 60 and 76 inches , 152 and 193 cm ) . American Percherons average 1 @,@ 900 pounds ( 860 kg ) , and their top weight is around 2 @,@ 600 pounds ( 1 @,@ 200 kg ) . In Great Britain , 16 @.@ 2 hands ( 66 inches , 168 cm ) is the shortest acceptable height for stallions and 16 @.@ 1 hands ( 65 inches , 165 cm ) for mares , while weights range from around 2 @,@ 000 to 2 @,@ 200 pounds ( 910 to 1 @,@ 000 kg ) for stallions and 1 @,@ 800 to 2 @,@ 000 pounds ( 820 to 910 kg ) for mares . They are generally gray or black in coloring , although the American registry also allows the registration of roan , bay and chestnut horses . Only gray or black horses may be registered in France and Britain . Many horses have white markings on their heads and legs , but registries consider excessive white to be undesirable . 
 The head has a straight profile , broad forehead , large eyes and small ears . The chest is deep and wide and the croup long and level . The feet and legs are clean and heavily muscled . The overall impression of the Percheron is one of power and ruggedness . Enthusiasts describe the temperament as proud and alert , and members of the breed are considered intelligent , willing workers with good dispositions . They are considered easy keepers and adapt well to many conditions and climates . In the 19th century , they were known to travel up to 60 kilometres ( 37 mi ) a day at a trot . Horses in the French registry are branded on the neck with the intertwined letters " SP " , the initials of the Société Hippique Percheronne . 
 = = History = = 
 The Percheron breed originated in the <unk> river valley in France , which arises in Orne , part of the former Perche province , from which the breed gets its name . Several theories have been put forth as to the ancestry of the breed , though its exact origins are unknown . One source of foundation bloodstock may have been mares captured by Clovis I from the Bretons some time after 496 AD , and another may have been Arabian stallions brought to the area by Muslim invaders in the 8th century . Other possibilities are captured Moorish cavalry horses from the Battle of Poitiers in 732 AD , some of which were taken by warriors from Perche . A final theory posits that the Percheron and the Boulonnais breed are closely related , and that the Boulonnais influenced the Percheron when they were brought to Brittany as reinforcements for the legions of Caesar . It is known that during the 8th century , Arabian stallions were crossed with mares native to the area , and more Oriental horse blood was introduced by the Comte de Perche upon his return from the Crusades and expeditions into territory claimed by Spain . Blood from Spanish breeds was added when the Comte de Rotrou imported horses from Castile . No matter the theory of origin , breed historians agree that the terrain and climate of the Perche area had the greatest influence on the development of the breed . A possible reference to the horse is made in the 13th @-@ century romance Guillaume de Dole , in which the title character asks for " the Count of Perche 's horse " to be made ready , possibly indicating the " ' great horse , ' which could accommodate an armored knight " and was bred in the geographical setting of the poem . 
 During the 17th century , horses from Perche , the ancestors of the current Percheron , were smaller , standing between 15 and 16 hands ( 60 and 64 inches , 152 and 163 cm ) high , and more agile . These horses were almost uniformly gray ; paintings and drawings from the Middle Ages generally show French knights on mounts of this color . After the days of the armored knight , the emphasis in horse breeding was shifted so as to develop horses better able to pull heavy stage coaches at a fast trot . Gray horses were preferred because their light coloring was more visible at night . This new type of horse was called the " Diligence Horse " , because the stage coaches they pulled were named " diligences " . After the stage coach was replaced by rail , the modern Percheron type arose as a slightly heavier horse for use in agriculture and heavy hauling work moving goods from docks to railway terminals . 
 = = = 19th century = = = 
 Arabian stallions were made available to Percheron breeders for use in breeding army mounts , beginning in 1760 at the royal stud at Le Pin . Between 1789 and the early 1800s , the Percheron was in danger of becoming extinct as horse breeding was suppressed during the French Revolution and its aftermath . Early histories of the breed point to two gray Arabian stallions from Le Pin , Godolphin , and <unk> , as the blood that helped to restart Percheron breeding . However , later research found that Godolphin was a chestnut Arabian of ordinary conformation and no special worth , while <unk> was a gray saddle horse of unknown breeding . Modern breed historians contest that there was enough breeding stock left after the early 19th century to restart the breed without further Arabian influence , and state that it is unlikely that two horses of unremarkable breeding and conformation had a significant influence on the breed . Jean le Blanc , a founding stallion of the Percheron breed , was foaled in 1823 . Today , all Percherons trace their ancestry to this stallion . At this time the breed also became larger , with horses from other French districts being imported to Perche to change the Percheron from a coach horse averaging 1 @,@ 200 to 1 @,@ 400 pounds ( 540 to 640 kg ) to a draft horse averaging 2 @,@ 000 pounds ( 910 kg ) . In 1893 , the first Percheron stud book was created in France . By 1910 , French registrations had risen to almost 32 @,@ 000 horses . Between 1880 and 1920 , Percheron breeders in France exported horses all over the world , including South Africa , South America , Australia and North America . 
 = = = = In the United States and Great Britain = = = = 
 Percherons were first imported into the United States in 1839 , although only one of the initial four horses survived the ocean trip . Soon after , two stallions and two mares were imported ; one mare died shortly after arrival and one stallion went blind and was retired within a year . Although the first importations of Percherons were less than successful , the remaining stallion , named Diligence , was credited with siring almost 400 foals . In 1851 , three stallions were imported : Normandy 351 , Louis Napoleon 281 and Gray Billy . Throughout their stud careers , each had significant influence on American draft horse stock . In the mid @-@ 19th century in the United States , Percheron stallions were crossed with <unk> mares to improve the local stock , resulting in thousands of crossbred horses . After the American Civil War in the 1860s greatly reduced the number of horses , there was a significant need for large draft horses , especially in growing cities and in the expanding West . Large numbers of Percherons were imported to the United States beginning in the early 1870s , and they became popular with draft horse breeders and owners . In the 1880s , approximately 7 @,@ 500 horses were exported to the United States . This extensive importation lasted until 1893 , when the US experienced a financial panic , and virtually no Percheron imports occurred between 1894 and 1898 . In addition , many existing horses were lost as people were too poor to purchase or care for large draft horses . In 1898 , importations began again as abruptly as they had ceased , with an average of 700 horses a year imported between 1898 and 1905 . In 1906 alone , over 13 @,@ 000 horses were imported to the United States from France . In the American traveling circuses of the late 19th century and early 20th century , the Percheron was the most frequently seen draft horse . Drivers appreciated the breed 's agility , stamina and quick @-@ footed gait . 
 In 1876 , the Norman @-@ Percheron Association was formed by a group of Percheron breeders in Chicago , and at the same time the stud book was begun . The Norman @-@ Percheron Association was the United States ' first purebred livestock association . In 1877 , the word " Norman " was dropped from the name . Later , in the panic of 1893 , the Percheron Association went bankrupt and ceased to function . In 1905 , also in Chicago , Percheron breeders met again to reform as the Percheron Society of America . Since 1934 , the group has been known as the Percheron Horse Association of America . At its height , the organization was the largest draft horse association in the world , in the early 20th century registering over 10 @,@ 000 horses annually . 
 In the late 19th century , Percherons also began to be exported from the United States to Great Britain , where they were used to pull horse @-@ drawn buses in large cities . The first Percherons imported to Britain included some of the thousands of crossbreds from the United States . In Britain , many of the horses , once they finished their bus @-@ pulling career , were sold to farmers . Other imported horses were sold to the British Army , and in 1900 , 325 horses were shipped to South Africa for use in the Boer War . 
 = = = 20th and 21st centuries = = = 
 In 1911 , the French society restricted registration to horses with both parents already registered with the society . In the early 20th century , the Percheron was one of the four major draft horse breeds , along with the Belgian , the Clydesdale and the Shire . Breeders could sell their horses for significant amounts of money , especially in the United States and Canada , where breeding stock brought a premium price . 
 Prior to World War I , a flourishing trade route for Percherons existed between Nogent @-@ le @-@ Rotrou , Le Havre and the United States . However , after the war began , an embargo was placed on French Percherons , disallowing them from exportation . Other than an exception in April 1916 to allow 59 horses to be shipped from France to the US , this embargo remained in place until the end of the war . The war took its toll on the Percheron breed as horses , fodder , and handlers were requisitioned for the fighting , and even after the embargo was lifted France did not have the quality or quantity of stock to fulfill the needs of American breeders . The embargo created a breeding boom in the US , replacing the previous practice of importing the majority of Percherons from France , and late in the war horses were shipped the other way – from the US to Europe – to supply those needed in the war . The lack of feathering on the Percheron 's lower legs made them easier to care for in the mud that they often worked in during wartime . Their quick trot on paved roads made them more versatile than motorized vehicles , and they were useful for work with guns and in forward units due to their calm temperaments . 
 Between 1918 and 1922 , over 350 Percherons were imported to Britain from France and , combined with stock from the US and Canada , were used as breeding stock to establish the breed in the country . In 1918 , the British Percheron Horse Society was formed . British breeders and owners continue to import Percherons from France , and also occasionally from Canada , when not prohibitively expensive . 
 By the 1930s , Percherons accounted for over 70 percent of the purebred draft horses in the United States , and all of the major land @-@ grant universities maintained stables of Percherons . A 1930 census of horses found over 33 @,@ 000 Percherons in the United States , with the next most popular breed , the Belgian , having a population of less than 10 @,@ 000 . One Percheron historian attributes this popularity to the breed 's " strength , energy , activity , robustness and endurance " . After World War II , increasing mechanization prompted a decline in the Percheron population . In 1954 , only 85 Percherons were registered in the US , a record low . The 1950s , 1960s and early 1970s were bad years for the US Percheron population , and breeding was reduced to only a few farms . These breeders kept the American population alive through these years , however , and the 1980s saw renewed interest in the breed . 
 In 1966 , the French stud book was changed to include draft types from other areas of France that were closely related to the Percheron – including the horses of <unk> , Nivernais , Marne , Augeron , Bourbonnais , Loire and Saône @-@ et @-@ Loire . French Percherons were also hit hard by the advent of mechanization , and between 1970 and 1990 focus was placed on breeding horses of greater mass for the meat market . The largest and heaviest stallions were selected for breeding . Beginning at the 1989 World Percheron Congress , French breeders realized that they needed a lighter breed for tourism , export to Japan for draft work , and other markets . In 1993 , a trend of importing American stallions to France was started with the black stallion Silver Shadows Sheik . This stallion and others were used to create a more elegant , smaller and sleeker look in the French Percheron , while still retaining the traditional bone and foot structure . All the imported stallions were black , reviving the popularity of black Percherons in France . French breeders continue to import American @-@ bred Percheron stallions in order to produce lighter foals , moving away from the heavier meat @-@ type horses of the late 20th century . Also in 1993 , the Société Hippique Percheronne anticipated the increasing tourist and exportation markets by prohibiting docking , which was not prohibited for other draft breeds until 1996 . This was partly at the request of the Germans , and partly due to the influence of magazines such as Cheval . 
 In 1988 , there were 1 @,@ 088 Percherons in the United States , rising to 2 @,@ 257 by 1998 . As of 2009 , the Percheron Horse Association of America had horses registered in all 50 states , and had nearly 3 @,@ 000 members , with around 2 @,@ 500 new horses being registered annually . The French Société Hippique Percheronne de France ( Percheron Horse Society of France ) registered between 750 and 885 horses in each year between 2007 and 2010 . As of 2012 , the American Livestock Breeds Conservancy considers the Percheron to be " recovering " , meaning that the breed has exceeded the numbers required to be in one of the " watch " categories , but still needs to be monitored . 
 = = = Augeron = = = 
 The Augeron , also known as Caen or Virois , was developed from the Percheron during the 19th century and was merged back into the Percheron in the 1960s . Bred mainly in the Pays d <unk> region , it previously had its own studbook , registered by the Société hippique du trait <unk> . The status of the subtype has been repeatedly debated because of its origin from Percherons bred in Pays d <unk> , a breeding group that was modified from the original breed standard due to the influence of soil and climate over the years , creating the Augeron type . <unk> are light gray in color , tall , strong , well @-@ built , and energetic . They stand between 158 – 170 cm ( 15 @.@ 2 – 16 @.@ 3 hands ) in height , but those horses bred in Vire are known to be smaller than the standard . 
 In the 19th century , the existence of the Augeron population was , despite its popularity , generally ignored by authors . In Paris , they were named " Caen " and " Virois " , after their region of origin , although specialists included the " Caen Virois " breed with the Augeron in a 1904 text . In the 19th century , these horses were sold at fairs in <unk> and Bayeux in Lower Normandy . They were noticed several times for their homogeneity , beauty , and high value . In 1858 , <unk> were sold for between 600 and 1200 francs . 
 The Société hippique du trait <unk> , or Augeron Horse Society , was formed in 1913 by breeders in Auge to record these horses in a breed registry . One reason for this lay in the desire to protect the cradle of breeding Percheron horses : only animals born near the Perche were entitled to registration in the studbook , and hence to use the name of " Percheron " . This limitation excluded several nearby populations of horses foaled outside of Perche , such as the Maine and the Augeron . 
 = = Uses = = 
 The Percheron is the most famous and populous of all French draft breeds in the world today . They were used to improve both the Ardennes and Vladimir Heavy Draft horses , and to create the Spanish @-@ Norman breed , a cross between the Andalusian and the Percheron . By the end of the 19th century , Percherons made up the majority of driving horses in Paris . The Percheron is still used extensively for draft work and , like other draft breeds , it is also used in France for meat production . Around the world , Percherons are used for parades , sleigh rides and hayrides , as well as being used to pull carriages in large cities . The largest team of working Percherons in Europe is found at Disneyland Paris , where the breed makes up 30 percent of the horses in the park and the horses work to pull trams on the main park street . One of the most famous horse teams in the United States is the Heinz hitch of Percherons , having appeared multiple times at the Tournament of Roses Parade . 
 In Great Britain , the Percheron is used for advertising and publicity , as well as forestry and farm work . They are crossbred with lighter horses by breeders of heavy hunters in order to increase size and improve disposition . Purebred Percherons are also ridden , and some have proven useful at show jumping . Crossbred Percherons have been used successfully in dressage . In both the Falkland Islands and northern Australia , Percherons have been crossed with local mares , primarily Criollos in the Falklands , to produce larger stock horses with greater stamina . These crossbred horses are used extensively in both the sub @-@ Antarctic climate of the Falklands and the sub @-@ tropical climate of Australia for working stock . In Australia they are also crossed with Thoroughbreds for use as mounted police horses . 
 In 1978 , the first World Percheron Congress was held in Great Britain , and has been held annually ever since . Although the majority of the shows have been held in North America , four – in 1980 , 1989 , 2001 and 2011 – have been held in France . Each year , in July , the French national breed show is held in Haras du Pin . 
 = Iridium = 
 Iridium is a chemical element with symbol Ir and atomic number 77 . A very hard , brittle , silvery @-@ white transition metal of the platinum group , iridium is generally credited with being the second densest element ( after osmium ) based on measured density , although calculations involving the space lattices of the elements show that iridium is denser . It is also the most corrosion @-@ resistant metal , even at temperatures as high as 2000 ° C. Although only certain molten salts and halogens are corrosive to solid iridium , finely divided iridium dust is much more reactive and can be flammable . 
 Iridium was discovered in 1803 among insoluble impurities in natural platinum . Smithson Tennant , the primary discoverer , named iridium for the Greek goddess Iris , personification of the rainbow , because of the striking and diverse colors of its salts . Iridium is one of the rarest elements in Earth 's crust , with annual production and consumption of only three tonnes . 191Ir and <unk> are the only two naturally occurring isotopes of iridium , as well as the only stable isotopes ; the latter is the more abundant of the two . 
 The most important iridium compounds in use are the salts and acids it forms with chlorine , though iridium also forms a number of organometallic compounds used in industrial catalysis , and in research . Iridium metal is employed when high corrosion resistance at high temperatures is needed , as in high @-@ performance spark plugs , crucibles for recrystallization of semiconductors at high temperatures , and electrodes for the production of chlorine in the chloralkali process . Iridium radioisotopes are used in some radioisotope thermoelectric generators . 
 Iridium is found in meteorites with an abundance much higher than its average abundance in Earth 's crust . For this reason , the unusually high abundance of iridium in the clay layer at the Cretaceous – Paleogene boundary gave rise to the Alvarez hypothesis that the impact of a massive extraterrestrial object caused the extinction of dinosaurs and many other species 66 million years ago . Similarly , an iridium anomaly in core samples from the Pacific Ocean suggested the <unk> impact of about 2 @.@ 5 million years ago . 
 It is thought that the total amount of iridium in the planet Earth is much higher than that observed in crustal rocks , but as with other platinum @-@ group metals , the high density and tendency of iridium to bond with iron caused most iridium to descend below the crust when the planet was young and still molten . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Physical properties = = = 
 A member of the platinum group metals , iridium is white , resembling platinum , but with a slight yellowish cast . Because of its hardness , brittleness , and very high melting point , solid iridium is difficult to machine , form , or work , thus powder metallurgy is commonly employed , instead . It is the only metal to maintain good mechanical properties in air at temperatures above 1 @,@ 600 ° C ( 2 @,@ 910 ° F ) . It has the 10th highest boiling point among all elements and becomes a superconductor at temperatures below 0 @.@ 14 K. 
 Iridium 's modulus of elasticity is the second @-@ highest among the metals , only being surpassed by osmium . This , together with a high shear modulus and a very low figure for Poisson 's ratio ( the relationship of longitudinal to lateral strain ) , indicate the high degree of stiffness and resistance to deformation that have rendered its fabrication into useful components a matter of great difficulty . Despite these limitations and iridium 's high cost , a number of applications have developed where mechanical strength is an essential factor in some of the extremely severe conditions encountered in modern technology . 
 The measured density of iridium is only slightly lower ( by about 0 @.@ 12 % ) than that of osmium , the densest element known . Some ambiguity occurred regarding which of the two elements was denser , due to the small size of the difference in density and difficulties in measuring it accurately , but , with increased accuracy in factors used for calculating density X @-@ ray crystallographic data yielded densities of 22 @.@ 56 g / cm3 for iridium and 22 @.@ 59 g / cm3 for osmium . 
 = = = Chemical properties = = = 
 Iridium is the most corrosion @-@ resistant metal known : it is not attacked by almost any acid , aqua regia , molten metals , or silicates at high temperatures . It can , however , be attacked by some molten salts , such as sodium cyanide and potassium cyanide , as well as oxygen and the halogens ( particularly fluorine ) at higher temperatures . 
 = = = Compounds = = = 
 Iridium forms compounds in oxidation states between − 3 and + 9 ; the most common oxidation states are + 3 and + 4 . Well @-@ characterized examples of the high + 6 oxidation state are rare , but include IrF 
 6 and two mixed oxides Sr 
 <unk> 
 6 and Sr 
 <unk> 
 6 . In addition , it was reported in 2009 that iridium ( VIII ) oxide ( IrO 
 4 ) was prepared under matrix isolation conditions ( 6 K in Ar ) by UV irradiation of an iridium @-@ <unk> complex . This species , however , is not expected to be stable as a bulk solid at higher temperatures . The highest oxidation state ( + 9 ) , which is also the highest recorded for any element , is only known in one cation , IrO + 
 4 ; it is only known as gas @-@ phase species and is not known to form any salts . 
 Iridium dioxide , IrO 
 2 , a brown powder , is the only well @-@ characterized oxide of iridium . A sesquioxide , Ir 
 2O 
 3 , has been described as a blue @-@ black powder which is oxidized to IrO 
 2 by <unk> 
 3 . The corresponding <unk> , diselenides , <unk> , and <unk> are known , and <unk> 
 3 has also been reported . Iridium also forms <unk> with oxidation states + 4 and + 5 , such as K 
 <unk> 
 3 and <unk> 
 3 , which can be prepared from the reaction of potassium oxide or potassium superoxide with iridium at high temperatures . 
 Although no binary hydrides of iridium , <unk> are known , complexes are known that contain <unk> − 
 5 and <unk> − 
 6 , where iridium has the + 1 and + 3 oxidation states , respectively . The ternary hydride Mg 
 <unk> 
 2H 
 11 is believed to contain both the <unk> − 
 5 and the 18 @-@ electron <unk> − 
 4 anion . 
 No <unk> or dihalides are known , whereas trihalides , <unk> 
 3 , are known for all of the halogens . For oxidation states + 4 and above , only the tetrafluoride , pentafluoride and hexafluoride are known . Iridium hexafluoride , IrF 
 6 , is a volatile and highly reactive yellow solid , composed of octahedral molecules . It decomposes in water and is reduced to IrF 
 4 , a crystalline solid , by iridium black . Iridium pentafluoride has similar properties but it is actually a tetramer , Ir 
 4F 
 20 , formed by four corner @-@ sharing octahedra . Iridium metal dissolves in molten alkali @-@ metal <unk> to produce the Ir ( CN ) 3 + 
 6 ( <unk> ) ion . 
 <unk> ( IV ) acid , H 
 <unk> 
 6 , and its ammonium salt are the most important iridium compounds from an industrial perspective . They are involved in the purification of iridium and used as precursors for most other iridium compounds , as well as in the preparation of anode coatings . The <unk> − 
 6 ion has an intense dark brown color , and can be readily reduced to the lighter @-@ colored <unk> − 
 6 and vice versa . Iridium trichloride , IrCl 
 3 , which can be obtained in anhydrous form from direct oxidation of iridium powder by chlorine at 650 ° C , or in hydrated form by dissolving Ir 
 2O 
 3 in hydrochloric acid , is often used as a starting material for the synthesis of other Ir ( III ) compounds . Another compound used as a starting material is ammonium <unk> ( III ) , ( NH 
 4 ) 
 <unk> 
 6 . Iridium ( III ) complexes are diamagnetic ( low @-@ spin ) and generally have an octahedral molecular geometry . 
 <unk> compounds contain iridium – carbon bonds where the metal is usually in lower oxidation states . For example , oxidation state zero is found in <unk> dodecacarbonyl , Ir 
 4 ( CO ) 
 12 , which is the most common and stable binary carbonyl of iridium . In this compound , each of the iridium atoms is bonded to the other three , forming a tetrahedral cluster . Some organometallic Ir ( I ) compounds are notable enough to be named after their discoverers . One is <unk> 's complex , IrCl ( CO ) [ P ( C 
 6H 
 5 ) 
 3 ] 
 2 , which has the unusual property of binding to the dioxygen molecule , O 
 2 . Another one is Crabtree 's catalyst , a homogeneous catalyst for hydrogenation reactions . These compounds are both square planar , <unk> complexes , with a total of 16 valence electrons , which accounts for their reactivity . 
 An iridium @-@ based organic LED material has been documented , and found to be much brighter than DPA or PPV , so could be the basis for flexible OLED lighting in the future . 
 = = = Isotopes = = = 
 Iridium has two naturally occurring , stable isotopes , 191Ir and <unk> , with natural abundances of 37 @.@ 3 % and 62 @.@ 7 % , respectively . At least 34 radioisotopes have also been synthesized , ranging in mass number from 164 to 199 . 192Ir , which falls between the two stable isotopes , is the most stable radioisotope , with a half @-@ life of 73 @.@ 827 days , and finds application in brachytherapy and in industrial radiography , particularly for nondestructive testing of welds in steel in the oil and gas industries ; iridium @-@ 192 sources have been involved in a number of radiological accidents . Three other isotopes have half @-@ lives of at least a day — <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . Isotopes with masses below 191 decay by some combination of β + decay , α decay , and ( rare ) proton emission , with the exceptions of <unk> , which decays by electron capture . Synthetic isotopes heavier than 191 decay by β − decay , although 192Ir also has a minor electron capture decay path . All known isotopes of iridium were discovered between 1934 and 2001 ; the most recent is <unk> . 
 At least 32 metastable isomers have been characterized , ranging in mass number from 164 to 197 . The most stable of these is <unk> , which decays by isomeric transition with a half @-@ life of 241 years , making it more stable than any of iridium 's synthetic isotopes in their ground states . The least stable isomer is <unk> with a half @-@ life of only 2 µs . The isotope 191Ir was the first one of any element to be shown to present a Mössbauer effect . This renders it useful for Mössbauer spectroscopy for research in physics , chemistry , biochemistry , metallurgy , and mineralogy . 
 = = History = = 
 The discovery of iridium is intertwined with that of platinum and the other metals of the platinum group . Native platinum used by ancient Ethiopians and by South American cultures always contained a small amount of the other platinum group metals , including iridium . Platinum reached Europe as platina ( " <unk> " ) , found in the 17th century by the Spanish conquerors in a region today known as the department of Chocó in Colombia . The discovery that this metal was not an alloy of known elements , but instead a distinct new element , did not occur until 1748 . 
 Chemists who studied platinum dissolved it in aqua regia ( a mixture of hydrochloric and nitric acids ) to create soluble salts . They always observed a small amount of a dark , insoluble residue . Joseph Louis Proust thought that the residue was graphite . The French chemists Victor Collet @-@ Descotils , Antoine François , comte de Fourcroy , and Louis Nicolas Vauquelin also observed the black residue in 1803 , but did not obtain enough for further experiments . 
 In 1803 , British scientist Smithson Tennant ( 1761 – 1815 ) analyzed the insoluble residue and concluded that it must contain a new metal . Vauquelin treated the powder alternately with alkali and acids and obtained a volatile new oxide , which he believed to be of this new metal — which he named <unk> , from the Greek word <unk> <unk> , " winged " . Tennant , who had the advantage of a much greater amount of residue , continued his research and identified the two previously undiscovered elements in the black residue , iridium and osmium . He obtained dark red crystals ( probably of Na 
 2 [ IrCl 
 6 ] · nH 
 2O ) by a sequence of reactions with sodium hydroxide and hydrochloric acid . He named iridium after Iris ( <unk> ) , the Greek winged goddess of the rainbow and the messenger of the Olympian gods , because many of the salts he obtained were strongly colored . Discovery of the new elements was documented in a letter to the Royal Society on June 21 , 1804 . 
 British scientist John George Children was the first to melt a sample of iridium in 1813 with the aid of " the greatest galvanic battery that has ever been constructed " ( at that time ) . The first to obtain high @-@ purity iridium was Robert Hare in 1842 . He found it had a density of around 21 @.@ 8 g / cm3 and noted the metal is nearly <unk> and very hard . The first melting in appreciable quantity was done by Henri Sainte @-@ Claire Deville and Jules Henri Debray in 1860 . They required burning more than 300 liters of pure O 
 2 and H 
 2 gas for each kilogram of iridium . 
 These extreme difficulties in melting the metal limited the possibilities for handling iridium . John Isaac Hawkins was looking to obtain a fine and hard point for fountain pen nibs , and in 1834 managed to create an iridium @-@ pointed gold pen . In 1880 , John Holland and William <unk> Dudley were able to melt iridium by adding phosphorus and patented the process in the United States ; British company Johnson Matthey later stated they had been using a similar process since 1837 and had already presented fused iridium at a number of World Fairs . The first use of an alloy of iridium with ruthenium in thermocouples was made by Otto <unk> in 1933 . These allowed for the measurement of high temperatures in air up to 2000 ° C. 
 In Munich , Germany in 1957 Rudolf Mössbauer , in what has been called one of the " landmark experiments in twentieth @-@ century physics " , discovered the resonant and recoil @-@ free emission and absorption of gamma rays by atoms in a solid metal sample containing only 191Ir . This phenomenon , known as the Mössbauer effect ( which has since been observed for other nuclei , such as <unk> ) , and developed as Mössbauer spectroscopy , has made important contributions to research in physics , chemistry , biochemistry , metallurgy , and mineralogy . Mössbauer received the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1961 , at the age 32 , just three years after he published his discovery . In 1986 Rudolf Mössbauer was honored for his achievements with the Albert Einstein Medal and the Elliot Cresson Medal . 
 = = Occurrence = = 
 Iridium is one of the nine least abundant stable elements in Earth 's crust , having an average mass fraction of 0 @.@ 001 ppm in crustal rock ; gold is 40 times more abundant , platinum is 10 times more abundant , and silver and mercury are 80 times more abundant . Tellurium is about as abundant as iridium . In contrast to its low abundance in crustal rock , iridium is relatively common in meteorites , with concentrations of 0 @.@ 5 ppm or more . The overall concentration of iridium on Earth is thought to be much higher than what is observed in crustal rocks , but because of the density and <unk> ( " iron @-@ loving " ) character of iridium , it descended below the crust and into Earth 's core when the planet was still molten . 
 Iridium is found in nature as an uncombined element or in natural alloys ; especially the iridium – osmium alloys , osmiridium ( osmium @-@ rich ) , and <unk> ( iridium @-@ rich ) . In the nickel and copper deposits , the platinum group metals occur as sulfides ( i.e. ( Pt , Pd ) S ) , tellurides ( i.e. PtBiTe ) , antimonides ( PdSb ) , and arsenides ( i.e. <unk> 
 2 ) . In all of these compounds , platinum is exchanged by a small amount of iridium and osmium . As with all of the platinum group metals , iridium can be found naturally in alloys with raw nickel or raw copper . 
 Within Earth 's crust , iridium is found at highest concentrations in three types of geologic structure : igneous deposits ( crustal intrusions from below ) , impact craters , and deposits reworked from one of the former structures . The largest known primary reserves are in the Bushveld igneous complex in South Africa , though the large copper – nickel deposits near Norilsk in Russia , and the Sudbury Basin in Canada are also significant sources of iridium . Smaller reserves are found in the United States . Iridium is also found in secondary deposits , combined with platinum and other platinum group metals in alluvial deposits . The alluvial deposits used by pre @-@ Columbian people in the Chocó Department of Colombia are still a source for platinum @-@ group metals . As of 2003 , the world reserves had not been estimated . 
 = = = Cretaceous – Paleogene boundary presence = = = 
 The Cretaceous – Paleogene boundary of 66 million years ago , marking the temporal border between the Cretaceous and Paleogene periods of geological time , was identified by a thin stratum of iridium @-@ rich clay . A team led by Luis Alvarez proposed in 1980 an extraterrestrial origin for this iridium , attributing it to an asteroid or comet impact . Their theory , known as the Alvarez hypothesis , is now widely accepted to explain the extinction of the non @-@ avian dinosaurs . A large buried impact crater structure with an estimated age of about 66 million years was later identified under what is now the Yucatán Peninsula ( the Chicxulub crater ) . Dewey M. McLean and others argue that the iridium may have been of volcanic origin instead , because Earth 's core is rich in iridium , and active volcanoes such as Piton de la Fournaise , in the island of Réunion , are still releasing iridium . 
 = = Production = = 
 Iridium is also obtained commercially as a by @-@ product from nickel and copper mining and processing . During electrorefining of copper and nickel , noble metals such as silver , gold and the platinum group metals as well as selenium and tellurium settle to the bottom of the cell as anode mud , which forms the starting point for their extraction . To separate the metals , they must first be brought into solution . Several separation methods are available depending on the nature of the mixture ; two representative methods are fusion with sodium peroxide followed by dissolution in aqua regia , and dissolution in a mixture of chlorine with hydrochloric acid . 
 After the mixture is dissolved , iridium is separated from the other platinum group metals by precipitating ammonium <unk> ( ( NH 
 4 ) 
 <unk> 
 6 ) or by extracting <unk> − 
 6 with organic amines . The first method is similar to the procedure Tennant and Wollaston used for their separation . The second method can be planned as continuous liquid – liquid extraction and is therefore more suitable for industrial scale production . In either case , the product is reduced using hydrogen , yielding the metal as a powder or sponge that can be treated using powder metallurgy techniques . 
 Iridium prices have fluctuated over a considerable range . With a relatively small volume in the world market ( compared to other industrial metals like aluminium or copper ) , the iridium price reacts strongly to instabilities in production , demand , speculation , hoarding , and politics in the producing countries . As a substance with rare properties , its price has been particularly influenced by changes in modern technology : The gradual decrease between 2001 and 2003 has been related to an oversupply of Ir crucibles used for industrial growth of large single crystals . Likewise the prices above 1000 USD / oz between 2010 and 2014 have been explained with the installation of production facilities for single crystal sapphire used in LED backlights for TVs . 
 = = Applications = = 
 The demand for iridium surged from 2 @.@ 5 tonnes in 2009 to 10 @.@ 4 tonnes in 2010 , mostly because of electronics @-@ related applications that saw a rise from 0 @.@ 2 to 6 tonnes – iridium crucibles are commonly used for growing large high @-@ quality single crystals , demand for which has increased sharply . This increase in iridium consumption is predicted to saturate due to accumulating stocks of crucibles , as happened earlier in the 2000s . Other major applications include spark plugs that consumed 0 @.@ 78 tonnes of iridium in 2007 , electrodes for the chloralkali process ( 1 @.@ 1 t in 2007 ) and chemical catalysts ( 0 @.@ 75 t in 2007 ) . 
 = = = Industrial and medical = = = 
 The high melting point , hardness and corrosion resistance of iridium and its alloys determine most of its applications . Iridium and especially iridium – platinum alloys or osmium – iridium alloys have a low wear and are used , for example , for multi @-@ pored spinnerets , through which a plastic polymer melt is extruded to form fibers , such as rayon . Osmium – iridium is used for compass bearings and for balances . 
 Their resistance to arc erosion makes iridium alloys ideal for electrical contacts for spark plugs , and iridium @-@ based spark plugs are particularly used in aviation . 
 Pure iridium is extremely brittle , to the point of being hard to weld because the heat @-@ affected zone cracks , but it can be made more ductile by addition of small quantities of titanium and zirconium ( 0 @.@ 2 % of each apparently works well ) 
 Corrosion and heat resistance makes iridium an important alloying agent . Certain long @-@ life aircraft engine parts are made of an iridium alloy , and an iridium – titanium alloy is used for deep @-@ water pipes because of its corrosion resistance . Iridium is also used as a hardening agent in platinum alloys . The Vickers hardness of pure platinum is 56 HV , whereas platinum with 50 % of iridium can reach over 500 HV . 
 Devices that must withstand extremely high temperatures are often made from iridium . For example , high @-@ temperature crucibles made of iridium are used in the Czochralski process to produce oxide single @-@ crystals ( such as sapphires ) for use in computer memory devices and in solid state lasers . The crystals , such as gadolinium gallium garnet and yttrium gallium garnet , are grown by melting pre @-@ sintered charges of mixed oxides under oxidizing conditions at temperatures up to 2100 ° C. 
 Iridium compounds are used as catalysts in the Cativa process for carbonylation of methanol to produce acetic acid . 
 The radioisotope iridium @-@ 192 is one of the two most important sources of energy for use in industrial γ @-@ radiography for non @-@ destructive testing of metals . Additionally , 192Ir is used as a source of gamma radiation for the treatment of cancer using brachytherapy , a form of radiotherapy where a sealed radioactive source is placed inside or next to the area requiring treatment . Specific treatments include high @-@ dose @-@ rate prostate brachytherapy , <unk> duct brachytherapy , and intracavitary cervix brachytherapy . 
 Iridium is a good catalyst for the decomposition of hydrazine ( into hot nitrogen and ammonia ) , and this is used in practice in low @-@ thrust rocket engines ; there are more details in the <unk> rocket article . 
 = = = Scientific = = = 
 An alloy of 90 % platinum and 10 % iridium was used in 1889 to construct the International Prototype Metre and kilogram mass , kept by the International Bureau of Weights and Measures near Paris . The meter bar was replaced as the definition of the fundamental unit of length in 1960 by a line in the atomic spectrum of krypton , but the kilogram prototype is still the international standard of mass . 
 Iridium has been used in the radioisotope thermoelectric generators of unmanned spacecraft such as the Voyager , Viking , Pioneer , Cassini , Galileo , and New Horizons . Iridium was chosen to encapsulate the plutonium @-@ 238 fuel in the generator because it can withstand the operating temperatures of up to 2000 ° C and for its great strength . 
 Another use concerns X @-@ ray optics , especially X @-@ ray telescopes . The mirrors of the Chandra X @-@ ray Observatory are coated with a layer of iridium 60 nm thick . Iridium proved to be the best choice for reflecting X @-@ rays after nickel , gold , and platinum were also tested . The iridium layer , which had to be smooth to within a few atoms , was applied by depositing iridium vapor under high vacuum on a base layer of chromium . 
 Iridium is used in particle physics for the production of antiprotons , a form of antimatter . <unk> are made by shooting a high @-@ intensity proton beam at a conversion target , which needs to be made from a very high density material . Although tungsten may be used instead , iridium has the advantage of better stability under the shock waves induced by the temperature rise due to the incident beam . 
 Carbon – hydrogen bond activation ( C – H activation ) is an area of research on reactions that cleave carbon – hydrogen bonds , which were traditionally regarded as unreactive . The first reported successes at activating C – H bonds in saturated hydrocarbons , published in 1982 , used organometallic iridium complexes that undergo an oxidative addition with the hydrocarbon . 
 Iridium complexes are being investigated as catalysts for asymmetric hydrogenation . These catalysts have been used in the synthesis of natural products and able to <unk> certain difficult substrates , such as <unk> alkenes , <unk> ( generating only one of the two possible enantiomers ) . 
 Iridium forms a variety of complexes of fundamental interest in triplet harvesting . 
 = = = Historical = = = 
 Iridium – osmium alloys were used to tip fountain pen nibs . The first major use of iridium was in 1834 in nibs mounted on gold . Since 1944 , the famous Parker 51 fountain pen was fitted with a nib tipped by a ruthenium and iridium alloy ( with 3 @.@ 8 % iridium ) . The tip material in modern fountain pens is still conventionally called " iridium " , although there is seldom any iridium in it ; other metals such as tungsten have taken its place . 
 An iridium – platinum alloy was used for the touch holes or vent pieces of cannon . According to a report of the Paris Exhibition of 1867 , one of the pieces being exhibited by Johnson and Matthey " has been used in a <unk> gun for more than 3000 rounds , and scarcely shows signs of wear yet . Those who know the constant trouble and expense which are occasioned by the wearing of the vent @-@ pieces of cannon when in active service , will appreciate this important adaptation " . 
 The pigment iridium black , which consists of very finely divided iridium , is used for painting porcelain an intense black ; it was said that " all other porcelain black colors appear grey by the side of it " . 
 = = Precautions = = 
 Iridium in bulk metallic form is not biologically important or hazardous to health due to its lack of reactivity with tissues ; there are only about 20 parts per trillion of iridium in human tissue . Like most metals , finely divided iridium powder can be hazardous to handle , as it is an irritant and may ignite in air . Very little is known about the toxicity of iridium compounds because they are used in very small amounts , but soluble salts , such as the iridium halides , could be hazardous due to elements other than iridium or due to iridium itself . However , most iridium compounds are insoluble , which makes absorption into the body difficult . 
 A radioisotope of iridium , 192Ir , is dangerous like other radioactive isotopes . The only reported injuries related to iridium concern accidental exposure to radiation from 192Ir used in brachytherapy . High @-@ energy gamma radiation from 192Ir can increase the risk of cancer . External exposure can cause burns , radiation poisoning , and death . Ingestion of 192Ir can burn the linings of the stomach and the intestines . 192Ir , <unk> , and <unk> tend to deposit in the liver , and can pose health hazards from both gamma and beta radiation . 
 = NeXT = 
 NeXT , Inc . ( later NeXT Computer , Inc. and NeXT Software , Inc ) was an American computer company headquartered in Redwood City , California , that developed and manufactured a series of computer workstations intended for the higher education and business markets . NeXT was founded in 1985 by Apple Computer co @-@ founder Steve Jobs , after he resigned from Apple , along with his co @-@ workers . NeXT introduced the first NeXT Computer in 1988 , and the smaller NeXTstation in 1990 . The NeXT computers experienced relatively limited sales , with estimates of about 50 @,@ 000 units shipped in total . Nevertheless , their innovative object @-@ oriented NeXTSTEP operating system and development environment were highly influential . 
 The NeXT Computer and NeXTSTEP operating system were the platform used for creating the World Wide Web , as well as creating the first app store , which was originally demonstrated to Steve Jobs in 1993 . 
 NeXT later released much of the NeXTSTEP system as a programming environment standard called OpenStep . NeXT withdrew from the hardware business in 1993 to concentrate on marketing OPENSTEP for Mach , its own OpenStep implementation , for several OEMs . NeXT also developed WebObjects , one of the first enterprise Web application frameworks . WebObjects never became very popular because of its initial high price of $ 50 @,@ 000 , but it remains a prominent early example of a Web server based on dynamic page generation rather than on static content . 
 Apple purchased NeXT in 1997 for $ 429 million and 1 @.@ 5 million shares of Apple stock . As part of the agreement , Steve Jobs , Chairman and CEO of NeXT Software , returned to Apple , the company he had co @-@ founded in 1976 . The founder promised to merge software from NeXT with Apple 's hardware platforms , eventually resulting in OS X , iOS , and now <unk> and <unk> . Parts of these operating systems incorporated the OPENSTEP foundation . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 In 1985 , Apple co @-@ founder Steve Jobs was the head of Apple 's <unk> division , which was responsible for the development of the Macintosh and Lisa personal computers . The Macintosh had been successful on university campuses in considerable part because of the Apple University Consortium , which allowed students and institutions to buy the computers at a discount . The consortium had sold more than $ 50 million in computers by February 1984 . 
 While chairman , Jobs visited university departments and faculty members to sell Macintosh . Jobs met Paul Berg , a Nobel Laureate in chemistry , at a luncheon held in Silicon Valley to honor François Mitterrand , then President of France . Berg was frustrated by the expense of teaching students about recombinant DNA from textbooks instead of in wet laboratories , used for the testing and analysis of chemicals , drugs , and other materials or biological matter . Wet labs were prohibitively expensive for lower @-@ level courses and were too complex to be simulated on personal computers of the time . Berg suggested to Jobs to use his influence at Apple to create a " 3M computer " workstation for higher education , featuring more than one megabyte of random @-@ access memory ( RAM ) , a megapixel display and <unk> performance , hence the name " 3M " . 
 Jobs was intrigued by Berg 's concept of a workstation and contemplated starting a higher education computer company in the fall of 1985 , amidst increasing turmoil at Apple . Jobs ' division did not release upgraded versions of the Macintosh and most of the Macintosh Office . As a result , sales plummeted , and Apple was forced to write off millions of dollars in unsold inventory . Apple 's chief executive officer ( CEO ) John Sculley ousted Jobs from his day @-@ to @-@ day role at Apple , replacing him with Jean @-@ Louis Gassée in 1985 . Later that year , Jobs began a power struggle to regain control of the company . The board of directors sided with Sculley while Jobs took a business visit to Western Europe and the Soviet Union on behalf of Apple . 
 = = = Original NeXT team = = = 
 After several months of being sidelined , Jobs resigned from Apple on September 13 , 1985 . He told the board he was leaving to set up a new computer company , and that he would be taking several Apple employees from the <unk> division with him . He also told the board that his new company would not compete with Apple and might even consider licensing its designs back to them to market under the Macintosh brand . 
 Jobs named his new company Next , Inc . A number of former Apple employees followed him to Next , including Joanna Hoffman , Bud Tribble , George Crow , Rich Page , Susan Barnes , Susan Kare , and Dan 'l Lewin . After consulting with major educational buyers from around the country , including a follow @-@ up meeting with Paul Berg , a tentative specification for the workstation was drawn up . It was designed to be powerful enough to run wet lab simulations and cheap enough for college students to use in their dormitory rooms . Before the specifications were finished , however , Apple sued Next for " nefarious schemes " to take advantage of the cofounders ' insider information . Jobs remarked , " It is hard to think that a $ 2 billion company with 4 @,@ 300 @-@ plus people couldn 't compete with six people in blue jeans . " The suit was eventually dismissed before trial . 
 In 1986 , Jobs recruited the famous graphic designer Paul Rand to create a brand identity costing $ 100 @,@ 000 . Rand created a 100 @-@ page brochure detailing the brand , including the precise angle used for the logo ( 28 ° ) and a new company name , NeXT . The first major outside investment was from Ross Perot , who invested after seeing a segment about NeXT on The Entrepreneurs . In 1987 , he invested $ 20 million in exchange for 16 percent of NeXT 's stock and subsequently joined the board of directors in 1988 . 
 = = = 1987 – 93 : NeXT Computer = = = 
 = = = = First generation = = = = 
 NeXT changed its business plan in mid @-@ 1986 . The company decided to develop both computer hardware and software , instead of just a low @-@ end workstation . A team led by Avie <unk> , who had joined the company after working as one of the Mach kernel engineers at Carnegie Mellon University , was to develop the NeXTSTEP operating system . The hardware division , led by Rich Page — one of the cofounders who had previously led the Apple Lisa team — designed and developed the hardware . NeXT 's first factory was completed in Fremont , California in 1987 . It was capable of producing 150 @,@ 000 machines per year . NeXT 's first workstation was officially named the NeXT Computer , although it was widely termed " the cube " because of its distinctive case , a 1 ft magnesium cube , designed by Apple IIc case designer <unk> in accordance with an edit from Jobs . 
 The original design team had anticipated releasing the computer for US $ 3 @,@ 000 in spring of 1987 to be ready for sale by summer of that year . Prototype workstations were eventually shown to standing ovations on October 12 , 1988 . The NeXT Computer was revealed at a lavish , invitation @-@ only gala event , " NeXT Introduction — the Introduction to the NeXT Generation of Computers for Education " at the Louise M. Davies Symphony Hall , San Francisco , California on Wednesday October 12 , 1988 . The following day , selected educators and software developers were invited ( for $ 100 registration fee ) to attend the first public technical overview of the NeXT computer at an event called " The NeXT Day " held at the San Francisco Hilton . This event gave developers interested in developing NeXT software an insight into the software architecture , object @-@ oriented programming and developing for the NeXT Computer . The luncheon speaker was Steve Jobs . 
 The first machines were tested in 1989 , after which NeXT started selling limited numbers to universities with a beta version of the NeXTSTEP operating system installed . Initially the NeXT Computer was targeted at U.S. higher education establishments only , with a base price of $ 6 @,@ 500 . The machine was widely reviewed in magazines , generally concentrating on the hardware . When asked if he was upset that the computer 's debut was delayed by several months , Jobs responded , " Late ? This computer is five years ahead of its time ! " 
 The NeXT Computer was based on the new 25 MHz Motorola <unk> central processing unit ( CPU ) . The Motorola <unk> RISC chip was originally considered , but was not available in sufficient quantities . It included between 8 and 64 MB of random @-@ access memory ( RAM ) , a 256 MB magneto @-@ optical ( MO ) drive , a 40 MB ( swap @-@ only ) , 330 MB , or 660 MB hard disk drive , <unk> Ethernet , <unk> and a 17 @-@ inch <unk> grayscale display measuring 1120 by 832 pixels . In 1989 a typical new PC , Macintosh , or Amiga computer included a few megabytes of RAM , a 640 × 480 16 @-@ color or <unk> 4000 @-@ color display , a 10 to 20 megabyte hard drive and few networking capabilities . It also was the first computer to ship with a general @-@ purpose DSP chip ( Motorola <unk> ) on the motherboard . This was used to support sophisticated music and sound processing , including the Music Kit software . 
 The magneto @-@ optical drive manufactured by Canon Inc. was used as the primary mass storage device . These drives were relatively new to the market , and the NeXT was the first computer to use them . They were cheaper than hard drives ( blank media especially so : though each had a cost of $ 150 to Canon , Jobs 's typically forthright negotiations saw Canon agree to a retail of only $ 50 apiece ) but slower ( with an average seek time of 96 ms ) . The design made it impossible to move files between computers without a network , since each NeXT Computer had only one MO drive and the disk could not be removed without shutting down the system . Storage options proved challenging for the first NeXT Computers . The magneto @-@ optical media was relatively expensive and had performance and reliability problems despite being faster than a floppy drive . The drive was not sufficient to run as the primary medium running the NeXTSTEP operating system both in terms of speed and capacity . 
 In 1989 , NeXT struck a deal for former Compaq reseller <unk> to sell NeXT computers in select markets nationwide . Selling through a retailer was a major change from NeXT 's original business model of only selling directly to students and educational institutions . <unk> founder David Norman predicted that sales of the NeXT Computer would surpass sales of Compaq computers after 12 months . 
 In 1989 , Canon invested US $ 100 million in NeXT , giving it a 16 @.@ 67 percent stake , making NeXT worth almost $ 600 million . Canon invested in NeXT with the condition that it would be able to use the NeXTSTEP environment with its own workstations , which would mean a greatly expanded market for the software . After NeXT exited the hardware business , Canon produced a line of PCs , called <unk> , including models 31 , 41 , 50 and 52 , specifically designed to run NeXTSTEP / Intel . Canon also served as NeXT 's distributor in Japan . 
 The first NeXT computers were released on the retail market in 1990 , for $ 9 @,@ 999 . NeXT 's original investor Ross Perot resigned from the board of directors in June 1991 to dedicate more time to Perot Systems , a Plano , Texas @-@ based systems integrator . 
 = = = = Second generation = = = = 
 NeXT released a second generation of workstations in 1990 . The new range included a revised NeXT Computer , renamed the NeXTcube , and the NeXTstation , nicknamed " the slab , " which used a " pizza box " case form @-@ factor . Jobs was explicit in ensuring NeXT staff did not use the latter terminology , lest the NeXT machines be compared to competing Sun workstations . The magneto @-@ optical drive was replaced with a 2 @.@ 88 MB floppy drive to offer users a way to use their floppy disks . However , individual 2 @.@ 88 MB <unk> were expensive and the technology did not supplant the 1 @.@ 44 MB floppy . Realizing this , NeXT utilized the CD @-@ ROM drive , which eventually became an industry standard for storage . Color graphics were available on the NeXTstation Color and the <unk> graphics processor hardware for the NeXTcube . The new computers were cheaper and faster than their predecessors , with the new Motorola <unk> processor . 
 In 1992 , NeXT launched " Turbo " variants of the NeXTcube and NeXTstation with a 33 MHz <unk> processor and maximum RAM capacity increased to 128 MB . NeXT sold 20 @,@ 000 computers in 1992 ( NeXT counted upgraded motherboards on back order as sales ) — a small number compared with their competitors . However , the company reported sales of $ 140 million for the year , encouraging Canon to invest a further $ 30 million to keep the company afloat . 
 In total , 50 @,@ 000 NeXT machines were sold , including thousands to the then super secret National Reconnaissance Office located in Chantilly , Virginia . NeXT 's long @-@ term aim was to migrate to the RISC ( Reduced Instruction Set Computing ) architecture , a processor design strategy intended to increase performance . The project was known as the NeXT RISC Workstation ( <unk> ) . Initially the <unk> was to be based on the Motorola <unk> processor , but due to a lack of confidence in Motorola 's commitment to the <unk> @-@ series architecture , it was later redesigned around dual PowerPC <unk> . NeXT produced some motherboards and enclosures , but exited the hardware business before full production . 
 = = = = Software applications = = = = 
 NeXT computers were delivered with Mathematica pre @-@ installed . Several developers used the NeXT platform to write pioneering programs . Tim Berners @-@ Lee used a NeXT Computer in 1990 to create the first Web browser and Web server ; accordingly , NeXT was instrumental in the development of the World Wide Web . 
 NeXT was an engineering computer used by professors for the most serious science challenges , and also for developing finished newspaper layouts using News running on Next . George Mason University in the early 1990s had a set of them for publishing , as well as Silicon Graphics for CAD / GL and Mathematica for astrophysics . The games Doom , Doom II : Hell on Earth and Quake were developed by id Software on NeXT machines . Other games based on the Doom engine , such as Heretic and Hexen : Beyond Heretic by Raven Software , as well as Strife by Rogue Entertainment were also developed on NeXT hardware using id 's tools . 
 Other commercial programs were released for NeXT computers , including <unk> Virtuoso , a vector drawing program with page @-@ layout features which was ported to Mac OS and Microsoft Windows as Aldus <unk> v4 , and the Lotus Improv spreadsheet program . The systems also came with a number of smaller built @-@ in applications , such as the Merriam @-@ Webster Collegiate Dictionary , Oxford Quotations , the complete works of William Shakespeare , and the Digital Librarian search engine to access them . 
 = = = 1993 – 96 : NeXT Software = = = 
 NeXT started porting the NeXTSTEP operating system to IBM PC compatible computers using the Intel <unk> processor in late 1991 . The operating system was ported to Intel 's architecture because of a change in NeXT 's business strategy , which was then to remove themselves from the hardware business entirely . A demonstration of the port was displayed at the <unk> Expo in January 1992 . By mid @-@ 1993 the product was complete and version 3 @.@ 1 , also known as NeXTSTEP 486 , was released . Prior to the release of NeXTSTEP , Chrysler planned to buy 3 @,@ 000 copies in 1992 . 
 NeXTSTEP 3.x was later ported to PA @-@ RISC and SPARC @-@ based platforms , for a total of four versions : NeXTSTEP / NeXT ( for NeXT 's 68k " black boxes " ) , NeXTSTEP / Intel , NeXTSTEP / PA @-@ RISC and NeXTSTEP / SPARC . Although these ports were not widely used , NeXTSTEP gained popularity at institutions such as First Chicago <unk> , Swiss Bank Corporation , O 'Connor and Company , and other organizations owing to its programming model . It was also used by many American federal agencies , such as United States Naval Research Laboratory , the National Security Agency , the Advanced Research Projects Agency , the Central Intelligence Agency and the National Reconnaissance Office . Some IBM PC clone vendors offered somewhat customized hardware solutions that were delivered running NeXTSTEP on Intel , such as the <unk> <unk> and the Canon <unk> 41 . 
 NeXT withdrew from the hardware business in 1993 and the company was renamed NeXT Software Inc ; consequently , 300 of the 540 staff employees were laid off . NeXT negotiated to sell the hardware business , including the Fremont factory , to Canon . Canon later pulled out of the deal . Work on the PowerPC machines was stopped , along with all hardware production . CEO of Sun Microsystems Scott <unk> announced plans to invest $ 10 million in 1993 and use NeXT software ( OpenStep ) in future Sun systems . NeXT partnered with Sun to create OpenStep which was NeXTSTEP sans the Mach @-@ based kernel . 
 After dropping the hardware business , NeXT returned to selling a toolkit to run on other operating systems , in effect returning to the original business plan . New products based on OpenStep were released , including OpenStep Enterprise , a version for Microsoft 's Windows NT . The company also launched WebObjects , a platform for building large @-@ scale dynamic web applications . Many large businesses including Dell , Disney , WorldCom , and the BBC used this WebObjects software for a short time . In the modern day , WebObjects is used almost solely to power Apple 's iTunes Store and most of its corporate Web site . 
 = = = 1996 – 97 : Apple merger = = = 
 Apple Computer announced an intention to acquire NeXT on December 20 , 1996 . Apple paid $ 429 million in cash , which went to the initial investors and 1 @.@ 5 million Apple shares , which went to Steve Jobs , who was deliberately not given cash for his part in the deal . The main purpose of the acquisition was to use NeXTSTEP as a foundation to replace the dated Mac OS , instead of <unk> or the in @-@ development Copland . The deal was finalized on February 7 , 1997 , bringing Jobs back to Apple as a consultant , who was later appointed as interim CEO . In 2000 Jobs took the CEO position as a permanent assignment . 
 Several NeXT executives replaced their Apple counterparts when Steve Jobs restructured the company 's board of directors . Over the next five years the NeXTSTEP operating system was ported to the PowerPC architecture . At the same time , an Intel port and OpenStep Enterprise toolkit for Windows were both produced . The operating system was code named Rhapsody , while the toolkit for development on all platforms was called " Yellow Box " . For backwards compatibility Apple added the " Blue Box " to Rhapsody , allowing existing Mac applications to be run in a self @-@ contained cooperative multitasking environment . 
 A server version of the new operating system was released as Mac OS X Server 1 @.@ 0 in 1999 , and the first consumer version , Mac OS X 10 @.@ 0 , in 2001 . The OpenStep developer toolkit was renamed Cocoa . Rhapsody 's Blue Box was renamed Classic Environment and changed to run applications full @-@ screen without requiring a separate window . Apple included an updated version of the original Macintosh toolbox , called Carbon , that gave existing Mac applications access to the environment without the constraints of Blue Box . Some of NeXTSTEP 's interface features were used in Mac OS X , including the Dock , the Services menu , the Finder 's " browser " view , and the Cocoa text system . 
 NeXTSTEP 's processor @-@ independent capabilities were retained in Mac OS X , leading to both PowerPC and Intel x86 versions ( although only PowerPC versions were publicly available before 2006 ) . Apple moved to Intel processors by August 2006 . 
 = = Corporate culture and community = = 
 Jobs created a different corporate culture at NeXT in terms of facilities , salaries , and benefits . Jobs had experimented with some structural changes at Apple but at NeXT he abandoned conventional corporate structures , instead making a " community " with " members " instead of employees . There were only two different salaries at NeXT until the early 1990s . Team members who joined before 1986 were paid $ 75 @,@ 000 while those who joined afterwards were paid $ 50 @,@ 000 . This caused a few awkward situations where managers were paid less than their employees . Employees were given performance reviews and raises every six months because of the spartan salary plans . To foster openness , all employees had full access to the payrolls , although few employees ever took advantage of the privilege . NeXT 's health insurance plan offered benefits to not only married couples but unmarried couples and same @-@ sex couples , although the latter privilege was later withdrawn due to insurance complications . The payroll schedule was also very different from other companies in Silicon Valley at the time : instead of getting paid twice a month at the end of the pay period , employees would get paid once a month in advance . 
 Jobs found office space in Palo Alto , California on <unk> Deer Creek Road , occupying a glass and concrete building which featured a staircase designed by architect I. M. Pei . The first floor used hardwood flooring and large <unk> where the workstations would be assembled . To avoid inventory errors , NeXT used the just @-@ in @-@ time ( JIT ) inventory strategy . The company contracted out for all major components such as <unk> and cases and had the finished components shipped to the first floor for assembly . The second floor was the office space with an open floor plan . The only enclosed rooms were Jobs 's office and a few conference rooms . 
 As NeXT expanded , more office space was needed . The company rented an office at 800 and 900 Chesapeake Drive in Redwood City , also designed by Pei . The architectural centerpiece was a " floating " staircase with no visible supports . The open floor plan was retained , although furnishings became luxurious , with $ 5 @,@ 000 chairs , $ 10 @,@ 000 sofas and Ansel Adams prints . 
 NeXT 's first former campus in Palo Alto was subsequently occupied by SAP AG . Its second former campus in Redwood City was occupied by <unk> and <unk> Pharmaceuticals Inc . 
 The first issue of <unk> magazine was printed in 1991 . It was published in San Francisco by Integrated Media and edited by Michael Miley and later Dan Ruby . It was the only mainstream periodical to discuss NeXT computers , the operating system , and NeXT software . Publication was discontinued in 1994 after only four volumes were released . A <unk> Expo followed as a developer conference , held in 1991 and 1992 at the San Francisco Civic Center and in 1993 and 1994 at the Moscone Center in San Francisco , with Steve Jobs as the keynote speaker . 
 = = Influence on the computer industry = = 
 Steve Jobs pooled the finest of over @-@ specified hardware and software into NeXT , and also the company added innovations of their own . As such , it was the machine of choice for well @-@ funded science departments that , of course , were Unix @-@ friendly at the time . 
 Despite NeXT 's limited commercial success , the company had a wide @-@ ranging impact on the computer industry . Object @-@ oriented programming and graphical user interfaces became more common after the 1988 release of the NeXTcube and NeXTSTEP , when other companies started to emulate NeXT 's object @-@ oriented system . Apple started the <unk> project in 1989 , with the goal of building a NeXT @-@ like operating system for the Macintosh , with collaboration from both Hewlett @-@ Packard and IBM . 
 Microsoft announced the Cairo project in 1991 ; the Cairo specification included similar object @-@ oriented user interface features for a coming consumer version of Windows NT . Although the project was ultimately abandoned , some elements were integrated into other projects . By 1994 , Microsoft and NeXT were collaborating on a Windows NT @-@ port of OpenStep ; the port , however , was never released . 
 WebObjects failed to achieve wide popularity partly because of the initial high price of US $ 50 @,@ 000 , but it remains the first and most prominent early example of a web application server which enabled dynamic page generation based on user interactions as opposed to static content . WebObjects is now bundled with OS X Server and Xcode . 
 = R v Secretary of State for Home Affairs , ex p O 'Brien = 
 R v Secretary of State for Home Affairs ex parte O 'Brien [ 1923 ] 2 KB 361 was a 1923 test case in English law that sought to have the internment and deportation of Irish nationalist sympathisers earlier that year declared legally invalid . In March 1923 between 80 and 100 suspected Irish nationalists in Britain were arrested by the police and sent to the Irish Free State under the Restoration of Order in Ireland Act 1920 ( <unk> ) . One of the detainees , Art O 'Brien , challenged his detention in a test case at the Divisional Court . The case eventually went to both the Court of Appeal and House of Lords , who decided that the internments were illegal because the Irish Free State was an independent nation and so British Acts of Parliament no longer applied to it . 
 The decision effectively <unk> the <unk> and led to the immediate release of O 'Brien and the other detained individuals , who sued the British Government for false imprisonment . The government pushed through the Restoration of Order in Ireland ( Indemnity ) Act 1923 , which limited the money they had to pay the detainees , who eventually received £ 43 @,@ 000 . O 'Brien himself was re @-@ arrested and found guilty of sedition , and was imprisoned until 1924 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following the Irish War of Independence the Irish Free State was set up as an independent British Dominion covering most of the island of Ireland . After a brief civil war between the pro @-@ Free State forces and members of the Irish Republican Army ( IRA ) who wanted any independent nation to cover the entire island the status of the Irish Free State was confirmed , and the IRA forced underground . The IRA had supporters in the United Kingdom , working openly as the Irish Self @-@ Determination League ( ISDL ) , and the Free State government shared the names of these supporters with the British authorities , who kept a close eye on them . Between February and March they provided information on individuals that they said were part of widespread plots against the Irish Free State being prepared on British soil . On 11 March 1923 the police in Britain arrested IRA sympathisers living in Britain including Art O 'Brien , the head of the ISDL . Sources disagree on numbers , giving either approximately eighty or approximately 100 . The arrested men were placed on special trains and sent to Liverpool , where they were transferred to Dublin via a Royal Navy destroyer . It later transpired that not only were many British citizens ( Art O 'Brien himself had been born in England ) , at least six had never even been to Ireland before . 
 The next day the arrests were publicly queried in the House of Commons , and a Labour backbencher Jack Jones started a debate on the subject in the afternoon . W.C. Bridgeman , the Home Secretary , said that he had directly ordered the police to arrest the ISDL members under the Restoration of Order in Ireland Act 1920 , and that he had consulted the Attorney General who considered it legal . 
 = = Divisional Court = = 
 A few days after the arrests the solicitors for one of the deported men , Art O 'Brien , got in contact with Sir Patrick Hastings KC , a Member of Parliament for the Labour Party and a noted barrister . On 23 March 1923 Hastings represented O 'Brien in front of a Divisional Court consisting of Mr Justice Avory and Mr Justice Salter to apply for a writ of habeas corpus for O 'Brien as a test case to allow the release of the others . The initial hearing did not go anywhere because Hastings was unable to provide an affidavit from O 'Brien ( who was in Mountjoy Prison ) , which was required for a writ of habeas corpus to be considered , but by the time the hearing was resumed on 10 April he had managed to obtain one . Hastings argued that because the Irish Free State was an independent nation the British laws governing it , such as the 1920 act , were effectively repealed . In addition the Home Secretary had no power to order an individual to be detained overseas because he had no control over what happened to them there . 
 The court eventually declared that they could not issue a writ , because the Habeas Corpus Act 1862 prevented them from issuing a writ to any colony possessing a court which could also issue a writ . Since Ireland possessed such a court , the English Divisional Court could not act . Hastings attempted to argue that the writ could be issued against the Home Secretary but this also failed , since the Home Secretary did not actually possess O 'Brien . 
 = = Court of Appeal and House of Lords = = 
 The decision was then appealed to the Court of Appeal and argued on 23 and 24 April . The Court of Appeal reversed the Divisional Court 's decision . The court decided that the Restoration of Order in Ireland Act 1920 had been implicitly repealed when the Irish Free State , an independent nation , came into existence . In addition it was not proper for the Home Secretary to order the detention and deportation of someone overseas , since they had no control over what happened to them . It was completely appropriate to issue a writ of habeas corpus against the Home Secretary because , even though he did not physically have O 'Brien , he was considered responsible for him . The Home Secretary was accordingly ordered to produce O 'Brien before the court on 16 May . 
 He appealed to the House of Lords , who decided ( led by Lord Birkenhead ) that they did not have the jurisdiction to hear the appeal , since a rule of English law specifies that once a writ of habeas corpus is issued ( as it was by the Court of Appeal ) no superior court can overrule it . After a further attempt to keep O 'Brien in custody ( simply by not letting him out of prison ) he was finally released on 16 May . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 O 'Brien immediately sued the British Government for false imprisonment , and to avoid any liability the government prepared the Restoration of Order in Ireland ( Indemnity ) Act 1923 which would indemnify them against any claims for damages by the imprisoned sympathisers . The Labour Party whittled it down when it was being prepared so that it would only limit compensation rather than remove it entirely . A tribunal was set up under Lord Atkin to assess damages , and the sympathisers as a whole were eventually paid £ 43 @,@ 000 . Art O 'Brien himself was arrested soon after release and convicted of sedition . He was released in 1924 . 
 = Amanita australis = 
 Amanita australis is a species of fungus in the Amanitaceae family . It is found only in New Zealand , where it occurs in Leptospermum and Nothofagus forest . The species was first described by New Zealand mycologist Greta Stevenson in 1962 ; in the same publication Stevenson also described what she thought was a unique species , Limacella macrospora , but over 30 years later this was reduced to synonymy with A. australis . 
 Amanita australis produces small- to medium @-@ sized fruit bodies , with brown caps up to 9 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) in diameter covered with pyramidal warts . The gills on the underside of the cap are white , closely crowded together , and free from attachment to the stem . The stem , which is up to 9 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) long and 26 mm ( 1 @.@ 0 in ) thick , has a ring and a bulbous base . The mushroom may be confused with another endemic New Zealand species , A. nothofagi , but can be distinguished by differences in microscopic characteristics . 
 = = Taxonomy and classification = = 
 Amanita australis was first described by Greta Stevenson in 1962 , based on specimens she collected in April 1954 around Lake Rotoiti in Nelson Lakes National Park , in New Zealand . In the same publication , Stevenson described Limacella macrospora , collected in 1952 at Day 's Bay near Wellington . Stevenson thought this was a new species different from any previously described Limacella because of its larger size and amyloid spores . Austrian mycologist Egon Horak later transferred it to the genus <unk> , but did not provide a reason for making the new combination . In 1986 , Pegler and Young proposed a classification for <unk> based largely on spore structure , but they excluded O. macrospora , considering it a species of Amanita . Geoff Ridley examined Stevenson 's holotype material and reduced L. <unk> to synonymy with A. australis in 1993 , explaining : 
 The size , shape and amyloid reaction of the spores , the dimensions of the basidia , the presence of clamp connections and lamella margin cells indicate that this is Amanita australis Stevenson and easily fits into the concept of this taxon . ... <unk> the specimen lacks the typical pronounced basal bulb to the stipe and volva remnants on the pileus ; however , it is not an unknown condition in this taxon . 
 Although Stevenson originally placed the species in Amanita section Phalloideae because of a perceived similarity to A. citrina , it is now classified in section <unk> ; many species in this section have bulbous stem bases . Ridley suggests an appropriate common name would be the " straw <unk> " , while Rodham Tulloss calls it the " far south Amanita " . The specific epithet australis means " southern " . 
 = = Description = = 
 The shape of the A. australis cap is initially convex , later flattening out or even developing a central depression , and reaching diameters of 20 – 90 mm ( 0 @.@ 8 – 4 in ) wide . The cap margin sometimes splits and rolls back to give a ragged appearance . The centre of the cap is dark buff , honey or isabelline , becoming paler to buff at the margin . The surface is sticky when young or wet , but dries out with age . The remnants of the volva form conical to pyramidal warts that are most densely aggregated in the center , but become sparse and low towards the margin . They are initially white then greyish @-@ sepia or isabelline with white to buff tips . 
 The gills are crowded closely together , free from attachment to the stem , 6 – 10 mm ( 0 @.@ 24 – 0 @.@ 39 in ) wide , and white . The lamellulae ( short gills that do not extend fully from the cap edge to the stem ) have truncated ends . The stem is 37 – 90 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 – 3 @.@ 5 in ) tall , 6 – 26 mm ( 0 @.@ 24 – 1 @.@ 02 in ) in diameter , and narrowest at center . It is hollow , and has an abruptly bulbous base that is between 14 and 38 mm ( 0 @.@ 55 and 1 @.@ 50 in ) in diameter . The surface of the stem above the level of the ring is white and covered in woolly tufts of mycelia ; below the ring it is white with buff to greyish transverse , grooved bands . The base may or may not have a rim of volval remnants that are powdery , and a greyish @-@ buff to greyish @-@ sepia colour . The ring is membranous , white to buff , first hanging freely then later adhering to the stem . The flesh of the cap is white , occasionally pale isabelline under the center of the cap ; the flesh of the stem is white . 
 The spore print is white . The spores are typically 9 – 12 by 8 – 10 @.@ 5 µm , spherical to ellipsoid , and thin @-@ walled . They are hyaline ( translucent ) , and amyloid — meaning they will stain bluish @-@ black to black in Melzer 's reagent . The basidia are 43 @.@ 5 – 76 @.@ 5 by 10 @.@ 5 – 17 µm , mostly four @-@ spored , and clamped at their bases . There are abundant spherical , elliptic or club @-@ shaped hyaline cells on the gill edges , measuring 16 – 39 @.@ 5 by 10 @.@ 5 – 27 @.@ 5 µm . The cap cuticle is 220 – 270 µm wide , consisting of a gelatinised suprapellis ( upper layer ) and non @-@ gelatinised subpellis ( lower layer ) . The volval remnants on the cap consist of abundant spherical , club @-@ shaped , or turnip @-@ shaped cells , measuring 10 – 86 by 9 – 85 µm . These cells are umber in colour , and arranged in chains perpendicular to the cap surface , becoming smaller and paler at tip of the wart , subtended by moderately abundant hyphae that are 4 – 10 µm wide . Clamp connections are abundant in the hyphae . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Amanita australis mushrooms that have lost their warts and have had the colours faded may resemble another New Zealand species , A. nothofagi . The two species may be distinguished reliably using microscopy — A. nothofagi does not have clamp connections at the base of the basidia , unlike A. <unk> australis also bears some resemblance to the eastern North American and east Asian species A. abrupta , which also has an abruptly bulbous stem base . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Amanita australis is found only on the north and south islands of New Zealand , where it grows in a mycorrhizal association with Southern Beech ( genus Nothofagus ) ( including New Zealand Red Beech , Silver beech , New Zealand Black Beech , Hard Beech ) , Manuka , and <unk> . The mushroom usually grows solitarily , but has on rare occasions been found growing in groups . 
 = Jaws 3 @-@ D = 
 Jaws 3 @-@ D ( also known as Jaws 3 or Jaws III ) is a 1983 American thriller film directed by Joe Alves and starring Dennis Quaid , Bess Armstrong , Lea Thompson and Louis Gossett , Jr . It is the second sequel to Steven Spielberg 's Jaws and the third installment in the Jaws franchise . The film follows the Brody children from the previous films at SeaWorld , a Florida marine park with underwater tunnels and lagoons . As the park prepares for opening , a young great white shark infiltrates the park from the sea , seemingly attacking and killing the park 's employees . Once the shark is captured , it becomes apparent that it was a second , much larger shark who also entered the park , that was the real culprit . 
 The film is notable for making use of 3D film during the revived interest in the technology in the 1980s , amongst other horror films such as Friday the 13th Part III and Amityville 3D . Cinema audiences could wear disposable cardboard polarized 3D glasses to create the illusion that elements penetrate the screen . Several shots and sequences were designed to utilise the effect , such as the shark 's destruction . Since 3D was ineffective in home viewing until the advent of 3D televisions in the late 2000s , the alternative title Jaws III is used for television broadcasts , VHS and DVD . Jaws 3 @-@ D received negative reviews and was followed by Jaws : The Revenge in 1987 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The film begins with a great white shark moving throughout the ocean as it starts to follow an unsuspecting team of water skiers . The driver , Richie , stalls the boat and manages to get it going again before the shark can attack anyone . The shark follows the water skiers into the park and throws the gate off its rails while it is closing . Meanwhile , Florida announces the opening of SeaWorld 's new underwater tunnels . 
 Kathryn " Kay " Morgan , the senior marine biologist , and her assistants wonder why the dolphins , Cindy and Sandy , are so afraid of leaving their dolphin pen . Shelby Overman , one of the mechanics , dives into the water to repair and secure the gates . He is attacked by a shark and killed , leaving only his severed right arm . Additionally that night , two men in diving equipment sneak into the park in a small inflatable boat to steal coral they intend to sell . One slips into the water quietly , but is taken by the shark , leaving only his diving mask drifting in the water . The other man is pulled into the water also ; then something sinks the inflatable . 
 The next day , Michael Brody and Kay are informed of Overman 's disappearance . They go down in a submarine to look in the tunnels to find Overman 's body . Kay suggests the filtration pipe but Mike says that the current is too strong and that it flows into the lagoon every hour . They decide to go into a piece of scenery , the Spanish Galleon , despite the two dolphins attempting to keep them out . As they search the Spanish Galleon they encounter a small great white shark . The dolphins rescue Kay and Mike but the shark escapes back into the park . 
 The news of the shark is disbelieved by Calvin Bouchard , the SeaWorld park manager , although the news is exciting to his hunter friend , Phillip FitzRoyce , who states his intention to kill the shark on network television . Kay protests , arguing that while killing the shark would be good for one headline , capturing and keeping a great white shark alive in captivity would guarantee TV crews and money constantly rolling into SeaWorld . The young shark is captured and Kay and her staff nurse it to health . Calvin , desperate to start the money rolling in immediately , orders it moved to an exhibit as " the first great white in captivity " . However , the shark dies in the exhibit . 
 At the underwater tunnel , a girl is terrified when she sees part of Overman 's corpse bob up to a window . Forcing Mike and a paramedic to let her review Overman 's corpse , Kay realizes that the shark that killed him must be the young shark 's mother , and that since Overman was killed inside the park , the mother shark must also be inside the park ; the shape of the bite shows that the shark 's mouth must be about 3 feet wide and thus the shark about 35 feet long . She captures the attention of FitzRoyce , but she cannot convince Calvin until the enormous shark herself shows up at the window of their underwater cafe , terrifying the customers . 
 Flushed out from her refuge inside the filtration pipe , the shark begins to wreak havoc on the park and attacks water skier Kelly Ann Bukowski and Sean Brody . The shark injures Kelly in the left leg and leaves . Sean is unharmed but the shark causes a leak that nearly drowns everyone in the underwater tunnel . FitzRoyce and his assistant Jack go down to the filtration pipe in an attempt to trap the shark back inside to kill it . FitzRoyce leads the shark into the pipe but his lifeline rope snaps and the shark attacks him . FitzRoyce grabs a grenade and prepares to use it , but before he can get his other hand to the grenade to pull its safety pin he is crushed and chewed , in the shark 's mouth as it swallows him fins first , cylinder and all as far as it can . 
 Hearing the shark has been lured into the pipe , Michael goes down to repair the underwater tunnel so the technicians can restore air pressure and drain the water , with Kay to watch his back . He welds the repair piece and Calvin orders the pump shut down to suffocate the shark , but all shutting the pump down does is let her break free from the pipe and attack Mike and Kay . They escape thanks to help from Cindy and Sandy , who attack the shark to distract her briefly . 
 They make their way back to the control room with Calvin and the technicians , but the shark appears in front of the window and smashes its way through the glass and floods the room . Calvin manages to swim out and rescue one technician but another technician is killed in the process . Mike notices FitzRoyce 's corpse still in the shark 's throat with the grenade in his hand trailing into its mouth , and uses a bent pole to pull the grenade 's pin , killing the shark . Its jaws then float through the blood and water and are shown to the viewer in 3D . 
 In the aftermath , Mike and Kay celebrate with Cindy and Sandy , who survived their brush with the shark at the snapshot to portraits as the background and screen fades to black and the movie ends . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Dennis Quaid as Michael ' Mike ' Brody 
 Bess Armstrong as Kathryn " Kay " Morgan 
 Simon <unk> as Philip FitzRoyce , 16th Earl of <unk> 
 Louis Gossett , Jr. as Calvin Bouchard 
 John Putch as Sean Brody 
 John W. Wilson as 3D Shark 
 Lea Thompson as Kelly Ann Bukowski 
 Harry Grant as Shelby Overman 
 P. H. Moriarty as Jack Tate 
 Dan Glasko as Danny 
 Liz Morris as Liz 
 Lisa Maurer as <unk> 
 Kaye Stevens as Mrs <unk> 
 = = Production = = 
 David Brown and Richard Zanuck , the producers for the first two films , originally pitched the second Jaws sequel as a spoof named Jaws 3 , People 0 . Matty Simmons , fresh off the success of National Lampoon 's Animal House , was brought in as producer , with Brown and Zanuck taking on executive producer roles . Simmons outlined a story and commissioned National Lampoon writers John Hughes and Todd Carroll for a script . Joe Dante was briefly pursued as a director . The project was shut down due to conflicts with Universal Studios . David Brown later said that the studio attitude was that a spoof would have been a mistake and that it would be like " fouling in your own nest . We should have fouled the nest . It would have been golden , maybe even platinum . " 
 Alan Landsburg bought the rights to produce the film . He attempted to involve experimental filmmaker Murray Lerner in Jaws 3 , telling him that people at the Marineland theme park in Florida had seen his 1978 3D film Sea Dream . Lerner said that his " heart sank " when he was sent the first script of Jaws 3 @-@ D , saying " I can 't really get involved in this " . As the production already had an art director , Lerner , who didn 't like the script , declined to be involved in the film . 
 The film was directed by Joe Alves , who was the production designer for the first two films and was the second unit director for Jaws 2 . It had been suggested that Alves co @-@ direct the first sequel with Verna Fields when first director John D. Hancock left the project . It was filmed at SeaWorld Orlando , a landlocked water park ; and Navarre , Florida , a community in the Florida Panhandle near Pensacola . 
 As with the first two films in the series , many people were involved in writing the film . Richard Matheson , who had written the script for Steven Spielberg 's celebrated 1971 television film Duel , says that he wrote a " very interesting " outline , although the story is credited to " some other writer " . Universal forced Matheson to include Brody 's two sons , which the writer " thought was dumb " . They also wanted it to be the same shark that was electrocuted in Jaws 2 . Matheson was also requested to write a custom @-@ role for Mickey Rooney , " which I did so successfully that when Mickey Rooney turned out not to be available , the whole part was pointless " . The writer was unhappy with the finished film . 
 I 'm a good storyteller and I wrote a good outline and a good script . And if they had done it right and if it had been directed by somebody who knew how to direct , I think it would have been an excellent movie . Jaws 3 @-@ D was the only thing Joe Alves ever directed ; the man is a very skilled production designer , but as a director , no . And the so @-@ called 3D just made the film look murky – it had no effect whatsoever . It was a waste of time . 
 <unk> Trueblood is credited for the story ; a reviewer for the website <unk> says that the screenplay was based upon Trueblood 's story about a white shark swimming upstream and becoming trapped in a lake . Carl Gottlieb , who had also revised the screenplays for the first two Jaws films , was credited for the script alongside Richard Matheson . Matheson has reported in interviews that the screenplay was revised by script doctors . 
 The film did not use any actors from the first two Jaws films . Roy Scheider , who played Police Chief Martin Brody in the first two films , laughed at the thought of Jaws 3 , saying that " Mephistopheles ... couldn 't talk me into doing [ it ] ... They knew better than to even ask " . He agreed to do Blue Thunder to ensure his unavailability for Jaws 3 @-@ D. 
 = = = 3D = = = 
 There was a revival in popularity of 3D at this time , with many films using the technique . Jaws ' second sequel integrated the technology into its title , as did Amityville 3D . Friday the 13th Part III could also make dual use of the number three . The gimmick was also advertised in the tagline " the third dimension is terror . " As it was Joe Alves ' first film as director , he thought that 3D would " give him an edge " . 
 Cinema audiences could wear disposable polarized glasses to view the film , creating the illusion that elements from the film were penetrating the screen to come towards the viewers . The opening sequence makes obvious use of the technique , with the titles flying to the forefront of the screen , leaving a trail . There are more subtle instances in the film where props are meant to leave the screen . The more obvious examples are in the climactic sequence of the shark attacking the control room and its subsequent destruction . The glass as the shark smashes into the room uses 3D , as does the shot where the shark explodes , with fragmented parts of it apparently bursting through the screen , ending with its jaws . There were many difficulties in making the green screen compositing work in 3D , and a lot of material had to be reshot . 
 Jaws 3 @-@ D had two 3D consultants : the production started with Chris Condon , president of StereoVision , and Stan Loth was later added to the team for the Arrivision 3D . Production began using the StereoVision , but this was dropped after a week for the Arrivision system , " which Alves believed was a superior system because it has a wider variety of lenses " . According to Alves , inferior systems lead to ghosting and blurring , leaving audiences with headaches . He says that " the left and right images [ in Jaws 3 @-@ D ] are very well @-@ matched , and the photography is very clean ; it 's restful to the eye , and though we do have the occasional effects where things do emerge toward the audience from the plane of projection , you come out of the film without a headache . " Historian R. M. Hayes says that the film was shot using both the Arrivision and StereoVision single strip @-@ over @-@ and @-@ under units . Both cameras were used in conjunction with each other . This is a means of shooting 3D movies in normal color with a single camera and single strip of film : the Arrivision 3D technique uses a special twin @-@ lens adapter fitted to the film camera , and divides the 35 mm film frame in half along the middle , capturing the left @-@ eye image in the upper half of the frame and the right @-@ eye image in the lower half – this is known as " over / under " . This allows filming to proceed as for any standard 2D film , without the considerable additional expense of having to double up on cameras and film stock for every shot . When the resultant film is projected through a normal projector ( albeit one requiring a special lens that combines the upper and lower images ) , a true polarised 3D image is produced . This system allows 3D films to be shown in almost any cinema since it does not require two projectors running simultaneously through the presentation – something most cinemas are not equipped to handle . What is required of the theatre is both the special projection lens and a reflective " silver " screen to enable the polarized images to reflect back to the viewer with the appropriate filter on each eye blocking out the wrong image , thus leaving the viewer to see the film from two angles as the eyes naturally see the world . According to the company that built the underwater camera housings for Jaws 3 @-@ D , the underwater sequences were shot using an Arriflex 35 – 3 camera with Arrivision 18 mm over / under 3D lens . 
 This kind of 3D effect does not work on television without special electronic hardware at the viewer 's end , and so with two exceptions , the home video and broadcast TV versions of Jaws 3 @-@ D were created using just the left @-@ eye image , and with the title changed to " Jaws 3 " or " Jaws III " . Because the left @-@ eye image only takes up half the 35 mm film frame , the picture resolution is noticeably poorer than would normally be expected of a film shot on 35 mm . 
 One of the above @-@ mentioned exceptions was a 1986 release of the film for the now @-@ obsolete VHD video disc system ( not to be confused with LaserDisc ) . This required a special 3D VHD player , or a standard VHD player with a hardware 3D adapter , and a set of LCD glasses that shuttered the viewer 's eyes according to control signals sent by the player , allowing the polarised 3D effect to work . The other exception was the <unk> 3D DVD of Jaws 3 @-@ D released in February 2008 . The <unk> 3D Processor is needed for 3D home viewing . 
 SCTV in Indonesian television broadcast the 3D version of the film on HD by 30 September 1994 at 21 : 30 to 22 : 30 <unk> , STAR TV Xing Kong in Chinese satellite television broadcast on Chinese New Year 's Eve Rabbit 2011 ( 22 January 2012 ) at 22 : 00 to 00 : 00 CST and TVB Pearl in Hong Kong English television broadcast on 3 July 2016 at 21 : 30 to 23 : 40 Hong Kong Time before News Roundup programme . The event was advertised heavily and required viewers to buy or obtain a pair of anaglyph glasses to fully enjoy the movie ; this was an anaglyph 3D version of the film created from the Arrivision original . 
 On June 14 , 2016 Universal released a Blu Ray transfer of the film . Though advertised as a 2 @-@ D release a complete Blu @-@ Ray 3D version is included as a special feature . 
 = = Music = = 
 The score was composed and conducted by Alan Parker , who had previously provided music for British television shows including Van der Valk and Minder . It was Parker 's first feature score , but he would later work on What 's Eating Gilbert Grape and American Gothic . John Williams ' original shark motif is , however , integrated into the score . The soundtrack album was released by MCA Records which was absorbed by Geffen Records . The soundtrack was later released on CD by Intrada and was limited to only 3000 copies . 
 = = = Track listing = = = 
 " Jaws 3 @-@ D Main Title " ( 2 : 59 ) 
 " Kay and Mike 's Love Theme " ( 2 : 18 ) 
 " Panic at Seaworld " ( 2 : 07 ) 
 " Underwater Kingdom and Shark Chase " ( 4 : 20 ) 
 " Shark Chase and Dolphin Rescue " ( 1 : 22 ) 
 " Saved by the Dolphins " ( 2 : 05 ) 
 " The Shark 's Gonna Hit Us ! " ( 2 : 42 ) 
 " It 's Alive / Seaworld Opening Day / Silver Bullet " ( 2 : 34 ) 
 " Overman 's Last Dive " ( 1 : 18 ) 
 " Philip 's Demise " ( 4 : 59 ) 
 " Night Capture " ( 4 : 53 ) 
 " Jaws 3 @-@ D End Titles " ( 4 : 06 ) 
 = = Reception = = 
 The film opened in more than a thousand screens across the U.S. There were many promotions to accompany the release of the film . As with Jaws 2 , Topps produced a series of trading cards . Television stations were encouraged to broadcast the featurette , Making of Jaws 3 @-@ D : Sharks Don 't Die , in a prime @-@ time slot between July 16 and 22 , 1983 to take advantage of an advertisement in that week 's issue of TV Guide . Alan Landsburg Productions found itself in trouble for using 90 seconds of footage from the National Geographic 's 1983 documentary film The Sharks in the featurette without authorization . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The film grossed $ 13 @,@ 422 @,@ 500 on its opening weekend , playing to 1 @,@ 311 theaters at its widest release . This was 29 @.@ 5 % of its total gross . It has achieved total lifetime worldwide gross of $ 87 @,@ 987 @,@ 055 . Despite being No. 1 at the box office , this illustrates the series ' diminishing returns , since Jaws 3 @-@ D has earned nearly $ 100 million less than the total lifetime gross of its predecessor and $ 300 million less than the original film . The final sequel would attract an even lower income , with around two thirds of Jaws 3 @-@ D 's total lifetime gross . However , the film was still drawing huge audiences when it was pulled from theaters ; film historian R.M. Hayes says this action " was pure nonsense considering some cinemas were actually turning over more money per screen than the latest Star Wars film " . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Reception for the movie was generally poor . Variety calls it " tepid " and suggests that Alves " fails to linger long enough on the Great White . " It has a 12 % ' rotten ' rating at Rotten Tomatoes . The 3D was criticized as being a gimmick to attract audiences to the aging series and for being ineffective . Allrovi , however , says that " the suspense sequences were made somewhat more memorable during the film 's original release with 3D photography , an attribute lost on video , thereby removing the most distinctive element of an otherwise run @-@ of @-@ the @-@ mill sequel . " Derek <unk> says that " with Richard Matheson 's name on the script you 'd expect a better yarn " although he continues to say that the film " is entirely watchable with a big pack of popcorn . " Others are disappointed that Matheson and Gottlieb produced this script given their previous success . 
 Although most critics are in agreement that Jaws 2 is the best of the Jaws sequels , some are unsure if Jaws @-@ 3D is better than Jaws : The Revenge . One reviewer says of Jaws 3 @-@ D : 
 Campy performances , cheesy special effects , and downright awful dialogue all contribute to making Jaws 3 a truly dismal experience for just about everyone . It 's not only hard to believe that a sequel this downright abominable didn 't kill the franchise , but that it actually would be followed by a movie that was arguably worse — Jaws : the Revenge . 
 Amongst some flaws , some critics describe the film as " marginally entertaining . " The sound design has been commended , however . The moment when an infant 's cry is heard when the baby shark dies in the pool is particularly praised by one reviewer . Gossett , Jet magazine says , was the " only cast member to survive the generally negative reviews " . 
 In her screenwriting textbook , Linda Aronson suggests that its protagonist , played by Quaid , is a major problem with the film . She says that after taking too long for him to be introduced , the character is " essentially a passive onlooker . " There is no hunt until the climax when the shark is terrorizing the people in the aquarium ; only then does Mike Brody become centre of the action . She also highlights inaccuracies in the plot . For instance , she refutes the idea of a " mother shark protecting her offspring [ as ] sharks do not mother their young , " and points out that dolphins can attack sharks . 
 Leonard Maltin calls the film a " road @-@ company Irwin Allen type @-@ disaster film " and notes that its premise is similar to the 1955 sequel to The Creature from the Black Lagoon . 
 Jaws 3 @-@ D was nominated for five 1983 Golden Raspberry Awards , including Worst Picture , Director , Supporting Actor ( Lou Gossett , Jr . ) , Screenplay , and Newcomer ( Cindy and Sandy , " The Shrieking Dolphins " ) , but received none . 
 = = DVD release = = 
 The film was released in a standard 2 @-@ D format on DVD by Universal on June 3 , 2003 under the title Jaws 3 . With the exception of one theatrical trailer , no bonus features were included . Universal Studios Home Entertainment has released The Jaws <unk> on Blu @-@ ray ( 2016 ) 
 = Ralph Waldo Christie = 
 Ralph Waldo Christie ( 30 August 1893 – 19 December 1987 ) was an admiral in the United States Navy who played a pivotal role in the development of torpedo technologies . During World War II , he commanded submarine operations out of the Australian ports of Brisbane and Fremantle . 
 A 1915 graduate of the United States Naval Academy , Christie served on a variety of warships beginning with the battleship New Jersey in 1915 . He was trained in torpedo design and implementation and became one of the first members of the Submarine School at New London . In 1923 Christie graduated from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology with a Master 's degree in Mechanical Engineering , specializing in torpedoes . During the 1920s , he was involved with project G @-@ 53 , a highly secret program to develop a magnetic influence exploder for torpedoes . The result of this was the development of the Mark 6 exploder and the Mark 14 torpedo . Christie also developed a design for an oxygen torpedo , designated project G @-@ 49 or " Navol " . 
 After the United States entered World War II , Christie was posted to Brisbane and commanded submarine operations during the Solomon Islands campaign . He then returned to the U.S. as Inspector of Ordnance at the Newport Torpedo Station . In January 1943 , Christie returned to Australia as commander of submarine operations in Fremantle . Despite growing evidence of problems with the Mark 6 exploder and the Mark 14 torpedo , he remained convinced of their effectiveness . During 1944 , he accompanied war patrols on the submarines USS Bowfin and USS Harder . In November 1944 , Christie was relieved of command of submarine operations at Fremantle by Vice Admiral Thomas C. Kinkaid and returned to the United States , where he commanded the Puget Sound Navy Yard . He retired from the Navy in August 1949 with the rank of vice admiral . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Ralph W. Christie was born in Somerville , Massachusetts on 30 August 1893 . He graduated from the United States Naval Academy in 1915 and served on a variety of warships beginning with the battleship New Jersey . Aboard the cruiser Montana in 1916 , he was trained in torpedo design and implementation . Christie was one of the first students of the Submarine School at New London . He went on to command the submarines USS Octopus in 1918 , USS R @-@ 6 in 1920 , USS S @-@ 1 in 1923 and USS S @-@ 17 in 1924 . Christie served as Commander , Submarines at Cavite from 1925 to 1926 . In 1923 , he graduated from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology with a Master 's degree in Mechanical Engineering , specializing in torpedoes . 
 = = = Development of the Mark 6 magnetic exploder = = = 
 In 1922 , as Christie was completing his graduate studies , the Bureau of Ordnance initiated project G @-@ 53 , a highly secret program to develop a magnetic influence exploder for torpedoes . In the summer of 1926 , Christie became intimately involved in the project , and was substantially involved in the technical development of the weapon system . By 1926 , the exploder was far enough advanced to permit its first test . On 8 May , the obsolete submarine USS L @-@ 8 was used as a target , and destroyed with an influence torpedo . Despite this early success , the influence exploder , which would become the Mark 6 , needed significant refinement . 
 Christie urged the Navy Department to allocate a target ship for extensive field tests of the torpedo and exploder . The Chief of Naval Operations authorized the use of the obsolete destroyer USS Ericsson , but placed so many restrictions on its use , Newport was forced to decline the offer . As a result , neither the Mark 6 exploder nor the Mark 14 torpedo ever underwent a live test , and their shortcomings would not become apparent until the outbreak of hostilities . It would be twenty months before the problems were corrected , over Christie 's objections . 
 = = = Development of the oxygen torpedo = = = 
 During the 1920s and 1930s , Christie carried out experimental work on an oxygen torpedo with the Ordnance Laboratory , in Alexandria , Virginia . Designated project G @-@ 49 or “ Navol ” , this torpedo used hydrogen peroxide instead of compressed air . Christie ’ s design had the experimental torpedo propel a 500 lb ( 230 kg ) warhead at 50 kn ( 93 km / h ; 58 mph ) to a maximum range of 15 @,@ 000 yd ( 14 @,@ 000 m ) . The Navol design was subsequently designated Mark 16 for submarines and Mark 17 for surface ships . The hydrogen peroxide system was test fitted to a Mark 14 torpedo in the mid @-@ 1930s , where Christie ’ s design propelled a 500 lb ( 230 kg ) warhead to a range of 16 @,@ 500 yd ( 15 @,@ 100 m ) at 46 kn ( 53 mph ; 85 km / h ; 53 mph ) . 
 Despite the promise of the design , many operational officers were opposed to the use of volatile hydrogen peroxide aboard ship . Ultimately , the Mark 16 went into limited production while work on the Mark 17 was suspended in 1941 , but resumed in 1944 . Admiral Ernest King favored focusing research efforts on electric torpedoes so work on the oxygen system was downgraded . As such , the U.S. Navy made no combat use of the oxygen torpedo design during the Second World War . 
 By May 1938 , Christie was head of the Torpedo Section at BuOrd and involved in providing torpedoes to the fleet . He would take command of Newport Torpedo Station in 1943 , shortly before the death of Admiral Robert English on 21 January 1943 . 
 = = = Other pre @-@ war assignments = = = 
 In 1939 , Christie was given command of Submarine Division 15 , consisting of all six Salmon @-@ class submarines . By 1941 , Germany and the United Kingdom were engaged in the Battle of the Atlantic . Although the United States was neutral , President Franklin D. Roosevelt ordered the U.S. Atlantic Fleet to enforce the Neutrality Patrol to assist UK @-@ bound convoys . As part of secret agreements with Britain , the United States agreed to provide the former with submarines under Royal Navy control , should America enter the conflict . Admiral Richard S. Edwards , Commander , Submarines , Atlantic Fleet ( <unk> ) , selected the now Captain Christie as tactical commander for the proposed submarine force in British waters . Christie wanted the new Tambor @-@ class submarines to be assigned to the Atlantic Fleet , but was overruled by Admiral Harold R. Stark , who selected the older S and Barracuda classes instead . As war seemed increasingly likely toward the end of 1941 , Christie placed his boats on full war footing . 
 = = World War Two service = = 
 = = = Brisbane = = = 
 At the outbreak of the Pacific War , remnants of the United States Asiatic Fleet fled to Australia , on orders from Washington . The S @-@ boats from the Philippines were organized into a fighting force at Brisbane , and Admiral Ernest King ordered S @-@ boats from the Atlantic Fleet to supplement the force in Australia . Christie went along , arriving in April 1942 , just in time for the Battle of the Coral Sea . During the Solomon Islands campaign , he ordered his boats to patrol around harbors which , while being key points for shipping , also tended to be heavily patrolled by aircraft and anti @-@ submarine craft . In step with then @-@ current U.S. Navy submarine doctrine , he made capital ships the prime targets , rather than have his boats focus on merchant shipping . 
 Almost as soon as the war began , submarine captains indicated there were problems with the Mark 14 torpedo and the influence feature of the Mark 6 exploder . Torpedoes would fail to explode , or explode prematurely . Despite these reports , Christie was not fully aware of the impact of the situation , because his S @-@ boats used the older Mark 10 torpedo , with a contact @-@ only pistol . Christie acknowledged Mark 14s were running deeper than set , but attributed the failures to poor maintenance and errors on the part of the captain and crew . He was convinced the Mark 6 was satisfactory , and ordered all fleet boats to continue to use it . In November 1942 , Christie was ordered to return to Newport as Inspector of Ordnance at the Torpedo Station . Newport had become a bottleneck for torpedo manufacture , and the Bureau of Ordnance wanted to advance development of the Mark 18 electric torpedo . Christie resisted leaving his command at Brisbane , but was considered of more use to resolve the torpedo issue . He was replaced by Captain James Fife . For his service at Brisbane , Christie was awarded the Legion of Merit . 
 Christie was promoted to rear admiral as part of his move back to Newport . In January 1943 , however , Rear Admiral Robert English , Commander , Submarines , U.S. Pacific Fleet , was killed in a plane crash . Christie hoped to get the position but the job went to Rear Admiral Charles A. Lockwood , commander of submarine operations in Fremantle , and the Bureau of Personnel selected Christie to take over Lockwood 's old command . Christie lobbied Vice Admiral Arthur ' Chips ' Carpender , Douglas MacArthur 's Commander Allied Naval Forces , to allow him to replace Fife as commander of the larger submarine force at Brisbane . Carpender refused , and Christie went on to Fremantle . Nevertheless , Christie continued to try for some time to take the Brisbane force under his control . 
 By the middle of 1943 , Lockwood had received enough reports from submarine officers to convince him the Mark 6 was significantly flawed . On 24 June 1943 , he formally ordered all submarines operating out of Pearl Harbor to deactivate the magnetic influence feature . However , Christie was still committed to the exploder , and ordered Fremantle boats to continue using the influence feature . Submarines operating between the two commands were required to either enable or disable it , depending on which command area they were in . This difference of opinion strained relations between the two admirals . 
 In November 1943 , Carpender was replaced by Vice Admiral Thomas C. Kinkaid , who ordered the final deactivation of the Mark 6 in all combat commands . Christie abided by the order , commencing on 20 January 1944 , but was still convinced the Mark 6 had potential . He had Commanders Chester Nimitz , Jr. and James McCallum continue technical studies of the Mark 6 and to develop improvements , but these revised <unk> were just as unreliable as the earlier versions . 
 = = = Fremantle = = = 
 It was common for Christie to greet a returning submarine at the pier , and to award decorations to the crew on the spot . This bypassed naval award boards , and annoyed Kinkaid and Lockwood , possibly because confirmation of sinkings was accomplished by Ultra , the reading of coded Japanese radio traffic , and news of awards given so quickly could constitute a security breach . Complicating the matter was the fact MacArthur awarded army decorations to naval personnel ; like Christie , he took it upon himself to authorize the decorations rather than to go through the standard review procedures . These events compelled Kinkaid to forbid Christie to give <unk> awards , and to keep Christie from recommending the award of army medals to navy personnel . These events would ultimately contribute to Christie 's dismissal as Commander of Submarines in Fremantle . 
 In early 1944 , Christie decided he wanted to make a war patrol and selected to ride with Walt Griffith in USS Bowfin . The admiral joined the boat on 29 January 1944 and , during the patrol , conducted standard duties such as standing watch . He departed Bowfin after an active 29 @-@ day patrol . In June 1944 , Christie decided he wanted to make a second patrol , and selected USS <unk> . However , that boat was having engine troubles , so Christie decided to go in USS Harder , commanded by Samuel D. Dealey . Dealey had just finished up Harder 's epic fifth war patrol , in which he was credited with sinking five Japanese destroyers ( reduced post @-@ war to three destroyers ) . Despite the fact the crew was exhausted , Dealey agreed to extend his fifth patrol and take Christie on board . When Harder returned to port on 3 July 1944 , Christie was concerned about its commander . Dealey was one of the leading submarine skippers but , having completed five war patrols , he was showing signs of strain . The admiral believed Dealey should step down from command of Harder , but Dealey felt he should make one more patrol before leaving the boat . 
 After Christie 's return from his second combat patrol , Admiral Chester Nimitz recommended he and Lockwood meet in Brisbane and discuss joint submarine operations . During the visit , Lockwood and Christie discussed technical issues , as well as the establishment of advanced bases in <unk> <unk> and Saipan . However , the meeting also resulted in some kind of personal rift between the two men . They had already clashed over the Mark 6 exploder and the Mark 14 torpedo , and some of Lockwood 's staff believed Christie 's ride in Harder was a risky and unnecessary stunt . After meeting with Lockwood , Christie met with MacArthur and related the events of Dealey 's fifth war patrol to the general . MacArthur then decided to award Dealey a Distinguished Service Cross , and Christie the Silver Star . Additionally at this meeting , Christie found out his earlier recommendation for an army decoration to Griffith had apparently been blocked by Kinkaid . Despite Kinkaid 's order regarding army decorations , MacArthur insisted on granting medals to the two men . Although Christie did not request the decorations , he was put on the spot and felt compelled to report the entire affair to Kinkaid . In the end , the general awarded the medals , displeasing Kinkaid . 
 On 5 August , Dealey took Harder out for a sixth patrol . His former executive officer , Frank C. " Tiny " Lynch , believed Dealey was mentally exhausted . Christie also had reservations , but Dealey seemed to recuperate while Harder was being refitted in port . The admiral therefore allowed Dealey to retain command . On 24 August , Harder was sunk with all hands off <unk> Bay . Dealey 's loss was a great shock to Christie , and the event worsened his relationship with Kinkaid . Christie recommended Dealey for the Medal of Honor for Harder 's fifth patrol and the supposed sinking of five Japanese destroyers . Kinkaid turned down the recommendation on the grounds Dealey had already received the Distinguished Service Cross for the same patrol . Christie was angered by this , and sent dispatches to Admiral Edwards , MacArthur , and Kinkaid himself . The radio dispatch to Kinkaid was sent in a low @-@ grade code that was easily decipherable ; it criticized Kinkaid and urged him to reconsider . The message was so blunt and public , it was viewed as bordering on insubordination . 
 In October and November 1944 , Christie received intelligence regarding German plans to operate a wolfpack of U @-@ boats in Australian waters . He directed Allied forces to detect and eliminate the threat , resulting in the Dutch submarine <unk> ( swordfish ) sinking U @-@ 168 on 6 October near Surabaya and USS Flounder 's sinking of U @-@ 537 on 10 November near the northern end of the Lombok Strait . Another U @-@ boat disappeared en route while a fourth , U @-@ 862 , evaded searchers to slip around the south coast of Australia and sink a Liberty ship south of Sydney in late December . 
 In November 1944 , Kinkaid relieved Christie of command of submarine operations at Fremantle , and assigned the position to Fife commencing 30 December . Although no specific reason was given , Christie was convinced it was because he pushed Kinkaid too hard for Dealey 's Medal of Honor , and for his process of awarding decorations in general . However , Christie 's losses , which included Dealey and Kinkaid 's nephew , Lieutenant Commander Manning Kimmel in USS <unk> in July 1944 , may have also influenced Kinkaid 's decision . 
 Christie returned to the United States , and went on to command Puget Sound Navy Yard . Now that he was no longer under Kinkaid 's command , Christie renewed his push to get Dealey awarded the Medal of Honor , this time by getting the endorsement for the decoration from MacArthur . The general agreed , and Dealey was posthumously awarded the medal . 
 = = Post @-@ war career = = 
 After the war , Christie attempted to get command of operations for Atlantic submarines , but that job went to James Fife instead . However , Christie was given command of naval forces in the Philippines . He retired from the Navy on 1 August 1949 , with tombstone promotion to the rank of vice admiral . He sold life insurance and dabbled in other ventures for some time . In his final years , he lived on the west coast of the United States and in Hawaii . Christie died in Honolulu , Hawaii on 19 December 1987 at the age of 94 . His wife , <unk> , joined him at the National Memorial Cemetery of the Pacific following her death on 31 May 2002 . His papers are in the Library of Congress . 
 = U.S. Route 2 in Washington = 
 U.S. Route 2 ( US 2 ) is a component of the United States Numbered Highway System that connects the city of Everett in the U.S. state of Washington to the Upper Peninsula of Michigan , with a separate segment that runs from Rouses Point , New York , to Houlton , Maine . Within Washington , the highway travels on a 326 @.@ 36 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 525 @.@ 23 km ) route that connects the western and eastern regions of the state as a part of the state highway system and the National Highway System . US 2 forms parts of two National Scenic Byways , the Stevens Pass Greenway from Monroe to Cashmere and the Coulee Corridor Scenic Byway near Coulee City , and an All @-@ American Road named the International Selkirk Loop within Newport . 
 US 2 begins in Everett at an intersection with State Route 529 ( SR 529 ) in Everett and travels east to an interchange with Interstate 5 ( I @-@ 5 ) . The highway travels over the Cascade Range through Stevens Pass , connecting the western and eastern parts of the state . US 2 becomes concurrent with US 97 from Peshastin to Orondo , crossing the Columbia River in Wenatchee on the Richard Odabashian Bridge . The highway continues east across the Columbia Plateau in Central Washington and crosses the Grand Coulee while concurrent with SR 17 west of Coulee City . The highway travels into Spokane concurrent with I @-@ 90 and US 395 and leaves both highways continuing northeast to Newport . US 2 leaves Washington at the Idaho state line , located along SR 41 in Newport and Idaho State Highway 41 ( ID @-@ 41 ) in <unk> , Idaho . 
 The present route of US 2 follows several wagon roads that were built in the late 19th century by local railroad companies , including the Stevens Pass Highway along the Skykomish River . The state of Washington began maintaining sections of what would become US 2 with the extension of State Road 7 in 1909 , from <unk> to Spokane on the Sunset Highway and later State Road 2 . In addition to State Road 2 , State Road 23 was created in 1915 , traveling north from Spokane to Newport , and was renumbered to State Road 6 in 1923 . The Stevens Pass Highway was transferred to state maintenance in 1931 with the establishment of State Road 15 , traveling from Everett to Peshastin . The United States Highway System was adopted on November 11 , 1926 , and designated US 10 on the future route of US 2 from Peshastin to Spokane and US 195 from Spokane to Newport . US 10 was re @-@ routed in 1939 and replaced by US 10 Alternate , which was routed across Stevens Pass in the 1940s and itself replaced by US 2 in 1946 . The primary state highways were replaced by the current state route system during the 1964 state highway renumbering , and US 2 replaced its three concurrent routes . US 2 underwent conversions to limited @-@ access highways during the next several decades , including the completion of the Hewitt Avenue Trestle and a bypass of Snohomish . A series of projects is planned to improve the US 2 corridor between Snohomish and Skykomish by expanding the highway near various cities and the completion of a bypass around Monroe in the near future . 
 = = Route description = = 
 US 2 is defined by the Washington State Legislature as SR 2 , part of the Revised Code of Washington as § 47 @.@ 17 @.@ 005 . Every year , WSDOT conducts a series of surveys on its highways in the state to measure traffic volume . This is expressed in terms of annual average daily traffic ( AADT ) , which is a measure of traffic volume for any average day of the year . In 2013 , WSDOT calculated that the busiest section of US 2 within Washington was the Hewitt Avenue Trestle above the Snohomish River east of Everett , carrying over 76 @,@ 000 vehicles , while the least busiest section of US 2 is in Moses Coulee , carrying 630 vehicles . The entire route of US 2 within Washington is designated as part of the National Highway System , classifying it as important to the national economy , defense , and mobility . WSDOT designates US 2 as a Highway of Statewide Significance , which includes highways that connect major communities in the state of Washington . 
 US 2 begins in downtown Everett , with its eastbound lanes starting at the intersection of Hewitt Avenue and Maple Street , signed as SR 529 , and its westbound lanes ending at the intersection of California Street and Maple Street ( SR 529 ) . The highway travels east onto the Hewitt Avenue Trestle , crossing the Snohomish River after an interchange with I @-@ 5 . The four @-@ lane trestle continues east across Ebey Island , intersecting <unk> Road before crossing the Ebey Slough . US 2 turns southeast at the east end of the trestle in <unk> at an interchange with SR 204 , which serves Lake Stevens . The limited @-@ access road travels around the city of Snohomish , intersecting Bickford Avenue in an at @-@ grade intersection and SR 9 in a diamond interchange . US 2 turns south and crosses over the <unk> River and the Centennial Trail before its limited @-@ access road ends at a diamond interchange with 88th Street . The two @-@ lane road continues southeast along the Scenic Subdivision of the Northern Transcon , a BNSF rail line , into Monroe . The highway travels past the Evergreen State Fairgrounds and intersects SR 522 before entering downtown Monroe . 
 US 2 , now part of a National Scenic Byway named the Stevens Pass Greenway , continues through the city of Monroe and forms the northern terminus of SR 203 . The highway leaves the city while parallel to the Skykomish River and travels through the cities of Sultan and Gold Bar . US 2 begins following the South Fork Skykomish River at Index into the Cascade Range , crossing into King County near the town of Baring . The highway enters Mount Baker @-@ Snoqualmie National Forest and continues east along the Tye River past the town of Skykomish and the Cascade Tunnel towards Stevens Pass . The pass , located 4 @,@ 061 feet ( 1 @,@ 238 m ) above sea level , is also home to the Stevens Pass Ski Area and a trailhead for the Pacific Crest Trail while serving as the point in which US 2 crosses into the Wenatchee National Forest in Chelan County . The highway continues east down Nason Creek to Coles Corner , the southern terminus of SR 207 , which serves Lake Wenatchee . US 2 travels due south along the Wenatchee River valley through Leavenworth before it begins a 27 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 43 km ) concurrency with US 97 at a diamond interchange east of Peshastin . 
 US 2 and US 97 travel together on a four @-@ lane highway on the north side of the Wenatchee River heading southeast past Cashmere heading towards Wenatchee . The roadway intersects SR 285 , a short connector to downtown Wenatchee , and US 97 Alternate , an alternate route to Chelan , in Sunnyslope before crossing the Richard Odabashian Bridge over the Columbia River and into Douglas County . The two highways continue east into East Wenatchee and turn north at the western terminus of SR 28 . US 2 and US 97 continue north between the Columbia River to the west and Badger Mountain to the east , passing the Rocky Reach Dam and its reservoir , Lake Entiat before reaching Orondo . US 2 and US 97 split at Orondo , with US 97 continuing north along the Columbia River towards Chelan and US 2 traveling east up Pine Canyon onto the Waterville Plateau . The highway travels through the town of Waterville via several turns on city streets before heading due east across the Columbia Plateau , intersecting SR 172 at Farmer . US 2 becomes concurrent with SR 17 as it descends into the Grand Coulee south of Banks Lake , becoming part of the Coulee Corridor Scenic Byway . 
 The byway travels off US 2 and onto SR 155 east of Coulee City at <unk> , continuing north through Grant County towards the Grand Coulee Dam . US 2 travels east into Lincoln County between the towns of Hartline and Almira and becomes concurrent with SR 21 in Wilbur for several city blocks . The highway parallels the Columbia River Subdivision of the BNSF Northern Transcon through Bachelor Prairie towards Davenport , where it intersects the termini of SR 28 and SR 25 . US 2 travels into Reardan concurrent with SR 231 and enters Spokane County east of the town boundary . The highway passes Fairchild Air Force Base and becomes a four @-@ lane arterial street through Airway Heights approaching Spokane . US 2 enters the city of Spokane as a four @-@ lane freeway northeast of Spokane International Airport and intersects Airport Way before beginning its 3 @.@ 82 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 6 @.@ 15 km ) concurrency with I @-@ 90 and US 395 at a partial cloverleaf interchange . 
 I @-@ 90 , US 2 and US 395 travel east into Downtown Spokane and intersects the northern terminus of US 195 , which travels south towards Pullman and Lewiston , Idaho . US 2 and US 395 split from I @-@ 90 and travel into Downtown Spokane on the one @-@ way pair of Browne and Division streets , serving the Spokane Intermodal Center and Spokane Convention Center before reaching Riverfront Park . Division Street crosses the Spokane River and the Centennial Trail on the Senator Sam C. Guess Memorial Bridge before splitting into the one @-@ way pairing of Division and Ruby streets . Division Street continues north past the <unk> Mall and the eastern terminus of SR 291 at Francis Street before US 2 and US 395 split . 
 US 2 travels northeast through Country Homes on the Newport Highway to an interchange with the North Spokane Corridor , an incomplete freeway bypass of Spokane that is signed as a spur route of US 395 . The highway continues west of Mead and intersects SR 206 , a road serving Mount Spokane State Park , before becoming a four @-@ lane divided highway parallel the <unk> River Subdivision of the BNSF Northern Transcon . US 2 travels north along the Little Spokane River through Colbert and <unk> before leaving Spokane County and entering Pend Oreille County . The divided highway ends at the southern terminus of SR 211 , located west of Diamond Lake . US 2 continues northeast along the Little Spokane River and enters the city of Newport , splitting into a one @-@ way pair on Washington and Union avenues . The two streets travel north through the city to the eastern terminus of SR 20 and turn east onto Walnut Street and the International Selkirk Loop , where US 2 crosses the Idaho state line at the northern terminus of SR 41 in Newport and ID @-@ 41 in <unk> , Idaho . 
 = = History = = 
 US 2 follows the route of several wagon roads and early state highways that themselves followed the route of the Skykomish River and the Great Northern Railway , a transcontinental railroad that was completed in 1893 . A wagon road from Snohomish to Skykomish was completed in the late 1880s , while another wagon road along the Wenatchee River from Leavenworth to Sunnyslope was completed by 1904 . The state of Washington began maintaining State Road 7 in 1909 , traveling from Peshastin to Spokane on what would become the Sunset Highway and US 2 . The easternmost segment of US 2 within Washington , from Spokane to Newport , was added to the state highway system in 1915 as State Road 23 and renamed to the Pend Oreille Highway two years later . State Road 7 was renumbered to State Road 2 , part of an east – west highway connecting Seattle to Spokane . The Stevens Pass Highway was opened on July 11 , 1925 , and traveled from Everett along the Skykomish River and over Stevens Pass towards Leavenworth . The highway was transferred to state maintenance from the Department of Highways in 1931 as State Road 15 . 
 The United States Highway System was adopted by the American Association of State Highway Officials ( AASHO ) on November 11 , 1926 , and included a shorter US 2 , traveling from Bonners Ferry , Idaho to the Upper Peninsula of Michigan , and several routes along the modern route of US 2 in Washington . The corridor of US 2 was signed as US 10 from Peshastin to Spokane and US 195 from Spokane to Newport , co @-@ signed with State Road 2 and State Road 6 , respectively . The Washington primary and secondary state highway system was adopted by the Washington State Legislature on March 17 , 1937 , and the three highways that comprise the present route of US 2 were included in the system as Primary State Highway 15 ( PSH 15 ) from Everett to Peshastin , PSH 2 from Peshastin to Spokane , and PSH 6 from Spokane to the Idaho state line in Newport via a short branch route . US 10 was relocated to a southern route in 1939 , crossing the Columbia River at Vantage , and the former route was replaced by US 10 Alternate the following year . A proposal from representatives of the highway departments of Idaho and Washington to extend US 2 to Everett was considered by the AASHO 's U.S. Route Numbering Committee in January 1946 , but was vetoed . The proposal resurfaced during the committee 's meeting on December 20 , 1946 , and was approved as a replacement of US 10 Alternate from Everett to Bonners Ferry and US 195 from Spokane to Newport . 
 The Washington state highway system was changed to its current " sign route system " beginning in January 1963 with a state highway renumbering . Under the new system , Interstate highways , U.S. routes , and state routes replaced the primary and secondary highways and were codified under the Revised Code of Washington in 1970 . US 2 was re @-@ routed around various cities over the next several decades onto limited @-@ access highways to reduce congestion , beginning with the construction of the current westbound Hewitt Avenue Trestle east of Everett in the 1960s , moving traffic off an existing wooden trestle that would be replaced with a new eastbound trestle in 2002 . US 2 was routed north of Wenatchee onto the Olds Station Bridge , renamed in 1991 to honor Richard Odabashian , over the Columbia River in 1975 , while the former alignment was designated as SR 285 in 1977 . The present two @-@ lane expressway north and east of Snohomish was completed in 1983 and was intended to also include an unfinished bypass of Monroe . US 97 had its concurrency with US 2 extended from Sunnyslope to Orondo along the east side of the Columbia River in 1987 after US 97 was moved onto the former route of SR 151 . The Stevens Pass Greenway , which became a National Forest Scenic Byway on April 14 , 1992 , was re @-@ designated as a National Scenic Byway on September 22 , 2005 . Within Newport , US 2 had an unsigned spur route that traveled on the southbound lanes of ID @-@ 41 on the Idaho state line until 1997 , when SR 41 was created to avoid confusion . The intersection between US 2 and US 97 east of Peshastin was replaced by a new diamond interchange completed in October 2008 as part of general improvements to the two highways ' concurrency from Peshastin to Sunnyslope . The current interchange between US 2 and the North Spokane Corridor , a spur route of US 395 , was opened in November 2011 to coincide with the opening of the northernmost 5 @.@ 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 85 km ) of the future freeway . 
 Recently , WSDOT began planning a series of 56 projects to improve the US 2 corridor between Snohomish and Skykomish , where the highway is two lanes wide and has been the site of over 2 @,@ 600 collisions between 1999 and 2007 that caused 47 fatalities . A study , conducted by WSDOT in 2007 , divided the corridor into four segments , each with a specialized development plan . The study suggested the expansion of the limited @-@ access highway from Snohomish to the western city limits of Monroe to four lanes , including an interchange at Bickford Avenue that is expected to be completed in fall 2013 . WSDOT planned the re @-@ routing of US 2 onto a northern bypass of Monroe with an extension of SR 522 to a roundabout with the bypass north of Monroe . From Monroe to Gold Bar , US 2 would be expanded to a four @-@ lane highway , with a roundabout connecting the highway to the city of Gold Bar , and become a two @-@ lane highway with wider shoulder lanes to Skykomish . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Here Come the Warm Jets = 
 Here Come the Warm Jets is the debut solo album by Brian Eno , credited only as " Eno " . Produced by him , it was released on Island Records in November 1973 . The musical style of Here Come the Warm Jets is a hybrid of glam rock and art rock , similar to Eno 's previous album work with Roxy Music , although in a stronger experimental fashion . In developing the album 's words and music , Eno used unusual methods such as dancing for his band members and having them play accordingly , and singing nonsense words to himself that would form the basis of subsequent lyrics . The album features various guest musicians , including members of Roxy Music , Hawkwind , Matching Mole and Pink Fairies , as well as Chris Spedding , and Robert Fripp of King Crimson , who collaborated with Eno a year before in ( No <unk> ) . 
 Here Come the Warm Jets peaked at number 26 on the United Kingdom album charts and number 151 on the US Billboard charts , receiving mostly positive reviews . It was re @-@ issued on compact disc in 1990 on Island Records and in 2004 on Virgin Records , and continued to elicit praise . Critic Steve Huey of AllMusic stated that the album " still sounds exciting , forward @-@ looking , and densely detailed , revealing more intricacies with every play " . 
 = = Production = = 
 Here Come the Warm Jets was recorded in twelve days at Majestic Studios in London during September 1973 by recording engineer Derek Chandler . It was mixed at Air and Olympic Studios by Eno and audio engineer Chris Thomas . The album 's title was originally described by Eno as a slang term for urination . However , in an interview with Mojo magazine in 1996 , Eno explained that it came from a description he wrote for the treated guitar on the title track ; he called it " warm jet guitar ... because the guitar sounded like a tuned jet . " 
 Eno enlisted sixteen guest musicians to play on the album with him , including John Wetton and Robert Fripp of King Crimson , Simon King from Hawkwind , Bill MacCormick of Matching Mole , Paul Rudolph of Pink Fairies , Chris Spedding and all the members of Roxy Music except vocalist Bryan Ferry . Eno selected them on the basis that he thought they were incompatible with each other musically . He stated that he " got them together merely because I wanted to see what happens when you combine different identities like that and allow them to compete ... [ The situation ] is organized with the knowledge that there might be accidents , accidents which will be more interesting than what I had intended " . 
 Eno directed the musicians by using body language and dancing , as well as through verbal suggestion , to influence their playing and the sounds they would emit . He felt at the time that this was a good way to communicate with musicians . The album credits Eno with instruments such as " snake guitar " , " simplistic piano " and " electric larynx " . These terms were used to describe the sound 's character or the means of production used to treat the instruments . After recording the individual tracks , Eno condensed and mixed the instrumentation deeply , resulting in some of the tracks bearing little resemblance to what the musicians recorded during the session . 
 Eno 's girlfriend at the time , potter Carol McNicoll , supervised the design of the cover for the album and it features one of her teapots . 
 = = Style = = 
 The songs on Here Come the Warm Jets reference various musical styles from the past and present . The overall style of the album has been described as " glammed @-@ up art @-@ pop " , showcasing glam rock 's simple yet theatrical crunchy guitar rock and art pop 's sonic texture and avant @-@ garde influences . In some tracks , Eno 's vocals emulate the manner of the lead singer of his former band Roxy Music , Bryan Ferry . On other songs such as " Baby 's on Fire " , they were described as " more nasal and slightly snotty vocals " . Musically , the album borrows from popular styles of the music in the 1950s such as the tinkling pianos and falsetto backing vocals on " Cindy Tells Me " , and the drum rhythm of " Blank Frank " , taken from Bo Diddley 's song " Who Do You Love ? " . 
 To create the lyrics , Eno would later play these backing tracks singing nonsense syllables to himself , then take them and form them into actual words , phrases and meaning . This lyric @-@ writing method was used for all his more vocal @-@ based recordings of the 1970s . The lyrics on Here Come the Warm Jets are macabre with an underlying sense of humour . They are mostly free @-@ associative and have no particular meaning . Exceptions include " The Paw Paw Negro Blowtorch " , about the historical A.W. Underwood of Paw Paw , Michigan with the purported ability to set items ablaze with his breath ; according to Eno , the song " celebrates the possibility of a love affair with the man . " Eno has attempted to dissuade fans from reading too much into his words ; he claims that the song " Needles in the Camel 's Eye " was " written in less time than it takes to sing ... I regard [ the song ] as an instrumental with singing on it " . 
 = = Release = = 
 Here Come the Warm Jets was released in January 1974 . The album was one of Brian Eno 's best @-@ selling releases , charting for two weeks and peaking at number 26 on the UK Albums Chart on 9 March 1974 , and number 151 on the Billboard Top LPs & Tapes chart . Eno planned a tour with the band The Winkies to accompany him following the release of Here Come the Warm Jets . Eno had to depart the tour after being diagnosed with a collapsed lung . After recovering , Eno played at an Island Records 1 June 1974 concert with fellow musicians Nico , Kevin Ayers and John Cale . 
 Here Come the Warm Jets was later re @-@ issued on Polydor in March 1977 , and again on compact disc in January 1987 . In 2004 , Virgin Records began reissuing Eno 's albums in batches of four to five . The remastered digipak release of Here Come the Warm Jets was released on 31 May 2004 in the UK and on 1 June 2004 in North America . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Initial critical reception for the album was mostly positive , praising its experimental tendencies . Critic Lester Bangs of Creem declared it " Incredible " , while Robert Christgau also of Creem gave it an " A " rating , stating that " The idea of this record — top of the pops from quasi @-@ dadaist British synth wizard — may put you off , but the actuality is quite engaging in a vaguely Velvet Underground kind of way . " Billboard wrote a positive review , stating that " ... while it all may be a bit unpredictable , and may be a longshot to do much in the U.S. market , it is an excellent LP . " The album was also placed in Circus magazine 's section for " Picks of the Month " . Cynthia <unk> of Rolling Stone wrote an article on Eno , calling the album " a very compelling experiment in controlled chaos and by his own self @-@ dictated standards a near success . " The next month , Gordon Fletcher wrote a negative review for the album in the " Records " section of Rolling Stone , stating " [ Eno 's ] record is annoying because it doesn 't do anything ... the listener must kick himself for blowing five bucks on baloney . " In 1974 , Here Come the Warm Jets was voted one of the best albums of the year in the Village Voice 's Pazz & Jop critics poll for that year . 
 Modern assessments of the album have been positive ; AllMusic gave the album five stars , their highest rating . In 1991 , Select gave the album a five out of five rating , describing it as an album of " mind @-@ blowing diversity " and as a " classic album " . In the November 2003 issue of Rolling Stone , the album charted at number 436 in the magazine 's list of the 500 greatest albums ever . In a retrospective review , Rolling Stone 's J. D. Considine gave the album four out of five stars and commented that " It may be easy to hear both an anticipation of punk and an echo of Roxy Music in the arch clangor of Here Come the Warm Jets , but what shines brightest is the offhand accessibility of the songs " , adding that " the melodies linger on [ … ] the album seems almost a blueprint for the pop experiments Bowie ( with Eno collaborating ) would conduct with Low " . In 2004 , Pitchfork ranked the album at number 24 on its " Top 100 Albums of the 1970s " list , as well as giving the re @-@ issue of the album 9 @.@ 2 out of 10 . In 2003 , Blender placed the album on their list " 500 CDs You Must Own : Alternative Rock " , stating that Here Come the Warm Jets " remains his best pop effort . His experimental touch turns basic glam @-@ rock into something sick and sinister . The free @-@ associating , posh @-@ voiced vocals are an acquired taste , but there 's method in this madness " . The Canadian music magazine Exclaim ! referred to Here Come the Warm Jets as " Arguably one of the greatest solo debuts of the 1970s ... Songs such as " Baby 's on Fire " , " Driving Me Backwards " and " Needles in the Camel 's Eye " capture the lush and sleazy underpinning narratives of the British Invasion in arrangements that sound quintessentially timeless " . 
 The album was included in Robert Dimery 's 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Brian Eno , except where noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Circus Juventas = 
 Circus Juventas ( formerly Circus of the Star ) is a youth performing arts circus school located in Saint Paul , Minnesota , serving youth throughout the Minneapolis – Saint Paul metropolitan area . The organization was founded in 1994 by Dan and Betty Butler , and offers circus arts training to young people ranging from 3 to 21 years old . 
 Emulating the style of Cirque du Soleil , Circus Juventas 's first show was at Saint Paul 's Highland Fest in 1995 . From there , the school 's enrollment quickly expanded and the organization initiated a campaign to fund a $ 2 @.@ 1 million permanent big top facility , which opened in 2001 on Saint Paul parkland in the Highland Park neighborhood . That year , it began to produce annual summer performances showcasing the work of its most advanced students , each with a distinct theme . 
 These shows have proven popular with local audiences and have been well received critically , with reviewers praising the professionalism and fearlessness exhibited in the productions , while noting students ' occasional missteps during performances . Circus Juventas students have performed and competed both around the Minneapolis – Saint Paul area and abroad . As of 2014 , Juventas was the largest youth performing arts circus in North America . The school had tentative plans to add a second facility elsewhere in the region . 
 = = History = = 
 The founders of Circus Juventas , Dan and Betty Butler , met as teenagers at the Sailor Circus of Sarasota during the mid @-@ 1970s . Dan was a catcher on the flying trapeze , and Betty was an aerialist on the cloud swing . They began dating at age sixteen , went on to perform at Florida State University 's Flying High Circus , and married in 1980 . Dan became a successful real estate broker in Atlanta , but eventually faced bankruptcy and chemical dependency . The couple came to reside in Minnesota because Dan Butler was receiving alcohol and drug abuse rehabilitation at Hazelden . The Butlers attended Sailor Circus reunions together and after one , in April 1994 , Betty Butler wondered , " Wouldn 't it be great if we could do something in Minnesota ? " 
 The Butlers founded Circus Juventas as a nonprofit corporation in October 1994 , citing a desire to give back to the community as one of the reasons for its creation . It was originally known as Circus of the Star , so called for Minnesota 's nickname , The North Star State . The newly opened Hillcrest Recreation Center in Saint Paul provided the couple with inspiration for the circus program , and they asked the city if they could hold classes there . The Saint Paul Parks and Recreation Department approved the program , and assumed liability for approximately fifty children who enrolled the first year . About thirty of those students stayed with the program and performed in their first show at the 1995 Highland Fest , an annual family @-@ oriented neighborhood festival . After this performance , interest in the program increased . By 1996 , 30 more students were enrolled , and by 1997 , an additional 25 had joined the program . The circus was still based out of the Hillcrest Recreation Center 's gym , and had to work around the schedule of the other regular activities in the facility . In 1997 , the <unk> for the program was around 200 students . 
 With the school 's growing popularity , the Butlers saw the need for a larger space so they developed plans to build a 1 @,@ 500 @-@ seat facility . In an article published in the St. Paul Pioneer Press in 1997 , the estimated cost of the project was quoted at $ 700 @,@ 000 , with a groundbreaking planned for April 1998 . The Butlers initiated their capital campaign on February 18 , 1998 , with the goal of raising $ 1 @.@ 1 million for their new building . By August 1999 , they had raised $ 1 million of their expanded $ 1 @.@ 6 million goal for the circus expansion , with plans to break ground on the new facility that November . Part of the funding came from Saint Paul 's Sales Tax Revitalization ( STAR ) program , through which surplus funds were distributed by councilmembers to worthy organizations . A total of $ 627 @,@ 183 was disbursed for the circus through the program , split between three STAR components : $ 450 @,@ 000 as part of Neighborhood STAR which sought to fund local initiatives , $ 122 @,@ 183 as part of Cultural STAR which funded arts and culture programs , and $ 55 @,@ 000 from 3rd Ward City Councilmember Pat Harris 's discretionary Neighborhood Investment Initiative budget . Another $ 60 @,@ 000 came from an anonymous recently retired Saint Paul businessperson . 
 The $ 1 @.@ 6 million were raised in full by the end of April 2000 , just in time to ensure the circus received its STAR funding which would have been nullified if the Butlers had not made their fundraising goal by May 5 of that year . The Butlers had found the space for the school through coincidence ; after driving along Montreal Avenue in Saint Paul one night , they turned into a parking lot , noticed an area beneath some trees , and realized it was an ideal location for their school 's expanded facility . On August 25 , 2000 , ground was broken on the new structure . The big top took about a year to complete , during which time the school also changed its name to Circus Juventas , named for Juventas , an ancient Roman goddess of youth and rejuvenation . Ultimately , the project totaled $ 2 @.@ 1 million and by 2006 , the school was $ 700 @,@ 000 in debt . It was working with various city agencies to resolve the shortfall and faced " no looming threat . " The school relies heavily on parent volunteers to help with various operational aspects , from rigging to administrative work to set construction and decoration , and concessions sales . Betty Butler estimated that 90 percent of work on the school 's shows is done by parent volunteers . The circus operates with the equivalent of 40 full @-@ time employees . 
 In 2010 , the circus school enrolled students from ages 6 to 21 , with an additional enrollment of about 150 toddlers and other younger participants as young as three years old . By 2013 , the enrollment had reached over 800 and the school 's annual operating budget exceeded $ 2 million . Circus Juventas has also held circus arts fitness classes for adults , taught by the school 's regular instructors . The school is a member of the Outdoor Amusement Business Association and the Fédération Mondiale du Cirque . A listing on the latter organization 's website notes that as of 2014 , Juventas is the largest performing arts circus school for youth in the United States ; other sources indicate that it is the largest in all of North America . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 Circus Juventas 's big top is located in the Highland Park neighborhood of Saint Paul , Minnesota . It stands 40 feet ( 12 m ) tall and encompasses 21 @,@ 000 square feet ( 1 @,@ 951 m2 ) of floor space built on concrete slab . The structure is supported by an aluminum frame and covered with flame @-@ resistant vinyl @-@ coated cloth . The building 's 1 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 93 m2 ) lobby space was designed by Locus Architecture , Ltd . , of Minneapolis . The firm connected <unk> fabric ( often used for awnings ) to the system of catwalks and supports to help " the lobby act ... as an immersion tank , rather than a threshold , to introduce spectators to the illusion of the world of circus . " Although Locus was still installing the fabric within hours of the circus 's gala opening , the company won one of the 10 honor awards distributed in 2002 by the Minnesota branch of the American Institute of Architects for their design . The circus school 's original bleachers could seat 1 @,@ 200 <unk> . 
 = = = Bleacher collapse = = = 
 On August 16 , 2009 , at the closing performance of the show Yulong , a set of bleachers with a carrying capacity of 450 people and holding 420 at the time collapsed , sending seven people to the hospital . In the ensuing investigation , it came to light that Juventas had not had the bleachers inspected each time they were set up , as required by their lease with the city . They had been issued a permit in 2006 for the bleachers , and had not had them inspected since . The school was fined $ 500 and shut down until the legal and safety issues could be fully investigated . It reopened about a month later and installed new bleachers with molded plastic seats the next March . 
 = = = Future = = = 
 In early 2014 , the Butlers announced plans to expand their big top facility by an additional 10 @,@ 000 square feet ( 930 m2 ) . The additional space would house a dance and theater studio , a costume shop , offices , and a 4 @,@ 500 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 420 m2 ) gym . Naming rights for the new structure would provide a component of the $ 4 million the school hoped to raise for the $ 2 million expansion , a $ 1 million addition to the circus 's endowment , and eventual repairs to the building 's exterior , estimated at $ 1 million . Betty Butler stated that the project stemmed from the desire to create " a true professional program , a separate program " for students looking to study and perform circus arts post @-@ Juventas , even though she and her husband originally shied away from pre @-@ professional training as a core aspect of their circus school . 
 According to Saint Paul 's Parks and Recreation Department , the cliffside space which the expansion would occupy was deemed unsuitable for building a structure of the expansion 's proposed size . In response , the Butlers were considering building a new facility of up to 50 @,@ 000 square feet ( 4 @,@ 600 m2 ) in the western suburbs of Minneapolis – Saint Paul . Construction of a new building would likely cost $ 10 million , require a capital campaign to fund , and probably not begin for five to 10 years . In the meantime , the school is performing a small expansion to its Highland Park space , on which the Circus has a lease for at least 17 more years , as of 2014 . 
