 = = Performances = = 
 The school typically puts on two shows each year : a spring performance featuring less advanced students studying circus arts at beginning and intermediate levels , and a late summer show to display the talents of more advanced students . While the earliest shows were focused primarily on technique and the individual acts , by 1997 or 1998 the school began to emphasize the artistic side of performances , including integrating those acts into Cirque du Soleil @-@ style narratives . The school also hosts an annual gala in late autumn that includes portions of the year 's earlier summer performance . Circus Juventas does not utilize animal acts in its shows . 
 = = = Big top summer shows = = = 
 2001 : Mythos , a production dealing with Greek mythology was performed not only in Circus Juventas 's newly opened permanent big top facility but also at the Minnesota State Capitol on New Year 's Eve , 2001 . 
 2002 : Cirque Napoleon , a show that delved into the history of circus , taking place in a French circus in 1859 and honoring Jules <unk> , an early trapeze artist . 
 2003 : <unk> , a production set in Morocco following four traveling nomads on a quest to determine the meaning of life . 
 2004 : Swash , a pirate @-@ themed performance that entailed a quest for lost treasure . 
 2005 : Dyrnwych , a production that included " an amalgam of fairy @-@ tale types , with wicked hag witches , trolls , forest spirits , and warrior women . " 
 2006 : <unk> , a retelling of the story of Cinderella , inspired by 1500s Venetian <unk> and featuring masks designed by the <unk> responsible for those used in the 1999 film Eyes Wide Shut . 
 2007 : Atlanticus , a performance set under the oceans in the domain of Poseidon . 
 2008 : RavensManor , a haunted house @-@ themed show , based loosely on the Haunted Mansion ride located in Disneyland . RavensManor 's story , set in New Orleans , included a tragic romance and zombies . 
 2009 : Yulong : The Jade Dragon ( sometimes shortened to Yulong ) , a presentation derived from Chinese legendary and circus traditions . Produced in collaboration with the Chinese American Association of Minnesota , the show spotlighted three Taiwanese guest artists and included an emphasis on Chinese circus acts such as Chinese pole and hoop diving . 
 2010 : Sawdust , a performance evoking the traditions of historic American circuses . Special guests in the show were veteran circus performers Willie <unk> and Tony Steele who played slightly fictionalized versions of themselves . 
 2011 : Grimm — Happily Ever After ! ( sometimes shortened to Grimm ) , a show retelling a number of the Brothers Grimm 's fairy tales . Characters included Rapunzel , Cinderella , Little Red Riding Hood , Hansel and Gretel , Snow White , and the Frog Prince . 
 2012 : Showdown , a Wild West @-@ themed show set in the fictional town of Tumbleweed . The performance included portrayals of historical figures including Lillie Langtry , Black Bart , Billy the Kid , and Wyatt Earp , and featured a seven @-@ man highwire pyramid , becoming the second youth circus to complete this trick . 
 2013 : Oz , based on The Wonderful Wizard of Oz . The performance retold Dorothy Gale 's travels through the Land of Oz and incorporated a " maison " trapeze , a cubic apparatus replicating Dorothy 's house that gets swept away and carried to Oz by a tornado . 
 2014 : Neverland , incorporating elements from the world of Peter Pan and featuring a cradle act . 
 2015 : 1001 Nights , a retelling of Scheherazade 's One Thousand and One Nights . 
 2016 's summer show is planned to be an adaptation of Alice 's Adventures in Wonderland . 
 = = = Other engagements = = = 
 In addition to shows at their Saint Paul big top , Juventas students have performed across the Minneapolis – Saint Paul metro area and at domestic and international shows and competitions . Performers have appeared at local events including the Saint Paul Winter Carnival , Minneapolis mayor R. T. Rybak 's 2002 inauguration at the Minneapolis City Hall , and at the Ordway Center for the Performing Arts as part of the Flint Hills International Children 's Festival . Students have presented their work at a variety of local public , retail , and theater spaces . Students have also participated non @-@ Juventas shows , including a 2004 Minnesota Fringe Festival production , the 2005 world premiere of Tin Forest with the Minnesota Orchestra at Orchestra Hall , the Children 's Theatre Company 's 2008 stage adaptation of Madeline and the Gypsies , and the 2012 adaptation of Jack <unk> 's The Dragons Are Singing Tonight at The Southern Theater . In 2010 , a cohort of Juventas students traveled to perform in Chattanooga , Tennessee at the <unk> Festival , Outside the United States , performers have traveled to compete , including at the International Circus Festival in Latina , Italy , and at the Circus Ring of Friendship Festival in Norrköping , Sweden , in which the troupe 's triple trapeze team garnered the gold medal . 
 = = Music = = 
 Much of the accompaniment for the big top summer shows came from Peter Ostroushko , a local mandolin player . Ostroushko , known for his work on the radio show A Prairie Home Companion , became involved in the youth circus after his daughter saw a show and decided to join . In 2005 , the Butlers discovered Ostroushko 's affinity for the mandolin and fiddle , and asked if he would play a Celtic song at the premiere of their upcoming summer big top show , Dyrnwych . He happily agreed , having expressed a lifelong dream of joining a circus , and played the track , " See It There / Con Cassidy 's " , not only at Dyrnwych 's opening but also at each of its subsequent 18 performances . The following year , he composed original music for the 2006 Juventas show , <unk> , and expanded his band to five members , including himself on mandolin , fiddle , and <unk> , Marc Anderson on percussion , Dan Chouinard on piano , accordion , and keyboard , Dirk <unk> on electric and acoustic guitars , and Joel Sayles on electric and acoustic bass guitars . Ostroushko again provided a score for Atlanticus and RavensManor , continued in 2010 with Sawdust , then Grimm , and finally Showdown . Tracks from the first four shows for which he played , from Dyrnwych to RavensManor , are anthologized on the album Peter Joins the Circus , published by Borderland Productions in 2008 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 <unk> Dominique , reporting for Spectacle : An Online Journal of Circus Arts , summarized audience and critical reception for Circus Juventas 's shows by describing them as " always sold out and enthusiastically reviewed by the press . " Renee Valois cited the age of the performers and the proximity between them and the audience when she asked in a St. Paul Pioneer Press review of Oz comparing the circus school with Cirque du Soleil , " Dare I say Circus Juventas is more exciting than the troupe that inspired it ? " Writing for Minnesota Monthly , Amanda <unk> commended the technical skill and professionalism of the performers in 2012 's Showdown : " There is nothing child @-@ like about the talent in this show . The budding stars fearlessly swing , flip , and soar through the air like pros . " In Spectacle , Dominique noted that Juventas 's productions consistently have " a polish and style not often seen in youth circuses , or most professional ones , for that matter . " 
 Susannah <unk> of Knight Arts wrote , " at two hours and 45 minutes , plus a 20 @-@ minute intermission , [ Grimm 's ] run time is an awfully long haul for the smallest circus @-@ goers . " Critics have also commented on the occasional misstep in a performance ; Rohan Preston noted in his review of Grimm that " there are moments – just a few stand out – when you realize that these are students , after all , in a celebrated after @-@ school program . You want them to succeed , even if they do not always . " Similarly , writing for <unk> , <unk> <unk> stated , " Sometimes their silks routines are a bit out of sync and sometimes the show features dance routines from younger kids who are still mastering stunts . Despite this , the performance is very impressive . " 
 = = = Cited = = = 
 LeFevre , Camille ( March – April 2003 ) . " Performance Architecture " . Architecture Minnesota 29 ( 2 ) . ISSN 0149 @-@ <unk> . 
 Rea , Amy C. ( 2012 ) . An Explorer 's Guide : Minnesota , Land of 10 @,@ 000 Lakes ( 2nd ed . ) . Woodstock , VT : Countryman Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 954 @-@ 0 . 
 Rowe , Ashleigh V. ( Series producer ) ( October 7 , 2010 ) . # 209 : Lightsey Darst , Mike <unk> , Circus Juventas + The Pines . Minnesota Original ( Television production ) ( Saint Paul , MN : Twin Cities PBS ) . Retrieved December 13 , 2013 . 
 Wall , Duncan ( 2013 ) . The Ordinary Acrobat : A Journey into the Wondrous World of the Circus , Past and Present . New York City : Alfred A. Knopf . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 307 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 = Bill Cook = 
 William Osser Xavier Cook ( October 9 , 1895 – May 5 , 1986 ) was a Canadian professional ice hockey right winger who played for the Saskatoon Crescents of the Western Canada Hockey League ( WCHL ) and the New York Rangers of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . A prolific scorer , Cook led the WCHL in goals twice and the NHL three times . He was named an all @-@ star seven times between the two leagues . Known as " The Original Ranger " , Cook was the first captain of the New York Rangers , scored the first goal in franchise history and led the team to two Stanley Cup championships . 
 Turning to coaching following his playing career , Cook led the Cleveland Barons to two Calder Cup championships and the Minneapolis Millers to a United States Hockey League championship . He coached the New York Rangers during the 1951 – 52 NHL season until his retirement in 1953 . Cook was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1952 and Canada 's Sports Hall of Fame in 1975 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Cook was born on October 9 , 1895 , in Brantford , Ontario . He was a middle child of a large family , and the eldest of three sons , preceding his brothers Frederick ( " Bun " ) and Alexander ( " Bud " ) . The family moved to Kingston , Ontario , where he learned to skate on the Rideau Canal . He joined the Kingston Frontenacs ' junior hockey team in 1913 and played for two seasons before his career was interrupted by the First World War . 
 He volunteered to join the Canadian Expeditionary Force in 1915 , and served with the Canadian Field Artillery for nearly two years in France and another at the Belgian front . Cook participated in several engagements , including at Ypres , the Somme , Vimy Ridge and Hill 70 . He then fought into 1919 in Siberia as part of the allied intervention in the Russian Civil War . 
 Upon his return from the war , Cook rejoined the Frontenacs for one season before joining the Sault Ste . Marie Greyhounds in 1920 . He led the Northern Ontario Hockey Association ( <unk> ) in both goals , 12 , and points , 19 , while the Greyhounds won the <unk> championship . He won the scoring title again in 1921 – 22 with 20 goals and 28 points . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Saskatoon Crescents = = = 
 <unk> offers from National Hockey League ( NHL ) teams to turn professional in the eastern league , Cook moved to Saskatchewan where he had been granted land for his service in the war . The Calgary Tigers of the Western Canada Hockey League ( WCHL ) attempted to recruit him for the 1922 – 23 season but failed to sign him . Instead , he joined the Saskatoon Crescents . He recorded 25 points in 30 games in his first professional season . 
 Returning to Saskatoon in 1923 – 24 , Cook led the WCHL with 26 goals and 40 points . He was named the all @-@ star right wing for the first of three consecutive seasons . He scored 22 goals in 1924 – 25 . The WCHL rebranded itself the Western Hockey League ( WHL ) and the Crescents became the Sheiks in 1925 – 26 . Cook again led in both goals and points with 31 and 44 respectively , and had become known as the best right wing in hockey . 
 = = = New York Rangers = = = 
 The WHL had run into financial difficulty in its final seasons , and after 1926 , ceased operations . The Montreal Maroons intended to sign both Cook and his brother Bun to join their team for the 1926 – 27 NHL season . While the team 's manager waited in Montreal to meet the brothers , Conn Smythe , manager of the newly formed New York Rangers , travelled to Winnipeg to reach the pair first . Smythe signed both Cook brothers for $ 12 @,@ 000 . Bill Cook was officially the first player signed by the Rangers , and was named the team 's first captain . The Cook brothers joined Frank Boucher to form the " Bread Line " , one of the early NHL 's most prolific scoring lines . 
 The Rangers made their NHL debut on November 16 , 1926 , against the Maroons . Cook scored the franchise 's first goal , which also stood up as the winner , in a 1 – 0 victory . Appearing in 44 games , he led the league in both goals , 33 , and points , 37 . He finished as the runner @-@ up to Herb Gardiner of the Montreal Canadiens for the Hart Trophy as the NHL 's most valuable player . The Rangers finished first in the American Division , but were eliminated by the Boston Bruins in the playoffs . Cook recorded 24 points in 1927 – 28 , the seventh highest total in the league . The Rangers again qualified for the playoffs , where they defeated the Pittsburgh Pirates , Boston Bruins and Montreal Maroons to win the franchise 's first Stanley Cup championship . The Bread Line scored every Rangers goal in the 1928 Stanley Cup Finals . 
 Twenty @-@ three points in 1928 – 29 again placed Cook seventh in the league . The Rangers defeated the New York Americans to reach the 1929 Stanley Cup Finals , but were defeated by the Montreal Canadiens . Cook led the Rangers and finished fourth in league scoring in 1929 – 30 and 1930 – 31 with 59 and 42 points respectively . In 1931 , he was named to the NHL 's inaugural All @-@ Star Team at right wing . It was the first of four consecutive appearances ; he was placed on the first team in 1931 , 1932 and 1933 , and on the second team in 1934 . Cook 's 34 goals in 1931 – 32 tied Charlie Conacher for the league lead . The Rangers won the American Division title , and after defeating the Canadians , faced Conacher 's Toronto Maple Leafs in the 1932 Stanley Cup Final . Toronto swept the series with three consecutive victories . 
 Cook was again the top scorer in 1932 – 33 , leading the NHL in both goals , 28 , and points , 50 . At 36 years , 5 months old , Cook was the oldest player in NHL history to win a scoring title until 2013 when Martin St. Louis of the Tampa Bay Lightning led the NHL in scoring at the age of 39 . The Rangers reached the 1933 Stanley Cup Finals against the Toronto Maple Leafs . Cook scored the winning goal in the second game , then scored the championship winning goal , in overtime , in the fourth game . It was the first overtime power play goal in NHL playoff history . The trophy was not available on the night the Rangers won , leading the series to become known as the " Forgotten Cup " . Cook accepted the Stanley Cup on behalf of his team in November of that year , seven months after the Rangers victory . 
 After scoring only 13 goals in 1933 – 34 , Cook improved to 20 goals in 1934 – 35 . In a 7 – 5 victory over the Maple Leafs on January 29 , 1935 , the Bread line scored four goals and five assists to reach a combined 1 @,@ 000 points as a unit over their nine seasons together . The Bread Line was broken up in 1935 – 36 when Bun was forced out of the Rangers lineup by illness . Bill Cook scored just seven goals that season , and at the age of 40 , scored one goal in 21 games before retiring as a player during the 1936 – 37 season . 
 = = Coaching career = = 
 Turning to coaching , Cook took over as the manager of the Cleveland Barons in the International @-@ American Hockey League ( IAHL ) in the 1937 – 38 season . He inherited a team that had struggled the season before and led it to a respectable season , winning 34 of 50 games played combined between the regular season and playoffs . Cook was pressed into service as a player as a result of injuries . His team was able to dress only 10 of 17 players in the deciding game of the Barons ' playoff series against the Syracuse Stars . Cook played a regular shift in the game , but the Barons lost , 3 – 2 , in the fourth overtime period . 
 The Barons finished fifth overall in the IAHL standings in 1938 – 39 , but defeated the Springfield Indians and Providence Reds to reach the league championship series against the Philadelphia Ramblers . They won the best @-@ of @-@ five championship three games to one to claim the Calder Cup . Cook coached the Barons to a second Calder Cup in 1940 – 41 , defeating the Hershey Bears in the final . Cook remained behind the Barons ' bench until the conclusion of the 1942 – 43 American Hockey League ( AHL ) season . He then turned coaching duties over to his brother Bun , but remained the team 's general manager . 
 Cook left the Barons to join the Minneapolis Millers of the United States Hockey League ( USHL ) in 1947 . He coached the team for three seasons , leading the team to the Paul W. Loudon Trophy as league champions in 1949 – 50 . He moved on to coach the Denver Falcons , also of the USHL , in 1950 – 51 then the Saskatoon Quakers of the Pacific Coast Hockey League ( <unk> ) the following season . Cook left the Quakers midway through the season when asked by Frank Boucher , general manager of the New York Rangers , to return to the NHL club as its head coach . He coached the final 47 games of the Rangers ' 1951 – 52 season , winning 17 , losing 22 and tying 8 . He remained behind the Rangers bench in 1952 – 53 , but the Rangers missed the playoffs after winning only 17 of 70 games . Cook was replaced as coach following the season as Boucher named himself head coach . Cook then retired from hockey . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 A prolific scorer , Cook scored 317 goals and 508 points in 591 games in his 15 year professional career . Known as " The Original Ranger " , he led the team in goals six times . He was regarded as being the greatest right wing in the game 's history when he retired , an opinion former teammate Frank Boucher retained many years later : " Bill was the finest all @-@ round player in Ranger history . And he 's my choice as the best right winger hockey ever knew – despite the fact that others disagree and give their votes to Rocket Richard or Gordie Howe . I say Cook topped them both . " Cook was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1952 , and Canada 's Sports Hall of Fame in 1975 . 
 A popular former Ranger , Cook participated in the closing of the old Madison Square Garden and the opening of the new facility in 1968 . In recognition of his scoring the first Rangers goal in the old Garden , he was asked to " score " the first goal in the new facility as part of the opening ceremony for the new . In 1986 , he was presented with the Rangers ' Alumni Association award , the first former Ranger to receive the award through a vote of alumni membership . The Hockey News ranked Cook as the 44th greatest player in NHL history , and highest Ranger on the list , in its 1998 book The Top 100 NHL Players of All Time . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Accepting a land grant from the federal government , Cook settled in Saskatchewan following the First World War , taking a half section of land adjacent to a similar holding of his brother Bun 's . He established his farm near Lac Vert , hunted and played baseball during hockey off @-@ seasons . He later returned to Kingston , Ontario , where he continued to farm and was nearly killed when one of his bulls gored him . Cook was married and had three children . He died of cancer in Kingston on May 5 , 1986 . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Playing career = = = 
 = = = NHL Coaching career = = = 
 = Leni Riefenstahl = 
 Helene Bertha Amalie " Leni " Riefenstahl ( German : [ <unk> ] ; 22 August 1902 – 8 September 2003 ) was a German film director , producer , screenwriter , editor , photographer , actress , dancer , and propagandist for the Nazis . 
 Born in 1902 into a Lutheran Protestant family , Leni Riefenstahl grew up in Germany with her brother Heinz ( 1905 – 1944 ) , who was killed on the Eastern Front in World War II . A talented swimmer and artist , she also became interested in dancing during her childhood , taking dancing lessons and performing across Europe . 
 After seeing a promotional poster for the 1924 film Der Berg des Schicksals ( " The Mountain of Destiny " ) , Riefenstahl was inspired to move into acting . Between 1925 and 1929 , she starred in five successful motion pictures . In 1932 , Riefenstahl decided to try directing with her own film called Das Blaue Licht ( " The Blue Light " ) . In the 1930s , she directed Triumph des Willens ( " Triumph of the Will " ) and Olympia , resulting in worldwide attention and acclaim . Both movies are widely considered two of the most effective , and technically innovative , propaganda films ever made . Her involvement in Triumph des Willens , however , would significantly damage her career and reputation after the war . The exact nature of her relationship with Nazi Party leader Adolf Hitler remains a matter of debate , although a friendship is known to have existed . After the war , Riefenstahl was arrested , but classified as being a " fellow traveler " only and was not associated with war crimes . Throughout her life , she denied having known about the Holocaust , and won nearly 50 libel cases . Besides directing , Riefenstahl released an autobiography and wrote several books on the Nuba people . 
 Riefenstahl died of cancer on 8 September 2003 at the age of 101 and was buried at Munich Waldfriedhof . She was praised for her body of work following her death and remains one of the most acclaimed movie directors . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Helene Bertha Amalie Riefenstahl was born in Germany on 22 August 1902 . Her father , Alfred Theodor Paul Riefenstahl , owned a successful heating and ventilation company and wanted his daughter to follow him into the business world . Since Riefenstahl was the only child for several years , Alfred wanted her to carry on the family name and secure the family fortune . However , her mother , Bertha Ida ( <unk> ) , who had been a part @-@ time seamstress before her marriage , had faith in Riefenstahl and believed that her daughter 's future was in show business . Riefenstahl had a younger brother , Heinz , who was killed at the age of 39 on the Eastern Front in Nazi Germany 's war against the Soviet Union . 
 Riefenstahl fell in love with the arts in her childhood . She began to paint and write poetry at the age of four . She was also athletic , and at the age of twelve joined a gymnastic and swim club . Her mother was confident her daughter would grow up to be successful in the field of art and therefore gave her full support , unlike Riefenstahl 's father , who was not interested in his daughter 's artistic inclinations . In 1918 , when she was 16 , Riefenstahl attended a presentation of Snow White which interested her deeply ; it led her to want to be a dancer . Her father instead wanted to provide his daughter with an education that could lead to a more dignified occupation . His wife , however , continued to support her daughter 's passion . Without her father 's knowledge , she enrolled Riefenstahl in dance and ballet classes at the Grimm @-@ Reiter Dance School in Berlin , where she quickly became a star pupil . 
 = = Dancing and acting careers = = 
 Riefenstahl attended dancing academies and became well known for her self @-@ styled interpretive dancing skills , traveling across Europe with Max Reinhardt in a show funded by Jewish producer Harry Sokal . Riefenstahl often made almost 700 Reichmarks for each performance and was so captivated with dancing that she gave filmmaking no thought . She began to suffer foot injuries that led to knee surgery , threatening her dancing career . It was while going to a doctor 's appointment that she first saw a poster for the 1924 film Der Berg des Schicksals ( " The Mountain of Destiny " ) . She became inspired to go into movie making , and began visiting the cinema to see films and also attended film shows . 
 On one of her adventures , Riefenstahl met Luis <unk> , who was an actor from Der Berg des Schicksals . At a meeting arranged by her friend Gunther Rahn , she met Arnold Fanck , the director of Der Berg des Schicksals and a pioneer of the mountain film genre . Fanck was working on a film in Berlin . After Riefenstahl told him how much she admired his work , she also convinced him of her acting skill . She persuaded him to feature her in one of his movies . Riefenstahl later received a package from Fanck containing the script of the 1926 film Der Heilige Berg ( " The Holy Mountain " ) . She made a series of films for Fanck , where she learned from him acting and film editing techniques . One of Fanck 's films that brought Riefenstahl into the limelight was Die Weisse Hölle vom Piz Palü ( " The White Hell of Piz Palü " ) of 1929 , co @-@ directed by G. W. Pabst . Her fame spread to countries outside Germany . 
 Riefenstahl produced and directed her own work called Das Blaue Licht ( " The Blue Light " ) in 1932 , co @-@ written by Carl Mayer and Béla Balázs . This film won the Silver Medal at the Venice Film Festival , but was not universally well @-@ received , for which Riefenstahl blamed the critics , many of whom were Jewish . Upon its 1938 re @-@ release , the names of Balázs and Sokal , both Jewish , were removed from the credits ; some reports claim this was at Riefenstahl 's behest . In the film , Riefenstahl played an innocent peasant girl who is hated by the villagers because they think she is diabolic and cast out . She is protected by a glowing mountain grotto . According to herself , Riefenstahl received invitations to travel to Hollywood to create films , but she refused them in favour of remaining in Germany with a boyfriend . The film attracted the attention of Hitler , who believed she epitomized the perfect German female . He saw talent in Riefenstahl and arranged a meeting . 
 In 1933 , Riefenstahl would appear in the <unk> co @-@ productions of the Arnold Fanck @-@ directed , German @-@ language SOS <unk> and the Tay Garnett @-@ directed , English @-@ language SOS Iceberg . The movies were filmed simultaneously in English and German and produced and distributed by Universal Studios . Her role as an actress in SOS Iceberg would be her only English language role in film . 
 = = Directing career = = 
 = = = Propaganda films = = = 
 Riefenstahl heard Nazi Party ( NSDAP ) leader Adolf Hitler speak at a rally in 1932 and was mesmerized by his talent as a public speaker . Describing the experience in her memoir , Riefenstahl wrote , " I had an almost apocalyptic vision that I was never able to forget . It seemed as if the Earth 's surface were spreading out in front of me , like a hemisphere that suddenly splits apart in the middle , spewing out an enormous jet of water , so powerful that it touched the sky and shook the earth " . 
 After meeting Hitler , Riefenstahl was offered the opportunity to direct Der Sieg des Glaubens ( " The Victory of Faith " ) , an hour @-@ long propaganda film about the fifth Nuremberg Rally in 1933 . Riefenstahl agreed to direct the movie . She and Hitler got on well , forming a friendly relationship . The propaganda film was funded entirely by the NSDAP . 
 Impressed with Riefenstahl 's work , Hitler asked her to film Triumph des Willens ( " Triumph of the Will " ) , a new propaganda film about the 1934 party rally in Nuremberg . More than one million Germans participated in the rally . Initially , according to Riefenstahl , she resisted and did not want to create further Nazi Party films , instead wanting to direct a feature film based on Hitler 's favourite opera , Eugen d 'Albert 's Tiefland ( " Lowlands " ) . Riefenstahl received private funding for the production of Tiefland , but the filming in Spain was derailed and the project was cancelled . Hitler was able to convince her to film Triumph des Willens on the condition that she would not be required to make further films for the party , according to Riefenstahl . The motion picture was generally recognized as an epic , innovative work of propaganda filmmaking . The film took Riefenstahl 's career to a new level and gave her further international recognition . 
 In interviews for the 1993 documentary The Wonderful , Horrible Life of Leni Riefenstahl , Riefenstahl adamantly denied any deliberate attempt to create Nazi propaganda and said she was disgusted that Triumph des Willens was used in such a way . 
 Despite allegedly vowing not to make any more films about the Nazi Party , Riefenstahl made the 28 @-@ minute Tag der Freiheit : Unsere Wehrmacht ( " Day of Freedom : Our Armed Forces " ) about the German Army in 1935 . Like Der Sieg des Glaubens and Triumph des Willens , this was filmed at the annual Nazi Party rally at Nuremberg . Riefenstahl said this film was a sub @-@ set of Der Sieg des Glaubens , added to mollify the German Army which felt it was not represented well in Triumph des Willens . 
 Hitler invited Riefenstahl to film the 1936 Summer Olympics scheduled to be held in Berlin , a film which Riefenstahl claimed had been commissioned by the International Olympic Committee . She visited Greece to take footage of the route of the inaugural torch relay and the games ' original site at Olympia , where she was aided by Greek photographer Nelly 's . This material became Olympia , a hugely successful film which has since been widely noted for its technical and aesthetic achievements . She was one of the first filmmakers to use tracking shots in a documentary , placing a camera on rails to follow the athletes ' movement . The film is also noted for its slow motion shots . Riefenstahl played with the idea of slow motion , underwater diving shots , extremely high and low shooting angles , panoramic aerial shots , and tracking system shots for allowing fast action . Many of these shots were relatively unheard of 80 years ago , but Leni ’ s use caused many of them to become streamlined , and is the reason why they are still used to this day . Riefenstahl 's work on Olympia has been cited as a major influence in modern sports photography . Riefenstahl filmed competitors of all races , including African @-@ American Jesse Owens in what would later become famous footage . 
 Olympia premiered for Hitler 's 49th birthday in 1938 . Its international debut led Riefenstahl to embark on an American publicity tour in an attempt to secure commercial release . In February 1937 , Riefenstahl enthusiastically told a reporter for the Detroit News , " To me , Hitler is the greatest man who ever lived . He truly is without fault , so simple and at the same time possessed of masculine strength " . She arrived in New York City on 4 November 1938 , five days before Kristallnacht ( the " Night of the Broken Glass " ) . When news of the event reached the United States , Riefenstahl publicly defended Hitler . On 18 November , she was received by Henry Ford in Detroit . Olympia was shown at the Chicago Engineers Club two days later . Avery Brundage , President of the International Olympic Committee , praised the film and held Riefenstahl in the highest regard . She negotiated with Louis B. Mayer , and on 8 December , Walt Disney brought her on a three @-@ hour tour showing her the ongoing production of Fantasia . 
 From the Goebbels Diaries , researchers learned that Riefenstahl had been friendly with Joseph Goebbels and his wife Magda , attending the opera with them and going to his parties . Riefenstahl maintained that Goebbels was upset when she rejected his advances and was jealous of her influence on Hitler , seeing her as an internal threat . She therefore insisted his diary entries could not be trusted . By later accounts , Goebbels thought highly of Riefenstahl 's filmmaking but was angered with what he saw as her overspending on the Nazi @-@ provided filmmaking budgets . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 When Germany invaded Poland on 1 September 1939 , Riefenstahl was photographed in Poland wearing a military uniform and a pistol on her belt in the company of German soldiers ; she had gone to Poland as a war correspondent . On 12 September , she was in the town of <unk> when 30 civilians were executed in retaliation for an alleged attack on German soldiers . According to her memoir , Riefenstahl tried to intervene but a furious German soldier held her at gunpoint and threatened to shoot her on the spot . She claimed she did not realize the victims were Jews . <unk> photographs of a distraught Riefenstahl survive from that day . Nevertheless , by 5 October 1939 , Riefenstahl was back in occupied Poland filming Hitler 's victory parade in Warsaw . Afterwards , she left Poland and chose not to make any more Nazi @-@ related movies . 
 On 14 June 1940 , the day Paris was declared an open city by the French and occupied by German troops , Riefenstahl wrote to Hitler in a telegram , " With indescribable joy , deeply moved and filled with burning gratitude , we share with you , my Führer , your and Germany 's greatest victory , the entry of German troops into Paris . You exceed anything human imagination has the power to conceive , achieving deeds without parallel in the history of mankind . How can we ever thank you ? " She later explained , " Everyone thought the war was over , and in that spirit I sent the cable to Hitler " . Riefenstahl was friends with Hitler for 12 years and reports vary as to whether she ever had an intimate relationship with him . Her relationship with Hitler severely declined in 1944 when her brother died on the Russian Front . 
 After the Nuremberg rallies trilogy and Olympia , Riefenstahl began work on the movie she had tried and failed to direct once before , namely Tiefland . On Hitler 's direct order , the German government paid her seven million Reichsmarks in compensation . From 23 September until 13 November 1940 , she filmed in <unk> near <unk> . The extras playing Spanish women and farmers were drawn from gypsies detained in a camp at Salzburg @-@ <unk> who were forced to work with her . Filming at the Babelsberg Studios near Berlin began 18 months later in April 1942 . This time Sinti and Roma people from the Marzahn detention camp near Berlin were compelled to work as extras . Almost to the end of her life , despite overwhelming evidence that the concentration camp occupants had been forced to work on the movie unpaid , Riefenstahl continued to maintain all the film extras survived and that she had met several of them after the war . Riefenstahl sued filmmaker Nina Gladitz , who said Riefenstahl personally chose the extras at their holding camp ; Gladitz had found one of the Gypsy survivors and matched his memory with stills of the movie for a documentary Gladitz was filming . The German court ruled largely in favour of Gladitz , declaring that Riefenstahl had known the extras were from a concentration camp , but they also agreed that Riefenstahl had not been informed the Gypsies would be sent to Auschwitz after filming was completed . 
 This issue came up again in 2002 , when Riefenstahl was one hundred years old and she was taken to court by a Roma group for denying the Nazis had exterminated gypsies . Riefenstahl apologized and said , " I regret that Sinti and Roma [ people ] had to suffer during the period of National Socialism . It is known today that many of them were murdered in concentration camps " . 
 In October 1944 the production of Tiefland moved to Barrandov Studios in Prague for interior filming . Lavish sets made these shots some of the most costly of the film . The film was not edited and released until almost ten years later . 
 The last time Riefenstahl saw Hitler was when she married Peter Jacob on 21 March 1944 . Riefenstahl and Jacob divorced in 1946 . As Germany 's military situation became impossible by early 1945 , Riefenstahl left Berlin and was hitchhiking with a group of men , trying to reach her mother , when she was taken into custody by American troops . She walked out of a holding camp , beginning a series of escapes and arrests across the chaotic landscape . At last making it back home on a bicycle , she found that American troops had seized her house . She was surprised by how kindly they treated her . 
 = = = Thwarted film projects = = = 
 Most of Riefenstahl 's unfinished projects were lost towards the end of the war . The French government confiscated all of her editing equipment , along with the production reels of Tiefland . After years of legal wrangling , these were returned to her , but the French government had reportedly damaged some of the film stock whilst trying to develop and edit it , with a few key scenes being missing ( although Riefenstahl was surprised to find the original negatives for Olympia in the same shipment ) . She edited and dubbed the remaining material and Tiefland premiered on 11 February 1954 in Stuttgart . However , it was denied entry into the Cannes Film Festival . Although Riefenstahl lived for almost another half century , Tiefland was her last feature film . 
 Riefenstahl tried many times to make more films during the 1950s and 1960s , but was met with resistance , public protests and sharp criticism . Many of her filmmaking peers in Hollywood had fled Nazi Germany and were unsympathetic to her . Although both film professionals and investors were willing to support her work , most of the projects she attempted were stopped owing to ever @-@ renewed and highly negative publicity about her past work for the Third Reich . 
 In 1954 , Jean Cocteau , who greatly admired the film , insisted on Tiefland being shown at the Cannes Film Festival , which he was running that year . In 1960 , Riefenstahl attempted to prevent filmmaker Erwin <unk> from juxtaposing scenes from Triumph des Willens with footage from concentration camps in his film Mein Kampf . Riefenstahl had high hopes for a collaboration with Cocteau called Friedrich und Voltaire ( " Friedrich and Voltaire " ) , wherein Cocteau was to play two roles . They thought the film might symbolize the love @-@ hate relationship between Germany and France . Cocteau 's illness and 1963 death put an end to the project . A musical remake of Das Blaue Licht ( " The Blue Light " ) with L. Ron Hubbard , a science fiction writer and founder of Scientology , also fell apart . 
 In the 1960s , Riefenstahl became interested in Africa from Ernest Hemingway 's Green Hills of Africa and from the photographs of George Rodger . She visited Kenya for the first time in 1956 and later Sudan , where she photographed Nuba tribes with whom she sporadically lived , learning about their culture so she could photograph them more easily . Even though her film project about modern slavery entitled Die Schwarze <unk> ( " The Black Cargo " ) was never completed , Riefenstahl was able to sell the stills from the expedition to magazines in various parts of the world . While scouting shooting locations , she almost died from injuries received in a truck accident . After waking up from a coma in a Nairobi hospital , she finished writing the script , but was soon thoroughly thwarted by uncooperative locals , the Suez Canal crisis and bad weather . In the end , the film project was called off . Even so , Riefenstahl was granted Sudanese citizenship for her services to the country , becoming the first foreigner to receive a Sudanese passport . 
 = = Post @-@ war life = = 
 = = = Detention and trials = = = 
 Novelist and sports writer Budd Schulberg , assigned by the U.S. Navy to the OSS for intelligence work while attached to John Ford 's documentary unit , was ordered to arrest Riefenstahl at her chalet in Kitzbühel , ostensibly to have her identify Nazi war criminals in German film footage captured by the Allied troops shortly after the war . Riefenstahl claimed she was not aware of the nature of the internment camps . According to Schulberg , " She gave me the usual song and dance . She said , ' Of course , you know , I 'm really so misunderstood . I 'm not political ' " . 
 Riefenstahl claimed she was fascinated by the Nazis , but also politically naive , remaining ignorant about war crimes . Throughout 1945 to 1948 , she was held by various Allied @-@ controlled prison camps across Germany . She was also under house arrest for a period of time . Despite being tried four times by postwar authorities , Riefenstahl was never convicted in any denazification trial . She was found to be a fellow traveler only who merely sympathized with the Nazis . 
 Riefenstahl said that her biggest regret in life was meeting Hitler , declaring , " It was the biggest catastrophe of my life . Until the day I die people will keep saying , ' Leni is a Nazi ' , and I 'll keep saying , ' But what did she do ? ' " Even though she went on to win up to 50 libel cases , details about her relation to National Socialism generally remain unclear . 
 = = = Books and final film = = = 
 Riefenstahl began a lifelong companionship with her cameraman Horst Kettner , who was 40 years her junior and assisted her with the photographs ; they were together from the time she was 60 and he was 20 . 
 Riefenstahl 's books with photographs of the Nuba tribes were published in 1974 and republished in 1976 as Die Nuba ( translated as " The Last of the Nuba " ) and Die Nuba von Kau ( " The Nuba People of Kau " ) . While heralded by many as outstanding colour photographs , they were harshly criticized by Susan Sontag , who claimed in a review that they were further evidence of Riefenstahl 's " fascist aesthetics " . The Art Director 's Club of Germany awarded Riefenstahl a gold medal for the best photographic achievement of 1975 . She also sold some of the pictures to German magazines . She photographed the 1972 Olympic Games in Munich , and rock star Mick Jagger along with his wife Bianca for the Sunday Times . Years later , Riefenstahl photographed Las Vegas entertainers Siegfried & Roy . She was guest of honour at the 1976 Olympic Games in Montreal , Canada . 
 In 1978 , Riefenstahl published a book of her sub @-@ aquatic photographs called <unk> ( " Coral Gardens " ) , followed by the 1990 book Wunder unter Wasser ( " Wonder under Water " ) . In her 90s , Riefenstahl was still photographing marine life and gained the distinction of being one of the world 's oldest scuba divers . On 22 August 2002 , her 100th birthday , she released the film Impressionen unter Wasser ( " Underwater Impressions " ) , an idealized documentary of life in the oceans and her first film in over 25 years . Riefenstahl was a member of Greenpeace for eight years . 
 Riefenstahl survived a helicopter crash in Sudan in 2000 while trying to learn the fates of her Nuba friends during the Second Sudanese Civil War and was airlifted to a Munich hospital . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 Riefenstahl celebrated her 101st birthday on 22 August 2003 at a hotel in <unk> , on Lake Starnberg , Bavaria , near her home . However , the day after her birthday celebration , she became ill . 
 Riefenstahl had been suffering from cancer for some time , and her health rapidly deteriorated during the last weeks of her life . Kettner said in an interview in 2002 , " Ms. Riefenstahl is in great pain and she has become very weak and is taking painkillers " . Leni Riefenstahl died in her sleep at around 10 : 00 pm on 8 September 2003 at her home in <unk> , Germany . After her death , there was a varied response in the obituary pages of leading publications , although most recognized her technical breakthroughs in film making . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Film scholar Mark Cousins notes in his book The Story of Film that , " Next to Orson Welles and Alfred Hitchcock , Leni Riefenstahl was the most technically talented Western film maker of her era " . 
 Reviewer Gary Morris called Riefenstahl , " An artist of unparalleled gifts , a woman in an industry dominated by men , one of the great <unk> of the cinema on a par with Eisenstein or Welles " . 
 Film critic Hal Erickson of the New York Times states that the " Jewish Question " is mainly unmentioned in Triumph des Willens ; " filmmaker Leni Riefenstahl prefers to concentrate on cheering crowds , precision marching , military bands , and Hitler 's climactic speech , all orchestrated , choreographed and illuminated on a scale that makes Griffith and DeMille look like poverty @-@ row directors " . 
 Charles Moore of The Daily Telegraph wrote , " She was perhaps the most talented female cinema director of the 20th century ; her celebration of Nazi Germany in film ensured that she was certainly the most infamous " . 
 Film journalist Sandra Smith from The Independent remarked , " Opinions will be divided between those who see her as a young , talented and ambitious woman caught up in the tide of events which she did not fully understand , and those who believe her to be a cold and opportunist propagandist and a Nazi by association . " 
 Critic Judith Thurman said in The New Yorker that , " Riefenstahl 's genius has rarely been questioned , even by critics who despise the service to which she lent it . Riefenstahl was a consummate stylist obsessed with bodies in motion , particularly those of dancers and athletes . Riefenstahl relies heavily for her transitions on portentous cutaways to clouds , mist , statuary , foliage , and rooftops . Her reaction shots have a tedious sameness : shining , ecstatic faces — nearly all young and Aryan , except for Hitler 's " . 
 Pauline Kael , also a film reviewer employed for The New Yorker , called Triumph des Willens and Olympia , " the two greatest films ever directed by a woman " . 
 Writer Richard Corliss wrote in Time that he was " impressed by Riefenstahl 's standing as a total auteur : producer , writer , director , editor and , in the fiction films , actress . The issues her films and her career raise are as complex and they are important , and her <unk> tend to reduce the argument to one of a director 's complicity in atrocity or her criminal ignorance " . 
 = = Film biographies = = 
 In 1993 , Riefenstahl was the subject of the award @-@ winning German documentary film The Wonderful , Horrible Life of Leni Riefenstahl , directed by Ray Müller . Riefenstahl appeared in the film and answered several questions and detailed the production of her films . The biofilm was nominated for seven Emmy Awards , winning in one category . Riefenstahl , who for some time had been working on her memoirs , decided to cooperate this documentary to tell her life story about the struggles she had gone through in her personal life , her film @-@ making career and what people thought of her . She was also the subject of Müller 's 2000 documentary film Leni Riefenstahl : Her Dream of Africa , about her return to Sudan to visit the Nuba people . 
 In April 2007 , The Guardian reported that British screenwriter Rupert Walters was writing a movie based on Riefenstahl 's life which would star actress Jodie Foster . The project did not receive Riefenstahl 's approval , since Riefenstahl asked for a veto on any scenes to which she did not agree . Riefenstahl also wanted Sharon Stone to play her rather than Foster , which ultimately resulted in the cancellation of the project . 
 In 2011 , director Steven Soderbergh revealed that he had also been working on a biopic of Riefenstahl for about six months . He eventually abandoned the project over concerns of its commercial prospects and instead pursued the pandemic thriller Contagion . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Riefenstahl 's filming merits are discussed between characters in the 2009 Quentin Tarantino film Inglourious Basterds . 
 Riefenstahl was portrayed by Zdena <unk> in Leni , a 2014 Slovak drama play about her fictional participation in the The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson . In Czech version of the play she was portrayed by Vilma Cibulková . 
 Riefenstahl was portrayed by Dutch actress Carice van Houten in Race , a sports drama film directed by Stephen Hopkins about Jesse Owens . It was released in North America on February 19 , 2016 . To make her sympathetic portrayal acceptable for an American audience , the film dramatizes her quarrels with Goebbels over her direction of the film , Olympia , especially about filming the African American star who is proving to be a politically embarrassing refutation of Nazi Germany 's claims of Aryan athletic supremacy . 
 Riefenstahl was referred to in the series finale of the television show Weeds when Nancy questions Andy for naming his daughter after a Nazi to which he replied " she was a pioneer in film @-@ making , I don 't believe in holding grudges . " 
 = = Works = = 
 = = = Films acted = = = 
 1925 : Wege zu Kraft und <unk> ( " Ways to Strength and Beauty " ) 
 1926 : Der Heilige Berg ( " The Holy Mountain " ) 
 1927 : Der Große Sprung ( " The Great Leap " ) 
 1928 : Das Schicksal <unk> von Habsburg ( " Fate of the House of Habsburg " ) 
 1929 : Die Weisse Hölle vom Piz Palü ( " The White Hell of Pitz <unk> " ) 
 1930 : <unk> über dem Mont Blanc ( " Storm Over Mont Blanc " ) 
 1931 : Der Weisse Rausch ( " The White Ecstasy " ) 
 1932 : Das Blaue Licht ( " The Blue Light " ) 
 1933 : S.O.S. <unk> ( " S.O.S. Iceberg " ) 
 1954 : Tiefland ( " Lowlands " ) 
 = = = Films directed / produced = = = 
 1932 : Das Blaue Licht ( " The Blue Light " ) 
 1933 : Der Sieg des Glaubens ( " The Victory of Faith " ) 
 1935 : Tag der Freiheit : Unsere Wehrmacht ( " Day of Freedom : Our Armed Forces " ) 
 1935 : Triumph des Willens ( " Triumph of the Will " ) 
 1937 : Wilde Wasser ( " Wilder Water " ) 
 1938 : Olympia 
 1954 : Tiefland ( " Lowlands " ) 
 1965 : Allein unter den Nuba ( " Alone Among the Nuba " ) ( Unreleased ) 
 2002 : Impressionen unter Wasser ( " Impressions under Water " ) 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Riefenstahl , Leni ( 1973 ) . Die Nuba [ The Last of the Nuba ] . ISBN 0 @-@ 312 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . 
 Riefenstahl , Leni ( 1976 ) . Die Nuba von Kau [ The Nuba People of Kau ] . ISBN 0 @-@ 312 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 Riefenstahl , Leni ( 1978 ) . <unk> [ Coral Gardens ] . ISBN 0 @-@ 06 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 Riefenstahl , Leni ( 1982 ) . Mein Afrika [ Vanishing Africa ] . ISBN 0 @-@ 517 @-@ <unk> @-@ X. 
 Riefenstahl , Leni ( 1987 ) . Leni Riefenstahl 's <unk> [ Leni Riefenstahl 's Memoir ] . ISBN 3 @-@ 8228 @-@ 0834 @-@ 2 . 
 Riefenstahl , Leni ( 1990 ) . Wunder unter Wasser [ Wonder under Water ] . ISBN 3 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1651 @-@ 2 . 
 Riefenstahl , Leni ( 1995 ) . Leni Riefenstahl : a memoir . New York : Picador USA . ISBN <unk> . 
 Review : hooks , bell ( 1997 ) . " Review : the <unk> mystique " . Transition ( Indiana University Press on behalf of the Hutchins Center for African and African American Research at Harvard University via JSTOR ) 73 : 156 – 162 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 2307 / <unk> . JSTOR <unk> . 
 Riefenstahl , Leni ( 2002 ) . Africa . ISBN 3 @-@ 8228 @-@ 1616 @-@ 7 . 
 Riefenstahl , Leni ( 2002 ) . Riefenstahl Olympia . ISBN 3 @-@ 8228 @-@ 1945 @-@ X. 
 = = = Printed = = = 
 = = = Online = = = 
 = Wilfrid = 
 Wilfrid ( originally spelled <unk> ; c . 633 – c . 709 ) was an English bishop and saint . Born a Northumbrian noble , he entered religious life as a teenager and studied at Lindisfarne , at Canterbury , in Gaul , and at Rome ; he returned to Northumbria in about 660 , and became the abbot of a newly founded monastery at Ripon . In 664 Wilfrid acted as spokesman for the Roman position at the Synod of Whitby , and became famous for his speech advocating that the Roman method for calculating the date of Easter should be adopted . His success prompted the king 's son , Alhfrith , to appoint him Bishop of Northumbria . Wilfrid chose to be consecrated in Gaul because of the lack of what he considered to be validly consecrated bishops in England at that time . During Wilfrid 's absence Alhfrith seems to have led an unsuccessful revolt against his father , Oswiu , leaving a question mark over Wilfrid 's appointment as bishop . Before Wilfrid 's return Oswiu had appointed Ceadda in his place , resulting in Wilfrid 's retirement to Ripon for a few years following his arrival back in Northumbria . 
 After becoming Archbishop of Canterbury in 668 , Theodore of Tarsus resolved the situation by deposing Ceadda and restoring Wilfrid as the Bishop of Northumbria . For the next nine years Wilfrid discharged his episcopal duties , founded monasteries , built churches , and improved the liturgy . However his diocese was very large , and Theodore wished to reform the English Church , a process which included breaking up some of the larger dioceses into smaller ones . When Wilfrid quarrelled with Ecgfrith , the Northumbrian king , Theodore took the opportunity to implement his reforms despite Wilfrid 's objections . After Ecgfrith expelled him from York , Wilfrid travelled to Rome to appeal to the papacy . Pope Agatho ruled in Wilfrid 's favour , but Ecgfrith refused to honour the papal decree and instead imprisoned Wilfrid on his return to Northumbria before exiling him . 
 Wilfrid spent the next few years in Selsey , where he founded an episcopal see and converted the pagan inhabitants of the Kingdom of Sussex to Christianity . Theodore and Wilfrid settled their differences , and Theodore urged the new Northumbrian king , Aldfrith , to allow Wilfrid 's return . Aldfrith agreed to do so , but in 691 he expelled Wilfrid again . Wilfrid went to Mercia , where he helped missionaries and acted as bishop for the Mercian king . Wilfrid appealed to the papacy about his expulsion in 700 , and the pope ordered that an English council should be held to decide the issue . This council , held at Austerfield in 702 , attempted to confiscate all of Wilfrid 's possessions , and so Wilfrid travelled to Rome to appeal against the decision . His opponents in Northumbria excommunicated him , but the papacy upheld Wilfrid 's side , and he regained possession of Ripon and Hexham , his Northumbrian monasteries . Wilfrid died in 709 or 710 . After his death , he was venerated as a saint . 
 Historians then and now have been divided over Wilfrid . His followers commissioned Stephen of Ripon to write a Vita Sancti Wilfrithi ( or Life of Wilfrid ) shortly after his death , and the medieval historian Bede also wrote extensively about him . Wilfrid lived ostentatiously , and travelled with a large retinue . He ruled a large number of monasteries , and claimed to be the first Englishman to introduce the Rule of Saint Benedict into English monasteries . Some modern historians see him mainly as a champion of Roman customs against the customs of the British and Irish churches , others as an advocate for monasticism . 
 = = Background = = 
 During Wilfrid 's lifetime the British Isles consisted of a number of small kingdoms . Traditionally the English people were thought to have been divided into seven kingdoms , but modern historiography has shown that this is a simplification of a much more confused situation . A late 7th @-@ century source , the Tribal Hidage , lists the peoples south of the Humber river ; among the largest groups of peoples are the West Saxons ( later Wessex ) , the East Angles and Mercians ( later the Kingdom of Mercia ) , and the Kingdom of Kent . Smaller groups who at that time had their own royalty but were later absorbed into larger kingdoms include the peoples of Magonsæte , Lindsey , Hwicce , the East Saxons , the South Saxons , the Isle of Wight , and the Middle Angles . Other even smaller groups had their own rulers , but their size means that they do not often appear in the histories . There were also native Britons in the west , in modern @-@ day Wales and Cornwall , who formed kingdoms including those of Dumnonia , Dyfed , and Gwynedd . 
 Between the Humber and Forth the English had formed into two main kingdoms , Deira and Bernicia , often united as the Kingdom of Northumbria . A number of Celtic kingdoms also existed in this region , including Craven , Elmet , Rheged , and Gododdin . A native British kingdom , later called the Kingdom of Strathclyde , survived as an independent power into the 10th century in the area which became modern @-@ day Dunbartonshire and Clydesdale . To the north @-@ west of Strathclyde lay the Gaelic kingdom of Dál Riata , and to the north @-@ east a small number of Pictish kingdoms . Further north still lay the great Pictish kingdom of Fortriu , which after the Battle of Dun Nechtain in 685 came to be the strongest power in the northern half of Britain . The Irish had always had contacts with the rest of the British Isles , and during the early 6th century they immigrated from the island of Ireland to form the kingdom of Dál Riata , although exactly how much conquest took place is a matter of dispute with historians . It also appears likely that the Irish settled in parts of Wales , and even after the period of Irish settlement , Irish missionaries were active in Britain . 
 Christianity had only recently arrived in some of these kingdoms . Some had been converted by the Gregorian mission , a group of Roman missionaries who arrived in Kent in 597 and who mainly influenced southern Britain . Others had been converted by the Hiberno @-@ Scottish mission , chiefly Irish missionaries working in Northumbria and neighbouring kingdoms . A few kingdoms , such as Dál Riata , became Christian but how they did so is unknown . The native Picts , according to the medieval writer Bede , were converted in two stages , initially by native Britons under Ninian , and subsequently by Irish missionaries . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Childhood and early education = = = 
 Wilfrid was born in Northumbria in about 633 . James Fraser argues that Wilfrid 's family were aristocrats from Deira , pointing out that most of Wilfrid 's early contacts were from that area . A conflict with his stepmother when he was about 14 years old drove Wilfrid to leave home , probably without his father 's consent . Wilfrid 's background is never explicitly described as noble , but the king 's retainers were frequent guests at his father 's house , and on leaving home Wilfrid equipped his party with horses and clothes fit for a royal court . 
 Queen Eanflæd became Wilfrid 's patroness following his arrival at the court of her husband , King Oswiu . She sent him to study under <unk> , formerly one of her husband 's retainers , but by that time in about 648 a monk on the island of Lindisfarne . The monastery on the island had recently been founded by Aidan , who had been instrumental in converting Northumbria to Christianity . At Lindisfarne Wilfrid is said to have " learned the whole Psalter by heart and several books " . Wilfrid studied at Lindisfarne for a few years before going to the Kentish king 's court at Canterbury in 652 , where he stayed with relatives of Queen Eanflæd . The queen had given Wilfrid a letter of introduction to pass to her cousin , King Eorcenberht , in order to ensure that Wilfrid was received by the king . While in Kent , Wilfrid 's career was advanced by Eanflæd 's cousin <unk> , who was later the King of Kent from 673 to 685 . The Kentish court included a number of visiting clergymen at that time , including Benedict Biscop , a noted missionary . Wilfrid appears to have spent about a year in Kent , but the exact chronology is uncertain . 
 = = = Time at Rome and Lyon = = = 
 Wilfrid left Kent for Rome in the company of Benedict Biscop , another of Eanflæd 's contacts . This is the first pilgrimage to Rome known to have been undertaken by English natives , and took place some time between 653 and 658 . According to Wilfrid 's later biographer , Stephen of Ripon , Wilfrid left Biscop 's company at Lyon , where Wilfrid stayed under the patronage of Annemund , the archbishop . Stephen says that Annemund wanted to marry Wilfrid to the archbishop 's niece , and to make Wilfrid the governor of a Frankish province , but that Wilfrid refused and continued on his journey to Rome . There he learned the Roman method of calculating the date of Easter , and studied the Roman practice of relic collecting . After an audience with the pope , Wilfrid returned to Lyon . 
 Stephen of Ripon says that Wilfrid stayed in Lyon for three years , leaving only after the archbishop 's murder . However , Annemund 's murder took place in 660 and Wilfrid returned to England in 658 , suggesting that Stephen 's chronology is awry . Stephen says that Annemund gave Wilfrid a clerical tonsure , although this does not appear to mean that he became a monk , merely that he entered the clergy . Bede is silent on the subject of Wilfrid 's monastic status , although Wilfrid probably became a monk during his time in Rome , or afterwards while he was in Gaul . Some historians , however , believe that Wilfrid was never a monk . While in Gaul , Wilfrid absorbed Frankish ecclesiastical practices , including some aspects from the monasteries founded by Columbanus . This influence may be seen in Wilfrid 's probable adoption of a Frankish ceremony in his consecration of churches later in his life , as well as in his employment of Frankish masons to build his churches . Wilfrid would also have learned of the Rule of Saint Benedict in Gaul , as Columbanus ' monasteries followed that monastic rule . 
 = = = Abbot of Ripon = = = 
 After Wilfrid 's return to Northumbria in about 658 , Cenwalh , King of Wessex , recommended Wilfrid to Alhfrith , Oswiu 's son , as a cleric well @-@ versed in Roman customs and liturgy . Alhfrith was a sub @-@ king of <unk> under his father 's rule , and the most likely heir to his father 's throne as his half @-@ brothers were still young . Shortly before 664 Alhfrith gave Wilfrid a monastery he had recently founded at Ripon , formed around a group of monks from Melrose Abbey , followers of the Irish monastic customs . Wilfrid ejected the abbot , Eata , because he would not follow the Roman customs ; Cuthbert , later a saint , was another of the monks expelled . Wilfrid introduced the Rule of Saint Benedict into Ripon , claiming that he was the first person in England to make a monastery follow it , but this claim rests on the Vita Sancti Wilfrithi and does not say where Wilfrid became knowledgeable about the Rule , nor exactly what form of the Rule was being referred to . Shortly afterwards Wilfrid was ordained a priest by Agilbert , Bishop of Dorchester in the kingdom of the Gewisse , part of Wessex . Wilfrid was a protégé of Agilbert , who later helped in Wilfrid 's consecration as a bishop . The monk Ceolfrith was attracted to Ripon from Gilling Abbey , which had recently been depopulated as a result of the plague . Ceolfrith later became Abbot of Wearmouth @-@ Jarrow during the time the medieval chronicler and writer Bede was a monk there . Bede hardly mentions the relationship between Ceolfrith and Wilfrid , but it was Wilfrid who consecrated Ceolfrith a priest and who gave permission for him to transfer to Wearmouth @-@ Jarrow . 
 = = Whitby = = 
 = = = Background to Whitby = = = 
 The Roman churches and those in the British Isles ( often called " Celtic churches " ) used different methods to calculate the date of Easter . The church in Northumbria had traditionally used the Celtic method , and that was the date observed by King Oswiu . His wife Eanflæd and a son , Alhfrith , celebrated Easter on the Roman date however , which meant that while one part of the royal court was still observing the Lenten fast , another would be celebrating with feasting . 
 Oswiu called a church council held at Whitby Abbey in 664 in an attempt to resolve this controversy . Although Oswiu himself had been brought up in the " Celtic " tradition , political pressures may have influenced his decision to call a council , as well as fears that if dissent over the date of Easter continued in the Northumbrian church it could lead to internal strife . The historian Richard Abels speculates that the expulsion of Eata from Ripon may have been the spark that led to the king 's decision to call the council . Regional tensions within Northumbria between the two traditional divisions , Bernicia and Deira , appear to have played a part , as churchmen in Bernicia favoured the Celtic method of dating and those in Deira may have leaned towards the Roman method . Abels identifies several conflicts contributing to both the calling of the council and its outcome , including a generational conflict between Oswiu and Alhfrith and the death of the Archbishop of Canterbury , Deusdedit . Political concerns unrelated to the dating problem , such as the decline of Oswiu 's preeminence among the other English kingdoms and the challenge to that position by Mercia , were also factors . 
 = = = Synod = = = 
 Wilfrid attended the synod , or council , of Whitby , as a member of the party favouring the continental practice of dating Easter , along with James the Deacon , Agilbert , and Alhfrith . Those supporting the " Celtic " viewpoint were King Oswiu , Hilda , the Abbess of Whitby , Cedd , a bishop , and Colmán of Lindisfarne , the Bishop of Lindisfarne . 
 Wilfrid was chosen to present the Roman position to the council ; he also acted as Agilbert 's interpreter , as the latter did not speak the local language . Bede describes Wilfrid as saying that those who did not calculate the date of Easter according to the Roman system were committing a sin . Wilfrid 's speech in favour of adopting Roman church practices helped secure the eclipse of the " Celtic " party in 664 , although most Irish churches did not adopt the Roman date of Easter until 704 , and Iona held out until 716 . Many of the Irish monasteries did not observe the Roman Easter , but they were not isolated from the continent ; by the time of Whitby the southern Irish were already observing the Roman Easter date , and Irish clergy were in contact with their continental counterparts . Those monks and clergy unable to accept the Whitby decision left Northumbria , some going to Ireland and others to Iona . 
 = = York = = 
 = = = Elevation to the episcopate = = = 
 After the supporters of the " Celtic churches " had withdrawn following the Council of Whitby , Wilfrid became the most prominent Northumbrian cleric . As a result , and because of his performance at Whitby , Wilfrid was elected to a bishopric in Northumbria about a year after the council . It is unclear where his diocese was located , although he was considered to be Alhfrith 's bishop . The Vita Sancti Wilfrithi states that , nominated by both Oswiu and Alhfrith , he was made bishop at York , and that he was a metropolitan bishop , but York at that time was not a metropolitan diocese . Bede says that Alhfrith alone nominated Wilfrid , and that Oswiu subsequently proposed an alternative candidate , " imitating the actions of his son " . Several theories have been suggested to explain the discrepancies between the two sources . One is that Alhfrith wished the seat to be at York , another is that Wilfrid was bishop only in Deira , a third supposes that Wilfrid was never bishop at York and that his diocese was only part of Deira . However , at that time the Anglo @-@ Saxon dioceses were not strictly speaking geographical designations , rather they were bishoprics for the tribes or peoples . 
 Wilfrid refused to be consecrated in Northumbria at the hands of Anglo @-@ Saxon bishops . Deusdedit had died shortly after Whitby , and as there were no other bishops in Britain whom Wilfrid considered to have been validly consecrated he travelled to Compiègne , to be consecrated by Agilbert , the Bishop of Paris . During his time in Gaul Wilfrid was exposed to a higher level of ceremony than that practised in Northumbria , one example of which is that he was carried to his consecration ceremony on a throne supported by nine bishops . 
 = = = Delays and difficulties = = = 
 Wilfrid delayed his return from Gaul , only to find on his arrival back in Northumbria that Ceadda had been installed as bishop in his place . The reason for Wilfrid 's delay has never been clear , although the historians Eric John and Richard Abels theorise that it was caused by Alhfrith 's unsuccessful revolt against Oswiu . They suggest that the rebellion happened shortly after Whitby , perhaps while Wilfrid was in Gaul for his consecration . Because Oswiu knew that Alhfrith had been a supporter of Wilfrid 's , Oswiu prevented Wilfrid 's return , suspecting Wilfrid of supporting his rivals . That Ceadda was supported by Oswiu , and Wilfrid had been a supporter of Oswiu 's son , lends further credence to the theory that Alhfrith 's rebellion took place while Wilfrid was in Gaul . Stephen of Ripon reported that Wilfrid was expelled by " <unk> " , or those who supported the celebration of Easter on the 14th day of the Jewish month Nisan , whether or not this was a Sunday . However , as the Irish church had never been <unk> , Stephen in this instance was constructing a narrative to put Wilfrid in the best light . 
 During his return to Northumbria Wilfrid 's ship was blown ashore on the Sussex coast , the inhabitants of which were at that time pagan . On being attacked by the locals , Wilfrid 's party killed the head priest before refloating their ship and making their escape . The historian Marion Gibbs suggests that after this episode Wilfrid visited Kent again , and took part in the diplomacy related to Wigheard 's appointment to the see of Canterbury . Wilfrid may also have taken part in negotiations to persuade King Cenwalh of Wessex to allow Agilbert to return to his see . 
 = = = Favourable outcome = = = 
 Denied episcopal office , Wilfrid spent the three years from 665 to 668 as abbot of the monastery at Ripon . He occasionally performed episcopal functions in Mercia and Kent , but never did so north of the river Humber . The historian James Fraser argues that Wilfrid may not have been allowed to return to Northumbria and instead went into exile at the Mercian court , but most historians have argued that Wilfrid was at Ripon . 
 Wilfrid 's monasteries in Mercia may date from this time , as King Wulfhere of Mercia gave him large grants of land in Mercia . Wilfrid may have persuaded King Ecgberht of Kent in 669 to build a church in an abandoned Roman fort at Reculver . When Theodore , the newly appointed Archbishop of Canterbury , arrived in England in 669 it was clear that something had to be done about the situation in Northumbria . Ceadda 's election to York was improper , and Theodore did not consider Ceadda 's consecration to have been valid . Consequently , Theodore deposed Ceadda , leaving the way open for Wilfrid , who was finally installed in his see in 669 , the first Saxon to occupy the see of York . Wilfrid spent the next nine years building churches , including at the monastery at Hexham , and attending to diocesan business . He continued to exercise control over his monastic houses of Ripon and Hexham while he was bishop . Oswiu 's death on 15 February 670 eliminated a source of friction and helped to assure Wilfrid 's return . 
 While at York , Wilfrid was considered the " bishop of the Northumbrian peoples " ; Bede records that Wilfrid 's diocese was contiguous with the area ruled by Oswiu . The diocese was restricted to north of the Humber , however . Wilfrid may also have sought to exercise some ecclesiastical functions in the Pictish kingdom , as he is accorded the title " bishop of the Northumbrians and the Picts " in 669 . Further proof of attempted Northumbrian influence in the Pictish regions is provided by the establishment for the Picts in 681 of a diocese centred on Abercorn , in the old territory of the British kingdom of Gododdin . The grants of land to Wilfrid west of the Pennines testify to Northumbrian expansion in that area . The Vita Sancti Wilfrithi claims that Wilfrid had ecclesiastical rule over Britons and Gaels . In 679 , while Wilfrid was in Rome , he claimed authority over " all the northern part of Britain , Ireland and the islands , which are inhabited by English and British peoples , as well as by Gaelic and Pictish peoples " . 
 = = = Diocesan affairs = = = 
 Wilfrid did not attend the Council of Hertford held in September 672 , but he did send representatives . Among the council 's resolutions was one postponing a decision on the creation of new dioceses , which affected Wilfrid later . Another ruling confirmed that the Roman calculation for the date of Easter should be adopted , and that bishops should act only in their own dioceses . During the middle 670s Wilfrid acted as middleman in the negotiations to return a Merovingian prince , Dagobert II , from his exile in Ireland to Gaul . Wilfrid was one of the first churchmen in Northumbria to utilise written charters as records of gifts to his churches . He ordered the creation of a listing of all benefactions received by Ripon , which was recited at the dedication ceremony . 
 Wilfrid was an advocate for the use of music in ecclesiastical ceremonies . He sent to Kent for a singing master to instruct his clergy in the Roman style of church music , which involved a double choir who sang in <unk> and responses . Bede says that this singing master was named <unk> ( or <unk> in Latin ) and had the surname Stephen . Traditionally historians have identified <unk> as Stephen of Ripon , author of the Vita Sancti Wilfrithi , which has led to the assumption that the Vita was based on the recollections of one of Wilfrid 's long @-@ time companions . However , recent scholarship has come to believe that the Vita was not authored by the singing master , but by someone who joined Wilfrid in the last years of Wilfrid 's life , not a close companion . 
 Wilfrid introduced the Rule of Saint Benedict into the monasteries he founded . It appears likely that he was the first to introduce the Benedictine Rule into England , as evidence is lacking that Augustine 's monastery at Canterbury followed the Rule . He also was one of the first Anglo @-@ Saxon bishops to record the gifts of land and property to his church , which he did at Ripon . Easter tables , used to calculate the correct date to celebrate Easter , were brought in from Rome where the Dionysiac Easter tables had been recently introduced . He set up schools and became a religious advisor to the Northumbrian queen Æthelthryth , first wife of Ecgfrith . Æthelthryth donated the land at Hexham where Wilfrid founded a monastery and built a church using some recycled stones from the Roman town of Corbridge . When Wilfrid arrived in York as bishop the cathedral 's roof was on the point of collapse ; he had it repaired and covered in lead , and had glass set in the windows . 
 The historian Barbara Yorke says of Wilfrid at this time that he " seems to have continued a campaign against any survival of ' Irish errors ' and distrusted any communities that remained in contact with Iona or other Irish religious houses which did not follow the Roman Easter " . He also worked to combat pagan practices , building a church at Melrose on a pagan site . Contemporaries said of him that he was the first native bishop to " introduce the Catholic way of life to the churches of the English " . He did not neglect his pastoral duties in his diocese , making visits throughout the diocese to baptise and perform other episcopal functions , such as consecrating new churches . Some of the monasteries in his diocese were put under his protection by their abbots or abbesses , who were seeking someone to help protect their endowments . In ruling over such monasteries , Wilfrid may have been influenced by the Irish model of a group of monasteries all ruled by one person , sometimes while holding episcopal office . 
 Wilfrid was criticised for dressing his household and servants in clothing fit for royalty . He was accompanied on his travels by a retinue of warriors , one of whom , while at York , Wilfrid sent to abduct a young boy who had been promised to the church but whose family had changed their mind . Wilfrid also educated young men , both for clerical and secular careers . 
 = = Expulsion = = 
 = = = Dispute with the king = = = 
 In 677 or 678 , Wilfrid and Ecgfrith quarrelled , and Wilfrid was expelled from his see . Abbess Hilda of Whitby was a leader in a faction of the Northumbrian church that disliked Wilfrid , and her close ties with Theodore helped to undermine Wilfrid 's position in Northumbria . Another contributory factor in Wilfrid 's expulsion was his encouragement of Æthelthryth 's entry into a nunnery ; he had personally given her the veil , the ceremony of entering a nunnery , on her retirement to Ely Abbey . Æthelthryth had donated the lands Wilfrid used to found Hexham Abbey , and the historian N. J. Higham argues that they had been part of the queen 's dower lands , which , when Ecgfrith remarried , his new queen wanted to recover . The historian Eric John feels that Wilfrid 's close ties with the Mercian kingdom also contributed to his troubles with <unk> , although John points out that these ties were necessary for Wilfrid 's monastic foundations , some of which were in Mercia . Wilfrid not only lost his diocese , he lost control of his monasteries as well . 
 Theodore took advantage of the situation to implement decrees of some councils on dividing up large dioceses . Theodore set up new bishoprics from Wilfrid 's diocese , with seats at York , Hexham , Lindisfarne , and one in the region of Lindsey . The Lindsey see was quickly absorbed by the Diocese of Lichfield , but the other three remained separate . The bishops chosen for these sees , Eata at Hexham , <unk> at Lindsey , and Bosa at York , had all either been supporters of the " Celtic " party at Whitby , or been trained by those who were . Eata had also been ejected from Ripon by Wilfrid . The new bishops were unacceptable to Wilfrid , who claimed they were not truly members of the Church because of their support for the " Celtic " method of dating Easter , and thus he could not serve alongside them . Another possible problem for Wilfrid was that the three new bishops did not come from Wilfrid 's monastic houses nor from the communities where the bishops ' seats were based . This was contrary to the custom of the time , which was to promote bishoprics from within the locality . Wilfrid 's deposition became tangled up in a dispute over whether or not the Gregorian plan for Britain , with two metropolitan sees , the northern one set at York , would be followed through or abandoned . Wilfrid seems to have felt that he had metropolitan authority over the northern part of England , but Theodore never acknowledged that claim , instead claiming authority over the whole of the island of Britain . 
 = = = Appeal to Rome = = = 
 Wilfrid went to Rome after his expulsion to appeal against Theodore and Ecgfrith 's decisions , the first Englishman to challenge a royal or ecclesiastical decision by petitioning the papacy . On the way he stopped at the court of <unk> , the Frisian king in Utrecht for most of 678 . Wilfrid had been blown off course on his trip from England to the continent , and ended up in Frisia according to some historians . Others state that he intended to journey via Frisia to avoid Neustria , whose mayor of the palace , Ebroin , disliked Wilfrid . He wintered in Frisia , avoiding the diplomatic efforts of Ebroin , who according to Stephen attempted to have Wilfrid killed . During his stay , Wilfrid attempted to convert the Frisians , who were still pagan at that time . Wilfrid 's biographer says that most of the nobles converted , but the success was short @-@ lived . After Frisia , he stopped at the court of Dagobert II in Austrasia , where the king offered Wilfrid the Bishopric of Strasbourg , which Wilfrid refused . Once in Italy , Wilfrid was received by <unk> , a Lombard king , who gave him a place at his court . 
 Pope Agatho held a synod in October 679 , which although it ordered Wilfrid 's restoration and the return of the monasteries to his control , also directed that the new dioceses should be retained . Wilfrid was , however , given the right to replace any bishop in the new dioceses to whom he objected . The council had been called to deal with the <unk> controversy , and Wilfrid 's concerns were not the sole focus of the council . In fact , the historian Henry Chadwick thought that one reason Wilfrid secured the mostly favourable outcome was that Agatho wished for Wilfrid 's support and testimony that the English Church was free of the <unk> heresy . Although Wilfrid did not win a complete victory , he did secure a papal decree limiting the number of dioceses in England to 12 . Wilfrid also secured the right for his monasteries of Ripon and Hexham to be directly supervised by the pope , preventing any further interference in their affairs by the diocesan bishops . 
 Wilfrid returned to England after the council via Gaul . According to Stephen of Ripon , after the death of Dagobert II , Ebroin wished to imprison Wilfrid , but Wilfrid miraculously escaped . In 680 Wilfrid returned to Northumbria and appeared before a royal council . He produced the papal decree ordering his restoration , but was instead briefly imprisoned and then exiled by the king . Wilfrid stayed for a short time in the kingdom of the Middle Angles and at Wessex , but soon took refuge in Sussex with King Æthelwealh of Sussex . 
 = = Missions in Sussex = = 
 Wilfrid spent the next five years preaching to , and converting the pagan inhabitants of Sussex , the South Saxons . He also founded Selsey Abbey , on an estate near Selsey of 87 hides , given to Wilfrid by Æthelwealh , king of the South Saxons . Bede attributes Wilfrid 's ability to convert the South Saxons to his teaching them how to fish , and contrasts it with the lack of success of the Irish monk <unk> . Bede also says that the Sussex area had been experiencing a drought for three years before Wilfrid 's arrival , but miraculously when Wilfrid arrived , and started baptising converts , rain began to fall . Wilfrid worked with Bishop Erkenwald of London , helping to set up the church in Sussex . Erkenwald also helped reconcile Wilfrid and Theodore before Theodore 's death in 690 . The mission was jeopardised when King Æthelwealh died during an invasion of his kingdom by Cædwalla of Wessex . Wilfrid previously had contact with Cædwalla , and may have served as his spiritual advisor before Cædwalla 's invasion of Sussex . After Æthelwealh 's death and Cædwalla 's accession to the throne of Wessex , Wilfrid became one of the new king 's advisors , and the king was converted . Cædwalla confirmed Æthelwealh 's grant of land in the Selsey area and Wilfrid built his cathedral church near the entrance to <unk> Harbour believed to be what is now Church Norton . 
 Cædwalla sent Wilfrid to the Isle of Wight , which was still pagan , with the aim of converting the inhabitants . The king also gave Wilfrid a quarter of the land on the island as a gift . In 688 , the king relinquished his throne and went on a pilgrimage to Rome to be baptised , but died shortly after the ceremony . Wilfrid was probably influential in Cædwalla 's decision to be baptised in Rome . 
 During his time in Sussex Wilfrid was reconciled with Archbishop Theodore ; the Vita Sancti Wilfrithi says that Theodore expressed a desire for Wilfrid to succeed him at Canterbury . Wilfrid may have been involved in founding monasteries near Bath as well as in other parts of Sussex , but the evidence backing this is based on the wording used in the founding charters resembling wording used by Wilfrid in other charters , not on any concrete statements that Wilfrid was involved . 
 = = Return to Northumbria and exile = = 
 = = = Return from exile = = = 
 In 686 Wilfrid was recalled to Northumbria after the death of Ecgfrith in battle with the Picts . During the 680s Theodore had created two more dioceses in Northumbria , at Ripon , and at Abercorn in the Pictish kingdom , but both were short @-@ lived . After Ecgfrith 's death , Theodore wrote to the new king of Northumbria , Aldfrith , and to Æthelred , king of Mercia and the Abbess of Whitby , Ælfflæd , suggesting that an agreement be made allowing Wilfrid 's return to Northumbria . Aldfrith agreed , Wilfrid returned to the north , and Bosa was removed from York . Wilfrid did not recover the whole of his previous bishopric however , as Hexham and Lindisfarne remained separate sees . 
 Wilfrid appears to have lived at Ripon , and for a time he acted as administrator of the see of Lindisfarne after Cuthbert 's death in 687 . In 691 , the subdivision issue arose once more , along with quarrels with King Aldfrith over lands , and attempts were made to make Wilfrid either give up all his lands or to stay confined to Ripon . A proposal to turn Ripon into a bishopric was also a source of dispute . When no compromise was possible Wilfrid left Northumbria for Mercia , and Bosa was returned to York . 
 Something of the reception to Wilfrid 's expulsion can be picked up in a Latin letter which has survived only in an incomplete quotation by William of Malmesbury in his Gesta pontificum Anglorum . We have it on William 's authority that the letter was written by Aldhelm of Malmesbury and addressed to Wilfrid 's abbots . In it , Aldhelm asks the clergymen to remember the exiled bishop " who , nourishing , teaching , reproving , raised you in fatherly love " and appealing to lay aristocratic ideals of loyalty , urges them not to abandon their superior . Neither William nor the citation itself gives a date , but the letter has been assigned to Wilfrid 's exile under Aldfrith in the 690s . 
 = = = Mercia = = = 
 During his stay in Mercia Wilfrid acted as bishop with the consent of King Æthelred . Information on Wilfrid 's life at this time is meagre , as the Vita Sancti Wilfrithi says little of this period . He is generally considered to have been Bishop of Leicester until about 706 , when he is held to have been transferred to Hexham . Wilfrid became involved in the missionary efforts to the Frisians , which he had started in 678 during his stay in Frisia . Wilfrid helped the missionary efforts of Willibrord , which were more successful than his own earlier attempts . Willibrord was a monk of Ripon who was also a native of Northumbria . 
 Wilfrid was present at the exhumation of the body of Queen Æthelthryth at Ely Abbey in 695 . He had been her spiritual adviser in the 670s , and had helped the queen become a nun against the wishes of her husband King Ecgfrith of Northumbria . The queen had joined Ely Abbey , where she died in 679 . The ceremony in 695 found that her body had not decayed , which led to her being declared a saint . Wilfrid 's testimony as to the character and virginity of Æthelthryth was recorded by Bede . 
 In about 700 , Wilfrid appealed once more to Pope Sergius I over his expulsion from York , and the pope referred the issue back to a council in England . In 702 King Aldfrith held a council at Austerfield that upheld Wilfrid 's expulsion , and once more Wilfrid travelled to Rome to appeal to the pope . The Vita Sancti Wilfrithi gives a speech , supposedly delivered by Wilfrid there , in defence of Wilfrid 's record over the previous 40 years . The council was presided over by Berhtwald , the new Archbishop of Canterbury , and the decision of the council was that Wilfrid should be deprived of all his monasteries but Ripon , and that he should cease to perform episcopal functions . When Wilfrid continued his appeal to the papacy , his opponents had him and his supporters excommunicated . 
 = = = Rome and final return to Northumbria = = = 
 On his way to Rome Wilfrid stopped in Frisia to visit Willibrord . Following Wilfrid 's arrival in Rome the pope held a council , which declared that the King of Northumbria should follow the earlier papal decrees restoring Wilfrid to his see . Wilfrid was disconcerted to find that the papal court spoke Greek , and his biographer noted that Wilfrid was displeased when the pope discussed the appeal with advisers in a language Wilfrid could not understand . The pope also ordered another council to be held in Britain to decide the issue , and ordered the attendance of Bosa , Berhtwald and Wilfrid . On his journey back to England Wilfrid had a seizure at Meaux , but he had returned to Kent by 705 . 
 Aldfrith died soon after Wilfrid 's arrival back in England . The new king , Eadwulf , had been considered one of Wilfrid 's friends , but after his accession to the throne he ordered Wilfrid to stay out of Northumbria . Eadwulf 's reign lasted only a few months however , before he was expelled to make way for Aldfrith 's son Osred , to whom Wilfrid acted as spiritual adviser . Wilfrid may have been one of Osred 's chief supporters , along with Oswiu 's daughter Abbess Ælfflæd of Whitby , and the nobleman Beornhæth . Once Osred was secure on the throne Wilfrid was restored to Ripon and Hexham in 706 . When Bosa of York died , however , Wilfrid did not contest the decision to appoint John of Beverley to York . This appointment meant John 's transfer from Hexham , leaving Wilfrid free to perform episcopal functions at Hexham , which he did until his death . 
 = = Other aspects = = 
 = = = Cult of St Oswald = = = 
 Sometime after the translation of the relics of Oswald of Northumbria to Bardney Abbey by Osthryth between 675 and 679 , Wilfrid , along with Hexham Abbey , began to encourage and promote the cult of the dead king . Barbara Yorke sees this advocacy as a major factor in the prominence given to Oswald in Bede 's Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum . Historian D. P. Kirby regards Wilfrid 's championing of Oswald as being a contributing factor in Wilfrid 's expulsion from York in 678 . Kirby believes that Ecgfrith felt Wilfrid was promoting Oswald 's branch of the Northumbrian royal family over his own . One of Wilfrid 's protégés , Willibrord , became a missionary to the Frisians in 695 , perhaps inspired by Wilfrid 's example . Willibrord may have felt it expedient to leave Northumbria , where he was known as one of Wilfrid 's followers . 
 = = = Monastic network = = = 
 Wilfrid 's network of monasteries extended across at least three of the kingdoms of England in his day . They included Hexham , Ripon , Selsey , and Oundle , as well as possibly Peterborough , <unk> , Evesham , Wing , and Withington . At his monasteries and dioceses he built churches in a style akin to that of the continent and Rome , travelling between them with a large entourage of up to 120 followers . He made many contacts and friends , not only in Northumbria and the other English kingdoms , but also in Gaul , Frisia , and Italy . Nobles sent their sons to him for fostering , and Wilfrid was known to help his protégés , no matter if they became clerics or not . The historian Peter Brown speculated that one reason for Wilfrid 's exile in 678 was that he was overshadowing the king as a patron . His contacts extended to the Lombard kingdom in Italy , where they included King <unk> and his son <unk> . 
 Wilfrid was a prolific founder of churches , which he then controlled until his death , and was a great fundraiser , acquiring lands and money from many of the kings he was in contact with . He was also noted for his ability to attract support from powerful women , especially queens . Queen Eanflæd , his first patron , introduced him to a number of helpful contacts , and he later attracted the support of Queen Æthelthryth , who gave the endowment for Hexham Abbey . Ælfflæd , sister of King Aldfrith of Northumbria and daughter of Wilfrid 's old patron Queen Eanflæd , helped to persuade the Northumbrians to allow Wilfrid to return from his last exile . 
 = = = Builder and artistic patron = = = 
 Wilfrid built a church capable of accommodating a congregation of 2 @,@ 000 at Hexham , using stone from Hadrian 's Wall . The 12th @-@ century writer Ailred of Rievaulx , whose family helped restore Hexham , credited Wilfrid as the designer of a church beautifully embellished with paintings and sculpture . It appears that the churches at Hexham and Ripon ( which Wilfrid also built ) were aisled basilicas , of the type that was common on the continent . Ripon was the first church in Northumbria to incorporate a porticus , similar to those of churches in Kent . 12th @-@ century pilgrims ' accounts declared that the church at Hexham rivalled those of Rome . The crypts at both Ripon and Hexham are unusual , and perhaps were intended by Wilfrid to mimic the Roman catacombs which he had seen on his travels . They are still extant , although the fabric of Wilfrid 's churches above ground has been replaced by later structures . The churches were finished with glazed windows , made by glassmakers brought over from the continent . 
 As well as his building projects Wilfrid also commissioned works to embellish the churches , including altar cloths made of silk woven with gold threads , and a gospel book written on parchment dyed purple , with gold lettering . The gospels were then enclosed in a gold book cover set with gems . When the church he had built at Ripon was consecrated , a three @-@ day feast was held to accompany the ceremony . 
 = = Resignation and death = = 
 After his final return to Northumbria Wilfrid retired to the monastery at Ripon , where he lived until his death during a visit to Oundle , at the age of 75 . A little over a year before his death in either 709 or 710 Wilfrid suffered another stroke or seizure , which led him to make arrangements for the disposition of his monasteries and possessions . He was buried near the altar of his church in Ripon . Bede records the epitaph that was placed on the tomb . Wilfrid was succeeded at Hexham by Acca of Hexham , a protégé who had accompanied him to Rome in 703 . The monastery at Ripon celebrated the first anniversary of Wilfrid 's death with a commemoration service attended by all the abbots of his monasteries and a spectacular white arc was said to have appeared in the sky starting from the gables of the basilica where his bones were laid to rest . 
 Wilfrid left large sums of money to his monastic foundations , enabling them to purchase royal favour . Soon after his death a Vita Sancti Wilfrithi , was written by Stephen of Ripon , a monk of Ripon . The first version appeared in about 715 followed by a later revision in the 730s , the first biography written by a contemporary to appear in England . It was commissioned by two of Wilfrid 's followers , Acca of Hexham , and the Abbot of Ripon , <unk> . Stephen 's Vita is concerned with vindicating Wilfrid and making a case for his sainthood , and so is used with caution by historians , although it is nevertheless an invaluable source for Wilfrid 's life and the history of the time . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Wilfrid 's feast day is 12 October or 24 April . Both dates were celebrated in early medieval England , but the April date appeared first in the liturgical calendars . The April date is the date when his relics were translated to a new shrine . Immediately after his death Wilfrid 's body was venerated as a cult object , and miracles were alleged to have happened at the spot where the water used to wash his body was discarded . A cult grew up at Ripon after his death and remained active until 948 , when King Eadred destroyed the church at Ripon ; after the destruction , Wilfrid 's relics were taken by Archbishop Oda of Canterbury , and held in Canterbury Cathedral . This account appears in a foreword written by Oda for Frithegod 's later poem on Wilfrid 's life . However , according to Byrhtferth 's Vita Sancti Oswaldi , or Life of Saint Oswald , Oda 's nephew , Oswald , Archbishop of York , preserved the relics at Ripon and restored the community there to care for them . The two differing accounts are not easily reconciled , but it is possible that Oswald collected secondary relics that had been overlooked by his uncle and installed those at Ripon . The relics that were held at Canterbury were originally placed in the High Altar in 948 , but after the fire at Canterbury Cathedral in 1067 , Wilfrid 's relics were placed in their own shrine . 
 After the Norman Conquest of England , devotion continued to be paid to Wilfrid , with 48 churches dedicated to him and relics distributed between 11 sites . During the 19th century , the feast of Wilfrid was celebrated on the Sunday following Lammas in the town of Ripon with a parade and horse racing , a tradition which continued until at least 1908 . Wilfrid is venerated in the Roman Catholic Church , Eastern Orthodox Church and the Anglican Communion . He is usually depicted either as a bishop preaching and baptising or else as a robed bishop holding an episcopal staff . 
 Wilfrid was one of the first bishops to bring relics of saints back from Rome . The papacy was trying to prevent the removal of actual body parts from Rome , restricting collectors to things that had come in contact with the bodily remains such as dust and cloth . Wilfrid was known as an advocate of Benedictine monasticism , and regarded it as a tool in his efforts to " root out the poisonous weeds planted by the Scots " . He built at Ripon and Hexham , and lived a majestic lifestyle . As a result of his various exiles , he founded monastic communities that were widely scattered over the British Isles , over which he kept control until his death . These monastic foundations , especially Hexham , contributed to the blending of the Gaelic and Roman strains of Christianity in Northumbria , which inspired a great surge of learning and missionary activity ; Bede and Alcuin were among the scholars who emerged from Northumbrian monasteries influenced by Wilfrid . Missionaries inspired by his example went from Northumbria to the continent , where they converted pagans in Germany and elsewhere . 
 One commentator has said that Wilfrid " came into conflict with almost every prominent secular and ecclesiastical figure of the age " . Hindley , a historian of the Anglo @-@ Saxons , states that " Wilfrid would not win his sainthood through the Christian virtue of humility " . The historian Barbara Yorke said of him that " Wilfrid 's character was such that he seems to have been able to attract and infuriate in equal measure " . His contemporary , Bede , although a partisan of the Roman dating of Easter , was a monk and always treats Wilfrid a little uneasily , showing some concern about how Wilfrid conducted himself as a clergyman and as a bishop . The historian Eric John feels that it was Wilfrid 's devotion to monasticism that led him to believe that the only way for the Church to be improved was through monasticism . John traces Wilfrid 's many appeals to Rome to his motivation to hold together his monastic empire , rather than to self @-@ interest . John also challenges the belief that Wilfrid was fond of pomp , pointing out that the comparison between the Irish missionaries who walked and Wilfrid who rode ignores the reality that the quickest method of travel in the Middle Ages was on horseback . 
 The historian Peter Hunter Blair summarises Wilfrid 's life as follows : " Wilfrid left a distinctive mark on the character of the English church in the seventh century . He was not a humble man , nor , so far as we can see , was he a man greatly interested in learning , and perhaps he would have been more at home as a member of the Gallo @-@ Roman episcopate where the wealth which gave him enemies in England would have passed unnoticed and where his interference in matters of state would have been less likely to take him to prison . " R. W. Southern , another modern historian , says that Wilfrid was " the greatest papal enthusiast of the century " . James Campbell , a historian specialising in the Anglo @-@ Saxon period , said of him " He was certainly one of the greatest ecclesiastics of his day . Ascetic , deemed a saint by some , the founder of several monasteries according to the rule of St Benedict , he established Christianity in Sussex and attempted to do so in Frisia . At the same time , his life and conduct were in some respects like those of a great Anglo @-@ Saxon nobleman . " 
 = <unk> = 
 Chitinozoa ( singular : chitinozoan , plural : chitinozoans ) are a taxon of flask @-@ shaped , organic walled marine microfossils produced by an as yet unknown animal . Common from the Ordovician to Devonian periods ( i.e. the mid @-@ Paleozoic ) , the millimetre @-@ scale organisms are abundant in almost all types of marine sediment across the globe . This wide distribution , and their rapid pace of evolution , makes them valuable <unk> markers . 
 Their bizarre form has made classification and ecological reconstruction difficult . Since their discovery in 1931 , suggestions of protist , plant , and fungal affinities have all been entertained . The organisms have been better understood as improvements in microscopy facilitated the study of their fine structure , and there is mounting evidence to suggest that they represent either the eggs or juvenile stage of a marine animal . 
 The ecology of <unk> is also open to speculation ; some may have floated in the water column , where others may have attached themselves to other organisms . Most species were particular about their living conditions , and tend to be most common in specific <unk> . Their abundance also varied with the seasons . 
 = = Appearance = = 
 Chitinozoa range in length from around 50 to 2000 micrometres . They appear dark to almost opaque when viewed under an optical microscope . External ornamentation is often preserved on the surface of the fossils , in the form of hairs , loops or protrusions , which are sometimes as large as the chamber itself . The range and complexity of ornament increased with time , against a backdrop of decreasing organism size . The earliest Ordovician species were large and smooth @-@ walled ; by the mid @-@ Ordovician a large and expanding variety of ornament , and of hollow appendages , was evident . While shorter appendages are generally solid , larger protrusions tend to be hollow , with some of the largest displaying a spongy internal structure . However , even hollow appendages leave no mark on the inner wall of the organisms : this may suggest that they were secreted or attached from the outside . There is some debate about the number of layers present in the organisms ' walls : up to three layers have been reported , with the internal wall often ornamented ; some specimens only appear to display one . The multitude of walls may indeed reflect the construction of the organism , but could be a result of the preservational process . 
 " Immature " or juvenile examples of Chitinozoans have not been found ; this may suggest that they didn 't " grow " , that they were moults ( unlikely ) , or that the <unk> parts of the organism only formed after the developmental process was complete . 
 Most chitinozoans are found as isolated fossils , but chains of multiple tests , joined from aperture to base , have been reported from all genera . Very long chains tend to take the form of a spring . Occasionally , clusters or condensed chains are found , packed in an organic " cocoon " . 
 = = Classification = = 
 Alfred Eisenack 's original description of the Chitinozoans placed them in three families , spanning seven genera , based on morphological grounds . Further genera were identified , at first on an annual basis , as time progressed . Since its publication in 1931 , Eisenack 's original classification has been much honed by these additional discoveries , as well as advances in microscopy . The advent of the scanning electron microscope in the 1970s allowed the improved detection of surface ornamentation which is hugely important in identification - as can be appreciated by a comparison of the images on this page . Even the light microscope image here is of far greater quality than could have been achieved earlier in the century , using poorly preserved specimens and less advanced microscopes . The original three families proposed by Eisenack represented the best classification possible with available data , based largely on the presence or absence of chains of organisms and the chamber 's shape . The orders were subsequently revised to conform better to Linnean taxonomy , placing related organisms more closely together . This was made possible as scientific advances permitted the identification of distinctive traits in organisms across Eisenack 's groups . Features of the base and neck , the presence of spines , and perforations or connections are now considered the most useful diagnostic features . 
 = = Relationships = = 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Alfred Eisenack 's original guess was that the Chitinozoa were of the <unk> order <unk> , since similar chitin @-@ based tests were produced by the extant members of this group . However , the chemistry of these tests differs from that of the fossils , and modern <unk> are almost exclusively fresh @-@ water - an extremely different environment . Within a year , he had abandoned this initial idea . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Arguments put forwards by <unk> ( 1973 ) proposed that the organisms were one @-@ celled " plants " similar to the dinoflagellates , which would now be grouped into the <unk> . However , as mentioned previously , spines and appendages are attached from the exterior of the vessel : only animals have the cellular machinery necessary to perform such a feat . Further , no analogy for the cocoon envelope can be found in this kingdom . 
 = = = Young graptolites = = = 
 The graptolites are colonial organic walled fossils which also occurred from the Ordovician to the Devonian ; only part of their life cycle is known and it is not clear how they reproduced . It has been suggested that the Chitinozoa may represent the pre @-@ <unk> stages of graptolites - the period between the colony 's sexual reproduction , and the formation of a new colony . This hypothesis appears to be supported by the co @-@ occurrence of <unk> and chitinozoan fossils , whose abundances appear to mirror one another . The similar chemical composition of the fossils has been seized by both sides of the argument . Proponents suggest that the use of the same chemical framework is an indicator that the two may be related . However , this factor means that situations favouring the preservation of one will also tend to preserve the other - and the preparation techniques used to extract the fossils will also favour or disfavour the two groups equally . Therefore , the apparent co @-@ occurrence of the two fossils may merely be an artifact of their similar composition . The hypothesis struggles to explain the continuing abundance of chitinozoans after the middle Devonian , when graptolites became increasingly rare . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The cyst forms of a particular group of ciliates , the <unk> have been suggested to be affiliated to Chitinozoans . 
 = = = Eggs = = = 
 The test of the Chitinozoa was fixed - there was no scope for any parts of it to move or rotate . This makes it seem likely that the tests were containers , to protect whatever was inside - whether that was a " hibernating " or encysted organism , or a clutch of hatching eggs . There are several arguments behind an association of the chitinozoans with annelids or gastropods , and it is not impossible that the chitinozoans are a convergent phenomenon laid by both groups . In fact , the spirally coiled nature of chitinozoan chains has been used to suggest that they were laid by a spirally coiled organism , such as the gastropods ; were this inference true , <unk> chains could be to be attributed to the ( straight ) annelid worms or other organisms . 
 Recent excavations of the Soom Shale , an Ordovician <unk> @-@ lagerstätten in South Africa , have yielded chitinozoans alongside a wide range of other organisms . It has been suggested that if whatever organism created the Chitinozoa was <unk> , it would be present in the Soom biota — from which gastropods and graptolites are notable in their absence . Most organisms present in the shale can be ruled out for a variety of reasons , but polychaete worms , <unk> conodonts and <unk> cephalopods remain as likely candidates . However , further evidence connecting chitinozoans to any of these groups is circumstantial at best . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 It is not immediately clear what mode of life was occupied by these improbably shaped fossils , and an answer only becomes apparent after following several lines of reasoning . 
 The fossils ' restriction to marine sediments can be taken as sound evidence that the organisms dwelt in the <unk> seas - which presents three main modes of life : 
 <unk> — living within the sediment - the " burrowers " 
 Benthic — dwelling upon the sea floor , perhaps anchored in place - the " sitters " 
 Pelagic — free @-@ floating in the water column - the " drifters " 
 An infaunal mode of life can be quickly ruled out , as the fossils are sometimes found in alignment with the depositing current ; as nothing attached them to the bottom , they must have fallen from the water column . 
 The ornament of the chitinozoans may cast light on the question . Whilst in some cases a defensive role - by making the vessel larger , and thus less digestible by would @-@ be predators - seems probable , it is not impossible that the protrusions may have anchored the organisms to the sea floor . However , their low @-@ density construction makes this unlikely : perhaps more plausible is that they acted to attach to other organisms . Longer spines also make the organisms more buoyant , by decreasing their Rayleigh number ( i.e. increasing the relative importance of water 's viscosity ) — it is therefore possible that at least the long @-@ spined chitinozoans were planktonic " floaters " . On the other hand , the walls of some chitinozoans were probably too thick and dense to allow them to float . 
 Whilst little is known about their interactions with other organisms , small holes in the tests of some chitinozoans are evidence that they were hosts to some parasites . Although some forms have been reinterpreted as " pock @-@ marks " caused by the disintegration of the diagenetic mineral pyrite , the clustering of cylindrical holes around the chamber — where the flesh of the organism was likely to be concentrated — is evidence for a biological cause . 
 Corals in Gotland with daily growth markings have been found in association with abundant chitinozoans , which allow the detection of seasonal variation in chitinozoan abundance . A peak in abundance during the late autumn months is observed , with the maxima for different species occurring on different dates . Such a pattern is also observed in modern @-@ day tropical zooplankton . The diversity of living habits is also reflected by the depth of water and distance from the shore . Different species are found in highest abundance at different depths . While deeper waters around 40 km from the shoreline are generally the optimal environment , some species appear to prefer very shallow water . On the whole , chitinozoans are less abundant in turbulent waters or reef environments , implying an aversion to such regimes when alive , if it is not an effect of sedimentary focusing . Chitinozoans also become rarer in shallower water - although the reverse is not necessarily true . They cannot survive freshwater input . 
 = = Stratigraphic application = = 
 Since Alfred Eisenack first recognised and named the group in 1930 , the Chitinozoa have proven incredibly useful as a stratigraphic markers in biostratigraphy during the Ordovician , Silurian and Devonian periods . Their utility is due to the rapidity of their morphological evolution , their abundance — the most productive samples bearing almost a thousand tests per gram — and the easy identification ( due largely to the large variation in shapes ) and short lifetimes ( < 10 million years ) of most species . They are also widely distributed and appear in a variety of marine depositional settings , making correlation easier ; better still , they can often be recognised in even quite strongly metamorphosed rocks . However , convergence of morphological form to similar environments sometimes leads to the mistaken identification of a species in several areas separated by vast differences in space and time , but sharing a similar depositional environment ; clearly , this can cause major problems if the organisms are interpreted as being the same species . Aside from the <unk> , chitinozoans were the only reliable means of correlating <unk> units until the late 1960s , when the detailed study of conodonts and graptolites fully unleashed their stratigraphic potential . 
 = Music in early modern Scotland = 
 Music in early modern Scotland includes all forms of musical production in Scotland between the early sixteenth century and the mid @-@ eighteenth century . In this period the court followed the European trend for instrumental accompaniment and playing . Scottish monarchs of the sixteenth century were patrons of religious and secular music , and some were accomplished musicians . In the sixteenth century the playing of a musical instrument and singing became an expected accomplishment of noble men and women . The departure of James VI to rule in London at the Union of Crowns in 1603 , meant that the Chapel Royal , Stirling Castle largely fell into disrepair and the major source of patronage was removed from the country . Important composers of the early sixteenth century included Robert Carver and David Peebles . The Lutheranism of the early Reformation was sympathetic to the incorporation of Catholic musical traditions and vernacular songs into worship , exemplified by The Gude and Godlie Ballatis ( 1567 ) . However , the Calvinism that came to dominate Scottish Protestantism led to the closure of song schools , disbanding of choirs , removal of organs and the destruction of music books and manuscripts . An emphasis was placed on the Psalms , resulting in the production of a series of <unk> and the creation of a tradition of unaccompanied singing . 
 Despite the attempts of the Kirk to limit the tradition of secular popular music , it continued . This period saw the adoption of the highland bagpipes and the fiddle . Ballads , some of which probably date from the Medieval period , existed as part of an distinctive oral tradition . Allan Ramsey advocated the creation of a national musical tradition and collaborated with Italian composer and cellist Lorenzo Bocchi on the first Scottish opera the Gentle Shepherd . A musical culture developed around Edinburgh and a number of composers began to produce collections of Lowland and Highland tunes grafted on to Italian musical forms . By the middle of the eighteenth century a number of Italian musicians and composers were resident in Scotland and Scottish composers of national significance had begun to emerge . 
 = = The court and noble households = = 
 In this era Scotland followed the trend of Renaissance courts for instrumental accompaniment and playing . James V , as well as being a major patron of sacred music , was a talented lute player and introduced French chansons and consorts of viols to his court , although almost nothing of this secular chamber music survives . The return of Mary , Queen of Scots from France in 1561 to begin her personal reign , and her position as a Catholic , gave a new lease of life to the choir of the Chapel Royal , but the destruction of Scottish church organs meant that instrumentation to accompany the mass had to employ bands of musicians with trumpets , drums , fifes , bagpipes and tabors . Like her father she played the lute , virginals and ( unlike her father ) was a fine singer . She brought French musical influences with her , employing lutenists and viol players in her household . 
 James VI ( r . 1566 – 1625 ) was a major patron of the arts in general . He rebuilt the Chapel Royal at Stirling in 1594 and the choir was used for state occasions like the baptism of his son Henry . He followed the tradition of employing lutenists for his private entertainment , as did other members of his family . When he went south to take the throne of England in 1603 as James I , he removed one of the major sources of patronage in Scotland . The Chapel Royal now began to fall into disrepair , and the court in Westminster would be the only major source of royal musical patronage . Holyrood Abbey was remodelled as a chapel for Charles I 's royal visit in 1633 and reclaimed by Charles II after the Restoration , becoming a centre of worship again during the future James VII 's residency in the early 1680s , but was sacked by an anti @-@ papist mob during the Glorious Revolution in 1688 . 
 These fashions permeated noble households , where resident musicians were employed , including viol and lute players . As elsewhere in Europe , musical ability became one of the major achievements expected of a nobleman or woman . Musicians were clearly employed as teachers for the children of the household , both male and female . There is evidence for the late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries of lessons being given in a variety of instruments and singing , and of the purchase of sheet music and instruments ( including the virginals and harpsichords ) . In the Highlands clan chiefs continued to employ harpists , and increasingly , pipers as <unk> and bards , whose prowess and ability to glorify their ancestors was a key element in underlying a clan 's status and heritage into the seventeenth century . The earliest printed collection of secular music in Scotland was by publisher John Forbes in Aberdeen in 1662 . Songs and <unk> : to <unk> , Foure , or Five Partes , both Apt for Voices and Viols , known as Forbes ' Cantus , was printed three times in the next twenty years . It contained 77 songs , of which 25 were of Scottish origin . 
 = = Church music = = 
 The outstanding Scottish composer of the first half of the sixteenth century was Robert Carver ( c . 1488 – 1558 ) , a canon of Scone Abbey . His complex polyphonic music could only have been performed by a large and highly trained choir such as the one employed in the Scottish Chapel Royal . James V was also a patron to figures including David Peebles ( c . 1510 – 79 ? ) , whose best known work " Si quis diligit me " ( text from John 14 : 23 ) , is a motet for four voices . These were probably only two of many accomplished composers from this era , whose work has largely only survived in fragments . Much of what survives of church music from the first half of the sixteenth century is due to the diligent work of Thomas <unk> ( d . 1590 ) , vicar of St Andrews , who compiled a part book from now lost sources , which was continued by unknown hands after his death . 
 The Reformation had a severe impact on church music . The song schools of the abbeys , cathedrals and collegiate churches were closed down , choirs disbanded , music books and manuscripts destroyed and organs removed from churches . The Lutheranism that influenced the early Scottish Reformation attempted to accommodate Catholic musical traditions into worship , drawing on Latin hymns and vernacular songs . The most important product of this tradition in Scotland was The Gude and Godlie Ballatis ( 1567 ) , which were spiritual satires on popular ballads composed by the brothers James , John and Robert Wedderburn . Never adopted by the kirk , they nevertheless remained popular and were reprinted from the 1540s to the 1620s . 
 Later the Calvinism that came to dominate the Scottish Reformation was much more hostile to Catholic musical tradition and popular music , placing an emphasis on what was biblical , which meant the Psalms . The Scottish Psalter of 1564 was commissioned by the Assembly of the Church . It drew on the work of French musician Clément Marot , Calvin 's contributions to the Strasbourg Psalter of 1539 and English writers , particularly the 1561 edition of the Psalter produced by William Whittingham for the English congregation in Geneva . The intention was to produce individual tunes for each psalm , but of 150 psalms , 105 had proper tunes and in the seventeenth century , common tunes , which could be used for psalms with the same metre , became more frequent . Because whole congregations would now sing these psalms , unlike the trained choirs who had sung the many parts of polyphonic hymns , there was a need for simplicity and most church compositions were confined to homophonic settings . 
 During his personal reign James VI attempted to revive the song schools , with an act of parliament passed in 1579 , demanding that councils of the largest burghs set up " ane sang <unk> with ane <unk> sufficient and able for <unk> of the <unk> in the said science of musik " . Five new schools were opened within four years of the act and by 1633 there were at least twenty @-@ five . Most of those without song schools made provision within their grammar schools . Polyphony was incorporated into editions of the Psalter from 1625 , but usually with the congregation singing the melody and trained singers the contra @-@ tenor , treble and bass parts . However , the triumph of the Presbyterians in the National Covenant of 1638 led to and end of polyphony and a new psalter in common metre , but without tunes , was published in 1650 . In 1666 The Twelve Tunes for the Church of Scotland , composed in Four Parts ( which actually contained 14 tunes ) , designed for use with the 1650 Psalter , was first published in Aberdeen . It would go through five editions by 1720 . By the late seventeenth century these two works had become the basic corpus of the psalmody sung in the kirk . 
 = = Popular music = = 
 The secular popular tradition of music continued , despite attempts by the Kirk , particularly in the Lowlands , to suppress dancing and events like penny weddings at which tunes were played . Large numbers of musicians continued to perform , including the fiddler Pattie Birnie and the piper Habbie Simpson ( 1550 – 1620 ) . 
 The first clear reference to the use of the Highland bagpipes is from a French history , which mentions their use at the Battle of Pinkie Cleugh in 1547 . George Buchanan claimed that they had replaced the trumpet on the battlefield . This period saw the creation of the <unk> mór ( the great music ) of the bagpipe , which reflected its martial origins , with battle @-@ tunes , marches , gatherings , salutes and laments . The Highlands in the early seventeenth century saw the development of piping families including the <unk> , MacArthurs , MacGregors and the <unk> of <unk> . There is also evidence of adoption of the fiddle in the Highlands with Martin Martin noting in his A Description of the Western Isles of Scotland ( 1703 ) that he knew of eighteen players in Lewis alone . 
 There is evidence of ballads from this period . Some may date back to the late Medieval era and deal with events and people that can be traced back as far as the thirteenth century , including " Sir Patrick Spens " and " Thomas the Rhymer " , but for which we do not have evidence until the eighteenth century . Scottish ballads are distinct , showing pre @-@ Christian influences in the inclusion of supernatural elements such as the fairies in the Scottish ballad " Tam Lin " . They remained an oral tradition until the increased interest in folk songs in the eighteenth century led collectors such as Bishop Thomas Percy to publish volumes of popular ballads . The oppression of secular music and dancing began to ease between about 1715 and 1725 and the level of musical activity was reflected in a flood of musical publications in broadsheets and compendiums of music such as the <unk> Allan Ramsay 's verse compendium The Tea Table Miscellany ( 1723 ) and William Thomson 's Orpheus <unk> ( 1725 ) . 
 = = Classical music = = 
 From the late seventeenth music became less an accomplishment of the gentle classes and increasingly a skill pursued by professionals . It was enjoyed in otherwise silent concert rooms rather than as incidental entertainment in the houses of royalty and nobles . The German flute was probably introduced into Scotland towards the end of the seventeenth century . The Italian style of classical music was probably first brought to Scotland by the Italian cellist and composer Lorenzo Bocchi , who travelled to Scotland in the 1720s , introducing the cello to the country and then developing settings for Lowland Scots songs . He possibly had a hand in the first Scottish Opera , the pastoral The Gentle Shepherd , with libretto by Allan Ramsay . Music in Edinburgh prospered through the patronage of figures including the merchant Sir John Clerk of Penicuik , who was also a noted composer , violinist and <unk> . The growth of a musical culture in the capital was marked by the incorporation of the Musical Society of Edinburgh in 1728 . 
 A group of Scottish composers began to respond to Allan Ramsey 's call to " own and refine " their own musical tradition , creating what James Johnson has characterised as the " Scots drawing room style " , taking primarily Lowland Scottish tunes and adding simple figured basslines and other features from Italian music that made them acceptable to a middle class audience . It gained momentum when major Scottish composers like James Oswald and William McGibbon became involved around 1740 . Oswald 's Curious Collection of Scottish Songs ( 1740 ) was one of the first to include Gaelic tunes alongside Lowland ones , setting a fashion common by the middle of the century and helping to create a unified Scottish musical identity . However , with changing fashions there was a decline in the publication of collections of specifically Scottish collections of tunes , in favour of their incorporation into British collections . By the mid @-@ eighteenth century there were Italians resident in Scotland , acting as composers and performers . These included Nicolò <unk> , Giusto <unk> and <unk> Barsanti . Thomas Erskine , 6th Earl of Kellie ( 1732 – 81 ) was one of the most important British composers of his era , and the first Scot known to have produced a symphony . 
 = First Battle of Tikrit = 
 The First Battle of Tikrit was a battle for the Iraqi city of Tikrit following the city 's capture by the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant ( ISIL ) and Ba 'athist Loyalists during the 2014 Northern Iraq offensive . The battle took place between 26 and 30 June 2014 . 
 In early June 2014 , ISIL took control of a number of cities in northern Iraq , including Tikrit . Tikrit has symbolic significance as the hometown of Saddam Hussein , and is also the administrative center of the Saladin Governorate . The Iraqi government responded on 26 June by launching an air assault operation to recapture the city . This initial attack was reinforced by a ground assault on 28 June . Fighting continued on 29 and 30 June , but the battle was an insurgent victory , with government forces retreating on 30 June . The defeat coincided with ISIL 's declaration of a worldwide caliphate on 29 June . 
 The Iraqi government made another attempt to retake the city on 15 July , but was again defeated . ISIL responded by attacking nearby Camp Speicher on 17 July . Tikrit remained under ISIL control until the Second Battle of Tikrit in March and April 2015 . 
 = = Background = = 
 In December 2013 , clashes involving tribal militias , Iraqi security forces , and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant ( ISIL ) broke out throughout western Iraq . Then , in January 2014 , ISIL militants successfully took control of Fallujah and Ramadi , bringing much of Anbar Province under their control . 
 In early June , insurgents began advancing into the central and northern parts of Iraq . On 10 June , Mosul fell to ISIL , a devastating defeat given that there were 30 @,@ 000 Iraqi troops in the city facing approximately 1 @,@ 500 ISIL fighters . Most of the Iraqi Army soldiers refused to fight and fled . 
 On 11 June , ISIL captured Tikrit . The following day , they killed over a thousand Iraqi Air Force cadets at Camp Speicher , 8 miles northwest of Tikrit . 
 = = The battle = = 
 On 26 June , Iraqi government forces launched an airborne assault on Tikrit with three or four commando helicopters flown into a stadium at the University of Tikrit . One of the helicopters was shot down and crash @-@ landed at the stadium , while another had to conduct an emergency landing after suffering a mechanical failure . The crew of the second helicopter , which included a Lebanese pilot , was then captured by insurgents . Fierce fighting then ensued around the university compound , while army snipers positioned themselves on tall buildings in the university complex . In the early hours of the assault , a helicopter gunship struck the city 's hospital compound . By the next day , sporadic clashes continued at the university as Iranian @-@ trained Shiite militiamen were dispatched and managed to seize control of tall buildings in the university area . 
 On 28 June , helicopter gunships conducted dawn air strikes against insurgents who were attacking troops at the university campus . By this point , the city had been coming under continuous air strikes for three days , which included barrel bombs . An all @-@ out ground offensive was launched during the day in an attempt to capture the city . A column of troops started out from Samarra towards Tikrit to the north and by sundown had reached the edge of the city . According to Lt. Gen. Ahmed Abu <unk> , another column was directed towards the Camp Speicher air base . There were initial claims by government sources of capturing Tikrit , but in fact Tikrit itself remained under insurgent control as heavy fighting continued to rage on the city outskirts during the night . In the evening , helicopters struck a gathering of people preparing for a wedding ceremony in the village of Al Bu <unk> , east of Tikrit , killing four civilians . 
 The next day , troops pulled back away from Tikrit to the nearby town of <unk> , south of the city , in an attempt to regroup after meeting stiff resistance . Fighting also continued near the university and around the air base , which had reportedly come under army control . During the day 's battles , another Iraqi army helicopter was shot down over the city and crashed near a market , while the army sent tanks to join the fighting at the university . An Iraqi army spokesman claimed 70 militants had been killed in Tikrit in the previous 24 hours and that the government forces were in control of the university . Neither of the claims were independently confirmed . Later , fierce clashes were reported in an area about 20 kilometers from the city center , toward Samarra . Militants reportedly made an advance but were stopped about 10 kilometers south of Tikrit . That same day , ISIL declared itself a worldwide caliphate . 
 On 30 June , government forces attempted to move out of the air base and link up with troops at the university but failed after encountering heavy insurgent resistance in the al @-@ Deum area . A military spokesman said that government forces were massing in Samarra and would soon make another push to capture Tikrit . Meanwhile , south of Tikrit , the army managed to recapture the town of <unk> in fighting that an army spokesman claimed killed 40 ISIS fighters . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 On 3 July , an Iraqi Army spokesman claimed the military had regained control of the town of Al @-@ Awja , Saddam Hussein 's birthplace , near Tikrit . However , later in the day , two battlefield commanders contradicted him and stated fighting was still continuing on the town 's perimeter and in Al @-@ Awja itself . 
 During this time , troops retreated from the university complex . 
 On 15 July , the military launched a new assault on Tikrit from Al @-@ Awja . Soldiers and militiamen quickly entered the city , as militants were reportedly retreating , and seized the city 's hospital . Following this , the Iraqi government was preparing to declare victory in the battle for the city . However , ISIL militants sprung an ambush , with suicide bombers reportedly leaping from windows into groups of soldiers . Government troops retreated from the city before sunset four kilometers to the south under constant mortar and sniper fire . Several security force vehicles were seen abandoned , with at least one of them burnt out . 52 soldiers and 40 militants were killed in the fighting . 
 On 17 July , insurgents launched an assault on Camp Speicher , where an estimated 700 government soldiers and 150 Iranian or Iraqi Shiite militiamen were besieged following the failed attempt to send reinforcements to the air base . The assault included snipers and suicide bombers and the militants quickly managed to reach the runway , at which point Iraqi special forces joined the battle . The base was bombarded and mortared all night . By the next morning , according to various sources , the final pocket of government troops had collapsed , with all of the government forces either killed , executed or captured . At least 25 – 35 insurgents were also killed . Iraqi forces attempted to save the base 's aircraft by flying them out , but according to ISIL 8 – 9 helicopters were destroyed on the ground or shot down , with several armored vehicles destroyed as well . The Iraqi Army denied the alleged capture of the base with soldiers from the front line reporting that Speicher was still under their control , with only three soldiers being killed , one helicopter destroyed and two damaged . A Tikrit resident also reported continued fighting around the base . Two days later , the military reported that Iraqi special forces had re @-@ secured the base . 
 Though the United States participated in the battle on the Iraqi side , the Washington Post wrote that some Iranian groups accused the coalition of bombarding a pro @-@ government headquarters in the city . In response , the U.S. Embassy in Baghdad issued a statement denying the allegations . 
 = Billy 's Bucket List = 
 " Billy 's Bucket List " is the final episode of the fifth season of the American animated television series Adventure Time . The episode was written and storyboarded by Ako Castuera and Jesse Moynihan , from a story by Kent Osborne , Pendleton Ward , Jack Pendarvis , and Adam Muto . It originally aired on Cartoon Network on March 17 , 2014 . The episode guest stars Lou Ferringo , Andy Samberg , and Mark Hamill ; Castuera herself also voiced a character . 
 The series follows the adventures of Finn ( voiced by Jeremy Shada ) , a human boy , and his best friend and adoptive brother Jake ( voiced by John DiMaggio ) , a dog with magical powers to change shape and grow and shrink at will . In this episode , Finn finds Billy 's ( voiced by Ferrigno ) bucket list and decides to complete the unfinished items , as a tribute toward the fallen hero . After completing most of the items , including giving Billy 's ex @-@ girlfriend Canyon ( voiced by Castuera ) one last motorcycle ride , and conquering his fear of the ocean , an apparition of Billy appears to Finn , telling him that Finn 's biological father is still alive . 
 The episode was the last to feature Castuera as a storyboard artist until her return to the series during the seventh season ; in the interim time , she focused on her art career . This episode also marked the last time Nate Cash was credited as supervising director ; he left to direct the animated mini @-@ series Over the Garden Wall . " Billy 's Bucket List " was met with critical acclaim , with one reviewer complimenting the episode 's cliffhanger and emotional growth . In addition , the episode was watched by 2 @.@ 335 million viewers . 
 = = Plot = = 
 During a freestyle rap battle with Rap Bear , hosted by Party Pat ( voiced by Andy Samberg ) , Finn is approached by Billy 's ( voiced by Lou Ferrigno ) ex @-@ girlfriend , Canyon ( voiced by Ako Castuera ) . She delivers Billy 's loincloth to Finn , and Finn and she venture back to Billy 's lair to pay their respects and move on . At his cavern , Finn defeats a group of fairies and then discovers a bucket list penned by Billy . Canyon and Finn decide to complete it as a tribute to the fallen hero . The two go on a joy ride in a desert environment , and afterwards Canyon and Finn part ways . Finn soon discovers that the list contains one more item hidden at the bottom left corner reading : " Lie on my back in the ocean . Just float . " 
 Finn , terrified of the ocean , decides to do this final task for Billy , but the Fear Feaster ( voiced by Mark Hamill ) manifests and taunts him , until he knocks himself unconscious ; during this time , he has an intense dream of swimming through the ocean and being consumed by a whale . Eventually he wakes up , and — possibly involuntarily — uses his grass sword to slice through and destroy the Fear Feaster , ending Finn 's ocean fear for good . The spirit of Billy manifests itself before Finn in the sky , thanking him for completing his list . Before his spirit departs , he reveals to Finn that his human father is still alive , trapped in a mysterious place known only as the " Citadel " . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Billy 's Bucket List " was written and storyboarded by Ako Castuera and Jesse Moynihan , from a story by Kent Osborne , Pendleton Ward , Jack Pendarvis , and Adam Muto . This episode was the last to feature Castuera — who had been storyboarding on the show since the first season finale " Gut Grinder " — until her return to the series during the seventh season . According to Moynihan , Castuera left the show " to do something different and pursue other interests " as well as to " pursue a different path from television animation . " On September 29 , 2014 , however , Kent Osborne posted an image on Instagram , confirming that Castuera and Moynihan would again be partners for the seventh season . Art direction was handled by Nick Jennings , whereas supervising direction was <unk> by Nate Cash and Adam Muto . This episode marked the last time Nate Cash was credited as supervising director , as he later left the series to direct the animated mini @-@ series Over the Garden Wall . 
 Castuera herself voiced Canyon . The episode also features the return of Lou Ferringo as the hero Billy ; Ferringo had previously appeared in the first season episode " His Hero " and the fourth season finale " The Lich " . In addition , both comedian and rapper Andy Samberg , as well as actor Mark Hamill , reprise their roles as Party Pat and the Fear Feaster , respectively . Samberg had previously voiced the character in the second season episode " Belly of the Beast " , whereas Hamill had appeared in the first season episode , " Ocean of Fear " . 
 The rap battle music was scored by Moynihan , who made heavy use of orchestra hits . The instrumental was later uploaded to Soundcloud and shared by the official Adventure Time production blog . In one of the episode 's background art pieces , artist Derek Ballard inserted a buried car , homemade bombs , and a hole in the side of a cliff , additions that he claims were in honor of " one of America ’ s greatest film treasures : Tremors " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Billy 's Bucket List " first aired on Cartoon Network on March 17 , 2014 . The episode was viewed by 2 @.@ 335 million viewers and scored a 0 @.@ 5 Nielsen rating in the 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ old demographic . Nielsen ratings are audience measurement systems that determine the audience size and composition of television programming in the United States , which means that the episode was seen by 0 @.@ 5 percent of all households aged 18 to 49 years old were watching television at the time of the episode 's airing . Furthermore , the episode was the 43rd most @-@ watched cable program on the night it aired . 
 Oliver Sava of The A.V. Club awarded the episode an " A – " , arguing that it was an example of the series ' continued growth : he wrote , " as Finn grows , so does this series " . Sava opined that , " the final minute of “ Billy ’ s Bucket List ” drops a major plot @-@ bomb that gives the series an exciting direction for next season , and while the events leading up to the cliffhanger aren 't quite as provocative or substantial as the last few episodes , they represent all the things that make this show such a great 10 @-@ minute oasis at the beginning of the week . " Sava also noted that , " Trippy psychedelia is another major ingredient of this series , and ' Billy ’ s Bucket List ' delivers a heavy serving when Finn finds himself underwater . " 
 Andrea Reiher of Zap2it called the episode " a great ending to Season 5 " . Darren Franich of Entertainment Weekly awarded the episode an " A " , noting that while the series " can do hilarious weirdness in its sleep , " this episode in particular " showcases its soulfulness " . He described the main plot as " oddly introspective " , and wrote that the end was " a surprise reveal — a mythology boost that could push the show in a radical new direction . " 
 = LW5 / 7 = 
 LW5 / 7 is a standing para @-@ Alpine and para @-@ Nordic skiing classification for skiers with upper extremity issues in both limbs that may include double amputation of both arms and hands or dysmelia of the upper limbs . The class has three subclasses defined by the location of the disability on the upper extremities . International classification is done by IPC Alpine Skiing and IPC Nordic Skiing . On the national level , classification is handled by national sports federation such as Cross @-@ Country Canada . 
 Skiers in this class use two skis and no ski poles in para @-@ Alpine and para @-@ Nordic , though skiers can use mini @-@ ski poles provided they cannot hold a ski pole without the use of a prosthesis . Skiers develop techniques to ski that compensate for balance issues as a result of missing arms . A factoring system is used in para @-@ Alpine and para @-@ Nordic to allow LW5 / 7 skiers to compete fairly against other skiers with disabilities . While this classification was not grouped with others at the 1984 Winter Olympics Exhibition Competition , it was grouped with other standing classes during events in the 1990s and 2000s . 
 = = Definition = = 
 LW5 / 7 is used in para @-@ Alpine and para @-@ Nordic standing skiing , where LW stands for Locomotor Winter . People in this class have upper extremity issues in both limbs and may include issue such as paralysis or dysmelia in both arms . The disability may be a result of double amputation of both arms and hands or dysmelia of the upper limbs . 
 The International Paralympic Committee ( IPC ) defined this classification for para @-@ alpine as " Competitors with disabilities in both upper limbs skiing with two normal skis and without poles ... The disability shall be such that the functional use of poles is not possible . Typical disability profile of the class is double @-@ arm amputation . " In 2002 , the Australian Paralympic Committee defined this classification for para @-@ Alpine as a standing skiing classification with " Two skis , no poles , disability in both arms or hands . " The IPC defined this classification for para @-@ Nordic skiing as for " those with impairment in both upper limbs without the use of prosthesis . The impairment must be such that the athlete is unable to use poles . " Cross Country Canada defined this classification for para @-@ Nordic as " Impairment in both upper limbs ( arms ) without the use of prosthesis . The impairment must be such that the athlete is unable to use poles . If the athlete is able to use a pole they must compete as LW6 or LW8 " in 2012 . 
 For international para @-@ Alpine skiing competitions , classification is done through IPC Alpine Skiing . A national federation such as Alpine Canada handles classification for domestic competitions . For para @-@ Nordic skiing events , classification is handled by IPC Nordic Skiing Technical Committee on the international level and by the national sports federation such as Cross @-@ Country Canada on a country by country level . When being assessed into this classification , a number of things are considered , including reviewing the skiers medical history and medical information on the skier 's disability , having a physical examination and an in person assessment of the skier training or competing . If a skier in this classification has the ability to use a ski pole of some sort , they may do so but they need to changes classes and compete in LW6 / 8 . 
 = = = LW5 / 7 @.@ 1 = = = 
 The IPC defines this para @-@ Alpine classification as " Both arms amputated above the elbow , Short stumps , no elbow joints or forearms " . 
 = = = LW5 / 7 @.@ 2 = = = 
 The IPC defines this para @-@ Alpine classification as " One arm amputated above the elbow , the other below the elbow " . 
 = = = LW5 / 7 @.@ 3 = = = 
 The IPC defines this para @-@ Alpine classification as " Both arms amputated or dysfunctional below the elbow , Both hands unable to hold or use ski poles " . 
 = = Equipment and technique = = 
 Skiers in this class use two skis and no ski poles in para @-@ Alpine and para @-@ Nordic . While skiers are prohibited from using traditional ski poles , they may use mini poles so long as they are unable to hold a traditional ski pole without the use of a prostheses . Skiers are also allowed to use prostheses or orthoses in competition . FIS rules for ski boots and binding heights are followed for this class . Skiers in this class must wear a Slalom helmet in Slalom events and crash helmets during the Giant Slalom . 
 In the Slalom event , competitors are more likely to use a partial ski pole or a prosthetic to hold a ski pole that they may not use in other disciplines . Techniques to compensate for balance issues as a result of an upper limb disability may be corrected by using knee drives or hip motions . 
 In the Biathlon , all Paralympic athletes shoot from a prone position . Athletes with amputations can use a rifle support while shooting . 
 = = Sport = = 
 A factoring system is used in the sport to allow different classes to compete against each other , when there are too few individual competitors in one class in a competition . The factoring system works by having a number for each class based on their functional mobility or vision levels , where the results are calculated by multiplying the finish time by the factored number . The resulting number is the one used to determine the winner in events where the factor system is used . For the 2003 / 2004 para @-@ Nordic skiing season , the percentage for the classic technique was 79 % and percentage for free was 87 % . The percentage for the 2008 / 2009 and 2009 / 2010 para @-@ Nordic ski seasons was 79 % for classic and 87 % for free technique . In para @-@ Nordic skiing , the percentage for the 2012 / 2013 ski season was 79 % for classic and 87 % for free . Each of the subclasses with in LW5 / 7 had their own factoring for the para @-@ Alpine 2011 / 2012 skiing season . The factoring for LW5 / 7 @.@ 1 alpine skiing classification during the 2011 / 2012 skiing season was 0 @.@ 982 for Slalom , 0 @.@ <unk> for Giant Slalom , 0 @.@ <unk> for Super @-@ G and 0 @.@ <unk> for downhill , for LW5 / 7 @.@ 2 was 0 @.@ <unk> for Slalom , 0 @.@ <unk> for Giant Slalom , 0 @.@ <unk> for Super @-@ G and 0 @.@ <unk> for downhill , and for LW5 / 7 @.@ 3 was 0 @.@ <unk> for Slalom , 0 @.@ <unk> for Giant Slalom , 0 @.@ <unk> for Super @-@ G and 0 @.@ <unk> for downhill . 
 In disability skiing events , this classification is grouped with standing classes who are seeded to start after visually impaired classes and before sitting classes in the Slalom and Giant Slalom . In downhill , Super @-@ G and Super Combined , this same group competes after the visually impaired classes and sitting classes . In cross @-@ country and biathlon events , this classification is grouped with other standing classes . The IPC advises event organisers to run the men 's standing ski group after the blind men 's group and before the blind women 's group . Women 's standing classes are advised to go last . In the biathlon , the skier is required to make sure " that the rifle touches the support in between the marked zone ( 5 cm in front of / behind the balance point ) . " 
 At times , skiers in this class have injured themselves while skiing . Such injuries have occurred for some in this class of the German national para @-@ Alpine skiing team between 1994 and 2006 . One incident occurred in 1997 and was a femur @-@ fracture caused as a result of a fall while skiing . Another incident occurred at the 1998 Winter Paralympics when a skier injured themselves , resulting in a partial ACL rupture . 
 = = Events = = 
 While this classification was not grouped with others at the 1984 Winter Olympics Exhibition Competition , it was grouped during events in the 1990s and 2000s . At the 1984 Winter Olympics Exhibition Competition , disciplines included on the programme were downhill and Giant Slalom , and was not grouped with others for medal events for men . At the 1996 Disabled Alpine World Championships in Lech , Austria , men 's LW1 , LW3 and LW5 were grouped together for medal events . At the 1998 Winter Paralympics , LW1 , LW3 and LW5 were put into one group for medal events in para @-@ Alpine events . At the 2002 Winter Paralympics in alpine @-@ skiing , LW3 , LW5 / 7 and LW9 were grouped for the men 's downhill , Super @-@ G , Slalom and Giant Slalom events . On the women 's side of the 2002 Games programme , LW1 , LW4 , LW5 and LW6 classes were combined for the downhill , Giant Slalom and Slalom events . At the 2005 IPC Nordic Skiing World Championships , this class was grouped with other standing skiing classifications . In cross country , this class was eligible to compete in the men and women 's 5 km , 10 km and 20 km individual race . In the men and women 's biathlon , this classification was again grouped with standing classes in the 7 @.@ 4 km race with 2 shooting stages 12 @.@ 5 km race which had four shooting stages . At the 2009 World Championships , there was one male and one female from this class the standing downhill event . 
 = Sanctified ( song ) = 
 " Sanctified " is a song by American hip hop recording artist Rick Ross , taken from his sixth studio album Mastermind ( 2014 ) . The song , produced by Kanye West , Mike Dean , and DJ Mustard , featuring guest appearances by rappers Kanye West and Big Sean . It was written by the aforementioned rappers and producers and Betty Wright sang the hook . " Sanctified " garnered critical acclaim from music critics , with most praising the production and Kanye West 's appearance . Despite not being released as a single , it is the highest charting song on Mastermind to date , debuting at number 25 on the UK R & B Chart , number 78 on the US Billboard Hot 100 and number 99 on the Canadian Hot 100 upon the album 's release . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 In February 2014 , a short preview of the song was released featuring the chorus , performed by Kanye West and Big Sean . Following the track list reveal for the album , on February 7 , 2014 , producer DJ Mustard revealed that he co @-@ produced " Sanctified " with Kanye West . The song was also produced by Mike Dean , along with being written by William Roberts , Sean Anderson , Kanye West , and Dijon McFarlane . Betty Wright lent her vocal talent to the song during a late night studio session she did as a favor to DJ Khaled in order for him to meet a deadline . She recorded the hook in fifteen minutes while sitting on a sofa In the song , West raps about how he feels about people playing up his earlier works and dismiss who he is now , before saying that he 's not going to worry about it . Then later he says , " Wipe my forehead with a handkerchief and wash my sins in the blood of Jesus , People sayin ' , ' Ye , we need another Yeezus . " This being a reference to his experimental sixth studio album . 
 Rick Ross stated that the song was one of his favorites featured on Mastermind . He said , " ' Sanctified ' was most definitely one of the favorites . It 's because how much time — Just watching Kanye put into this because it actually started as a sample . We did the sample maybe 10 different ways and then we ultimately went with a beautiful lady out of Miami , Ms. Betty Wright . She blessed us . So , just hearing that chorus . Just hearing the way it came out . All the time we put in it . It most definitely was dope . " Then after Ross ' sixth studio album Mastermind was released for free streaming on iTunes , the full version of " Sanctified " was released . 
 On March 6 , 2014 , Big Sean released his verse for the song that was cut from the album version of the song . Detailing the song 's recording process to MTV , Big Sean said , " Me and [ Kanye West ] was in the studio working on a whole bunch of ideas and [ Ross ] came in the conversation . And everybody know Rick Ross albums is events . So Ye pulled a track up , and I was telling him I think it 's a banger , it 's a smash , and he thought we should give it to <unk> . Me and him wrote our verses on the spot and we sent it to [ Ross ] and he did what he did to it . " 
 = = Live performance = = 
 On March 6 , 2014 , Rick Ross , Big Sean and Kanye West performed " Sanctified " on The Arsenio Hall Show backed by a live band . This was the first live performance of the song with all three rappers . West 's surprise appearance received a very large response from the audience . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Sanctified " was met with critical acclaim from music critics , with most of them favoring West 's guest appearance than Ross himself . Mikael Wood of The Los Angeles Times called it the album 's best song . Kevin Ritchie of Now named it the album 's best song , praised Betty Wright 's performance singing the hook and Kanye West 's production . Nick Catucci of Entertainment Weekly and Michael Madden of Consequence of Sound both considered the song one of the album 's best . Kellin Miller of AllHipHop stated that it " has a strong case for an early song of the year nomination . " Dan <unk> of XXL praised the song 's production and called West 's appearance as show stealing . Jesse Cataldo of Slant Magazine said , " The album revives when Kanye West shows up to produce and guest on " Sanctified , " a revival song that pairs religious rebirth with monetary excess in a sort of frenzied ritual . " 
 Peter Cashmore of NME stated that it " is a glorious snail ’ s @-@ pace gush of braggadocio . In fact , if the album had wrapped up after " Sanctified " , rather than dribbling to a close with the weedy " Walkin ’ On Air " and " Thug Cry " , then Mastermind would be pretty much wall @-@ to @-@ wall bangers . " Craig Jenkins of Pitchfork Media gave this song the tag of " Best New Track " and stated , " ' Sanctified ' is an outstanding entry into Ross and Kanye ’ s catalogue of stunners , but it never feels like Ross ' song . " Christopher Weingarten of Rolling Stone said , the song " shines with guest singer Betty Wright 's powerful gospel rasp and Kanye West confessing his sins on a featured verse . Ross , meanwhile , ends up talking designer clothes and fellatio . " Ken Capobianco of the Boston Globe said that " Kanye West turns his host into an afterthought on the fine , gospel @-@ influenced " Sanctified " . 
 Sheldon Pearce of HipHopDX stated , " While Kanye is transposing himself with Muhammad Ali and washing his sins in the blood of Jesus and boldly second guessing God ’ s direct message the most grandiose thing Ross can muster is an ill @-@ fated ( and perhaps uninformed ) comparison to fallen Waco cult leader David Koresh . It feels tired and uninspired . " Nathan Slavik of DJBooth praised the song 's depth and said it featured " a rewind @-@ worthy verse from Kanye and a completely superfluous Big Sean . " Jesal Padania of RapReviews called the song riotously enjoyable , but said that Ross ' contribution did not add anything to the song . 
 Complex named it the second best song of the first @-@ half of 2014 . Writer Justin Charity commented saying , " While hardly their strongest verses of even the past couple years , Ross , Kanye , and Sean all come correct with the <unk> here , from Sean 's opening mantra to Kanye 's aggressive confessional to post @-@ sex grilled cheese . The song 's weary gospel build @-@ up makes way for the minimal , rarefied ecstasy of that spaceship hangover melody . An arena confession I need to be shouting at the <unk> of live shows by year 's end : " All I wanted was a hundred million dollars and a bad bitch ! " Verdict : We need another Yeezus . " MySpace also named the song one of the 50 best songs of the same time period . A writer for them said , " ' Sanctified ' is a behemoth of a track , replete with an original vocal line from Bettye LaVette that plays like a gospel sample and an impeccable verse from ' Ye that makes up for Ross rapping , " <unk> 's <unk> ' , make grilled cheese for you , the best . " It 's simply the best gospel song masquerading as a rap jam this year . " 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Mastermind . 
 Rick Ross – lead vocals , songwriting 
 Kanye West – guest vocals , songwriting , production 
 Betty Wright – guest vocals 
 Big Sean – guest vocals , songwriting 
 DJ Mustard – co @-@ production / original production 
 Mike Dean – production 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = DJ Kool Herc = 
 Clive Campbell ( born 16 April 1955 ) , better known by his stage name DJ Kool Herc , is a Jamaican American DJ who is credited for originating hip hop music in the early 1970s in The Bronx , New York City . His playing of hard funk records of the sort typified by James Brown was an alternative both to the violent gang culture of the Bronx and to the nascent popularity of disco in the 1970s . Campbell began to isolate the instrumental portion of the record , which emphasized the drum beat — the " break " — and switch from one break to another . 
 Using the same two turntable set @-@ up of disco DJs , Campbell used two copies of the same record to elongate the break . This breakbeat DJing , using hard funk and records with Latin percussion , formed the basis of hip hop music . Campbell 's announcements and exhortations to dancers helped lead to the syncopated , rhymed spoken accompaniment now known as rapping . He called his dancers " break @-@ boys " and " break @-@ girls " , or simply b @-@ boys and b @-@ girls . Campbell 's DJ style was quickly taken up by figures such as Afrika Bambaataa and Grandmaster Flash . Unlike them , he never made the move into commercially recorded hip hop in its earliest years . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life and education = = = 
 Clive Campbell was the first of six children born to Keith and Nettie Campbell in Kingston , Jamaica . While growing up , he saw and heard the sound systems of neighbourhood parties called <unk> , and the accompanying speech of their DJs , known as toasting . He emigrated with his family at the age of 12 to the Bronx , New York in November 1967 , where they lived at 1520 Sedgwick Avenue . 
 They encountered wide @-@ scale social disruption following the construction of the Cross Bronx Expressway by Robert Moses ( completed 1963 , with further construction continuing through to 1972 ) ; it had uprooted thousands in stable neighborhoods , displacing communities , and leading to " white flight " when property values dropped near the roadway . Many landlords resorted to arson to recoup money through insurance policies . A violent new street gang youth culture emerged around 1968 , and spread with increasing lawlessness across large parts of the Bronx by 1973 . 
 Campbell attended the Alfred E. Smith Career and Technical Education High School in the Bronx , where his height , frame , and demeanor on the basketball court prompted the other kids to nickname him " Hercules " . He began running with a graffiti crew called the Ex @-@ Vandals , taking the name Kool Herc . Herc recalls persuading his father to buy him a copy of " Sex Machine " by James Brown , a record that not a lot of his friends had , and which they would come to him to hear . He and his sister , Cindy , began hosting back @-@ to @-@ school parties in the recreation room of their building , 1520 Sedgwick Avenue . Herc 's first soundsystem consisted of two turntables connected to two amplifiers and a Shure " Vocal Master " PA system with 2 amazing speakers columns , on which he played records such as James Brown 's " Give It Up Or <unk> A Loose " , The Jimmy Castor Bunch 's " It 's Just Begun " and Booker T & the MG 's ' " Melting Pot " . With Bronx clubs ' struggling with street gangs , uptown DJs ' catering to an older disco crowd with different aspirations , and commercial radio also catering to a demographic distinct from teenagers in the Bronx , Herc 's parties had a ready @-@ made audience . 
 = = = The break = = = 
 DJ Kool Herc developed the style that was the blueprint for hip hop music . Herc used the record to focus on a short , heavily percussive part in it : the " break " . Since this part of the record was the one the dancers liked best , Herc isolated the break and prolonged it by changing between two record players . As one record reached the end of the break , he cued a second record back to the beginning of the break , which allowed him to extend a relatively short section of music into " five @-@ minute loop of fury " . This innovation had its roots in what Herc called " The Merry @-@ Go @-@ Round , " a technique by which the deejay switched from break to break at the height of the party . Herc told The New York Times that he first introduced the Merry @-@ Go @-@ Round into his sets in 1972 . The earliest known Merry @-@ Go @-@ Round involved playing James Brown 's " Give It Up or <unk> a Loose " ( with its refrain , " Now clap your hands ! Stomp your feet ! " ) , then switching from that record 's break into the break from a second record , " Bongo Rock " by The Incredible Bongo Band . From the " Bongo Rock " ' s break , Herc used a third record to switch to the break on " The Mexican " by the English rock band Babe Ruth . Kool Herc also contributed to developing the rhyming style of hip hop by punctuating the recorded music with slang phrases , announcing : " Rock on , my mellow ! " " B @-@ boys , b @-@ girls , are you ready ? keep on rock steady " " This is the joint ! Herc beat on the point " " To the beat , y 'all ! " " You don 't stop ! " For his contributions , Herc is called a " founding father of hip hop , " a " nascent cultural hero , " and an integral part of the beginnings of hip hop by Time . 
 On 11 August 1973 , DJ Kool Herc was a disc jockey and emcee at a party in the recreation room at Sedgwick Avenue . Specifically , DJ Kool Herc : 
 extended an instrumental beat ( breaking or scratching ) to let people dance longer ( break dancing ) and began MC 'ing ( rapping ) during the extended breakdancing . ... [ This ] helped lay the foundation for a cultural revolution . 
 = = = B @-@ boys and b @-@ girls = = = 
 The " b @-@ boys " and " b @-@ girls " were the dancers to Herc 's breaks , who were described as " breaking " . Herc has noted that " breaking " was also street slang of the time meaning " getting excited " , " acting energetically , " or " causing a disturbance " . Herc coined the terms " b @-@ boy " , " b @-@ girl , " and " breaking " which became part of the lexicon of what would be eventually called hip hop culture . Early Kool Herc b @-@ boy and later DJ innovator <unk> <unk> describes the early evolution as follows : 
 " ... [ E ] verybody would form a circle and the B @-@ boys would go into the center . At first the dance was simple : touch your toes , hop , kick out your leg . Then some guy went down , spun around on all fours . Everybody said wow and went home to try to come up with something better . " 
 In the early 1980s , the media began to call this style " breakdance , " which in 1991 the New York Times wrote was " an art as demanding and inventive as mainstream dance forms like ballet and jazz . " Since this emerging culture was still without a name , participants often identified as " b @-@ boys , " a usage that included and went beyond the specific connection to dance , a usage that would persist in hip hop culture . 
 = = = Move to the streets = = = 
 With the mystique of his graffiti name , his physical stature , and the reputation of his small parties , Herc became a folk hero in the Bronx . He began to play at nearby clubs including the Twilight Zone <unk> , Executive Playhouse , the PAL on 183rd Street , as well as at high schools such as Dodge and Taft . Rapping duties were delegated to Coke La Rock . Herc 's collective , known as The <unk> , was augmented by Clark Kent and dancers The Nigga Twins . Herc took his soundsystem ( the <unk> ) — still legendary for its sheer volume — to the streets and parks of the Bronx . Nelson George recalls a schoolyard party : 
 " The sun hadn 't gone down yet , and kids were just hanging out , waiting for something to happen . Van pulls up , a bunch of guys come out with a table , crates of records . They unscrew the base of the light pole , take their equipment , attach it to that , get the electricity – Boom ! We got a concert right here in the schoolyard and it 's this guy Kool Herc . And he 's just standing with the turntable , and the guys were studying his hands . There are people dancing , but there 's as many people standing , just watching what he 's doing . That was my first introduction to in @-@ the @-@ street , hip hop DJing . " 
 = = = Influence on artists = = = 
 In 1975 , the young Grandmaster Flash , to whom Kool Herc was , in his words , " a hero " , began DJing in Herc 's style . By 1976 , Flash and his MCs The Furious Five played to a packed Audubon Ballroom in Manhattan . Venue owners were often nervous of unruly young crowds , however , and soon sent hip hop back to the clubs , community centres and high school gymnasiums of the Bronx . 
 Afrika Bambaataa first heard Kool Herc in 1973 . Bambaataa , at that time a general in the notorious Black Spades gang of the Bronx , obtained his own soundsystem in 1975 and began to DJ in Herc 's style , converting his followers to the non @-@ violent Zulu Nation in the process . Kool Herc began using The Incredible Bongo Band 's " Apache " as a break in 1975 . It became a firm b @-@ boy favourite — " the Bronx national anthem " — and is still in use in hip hop today . Steven Hager wrote of this period : 
 " For over five years the Bronx had lived in constant terror of street gangs . Suddenly , in 1975 , they disappeared almost as quickly as they had arrived . This happened because something better came along to replace the gangs . That something was eventually called hip @-@ hop . " 
 In 1979 , the record company executive Sylvia Robinson assembled a group she called The Sugarhill Gang and recorded " Rapper 's Delight " . The hit song ushered in the era of commercially released hip hop . By that year 's end , Grandmaster Flash was recording for Enjoy Records . In 1980 , Afrika Bambaataa began recording for Winley . By this time , DJ Kool Herc 's star had faded . 
 Grandmaster Flash suggests that Herc may not have kept pace with developments in techniques of cueing ( lining up a record to play at a certain place on it ) . Developments changed techniques of cutting ( switching from one record to another ) and scratching ( moving the record by hand to and fro under the stylus for percussive effect ) in the late 1970s . Herc said he retreated from the scene after being stabbed at the Executive Playhouse while trying to intercede in a fight , and the burning down of one of his venues . In 1980 , Herc had stopped DJing and was working in a record shop in South Bronx . 
 = = = Later years = = = 
 Kool Herc appeared in Hollywood 's motion picture take on hip hop , Beat Street ( Orion , 1984 ) , as himself . In the mid @-@ 1980s , his father died , and he became addicted to crack cocaine . " I couldn 't cope , so I started medicating " , he says of this period . 
 In 1994 Herc performed on Terminator X & the Godfathers of Threatt 's album , Super Bad . In 2005 , he wrote the foreword to Jeff Chang 's book on hip hop , Can 't Stop Won 't Stop . In 2005 he appeared in the music video of " Top 5 ( Dead or Alive ) " by Jin from the album The Emcee 's <unk> . In 2006 , he became involved in getting Hip Hop commemorated at the Smithsonian Institution museums . 
 Since 2007 Herc has worked in a campaign to prevent 1520 Sedgwick Avenue from being sold to developers and withdrawn from its status as a Mitchell @-@ Lama affordable housing property . In the summer of 2007 , New York state officials declared 1520 Sedgwick Avenue the " birthplace of hip @-@ hop " , and nominated it to national and state historic registers . The city 's Department of Housing Preservation and Development ruled against the proposed sale in February 2008 , on the grounds that " the proposed purchase price is inconsistent with the use of property as a Mitchell @-@ Lama affordable housing development " . It is the first time they have so ruled in such a case . 
 = = = Serious illness = = = 
 According to a DJ Premier fan blog , The Source 's website and other sites , DJ Kool Herc fell gravely ill in early 2011 and was said to lack health insurance . He had surgery for kidney stones , with a stent placed to relieve the pressure . He needed follow @-@ up surgery but St. Barnabas Medical Center , the site that performed the previous surgery , has requested that he make a deposit toward the next surgery , because he has missed several follow @-@ up visits . The hospital said it would not turn away uninsured patients in the emergency room . DJ Kool Herc and his family set up an official website on which he describes his medical issue and the larger goal of establishing the DJ Kool Herc Fund to pioneer long @-@ term health care solutions . In April 2013 , Campbell recovered from surgery and moved into post @-@ medical care . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Guest appearances = = = 
 Terminator X - " Herc 's Message " from Super Bad ( 1994 ) 
 The Chemical Brothers - " <unk> " from Dig Your Own Hole ( 1997 ) 
 Substantial - " Sacrifice " from Sacrifice ( 2008 ) 
 = County Route 574 ( Erie County , New York ) = 
 County Route 574 ( CR 574 ) is an east – west county route north of East Aurora in Erie County , New York , in the United States . The western terminus of the route is at New York State Route 16 ( NY 16 ) and NY 78 in the town of Elma . Its eastern terminus is at Two Rod Road , a state @-@ maintained north – south highway in the town of Marilla . The entire length of CR 574 is named " Jamison Road " . 
 Parts of CR 574 carried a state highway designation as early as 1930 . By 1931 , the entirety of CR 574 was designated as New York State Route 422 . Ownership and maintenance of NY 422 was transferred from the state of New York to Erie County on April 1 , 1980 , and the NY 422 designation officially ceased to exist on September 25 , 1980 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 CR 574 begins at an intersection with NY 16 and NY 78 ( Seneca Street ) northwest of East Aurora in the town of Elma . The route heads eastward along Jamison Road , passing south of a predominantly residential neighborhood and north of a large industrial complex . The latter ends after 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) , and CR 574 continues on to an interchange with the Aurora Expressway ( NY 400 ) . CR 574 intersects Bowen Road ( CR 242 ) and ( CR 361 ) just east of the expressway . 
 As CR 574 approaches the hamlet of East Elma , it meets Girdle Road ( CR 336 ) . In East Elma itself , Jamison Road intersects Creek Road ( CR 134 ) and <unk> Road ( CR 172 ) . Past East Elma , the land surrounding CR 574 becomes less developed and largely dominated by cultivated fields . CR 574 continues on through the open fields and into the town of Marilla , where it ends at a junction with Two Rod Road , a local arterial maintained by the New York State Department of Transportation as NY <unk> , an unsigned reference route . Prior to 1982 , Two Rod Road was NY 358 . 
 = = History = = 
 The portion of Jamison Road from Bowen Road to Maple Road was originally designated as part of NY 78 in the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York . By the following year , the entirety of Jamison Road was designated as NY 422 . NY 78 was realigned c . 1932 to follow a new routing between East Aurora and Depew while its former routing from East Aurora to Lancaster was redesignated as NY 78A . The NY 78A designation , which overlapped NY 422 between Bowen Road and Maple Road , was removed c . 1938 . 
 On April 1 , 1980 , ownership and maintenance of NY 422 was transferred from the state of New York to Erie County as part of a larger highway maintenance swap between the two levels of government . The NY 422 designation was removed on September 25 , 1980 , allowing Jamison Road to become CR 574 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Erie County . 
 = Toru Takemitsu = 
 Toru Takemitsu ( <unk> <unk> , Takemitsu Tōru , October 8 , 1930 – February 20 , 1996 ) pronounced [ <unk> <unk> ] was a Japanese composer and writer on aesthetics and music theory . Largely self @-@ taught , Takemitsu possessed consummate skill in the subtle manipulation of instrumental and orchestral timbre . He is famed for combining elements of oriental and <unk> philosophy to create a sound uniquely his own , and for fusing opposites together such as sound with silence and tradition with innovation . 
 He composed several hundred independent works of music , scored more than ninety films and published twenty books . He was also a founding member of the Jikken Kobo ( experimental workshop ) in Japan , a group of avant @-@ garde artists who distanced themselves from academia and whose collaborative work is often regarded among the most influential of the 20th century . 
 His 1957 Requiem for string orchestra attracted international attention , led to several commissions from across the world and established his reputation as one of the leading 20th @-@ century Japanese composers . He was the recipient of numerous awards and honours and the Toru Takemitsu Composition Award is named after him . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Youth = = = 
 Takemitsu was born in Tokyo on October 8 , 1930 ; a month later his family moved to Dalian in the Chinese province of Liaoning . He returned to Japan to attend elementary school , but his education was cut short by military conscription in 1944 . Takemitsu described his experience of military service at such a young age , under the Japanese Nationalist government , as " ... extremely bitter " . Takemitsu first became really conscious of Western classical music ( which was banned in Japan during the war ) during his term of military service , in the form of a popular French Song ( " <unk> @-@ moi d 'amour " ) which he listened to with colleagues in secret , played on a gramophone with a makeshift needle fashioned from bamboo . 
 During the post @-@ war U.S. occupation of Japan , Takemitsu worked for the U.S. Armed Forces , but was ill for a long period . <unk> and bed @-@ ridden , he took the opportunity to listen to as much Western music as he could on the U.S. Armed Forces network . While deeply affected by these experiences of Western music , he simultaneously felt a need to distance himself from the traditional music of his native Japan . He explained much later , in a lecture at the New York International Festival of the Arts , that for him Japanese traditional music " always recalled the bitter memories of war " . 
 Despite his almost complete lack of musical training , and taking inspiration from what little Western music he had heard , Takemitsu began to compose in earnest at the age of 16 : " ... I began [ writing ] music attracted to music itself as one human being . Being in music I found my raison d 'être as a man . After the war , music was the only thing . Choosing to be in music clarified my identity . " Though he studied briefly with <unk> <unk> beginning in 1948 , Takemitsu remained largely self @-@ taught throughout his musical career . 
 = = = Early development and Jikken Kōbō = = = 
 In 1948 , Takemitsu conceived the idea of electronic music technology , or in his own words , to " bring noise into tempered musical tones inside a busy small tube . " During the 1950s , Takemitsu had learned that in 1948 " a French [ engineer ] Pierre Schaeffer invented the method ( s ) of musique concrète based on the same idea as mine . I was pleased with this coincidence . " 
 In 1951 , Takemitsu was a founding member of the anti @-@ academic Jikken Kōbō ( <unk> , " experimental workshop " ) : an artistic group established for multidisciplinary collaboration on mixed @-@ media projects , who sought to avoid Japanese artistic tradition . The performances and works undertaken by the group introduced several contemporary Western composers to Japanese audiences . During this period he wrote <unk> <unk> I ( " Uninterrupted Rest I " , 1952 : a piano work , without a regular rhythmic pulse or <unk> ) ; and by 1955 Takemitsu had begun to use electronic tape @-@ recording techniques in such works as Relief <unk> ( 1955 ) and <unk> A · I ( 1956 ) . Takemitsu also studied in the early 1950s with the composer Fumio Hayasaka , perhaps best known for the scores he wrote for films by Kenji Mizoguchi and Akira Kurosawa , the latter of whom Takemitsu would collaborate with decades later . 
 In the late 1950s chance brought Takemitsu international attention : his Requiem for string orchestra ( 1957 listen ) , written as an homage to Hayasaka , was heard by Igor Stravinsky in 1958 during his visit to Japan . ( The NHK had organised opportunities for Stravinsky to listen to some of the latest Japanese music ; when Takemitsu 's work was put on by mistake , Stravinsky insisted on hearing it to the end . ) At a press conference later , Stravinsky expressed his admiration for the work , praising its " sincerity " and " passionate " writing . Stravinsky subsequently invited Takemitsu to lunch ; and for Takemitsu this was an " unforgettable " experience . After Stravinsky returned to the U.S. , Takemitsu soon received a commission for a new work from the Koussevitsky Foundation which , he assumed , had come as a suggestion from Stravinsky to Aaron Copland . For this he composed Dorian Horizon , ( 1966 ) , which was premièred by the San Francisco Symphony Orchestra , conducted by Copland . 
 = = = Influence of Cage ; interest in traditional Japanese music = = = 
 During his time with Jikken Kōbō , Takemitsu came into contact with the experimental work of John Cage ; but when the composer Toshi Ichiyanagi returned from his studies in America in 1961 , he gave the first Japanese performance of Cage 's Concert for Piano and Orchestra . This left a " deep impression " on Takemitsu : he recalled the impact of hearing the work when writing an obituary for Cage , 31 years later . This encouraged Takemitsu in his use of indeterminate procedures and graphic @-@ score notation , for example in the graphic scores of Ring ( 1961 ) , Corona for pianist ( s ) and Corona II for string ( s ) ( both 1962 ) . In these works each performer is presented with cards printed with coloured circular patterns which are freely arranged by the performer to create " the score " . 
 Although the immediate influence of Cage 's procedures did not last in Takemitsu 's music — Coral Island , for example for soprano and orchestra ( 1962 ) shows significant departures from indeterminate procedures partly as a result of Takemitsu 's renewed interest in the music of Anton Webern — certain similarities between Cage 's philosophies and Takemitsu 's thought remained . For example , Cage 's emphasis on timbres within individual sound @-@ events , and his notion of silence " as plenum rather than vacuum " , can be aligned with Takemitsu 's interest in ma . Furthermore , Cage 's interest in Zen practice ( through his contact with Zen scholar <unk> <unk> Suzuki ) seems to have resulted in a renewed interest in the East in general , and ultimately alerted Takemitsu to the potential for incorporating elements drawn from Japanese traditional music into his composition : 
 I must express my deep and sincere gratitude to John Cage . The reason for this is that in my own life , in my own development , for a long period I struggled to avoid being " Japanese " , to avoid " Japanese " qualities . It was largely through my contact with John Cage that I came to recognize the value of my own tradition . 
 For Takemitsu , as he explained later in a lecture in 1988 , one performance of Japanese traditional music stood out : 
 One day I chanced to see a performance of the Bunraku puppet theater and was very surprised by it . It was in the tone quality , the timbre , of the <unk> shamisen , the wide @-@ necked shamisen used in Bunraku , that I first recognized the splendor of traditional Japanese music . I was very moved by it and I wondered why my attention had never been captured before by this Japanese music . 
 Thereafter , he resolved to study all types of traditional Japanese music , paying special attention to the differences between the two very different musical traditions , in a diligent attempt to " bring forth the sensibilities of Japanese music that had always been within [ him ] " . This was no easy task , since in the years following the war traditional music was largely overlooked and ignored : only one or two " masters " continued to keep their art alive , often meeting with public indifference . In <unk> across the country , even students of traditional instruments were always required to learn the piano . 
 From the early 1960s , Takemitsu began to make use of traditional Japanese instruments in his music , and even took up playing the biwa — an instrument he used in his score for the film <unk> ( 1962 ) . In 1967 , Takemitsu received a commission from the New York Philharmonic Orchestra , to commemorate the orchestra 's 125th anniversary , for which he wrote November Steps for biwa , shakuhachi , and orchestra . Initially , Takemitsu had great difficulty in uniting these instruments from such different musical cultures in one work . Eclipse for biwa and shakuhachi ( 1966 ) illustrates Takemitsu 's attempts to find a viable notational system for these instruments , which in normal circumstances neither sound together nor are used in works notated in any system of Western staff notation . 
 The first performance of November Steps was given in 1967 , under Seiji Ozawa . Despite the trials of writing such an ambitious work , Takemitsu maintained " that making the attempt was very worthwhile because what resulted somehow liberated music from a certain stagnation and brought to music something distinctly new and different " . The work was distributed widely in the West when it was coupled as the fourth side of an LP release of Messiaen 's Turangalîla Symphony . 
 In 1972 , Takemitsu , accompanied by Iannis Xenakis , Betsy Jolas , and others , heard Balinese gamelan music in Bali . The experience influenced the composer on a largely philosophical and theological level . For those accompanying Takemitsu on the expedition ( most of whom were French musicians ) , who " ... could not keep their composure as I did before this music : it was too foreign for them to be able to assess the resulting discrepancies with their logic " , the experience was without precedent . For Takemitsu , however , by now quite familiar with his own native musical tradition , there was a relationship between " the sounds of the gamelan , the tone of the <unk> , the unique scales and rhythms by which they are formed , and Japanese traditional music which had shaped such a large part of my sensitivity " . In his solo piano work For Away ( written for Roger Woodward in 1973 ) , a single , complex line is distributed between the pianist 's hands , which reflects the interlocking patterns between the <unk> of a gamelan orchestra . 
 A year later , Takemitsu returned to the instrumental combination of shakuhachi , biwa , and orchestra , in the less well known work Autumn ( 1973 ) . The significance of this work is revealed in its far greater integration of the traditional Japanese instruments into the orchestral discourse ; whereas in November Steps , the two contrasting instrumental ensembles perform largely in alternation , with only a few moments of contact . Takemitsu expressed this change in attitude : 
 But now my attitude is getting to be a little different , I think . Now my concern is mostly to find out what there is in common ... Autumn was written after November Steps . I really wanted to do something which I hadn 't done in November Steps , not to blend the instruments , but to integrate them . 
 = = = International status and the gradual shift in style = = = 
 By 1970 , Takemitsu 's reputation as a leading member of avant @-@ garde community was well established , and during his involvement with Expo ' 70 in Osaka , he was at last able to meet more of his Western colleagues , including Karlheinz Stockhausen . Also , during a contemporary music festival in April 1970 , produced by the Japanese composer himself ( " Iron and Steel Pavilion " ) , Takemitsu met among the participants Lukas Foss , Peter <unk> , and Vinko <unk> . Later that year , as part of a commission from Paul Sacher and the Zurich Collegium Musicum , Takemitsu incorporated into his Eucalypts I parts for international performers : flautist Aurèle Nicolet , oboist Heinz Holliger , and harpist Ursula Holliger . 
 Critical examination of the complex instrumental works written during this period for the new generation of " contemporary soloists " reveals the level of his high @-@ profile engagement with the Western avant @-@ garde , in works such as Voice for solo flute ( 1971 ) , Waves for clarinet , horn , two trombones and bass drum ( 1976 ) , Quatrain for clarinet , violin , cello , piano and orchestra ( 1977 ) . Experiments and works that incorporated traditional Japanese musical ideas and language continued to appear in his output , and an increased interest in the traditional Japanese garden began to reflect itself in works such as In an Autumn Garden for gagaku orchestra ( 1973 ) , and A Flock Descends into the Pentagonal Garden for orchestra ( 1977 ) . 
 Throughout this apogee of avant @-@ garde work , Takemitsu 's musical style seems to have undergone a series of stylistic changes . Comparison of Green ( for orchestra , 1967 ) and A Flock Descends into the Pentagonal Garden ( 1977 ) quickly reveals the seeds of this change . The latter was composed according to a pre @-@ compositional scheme , in which pentatonic modes were superimposed over one central pentatonic scale ( the so @-@ called " black @-@ key pentatonic " ) around a central sustained central pitch ( F @-@ sharp ) , and an approach that is highly indicative of the sort of " <unk> " and modal pitch material seen gradually emerging in his works throughout the 1970s . The former , Green ( or November Steps II ) written 10 years earlier , is heavily influenced by Debussy , and is , in spite of its very dissonant language ( including momentary quarter @-@ tone clusters ) , largely constructed through a complex web of modal forms . These modal forms are largely audible , particularly in the momentary repose toward the end of the work . Thus in these works , it is possible to see both a continuity of approach , and the emergence of a simpler harmonic language that was to characterise the work of his later period . 
 His friend and colleague Jō Kondō said , " If his later works sound different from earlier pieces , it is due to his gradual refining of his basic style rather than any real alteration of it . " 
 = = = Later works : the sea of tonality = = = 
 In a Tokyo lecture given in 1984 , Takemitsu identified a melodic motive in his Far Calls . Coming Far ! ( for violin and orchestra , 1980 ) that would recur throughout his later works : 
 I wanted to plan a tonal " sea " . Here the " sea " is E @-@ flat [ Es in German nomenclature ] -E @-@ A , a three @-@ note ascending motive consisting of a half step and perfect fourth . [ ... In Far Calls ] this is extended upward from A with two major thirds and one minor third ... Using these patterns I set the " sea of tonality " from which many <unk> chords flow . 
 Takemitsu 's words here highlight his changing stylistic trends from the late 1970s into the 1980s , which have been described as " an increased use of diatonic material [ ... with ] references to tertian harmony and jazz voicing " , which do not , however , project a sense of " large @-@ scale tonality " . Many of the works from this period have titles that include a reference to water : Toward the Sea ( 1981 ) , Rain Tree and Rain Coming ( 1982 ) , riverrun and I Hear the Water Dreaming ( 1987 ) . Takemitsu wrote in his notes for the score of Rain Coming that " ... the complete collection [ is ] entitled " <unk> " ... it was the composer 's intention to create a series of works , which like their subject , pass through various metamorphoses , culminating in a sea of tonality . " Throughout these works , the S @-@ E @-@ A motive ( discussed further below ) features prominently , and points to an increased emphasis on the melodic element in Takemitsu 's music that began during this later period . 
 His 1981 work for orchestra named Dreamtime was inspired by a visit to Groote Eylandt , off the coast of the Northern Territory of Australia , to witness a large gathering of Australian indigenous dancers , singers and story tellers . He was there at the invitation of the choreographer Jiří <unk> . 
 Pedal notes played an increasingly prominent role in Takemitsu 's music during this period , as in A Flock Descends into the Pentagonal Garden . In Dream / Window , ( orchestra , 1985 ) a pedal D serves as anchor point , holding together statements of a striking four @-@ note motivic gesture which recurs in various instrumental and rhythmic guises throughout . Very occasionally , fully fledged references to diatonic tonality can be found , often in harmonic allusions to early- and pre @-@ 20th @-@ century composers — for example , Folios for guitar ( 1974 ) , which quotes from J. S. Bach 's St Matthew Passion , and Family Tree for narrator and orchestra ( 1984 ) , which invokes the musical language of Maurice Ravel and American popular song . ( He revered the St Matthew Passion , and would play through it on the piano before commencing a new work , as a form of " <unk> ritual " . ) 
 By this time , Takemitsu 's incorporation of traditional Japanese ( and other Eastern ) musical traditions with his Western style had become much more integrated . Takemitsu commented , " There is no doubt ... the various countries and cultures of the world have begun a journey toward the geographic and historic unity of all peoples ... The old and new exist within me with equal weight . " 
 Toward the end of his life , Takemitsu had planned to complete an opera , a collaboration with the novelist Barry Gifford and the director Daniel Schmid , commissioned by the Opéra National de Lyon in France . He was in the process of publishing a plan of its musical and dramatic structure with <unk> Ōe , but he was prevented from completing it by his death at 65 . He died of pneumonia on February 20 , 1996 , while undergoing treatment for bladder cancer . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 In a memorial issue of Contemporary Music Review , Jō Kondō wrote , " Needless to say , Takemitsu is among the most important composers in Japanese music history . He was also the first Japanese composer fully recognized in the west , and remained the guiding light for the younger generations of Japanese composers . " 
 Composer Peter Lieberson shared the following in his program note to the Ocean that has no East and West , written in memory of Takemitsu : " I spent the most time with Toru in Tokyo when I was invited to be a guest composer at his Music Today Festival in 1987 . Peter Serkin and composer Oliver Knussen were also there , as was cellist Fred Sherry . Though he was the senior of our group by many years , Toru stayed up with us every night and literally drank us under the table . I was confirmed in my impression of Toru as a person who lived his life like a traditional Zen poet . " 
 In the foreword to a selection of Takemitsu 's writings in English , conductor Seiji Ozawa writes : " I am very proud of my friend Toru Takemitsu . He is the first Japanese composer to write for a world audience and achieve international recognition . " 
 = = Music = = 
 Composers whom Takemitsu cited as influential in his early work include Claude Debussy , Anton Webern , Edgard Varèse , Arnold Schoenberg , and Olivier Messiaen . ( Messiaen was introduced to him by fellow composer Toshi Ichiyanagi , and remained a lifelong influence . ) Although Takemitsu 's wartime experiences of nationalism initially discouraged him from cultivating an interest in traditional Japanese music , he showed an early interest in " ... the Japanese Garden in color spacing and form ... " . The formal garden of the <unk> @-@ shiki interested him in particular . 
 He expressed his unusual stance toward compositional theory early on , his lack of respect for the " trite rules of music , rules that are ... stifled by formulas and calculations " ; for Takemitsu it was of far greater importance that " sounds have the freedom to breathe . ... Just as one cannot plan his life , neither can he plan music " . 
 Takemitsu 's sensitivity to instrumental and orchestral timbre can be heard throughout his work , and is often made apparent by the unusual instrumental combinations he specified . This is evident in works such as November Steps , that combine traditional Japanese instruments , shakuhachi and biwa , with a conventional Western orchestra . It may also be discerned in his works for ensembles that make no use of traditional instruments , for example Quotation of Dream ( 1991 ) , Archipelago S. , for 21 players ( 1993 ) , and Arc I & II ( 1963 – 66 / 1976 ) . In these works , the more conventional orchestral forces are divided into unconventional " groups " . Even where these instrumental combinations were determined by the particular ensemble commissioning the work , " Takemitsu 's genius for instrumentation ( and genius it was , in my view ) ... " , in the words of Oliver Knussen , " ... creates the illusion that the instrumental restrictions are self @-@ imposed " . 
 = = = Influence of traditional Japanese music = = = 
 Takemitsu summed up his initial aversion to Japanese ( and all non @-@ Western ) traditional musical forms in his own words : " There may be folk music with strength and beauty , but I cannot be completely honest in this kind of music . I want a more active relationship to the present . ( Folk music in a ' contemporary style ' is nothing but a deception ) . " His dislike for the music traditions of his own country in particular were intensified by his experiences of the war , during which Japanese music became associated with militaristic and nationalistic cultural ideals . 
 Nevertheless , Takemitsu incorporated some idiomatic elements of Japanese music in his very earliest works , perhaps unconsciously . One unpublished set of pieces , <unk> ( " Conduit " ) , written at the age of 17 , incorporates the ryō , <unk> and <unk> scales throughout . When Takemitsu discovered that these " nationalist " elements had somehow found their way into his music , he was so alarmed that he later destroyed the works . Further examples can be seen for example in the quarter @-@ tone glissandi of Masques I ( for two flutes , 1959 ) , which mirror the characteristic pitch bends of the shakuhachi , and for which he devised his own unique notation : a held note is tied to an enharmonic spelling of the same pitch class , with a portamento direction across the tie . 
 Other Japanese characteristics , including the further use of traditional pentatonic scales , continued to crop up elsewhere in his early works . In the opening bars of Litany , for Michael Vyner ( first movement ) , a reconstruction from memory by Takemitsu of Lento in Due <unk> ( 1950 ; the original score was lost ) , <unk> is clearly visible in the upper voice , which opens the work on an unaccompanied <unk> . The pitches of the opening melody combine to form the constituent notes of the ascending form of the Japanese in scale . 
 When , from the early 1960s , Takemitsu began to " consciously apprehend " the sounds of traditional Japanese music , he found that his creative process , " the logic of my compositional thought [ , ] was torn apart " , and nevertheless , " <unk> [ traditional Japanese music ... ] seized my heart and refuses to release it " . In particular , Takemitsu perceived that , for example , the sound of a single stroke of the biwa or single pitch breathed through the shakuhachi , could " so transport our reason because they are of extreme complexity ... already complete in themselves " . This fascination with the sounds produced in traditional Japanese music brought Takemitsu to his idea of ma ( usually translated as the space between two objects ) , which ultimately informed his understanding of the intense quality of traditional Japanese music as a whole : 
 Just one sound can be complete in itself , for its complexity lies in the formulation of ma , an <unk> metaphysical space ( duration ) of dynamically tensed absence of sound . For example , in the performance of nō , the ma of sound and silence does not have an organic relation for the purpose of artistic expression . Rather , these two elements contrast sharply with one another in an immaterial balance . 
 In 1970 , Takemitsu received a commission from the National Theatre of Japan to write a work for the gagaku ensemble of the Imperial Household ; this was fulfilled in 1973 , when he completed <unk> ( " In an Autumn Garden " , although he later incorporated the work , as the fourth movement , into his 50 minute long " In an Autumn Garden — Complete Version " ) . As well as being " ... the furthest removed from the West of any work he had written " , While it introduces certain Western musical ideas to the Japanese court ensemble , the work represents the deepest of Takemitsu 's investigations into Japanese musical tradition , the lasting effects of which are clearly reflected in his works for conventional Western ensemble formats that followed . 
 In Garden Rain ( 1974 , for brass ensemble ) , the limited and pitch @-@ specific harmonic vocabulary of the Japanese mouth organ , the shō ( see ex . 3 ) , and its specific timbres , are clearly emulated in Takemitsu 's writing for brass instruments ; even similarities of performance practice can be seen , ( the players are often required to hold notes to the limit of their breath capacity ) . In A Flock Descends into the Pentagonal Garden , the characteristic timbres of the shō and its chords ( several of which are simultaneous soundings of traditional Japanese pentatonic scales ) are emulated in the opening held chords of the wind instruments ( the first chord is in fact an exact transposition of the shō 's chord , <unk> ( i ) ; see ex . 3 ) ; meanwhile a solo oboe is assigned a melodic line that is similarly reminiscent of the lines played by the <unk> in gagaku ensembles . 
 = = = Influence of Messiaen = = = 
 The influence of Olivier Messiaen on Takemitsu was already apparent in some of Takemitsu 's earliest published works . By the time he composed Lento in Due <unk> , ( 1950 ) , Takemitsu had already come into possession of a copy of Messiaen 's 8 Préludes ( through Toshi Ichiyanagi ) , and the influence of Messiaen is clearly visible in the work , in the use of modes , the suspension of regular metre , and sensitivity to timbre . Throughout his career Takemitsu often made use of modes from which he derived his musical material , both melodic and harmonic among which Messiaen 's modes of limited transposition to appear with some frequency . In particular , the use of the octatonic , ( mode II , or the 8 – 28 collection ) , and mode VI ( 8 – 25 ) is particularly common . However , Takemitsu pointed out that he had used the octatonic collection in his music before ever coming across it in Messiaen 's music . 
 In 1975 , Takemitsu met Messiaen in New York , and during " what was to be a one @-@ hour ' lesson ' [ but which ] lasted three hours ... Messiaen played his Quartet for the End of Time for Takemitsu at the piano " , which , Takemitsu recalled , was like listening to an orchestral performance . Takemitsu responded to this with his homage to the French composer , Quatrain , for which he asked Messiaen 's permission to use the same instrumental combination for the main quartet , cello , violin , clarinet and piano ( which is accompanied by orchestra ) . As well as the obvious similarity of instrumentation , Takemitsu employs several melodic figures that appear to " mimic " certain musical examples given by Messiaen in his Technique de mon langage musical , ( see ex . 4 ) . In 1977 , Takemitsu reworked Quatrain for quartet alone , without orchestra , and titled the new work Quatrain II 
 On hearing of Messiaen 's death in 1992 , Takemitsu was interviewed by telephone , and still in shock , " blurted out , ' His death leaves a crisis in contemporary music ! ' " Then later , in an obituary written for the French composer in the same year , Takemitsu further expressed his sense of loss at Messiaen 's death : " Truly , he was my spiritual mentor ... Among the many things I learned from his music , the concept and experience of color and the form of time will be unforgettable . " The composition Rain Tree Sketch II , which was to be Takemitsu 's final piano piece , was also written that year and subtitled " In Memoriam Olivier Messiaen " . 
 = = = Influence of Debussy = = = 
 Takemitsu frequently expressed his indebtedness to Claude Debussy , referring to the French composer as his " great mentor " . As Arnold Whittall puts it : 
 Given the enthusiasm for the exotic and the Orient in these [ Debussy and Messiaen ] and other French composers , it is understandable that Takemitsu should have been attracted to the expressive and formal qualities of music in which flexibility of rhythm and richness of harmony count for so much . 
 For Takemitsu , Debussy 's " greatest contribution was his unique orchestration which emphasizes colour , light and shadow ... the orchestration of Debussy has many musical focuses . " He was fully aware of Debussy 's own interest in Japanese art , ( the cover of the first edition of La mer , for example , was famously adorned by Hokusai 's The Great Wave off Kanagawa ) . For Takemitsu , this interest in Japanese culture , combined with his unique personality , and perhaps most importantly , his lineage as a composer of the French musical tradition running from Rameau and Lully through Berlioz in which colour is given special attention , gave Debussy his unique style and sense of orchestration . 
 During the composition of Green ( November Steps II , for orchestra , 1967 : " steeped in the sound @-@ color world of the orchestral music of Claude Debussy " ) Takemitsu said he had taken the scores of Debussy 's Prélude à l <unk> @-@ midi d 'un Faune and Jeux to the mountain villa where both this work and November Steps I were composed . For Oliver Knussen , " the final appearance of the main theme irresistibly prompts the thought that Takemitsu may , quite unconsciously , have been attempting a latterday Japanese Après @-@ midi d 'un Faune " . Details of orchestration in Green , such as the prominent use of antique cymbals , and <unk> harmonies in the strings , clearly point to the influence of Takemitsu 's compositional mentor , and of these works in particular . 
 In Quotation of Dream ( 1991 ) , direct quotations from Debussy 's La Mer and Takemitsu 's earlier works relating to the sea are incorporated into the musical flow ( " stylistic jolts were not intended " ) , depicting the landscape outside the Japanese garden of his own music . 
 = = = Motives = = = 
 Several recurring musical motives can be heard in Takemitsu 's works . In particular the pitch motive E ♭ -E @-@ A can be heard in many of his later works , whose titles refer to water in some form ( Toward the Sea , 1981 ; Rain Tree Sketch , 1982 ; I Hear the Water Dreaming , 1987 ) . 
 When spelt in German ( Es @-@ E @-@ A ) , the motive can be seen as a musical " transliteration " of the word " sea " . Takemitsu used this motive ( usually transposed ) to indicate the presence of water in his " musical landscapes " , even in works whose titles do not directly refer to water , such as A Flock Descends into the Pentagonal Garden ( 1977 ; see ex . 5 ) . 
 = = = Musique concrète = = = 
 During Takemitsu 's years as a member of the Jikken Kōbō , he experimented with compositions of musique concrète ( and a very limited amount of electronic music , the most notable example being Stanza II for harp and tape written later in 1972 ) . In Water Music ( 1960 listen ) , Takemitsu 's source material consisted entirely of sounds produced by droplets of water . His manipulation of these sounds , through the use of highly percussive envelopes , often results in a resemblance to traditional Japanese instruments , such as the tsuzumi and nō ensembles . 
 = = = <unk> techniques = = = 
 One aspect of John Cage 's compositional procedure that Takemitsu continued to use throughout his career , was the use of indeterminacy , in which performers are given a degree of choice in what to perform . As mentioned previously , this was particularly used in works such as November Steps , in which musicians playing traditional Japanese instruments were able to play in an orchestral setting with a certain degree of improvisational freedom . However , he also employed a technique that is sometimes called " aleatory counterpoint " in his well @-@ known orchestral work A Flock Descends Into the Pentagonal Garden ( 1977 , at [ J ] in the score listen ) , and in the score of Arc II : i Textures ( 1964 ) for piano and orchestra , in which sections of the orchestra are divided into groups , and required to repeat short passages of music at will . In these passages the overall sequence of events is , however , controlled by the conductor , who is instructed about the approximate durations for each section , and who indicates to the orchestra when to move from one section to next . The technique is commonly found in the work of Witold Lutosławski , who pioneered it in his Jeux vénitiens . 
 = = = Film music = = = 
 Takemitsu 's contribution to film music was considerable ; in under 40 years he composed music for over 100 films , some of which were written for purely financial reasons ( such as those written for Noboru Nakamura ) . However , as the composer attained financial independence , he grew more selective , often reading whole scripts before agreeing to compose the music , and later surveying the action on set , " breathing the atmosphere " whilst conceiving his musical ideas . One notable consideration in Takemitsu 's composition for film was his careful use of silence ( also important in many of his concert works ) , which often immediately intensifies the events on screen , and prevents any monotony through a continuous musical accompaniment . For the first battle scene of Akira Kurosawa 's Ran , Takemitsu provided an extended passage of intense elegiac quality that halts at the sound of a single gunshot , leaving the audience with the pure " sounds of battle : cries screams and neighing horses " . 
 Takemitsu attached the greatest importance to the director 's conception of the film ; in an interview with Max Tessier , he explained that , " everything depends on the film itself ... I try to concentrate as much as possible on the subject , so that I can express what the director feels himself . I try to extend his feelings with my music . " 
 = = Awards = = 
 Takemitsu won awards for composition , both in Japan and abroad , including the Prix Italia for his orchestral work Tableau noir in 1958 , the <unk> Prize in 1976 and 1981 , the Los Angeles Film Critics Award in 1987 ( for the film score Ran ) and the University of Louisville Grawemeyer Award for Music Composition in 1994 ( for Fantasma / Cantos ) . In Japan , he received the Film Awards of the Japanese Academy for outstanding achievement in music , for soundtracks to the following films : 
 1979 Ai no <unk> ( <unk> ) 
 1986 Ran ( <unk> ) 
 1990 <unk> ( <unk> ) 
 1996 Sharaku ( <unk> ) 
 He was also invited to attend numerous international festivals throughout his career , and presented lectures and talks at academic institutions across the world . He was made an honorary member of the Akademie der <unk> of the DDR in 1979 , and the American Institute of Arts and Letters in 1985 . He was admitted to the French Ordre des Arts et des Lettres in 1985 , and the Académie des Beaux @-@ Arts in 1986 . He was the recipient of the 22nd Suntory Music Award ( 1990 ) . Takemitsu was posthumously awarded the fourth Glenn Gould Prize in Autumn , 1996 . 
 The Toru Takemitsu Composition Award , intended to " encourage a younger generation of composers who will shape the coming age through their new musical works " , is named after him . 
 = = Notable compositions = = 
 = = Literary works = = 
 Takemitsu , Toru ( 1995 ) . Confronting Silence . Fallen Leaf Press . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 36 @-@ 0 . 
 Takemitsu , Toru , with Cronin , Tania and Tann , Hilary , " Afterword " , Perspectives of New Music , vol . 27 , no . 2 ( Summer , 1989 ) , 205 – 214 , accessible at JSTOR , ( subscription access ) [ 5 ] 
 Takemitsu , Tōru , ( trans . Adachi , Sumi with Reynolds , Roger ) , " Mirrors " , Perspectives of New Music , vol . 30 no . 1 ( Winter , 1992 ) , 36 – 80 accessible at JSTOR , ( subscription access ) [ 6 ] 
 Takemitsu , Toru , ( trans . Hugh de Ferranti ) " One Sound " , Contemporary Music Review , vol . 8 , part 2 , ( Harwood , 1994 ) , 3 – 4 , accessible at <unk> ( subscription access ) [ 7 ] 
 Takemitsu , Tōru , " Contemporary Music in Japan " , Perspectives of New Music , vol . 27 no . 2 ( Summer , 1989 ) , 198 – 204 accessible at JSTOR , ( subscription access ) [ 8 ] 
 = = Listening = = 
 Toru Takemitsu : Air , John McMurtery , flute 
 Toru Takemitsu : Voice , John McMurtery , flute 
 Toru Takemitsu : Guitar , Shin @-@ Ichi Fukuda , guitar 
 = Saxbe fix = 
 The Saxbe fix / <unk> / , or salary rollback , is a mechanism by which the President of the United States , in appointing a current or former member of the United States Congress whose elected term has not yet expired , can avoid the restriction of the United States Constitution 's Ineligibility Clause . That clause prohibits the President from appointing a current or former member of Congress to a civil office position that was created , or to a civil office position for which the pay or benefits ( collectively , " emoluments " ) were increased , during the term for which that member was elected until the term has expired . The rollback , first implemented by an Act of Congress in 1909 , reverts the emoluments of the office to the amount they were when that member began his or her elected term . 
 To prevent ethical conflicts , James Madison proposed language at the Constitutional Convention that was adopted as the Ineligibility Clause after debate and modification by other Founding Fathers . Historically , a number of approaches have been taken to address the problem posed by restriction ; these have included choosing another nominee , allowing the desired nominee 's elected term of office to expire , ignoring the clause entirely , or reducing the offending emoluments to the level prior to when the nominee took office . Although Congress passed the mechanism reducing emoluments in 1909 , the procedure was named " Saxbe fix " after Senator William Saxbe , who was confirmed as Attorney General in 1973 after Congress reduced the office 's salary to the level it had been before Saxbe 's term commenced . The Saxbe fix has subsequently become relevant as a successful — though not universally accepted — solution for appointments by presidents of both parties of sitting members of the United States Congress to the United States Cabinet . Members of Congress have been appointed to federal judgeships without any fix being enacted ; court challenges to such appointments have failed . 
 There were four Saxbe fixes for appointees of presidents prior to Barack Obama . The first two rollbacks concerned appointees of Republicans William Howard Taft and Richard Nixon , and the last two were implemented for appointees of Democrats Jimmy Carter and Bill Clinton . Congress approved two more in the weeks preceding Obama 's presidency in preparation for his designated Cabinet nominees . Since the 1980s , Saxbe fixes have only been temporary , extending to the conclusion of the term for which the sitting member of Congress was elected . The Clause has received relatively little scholarly or judicial attention ; the sparse extant debate centers on whether the reduction of salary satisfies the Ineligibility Clause , or whether affected members of Congress are ineligible for appointment in spite of the reduction . 
 = = Background = = 
 In his notes of the Philadelphia Convention in 1787 , James Madison expressed the fear that members of Congress would create new federal jobs , or increase the salaries for existing jobs , and then take those jobs for themselves . Madison wrote that corrupt legislative actions , in the form of the unnecessary creation of offices and the increase of salaries for personal benefit , were one of his greatest concerns . The delegates who were present agreed that no member of Congress should be eligible to be appointed to an executive position while serving in Congress . Madison originally proposed a one @-@ year length on such a bar . However , Nathaniel Gorham , James Wilson , and Alexander Hamilton wanted no bar at all at the conclusion of congressional service . Eventually , Madison proposed a compromise : " that no office ought to be open to a member , which may be created or augmented while he is in the legislature " ; this led to extensive debate . 
 The delegates eliminated the prohibition on a member of Congress 's assuming holding state office based on the rationale that there might be times when it might be in the best interest of the nation to allow such service . They eliminated the one @-@ year ban because they judged it to be ineffective in protecting the Constitution . Charles Cotesworth Pinckney moved that the states vote and the prohibition carried by vote of 8 states to 3 . Robert Yates noted that the clause " which shall have been created , or the Emoluments whereof shall have been increased " was an amendment passed in his absence , and that he did not place much faith in it as he felt unscrupulous politicians would circumvent it by creating new positions for persons who would subsequently place a member of Congress in a vacancy that they and not Congress created . Madison moved that the phrase " or the Emoluments whereof shall have been augmented by the legislature of the United States , during the time they were members thereof , and for one year thereafter . " This motion failed 2 – 8 , with one state divided . The clause was limited to " civil " offices so as not to restrict military service . Accordingly , the clause was passed in its current form without an explicit time consideration . 
 Article 1 , Section 6 , Clause 2 of the United States Constitution therefore prohibits self @-@ dealing legislation and is intended to protect the " separation of power " of the various branches of government . Corruption such as previously seen in the British Parliament was a consideration during debate by the framers of the Constitution . Legal scholars have accorded this clause little attention in their academic writings and there have been no cases which directly applied the clause , as no plaintiff has been able to establish legal standing . In fact , some general guides to Constitutional research , such as the clause @-@ by @-@ clause The Constitution of the United States : A Guide and Bibliography to Current Scholarly Research , do not discuss the Ineligibility clause . Most scholarly texts on the Constitution ignore the clause . Although the Saxbe fix is named for Nixon nominee William Saxbe , the device 's first intentional use predates him by several decades . As a matter of historical tradition , the Saxbe fix is considered sufficient to remove the disqualification of the Ineligibility Clause . 
 = = History = = 
 The Ineligibility Clause has interfered with appointments as far back as 1793 . President George Washington attempted to appoint William Paterson to the Supreme Court on February 27 , 1793 , after the resignation of Associate Justice Thomas Johnson . However , Paterson , who was serving as Governor of New Jersey , had previously been elected to serve a Senate term that would expire at noon on March 4 , 1793 . Washington withdrew the nomination and withheld it until the afternoon of March 4 , when the term for the disqualifying office had expired . 
 = = = 19th century = = = 
 In 1882 , a formal opinion by the Attorney General concluded that resignation from Congress does not free a member to be appointed to civil office because the Clause speaks to the term for which a member was elected , and that term still exists , even if a member resigns . Therefore , as in the Paterson matter nine decades earlier , Iowa Governor Samuel J. Kirkwood , who had resigned a Senate seat with a term that did not expire until March 1883 , was ineligible for appointment to the position of United States Tariff Commissioner . In 1896 , the Comptroller of the Treasury determined , after the fact , that former Senator Matthew Ransom 's appointment as Minister to Mexico was invalid , as that office 's salary had been increased during Ransom 's term ; the belated discovery precluded Ransom from drawing a salary . 
 The practice of barring members of Congress from serving in other civil offices was not without exception . Ransom , after all , was in fact appointed . In another case , there may have been an inadvertent Saxbe fix . Senator Lot M. Morrill began serving a six @-@ year term in 1871 , and in 1873 , as part of the Salary Grab Act , Congress increased Cabinet officers ' salaries from $ 8 @,@ 000 to $ 10 @,@ 000 ; it repealed the increase in 1874 , and two years later — before the end of his term — Morrill was appointed United States Secretary of the Treasury . The repeal of the " salary grab " was motivated by reaction to public outrage rather than concerns about a member 's eligibility for office , but Acting United States Attorney General Robert Bork would later cite the Morrill case in his opinion about the Saxbe appointment . 
 = = = 20th century = = = 
 In 1909 , President @-@ elect Taft announced his intent to nominate Senator Philander C. Knox to be Secretary of State . Shortly after the announcement , the Clause emerged as a problem that caught those involved by surprise : Knox had been elected to serve a term that would not end until 1911 , and during that term Congress had voted to increase executive branch pay . Members of Congress considered reverting the fix after the appointed nominee had resigned and assumed the post so that Knox would not have to forgo any emoluments . Members of Congress also discussed reverting the salaries of all United States Cabinet members . At the suggestion of the Senate Judiciary Committee , Congress passed a bill reducing only the Secretary of State 's salary to the level it had been at before Knox 's term began , believing this would cure the problem . The Senate passed the bill unanimously , but there was much more opposition in the U.S. House of Representatives , where the same measure failed to get a required two @-@ thirds vote under a motion to suspend the rules and pass , a procedure normally reserved for uncontroversial matters . After a different procedural rule was applied , it passed by a 173 – 115 majority vote and President Roosevelt subsequently signed the bill . On March 4 , the first Saxbe fix became effective when the salary of the Secretary of State ( but not that of other Cabinet members ) was reverted from $ 12 @,@ 000 to $ 8 @,@ 000 . The Senate confirmed all of Taft 's Cabinet appointees on March 5 , and Knox took office on March 6 . 
 In 1922 , the boundaries of the Clause were further defined when Senator William S. Kenyon was allowed to accept an appointment by President Warren G. Harding as circuit judge for the Eighth Circuit . Attorney General Harry M. Daugherty concluded that no disqualifying event had occurred because the increase in emoluments to that office had occurred in a term prior to the one Kenyon was serving at the time of the nomination . ( Daugherty 's opinion would later be reaffirmed by the Clinton administration when Representative Bill Richardson was nominated as U.N. Ambassador . ) No rollback was attempted when Senator Hugo Black was appointed to the Supreme Court , and in Ex parte Levitt , the court rejected , for lack of legal standing , an attempt to prevent Black from taking his seat based on Ineligibility Clause objections . The <unk> in the Black case , Albert Levitt , only had an interest in the case as a United States Citizen and a member of the Supreme Court bar , which the Court found to be insufficient . 
 The Nixon administration skirted the Ineligibility Clause during its first year , when Nixon named Representative Donald Rumsfeld as Director of the Office of Economic Opportunity in 1969 . Although the salary for that office had been increased to $ 42 @,@ 500 during Rumsfeld 's term in Congress , Rumsfeld was not paid a salary for the position . Rather , Rumsfeld was dually employed as Assistant to the President at the same $ 42 @,@ 500 salary , a position presumably outside the scope of the Clause . 
 The rollback device gained its name when President Richard Nixon sought to appoint Senator William Saxbe as Attorney General following the Saturday Night Massacre . Elliot Richardson resigned on October 20 , 1973 and Nixon nominated Saxbe on November 1 . Saxbe was chosen in large part because , despite the confrontations of the ongoing Watergate scandal , Nixon felt the Senate would want to confirm one of their own . Saxbe had been a senator in 1969 when the Congress passed a pay increase from $ 35 @,@ 000 to $ 60 @,@ 000 for Cabinet members . According to 2 U.S.C. § 358 , " After considering the report and recommendations of the Commission submitted under section 357 of this title , the President shall transmit to Congress his recommendations with respect to the exact rates of pay , for offices and positions within the purview of <unk> ( A ) , ( B ) , ( C ) , and ( D ) of section 356 of this title , which the President considers to be fair and reasonable … " The President transmitted " Salary Recommendations For 1969 Increases " to Congress on January 15 , 1969 following the first Commission Report submitted to him under Pub.L. 90 – 206 in December 1968 . ( 34 F.R. 2241 ; 83 Stat . 863 ) . Saxbe had become a Senator on January 3 , 1969 and on February 14 the legislation became law when Congress took no action to veto the proposal that raised the salary of top executive branch officials , the judicial branch and members of Congress . 
 As with the Knox instance , the Clause complication caught both Saxbe and the Nixon administration by surprise after the nomination had been announced . In early November 1973 Nixon requested a reduction in emoluments to pre @-@ 1969 levels as a remedy to the problem . The Senate Judiciary Committee held several days of hearings on how to properly interpret the Ineligibility Clause , with conflicting opinions being given by constitutional law professors about whether the proposed remedy was constitutional . The Senate then acted upon the advice of acting Attorney General Robert Bork that reducing the Attorney General 's salary to its pre @-@ 1969 level by enacting H.R. <unk> ( Pub.L. 93 – 178 ) would cure the ineligibility . S. <unk> passed in the Senate by a 75 – 16 roll @-@ call vote on November 28 after it was approved by the Senate Post Office and Civil Service Committee and sharply criticized by the Senate Judiciary Committee . 
 Although passage in the House was less controversial than it was in the Senate because the constitutional issues did not dominate consideration , the bill met with other procedural obstacles . At the time , Congress was under siege for what was widely perceived as abuse of members ' franking privileges . In April , the House had approved H.R. <unk> to clarify what was and was not proper use of franking , and the Senate amended the bill on October 11 . The House requested a conference , but the Senate delayed . Supposedly , Senate Post Office and Civil Service Committee Chairman Gale McGee was delaying the franking bill until the Senate @-@ passed post card voter registration bill ( S. 352 ) was put to a House vote . Thus , at first the House inserted franking language in its Saxbe fix bill . On December 3 , it suspended its rules to pass the bill 261 – 129 . The Senate then passed the Saxbe fix bill ( H.R. <unk> ) on December 6 without the franking language . The House agreed to the amended bill on December 7 . On December 10 , Nixon officially submitted the Saxbe nomination . The Judiciary Committee approved Saxbe on December 13 and the full senate confirmed him on December 17 by a 75 – 10 vote . Ten Democratic senators cited constitutional concerns in opposing this move . Senator Robert C. Byrd , who felt the bar was not avoidable by legislation , explained his position at the time : " [ The Clause is ] so clear that it can 't be waived … . We should not delude the American people into thinking a way can be found around the constitutional obstacle . " Saxbe did not resign his Senate seat until January 4 , 1974 , when his wife became eligible for survivor benefits after the completion of his fifth year of service . This delayed his transition to the Cabinet because the Clause expressly prohibits dual service . Saxbe later wrote that although he needed the additional salary he lost ( he was earning $ 42 @,@ 500 per year as a senator ) , he was still willing to serve as Attorney General and would get by financially . His biggest fear was that the fix would be ruled unconstitutional by the Supreme Court several months after he had been in office , and he would have to repay salary already spent . 
 Subsequently , Jimmy Carter became the first Democratic president to use a Saxbe fix when he appointed Senator Edmund Muskie as his Secretary of State . Cyrus Vance had resigned on April 28 , 1980 . ( Ironically , Muskie had been one of the ten senators voting against Saxbe 's confirmation . ) Carter nominated Muskie on April 29 , and the Senate confirmed Muskie on May 7 by a 94 – 2 vote . Unlike the Knox and Saxbe fixes , the salary reduction to allow Muskie 's appointment was temporary , reducing the salary only for the duration of Muskie 's tenure . When Carter appointed Representative Abner Mikva to the D.C. Circuit , a lawsuit challenging the appointment based on Ineligibility Clause objections again failed for lack of standing . 
 Upon the retirement of Supreme Court Justice Lewis F. Powell , Jr. in 1987 , President Ronald Reagan considered appointing Senator Orrin Hatch to fill his seat . But Congress had , during the term which he was still serving , enacted a salary increase for the judiciary . In July 1987 , Bork was nominated instead , although it is not clear how important a role the Ineligibility Clause issue played in the selection . Two months later , Assistant Attorney General Charles J. Cooper rejected the Saxbe fix in a written opinion , concluding that it did not resolve the Ineligibility Clause issue . ( The Bork nomination was rejected by the Senate , and the seat ultimately went to Anthony Kennedy . ) According to Jan Crawford Greenberg , the Justice Department had previously done the same to Senator Hatch the year prior when Hatch put forth his name as a replacement for retiring Chief Justice Warren Burger . According to Greenburg , Michael Carvin used the Ineligibility Clause as a pretext to allow the White House to quietly say no to Hatch . 
 On January 5 , 1993 , S.J.Res. 1 , a bill to reduce the salary of the Treasury Secretary from $ 148 @,@ 400 to $ 99 @,@ 500 ( the pre @-@ 1989 level ) , passed by a voice vote in the Senate and by the House on January 6 . On January 19 , President George H.W. Bush signed a bill enacting a temporary Saxbe fix so that Senator Lloyd Bentsen could move from the Senate to take the job of Treasury Secretary during the newly elected Clinton administration . S.J. RES . 1 ( 1993 ) , which canceled emolument increases for the remainder of Bentsen 's term , a term set to expire at noon on January 3 , 1995 , had been passed by both Houses without objection . However , in a law review article , University of Minnesota Law School Professor Michael Stokes Paulson rejected the Bentsen fix as unconstitutional . In 1994 , President Bill Clinton received approval to use a Saxbe fix to appoint United States Senate Majority Leader George J. Mitchell to the Supreme Court , but Mitchell withdrew his name from consideration for reasons unrelated to his eligibility . 
 = = = 21st century = = = 
 The term " Saxbe fix " reentered the public lexicon in 2008 with the speculation that Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton was President @-@ elect Barack Obama 's preferred nominee to be Secretary of State , fueled by Obama 's confirmation of his intent to nominate Clinton December 1 , 2008 . Clinton 's relevant Senate term began with the seating of the 110th United States Congress on January 3 , 2007 , following her 2006 re @-@ election . During that time , United States Cabinet salaries were increased from $ 186 @,@ 600 to $ 191 @,@ 300 in January 2008 , and to $ 196 @,@ 700 in January 2009 . These pay raises were by executive order in accordance with cost of living adjustment statutes , as noted by legal scholar Eugene Volokh on his blog , The Volokh Conspiracy . Before the January 2009 pay increases , secretaries made $ 191 @,@ 300 compared to Members of Congress who earned $ 169 @,@ 300 . 
 Without a Saxbe fix , Clinton would have been ineligible to serve in the Cabinet until the conclusion of the 112th United States Congress in January 2013 , near the end of Obama 's elected term . The Senate passed Saxbe @-@ fix legislation on December 10 , 2008 , acting by unanimous consent to reduce the Secretary of State 's salary back to its January 1 , 2007 level of $ 186 @,@ 000 , taking effect at 12 : 00 noon on January 20 , 2009 . President George W. Bush signed the resolution into law on December 19 , cancelling all emolument increases made or to be made during Clinton 's Senate term between noon of January 3 , 2007 , and noon of January 3 , 2013 . 
 The conservative advocacy group Judicial Watch announced after the nomination that it believed a Saxbe fix was unconstitutional and that Clinton could not become Secretary of State until 2013 at the earliest . After the Saxbe fix was passed , Judicial Watch said it might seek to halt Clinton 's appointment via litigation . On January 29 , 2009 , a week after Clinton had been sworn into the position , Judicial Watch filed the lawsuit Rodearmel v. Clinton in the United States District Court for the District of Columbia , on behalf of David Rodearmel , a U.S. Foreign Service Officer and State Department employee . The suit claims that Clinton is " constitutionally ineligible " to serve as Secretary of State due to the Ineligibility Clause and that Rodearmel cannot be forced to serve under her , as it would violate the oath he took as a Foreign Service Officer in 1991 to " support and defend " and " bear true faith and allegiance " to the U.S. Constitution . On February 6 , a panel of three judges was appointed to hear the case . On May 20 , the Obama administration Office of Legal Counsel filed an opinion with the district court saying that Clinton 's appointment did not violate the Ineligibility Clause , and that an " on net " view of the Clause " presents an entirely natural interpretation of the [ Constitution 's ] language . " On October 30 , 2009 , the District Court dismissed the case , stating " Because Rodearmel has failed to allege that Clinton has taken any action — much less an action that has aggrieved him — he does not come within the ' zone of interests ' protected by the Secretary of State Emoluments Act . " 
 Senator Ken Salazar , the Secretary of the Interior , also required a Saxbe fix by the 111th United States Congress . Salazar was given a temporary Saxbe fix on January 6 , 2009 as part of S.J.Res. 3 . This resolution rolled back the salary of the Secretary of the Interior to the January 1 , 2005 level , effective January 20 , 2009 . The resolution canceled all emolument increases for this office made or to be made between noon of January 3 , 2005 , and ending at noon of January 3 , 2011 . The bill was sponsored by Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid , was introduced on January 6 , 2009 , and became the first public law enacted by the 111th Congress ( Pub.L. 111 – 1 ) . There are currently three Cabinet members serving who were sitting members of the House or Senate when appointed , two of whom ( Clinton and Salazar ) have required Saxbe fixes . The May 2009 Office of Legal Counsel brief also asserted the constitutionality of Salazar 's appointment . 
 = = Legality = = 
 Over time , the Saxbe fix has become politically uncontroversial . Both Democratic and Republican Presidents have used the fix , and indeed Republican outgoing President George H. W. Bush helped Democratic incoming President Bill Clinton execute the fix by signing it into law on the eve of Clinton 's inauguration . The fixes that have been enacted for Obama 's cabinet have passed in both the House and the Senate without amendment and by unanimous consent . Outgoing Republican President George W. Bush signed the Saxbe fixes for both Hillary Clinton and Ken Salazar into law for the incoming Democratic Obama administration . 
 The constitutionality of the fix has been much debated , however , and the U.S. Supreme Court has never directly ruled on it . Critical review of the clause begins with a study of the terms in the plain language of the clause : " No Senator or Representative shall , during the Time for which he was elected , be appointed to any civil Office under the Authority of the United States , which shall have been created , or the Emoluments whereof shall have been increased during such time .... " All of the terms have been at issue in past controversies and many of the terms have been well @-@ settled . Historically , the excluded class of individuals affected by the clause has not been an issue : all scholars have agreed that the clause refers exclusively to all members of Congress . The clause uses the verb " elected " . If a senator serving under an appointment to fill a vacancy in an unexpired term accepted a nomination to federal office before the expiration of his or her term , this might be an issue . 
 The phrase " During the time for which he was elected " has not been controversial . Justice Joseph Story has expounded in his Commentaries on the Constitution of the United States that the disqualifying event expires at the conclusion of the elected term in which it occurred . This view is commonly accepted . Moreover , Department of Justice memoranda , outlining official opinions by United States Attorney General , hold that " the Ineligibility Clause covers only increases during the term that a Member of Congress is [ or would be ] currently serving " . This principle was applied , for example , to the question of whether President Clinton could appoint Representative Bill Richardson as Ambassador to the United Nations despite a salary increase prior to his current term , and whether President Harding could appoint Senator William Kenyon as a Judge despite the Congressional increase of judicial salaries during his previous term . Opinions issued by the Clinton administration Office of Legal Counsel often presupposed the application of the clause , and conceded that " [ t ] he tradition of interpreting the Clause has been ' formalistic ' rather than ' functional ' " . Another clarification came in 1969 , when newly re @-@ elected Representative Melvin Laird was President @-@ elect Nixon 's choice for Secretary of Defense and Congress was expected to raise the pay of Cabinet members in the new term . Attorney General Ramsey Clark gave an official opinion , which Laird followed , that Laird could be sworn in and serve in the new term from January 3 to January 20 ( when Nixon would take office ) without running afoul of the Clause , as long as he joined the cabinet before the pay raise went into effect . 
 = = = Arguments for its constitutionality = = = 
 One way to interpret the clause is by the <unk> view . As stated by University of North Carolina School of Law professor Michael J. Gerhardt , this is the position that " the critical inquiry is not whether the letter of the law has been broken ( it has ) but rather whether the problem that the clause exists to preclude — conflicts of interest in nominating a member of Congress who has been able to vote himself or herself a raise — has been avoided " . The commonly used term for this spirit of the law argument is " net increases " . According to conservative constitutional law attorney Bruce Fein , " The so @-@ called fix fits the purpose of the clause like a glove . " 
 If the Saxbe fix is a solution for the primary problem of self @-@ dealing , a relevant fact is that Congress has not voted to increase any Cabinet salary or benefits since the 1990s , when it granted that power to the president in the form of an across @-@ the @-@ board cost of living adjustment by executive order . However , the Ineligibility Clause does not distinguish between increases in emoluments by legislation , and increases by executive order . Perhaps the most lenient interpretation of self @-@ dealing was made during the 1973 Saxbe hearings by Duke University School of Law professor William Van <unk> , who argued that the ineligibility clause only applied to new offices created during a congressional term , not to appointments to existing offices . 
 Some scholars think that the phrase " shall have been increased during such time " is ambiguous and allows different interpretations . For instance , it could be interpreted as meaning either " shall have been increased at least once " or " shall have been increased on net " . In the latter case the Saxbe fix would be constitutional . 
 = = = Arguments against its constitutionality = = = 
 Another way to interpret the clause is through the lens of textualism , that is , giving primary consideration to what the law says rather than to its purpose . Most legal scholars who take this view argue that the Saxbe fix does not address the constitutional problem . Because to textualism believers the language of the rule is an absolute prohibition , law professor and textualist Michael Paulsen has said , a " ' fix ' can rescind the salary , ... but it cannot repeal historical events . The emoluments of the office had been increased . The rule specified in the text still controls . " Most textualists agree that the spirit of the Ineligibility Clause would be addressed by a Saxbe fix , but they dispute that a clause 's " spirit " overrides its text . 
 This view is not confined to textualists ; for example , law professors Jack Balkin and Mark Tushnet share it , with Tushnet observing that the Saxbe fix " smacks of clever manipulation " and does not adequately address the issue because " rescinding the increase does not mean that the salary ' shall not have been increased ' ; it simply means that the salary shall have been both increased and reduced during the term . " Some <unk> interpret the Ineligibility Clause as a safeguard against escalation of the size and scope of the federal government and its corresponding budget , in addition to being a safeguard against self @-@ enrichment . They argue that reverting salary increases does not prevent members of congress from engaging in conduct that would bloat the government . 
 Another argument presented during the Saxbe nomination hearings was that the constitutional framers wrote the Ineligibility Clause to prevent Congress from enacting laws to benefit one of its own members . Any Saxbe fix is such a law and should be disallowed based on this fact alone . 
 = = = Challenges = = = 
 Once Congress approves a salary reduction and the nominee is confirmed , legal experts conclude that in practice it is unlikely that an appointment would be successfully challenged in the courts . The most likely claimant would be an individual who has been adversely affected by a discretionary decision under the nominee 's authority — for example someone denied a passport . It is unlikely that anyone would be found to have standing to contest the appointment . The Supreme Court has become less solicitous of standing since retreating from the most expansive level of United States v. <unk> . In particular , it has been unwilling to grant standing for a generalized constitutional injury other than to a plaintiff who is protected by a statute or when a statute grants standing . 
 It has already proven difficult to be recognized as having standing when a fix is not used for a controversial appointment . The courts have dismissed suits contesting the appointments of Justice Hugo Black ( Ex parte Levitt , 302 U.S. 633 ( 1937 ) ) and Judge Abner Mikva ( McClure v. Carter , 454 U.S. 1025 ( 1981 ) ) , each a member of Congress ( Black of the Senate , Mikva of the House of Representatives ) prior to appointment and each appointed without a Saxbe fix , due to failure to establish legal standing . Other than these cases , most attempts to gain standing have been considered frivolous lawsuits brought by fringe groups . 
 = = = Precedents = = = 
 There are several nuances to the Ineligibility Clause that determine the necessity of fixes in specific situations : 
 It applies to those members who have actually taken their seats , not to those who were elected but not yet sworn in . 
 According to Marbury v. Madison , " appointed " means at the moment of nomination for civil office , not at the time of approval . Although Chief Justice John Marshall stated that appointments by the President are completely voluntary , there are restrictions on his statutory authority . For example , the duty to commission officers of the United States is enjoined by the constitution and he must nominate with the advice and consent of the Senate . 
 The bar cannot be evaded by resignation from Congress . In a written opinion of Attorney General Benjamin H. Brewster , the clause applies for the term " for which he was elected , " not the time during which the member actually holds office . 
 According to United States v. Hartwell , " Civil office " is one in which the appointee exercises an authoritative role . It does not apply to temporary , honorific , advisory , or occasional postings . The terms civil office and civil officer are used only once each in the Constitution and civil office is never defined therein . 
 According to McLean v. United States , " Emoluments " means not only salary , but also includes other benefits such as forage and rations . 
 Under Presidents Lyndon B. Johnson and Jimmy Carter , the United States Department of Justice determined that it did not matter when Congress passed legislation increasing the salary for an office , so long as the former member of Congress was nominated before the salary increase went into effect . 
 = Sinclair Scientific = 
 The Sinclair Scientific calculator was a 12 @-@ function , pocket @-@ sized scientific calculator introduced in 1974 , dramatically undercutting in price other calculators available at the time . The Sinclair Scientific Programmable , released a year later , was advertised as the first budget programmable calculator . 
 Significant modifications to the algorithms used meant that a chipset intended for a four @-@ function calculator was able to process scientific functions , but at the cost of reduced speed and accuracy . Compared to contemporary scientific calculators , some functions were slow to execute , and others had limited accuracy or gave the wrong answer , but the cost of the Sinclair was a fraction of the cost of competing calculators . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1972 , Hewlett @-@ Packard launched the HP @-@ 35 , the world 's first handheld scientific calculator . Despite market research suggesting that it was too expensive for there to be any real demand , production went ahead . It cost US $ 395 ( about GB £ 165 ) , but despite the price , over 300 @,@ 000 were sold in the three and a half years for which it was produced . 
 From 1971 Texas Instruments had been making available the building block for a simple calculator on a single chip and the <unk> chipset appeared in a number of Sinclair calculators . Clive Sinclair wanted to design a calculator to compete with the HP @-@ 35 using this series of chips . Despite scepticism about the feasibility of the project from Texas Instruments engineers , Nigel Searle was able to design algorithms that sacrificed some speed and accuracy in order to implement scientific functions on the <unk> variation . 
 The Sinclair Scientific first appeared in a case derived from that of the Sinclair Cambridge , but it was not part of the same range . The initial retail price was GB £ 49 @.@ 95 in the UK , and in the US for US $ 99 @.@ 95 as a kit or US $ 139 @.@ 95 fully assembled . By July 1976 , however , it was possible to purchase one for GB £ 7 . 
 The Sinclair Scientific Programmable was introduced in August 1975 , and was larger than the Sinclair Scientific , at 73 by 155 by 34 millimetres ( 2 @.@ 9 in × 6 @.@ 1 in × 1 @.@ 3 in ) . It was advertised as " the first ... calculator to offer a ... programming facility ... at a price within the reach of the general public , " but was limited by having only 24 program steps . 
 Both the Sinclair Scientific and the Sinclair Scientific Programmable were manufactured in England , like all other Sinclair calculators except the Sinclair President . 
 = = Design = = 
 = = = Sinclair Scientific = = = 
 The HP @-@ 35 used five chips , and had a been developed by twenty engineers at a cost of a million dollars , leading the Texas Instruments engineers to think that Sinclair 's aim to build a scientific calculator around the <unk> chip , which could barely handle four @-@ function arithmetic , was impossible . However , by sacrificing some speed and accuracy , Sinclair used clever algorithms to run scientific operations on a chip with room for just 320 instructions . Constants , rather than being stored in the calculator , were printed under the screen . 
 It displays only in scientific notation , with a five digit mantissa and a two digit exponent , although a sixth digit of the mantissa was stored internally . Because of the way the processor was designed , it uses Reverse Polish notation ( RPN ) for inputting calculations . RPN meant that the difficult implementation of brackets , and the associated recursive logic , was not necessary to implement in the hardware , but the effort was instead offloaded to the user . Instead of an " Equals " button , there is an " Enter " button that tells the calculator when a value has been entered , and then the operators are entered in after the operands . For example , on some devices to evaluate " ( 1 + 2 ) x 3 " , the sequence entered would be " 3 enter 2 enter 1 + x . " The Sinclair Scientific entry procedure is slightly different as it lacks an enter key and has a limited number of internal registers . 
 To fit the program into the 320 words available on the chip , some significant modification was used . By not using regular floating point numbers , which require lots of instructions to keep the decimal point in the right place , some space was freed up . Trigonometric functions were implemented in about 40 instructions , and inverse trigonometric functions are almost 30 more instructions . Logarithms are about 40 instructions , with anti @-@ log about 20 on top of that . The code to normalize and display the computed values are roughly the same in both the TI and Sinclair programs . 
 The design of the algorithms meant that some calculations , such as <unk> , could take up to 15 seconds , whereas the HP @-@ 35 was designed to complete calculations in under a second . Accuracy in scientific functions was also limited to around three digits at most , and there were a number of bugs and limitations . 
 Ken <unk> , an employee of Google , reverse engineered a Sinclair Scientific and built a simulator using the original algorithms . 
 = = = = Assembly kit = = = = 
 The assembly kit consisted of eight groups of components , plus a carry case . The build time was advertised as being around three hours , and required a soldering iron and a pair of cutters . In January 1975 , the kit was available for US $ 49 @.@ 95 , half the price at the time of introduction a year earlier , and in December 1975 it was available for GB £ 9 @.@ 95 , less than a quarter of the introductory price . 
 = = = = Giant Scientific = = = = 
 A version of the Scientific , with all the same functionality , was made to be 30 by 68 centimetres ( 12 in × 27 in ) , and was known as the Giant Scientific . It was powered by 240V AC , and used discrete LEDs for its display . 
 = = = Sinclair Scientific Programmable = = = 
 The Sinclair Scientific Programmable was introduced in 1975 , with the same case as the Sinclair Oxford . It was larger than the Scientific , at 73 by 155 by 34 millimetres ( 2 @.@ 9 in × 6 @.@ 1 in × 1 @.@ 3 in ) , and used a larger <unk> battery , but could also be powered by mains electricity . 
 It had 24 @-@ step programming abilities , which meant it was highly limited for many purposes . It also lacked functions for the natural logarithm and exponential function . Constants used in programs were required to be integers , and the programming was wasteful , with start and end quotes needed to use a constant in a program . 
 However , included with the calculator was a library of over 120 programs that that performed common operations in mathematics , geometry , statistics , finance , physics , electronics , engineering , as well as fluid mechanics and materials science . The full library of standard programs contained over 400 programs in the Sinclair Program Library . 
 = = = Calculations Using the Sinclair Scientific = = = 
 The Sinclair used a slightly different Reverse Polish Notation method ; lacking an enter key , the operation keys enter a number into the appropriate register and the calculation is performed . For example , " ( 1 + 2 ) * 3 " could be calculated as : C 1 + 2 + 3 × to give the result of 9 @.@ 0000 00 ( 9 @.@ 0000 × 100 , or 9 ) . The " C " key performs a clear ; pressing it sets the calculator to a state with zero in the internal registers . Pressing " C " followed by number keys then " + " effectively adds the number entered to the zero and stores it internally to be worked on in subsequent calculations . If the " - " key is pressed instead , the number is subtracted from zero , effectively entering a negative number . 
 All numbers are entered in scientific notation . After entering the mantissa part of the number the " E " exponent key is pressed prior to entering the integer exponent of the number . Respect for the order of operations is placed on the user , and there are no bracket keys . The display shows only five digits , but six digits can be entered . As an example 12 @.@ 3 * ( <unk> + 123 @.@ 456 ) could be entered as C 1 2 3 4 E 2 - 1 2 3 4 5 6 E 2 + 1 2 3 E 1 × for a displayed result of 6 @.@ 8880 <unk> ( representing 6 @.@ 8880 × 10 − 1 , or 0 @.@ <unk> ) . 
 Four constants are printed on the calculator case for easy reference . For converting to and from base 10 logarithms and natural logarithms the natural logarithm of 10 ( 2 @.@ <unk> ) and e ( 2 @.@ 71828 ) are printed on the case . Pi ( 3 @.@ 14159 ) and 57 @.@ 2958 ( 180 / Pi ) are also on the case for trigonometry calculations . There was not enough internal memory to store these constants internally . Angles are computed using radians ; degree values must be converted to radians by dividing by 57 @.@ 2958 . As an example , to calculate 25 sin ( 600 * 0 @.@ 05 ° ) one would enter C 6 E 2 + 0 0 5 × 5 7 2 9 5 8 E 1 ÷ ▲ + 2 5 E 1 × to get a result of 1 @.@ 2500 01 ( representing 12 @.@ 5 which is equal to 25 sin ( 30 ° ) ) . Sine is selected with the combination of the " ▲ " key followed by the " + " key . The " <unk> " ( down ) and " ▲ " ( up ) arrow keys are function select keys . The four operation keys ( " - , + , ÷ and × " ) all have two other function activated by using one of the arrow keys . The function available are Sine , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Tangent , <unk> , Logarithm and <unk> . 
 = Ratanakiri Province = 
 Ratanakiri ( Khmer : <unk> IPA : [ <unk> ̯ ̆ ʔ <unk> <unk> ki <unk> ] " Mountain of Jewels " ) is a province ( <unk> ) of Cambodia located in the remote northeast . It borders the provinces of Mondulkiri to the south and Stung Treng to the west and the countries of Laos and Vietnam to the north and east , respectively . The province extends from the mountains of the Annamite Range in the north , across a hilly plateau between the Tonle San and Tonle Srepok rivers , to tropical deciduous forests in the south . In recent years , logging and mining have scarred Ratanakiri 's environment , long known for its beauty . 
 For over a millennium , Ratanakiri has been occupied by the highland Khmer Loeu people , who are a minority elsewhere in Cambodia . During the region 's early history , its Khmer Loeu inhabitants were exploited as slaves by neighboring empires . The slave trade economy ended during the French colonial era , but a harsh Khmerization campaign after Cambodia 's independence again threatened Khmer Loeu ways of life . The Khmer Rouge built its headquarters in the province in the 1960s , and bombing during the Vietnam War devastated the region . Today , rapid development in the province is altering traditional ways of life . 
 Ratanakiri is sparsely populated ; its 150 @,@ 000 residents make up just over 1 % of the country 's total population . Residents generally live in villages of 20 to 60 families and engage in subsistence shifting agriculture . Ratanakiri is among the least developed provinces of Cambodia . Its infrastructure is poor , and the local government is weak . Health indicators in Ratanakiri are extremely poor ; men 's life expectancy is 39 years , and women 's is 43 years . Education levels are also low , with just under half of the population illiterate . 
 = = History = = 
 Present @-@ day Ratanakiri has been occupied since at least the Stone or Bronze Age , and trade between the region 's highlanders and towns along the Gulf of Thailand dates to at least the 4th century A.D. The region was invaded by <unk> , the Cham , the Khmer , and the Thai during its early history , but no empire ever brought the area under centralized control . From the 13th century or earlier until the 19th century , highland villages were often raided by Khmer , Lao , and Thai slave traders . The region was conquered by local Laotian rulers in the 18th century and then by the Thai in the 19th century . The area was incorporated into French Indochina in 1893 , and colonial rule replaced slave trading . The French built huge rubber plantations , especially in <unk> ( present @-@ day Banlung ) ; indigenous workers were used for construction and rubber harvesting . While under French control , the land comprising present @-@ day Ratanakiri was transferred from Siam ( Thailand ) to Laos and then to Cambodia . Although highland groups initially resisted their colonial rulers , by the end of the colonial era in 1953 they had been subdued . 
 Ratanakiri Province was created in 1959 from land that had been the eastern area of Stung Treng Province . The name Ratanakiri ( <unk> ) is formed from the Khmer words <unk> ( <unk> " gem " from Sanskrit ratna ) and <unk> ( kiri " mountain " from Sanskrit giri ) , describing two features for which the province is known . During the 1950s and 1960s , Norodom Sihanouk instituted a development and Khmerization campaign in northeast Cambodia that was designed to bring villages under government control , limit the influence of insurgents in the area , and " modernize " indigenous communities . Some Khmer Loeu were forcibly moved to the lowlands to be educated in Khmer language and culture , ethnic Khmer from elsewhere in Cambodia were moved into the province , and roads and large rubber plantations were built . After facing harsh working conditions and sometimes involuntary labor on the plantations , many Khmer Loeu left their traditional homes and moved farther from provincial towns . In 1968 , tensions led to an uprising by the <unk> in which several Khmer were killed . The government responded harshly , torching settlements and killing hundreds of villagers . 
 In the 1960s , the ascendant Khmer Rouge forged an alliance with ethnic minorities in Ratanakiri , exploiting Khmer Loeu resentment of the central government . The Communist Party of Kampuchea headquarters was moved to Ratanakiri in 1966 , and hundreds of Khmer Loeu joined <unk> units . During this period , there was also extensive Vietnamese activity in Ratanakiri . Vietnamese communists had operated in Ratanakiri since the 1940s ; at a June 1969 press conference , Sihanouk said that Ratanakiri was " practically North Vietnamese territory " . Between March 1969 and May 1970 , the United States undertook a massive covert bombing campaign in the region , aiming to disrupt sanctuaries for communist Vietnamese troops . Villagers were forced outside of main towns to escape the bombings , foraging for food and living on the run with the Khmer Rouge . In June 1970 , the central government withdrew its troops from Ratanakiri , abandoning the area to Khmer Rouge control . The Khmer Rouge regime , which had not initially been harsh in Ratanakiri , became increasingly oppressive . The Khmer Loeu were forbidden from speaking their native languages or practicing their traditional customs and religion , which were seen as incompatible with communism . Communal living became compulsory , and the province 's few schools were closed . Purges of ethnic minorities increased in frequency , and thousands of refugees fled to Vietnam and Laos . Preliminary studies indicate that bodies accounting for approximately 5 % of Ratanakiri 's residents were deposited in mass graves , a significantly lower rate than elsewhere in Cambodia . 
 After the Vietnamese defeated the Khmer Rouge in 1979 , government policy toward Ratanakiri became one of benign neglect . The Khmer Loeu were permitted to return to their traditional livelihoods , but the government provided little infrastructure in the province . Under the Vietnamese , there was little contact between the provincial government and many local communities . Long after the fall of the Khmer Rouge regime , however , Khmer Rouge rebels remained in the forests of Ratanakiri . Rebels largely surrendered their arms in the 1990s , though attacks along provincial roads continued until 2002 . 
 Ratanakiri 's recent history has been characterized by development and attendant challenges to traditional ways of life . The national government has built roads , encouraged tourism and agriculture , and facilitated rapid immigration of lowland Khmers into Ratanakiri . Road improvements and political stability have increased land prices , and land alienation in Ratanakiri has been a major problem . Despite a 2001 law allowing indigenous communities to obtain collective title to traditional lands , some villages have been left nearly landless . The national government has granted concessions over land traditionally possessed by Ratanakiri 's indigenous peoples , and even land " sales " have often involved bribes to officials , coercion , threats , or misinformation . Following the involvement of several international non @-@ governmental organizations ( NGOs ) , land alienation had decreased in frequency as of 2006 . In the 2000s , Ratanakiri also received hundreds of <unk> ( Montagnard ) refugees fleeing unrest in neighboring Vietnam ; the Cambodian government was criticized for its forcible repatriation of many refugees . 
 = = Geography and climate = = 
 The geography of Ratanakiri Province is diverse , encompassing rolling hills , mountains , plateaus , lowland watersheds , and crater lakes . Two major rivers , Tonle San and Tonle Srepok , flow from east to west across the province . The province is known for its lush forests ; as of 1997 , 70 – 80 % of the province was forested , either with old @-@ growth forest or with secondary forest regrown after shifting cultivation . In the far north of the province are mountains of the Annamite Range ; the area is characterized by dense broadleaf evergreen forests , relatively poor soil , and abundant wildlife . In the highlands between Tonle San and Tonle Srepok , the home of the vast majority of Ratanakiri 's population , a hilly basalt plateau provides fertile red soils . Secondary forests dominate this region . South of the Srepok River is a flat area of tropical deciduous forests . 
 Like other areas of Cambodia , Ratanakiri has a monsoonal climate with a rainy season from June to October , a cool season from November to January , and a hot season from March to May . Ratanakiri tends to be cooler than elsewhere in Cambodia . The average daily high temperature in the province is 34 @.@ 0 ° C ( 93 @.@ 2 ° F ) , and the average daily low temperature is 22 @.@ 1 ° C ( 71 @.@ 8 ° F ) . Annual precipitation is approximately 2 @,@ 200 millimetres ( 87 in ) . Flooding often occurs during the rainy season and has been exacerbated by the recently built <unk> Falls Dam . 
 Ratanakiri has some of the most biologically diverse lowland tropical rainforest and montane forest ecosystems in mainland Southeast Asia . One 1996 survey of two sites in Ratanakiri and one site in neighboring Mondulkiri recorded 44 mammal species , 76 bird species , and 9 reptile species . A 2007 survey of Ratanakiri 's <unk> National Park recorded 30 ant species , 19 katydid species , 37 fish species , 35 reptile species , 26 amphibian species , and 15 mammal species , including several species never before observed . Wildlife in Ratanakiri includes Asian elephants , gaur , and monkeys . Ratanakiri is an important site for the conservation of endangered birds , including the giant ibis and the greater adjutant . The province 's forests contain a wide variety of flora ; one half @-@ hectare forest inventory identified 189 species of trees and 320 species of ground flora and saplings . 
 Nearly half of Ratanakiri has been set aside in protected areas , which include <unk> Wildlife Sanctuary and <unk> National Park . Even these protected areas , however , are subject to illegal logging , poaching , and mineral extraction . Though the province has been known for its relatively pristine environment , recent development has spawned environmental problems . The unspoiled image of the province often conflicts with the reality on the ground : visitors " expecting to find pristine forests teeming with wildlife are increasingly disappointed to find lifeless patches of freshly cut tree stumps " . Land use patterns are changing as population growth has accelerated and agriculture and logging have intensified . Soil erosion is increasing , and microclimates are being altered . Habitat loss and unsustainable hunting have contributed to the province 's decreasing biodiversity . 
 = = Government and administrative divisions = = 
 Government in Ratanakiri is weak , largely due to the province 's remoteness , ethnic diversity , and recent history of Khmer Rouge dominance . The provincial legal framework is poor , and the rule of law is even weaker in Ratanakiri than elsewhere in Cambodia . Furthermore , government services are ineffective and insufficient to meet the needs of the province . The Cambodian government has traditionally accepted substantial support from NGOs in the region . 
 Thon <unk> is the provincial governor . Commune councils in Ratanakiri are composed of 223 members representing the CPP , 30 members representing the Sam Rainsy Party , and 7 members representing the Funcinpec Party . Political scientist Caroline Hughes has suggested that the CPP 's overwhelming dominance in rural areas such as Ratanakiri stems from the central government 's ability to suppress collective action , which in urban areas is offset by international donors and NGOs that provide support for opposition parties . Fifty @-@ one commune council members in Ratanakiri ( 20 % ) are women , and 98 % of Ratanakiri 's government staff was Khmer as of 2006 . Bou Lam , a member of the CPP , represents Ratanakiri in the National Assembly of Cambodia . 
 Village government in Ratanakiri has both traditional and administrative components . Traditional forms of government , namely village elders and other indigenous institutions , are dominant . Members of each village designate one or more community elders to manage village affairs , mediate conflicts , and ensure that villagers follow customary laws , particularly about land and resource use . Elders do not play an autocratic role , and are instead primarily respected advisors and consensus builders . Village elders are generally male , but women also play a role in the management of the community and its resources . A village may also have a village chief , i.e. , a local government person who is appointed by a higher governmental official . The village chief serves as a liaison between the village and outside government officials , but lacks traditional authority . The role of the village chief in village governance may be poorly defined ; in one Kreung village , residents told a researcher that they were " very unclear exactly what the work of the village chief entailed . " 
 The province is subdivided into nine districts , as follows : 
 = = Economy and transportation = = 
 The vast majority of workers in Ratanakiri are employed in agriculture . Most of the indigenous residents of Ratanakiri are subsistence farmers , practicing slash and burn shifting cultivation . ( See Culture below for more information on traditional subsistence practices . ) Many families are beginning to shift production to cash crops such as cashews , mangoes , and tobacco , a trend that has accelerated in recent years . Ratanakiri villagers have traditionally had little contact with the cash economy . Barter exchange remains widespread , and Khmer Loeu villagers tended to visit markets only once per year until quite recently . As of 2005 , monetary income in the province averaged US $ 5 per month per person ; purchased possessions such as motorcycles , televisions , and karaoke sets have become extremely desirable . 
 Larger @-@ scale agriculture occurs on rubber and cashew plantations . Other economic activities in the province include gem mining and commercial logging . The most abundant gem in Ratanakiri is blue zircon . Small quantities of amethyst , <unk> , and black opal are also produced . Gems are generally mined using traditional methods , with individuals digging holes and tunnels and manually removing the gems ; recently , however , commercial mining operations have been moving into the province . Logging , particularly illegal logging , has been a problem both for environmental reasons and because of land alienation . This illegal logging has been undertaken by the Cambodian military and by Vietnamese loggers . In 1997 , an estimated 300 @,@ 000 cubic meters of logs were exported illegally from Ratanakiri to Vietnam , compared to a legal limit of 36 @,@ 000 cubic meters . John Dennis , a researcher for the Asian Development Bank , described the logging in Ratanakiri as a " human rights emergency " . 
 Ratanakiri 's tourist industry has rapidly expanded in recent years : visits to the province increased from 6 @,@ 000 in 2002 to 105 @,@ 000 in 2008 and 118 @,@ 000 in 2011 . The region 's tourism development strategy focuses on encouraging ecotourism . Increasing tourism in Ratanakiri has been problematic because local communities receive very little income from tourism and because guides sometimes bring tourists to villages without residents ' consent , disrupting traditional ways of life . A few initiatives have sought to address these issues : a provincial tourism steering committee aims to ensure that tourism is non @-@ destructive , and some programs provide English and tourism skills to indigenous people . 
 Ox @-@ cart and motorcycle are common means of transportation in Ratanakiri . The provincial road system is better than in some parts of the country , but remains in somewhat bad condition . National Road 78 between Banlung and the Vietnam border was built between 2007 and 2010 ; the road was expected to increase trade between Cambodia and Vietnam . There is a small airport in Banlung , but commercial flights to Ratanakiri have long been discontinued . 
 = = Demographics and towns = = 
 As of 2013 , Ratanakiri Province had a population of approximately 184 @,@ 000 . Its population nearly doubled between 1998 and 2013 , largely due to internal migration . In 2013 , Ratanakiri made up 1 @.@ 3 % of Cambodia 's total population ; its population density of 17 @.@ 0 residents per square kilometer was just over one fifth the national average . About 70 % of the province 's population lives in the highlands ; of the other 30 % , approximately half live in more urbanized towns , and half live along rivers and in the lowlands , where they practice wetland rice cultivation and engage in market activities . Banlung , the provincial capital located in the central highlands , is by far the province 's largest town , with a population of approximately 25 @,@ 000 . Other significant towns include <unk> Sai in the north and <unk> in the south , with populations of 2 @,@ 000 and 3 @,@ 000 respectively . 
 In 2013 , 37 % of Ratanakiri residents were under age 15 , 52 % were age 15 to 49 , 7 % were age 50 to 64 , and 3 % were aged 65 or older ; 49 @.@ 7 % of residents were male , and 50 @.@ 3 % were female . Each household had an average of 4 @.@ 9 members , and most households ( 85 @.@ 6 % ) were headed by men . 
 While highland peoples have inhabited Ratanakiri for well over a millennium , lowland peoples have migrated to the province in the last 200 years . As of 2013 , various highland groups collectively called Khmer Loeu made up approximately half of Ratanakiri 's population , ethnic Khmers made up 36 % , and ethnic Lao made up 10 % . Within the Khmer Loeu population , 35 % were <unk> as of 1998 , 24 % were <unk> , 23 % were Kreung , 11 % were <unk> , 3 % were <unk> , and 3 % were <unk> , with other groups making up the remaining one percent . There are also very small Vietnamese , Cham , and Chinese minorities . Though the official language of Ratanakiri ( like all of Cambodia ) is Khmer , each indigenous group speaks its own language . Less than 10 % of Ratanakiri 's indigenous population can speak Khmer fluently . 
 = = Health , education , and development = = 
 Health indicators in Ratanakiri are the worst in Cambodia . Life expectancy is 39 years for men and 43 years for women . Malaria , tuberculosis , intestinal parasites , cholera , diarrhea , and vaccine @-@ preventable diseases are endemic . Ratanakiri has very high rates of maternal and child mortality ; in Ratanakiri and neighboring Mondulkiri ( whose figures were combined in the most recent survey ) , over 10 % of children die before the age of five . Ratanakiri also has the country 's highest rates of severe malnutrition . Ratanakiri residents ' poor health can be attributed to a variety of factors , including poverty , remoteness of villages , poor quality medical services , and language and cultural barriers that prevent Khmer Loeu from obtaining medical care . The province has one referral hospital , 10 health centers , and 17 health posts . Medical equipment and supplies are minimal , and most health facilities are staffed by nurses or midwives , who are often poorly trained and irregularly paid . 
 As of 1998 , Ratanakiri had 76 primary schools , one junior high school , and one high school . Education levels , particularly among Khmer Loeu , are very low . A 2002 survey of residents in six villages found that fewer than 10 % of respondents had attended any primary school . Access to education is limited because of the expense of books , distance to schools , children 's need to contribute to their families ' livelihood , frequent absence of teachers , and instruction that is culturally inappropriate and in a language foreign to most students . Only 55 % of Ratanakiri adults were literate as of 2013 ( compared to 80 % in Cambodia overall ) . Bilingual education initiatives , in which students begin instruction in native languages and gradually transition to instruction in Khmer , began in Ratanakiri in 2002 and appear to have been successful . The programs aim to make education more accessible to speakers of indigenous languages , as well as to give Khmer Loeu access to national political and economic affairs by providing Khmer language skills . 
 Ratanakiri is one of the least developed provinces in Cambodia . As of 2013 , the average home had 1 @.@ 9 rooms , and only 14 @.@ 9 % of buildings in the province had permanent roofs , walls , and flooring . Relatively few households ( 27 @.@ 8 % ) had toilet facilities . The largest share of households ( 38 @.@ 0 % ) obtained water from springs , streams , ponds , or rain ; much of the remainder obtained water from protected ( 23 @.@ 9 % ) or unprotected ( 15 @.@ 1 % ) dug wells . Only 21 @.@ 6 % of Ratanakiri residents obtained water from sources that are considered safe ( purchased water , piped water , or tube / piped wells ) . Household water sources were within the home for 28 @.@ 0 % of households , near the home for 39 @.@ 1 % , and away from the home for 32 @.@ 9 % . The most common source of light was battery power ( 39 @.@ 5 % ) , followed by government @-@ provided power ( 25 @.@ 5 % ) , and kerosene ( 16 @.@ 5 % ) . Most households ( 85 % ) used firewood as the main fuel for cooking . A variety of NGOs , including Oxfam and Health Unlimited , work to improve health and living conditions in the province . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Khmer Loeu typically practice subsistence slash and burn shifting cultivation in small villages of between 20 and 60 nuclear families . Each village collectively owns and governs a forest territory whose boundaries are known though not marked . Within this land , each family is allocated , on average , 1 – 2 hectares ( 2 @.@ 5 – 5 acres ) of actively cultivated land and 5 – 6 hectares ( 12 @.@ 5 – 15 acres ) of fallow land . The ecologically sustainable cultivation cycle practiced by the Khmer Loeu generally lasts 10 to 15 years . Villagers supplement their agricultural livelihood with low @-@ intensity hunting , fishing , and gathering over a large area . 
 Khmer Loeu diets in Ratanakiri are largely dictated by the food that is available for harvesting or gathering . Numerous food taboos also limit food choice , particularly among pregnant women , children , and the sick . The primary staple grain is rice , though most families experience rice shortages during the six months before harvest time . Some families have begun to plant maize to alleviate this problem ; other sources of grain include potatoes , cassava , and taro . Most Khmer Loeu diets are low in protein , which is limited in availability . Wild game and fish are major protein sources , and smaller animals such as rats , wild chickens , and insects are also sometimes eaten . Domestic animals such as pigs , cows , and buffaloes are only eaten when sacrifices are made . In the rainy season , many varieties of vegetables and leaves are gathered from the forest . ( Vegetables are generally not cultivated . ) Commonly eaten fruits include bananas , jackfruit , papayas , and mangoes . 
 Houses in rural Ratanakiri are made from bamboo , rattan , wood , <unk> , and <unk> leaves , all of which are collected from nearby forests ; they typically last for around three years . Village spatial organization varies by ethnic group . Kreung villages are constructed in a circular manner , with houses facing inwards toward a central meeting house . In <unk> villages , vast longhouses are inhabited by all extended families , with the inner house divided into smaller compartments . <unk> villages may follow either pattern . 
 Nearly all Khmer Loeu are animist , and their cosmologies are intertwined with the natural world . Some forests are believed to be inhabited by local spirits , and local taboos forbid cutting in those areas . Within spirit forests , certain natural features such as rock formations , waterfalls , pools , and vegetation are sacred . Major sacrificial festivals in Ratanakiri occur during March and April , when fields are selected and prepared for the new planting season . Christian missionaries are present in the province , and some Khmer Loeu have converted to Christianity . The region 's ethnic Khmer are Buddhist . There is also a small Muslim community , consisting mainly of ethnic Cham . 
 Because of the province 's high prevalence of malaria and its distance from regional centers , Ratanakiri was isolated from Western influences until the late 20th century . Major cultural shifts have occurred in recent years however , particularly in villages near roads and district towns ; these changes have been attributed to contact with internal immigrants , government officials , and NGO workers . Clothing and diets are becoming more standardized , and traditional music is being displaced by Khmer music . Many villagers have also observed a loss of respect for elders and a growing divide between the young and the old . Young people have begun to refuse to abide by traditional rules and have stopped believing in spirits . 
 = Carl Berners plass ( station ) = 
 Carl Berners plass is an underground rapid transit station located on the Grorud Line of the Oslo Metro , and a tram stop on the Sinsen Line of the Oslo Tramway . The square also has a bus stop for lines 20 , 21 , 31 , 33 and 57 . Located at Grünerløkka in Oslo , Norway , the area has a mixture of apartment buildings and small businesses . The station is the first metro station on the Grorud Line after it branches off from the shared Common Tunnel . North of the station , the Ring Line branches off from the Grorud Line . The station is served by lines 5 and 6 of the metro and Line 17 of the tramway , with eight and four hourly departures during regular hours . The tram operates every 10 minutes during regular hours . 
 The square was taken into use as a tram stop on 1 February 1923 . The station took the name after the square , which is again named for the 18th and early 19th @-@ century politician Carl Berner . From 6 February 1949 , Line 20 of the Oslo trolleybus started serving the square . From 2 January 1955 , the Rodeløkka Line of the tramway was rerouted to run via Carl Berners plass , although it was closed again on 1961 . The underground metro station opened on 16 October 1966 , and the trolleybus service was replaced by diesel buses in 1968 . From 20 August 2006 , the metro station also started serving the Ring Line ( Line 6 ) . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 Carl Berners plass is a combined metro , tram and bus station located at the square Carl Berners plass , from which it takes its name . The underground station is actually located a couple of hundred meters off the square , with ground @-@ level entrances on either side of the heavily trafficked <unk> as that road ascends from the square towards the east . The underground metro station is on the Grorud Line , and is located 3 @.@ 3 kilometers ( 2 @.@ 1 mi ) from Stortinget in the city center . The tracks are 50 @.@ 3 meters ( 165 ft ) above sea level . The area around the station is mostly dense residential and small businesses . South of the station is Tøyen Park . 
 = = Service = = 
 The rapid transit station is served by lines 5 and 6 of the Oslo Metro . The lines have a 7 @.@ 5 and 15 @-@ minute headway respectively during the day , with reduced frequency in the late evenings . Heading south towards the city center , both lines operate through the Common Tunnel — Line 5 continues along the Ring Line and Line 6 along the Kolsås Line . Northwards , the line splits with Line 6 continuing to Sinsen and the Ring Line , while Line 5 continues to Hasle and the Grorud Line . The metro is operated by Oslo T @-@ banedrift on contract with Ruter . 
 The tram stop is served by Line 17 of the Oslo Tramway . It has a ten @-@ minute headway during the day , with half the frequency during evenings and in the weekends . Travel time to Jernbanetorget in the city center is nine minutes , while it is five minutes northwards to Grefsen Station . The service is provided using SL95 trams operated by Oslo Sporvognsdrift on contract with Ruter . Carl Berners plass is one of eight transfer points between the tramway and the metro . 
 The bus stop serves three full @-@ time services , no . 20 , 21 and 31 , and two reduced @-@ time services , no . 33 and 57 . The latter serves as a shuttle bus to the Løren area . The bus services are operated by private contractors on contract with Ruter . 
 = = History = = 
 Carl Berners plass became a public transport station on 1 February 1923 , when the then single @-@ track Sinsen Line of the tramway opened as a branch of the Rodeløkka Line . The station took its name from the square it was located at , Carl Berners plass , which is again named for the politician Carl Berner . The station was served by the newly created Line 13 that operated through the city center and ran every twelve minutes , and since 29 June 1924 every fifteen minutes . The line was built by Kristiania <unk> , but they were taken over by the municipality in 1924 , and the line became part of Oslo Sporveier . On 28 June 1938 , the line was rebuilt to double track . From 19 December 1939 , the line was extended along Trondheimsveien to Sinsen ; this section was built with double track . In 1948 , the tracks at Carl Berners plass was rebuilt to run through the roundabouts at both ends of the square . The station was served by various services numbers along the Sinsen Line , including 1 , 3 , 7 , 13 and 17 , although not all at the same time . At the most , three services operated to the station , giving a five @-@ minute headway . 
