 On 6 February 1949 , Oslo trolleybus lines were installed to cross the tram lines at Carl Berners plass to allow Line 20 to be electrically operated . The original Rodeløkka Line was closed in 1949 , but new branch line to Rodeløkka was opened on 2 January 1955 , because the tram gave lower operating costs than the bus . The line ran from Carl Berners plass down <unk> . From 1959 , the Rodeløkka Line was reduced to a rush @-@ hour only service and was terminated on 23 April 1961 . The tracks were removed from 1962 to 1964 . The metro station at Carl Berners plass was opened along with the Grorud Line on 16 October 1966 . The metro station was designed by Per <unk> . In 1968 , the trolleybus lines were removed from Carl Berners plass and Line 20 to a diesel service . 
 The Sinsen Line was among those proposed for closure in 2002 when the tram company attempted to save money by transferring the traffic to buses . A city grant of 25 million Norwegian krone ( NOK ) saved the line along with several others . The metro station was for many years in bad need of rehabilitation , with dim lighting at the platforms , grimy walls , and broken roof tiles leaving piping and wiring exposed . Architect <unk> <unk> , who was in charge of the renewal project , compared the station to the scenery of a horror movie . The 2006 renovation involved making the station brighter lit , and a new entrance was built which attempted to make the station more visible from outside . Upgrading of the station included letting parts of sculpture exhibitions by the Norwegian <unk> Society be placed inside the station area . From 20 August 2006 , Carl Berners plass also started serving the Ring Line of the metro . The line branches off from the Grorud Line north of Carl Berners plass , and the station thereby became the transfer station between the Ring Line and the Grorud Line . From 2008 , the square itself was rebuilt to become more pedestrian @-@ friendly . 
 = Burney Relief = 
 The Burney Relief ( also known as the Queen of the Night relief ) is a Mesopotamian terracotta plaque in high relief of the Isin @-@ <unk> or Old @-@ Babylonian period , depicting a winged , nude , goddess @-@ like figure with bird 's talons , flanked by owls , and perched upon two lions . The relief is displayed in the British Museum in London , which has dated it between 1800 and 1750 BCE . It originates from southern Iraq , but the exact find @-@ site is unknown . Apart from its distinctive iconography , the piece is noted for its high relief and relatively large size , which suggest that it was used as a cult relief , making it a very rare survival from the period . However , whether it represents Lilitu , Inanna / Ishtar , or Ereshkigal , is under debate . The authenticity of the object has been questioned from its first appearance in the 1930s , but opinion has generally moved in its favour over the subsequent decades . 
 = = Provenance = = 
 Initially in the possession of a Syrian dealer , who may have acquired the plaque in southern Iraq in 1924 , the relief was deposited at the British Museum in London and analysed by Dr. H.J. <unk> in 1933 . However , the Museum declined to purchase it in 1935 , whereupon the plaque passed to the London antique dealer Sidney Burney ; it subsequently became known as the " Burney Relief " . The relief was first brought to public attention with a full @-@ page reproduction in The Illustrated London News , in 1936 . From Burney , it passed to the collection of Norman Colville , after whose death it was acquired at auction by the Japanese collector Goro Sakamoto . British authorities , however , denied him an export licence . The piece was loaned to the British Museum for display between 1980 and 1991 , and in 2003 the relief was purchased by the Museum for the sum of £ 1 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 as part of its 250th anniversary celebrations . The Museum also renamed the plaque the " Queen of the Night Relief " . Since then , the object has toured museums around Britain . 
 Unfortunately , its original provenance remains unknown . The relief was not archaeologically excavated , and thus we have no further information where it came from , or in which context it was discovered . An interpretation of the relief thus relies on stylistic comparisons with other objects for which the date and place of origin have been established , on an analysis of the iconography , and on the interpretation of textual sources from Mesopotamian mythology and religion . 
 = = Description = = 
 Detailed descriptions were published by Henri Frankfort ( 1936 ) , by Pauline Albenda ( 2005 ) , and in a monograph by Dominique Collon , curator at the British Museum , where the plaque is now housed . The composition as a whole is unique among works of art from Mesopotamia , even though many elements have interesting counterparts in other images from that time . 
 = = = Physical aspect = = = 
 The relief is a terracotta ( fired clay ) plaque , 50 by 37 centimetres ( 20 in × 15 in ) large , 2 to 3 centimetres ( 0 @.@ 79 to 1 @.@ 18 in ) thick , with the head of the figure projecting 4 @.@ 5 centimetres ( 1 @.@ 8 in ) from the surface . To manufacture the relief , clay with small calcareous inclusions was mixed with chaff ; visible folds and fissures suggest the material was quite stiff when being worked . The British Museum 's Department of Scientific Research reports , " it would seem likely that the whole plaque was moulded " with subsequent modelling of some details and addition of others , such as the rod @-@ and @-@ ring symbols , the tresses of hair and the eyes of the owls . The relief was then burnished and polished , and further details were incised with a pointed tool . Firing burned out the chaff , leaving characteristic voids and the pitted surface we see now ; Curtis and Collon believe the surface would have appeared smoothed by ochre paint in antiquity . 
 In its dimensions , the unique plaque is larger than the mass @-@ produced terracotta plaques – popular art or devotional items – of which many were excavated in house ruins of the Isin @-@ Larsa and Old Babylonian periods . 
 Overall , the relief is in excellent condition . It was originally received in three pieces and some fragments by the British Museum ; after repair , some cracks are still apparent , in particular a triangular piece missing on the right edge , but the main features of the deity and the animals are intact . The figure 's face has damage to its left side , the left side of the nose and the neck region . The headdress has some damage to its front and right hand side , but the overall shape can be inferred from symmetry . Half of the necklace is missing and the symbol of the figure held in her right hand ; the owls ' beaks are lost and a piece of a lion 's tail . A comparison of images from 1936 and 2005 shows that some modern damage has been sustained as well : the right hand side of the crown has now lost its top tier , and at the lower left corner a piece of the mountain patterning has chipped off and the owl has lost its right @-@ side toes . However , in all major aspects , the relief has survived intact for more than 3 @,@ 500 years . 
 Traces of red pigment still remain on the figure 's body that was originally painted red overall . The feathers of her wings and the owls ' feathers were also colored red , alternating with black and white . By Raman spectroscopy the red pigment is identified as red ochre , the black pigment , amorphous carbon ( " lamp black " ) and the white pigment gypsum . Black pigment is also found on the background of the plaque , the hair and eyebrows , and on the lions ' manes . The pubic triangle and the areola appear accentuated with red pigment but were not separately painted black . The lions ' bodies were painted white . The British Museum curators assume that the horns of the headdress and part of the necklace were originally colored yellow , just as they are on a very similar clay figure from Ur . They surmise that the bracelets and rod @-@ and @-@ ring symbols might also have been painted yellow . However , no traces of yellow pigment now remain on the relief . 
 = = = The female figure = = = 
 The nude female figure is realistically sculpted in high @-@ relief . Her eyes , beneath distinct , joined eyebrows , are hollow , presumably to accept some inlaying material – a feature common in stone , alabaster , and bronze sculptures of the time , but not seen in other Mesopotamian clay sculptures . Her full lips are slightly upturned at the corners . She is adorned with a four @-@ tiered headdress of horns , topped by a disk . Her head is framed by two braids of hair , with the bulk of her hair in a bun in the back and two wedge @-@ shaped braids extending onto her breasts . 
 The stylized treatment of her hair could represent a ceremonial wig . She wears a single broad necklace , composed of squares that are structured with horizontal and vertical lines , possibly depicting beads , four to each square . This necklace is virtually identical to the necklace of the god found at Ur , except that the latter 's necklace has three lines to a square . Around both wrists she wears bracelets which appear composed of three rings . Both hands are symmetrically lifted up , palms turned towards the viewer and detailed with visible life- , head- and heart lines , holding two rod @-@ and @-@ ring symbols of which only the one in the left hand is well preserved . Two wings with clearly defined , stylized feathers in three registers extend down from above her shoulders . The feathers in the top register are shown as overlapping scales ( coverts ) , the lower two registers have long , staggered flight feathers that appear drawn with a ruler and end in a convex trailing edge . The feathers have smooth surfaces ; no barbs were drawn . The wings are similar but not entirely symmetrical , differing both in the number of the flight feathers and in the details of the coloring scheme . 
 Her wings are spread to a triangular shape but not fully extended . The breasts are full and high , but without separately modelled nipples . Her body has been sculpted with attention to naturalistic detail : the deep navel , structured abdomen , " softly modeled pubic area " the recurve of the outline of the hips beneath the iliac crest , and the bony structure of the legs with distinct knee caps all suggest " an artistic skill that is almost certainly derived from observed study " . A spur @-@ like protrusion , fold , or tuft extends from her calves just below the knee , which Collon interprets as dewclaws . Below the shin , the figure 's legs change into those of a bird . The bird @-@ feet are detailed , with three long , well @-@ separated toes of approximately equal length . Lines have been scratched into the surface of the ankle and toes to depict the scutes , and all visible toes have prominent talons . Her toes are extended down , without perspective foreshortening ; they do not appear to rest upon a ground line and thus give the figure an impression of being dissociated from the background , as if hovering . 
 = = = The animals and background = = = 
 The two lions have a male mane , patterned with dense , short lines ; the manes continue beneath the body . Distinctly patterned tufts of hair grow from the lion 's ears and on their shoulders , emanating from a central disk @-@ shaped whorl . They lie prone , their heads are sculpted with attention to detail , but with a degree of artistic liberty in their form , e.g. , regarding their rounded shapes . Both lions look towards the viewer , and both have their mouths closed . 
 The owls shown are recognizable , but not sculpted naturalistically : the shape of the beak , the length of the legs , and details of plumage deviate from those of the owls that are indigenous to the region . Their plumage is colored like the deity 's wings in red , black and white ; it is bilaterally similar but not perfectly symmetrical . Both owls have one more feather on the right @-@ hand side of their plumage than on the left @-@ hand side . The legs , feet and talons are red . 
 The group is placed on a pattern of scales , painted black . This is the way mountain ranges were commonly symbolized in Mesopotamian art . 
 = = Context = = 
 = = = Date and place of origin = = = 
 Stylistic comparisons place the relief at the earliest into the Isin – Larsa period , or slightly later , to the beginning of the Old Babylonian period . Frankfort especially notes the stylistic similarity with the sculpted head of a male deity found at Ur , which Collon finds to be " so close to the Queen of the Night in quality , workmanship and iconographical details , that it could well have come from the same workshop . " Therefore , Ur is one possible city of origin for the relief , but not the only one : Edith Porada points out the virtual identity in style that the lion 's tufts of hair have with the same detail seen on two fragments of clay plaques excavated at Nippur . And Agnès <unk> reported on a similar necklace on a fragment found in Isin . 
 = = = Geopolitical context = = = 
 A creation date at the beginning of the second millennium BCE places the relief into a region and time in which the political situation was unsteady , marked by the waxing and waning influence of the city states of Isin and Larsa , an invasion by the Elamites , and finally the conquest by Hammurabi in the unification in the Babylonian empire in 1762 BCE . 
 300 to 500 years earlier , the population for the whole of Mesopotamia was at its all @-@ time high of about 300 @,@ 000 . Elamite invaders then toppled the third Dynasty of Ur and the population declined to about 200 @,@ 000 ; it had stabilized at that number at the time the relief was made . Cities like Nippur and Isin would have had on the order of 20 @,@ 000 inhabitants and Larsa maybe 40 @,@ 000 ; Hammurabi 's Babylon grew to 60 @,@ 000 by 1700 BCE . A well @-@ developed infrastructure and complex division of labour is required to sustain cities of that size . The fabrication of religious imagery might have been done by specialized artisans : large numbers of smaller , devotional plaques have been excavated that were fabricated in molds . 
 Even though the fertile crescent civilizations are considered the oldest in history , at the time the Burney Relief was made other late bronze age civilizations were equally in full bloom . Travel and cultural exchange were not commonplace , but nevertheless possible . To the east , Elam with its capital Susa was in frequent military conflict with Isin , Larsa and later Babylon . Even further , the Indus Valley Civilization was already past its peak , and in China , the <unk> culture blossomed . To the southwest , Egypt was ruled by the 12th dynasty , further to the west the Minoan civilization , centred on Crete with the Old Palace in Knossos , dominated the Mediterranean . To the north of Mesopotamia , the Anatolian Hittites were establishing their Old Kingdom over the Hattians ; they brought an end to Babylon 's empire with the sack of the city in 1531 BCE . Indeed , Collon mentions this raid as possibly being the reason for the damage to the right @-@ hand side of the relief . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 The size of the plaque suggests it would have belonged in a shrine , possibly as an object of worship ; it was probably set into a mud @-@ brick wall . Such a shrine might have been a dedicated space in a large private home or other house , but not the main focus of worship in one of the cities ' temples , which would have contained representations of gods sculpted in the round . Mesopotamian temples at the time had a rectangular cella often with niches to both sides . According to Thorkild Jacobsen , that shrine could have been located inside a brothel ( see below ) . 
 = = = Art history = = = 
 Compared with how important religious practice was in Mesopotamia , and compared to the number of temples that existed , very few cult figures at all have been preserved . This is certainly not due to a lack of artistic skill : the " Ram in a Thicket " ( see image below ) shows how elaborate such sculptures could have been , even 600 to 800 years earlier . It is also not due to a lack of interest in religious sculpture : deities and myths are ubiquitous on cylinder seals and the few steles , <unk> , and reliefs that have been preserved . Rather , it seems plausible that the main figures of worship in temples and shrines were made of materials so valuable they could not escape looting during the many shifts of power that the region saw . The Burney Relief is comparatively plain , and so survived . In fact , the relief is one of only two existing large , figurative representations from the Old Babylonian period . The other one is the top part of the Code of Hammurabi , which was actually discovered in Elamite Susa , where it had been brought as booty ( see image ) . 
 A static , frontal image is typical of religious images intended for worship . Symmetric compositions are common in Mesopotamian art when the context is not narrative . Many examples have been found on cylinder seals . Three @-@ part arrangements of a god and two other figures are common , but five @-@ part arrangements exist as well . In this respect , the relief follows established conventions . In terms of representation , the deity is sculpted with a naturalistic but " modest " nudity , reminiscent of Egyptian goddess sculptures , which are sculpted with a well @-@ defined navel and pubic region but no details ; there , the lower hemline of a dress indicates that some covering is intended , even if it does not conceal . In a typical statue of the genre , <unk> <unk> and two goddesses , Hathor and Bat are shown in human form and sculpted naturalistically , just as in the Burney Relief ; in fact , Hathor has been given the features of Queen <unk> II ( see image and article ) . Depicting an anthropomorphic god as a naturalistic human is an innovative artistic idea that may well have diffused from Egypt to Mesopotamia , just like a number of concepts of religious rites , architecture , the " banquet plaques " , and other artistic innovations previously . In this respect , the Burney Relief shows a clear departure from the schematic style of the worshiping men and women that were found in temples from periods about 500 years earlier ( see image ) . It is also distinct from the next major style in the region : Assyrian art , with its rigid , detailed representations , mostly of scenes of war and hunting ( see image ) . 
 The extraordinary survival of the figure type , though interpretations and cult context shifted over the intervening centuries , is expressed by the cast terracotta funerary figure of the 1st century BCE , from <unk> on the coast of Mysia in Asia Minor , where it was excavated by the French School at Athens , 1883 ; the terracotta is conserved in the Musée du Louvre ( illustrated left ) . 
 Comparisons 
 Compared to visual artworks from the same time , the relief fits quite well with its style of representation and its rich iconography . The images below show earlier , contemporary , and somewhat later examples of woman and goddess depictions . 
 Contemporaries 
 = = = Iconography = = = 
 Mesopotamian religion recognizes literally thousands of deities , and distinct iconographies have been identified for about a dozen . Less frequently , gods are identified by a written label or dedication ; such labels would only have been intended for the literate elites . In creating a religious object , the sculptor was not free to create novel images : the representation of deities , their attributes and context were as much part of the religion as the rituals and the mythology . Indeed , innovation and deviation from an accepted canon could be considered a cultic offense . The large degree of similarity that is found in plaques and seals suggests that detailed iconographies could have been based on famous cult statues ; they established the visual tradition for such derivative works but have now been lost . It appears , though , that the Burney Relief was the product of such a tradition , not its source , since its composition is unique . 
 = = = = Frontal nudity = = = = 
 The frontal presentation of the deity is appropriate for a plaque of worship , since it is not just a " pictorial reference to a god " but " a symbol of his presence " . Since the relief is the only existing plaque intended for worship , we do not know whether this is generally true . But this particular depiction of a goddess represents a specific motif : a nude goddess with wings and bird 's feet . Similar images have been found on a number of plaques , on a vase from Larsa , and on at least one cylinder seal ; they are all from approximately the same time period . In all instances but one , the frontal view , nudity , wings , and the horned crown are features that occur together ; thus , these images are iconographically linked in their representation of a particular goddess . Moreover , examples of this motif are the only existing examples of a nude god or goddess ; all other representations of gods are clothed . The bird 's feet have not always been well preserved , but there are no counter @-@ examples of a nude , winged goddess with human feet . 
 = = = = Horned crown = = = = 
 The horned crown – usually four @-@ tiered – is the most general symbol of a deity in Mesopotamian art . Male and female gods alike wear it . In some instances , " lesser " gods wear crowns with only one pair of horns , but the number of horns is not generally a symbol of " rank " or importance . The form we see here is a style popular in Neo @-@ Sumerian times and later ; earlier representations show horns projecting out from a conical headpiece . 
 = = = = Wings = = = = 
 Winged gods , other mythological creatures , and birds are frequently depicted on cylinder seals and steles from the 3rd millennium all the way to the Assyrians . Both two @-@ winged and four @-@ winged figures are known and the wings are most often extended to the side . Spread wings are part of one type of representation for Ishtar . However , the specific depiction of the hanging wings of the nude goddess may have evolved from what was originally a cape . 
 = = = = Rod and ring symbol = = = = 
 This symbol may depict the measuring tools of a builder or architect or a token representation of these tools . It is frequently depicted on cylinder seals and steles , where it is always held by a god – usually either Shamash , Ishtar , and in later Babylonian images also Marduk – and often extended to a king . 
 = = = = Lions = = = = 
 Lions are chiefly associated with Ishtar or with the male gods Shamash or <unk> . In Mesopotamian art , lions are nearly always depicted with open jaws . H. Frankfort suggests that The Burney Relief shows a modification of the normal canon that is due to the fact that the lions are turned towards the worshipper : the lions might appear inappropriately threatening if their mouths were open . 
 = = = = Owls = = = = 
 No other examples of owls in an iconographic context exist in Mesopotamian art , nor are there textual references that directly associate owls with a particular god or goddess . 
 = = = = Mountains = = = = 
 A god standing on or seated on a pattern of scales is a typical scenery for the depiction of a <unk> . It is associated with gods who have some connection with mountains but not restricted to any one deity in particular . 
 = = Identification = = 
 The figure has initially been identified as a depiction of Ishtar ( Inanna ) but almost immediately other arguments have been put forward : 
 = = = Lilitu = = = 
 The identification of the relief as depicting " Lilith " has become a staple of popular writing on that subject . Raphael Patai ( 1990 ) believes the relief to be the only extant depiction of a Sumerian female demon called <unk> and thus to define <unk> 's iconography . Citations regarding this assertion lead back to Henri Frankfort ( 1936 ) . Frankfort himself based his interpretation of the deity as the demon Lilith on the presence of wings , the birds ' feet and the representation of owls . He cites the Babylonian Epic of Gilgamesh as a source that such " creatures are inhabitants of the land of the dead " . In that text Enkidu 's appearance is partially changed to that of a feathered being , and he is led to the nether world where creatures dwell that are " birdlike , wearing a feather garment " . This passage reflects the Sumerians ' belief in the nether world , and Frankfort cites evidence that Nergal , the ruler of the underworld , is depicted with bird 's feet and wrapped in a feathered gown . 
 However Frankfort did not himself make the identification of the figure with Lilith ; rather he cites Emil Kraeling ( 1937 ) instead . Kraeling believes that the figure " is a superhuman being of a lower order " ; he does not explain exactly why . He then goes on to state " Wings [ ... ] regularly suggest a demon associated with the wind " and " owls may well indicate the nocturnal habits of this female demon " . He excludes Lamashtu and Pazuzu as candidate demons and states : " Perhaps we have here a third representation of a demon . If so , it must be <unk> [ ... ] the demon of an evil wind " , named ki @-@ <unk> @-@ lil @-@ la ( literally " wind @-@ maiden " or " phantom @-@ maiden " , not " beautiful maiden " , as Kraeling asserts ( see below ) ) . This ki @-@ <unk> @-@ lil is an antagonist of Inanna ( Ishtar ) in a brief episode of the epic of Gilgamesh , which is cited by both Kraeling and Frankfort as further evidence for the identification as Lilith , though this appendix too is now disputed . In this episode , Inanna 's holy <unk> tree is invaded by malevolent spirits . Frankfort quotes a preliminary translation by Gadd ( 1933 ) : " in the midst Lilith had built a house , the shrieking maid , the joyful , the bright queen of Heaven " . However modern translations have instead : " In its trunk , the phantom maid built herself a dwelling , the maid who laughs with a joyful heart . But holy Inanna cried . " The earlier translation implies an association of the demon Lilith with a shrieking owl and at the same time asserts her god @-@ like nature ; the modern translation supports neither of these attributes . In fact , Cyril J. Gadd ( 1933 ) , the first translator , writes : " <unk> <unk> ( <unk> @-@ lil ) is never associated with owls in Babylonian mythology " and " the Jewish traditions concerning Lilith in this form seem to be late and of no great authority " . This single line of evidence was taken as virtual proof of the identification of the Burney Relief with " Lilith " may have been motivated by later associations of " Lilith " in later Jewish sources . 
 The association of Lilith with owls in later Jewish literature such as the Songs of the Sage ( 1st century BCE ) and Babylonian Talmud ( 5th century CE ) is derived from a reference to a <unk> among a list of wilderness birds and animals in Isaiah ( 7th century BCE ) , though some scholars , such as Blair ( 2009 ) consider the pre @-@ Talmudic Isaiah reference to be non @-@ supernatural , and this is reflected in some modern Bible translations : 
 Isaiah 34 : 13 Thorns shall grow over its strongholds , nettles and thistles in its fortresses . It shall be the haunt of jackals , an abode for ostriches . 14 And wild animals shall meet with hyenas ; the wild goat shall cry to his fellow ; indeed , there the night bird ( <unk> or <unk> ) settles and finds for herself a resting place . 15 There the owl nests and lays and hatches and gathers her young in her shadow ; indeed , there the hawks are gathered , each one with her mate . ( ESV ) 
 Today , the identification of the Burney Relief with Lilith is questioned , and the figure is now generally identified as the goddess of love and war . 
 = = = Ishtar = = = 
 50 years later , Thorkild Jacobsen substantially revised this interpretation and identified the figure as Inanna ( Akkadian : Ishtar ) in an analysis that is primarily based on textual evidence . According to Jacobsen : 
 The hypothesis that this tablet was created for worship makes it unlikely that a demon was depicted . Demons had no cult in Mesopotamian religious practice since demons " know no food , know no drink , eat no flour offering and drink no libation . " Therefore , " no relationship of giving and taking could be established with them " ; 
 The horned crown is a symbol of divinity , and the fact that it is four @-@ tiered suggests one of the principal gods of the Mesopotamian pantheon ; 
 Inanna was the only goddess that was associated with lions , for example a hymn by En @-@ <unk> @-@ ana specifically mentions " Inanna , seated on crossed ( or harnessed ) lions " 
 The goddess is depicted standing on mountains . According to text sources , Inanna 's home was on Kur @-@ <unk> , the mountain crests . <unk> , other gods were depicted on mountain scales as well , but there are examples in which Inanna is shown on a mountain pattern and another god is not , i.e. the pattern was indeed sometimes used to identify Inanna . ; 
 The rod @-@ and @-@ ring symbol , her necklace and her wig are all attributes that are explicitly referred to in the myth of Inanna 's descent into the nether world . 
 Jacobsen quotes textual evidence that the Akkadian word <unk> ( owl ) corresponds to the Sumerian word ninna , and that the Sumerian <unk> @-@ ninna ( Divine lady ninna ) corresponds to the Akkadian Ishtar . The Sumerian ninna can also be translated as the Akkadian <unk> , which is also a name or epithet for Ishtar . Inanna / Ishtar as harlot or goddess of harlots was a well known theme in Mesopotamian mythology and in one text , Inanna is called kar @-@ kid ( harlot ) and ab @-@ <unk> [ <unk> ] <unk> , which in Akkadian would be rendered <unk> . Thus there appears to be a cluster of metaphors linking prostitute and owl and the goddess Inanna / Ishtar ; this could match the most enigmatic component of the relief to a well known aspect of Ishtar . Jacobsen concludes that this link would be sufficient to explain talons and wings , and adds that nudity could indicate the relief was originally the house @-@ altar of a bordello . 
 = = = Ereshkigal = = = 
 In contrast , the British Museum does acknowledge the possibility that the relief depicts either Lilith or Ishtar , but prefers a third identification : Ishtar 's antagonist and sister Ereshkigal , the goddess of the underworld . This interpretation is based on the fact that the wings are not outspread and that the background of the relief was originally painted black . If this were the correct identification , it would make the relief ( and by implication the smaller plaques of nude , winged goddesses ) the only known figurative representations of Ereshkigal . Edith Porada , the first to propose this identification , associates hanging wings with demons and then states : " If the suggested <unk> of the Burney Relief at Nippur proves to be correct , the imposing demonic figure depicted on it may have to be identified with the female ruler of the dead or with some other major figure of the Old Babylonian pantheon which was occasionally associated with death . " No further supporting evidence was given by Porada , but another analysis published in 2002 comes to the same conclusion . E. von der Osten @-@ Sacken describes evidence for a weakly developed but nevertheless existing cult for Ereshkigal ; she cites aspects of similarity between the goddesses Ishtar and Ereshkigal from textual sources – for example they are called " sisters " in the myth of " Inanna 's descent into the nether world " – and she finally explains the unique doubled rod @-@ and @-@ ring symbol in the following way : " Ereshkigal would be shown here at the peak of her power , when she had taken the divine symbols from her sister and perhaps also her identifying lions " . 
 = = Authenticity = = 
 The 1936 London Illustrated News feature had " no doubt of the authenticity " of the object which had " been subjected to exhaustive chemical examination " and showed traces of bitumen " dried out in a way which is only possible in the course of many centuries " . But stylistic doubts were published only a few months later by D. Opitz who noted the " absolutely unique " nature of the owls with no <unk> in all of Babylonian figurative artefacts . In a back @-@ to @-@ back article , E. Douglas Van Buren examined examples of Sumerian [ sic ] art , which had been excavated and <unk> and she presented examples : Ishtar with two lions , the Louvre plaque ( AO <unk> ) of a nude , bird @-@ footed goddess standing on two <unk> and similar plaques , and even a small haematite owl , although the owl is an isolated piece and not in an iconographical context . 
 A year later Frankfort ( 1937 ) acknowledged Van Buren 's examples , added some of his own and concluded " that the relief is genuine " . Opitz ( 1937 ) concurred with this opinion , but reasserted that the iconography is not consistent with other examples , especially regarding the rod @-@ and @-@ ring symbol . These symbols were the focus of a communication by Pauline Albenda ( 1970 ) who again questioned the relief 's authenticity . Subsequently the British Museum performed thermoluminescence dating which was consistent with the relief being fired in antiquity ; but the method is imprecise when samples of the surrounding soil are not available for estimation of background radiation levels . A rebuttal to Albenda by Curtis and Collon ( 1996 ) published the scientific analysis ; the British Museum was sufficiently convinced of the relief to purchase it in 2003 . The discourse continued however : in her extensive reanalysis of stylistic features , Albenda once again called the relief " a pastiche of artistic features " and " continue [ d ] to be unconvinced of its antiquity " . 
 Her arguments were rebutted in a rejoinder by Collon ( 2007 ) , noting in particular that the whole relief was created in one unit , i.e. there is no possibility that a modern figure or parts of one might have been added to an antique background ; she also reviewed the iconographic links to <unk> pieces . In concluding Collon states : " [ Edith Porada ] believed that , with time , a forgery would look worse and worse , whereas a genuine object would grow better and better . [ ... ] Over the years [ the Queen of the Night ] has indeed grown better and better , and more and more interesting . For me she is a real work of art of the Old Babylonian period . " 
 In 2008 / 9 the relief was included in exhibitions on Babylon at the Pergamon Museum in Berlin , the Louvre in Paris , and the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York . 
 = Southworth House ( Cleveland , Ohio ) = 
 The Southworth House is a Classical Revival and Italianate house in Cleveland , Ohio , United States that was built in 1879 . Named for its first owner , W.P. Southworth , a leading resident of late nineteenth @-@ century Cleveland , the house has been used for a variety of commercial purposes in recent decades . One of many historic sites in its eastside neighborhood , it has been listed on the National Register of Historic Places since 1984 . 
 = = Construction = = 
 The house was built in 1879 by William Palmer Southworth , a Cleveland businessman who established W.P. Southworth Co . , a leading Cleveland grocery , in the 1850s . He and his wife Louise were prominent in Cleveland society ; while she was a leader of the women 's suffrage movement , his store ( located in Public Square downtown ) was significant enough that its destruction by fire in 1882 prompted a front @-@ page story in the New York Times . 
 The house is built on a stone foundation with a basement , with walls of brick ; the architect 's name is not known . Its three floors were divided into nineteen rooms , and by 1904 Southworth had installed an elevator . The elevator remains today . 
 = = After Southworth = = 
 In August 1906 , a group of Cleveland Baptists incorporated an organization , the Baptist Home of Northern Ohio , to establish a retirement home for elderly Baptists . Ten months later , Southworth sold his house to the organization , which was supported financially by industrialist and philanthropist John D. Rockefeller , who was a Baptist . With the aid of local churches , the home was opened on October 16 , 1907 . According to the 1910 census , the Baptist Home served fourteen residents at the end of 1910 , at which time the entire property was worth $ 15 @,@ 000 . The former Southworth residence was not long a retirement home : the Baptist Home moved to a new location in 1919 and sold the Southworth House in the same year . Since that time , the house has been used for a wide range of purposes . 
 During the 1950s and 1960s , various businesses had offices in the house , which was then called the " <unk> Building " or the " Accountants Building . " In 1973 , the Southworth House was purchased by Pi Sigma Tau Alpha , a fraternity based at the nearby Cleveland State University ; it later served as the fraternity house for Cleveland State 's chapter of Delta Sigma Phi . The house has changed hands several times since its fraternity days . In 1997 , a health care company bought it ; in 2005 , after the company was found to be fraudulent and the owner imprisoned , a historic preservation company bought the property at auction , and it too has since sold the house . Currently , the Southworth House is the location of offices for organizations such as an actual health care company and a local of the Laborers ' International Union of North America . 
 = = Preservation = = 
 The Southworth House is recognized as a landmark both locally and nationally . Along with many other properties along Prospect Avenue , it was added to the National Register of Historic Places on November 1 , 1984 as part of the " Upper Prospect Multiple Resource Area . " It was included both for its distinctive combination of Classical Revival and Italianate architecture and for its association with Southworth . As the " Delta Sigma Phi Fraternity House , " it has been designated a Cleveland Landmark by the city of Cleveland . Since being listed on the Register in 1984 , the Southworth House has been the focus of both publicly funded and privately funded historic preservation efforts . In late 1996 , as Sunrise Home Health Care prepared to buy the Southworth House , Cleveland City Council provided over $ 250 @,@ 000 to help purchase and renovate the property . Architects Scott and <unk> <unk> began a restoration of the house for developer Michael Chesler , and continued to guide its restoration when it was purchased by Laborers Union Local 860 in 2005 . The construction workers made it their union hall , completing the work in October 2007 . In October 2009 , the National Trust for Historic Preservation recognized the restoration with its Honor Award . Today , the house features wrought ironwork and a distinctive Italianate facade . 
 = Armed Forces Special Weapons Project = 
 The Armed Forces Special Weapons Project ( AFSWP ) was a United States military agency responsible for those aspects of nuclear weapons remaining under military control after the Manhattan Project was succeeded by the Atomic Energy Commission on 1 January 1947 . These responsibilities included the maintenance , storage , surveillance , security and handling of nuclear weapons , as well as supporting nuclear testing . The AFSWP was a joint organization , staffed by the United States Army , United States Navy and United States Air Force ; its chief was supported by deputies from the other two services . Major General Leslie R. Groves , the former head of the Manhattan Project , was its first chief . 
 The early nuclear weapons were large , complex and cumbersome . They were stored as components rather than complete devices and required expert knowledge to assemble . The short life of their lead @-@ acid batteries and modulated neutron initiators , and the heat generated by the fissile cores , precluded storing them assembled . The large quantity of conventional explosive in each weapon demanded special care be taken in handling . Groves hand @-@ picked a team of regular Army officers , who were trained in the assembly and handling of the weapons . They in turn trained the enlisted soldiers , and the Army teams then trained teams from the Navy and Air Force . 
 As nuclear weapons development proceeded , the weapons became mass @-@ produced , smaller , lighter , and easier to store , handle and maintain . They also required less effort to assemble . The AFSWP gradually shifted its emphasis away from training assembly teams , and became more involved in stockpile management and providing administrative , technical and logistical support . It supported nuclear weapons testing , although after Operation Sandstone in 1948 , this was increasingly in a planning and training capacity rather than a field role . In 1958 , the AFSWP became the Defense Atomic Support Agency ( DASA ) , a field agency of the Department of Defense . 
 = = Origins = = 
 Nuclear weapons were developed during World War II by the Manhattan Project , a major research and development effort led by the United States , with participation from the United Kingdom and Canada . From 1942 to 1946 , it was under the direction of Major General Leslie R. Groves , Jr . , of the US Army Corps of Engineers . It created a network of production facilities , most notably for uranium enrichment at Oak Ridge , Tennessee , plutonium production at Hanford , Washington and weapons research and design at the Los Alamos Laboratory in Los Alamos , New Mexico . The nuclear weapons that were developed were used in the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in August 1945 . 
 After the war ended , the Manhattan Project supported the nuclear weapons testing at Bikini Atoll as part of Operation Crossroads in 1946 . One of Secretary of the Navy James Forrestal 's aides , Lewis Strauss proposed this series of tests to refute " loose talk to the effect that the fleet is obsolete in the face of this new weapon . " The nuclear weapons were handmade devices , and a great deal of work remained to improve their ease of assembly , safety , reliability and storage before they were ready for production . There were also many improvements to their performance that had been suggested or recommended , but that had not been possible under the pressure of wartime development . 
 Groves 's biggest concern was about people . Soldiers and scientists wanted to return to their peacetime pursuits , and there was a danger that wartime knowledge would be lost , leaving no one who knew how to handle and maintain nuclear weapons , much less how to improve the weapons and processes . The military side of the Manhattan Project had relied heavily on reservists , all of whom were eligible for separation . To replace them , Groves asked for fifty West Point graduates from the top ten percent of their classes to man bomb assembly teams at Sandia Base , where the assembly staff and facilities had been moved from Los Alamos and Wendover Field in September and October 1945 . He felt that only such high quality personnel would be able to work with the scientists who were currently doing the job . They were also urgently required for many other jobs in the postwar Army . When General Thomas T. Handy turned down his request , Groves raised the matter with the Chief of Staff of the Army , General of the Army Dwight D. Eisenhower , who similarly did not approve it . Groves then went over his head too , and took it to the Secretary of War , Robert P. Patterson , who agreed with Groves . The personnel manned the <unk> Engineer Battalion ( Special ) , which became a field unit under the Armed Forces Special Weapons Project ( AFSWP ) . 
 Groves hoped that a new , permanent agency would be created to take over the responsibilities of the wartime Manhattan Project in 1945 , but passage of the Atomic Energy Act of 1946 through Congress took much longer than expected , and involved considerable debate about the proper role of the military with respect to the development , production and control of nuclear weapons . The act that was signed by President Harry S. Truman on 1 August 1946 created a civilian agency , the United States Atomic Energy Commission ( AEC ) , to take over the functions and assets of the Manhattan Project , but the commissioners were not appointed until October , and AEC did not assume its role until 1 January 1947 . In the meantime , the Military Appropriation Act of 1946 gave the Manhattan Project $ 72 @.@ 4 million for research and development , and $ 19 million for housing and utilities at Los Alamos and Oak Ridge . 
 The Atomic Energy Act provided for a Military Liaison Committee to advise the AEC on military matters , so Patterson appointed Lieutenant General Lewis H. Brereton , who became chairman , along with Major General Lunsford E. Oliver and Colonel John H. Hinds as Army members of the Military Liaison Committee ; Forrestal appointed Rear Admirals Thorvald A. Solberg , Ralph A. <unk> and William S. Parsons as its naval members . 
 = = Organization = = 
 Chiefs of the Armed Forces Special Weapons Project 
 Patterson asked Groves to create a new agency to take over responsibility for the aspects of nuclear weapons that still remained under the military . It was to be jointly staffed by the Army and Navy , and on 29 January 1947 , Patterson and Forrestal issued a memorandum that formally established the AFSWP . Its chief would be appointed jointly by the Chief of Staff of the Army and the Chief of Naval Operations , along with a deputy from the opposite service . Both would be members of the Military Liaison Committee , because the Atomic Energy Act stipulated that the Military Liaison Committee was the sole military body that dealt with the AEC . In February 1947 , Eisenhower and Chief of Naval Operations Fleet Admiral Chester W. Nimitz appointed Groves as head of the AFSWP , with Parsons as his deputy . Accordingly , Groves was appointed to the Military Liaison Committee , although the newly appointed AEC chairman , David E. Lilienthal , told Patterson that he did not think that it was a good idea , because Groves had run the Manhattan Project by himself for four years , and was not used to having to compromise . 
 Groves and Parsons drafted a proposed organization and charter for the AFSWP , which they sent to Eisenhower and Nimitz for approval in July 1947 . Groves did not get everything that he asked for ; he wanted a status equal to that of a deputy to the Chief of Staff and Chief of Naval Operations , but the most that Eisenhower and Nimitz would allow was a status equal to that of the heads of a technical service , although Groves still reported directly to them . They also characterized his role as a staff post rather than a command , although Groves was already exercising the functions of a commander at Sandia . After the National Security Act of 1947 created an independent Air Force , Groves reported to the Chief of Staff of the Air Force as well , and was given a second deputy chief from the Air Force , Major General Roscoe C. Wilson , who had worked on the Silverplate project during the war . 
 Groves initially established the headquarters of the AFSWP in the old offices of the Manhattan Project on the fifth floor of the New War Department Building in Washington , DC , but on 15 April 1947 it moved to the Pentagon . As AFSWP headquarters expanded , it filled up its original accommodation , and began using office space in other parts of the building , which was not satisfactory from a security point of view . In August 1949 , it moved to 18 @,@ 000 square feet ( 1 @,@ 700 m2 ) of new offices inside the Pentagon . This included space for a soundproof conference room , a darkroom , and vaults where its records and films were stored . 
 The <unk> Engineer Battalion ( Special ) at Sandia was commanded by Colonel Gilbert M. Dorland , and consisted of a headquarters company , a security company ( Company A ) , a bomb assembly company ( Company B ) and a radiological monitoring company ( Company C ) , although Company C was never fully formed . For training purposes , Company B was initially divided into command , electrical , mechanical and nuclear groups , but the intention was to create three integrated 36 @-@ man bomb assembly teams . To free the bomb assembly teams from having to train newcomers , a Technical Training Group ( TTG ) was created under Lieutenant Colonel John A. Ord , a Signal Corps officer with a Doctor of Science degree from Carnegie Institute of Technology who had directed the training of thousands of radar technicians at the Southern Signal Corps School during the war . The battalion was redesignated the 38th Engineer Battalion ( Special ) in April 1947 , and in July it became part of the newly created AFSWP Field Command , under the command of Brigadier General Robert M. Montague . The TTG was soon reporting directly to Montague as well . 
 The first bomb assembly team was formed in August 1947 , followed by a second in December and a third in March 1948 . Experience with assembling the bombs convincingly demonstrated the requirement , in Sandia if not in Washington , for a much larger unit . Groves reluctantly approved a 109 @-@ man special weapons unit , and Montague converted the three lettered companies of the 38th Engineer Battalion into special weapons units . In 1948 , they began training a Navy special weapons unit , as the Navy foresaw delivery of nuclear weapons with its new North American AJ Savage bombers from its Midway @-@ class aircraft carriers . This unit became the 471st Naval Special Weapons Unit on its certification in August 1948 . Two Air Force units were created in September and December 1948 , which became the <unk> and 508th Aviation Squadrons . An additional Army special weapons unit was created in May 1948 , and in December , the 38th Engineer Battalion ( Special ) became the <unk> Special Weapons Group , with all seven special weapons units under its command . The four Army units were then renamed the 111th , <unk> , <unk> and 144th Special Weapons Units . During the late 1940s the Air Force gradually became the major user of nuclear weapons , and by the end of 1949 , it had twelve assembly units , and another three in training , while the Army had only four , and the Navy three , one for each of the three Midway @-@ class carriers . 
 In March 1948 , the Chief of Staff of the Air Force , General Carl Spaatz , proposed that the Air Force take over the AFSWP , on the grounds that the Key West Agreement had given it responsibility for strategic bombing . This would have simplified command of the AFSWP , as it would have been answerable to only one service chief instead of three The Army cautiously supported the proposal , but the Navy was strongly opposed , fearing that the Air Force 's confusion of atomic bombing and strategic bombing would impede or even prevent the Navy from having access to nuclear weapons , which it felt was necessary to accomplish its primary maritime mission . Another series of talks was held at the Naval War College in Newport , Rhode Island , from 20 to 22 August 1948 , which resulted in the Newport Agreement , under which the Navy agreed to drop its opposition to the AFSWP being placed under the Air Force temporarily , in return for the Air Force recognizing the Navy 's requirement for nuclear weapons . When the Air Force moved to make the temporary arrangement permanent in September 1948 , the Army and Navy objected , and the Military Liaison Committee directed that the AFSWP should remain a tri @-@ service organization answerable to the three service chiefs . 
 = = Field operations = = 
 Groves and the wartime director of the Los Alamos Laboratory , Robert Oppenheimer , had begun the move of ordnance functions to Sandia in late 1945 . The laboratory 's ordnance engineering division , known as Z Division , after its first director , Jerrold R. Zacharias , was split between Los Alamos and Sandia . Between March and July 1946 , Z Division relocated to Sandia , except for its mechanical engineering ( Z @-@ 4 ) section , which followed in February 1947 . Z Division worked on improving the mechanical and electrical reliability of the Mark 3 Fat Man bomb , but this work was disrupted by the Crossroads tests . 
 The 1947 nuclear stockpile consisted of nuclear weapons components , not weapons . Meeting with Truman in April 1947 , Lilienthal informed him that not only were there no assembled weapons , but there were only a few sets of components , and no fully trained bomb assembly teams . By August 1946 , Sandia Base held electrical and mechanical assemblies for about 50 Fat Man bombs , but there were only nine fissile cores in storage . The stockpile of cores grew to 13 in 1947 , and 53 in 1948 . Oppenheimer noted that the bombs were " still largely the haywire contraptions that were slapped together in 1945 . " With a half @-@ life of only 140 days , the polonium @-@ beryllium modulated neutron initiators had to be periodically removed from the plutonium pits , tested , and , if necessary , replaced . The cores had to be stored separately from the high explosive blocks that would surround them in the bomb because they generated enough heat to melt the plastic explosive over time . The heat could also affect the cores themselves , provoking a phase transition to a different allotrope of plutonium . They had to be periodically inspected by technicians wearing gloves and respirators . The bomb 's electrical power for its radar fuzes and detonators came from a pair of lead @-@ acid batteries similar to those used in cars . These had to be charged 24 hours before use . After a few days , the bomb had to be partially disassembled so that they could be re @-@ charged ; and three days after that the batteries had to be replaced . 
 The 38th Engineer Battalion 's electrical group studied the batteries , the electrical firing systems and the radar fuzes which detonated the bomb at the required altitude . The mechanical group dealt with the exploding @-@ bridgewire detonators and the explosive lenses . The nuclear group moved to Los Alamos to study the cores and initiators . As part of their training , they attended lectures by Edward Teller , Hans Bethe , Lise Meitner and Enrico Fermi . The electrical and mechanical groups at Sandia , although not the nuclear group , completed their training around the end of October 1946 and spent the next month devising the best methods of assembling a Fat Man , drawing up detailed checklists so that later bomb assembly teams could be trained . They also drew up a proposed table of organization and equipment for an assembly team . It took two weeks for them to assemble their first bomb in December 1946 . 
 Most of 1947 was spent planning for a field exercise in which a bomb team would deploy to a base and assemble weapons under field conditions . A 20 @-@ foot ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) by 100 @-@ foot ( 30 m ) portable building was acquired and outfitted as field workshops that could be loaded onto a C @-@ 54 or C @-@ 97 transport aircraft . In November 1947 , the 38th Engineer Battalion carried out its first major field exercise , Operation Ajax . It drew bomb components , except for fissile cores , from the AEC , and deployed by air to Wendover Field , Utah . This was the home of the 509th Bombardment Group , which was the only unit operating Silverplate B @-@ 29 bombers , and therefore the only B @-@ 29 group capable of delivering nuclear weapons . To simulate operational conditions , they took a roundabout route via New England and Seattle . Over the following ten days , they assembled bombs and flew training missions with them , including a live drop at the Naval Ordnance Test Station at Inyokern , California . 
 This was followed by other exercises . In one exercise in March 1948 , the base personnel successfully fought off an " attack " by 250 paratroopers from Fort Hood , Texas . In another exercise in November 1948 , the 471st Special Weapons Unit flew to Norfolk , Virginia , and practiced bomb assembly on board the Midway @-@ class aircraft carriers . 
 = = Nuclear testing = = 
 In addition to assembly of weapons , the AFSWP supported nuclear weapons testing . For Operation Sandstone in 1948 , Groves ordered Dorland to fill every possible job with his men . He did this so well that Strauss , now an AEC commissioner , became disturbed at the number of AFSWP personnel who were participating , and feared that the Soviet Union might launch a sneak attack on Enewetak to wipe out the nation 's ability to assemble nuclear weapons . The successful testing in Operation Sandstone was a major leap forward . The new Mark 4 nuclear bomb that the AEC began delivering in 1949 was a production design that was much easier to assemble and maintain , and enabled a bomb assembly team to be reduced to just 46 men . Kenneth D. Nichols , the wartime commander of the Manhattan District , now " recommended that we should be thinking in terms of thousands of weapons rather than hundreds . " 
 After Operation Sandstone , only relatively small numbers of AFSWP personnel were involved in nuclear testing . The AFSWP was heavily involved in the planning , preparation and coordination of tests , but it had limited participation in the tests themselves , where the bomb assembly function was usually undertaken by scientists . During Operation Buster @-@ Jangle , AFSWP personnel showed films and gave lectures to 2 @,@ 800 military personnel who had been selected to witness the test , explaining what would occur and the procedures to be followed . This was expanded to cater for the more than 7 @,@ 000 personnel who were involved in Operation <unk> @-@ <unk> in 1953 . 
 = = Custody of nuclear weapons = = 
 When the AEC was formed in 1947 it acquired custody of nuclear components from the Manhattan Project on the understanding that the matter would be reviewed . In November 1947 , the Military Liaison Committee requested that custody of the nuclear stockpile be transferred to the military , but Lilienthal believed that AEC custody of the stockpile was an important aspect of civilian control of nuclear weapons . He was disturbed that the AFSWP had not informed the AEC in advance of Operation Ajax . For his part , Groves suspected that the AEC was not keeping bomb components in the condition in which the military wanted to receive them , and Operation Ajax only confirmed his suspicions . Reviewing the exercise , Montague reported that " under the existing law , with the AEC charged with procurement and custody of all atomic weapons , there was no adequate logistic support for the weapon . " He recommended a larger role for the military , a recommendation with which Groves concurred , but was powerless to implement . 
 Groves retired at the end of February 1948 , and Nichols was designated as his successor with the rank of major general . At the same time , Forrestal , now the Secretary of Defense , reorganized the Military Liaison Committee . A civilian , Donald F. Carpenter , replaced Brereton as chairman , and there were now two members from each of the three services . On 11 March , Truman summoned Lilienthal , Nichols and Secretary of the Army Kenneth C. Royall to his office , and told them that he expected the AFSWP and the AEC to cooperate . 
 Nichols 's position was the same as Groves 's and Montague 's : that nuclear weapons needed to be available in an emergency , and the men who had to use them in battle needed to have experience with their maintenance , storage and handling . Norris Bradbury , who had replaced Oppenheimer as the director of the Los Alamos Laboratory in December 1945 , argued that rapid transfer could be accomplished by improved procedures and that the other difficulties could best be resolved by further development , mostly from the scientists . Forrestal and Carpenter took the matter up with Truman , who issued his decision on 21 July 1948 : " I regard the continued control of all aspects of the atomic energy program , including research , development and the custody of atomic weapons as the proper functions of the civil authorities . " 
 With the outbreak of the Korean War in 1950 , air transport resources were put under great strain , and it was decided to reduce the requirement for it by pre @-@ positioning non @-@ nuclear components at locations in Europe and the Pacific . That way , in an emergency , only the nuclear components would have to be flown out . In June , Truman ordered the transfer of 90 sets of non @-@ nuclear Mark 4 components to the AFSWP for training purposes . In December , he authorized the carriage of non @-@ nuclear components on board the Midway @-@ class carriers . In April 1951 , the AEC released nine Mark 4 weapons to the Air Force in case the Soviet Union intervened in the war in Korea . These were flown to Guam , where they were maintained by the Air Force special weapons unit there . Thus , at the end of 1951 , there were 429 weapons in AEC custody and nine held by the Department of Defense . 
 In the light of this , a new AEC @-@ AFSWP agreement on " Responsibilities of Stockpile Operations " was drawn up in August 1951 , but in December , the Joint Chiefs of Staff began a new push for weapons to be permanently assigned to the armed forces , so as to ensure a greater degree of flexibility and a higher state of readiness . On 20 June 1953 , Eisenhower , now as president , approved the deployment of nuclear components in equal numbers to non @-@ nuclear components , and the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 amended the sections of the old act that gave exclusive custody to the AEC . By 1959 , the nuclear stockpile had grown to 12 @,@ 305 weapons of which 3 @,@ 968 were in AEC custody and the remaining 8 @,@ 337 were held by the Department of Defense . The total yield of the stockpile was now in excess of 19 @,@ 000 megatons of TNT ( 79 @,@ 000 PJ ) . 
 As Bradbury had promised , with research and development , nuclear weapons became smaller , simpler and lighter . They also became easier to store , assemble , test and maintain . Thus , while under Eisenhower 's New Look policy the Armed Forces became more heavily involved with aspects of nuclear weapons than ever , the role of the AFSWP diminished . It began moving away from training assembly teams , which were increasingly not required , as its primary mission , and became more involved in the management of the rapidly growing nuclear stockpile , and providing technical advice and logistical support . In 1953 , the AFSWP Field Command had 10 @,@ 250 personnel . On 16 October 1953 , the Secretary of Defense charged the AFSWP with responsibility for " a centralized system of reporting and accounting to ensure that the current status and location " of all nuclear weapons " will be known at all times " . The Atomic Warfare Status Center was created within the AFSWP to handle this mission . 
 = = Conversion to Defense Atomic Support Agency = = 
 In April 1958 , Eisenhower asked Congress for legislation to overhaul the Department of Defense . Over a decade had passed since the legislation which had established it , and he was concerned about the degree of inter @-@ service rivalry , duplication and mismanagement that was evident in many programs . In ballistic missile development , the Soviet Sputnik program had demonstrated that country 's technological lead over the United States . The Army and Air Force had rival programs , PGM @-@ 19 Jupiter and PGM @-@ 17 Thor respectively , and the additional cost to the taxpayers of developing two systems instead of one was estimated at $ 500 million . 
 The Defense Reorganization Act of 1958 was signed by Eisenhower in August 1958 . It increased the authority of the Secretary of Defense , who was authorized to establish such defense agencies as he thought necessary " to provide for more effective , efficient and economical administration and operation " . The first field agency established under the act was the Defense Atomic Support Agency ( DASA ) , which replaced the AFSWP on 1 May 1959 . The new agency reported to the Secretary of Defense through the Joint Chiefs of Staff , and was given responsibility for the supervision of all Department of Defense nuclear testing , which had hitherto been handled by the individual services . Otherwise , its role and organization remained much the same , and its commander , Rear Admiral Edward N. Parker , remained as its first director . Eisenhower 's proposed nuclear testing moratorium ultimately fundamentally changed DASA 's mission , as nuclear testing was phased out , Cold War tensions eased , and nuclear disarmament became a prospect . 
 = 2001 – 02 Arsenal F.C. season = 
 The 2001 – 02 season was the 104th season of competitive football played by Arsenal . Having ended the previous season as FA Cup finalists and league runners @-@ up to Manchester United , the club went one better in this campaign , by completing the domestic double – their second in four years and third overall . Arsenal won the Premier League by a seven @-@ point margin , were unbeaten away from home and managed the unique feat of scoring in every league game . They lost only three times in the division , all of which at home . At the Millennium Stadium , Arsenal beat Chelsea 2 – 0 to win the 2002 FA Cup Final . In Europe however , they fared poorly as they were eliminated in the second group stage of the UEFA Champions League . 
 In the transfer window , Arsenal sold several fringe players , notably Nelson Vivas to Internazionale and Sylvinho to Celta Vigo ; goalkeeper John Lukic was released following his decision to retire . Goalkeeper Richard Wright was signed as an earmarked understudy to David Seaman , while midfielder Giovanni van Bronckhorst and striker Francis Jeffers were purchased in big money moves from Rangers and Everton respectively . Perhaps the marked signing for Arsenal was the acquisition of defender Sol Campbell , who moved from local rivals Tottenham Hotspur on a free transfer . 
 Manager Arsène Wenger was named Barclaycard Manager of the Year and midfielder Fredrik Ljungberg received the player equivalent – the Barclaycard Player of the Year , in recognition of the team 's achievement . Winger Robert Pirès was given the accolade of being the Football Writers ' Association Footballer of the Year , while Thierry Henry ended the campaign as club and the league 's top goalscorer , the latter for which he was awarded the Premier League Golden Boot . At the end of the season , club captain Tony Adams announced his retirement from football ; he was followed by fellow defender Lee Dixon and club goalkeeping coach Bob Wilson . 
 = = Background = = 
 In the 2000 – 01 season , Arsenal finished second in the Premier League for the third consecutive season – this time ten points behind Manchester United . The title race was as good as over by February , when Arsenal lost 6 – 1 to United at Old Trafford . The season gave priority to cups , with the best chance of ending their three @-@ year wait for a trophy being in the FA Cup ; Arsenal beat Tottenham Hotspur in the semi @-@ finals and met Liverpool in the final . Although they dominated most of the match and went a goal up , they succumbed to two late Michael Owen goals and lost 2 – 1 . 
 = = = Transfers = = = 
 The cup final defeat prompted manager Arsène Wenger to admit new players would be brought in during the transfer window . To fill the seemingly void left by Emmanuel Petit in the centre of midfield , Giovanni van Bronckhorst was signed from Rangers for £ 8 @.@ 5 million . Teenager Francis Jeffers was purchased from Everton in an initial £ 8 million deal . Junichi <unk> and Richard Wright were also recruited , with Nelson Vivas and Sylvinho departing the club . After a protracted transfer saga , which involved him questioning Arsenal 's ambitions and being linked to a move with Manchester United , midfielder Patrick Vieira remained at the club . 
 Perhaps the marked signing of the summer was defender Sol Campbell , who moved from rivals Tottenham Hotspur on a Bosman ruling . The player 's wage demands seemed to have extinguished Arsenal 's chances of signing the player at one point . Campbell was unveiled at a midday news conference on 3 July 2001 , which journalists " presumed had been called to announce goalkeeper Richard Wright 's arrival from Ipswich . " Wenger described Campbell as the " best " , adding : " I felt we could not compete on financial basis with the top clubs but we could give him a football challenge . " 
 = = = = In = = = = 
 = = = = Out = = = = 
 = = Premier League = = 
 = = = August – October = = = 
 Arsenal 's league campaign started on 18 August 2001 , with an away fixture at Middlesbrough . Thierry Henry scored the opening goal in the 43rd minute , before teammate Ray Parlour was sent off in the second half for a second bookable offence . In spite of the man disadvantage , Arsenal was awarded a late penalty which was converted in by Robert Pirès – it was conceded by Ugo Ehiogu for a trip on Ashley Cole , who subsequently was sent off . Substitute Dennis Bergkamp added two goals in two minutes , in what finished a 4 – 0 victory . At home to Leeds United , Arsenal conceded within the half @-@ hour after Ian Harte ’ s " low , left @-@ footed free @-@ kick " beat goalkeeper Seaman . Although Sylvain Wiltord equalised moments after , striker Mark Viduka in the second half collected a pass from Harry Kewell and used his strength to beat Tony Adams and score for the visitors . In spite of an attacking formation change and Leeds going down to nine men , as Danny Mills and Lee Bowyer were dismissed , Arsenal was unable to break down their defence . Goals from Ljungberg , Wiltord , Henry and Kanu against Leicester City moved Arsenal into third place , a point behind joint @-@ leaders Everton and Leeds . 
 The team could only manage a draw against Chelsea on 8 September 2001 , in a game described by The Guardian writer David Lacey as one where " the teams simply battered away at each other until one cracked . " Henry scored the winning goal away to newly promoted outfit Fulham ; the 3 – 1 victory moved Arsenal to the top of the league for the first time in the campaign . Against Bolton Wanderers , Arsenal was held to a 1 – 1 draw after Jeffers goal was cancelled out by Michael Ricketts . A win at Derby County , where Henry scored two goals was followed by an identical scoreline against Southampton at the new St. Mary 's Stadium . At home to Blackburn Rovers , midfielder Keith Gillespie gave the visitors the lead , before Pirès equalised and Bergkamp put Arsenal in front . A mistake by Lauren presented David Dunn the chance to shoot " from 25 yards " and score . Henry 's controlled effort looked to have been the winner for Arsenal , until a pass by Tugay caused goalkeeper Wright to " race out of his goal " – the loose ball was collected by Dunn who shot into the empty net . Although Wenger was disappointed with the manner of the defeat , he saw some encouragement : " What 's positive for everyone is that Manchester United are dropping points as well . But we need to rectify the fact we concede goals at home . " October ended with a draw against Sunderland , where notably former Arsenal player Stefan Schwarz equalised for the home side and Patrick Vieira missed a penalty . 
 = = = November – February = = = 
 Arsenal 's first fixture of November was at home to Charlton Athletic . The team conceded four goals in 20 minutes and blew several chances to " kill the game " , in what was the club 's biggest home defeat in the league under Wenger . An away trip to local rivals Tottenham <unk> became magnified with interest , given it marked the return of Campbell following his move to Arsenal . An 81st @-@ minute goal scored by Pirès put Arsenal into the lead , before a lapse by Wright in goal allowed Gus Poyet ‘ s shot to squirm from his grasp and enter the goalnet . Arsenal then faced league champions Manchester United and in spite of conceding inside 14 minutes through a Paul Scholes ’ strike , Ljungberg equalised for them " with a wonderful chipped finish , following Gary Neville 's wretched error . " Arsenal improved in the second half but scored in unforeseen fashion : United goalkeeper Fabien Barthez passed the ball directly into the feet of Henry , who profited from the error and scored . Five minutes later , Barthez 's failure to grasp the ball presented Henry the chance to score his second , which he did . Both Henry and Wenger defended the opposition goalkeeper , with the former , his international teammate saying : " Of course I was happy to score the goals but it was strange . He 's my good friend and I feel sorry for him ; I would rather have got them another way . " 
 Arsenal beat Ipswich Town on 1 December 2001 to put the club second in the league table . A week later the team played Aston Villa , . Goals from ex @-@ Arsenal midfielder Paul Merson and Steve Stone gave the visitors a deserved lead before Arsenal produced an " enthralling " fight back , capped off by Henry , who scored the winner in stoppage time . The team drew 1 – 1 at West Ham United and lost more ground at the top of the league table following a comprehensive home defeat to Newcastle United . Arsenal began the Christmas period with a fixture against Liverpool and the team were without Vieira , who was suspended . Striker Michael Owen thought he had scored his 100th goal for Liverpool , which was acrobatically cleared off the line by Cole . Vieira 's replacement Giovanni van Bronckhorst was sent off in the 35th minute for a dive but the man disadvantage did not stop Arsenal " catching their opponents on the break " . The team scored the first goal of the match – a penalty , converted by Henry minutes before the interval and " uncharacteristic slackness " by Steven Gerrard allowed Pirès to beat his defender and cross the ball from the left @-@ hand side ; it was met by Ljungberg , who nipped in at the far post to double Arsenal 's lead . Jari Litmanen pulled a goal back for Liverpool but Arsenal hung on to record their first win at Anfield in Wenger 's tenure . On Boxing Day Arsenal recorded a win against Chelsea and two days after , earned three points at home to Middlesbrough , courtesy of a headed winner by Cole . 
 In their first league match of 2002 , Arsenal hosted Liverpool at Highbury . The match brought " little but frustration " for the home side as Liverpool scored an equaliser six minutes after Ljungberg gave Arsenal the lead . More ground was lost and the initiative was handed to Manchester United , following a second successive stalemate in the league , this time away to Leeds on 20 January 2002 . With results going in Arsenal 's favour that midweek however , the club moved second in the table after a 3 – 1 win against Leicester City . Victory away to Blackburn Rovers , where Oleg Luzhny was sent off in the second half and his defensive partner Campbell " provided the sort of display usually described as sterling " , kept Arsenal in @-@ touch of Manchester United . 
 A Jo Tessem equaliser for Southampton earned the visitors a point against Arsenal on 2 February 2002 ; in hindsight this proved to be the last time they dropped points in the league season . Wiltord scored the winning goal against Everton and Arsenal moved back to second place , which was obtained by Liverpool , following a 4 – 1 win at home to Fulham . 
 = = = March – May = = = 
 Arsenal recorded a 2 – 0 win against Newcastle United on 2 March 2002 . The opening goal scored by Bergkamp was described as a " really clever goal " by opposition manager Sir Bobby Robson . The move involved the striker receiving a low pass from Pirès and under pressure from his marker Nikos <unk> , he controlled the ball with one flick and went around before placing the ball into the right @-@ hand corner . Arsenal moved to the top of the table three days after , as they beat Derby County by one goal to nil . They were displaced by Manchester United the following night , albeit with the reigning champions having played a game more . An inspired performance by Pirès against Aston Villa on 17 March 2002 kept a point behind top spot ; the win was followed up by a comprehensive defeat of Sunderland , where all three Arsenal goals were scored in the first half . 
 Henry scored a brace against Charlton Athletic to move Arsenal back to first spot , one clear of Liverpool with a game @-@ in @-@ hand . They then played Tottenham Hotspur on 6 April 2002 and took the lead in the opening half through Ljungberg , via a deflection off goalkeeper Kasey Keller . Teddy Sheringham equalised for Spurs from the penalty spot , before Arsenal was awarded a spot kick when Henry was adjusted to have been fouled by Dean Richards . With Henry receiving treatment and normal penalty takers Edu and Bergkamp substituted , Lauren stepped up to take the responsibility and scored what was the winner . Victory against Ipswich Town and five days later at home against West Ham United , where Ljungberg and Kanu scored meant Arsenal was two wins away from securing the title . The team beat Bolton Wanderers at the Reebok Stadium , which mathematically ruled out Liverpool 's chances of winning the league and meant Manchester United needed to beat Arsenal the following game to have any chance of retaining it . Ruud van Nistelrooy was surprisingly named on the bench for Sir Alex Ferguson 's side , with Arsenal missing Adams and Henry . Having withstood pressure from the home side in the first half , Wiltord scored for Arsenal in the second half , receiving a pass from Ljungberg in the build up . The win secured the double for the second time in four seasons and prompted Wenger to acclaim a " shift of power " in the league . On the final day of the season , Arsenal beat Everton by four goals to three , in a match where defender Lee Dixon and goalkeeping coach Bob Wilson received warm send @-@ offs from the crowd . 
 = = = Match results = = = 
 = = = Classification = = = 
 Source : 
 Rules for classification : 1 ) points ; 2 ) goal difference ; 3 ) number of goals scored ( C ) 
 = Champion ; ( R ) = 
 Relegated ; ( P ) 
 = Promoted ; ( E ) = 
 Eliminated ; ( O ) 
 = Play @-@ off winner ; ( A ) = 
 Advances to a further round . 
 Only applicable when the season is not finished : ( Q ) 
 = Qualified to the phase of tournament indicated ; ( TQ ) = 
 Qualified to tournament , but not yet to the particular phase indicated ; ( RQ ) 
 = Qualified to the relegation tournament indicated ; ( DQ ) = 
 Disqualified from tournament . 
 = = = = Results summary = = = = 
 Source : 
 = = = = Results by round = = = = 
 Source : Ground : A 
 = Away ; H = 
 Home . Result : D 
 = Draw ; L = 
 Loss ; W 
 = Win ; P = 
 Postponed . 
 = = FA Cup = = 
 Arsenal entered the FA Cup in the third round , in which they were drawn to play Watford of the First Division . They took the lead in the eighth minute , where good play by Kanu allowed Henry to round goalkeeper Alec Chamberlain and tap the ball into the net . The lead was doubled two minutes later : Kanu again found Henry , who " unselfishly squared the ball to midfielder Freddie Ljungberg for another tap @-@ in . " Gifton Noel @-@ Williams moments afterwards halved the lead , when Arsenal failed to deal with a corner ; Noel @-@ Williams headed the ball in from a Gary <unk> cross . After squandering numerous chances to increase their lead , Arsenal added a late third and fourth goal from Kanu and Bergkamp before Marcus Gayle scored what was a mere consolation for Watford in stoppage time . Arsenal faced cup holders <unk> the following round , whom they lost to in the 2001 FA Cup Final . A solitary goal scored by Bergkamp in the 27th minute was enough for Arsenal to progress , in a match layered with controversy : Martin Keown , Bergkamp and Liverpool 's Jamie Carragher were sent off in the space of ten minutes – the latter footballer for hurling back a coin at the crowd . Against Gillingham in the fifth round , Arsenal twice had their lead cancelled out , before Adams , making his long awaited return , scored the match @-@ winning goal . 
 Arsenal played league challengers Newcastle United in the sixth round , on 9 March 2002 . The timing of the game , influenced by the television schedulers , angered Wenger , who threatened to field a weakened side , to prioritise on their Champions League progress : " The BBC have put us in this position of playing at <unk> on Saturday night instead of a noon kick @-@ off . I don 't know whether Newcastle would have played the game earlier on the Saturday but what can I do about the BBC ? I feel it 's being very unfair as we are the only side left in all three competitions . " It was the second meeting between both teams in a week , and in spite of Arsenal winning the first fixture and scoring the opener in the cup tie , Newcastle found " new reserves of energy and determination " to draw level and created numerous opportunities to win the game outright . With the game ending in a draw , a replay was scheduled two weeks later . Arsenal won 3 @-@ 0 , but more <unk> lost Pirès , who was carried off and subsequently ruled out for the remainder of the season with medial knee ligament damage . An own goal by Middlesbrough 's Gianluca Festa , from an Henry free @-@ kick in the semi @-@ finals was enough to send Arsenal to their 15th FA Cup final . 
 = = = Final = = = 
 Arsenal contested the final against Chelsea on 4 May 2002 . Wenger recalled Seaman in goal from the previous fixture , in place of Wright while Campbell was paired up with Adams in central defence . For Chelsea , Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink and Graeme Le Saux passed late fitness tests and were named in the first team ; John Terry filled the substitutes bench , having woken up with a virus . Chelsea threatened early with goal efforts from Le Saux and midfielder Frank Lampard , before Bergkamp fashioned the first real chance of the match – he headed the ball over the top , which caught goalkeeper Carlo Cudicini off his line . In the 70th minute Arsenal took the lead : Adams found Wiltord in space , who in turn passed the ball towards Parlour – he kicked " from just beyond the arc " , which flew into the top right corner . Ten minutes after , Ljungberg increased the lead , running from the half @-@ way line and <unk> off a late challenge by Terry to curl the ball past Cudicini . The win meant Arsenal completed one half of an expected double ; Wenger was pleased with the team 's performance , adding : " We were very frustrated last year . We have shown a lot of strength to come back here – beating Liverpool and Newcastle on the way . " 
 = = Football League Cup = = 
 In the third round of the Football League Cup , Arsenal faced Manchester United at Highbury . With both managers making several first team changes to give their younger and fringe players game time , it was Arsenal who came out on top , with Wiltord scoring a hat @-@ trick . A 2 – 0 win against First Division outfit Grimsby Town , who knocked out competition holders Liverpool in the previous round followed , but Arsenal was eliminated in the fifth round , losing 4 – 0 to Blackburn Rovers on 11 December 2001 . Wenger shrugged off the significance of the defeat and suggested that a spot in Europe , given to the winners of the competition , should instead be allocated to the Premier League : " I would give one more place to the championship because it 's more difficult to play in the championship . But , as long as there is a European place at stake , we will play in the competition . " 
 = = UEFA Champions League = = 
 = = = Group stage = = = 
 Arsenal 's qualification into the UEFA Champions League was ensured as league runners @-@ up the previous season . The club were drawn in Group B , along with German opposition Schalke 04 , Panathinaikos of Greece and Spain 's Mallorca . In the opening match against Mallorca on 11 September 2001 , Cole was handed a straight red card , as he was adjudged to have brought down striker Albert Luque in the penalty box . Vicente <unk> scored from the resulting penalty , which proved to be the winning goal , in spite of Wenger making attacking substitutions that threatened to go close . A 3 – 2 victory against Schalke 04 , where Henry scored two goals was followed by a defeat away to Panathinaikos . In the reverse fixture , Arsenal held on to win 2 – 1 and secured their passage to the second group stage with victory over Mallorca . With nothing to play for , Wenger fielded an understrength Arsenal team against Schalke 04 , who " ... produced next to nothing in attack , looked poor in defence and were beaten by the time Sylvain Wiltord scored from Ray Parlour 's cross . " 
 = = = Second group stage = = = 
 First half goals scored by Roy Makaay and Diego Tristan inflicted defeat for Arsenal in their opening group game against Deportivo La Coruña . The team responded with a 3 – 1 win against Italian champions Juventus ; Ljungberg 's second goal of the match and Arsenal 's third involved a " wonderful piece of individual skill " by Bergkamp , as he held off two markers , before twisting and turning to find the Swede . What looked to be a priceless win against Bayer Leverkusen at the <unk> as Arsenal for much of the second half were down to ten men , in fact turned into a draw , as Ulf Kirsten scored in stoppage time to cancel out Pirès 56th @-@ minute goal . In spite of winning the reverse fixture , defeat at home to Deportivo La Coruña and away at Juventus meant Arsenal finished third in the group with seven points . 
 = = Awards = = 
 In recognition of the team 's achievement , Wenger was awarded the Barclaycard Manager of the Year , in addition to being named the League Managers Association Manager of the Year . Ljungberg , who scored in five of Arsenal 's last eight league matches , as well as the second goal in the cup final , was given the Barclaycard Player of the Year accolade . Pirès was named the Football Writers ' Association Footballer of the Year , with five votes separating himself from Ruud van Nistelrooy ; he said it was " a great honour " to receive the award , adding : " Times have been difficult with my injury , but this has given me something to smile about . " 
 For his goal against Newcastle United , Bergkamp received the Goal of the Season award , as voted by viewers of ITV 's The Premiership . Henry earned the Premier League Golden Boot , scoring 24 league goals – one more than van Nistelrooy , while Paul Burgess was named " Premier League Groundsman of the Year " . 
 = = Player statistics = = 
 [ R ] – Reserve team player [ L ] – Out on loan [ S ] – Sold 
 Source : 
 = New York State Route 12E = 
 New York State Route 12E ( NY 12E ) is a state highway located entirely within the northwestern part of Jefferson County in northern New York in the United States . Officially , the southern terminus of NY 12E is at NY 12 in the city of Watertown ; however , its signed terminus is at NY 12F in the village of Brownville . Its northern terminus , both signed and official , is at NY 12 in the village of Clayton . While NY 12 follows a direct north – south routing between Watertown and Clayton , NY 12E diverges westward to follow the shoreline of Lake Ontario . The portion of NY 12E north of its junction with NY 180 is part of the Seaway Trail , a National Scenic Byway . 
 Most of modern NY 12E was originally designated as part of NY 3 in 1924 . NY 3 was moved onto its current alignment east of Watertown as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , at which time its former routing between Watertown and Clayton became NY 12E . From Watertown to Limerick , what is now NY 12E was originally NY 12F . The alignments of the two routes were flipped in the late 1930s . In 1980 , Jefferson County assumed maintenance of NY 12E between the Watertown city line and Brownville as part of a highway maintenance swap between the county and the state . This section is now county @-@ maintained as County Route 190 ( CR 190 ) . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Watertown and Brownville = = = 
 NY 12E begins at the intersection of West Main and Bradley ( NY 12 ) streets in the city of Watertown . It initially proceeds northwest on West Main Street as a four @-@ lane residential and commercial street ; however , it becomes a two @-@ lane divided highway at a CSX Transportation railroad overpass just six blocks from NY 12 . Past the crossing , the road follows the Black River across the city line and into the town of Pamelia , where it becomes co @-@ designated as CR 190 . The highway soon passes under Interstate 81 and narrows to a two @-@ lane undivided road before turning westward into the riverside village of Glen Park . It retains its Main Street name through the community , following a two @-@ lane residential street through the village center and eventually into the adjacent village of Brownville . 
 In Brownville , the route intersects with the northern terminus of Bridge Street ( unsigned NY 971H ) , a short north – south connector leading to NY 12F on the south bank of the Black River . At this point , the CR 190 co @-@ designation ends and maintenance of the route becomes the responsibility of the state . Through Brownville , NY 12E remains a two @-@ lane residential and commercial street , intersecting with the southern terminus of CR 54 ( Brown Boulevard ) near the Brownville Hotel , a National Register of Historic Places @-@ listed ( NRHP ) property . At the western edge of the village , NY 12E passes Brownville Cemetery before leaving for the surrounding town of Brownville and losing the Main Street name . The highway parallels a former railroad right @-@ of @-@ way as it heads through the town of Brownville , becoming a two @-@ lane rural highway and gradually bending northeastward away from the riverbank . 
 About 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) from the center of Brownville , NY 12E intersects with CR 53 ( Cemetery Road ) , an east – west highway linking the state route to the nearby village of Dexter . NY 12E continues on , passing just east of Dexter Cemetery and traversing an undeveloped rural area to reach the hamlet of Limerick . Within the community , it serves mostly residential areas and remains two lanes wide . In the center of the hamlet , the highway intersects with NY 180 , a road leading to Dexter in the south and the Thousand Islands region in the north . Also present at the junction is the Seaway Trail , a National Scenic Byway that enters from the south on NY 180 and exits to the west on NY 12E . NY 12E leaves Limerick after this junction and continues through the town of Brownville , bending slightly to the northeast at a junction with CR 59 ( North Shore Road ) 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) from Limerick at the Brownville – Lyme town line . 
 = = = Lyme and Cape Vincent = = = 
 After this junction , NY 12E crosses <unk> Creek on its way into the village of Chaumont . Here , NY 12E becomes Main Street again as it transitions from a rural highway back to a residential street . In the southern part of Chaumont , the route connects to CR 125 , at which point NY 12E begins to pass by a mix of commercial and residential properties . It crosses over a small creek leading away from Chaumont Bay before turning slightly westward and entering the Chaumont Historic District . Just past the district , the route intersects with CR 179 ( Evans Street ) , formerly part of NY 179 . After this junction , NY 12E crosses over the Chaumont River and leaves the village limits at a junction with CR 8 ( Johnny Cake Road ) . 
 Through the surrounding town of Lyme , NY 12E reverts to a two @-@ lane rural highway as it proceeds west into the hamlet of Herrick Grove , located 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) from Chaumont . Here , the highway heads along a short commercial strip and intersects with the southern terminus of CR 5 ( Depot and Church streets ) off the shore of Chaumont Bay . After leaving Herrick Grove , NY 12E enters the nearby hamlet of Three Mile Bay , which comprises a few homes and a junction with CR 57 ( Carrying Road ) . Past Three Mile Bay , the route makes a gradual bend to the northwest , leaving Lyme for the town of Cape Vincent , where NY 12E intersects with Bedford Corners Road ( former CR 56 ) roughly 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) from the town line . Heading northwest through the rural town , the route crosses over Kents Creek and intersects with CR 4 on its way into the village of Cape Vincent , located at the point where Lake Ontario meets the St. Lawrence River . 
 Inside the village limits , NY 12E becomes known as Market Street . It heads north as a two @-@ lane residential street , passing the NRHP @-@ listed John Borland House on its way to the south bank of the St. Lawrence River . Here , it intersects with Broadway , an east – west village street connecting to CR 6 west of the village . NY 12E turns northeastward on Broadway , passing through the Broadway Historic District and serving the NRHP @-@ listed Vincent <unk> House . Two blocks from Market Street , NY 12E intersects with James Street , which leads to Wolfe Island via Horne 's Ferry . At its north end , the ferry connects to what was once Highway 95 in Ontario , Canada . Past James Street , NY 12E follows Broadway through a commercial area that continues to the eastern village limits . 
 = = = St. Lawrence River corridor = = = 
 Outside of the village of Cape Vincent , NY 12E loses the Broadway moniker , passing St. Vincent of Paul Cemetery and a mobile home park as it runs northeastward along the St. Lawrence River . About 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) from the village , the route passes an intersection with Carleton Drive , which serves a ferry linking Carleton Island to the river 's south bank . After Carleton Drive , the route continues northeast through the town of Cape Vincent , passing another mobile home park and Burnham Point State Park . The route continues on , entering the adjacent hamlets of Sunnybank and <unk> Bay . In the latter , NY 12E intersects with CR 7 , a riverside highway serving a small community located between the river and NY 12E . 
 At the northern end of <unk> Bay , CR 7 merges back into NY 12E , and the latter highway continues along the St. Lawrence River through the northern reaches of the town . Not far from the eastern town line , the route intersects with CR 9 ( Sand Bay Road ) and passes the Cape Vincent Correctional Facility and Cedar Point State Park , located on opposite sides of the highway . After the correctional facility , NY 12E crosses into the town of Clayton , where the route remains a two @-@ lane rural riverside highway . Roughly 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) into the town , the route bends slightly to the east and intersects with the northern terminus of CR 4 ( Fish Pond Road ) , which intersected NY 12E back in the town of Cape Vincent . 
 Past the junction with CR 4 , NY 12E bends back to the northeast , passing more riverside residences and a handful of farms before entering the village of Clayton . In the village , NY 12E becomes known as State Street as it crosses over an inlet from the St. Lawrence River . The bridge over the waterway brings the route into Clayton 's downtown portion , where it intersects with NY 12 ( James Street ) . This intersection serves as the northern terminus of NY 12E , as State Street continues northeastward as part of NY 12 . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1924 , NY 3 was assigned to the New York portion of the Theodore Roosevelt International Highway , an auto trail that extended from Portland , Maine , to Portland , Oregon . In New York , it connected North Tonawanda ( near Niagara Falls ) in the west to Plattsburgh in the east via Rochester and Watertown . In Jefferson County , the trail and NY 3 entered Watertown on modern U.S. Route 11 and exited on what is now NY 12F . At Dexter , NY 3 turned north to follow current NY 180 and NY 12E to Clayton , where it continued eastward on modern NY 12 . 
 In the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , NY 3 was rerouted to exit Watertown to the east on its modern alignment . The former alignment of NY 3 from Watertown to Clayton was redesignated as NY 12E . At the same time , an alternate route of NY 12E extending from the modern junction of NY 12E and NY 180 to downtown Watertown along the northern bank of the Black River was designated as NY 12F . The alignments of NY 12E and NY 12F east of what is now NY 180 were swapped c . 1939 , placing both routes on their current alignments . 
 On August 1 , 1979 , maintenance of NY 12E between Bridge Street in Brownville and the Watertown city line was transferred from the state of New York to Jefferson County as part of a larger highway maintenance swap between the two levels of government . In return , the state assumed maintenance of Bridge Street in Brownsville and the town of <unk> , among other highways . Following the swap , the segment of NY 12E between Bridge Street and the Watertown city limits became concurrent with CR 190 while Bridge Street became NY 971H , an unsigned reference route . The section of NY 12E within the city of Watertown is locally maintained . 
 Current signage along NY 12E indicates that the route has been rerouted east of Bridge Street to follow NY 971H across the Black River to a terminus at NY 12F . However , the 2012 New York State Department of Transportation ( NYSDOT ) description of routes in New York and the 2008 NYSDOT Traffic Data Report both indicate that NY 12E 's southern terminus is still located at NY 12 in downtown Watertown . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Jefferson County . 
 = New Zealand Labour Party leadership election , 2011 = 
 The New Zealand Labour Party leadership election , 2011 was held on 13 December 2011 to choose the thirteenth leader of the New Zealand Labour Party . A deputy leader and a senior and a junior whip were also elected . Following the Labour Party 's loss in the 2011 general election , leader Phil Goff and deputy leader Annette King resigned , prompting the leadership election , which was conducted as a secret ballot of the Labour caucus . 
 David Cunliffe , David Shearer and David Parker stood for the leadership , and <unk> Mahuta and Grant Robertson contested the deputy position . Cunliffe and Mahuta ran as a ticket . During the campaign Parker pulled out of the race and endorsed Shearer . Shearer and Robertson won the votes for their respective positions . Chris <unk> and Darien Fenton were chosen as the senior and junior whips , respectively . 
 = = Background = = 
 At the 2008 general election , the Fifth Labour Government , led by Helen Clark , was defeated by John Key 's National Party . Following Clark 's election @-@ night resignation , Phil Goff was unanimously elected as the party 's leader , with Annette King as deputy , and Darren Hughes and Steve Chadwick as the senior and junior whips , respectively . The party lost more support in the 26 November 2011 general election ; its popular vote dipped to 27 % – its worst @-@ ever result under the mixed @-@ member proportional representation system – and its number of MPs was reduced from forty @-@ three to thirty @-@ four . On 29 November 2011 , Goff and King announced their resignations , effective 13 December . New whips also had to be chosen because Rick Barker ( who replaced Hughes as the senior whip in April 2011 , following Hughes leaving Parliament ) and Chadwick were not re @-@ elected to Parliament . 
 = = Candidates = = 
 Former Cabinet ministers David Cunliffe ( MP for New Lynn ) and <unk> Mahuta ( Hauraki @-@ Waikato ) ran as a ticket for the leadership and deputy leadership , respectively . Former minister and list MP David Parker and Mount Albert by @-@ election , 2009 winner David Shearer were candidates for the party leadership , and Wellington Central representative Grant Robertson sought the deputy leadership . Shane Jones considered standing for the deputy leadership , but in the end did not run . Parker stated his preference for Robertson as deputy leader . Shearer did not indicate a preferred deputy . 
 Shearer was viewed as unlikely to win the election ; Claire Trevett of The New Zealand Herald originally expected that only Cunliffe and Parker would run for the leader 's role , and The Dominion Post 's Vernon Small wrote that " Mr Shearer 's bid is seen as a way to lift his profile " . Political commentator Bryce Edwards said that Cunliffe was the more appealing candidate to the public , and described Parker and Robertson as " sort of Phil Goff clones " . 
 = = Campaign = = 
 Labour Party president Moira Coatsworth stated that the leadership contest would be a " robust contest of ideas " , and suggested to the party 's caucus that a series of meetings with party members be held around New Zealand . These were held from 6 to 11 December in six major cities — Hamilton , Palmerston North , Wellington , Christchurch , Dunedin and Auckland . The party membership was then encouraged to give feedback to the party caucus , who would vote in the election . On 30 November Cunliffe , Parker and Shearer were interviewed by Mark Sainsbury on the current affairs programme Close Up . The television show held a text message poll in which viewers voted for their preferred leader of the party . Over 7 @,@ 500 people took part ; Shearer received 50 % of the support , Cunliffe 31 % and Parker 19 % . The following day , Parker pulled out of the leadership race and put his support behind Shearer . Shearer and Cunliffe were interviewed by Guyon <unk> on political talkshow Q + A on 4 December . During the interview , both candidates indicated their support for the introduction of a capital gains tax , which was a key part of Labour 's tax policy during the 2011 general election campaign . Both also disagreed with the 2008 Employment Relations Amendment Act ( 90 @-@ day workplace trial ) , and wanted New Zealand to invest further in research and development ; Shearer mentioned striving for a more green economy . On 9 December , Horizon Research released a demographically @-@ weighted survey which found that 35 @.@ 4 % of adult New Zealanders supported Shearer 's bid for the leadership , and 19 @.@ 9 % backed Cunliffe . 
 = = Outcome and aftermath = = 
 The election took place on 13 December 2011 and comprised a secret ballot of the thirty @-@ four Labour caucus members , meaning a candidate had to receive the support of eighteen MPs to win . Shearer was elected the party leader , Robertson the deputy leader , Chris <unk> the senior whip and Darien Fenton the junior whip . Upon election , Shearer stated , " I am a fresh face for Labour and I represent a fresh start for New Zealand . " <unk> reported that Shearer received about twenty @-@ two of the thirty @-@ four votes for the leadership position , and a 3 News source claimed a similar number ; however , Coatsworth stipulated that the election was secret and that she was the only person who had access to the ballot papers , which were destroyed . Robertson and Jacinda <unk> publicly supported Shearer , and Carmel <unk> backed Cunliffe . 
 On 19 December , Shearer announced a reshuffle of the Labour front bench — Parker replaced Cunliffe in the finance portfolio and number three ranking , <unk> took the number four spot as social development spokesperson , while Cunliffe moved down to number five and gained the economic development portfolio . Clayton Cosgrove ( number six ) became responsible for state owned enterprises and commerce , Jones ( number seven ) took regional development and fisheries and Mahuta ( number eight ) picked up education . Shearer himself took the science and innovation portfolio , while Robertson was made environment spokesperson . 
 = M @-@ 189 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 189 is a north – south state trunkline highway in the Upper Peninsula of the US state of Michigan . It serves as the continuation of Highway 139 ( WIS 139 ) from Wisconsin into Michigan , connecting to US Highway 2 ( US 2 ) in Iron River . M @-@ 189 has been largely unchanged since being designated in the 1930s , although a new bridge over the Brule River at the state line was built in 1988 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 189 starts at the Wisconsin state line in the middle of a bridge crossing the Brule River that connects to WIS 139 . The highway runs to the northeast away from the river through forests . The trunkline turns north and curving to the east to run past Laurel Lake . The highway forks at the junction with Caspian Cutoff Road ( County Road 651 ) ; M @-@ 189 takes the northwesterly fork and runs around the west side of Caspian . The roadway passes the Iron River County Club as the highway begins to parallel the Iron River . M @-@ 189 follows Selden Road north through the southside of the city of Iron River , continuing as 4th Street into downtown . The trunkline ends at a junction with US 2 ( Adams Street ) in the middle of town . 
 No part of M @-@ 189 is listed on the National Highway System . In 2009 , the Michigan Department of Transportation conducted a survey to determine the traffic volume along the highway , reported using a metric called average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) . The department determined that 892 vehicles a day used the highway near the state line while 5 @,@ 308 vehicles used the central section through Caspian . The northernmost segment near US 2 had an AADT of 4 @,@ 079 vehicles . 
 = = History = = 
 The Michigan State Highway Department designated M @-@ 189 as a state trunkline highway in late 1932 or early 1933 . During the latter half of 1936 , the department paved the highway in its entirety . The route has remained the same since . The current bridge across the Brule River was built in 1988 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is in Iron County . 
 = Blackburn Olympic F.C. = 
 Blackburn Olympic Football Club was an English football club based in Blackburn , Lancashire in the late 19th century . Although the club was only in existence for just over a decade , it is significant in the history of football in England as the first club from the north of the country and the first from a working @-@ class background to win the country 's leading competition , the Football Association Challenge Cup ( FA Cup ) . The cup had previously been won only by teams of wealthy amateurs from the Home counties , and Olympic 's victory marked a turning point in the sport 's transition from a pastime for upper @-@ class gentlemen to a professional sport . 
 The club was formed in 1878 and initially took part only in minor local competitions . In 1880 , the club entered the FA Cup for the first time , and three years later defeated Old Etonians at Kennington Oval to win the trophy . Olympic , however , proved unable to compete with wealthier and better @-@ supported clubs in the new professional era , and folded in 1889 . 
 Most of Olympic 's home matches took place at the Hole @-@ i ' -th @-@ Wall stadium , named after an adjacent public house . From 1880 onwards , the club 's first @-@ choice colours consisted of light blue shirts and white shorts . One Olympic player , James Ward , was selected for the England team and six other former or future England internationals played for the club , including Jack Hunter , who was the club 's coach at the time of Olympic 's FA Cup win . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation and early years = = = 
 Association football was first codified in the 1860s in the south of England and played by teams of upper @-@ class former public school pupils and Oxbridge graduates . However , the game spread to the industrial towns of the north by the following decade . The town of Blackburn in Lancashire had more than a dozen active football clubs by 1877 , with Blackburn Rovers , founded in 1875 , generally viewed as the leading team . Blackburn Olympic F.C. was founded in February 1878 when two of these clubs , Black Star and James Street , opted to merge . The name was chosen by James Edmondson , the club 's first treasurer , and is believed to have been inspired by the recent excavation of Olympia , site of the ancient Olympic Games . The new club 's first match was a friendly played on 9 February 1878 which resulted in a 2 – 0 win over local team St. John 's . In April , the club entered its first competition , the Livesey United Cup . Olympic beat St. Mark 's in the final to win the tournament , and , as the competition was not held again , the club retained the trophy in perpetuity . Over the next two seasons the club continued to play friendly matches and also entered the Blackburn Association Challenge Cup , a knock @-@ out tournament open to all local clubs set up by the organisation which governed football within the town . Olympic won the cup in both 1879 and 1880 , after which the competition was discontinued when the Blackburn Association was absorbed into the larger Lancashire County Football Association . As with the Livesey United Cup , the trophy remained in Olympic 's possession for the remainder of the club 's existence . 
 In 1880 the club 's committee decided that Olympic should compete for greater prizes , and opted to enter two further competitions , the Lancashire Senior Cup and the Football Association Challenge Cup ( FA Cup ) , the country 's premier football competition . In the club 's first FA Cup match , the " Light Blues " were defeated 5 – 4 by Sheffield , and the following season the team again lost in the first round , away to Darwen . The club 's reputation within its home area was growing , however , and matches were now being arranged with teams from further afield , such as Sheffield Wednesday , Nottingham Forest , and even Scottish clubs such as Cowlairs and Hibernian . The club 's increasing expenses were met with the help of Sydney Yates , a local iron foundry owner , who invested a large amount of money and continued to bankroll the club for most of its existence . At the end of the 1881 – 82 season , Olympic defeated Blackburn Rovers to win the East Lancashire Charity Cup . 
 = = = Success = = = 
 In the 1882 – 83 FA Cup , Olympic defeated four other Lancashire clubs , Accrington , Lower Darwen , Darwen Ramblers , and Church , to reach the fifth round . At this stage the " Light Blues " were drawn to play Welsh team Druids . Olympic defeated the Ruabon @-@ based team 4 – 1 to progress to the semi @-@ final stage , where for the first time they faced opponents from the south of England — Old Carthusians . The Carthusians , the team for former pupils of Charterhouse School , had won the cup two years earlier and even the local newspapers in Blackburn considered them strong favourites to reach the final again . Olympic , however , won 4 – 0 in a match played at a neutral venue in Whalley Range , Manchester , to set up a match with another of the great amateur teams , Old Etonians , in the final at Kennington Oval . The Etonians had defeated Olympic 's close rivals Blackburn Rovers in the final a year earlier , the first time a northern team had reached the final . 
 Before the final , former England player Jack Hunter , who had joined the club in 1882 in the twin roles of player and coach , arranged to take the team to Blackpool for several days ' special training . Such an undertaking had never before been made by a club , and it was considered an extremely novel idea . 
 The Etonians took the lead in the final when Harry Goodhart scored during the first half , however Arthur Matthews equalised for Olympic in the second half . Soon afterwards , Arthur Dunn was injured and forced to leave the field , reducing the Etonians to ten men for the rest of the match . The scores remained level at the end of the regulation ninety minutes . Under the regulations of the FA Cup , thirty minutes of extra time could be played in the event of a draw , at the referee 's discretion , and in response to the fervent mood of the crowd the captains asked to play on to try to secure a result . During the extra period , Olympic 's superior stamina began to show . Around twenty minutes into extra time , Jimmy <unk> received a pass from John Yates and kicked the ball past Etonian goalkeeper John Rawlinson to score the winning goal . Upon the team 's return to Blackburn , the players took part in a celebratory parade and received a civic reception at which team captain Albert Warburton reportedly proclaimed " The Cup is very welcome to Lancashire . It 'll have a good home and it 'll never go back to London . " 
 In the south , however , Olympic 's victory over one of the great amateur teams provoked consternation . At the time , The Football Association ( the FA ) , the sport 's governing body , prohibited clubs from paying their players . Despite this , working @-@ class clubs , especially those based in Lancashire , had been widely suspected of making illicit payments to players since at least 1876 . In the wake of Olympic 's high @-@ profile victory , journalists and officials affiliated with southern amateur clubs intensified their calls for the FA to investigate the finances of northern clubs . They focussed in particular on Olympic 's training excursion to Blackpool , suggesting that the players would not have been able to take so much time off work unless the club was paying them some form of wage . Questions were also asked about players who had relocated from one town to another seemingly for the sole purpose of playing for a new football team . In Olympic 's case Jack Hunter had moved from Sheffield to join the club . Ultimately no action was taken against Olympic , although punishments were imposed on other clubs , including Preston North End , who were expelled from the FA Cup . This in turn prompted the northern clubs to make plans to break away from the FA and form a rival governing body which would not impose the so @-@ called " amateur ideal " on clubs . 
 = = = Decline and collapse = = = 
 The following season , Olympic again reached the semi @-@ finals of the FA Cup , as did Blackburn Rovers . When the draw for the semi @-@ finals was made , the club was paired with Queen 's Park in one match and Rovers with Notts County in the other , setting up the possibility of the two teams meeting in the final . The Olympic team , however , were outclassed and defeated 4 – 0 by their Scottish opponents . The club lodged an appeal with the FA based on the encroachment onto the pitch of some of the 16 @,@ 000 spectators , but to no avail . Rovers went on to defeat Queen 's Park in the final . 
 The club was never again able to achieve this level of success . In the 1884 – 85 season , Olympic lost in the second round of the FA Cup to rivals Rovers , who went on to cement their position as the town 's leading team by winning the competition for the second consecutive season . The threat of a schism within the sport was averted in 1885 when the FA agreed to legalise professionalism . In a town the size of Blackburn , however , Olympic found it hard to compete for spectators and sponsors with the longer @-@ established and more successful Rovers , and as a result could not pay wages on a par with those offered by that club or by other professional clubs in Lancashire . In 1886 the club 's committee was forced to reduce the players ' wages to a quarter of what was being offered by Preston North End . Many of the team 's key players walked out in response and were quickly signed by wealthier clubs . 
 The Football League , the world 's first association football league , was formed in 1888 by the leading clubs of the Midlands and North . Aston Villa chairman William McGregor , the driving force behind the new competition , put in place a rule stating that only one club from each town or city could join , and chose Rovers , rather than Olympic , to be Blackburn 's entrant . Some of the clubs not invited to join the League , including Olympic , formed The Combination , but this was a poorly organised competition which attracted only small crowds and collapsed before the end of the 1888 – 89 season . Beset by heavy debts , the club 's committee announced in early 1889 that all professional players were being released from their contracts with immediate effect and that henceforth the club would employ only amateur players . This desperate measure came too late to save the club , which closed down in September 1889 . Blackburn Olympic 's last match was a defeat away to Everton . 
 = = Stadia and supporters = = 
 Olympic 's first match took place on a pitch owned by the Blackburn Cricket Club , situated in open countryside at Higher <unk> . For the first eighteen months of the club 's existence , Olympic played home matches at various sites in Blackburn , including Roe Lee and Cob Wall . In 1879 the club 's committee secured the lease on a pitch adjacent to the Hole @-@ i ' -th ' <unk> public house , at the top of the Shear Brow hill . The site had previously been used by another club , Queen 's Own , but had been left vacant when that club folded after most of its players defected to Blackburn Rovers . 
 The playing surface sloped downwards and was initially known for being exceptionally muddy , but in 1880 the club 's committee spent £ 100 improving the drainage . Facilities were minimal and most spectators simply stood around the perimeter of the pitch , as was the case at most football grounds at the time . A grandstand was erected behind one goal in 1881 , but it was severely damaged in a storm in 1884 and was replaced by a more elaborate structure along one of the long sides of the playing area . At the same time several other shelters were erected to give spectators in other areas cover from the elements . The largest crowd registered at Hole @-@ i ' -th ' <unk> was approximately 10 @,@ 000 for a match against Preston North End in November 1884 , but crowds of between 1 @,@ 000 and 2 @,@ 000 spectators were the norm at Olympic matches . After the club 's demise the pitch was taken over by the Blackburn Railway Clerks Club . It is now the site of St. Mary 's College . 
 = = Colours = = 
 At the start of the club 's existence , the players usually wore magenta shirts , although the rules regarding kits were less rigid at the time , and half @-@ back Tommy Gibson insisted on wearing a supposedly lucky amber and black hooped shirt , a practice later copied by team @-@ mate Alf Astley . When the club entered the FA Cup for the first time in 1880 , competition regulations meant that all the players in the team had to wear matching colours , and a new combination of light blue shirts and white shorts was chosen . When there was a clash of colours with the opposition and Olympic were the team obliged to change , the players wore dark blue shirts and white shorts . There is no record of the club having a badge or crest , although photographs of the FA Cup @-@ winning team show several players with the crest of the Lancashire FA sewn onto their shirts , indicating that they had represented Lancashire in inter @-@ county matches . 
 = = Players = = 
 The club 's FA Cup winning team of 1883 comprised eleven players born in England , the first time an all @-@ English XI had won the competition . The team lined up as follows : 
 James Ward was the only player to be selected for the England team while on the books of the club . He won one cap , against Wales in 1885 . Tommy Dewhurst was originally chosen for an international match in 1884 , but was deselected after he was involved in a fight with an opposition player during a match between Olympic and Northwich Victoria . Six other Olympic players represented England either before or after their time with the club : Joe Beverley , Edgar Chadwick , Jack Hunter , Jack Southworth , William Townley and John Yates . 
 = = Officials = = 
 The concept of a football manager did not exist in the 19th century , although some modern sources identify Jack Hunter as having been the team 's manager . Hunter 's main responsibility was for the coaching of the players , although in the club 's later years he also took charge of seeking out and signing promising amateur players . The club 's benefactor , Sydney Yates , held the post of president and his brother Fred served as chairman of the club 's committee . The majority of the administration of the club was handled by the secretary , a post held for most of the club 's existence by Bill Bramham . 
 = = Honours = = 
 The club won the following trophies : 
 FA Cup 
 1883 
 East Lancashire Charity Cup 
 1882 
 Blackburn Association Challenge Cup 
 1879 , 1880 
 Livesey United Cup 
 1878 
 The only competition the club entered but never won , other than the unfinished Combination , was the Lancashire Senior Cup . 
 = = Rivalries = = 
 Blackburn Olympic 's chief rivalry was with Blackburn Rovers . The first match between the two clubs was a game in February 1879 , which resulted in a 3 – 1 win for Olympic . The clubs played each other forty times , but Olympic won only six of these matches . The rivalry became especially fierce in September 1884 , when , amid accusations that the clubs were using underhand tactics in attempts to " poach " each other 's star players , the Rovers ' secretary sent a telegram to his opposite number stating that his club would play no matches against Olympic in the 1884 – 85 season . In December , however , the clubs were drawn against each other in the FA Cup , and matches between the rivals resumed later that season . Their final meeting was a benefit match for Olympic in February 1889 , which Rovers won 6 – 1 . Rovers agreed to allow the financially embarrassed Olympic to keep all available gate money , instead of sharing it . 
 = Wolf : The Journey Home = 
 Wolf : The Journey Home , originally titled Hungry for Home : A Wolf Odyssey , is a 1997 American young @-@ adult novel written by ' Asta Bowen . Originally published by Simon & Schuster with line drawings by Jane Hart Meyer , it was retitled and reprinted without illustrations in 2006 by Bloomsbury Publishing . Based on true accounts of the Pleasant Valley , Montana , wolf pack , the novel traces the life of a female alpha wolf named Marta after the forced relocation of her pack in 1989 to an unfamiliar territory . Terrified , Marta abandons her pack and begins a journey in search of her home ; she eventually arrives in Ninemile Valley , where she finds a new mate with whom she starts a new pack . 
 Bowen was prompted to write the story of the relocated wolves after becoming outraged over the continued poaching of wolves in the protected areas of Ninemile Valley . She spent four years researching wolves while working on the novel . In recounting the fates of the animals at the end , she expresses hope in the ideals behind efforts to restore wolf populations . Nominated for a 2006 Teens ' Top Ten award by the American Library Association , the novel was praised by critics . Two praised Bowen 's ability to avoid anthropomorphism while capturing the essence of wolf behavior and life . Another also praised the story 's highlighting of the difficulties in wolf relocation programs . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Marta , a black gray wolf , is alpha female in a small pack in Pleasant Valley , Montana , that consists of her mate , Calef , their three pups Rann , Sula , and Annie , and a seven @-@ year @-@ old wolf named Oldtooth . One morning Calef is killed by poachers , leaving Marta and Oldtooth to try to feed and raise the pups on their own . Though an experienced hunter , Oldtooth is unable to bring down large game as he lost most of his teeth chewing a steel leg trap off his leg years ago . Once the cubs are old enough to be left alone for short periods of time , Marta takes over the bulk of the hunting . Though it is difficult , the two adults successfully keep all three cubs alive and begin weaning them and teaching them the ways of the wolf . In the summer , traps begin appearing in the area as human populations increase . Annie and Sula are caught and are taken away by humans , but reappear a few days later , locked in cages . Marta tries to free her pups but is unsuccessful ; however humans come regularly to keep them fed and ensure they have water . Oldtooth is later captured , while Marta is tranquilized from a helicopter . Rann escapes and is not seen again . 
 The wolves are kept in a human facility for a couple of months to be examined , and a wound on Oldtooth 's paw is treated . In early winter , the wolves are sedated again and awaken to find themselves in a strange high place with radio collars around their necks . Still groggy from the tranquilizer , the strangeness of the events and the smell of grizzly bear in the area triggers Marta 's flight instincts and she runs blindly downward , leaving Oldtooth and the cubs behind . When Oldtooth awakens , he quietly abandons Annie and Sula , following Marta 's trail , but at a much slower pace . 
 Marta continues running in the direction she believes will lead back to Pleasant Valley , swimming across Middle Fork River , crossing the nearby highway and railroad tracks , and running through various woodlands in between . Pausing only to drink water and tend her paws , she crosses Pyramid Peak and swims across the Hungry Horse Reservoir , before a week without food and exhaustion cause her to collapse on the shore . After resting , she continues her run , though hunger now spurs her to pause to hunt when she can but she eventually collapses by Flathead Lake , where she remains unconscious for days . Meanwhile , unskilled at hunting and without the adults to teach them how to survive , Annie and Sula slowly starve to death . Oldtooth reaches Middle Fork Valley , where illness and his lame foot drive him to hunt local livestock . He is shot and killed by a human . 
 When Marta recovers , her instincts to return home are dulled and she begins traveling more slowly . She makes her way through Swan Valley to cross the Swan Range and Mission Mountains . As winter settles in , she makes a winter home around Lindbergh Lake , where hunting is good and humans few . Near the end of winter , she meets another lone wolf , Greatfoot , a large male . Initially they maintain their distance from one another , until Greatfoot hunts the elk herd in Marta 's range , specifically the aging leader that Marta favored and refused to hunt herself . She stops the other wolf 's hunt , and after a brief skirmish they forget the elk and become friendly . They form a pack of two and leave the area , heading south . After mating , their travels become more urgent to find a home to raise young . 
 They settle in Ninemile Valley , a large forested region that while inhabited by humans , has few roads and homes . Several weeks after they make their den , Marta gives birth to seven pups , though one dies shortly after birth . As spring arrives , the pups grow well under their parents care and begin making their first explorations outside of the den . In early summer , Marta leaves the den to hunt and is killed by a poacher . Greatfoot is left as the sole provider for the pups . Though they were not fully weaned , they soon learn to eat the meat their father provides and he slowly begins teaching them how to avoid humans and how to survive . The only human the pack ignores is a human scent they frequently find on their trails , as no human ever appears with it , only the occasional sound of a truck nearby . 
 Near the end of summer , Greatfoot is run over and killed while crossing a freeway during a hunt . The pups begin hearing a strange wolf howl , but when they track it they find a fresh kill and the familiar human scent . New kills appear every few days as the young wolves grow larger and stronger . One night when they hear the unusual howl , they are closer than usual to it and reach the kill in time to meet their benefactor , a human male . The pack stares at the man , before disappearing back into the forest , ignoring his howl . As he goes to leave , however , the six return to the edge of the clearing and howl . 
 = = Development and publication = = 
 According to Bowen , she was " not a wolf person " before penning Wolf : The Journey Home . A language arts teacher at Flathead High School in northwest Montana and a former op @-@ ed columnist for the Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer , she stated that she read news reports about the Pleasant Valley wolf pack in the Daily Inter Lake , but it was the death of one of the Ninemile pups that spurred her to write the novel . In her words , it was " one death too many " from the many non @-@ accidental deaths of the wolves , and she felt the " story needed to be told " . She spent four years studying wolves in preparation for writing the novel , particularly the lives of a pack of wolves that were part of the federal wolf relocation program and who were documented in records kept by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service . The pack formed in the spring of 1989 in Pleasant Valley , Montana . As in the novel , the alpha male was killed , mistaken for a dog by a rancher , and the rest of the pack was trapped , except the one pup that escaped . They were held in Kalispell until they could be transferred to Glacier Park . Using radio collars , biologists were able to track the pack members from their release to their eventual fates , as depicted in the novel . The pups born to Marta and Greatfoot were born in Spring 1990 in Ninemile Valley , an area near Missoula . When they stopped receiving a signal for Marta , authorities searched for her body for weeks until her broken radio collar was found in a creek . Mike Jimenez , then a wildlife biologist and the Wyoming Wolf Recovery Project Leader , was the man in the blue truck who tracked and monitored the pack in the novel and fed the pups after the death of Greatfoot . 
 The novel , then titled Hungry for Home : A Wolf Odyssey , was first published by Simon & Schuster in hardback format on January 13 , 1997 . The first edition included ink illustrations by Jane Hart Meyer . The novel was reprinted in paperback format on January 30 , 1998 . The novel later went out of print , after enjoying modest success in the Netherlands . A few years later , Bowen 's attorney convinced her to rework the novel for young @-@ adult readers , and on December 27 , 2005 , Bloomsbury USA reprinted the edited novel with the new title of Wolf : The Journey Home in hardback format , without the illustrations of the previous edition and with a new photographic cover . The new edition of the novel has been translated and reprinted in China . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 Jimenez stopped feeding the pups after Thanksgiving that same year . Though the pups learned to hunt , Silver and <unk> left the pack and the other four began killing livestock . They were captured to be relocated , much as their parents had been . One , Camas , escaped after waking up from the tranquilizer early . Chinook was killed for continuing to hunt livestock and Timber was killed by a poacher . Tenino , who also continued hunting livestock , was recaptured and sent to Wolf Haven International , a sanctuary in Washington State , where he lived until his death in 2001 . The fates of the other cubs , as well as Rann , the cub who escaped the initial relocation , are unknown . In the epilogue of the novel , Bowen expresses hope that they survived and bred , enabling the bloodlines started with Marta and Greatfoot to continue in the wolf packs that now inhabit the area . Jimenez continued working as the Wyoming Wolf Recovery Project Leader for the United States Fish and Wildlife Service until 2008 , when he was selected to be the Wyoming Game and Fish Department 's Wolf Program Coordinator . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Wolf : The Journey Home was nominated for the 2006 Teens ' Top Ten award by the American Library Association . Publishers Weekly 's Sybil Steinberg called it a " powerful first novel " and a " genuinely eye @-@ opening tale " . She praised Bowen for " striving to inhabit the wild psyche of Marta with a minimum of anthropomorphic sentimentality , " and felt the author conveyed " both a reverence for the ways of the wild and a realistic grasp of wolves ' fear of humans . " Reviewing the title for The Detroit Free Press , Judy Rose considered it a " fact @-@ and @-@ fiction book " written " with a wolf 's @-@ eye view " . She praised the work 's factual basis and Bowen 's extensive research into the topic , and felt the novel 's release was " well @-@ timed " , coinciding with growing interest in wolf research and the reintroduction programs , particularly those at Yellowstone Park . While noting the novel is not for everyone , she felt it would be enjoyable to " wildlife lovers " and that readers will " howl with [ the wolves ] pain " . David <unk> of the Chicago Tribune considered the novel to be in the same " vein [ as ] the classic The Incredible Journey " , praising the author 's " faithfully [ capturing of ] their indomitable spirit " . He thought that " Bowen 's first @-@ rate skills as a nature writer keep her from falling off the edge into anthropomorphism " , though he criticized the scenes in which Marta refuses to hunt and even defends an old buck , feeling that she allowed " her sympathies to distort reality " and contradicted her own assertion that wolves are " always looking for an easy meal . " Jennifer Henderson , of the Booklist , found it to be a " memorable tale " that highlights the difficulties in reintroducing wolves even to protected areas . Calling it a " beautifully told wolf story " with a " tragic outcome " , she recommended the novel for teenage readers who love animals . In Gentle Reads : Great Books to Warm Hearts and Lift Spirits , Deanna McDaniel recommends the novel in her list of 500 inspiring stories for young adults , considering it to be an engaging and " vivid " tale of survival that contains a " strong message of hope " in the legacy Marta leaves behind . 
 = Bad Day ( Daniel Powter song ) = 
 " Bad Day " is a pop song from Canadian singer Daniel Powter 's self @-@ titled debut studio album ( 2005 ) . It was written by Powter and produced by Jeff Dawson and Mitchell Froom . Powter and Dawson recorded the song in 2002 but could not find a record label to release it at first . The song was first used in a French Coca @-@ Cola television advertisement in Christmas 2004 before its official release . Tom Whalley , Warner Bros. Records ' chairman and CEO , offered Powter a contract after hearing a demo tape of it . This track ended up being released as the lead single in Europe in early 2005 . 
 Although " Bad Day " received mixed critical reviews , with some music critics finding a " universal appeal " and others claiming a lack of depth in its lyrics , it was a commercial success . In 2005 , the single charted in the top five in more than ten countries worldwide , and became the most played song on European radio . After its European success , it was released in the United States where it topped Billboard 's Hot 100 , Pop 100 , Adult Top 40 , and Adult Contemporary charts . In 2006 , it became the first song ever to sell two million digital copies in the United States . After another million were sold , it was certified three @-@ times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) in 2009 . It was certified platinum in Australia and Canada , gold in Denmark , Germany and the United Kingdom , and also received a certification in France and Japan . 
 The accompanying music video for " Bad Day " was directed by Marc Webb and reached 9 @.@ 8 million views in 2006 . The video depicts two downcast people sharing a similar routine until they meet each other at the end of the video . The song was used for advertisements and television programs , most prominently as American Idol 's elimination song . Different shows and artists covered and parodied " Bad Day " , including Saturday Night Live and Alvin and the Chipmunks . Powter has also performed the song on television shows including The Tonight Show with Jay Leno and The Ellen DeGeneres Show , and during his concert tours in North America and Europe . The song 's success made it Powter 's " anthem " and would be included on his later compilation albums B @-@ Sides ( 2007 ) and Best of Me ( 2010 ) . 
 = = Background and writing = = 
 After leaving MacEwan University in Edmonton at 20 , Powter moved to Vancouver , British Columbia where he played keyboards before he started composing songs . In 1997 , he partnered with music producer Jeff Dawson ; they recorded " Bad Day " in 2002 . For two weeks , Powter had a melody that " wouldn 't go away " from his mind . Thinking of a lyric that would fit the melody , he thought an " up and poppy " lyric would make it " the cheesiest song of all time " . He then thought " bad day " would be a good choice for the chorus , and wrote the lyrics partly based on his life as " a struggling musician " . It was the last song to be composed for his album , with Powter writing it in an hour during a ferry journey between Victoria and Vancouver . Powter said it was not a lyrically elaborate song , but that : " mostly it 's about phonics . It 's about words that sing great . I was mumbling something , and those words came out . " 
 Dawson and Powter included the song on a disc that was offered to record labels that asked Powter to audition in New York ; but his lack of stage presence led to the labels turning him down . Disappointed , he returned to Vancouver to move on because : " once a record company says no , it 's difficult to come around again " . After this failure , his new representative , Gary <unk> , played a demo tape for Tom Whalley , chairman and CEO of Warner Bros. Records . Whalley offered Powter a contract but he was reluctant to sign it because he considered himself primarily a songwriter . He accepted the offer in April 2003 and , along with Dawson and producer Mitchell Froom , worked on his album and the song in Los Angeles , California . The album was originally recorded in Powter 's Vancouver apartment but Warner Bros. asked that it be rerecorded . However , because Froom wanted to keep its " original feel [ ing ] " , in Powter 's words it was just " touch [ ed ] up " . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Bad Day " is a " midtempo pop " power ballad , performed in a moderate groove and accompanied by a piano . The song is composed in the key E ♭ major , and uses syncopated 16th @-@ note rhythms . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Warner Bros. , Powter 's vocals range from the note of E ♭ 4 and D ♭ 6 . Its instrumentation differs from " the scores of adolescent thrust @-@ rockers " and includes , as Powter referred to it , " aggressive " drums . David Browne of Entertainment Weekly said it is : " addressed to anyone who 's feeling depressed ... but [ in contrast ] its grand , panoramic arrangement wants to pump you up " . Simon Donohue of the Manchester Evening News commented its sound " <unk> [ sic ] from boy band banality to Foo Fighters @-@ style raucous rock " . According to Winston Kung of PopMatters , it is " in tune with the zeitgeist " . 
 The lyrics of " Bad Day " were said to have a universal appeal by Alan Connor of BBC News Magazine as they have an " everyman <unk> " because the song 's subject can be any person going through a bad daytime . Stephen Thomas Erlewine from AllMusic described it as : " a loping , sunny tune that pretty much has the opposite sentiment of its title " . Although About.com 's Bill Lamb described its lyrics as having a " reassuring , comforting " tone , Powter said the song " mak [ es ] fun of self @-@ absorbed and narcissistic people who bitch and gripe " . He also affirmed : " It 's not literally about having a bad day , it 's more about not taking yourself too seriously and complaining about trivial things " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The song received mixed reviews by commentators ; some reviewers praised it for its composition , while other critics felt that the lyrics were not profound . Billboard 's Chuck Taylor called the song " instantly memorable " and praised its instrumentation for being different " from the scores of adolescent thrust @-@ rockers currently dominating the scene . " Dubbing it " elegant , timeless pop / rock " , Taylor qualified it as " one of the great discoveries of the year " , while Pete Waterman , writing for The Guardian in 2007 , stated it was " one of [ his ] favourite songs of recent years " . Eric R. Danton from the Hartford Courant classified it as the best track on the album , while Erlewine called it " the template for the rest of his debut " . In contrast , Wilson Kung said the song " pales in comparison to some of the truly strong songs " on the album Daniel Powter . Alan Connor of BBC News Magazine said it is a typical sentimental song but that in " Bad Day " ' s case " there 's even less detail " . He said the song " is so low on the specifics , there are some couplets that feel like they 've been translated from a foreign language , possibly by a computer " . A writer for The Daily Edge called it " a song so sweet it gave you a toothache " , while a reviewer from The Scotsman called it a " horrible song " . Bill Lamb said it " feels genuine " but " if you are looking for depth , this is not your song " , Chris Lee of the Los Angeles Times said the song is " baleful but soulful " , and People commented : " ' Bad Day ' may be catchy enough to overcome its trite lyrics " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 " Bad Day " won an award from the Society of Composers , Authors and Music Publishers of Canada as one of six Canadian pop songs with the most radio airplay in 2005 . In 2006 , it won the Tokio Hot 100 Award for Best Song , and guaranteed Powter the Canadian Radio Music Award for Best New Group or Solo Artist — Mainstream AC . In the following year , the song won a BMI Pop Award , and shared the 2007 Japan Gold Disc Award for the most @-@ downloaded international song with " You Raise Me Up " by Celtic Woman and " Dani California " by Red Hot Chili Peppers . The song was nominated for Hot 100 Single of the Year at the 2006 Billboard Music Awards losing to Nelly Furtado 's " Promiscuous " . At the APRA Music Awards of 2006 , it was nominated for Most Performed Foreign Work but lost to Rob Thomas 's " Lonely No More " . In 2007 , it was nominated for Best Male Pop Vocal Performance at the 49th Annual Grammy Awards but John Mayer 's performance on " Waiting on the World to Change " won him the award . It received a nomination for Best Song at the 2007 Kids ' Choice Awards but lost to Beyoncé 's " Irreplaceable " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Bad Day " topped Nielsen Music Control 's Pan European Airplay 100 as the most played song on European radio stations in 2005 . It was also the third most downloaded song that year in Europe . On Billboard 's European Hot 100 Singles it peaked at number two on the weekly chart , while it placed seventh on its year @-@ end chart . The song debuted on the UK Singles Chart issue dated August 6 , 2005 , at number two , its peak position , spending 38 weeks on the chart . " Bad Day " was the eleventh best @-@ selling single and the third most downloaded song in the UK in 2005 . It was the most played song on UK radio during the period 2003 – 08 . The song debuted on the Irish Singles Chart at number 13 on July 28 , 2005 , and topped it for three weeks , spending 19 weeks on the chart . The song peaked at number three on the French Singles Chart , and was the most played song on French radio in 2005 . It was the most played song on the German Airplay Chart in 2005 . It sold 143 @,@ 600 copies and was certified silver in France , and in Germany it was certified gold for the shipment of over 150 @,@ 000 copies . It peaked at number one in the Czech Republic , at number three in Italy , at number 5 in Denmark , and reached the top 10 on the singles chart in eight other European territories . 
 " Bad Day " debuted at number 55 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart issue dated February 25 , 2006 . On March 30 , 2006 it reached the top spot on the chart . A week before , the song had reached the top of the Hot Digital Songs chart . In the following weeks , it reached number one on the Pop 100 and the Adult Top 40 . It topped the Adult Top 40 for 12 weeks , the longest period a song by a lead male artist had spent on the chart . It remained at number one on the Adult Contemporary chart for 19 weeks , making it the song that spent the most time on the Adult Contemporary chart that year , tying Phil Collins ' " You 'll Be in My Heart " as the longest @-@ running number @-@ one song by a solo male artist to that date . " Bad Day " became the first song to sell two million digital copies in the United States in December 2006 , and was the best @-@ selling " digital track " and " digital song " for 2006 . " Bad Day " received a three @-@ times platinum certification from the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for digital sales of over 3 million in September 2009 . It was the seventh most played song on the American radio in 2006 , and was the number one song of 2006 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart . It also performed well on other year @-@ end charts , ranking first on Hot Digital Songs , second on Hot Adult Pop Songs , and third on Hot Adult Contemporary Songs . Media considered its exposure on American Idol as a major factor in its success in the United States . 
 In Canada , the song was certified platinum by the Canadian Recording Industry Association for the sale 20 @,@ 000 downloads . " Bad Day " peaked at number seven on the Canadian Singles Chart and at number six on the Hot Canadian Digital Singles chart . In Japan , a ringtone version was certified by the Recording Industry Association of Japan ( RIAJ ) for shipment of over one million copies . Its full @-@ length ringtone version was certified platinum for shipment of over 250 @,@ 000 copies , while its single track version was certified double platinum for shipment of over 500 @,@ 000 copies . " Bad Day " was certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for shipment of over 70 @,@ 000 copies . The song debuted at number 21 on the ARIA Charts issue dated July 4 , 2005 , peaked at number three on the issue dated August 15 , 2005 , and spent 20 weeks on the chart . It was the 18th top single of 2005 in the year @-@ end ARIA Charts , and was the second most @-@ played song in the country in 2006 . It peaked at number 7 in New Zealand appearing for 23 weeks , and was on Venezuela 's Pop Rock chart for 19 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video was directed by Marc Webb and premiered on Yahoo ! ' s website in early 2005 . As of August 2005 , it had been streamed over a million times . It was released on VH1.com on April 28 , 2005 , and at the iTunes Store for digital download on December 13 , 2005 . It debuted on television channel VH1 on January 23 of the following year , reaching the Top 20 Countdown for two weeks in March . It was subsequently put on heavy rotation in April 2006 , when it was played more than 50 times a week , reduced to 30 weekly airings in May . The video was the eighth most @-@ watched music video on the Internet , with over 9 @.@ 8 million views in 2006 . Warner Bros. Records released the video on YouTube on October 26 , 2009 . 
 The music video accompanying " Bad Day " features a man ( Jason Adelman ) and a woman ( <unk> Armstrong ) going about their daily routines over a three @-@ day period . Parts of the video are shown in split screen as they do exactly the same thing at different times , sometimes in the same location . The central point of the video occurs when they paint separately on the same billboard . Armstrong character shows her <unk> by adding rain and a car running through puddle of water while Adelman adds an umbrella and a man with a coat to protect the woman in the billboard . At some point , he draws half a heart and she completes it . At the end of the video , they finally meet when the man offers the woman an umbrella during a rain shower as a taxi cab stops for them . Throughout the video , Powter is shown playing a piano while wearing a <unk> — a type of knitted hat . 
 Chuck Taylor said the video is " strikingly good " and " brings emotion and clarity to an artist that we are meeting for the first time " . The Daily Edge disagreed calling the video " drippy " . VH1 ranked it 17th on its Top 40 Videos of the Year in 2006 . It was nominated for the MuchMoreMusic Award at the 2006 MuchMusic Video Awards , but lost to Michael Bublé 's " Save the Last Dance for Me " . It was nominated for Best Male Video at the 2007 MTV Video Music Awards Japan , but " Age Age Every Knight " by DJ Ozma was the winner . 
 = = Usage in other media = = 
 " Bad Day " was much @-@ used in the media to the point where Powter declared he felt " quite detached from th [ e ] song . It 's more like it 's everybody 's song . " According to Alan Connor : " ... turning off the radio isn 't enough to escape the tune . It can be heard everywhere from in shops , on mobiles and especially on TV . " During Christmas 2004 , the song was used in a Coca @-@ Cola advertisement which played in France for two weeks . It was also featured in a television advertisement for Right Guard deodorant in the United Kingdom . 
 The fifth season of American Idol used " Bad Day " to underscore a montage of each contestant shown when they were eliminated . Although it was not his decision to have it on the show , Powter said : " I need every opportunity that I can to get the music out there " . " Bad Day " was subsequently used in other shows , including the Brazilian series Malhação in 2005 , and TV Asahi 's 2006 Japanese drama Regatta : Kimi to Ita Eien . It was featured in Veronica Mars episode " The Bitch Is Back " in 2007 , and in a 2012 episode of the German show Danni <unk> . In 2014 , the song was used as a ringtone for Sherlock Holmes and Joan Watson in an episode of Elementary titled " The One Percent Solution " . A FX promotional trailer for Fargo featured a muzak version of " Bad Day " . 
 " Weird Al " Yankovic wanted to record a parody of the song in 2006 but Powter refused his proposal . Later , Powter decided to give him permission to record the parody , which was to have been called " You Had a Bad Date " , but was told by Yankovic told that " the train had left the station " ; he had recorded " White & Nerdy " the day before instead . In April 2006 , " Bad Day " was parodied on an episode of the television series Saturday Night Live , featuring a montage of former member of the United States House of Representatives Tom DeLay . The Daily Show used the song for an American Idol @-@ based montage satirizing the June 2006 death of Abu Musab al @-@ Zarqawi , leader of Al @-@ Qaeda in Iraq . It was parodied by comedy group Moron Life titled " <unk> " and was released on MySpace in August 2006 . " Bad Day " was also covered by the fictional music group Alvin and the Chipmunks for their 2007 film Alvin and the Chipmunks . Their version made the charts in January 2008 , peaking at number 67 on the Billboard Hot 100 . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Powter performed " Bad Day " during the Live 8 concert in Berlin on July 2 , 2005 , at the <unk> . He also performed the song at the MTV Asia Awards 2006 on May 6 at the Siam Paragon in Bangkok . During the penultimate episode of American Idol on May 23 , 2006 , Powter performed " Bad Day " at the Kodak Theatre . On May 26 , 2007 , he performed the song at the Saitama Super Arena during the MTV Video Music Awards Japan . Powter performed it in a duo with Japanese singer Ayaka on November 26 , 2008 , at Astro Hall in Harajuku , Japan . 
 Powter has performed the song on several television shows , including CD USA in February 2006 , and Total Request Live on April 6 , 2006 . On April 14 , he sang it during the The Today Show at the <unk> Center in the morning , and , at night , on the Late Night with Conan O 'Brien . He sang it on Live with Regis and Kelly on April 18 , on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno on April 24 and , on The Ellen DeGeneres Show on April 27 . He performed again on Leno 's and DeGeneres 's shows on June 1 and on July 7 respectively , and appeared on The CBS Early Show to sing it on August 9 . 
 The song was included on the set lists for Powter 's European tour , in the United Kingdom , and in the United States to promote its parent album . In a performance in Chicago 's Park West venue during the American tour , Andy Downing of the Chicago Tribune called the song " a high point " of the show , and said the slower version was prettier than the original record but that it was " the spartan arrangement " that saved it from " montage hell . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Personnel 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Daniel Powter . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = = = Process = = = 
 " Bad Day " was first released to three French radio stations — RTL , NRJ , and Europe 2 — in early 2005 . On February 8 , Barnes & Noble released it on an exclusive extended play ( EP ) , which also contained " Free Loop " , " Lie to Me " , and " Song 6 " . In the United States it was digitally released on February 22 , 2005 . In 2005 , Warner Bros. Records released it as a CD single in Switzerland on March 4 , in France on March 22 , in Italy on May 18 , in Germany on May 30 , in Australia on June 27 , in the United Kingdom on July 25 , and in Canada on July 28 . The Swiss and Canadian release also included " Stupid Like This " , a non @-@ album track , while the Italian , German , and Australian versions included " Stupid Like This " and " Lost on The Stoop " . In France and the United Kingdom , both versions were released , and the British release also contained the music video for " Bad Day " . A live @-@ recorded version for Austrian radio station <unk> Ö3 was included on the 2005 EP Free Loop . On August 6 , 2008 an EP live from Tokyo was released exclusively on iTunes and it included " Song 6 " , " Free Loop " , " Best of Me " , " Love You Lately " and " Bad Day " . " Bad Day " was also included on Powter 's compilation albums B @-@ Sides ( 2007 ) and Best of Me ( 2010 ) . 
 = = = History = = = 
 = Hurricane Doreen ( 1977 ) = 
 Hurricane Doreen was considered the worst tropical cyclone to affect California in 32 years . The tenth tropical cyclone , fourth named storm , and second hurricane of the otherwise inactive 1977 Pacific hurricane season , it developed on August 13 . The depression tracked northwestward , intensifying into Tropical Storm Doreen later that day . Further strengthening occurred over the subsequent days , and Doreen attained its peak as a minimal hurricane early on August 15 . Executing a turn towards the north @-@ northwest , Doreen made its first landfall as a Category 1 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Wind Scale near Puerto San Carlos . Drifting offshore , Doreen made a second and final landfall near the northern portion of the Baja California as a tropical storm before rapidly weakening to a tropical depression . The tropical depression dissipated south of southern California on August 18 . 
 Hurricane Doreen and its remnants caused severe flooding in northwestern Mexico and the southwestern United States . In Mexico , heavy rainfall was reported on both Baja California and the mainland of Mexico . Flooding left 2 @,@ 000 people homeless in Mexicali along the United States @-@ Mexico border , in addition , 325 homes and businesses were destroyed in southern California . Several highways were also flooded during the passage of the storm , most notably , lanes on Interstate 8 and Interstate 15 were washed out . In San Diego and Imperial County , the total damage to agricultural interests was $ 25 million ( 1977 USD ) . In addition , eight fatalities were reported in California . Elsewhere , impact from Doreen was relatively light . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Hurricane Doreen were a tropical disturbance which formed 115 mi ( 185 km ) west of Acapulco , on August 11 . Over the next two days , the system drifted westward at 7 mph ( 11 km / h ) . By 0000 UTC August 13 , the Eastern Pacific Hurricane Center began classifying the system as Tropical Depression Ten , centered 460 mi ( 740 km ) west of Acapulco , Mexico . Immediately after developing , the depression curved northwestward , and began slowly intensifying over sea surface temperatures ( SST 's ) of 82 ° F ( 28 ° C ) . By 1800 UTC , winds increased to 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) , and the depression was then upgraded to Tropical Storm Doreen , which was centered about 530 mi ( 850 km ) west @-@ northwest of Acapulco . Air Force reconnaissance began investigating Doreen late on August 14 , and located the center about 185 mi ( 298 km ) south of the tip of Baja California . Another flight into the storm shortly thereafter confirmed that Doreen had intensified into a hurricane at 1800 UTC . 
 At that time , the eye of Doreen was around 17 mi ( 27 km ) in diameter . After becoming a hurricane , Doreen re @-@ curved to the north @-@ northwest as it sped up slightly to 10 mph ( 16 km / h ) . Doreen approached the Baja California Peninsula , as it maintained minimal hurricane status . By August 18 at 1800 UTC , Doreen was centered only 17 mi ( 27 km ) when it curved northwestward . Late on August 18 , the storm made landfall on the western coast of Baja California as a minimal hurricane . Unlike Hurricane Kathleen in 1976 which accelerated inland , Doreen moved slowly and re @-@ emerged into the Pacific Ocean , over SST 's of less than 72 ° F ( 22 ° C ) . As a result , Doreen weakened to a tropical storm before making another landfall on the Port Eugenia Peninsula on August 16 shortly after 0600 UTC . Once again , Doreen quickly re @-@ emerged into the Pacific Ocean over the Bay of Sebastian Vizcaino . Due to SST 's as low as 68 ° F ( 20 ° C ) , Doreen continued to weaken , and was downgraded to a tropical depression early on August 17 . After satellite imagery noted a poorly @-@ defined low @-@ level circulation , the final advisory was issued on Doreen , which was centered about 29 miles ( 47 km ) west of San Clemente Island , California at 0000 UTC on August 18 . The remnants of the storm tracked into the Southwestern United States and dissipated over the Colorado River Valley . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = Mexico = = = 
 Hurricane Doreen dropped heavy rainfall along the western portions of Mexico and the Southwestern Region of the United States . In Mexico , Doreen produced heaviest precipitation along the Baja California peninsula , where rainfall peaked at 14 @.@ 80 in ( 376 mm ) in the Los Cabos Area . The mainland of Mexico also received heavy rainfall , especially in the Sierra Madre Oriental mountains . In the city of Mexicali , the storm left more than 2 @,@ 000 people homeless , many of which were shanty @-@ style homes . 
 = = = California = = = 
 In anticipation of the storm , flash flood warnings were issued in the Colorado River Valley area , and were extended into southern California on August 16 , including places such as Santa Barbara County , the mountains of San Diego County , Riverside County , and portions of the Mohave Desert . Heavy rainfall fell in southern California on August 16 . An average of 2 – 4 in ( 51 – 102 mm ) of rain fell over low @-@ lying areas of southern California for a period of three days . Heavier precipitation was reported in the mountainous areas , where rainfall peaked at 7 @.@ 45 in ( 189 mm ) on San Jacinto Peak . Several other locations also reported heavy rainfall ; 3 @.@ 78 in ( 96 mm ) was reported in Calexico and 6 in ( 150 mm ) fell at Mitchell Caverns . At Edwards Air Force Base , the launch of Space Shuttle Enterprise on August 31 was delayed to September 7 after rainfall from Doreen flooded the runway of the previous flight . 
 In addition to heavy rain , high winds were reported . In Palm Springs , wind gusts were reported as high as 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) . As a result , several trees were felled and power outages occurred . Highway 88 and 111 were under water from Brawley , near the Mexican border to the Salton Sea . California State Route 98 was also flooded from <unk> to Blythe . Two of the four lanes on Interstate 15 were washed out from Los Angeles to Las Vegas , stranding thousands of gamblers in places like Barstow . Ocotillo , a town that was devastated during Hurricane Kathleen in 1976 , was flooded again . Buses were sent to evacuate the townspeople , but the residents declined to evacuate . Overall , damage totaled $ 25 million , mostly in agricultural losses in San Diego and Imperial Counties . Eight deaths were reported . Six children were swept away in the Los Angeles River . Five of them were rescued , but the sixth was later presumed dead . 
 = = = Arizona = = = 
 Doreen also produced heavy rainfall in a small area of southwestern Arizona , limited to the Yuma area . Along the border of Arizona , California , and Mexico , rainfall was recorded between 2 and 7 in ( 51 and 178 mm ) . Rainfall in the state of Arizona had peaked at 7 @.@ 01 in ( 178 mm ) in that area . Light to moderate rainfall was also occurred in other areas of the state , such as Nogales , where 3 @.@ 10 in ( 79 mm ) of precipitation was recorded . Damage to roads , levees , houses , dikes were reported throughout the state , especially in the Bullhead City area . 
 While surveying damage in southwestern Arizona , a request was made to then @-@ Governor Raul Hector Castro for $ 750 @,@ 000 in emergency services funds . The American Red Cross had been in the area and spent $ 12 @,@ 000 to assist families that were left homeless after the flood . 
 = = = Elsewhere in the United States = = = 
 Further west , larger swaths of rainfall occurred in Nevada , though precipitation was generally light with many areas experiencing less than 3 in ( 76 mm ) . Rainfall in Nevada had peaked at 4 @.@ 14 in ( 105 mm ) in <unk> , making Doreen the wettest tropical cyclone for the state of Nevada as of 2011 . In Las Vegas , major intersections were flooded due to precipitation amounts of about 1 @.@ 5 in ( 38 mm ) . In addition to street flooding , some roofs of houses and buildings collapsed . 
 In New Mexico , lesser amounts of rainfall were reported , and precipitation was limited to the northeastern and southwestern portions of the state . Much it the rainfall was between 1 to 2 in ( 25 to 51 mm ) , and precipitation with the state peaked at 2 @.@ 05 in ( 52 mm ) in the city of Florida . Rainfall was also minimal in the state of Utah , with only a few isolated areas reporting light precipitation , and generally did not exceed 3 in ( 76 mm ) . However , rainfall peaked at 4 @.@ 31 in ( 109 mm ) in Logan . 
 = Book of the Dead = 
 The Book of the Dead is an ancient Egyptian funerary text , used from the beginning of the New Kingdom ( around 1550 BCE ) to around 50 BCE . The original Egyptian name for the text , transliterated <unk> nw <unk> m <unk> is translated as Book of Coming Forth by Day . Another translation would be Book of emerging forth into the Light . " Book " is the closest term to describe the loose collection of texts consisting of a number of magic spells intended to assist a dead person 's journey through the Duat , or underworld , and into the afterlife and written by many priests over a period of about 1000 years . 
 The Book of the Dead was part of a tradition of funerary texts which includes the earlier Pyramid Texts and Coffin Texts , which were painted onto objects , not papyrus . Some of the spells included were drawn from these older works and date to the 3rd millennium BCE . Other spells were composed later in Egyptian history , dating to the Third Intermediate Period ( 11th to 7th centuries BCE ) . A number of the spells which made up the Book continued to be inscribed on tomb walls and sarcophagi , as had always been the spells from which they originated . The Book of the Dead was placed in the coffin or burial chamber of the deceased . 
 There was no single or canonical Book of the Dead . The surviving papyri contain a varying selection of religious and magical texts and vary considerably in their illustration . Some people seem to have commissioned their own copies of the Book of the Dead , perhaps choosing the spells they thought most vital in their own progression to the afterlife . The Book of the Dead was most commonly written in hieroglyphic or hieratic script on a papyrus scroll , and often illustrated with vignettes depicting the deceased and their journey into the afterlife . 
 = = Development = = 
 The Book of the Dead developed from a tradition of funerary manuscripts dating back to the Egyptian Old Kingdom . The first funerary texts were the Pyramid Texts , first used in the Pyramid of King Unas of the 5th dynasty , around 2400 BCE . These texts were written on the walls of the burial chambers within pyramids , and were exclusively for the use of the Pharaoh ( and , from the 6th dynasty , the Queen ) . The Pyramid Texts were written in an unusual hieroglyphic style ; many of the hieroglyphs representing humans or animals were left incomplete or drawn mutilated , most likely to prevent them causing any harm to the dead pharaoh . The purpose of the Pyramid Texts was to help the dead King take his place amongst the gods , in particular to reunite him with his divine father Ra ; at this period the afterlife was seen as being in the sky , rather than the underworld described in the Book of the Dead . Towards the end of the Old Kingdom , the Pyramid Texts ceased to be an exclusively royal privilege , and were adopted by regional governors and other high @-@ ranking officials . 
 In the Middle Kingdom , a new funerary text emerged , the Coffin Texts . The Coffin Texts used a newer version of the language , new spells , and included illustrations for the first time . The Coffin Texts were most commonly written on the inner surfaces of coffins , though they are occasionally found on tomb walls or on papyri . The Coffin Texts were available to wealthy private individuals , vastly increasing the number of people who could expect to participate in the afterlife ; a process which has been described as the " democratization of the afterlife " . 
 The Book of the Dead first developed in Thebes towards the beginning of the Second Intermediate Period , around 1700 BCE . The earliest known occurrence of the spells included in the Book of the Dead is from the coffin of Queen Mentuhotep , of the 13th dynasty , where the new spells were included amongst older texts known from the Pyramid Texts and Coffin Texts . Some of the spells introduced at this time claim an older provenance ; for instance the rubric to spell 30B states that it was discovered by the Prince <unk> in the reign of King Menkaure , many hundreds of years before it is attested in the archaeological record . 
 By the 17th dynasty , the Book of the Dead had become widespread not only for members of the royal family , but courtiers and other officials as well . At this stage , the spells were typically inscribed on linen shrouds wrapped around the dead , though occasionally they are found written on coffins or on papyrus . 
 The New Kingdom saw the Book of the Dead develop and spread further . The famous Spell 125 , the ' Weighing of the Heart ' , is first known from the reign of Hatshepsut and Thutmose III , <unk> BCE . From this period onward the Book of the Dead was typically written on a papyrus scroll , and the text illustrated with vignettes . During the 19th dynasty in particular , the vignettes tended to be lavish , sometimes at the expense of the surrounding text . 
 In the Third Intermediate Period , the Book of the Dead started to appear in hieratic script , as well as in the traditional hieroglyphics . The hieratic scrolls were a cheaper version , lacking illustration apart from a single vignette at the beginning , and were produced on smaller papyri . At the same time , many burials used additional funerary texts , for instance the Amduat . 
 During the 25th and 26th dynasties , the Book of the Dead was updated , revised and standardised . Spells were consistently ordered and numbered for the first time . This standardised version is known today as the ' Saite recension ' , after the Saite ( 26th ) dynasty . In the Late period and Ptolemaic period , the Book of the Dead remained based on the Saite recension , though increasingly abbreviated towards the end of the Ptolemaic period . New funerary texts appeared , including the Book of Breathing and Book of Traversing Eternity . The last use of the Book of the Dead was in the 1st century BCE , though some artistic motifs drawn from it were still in use in Roman times . 
 = = Spells = = 
 The Book of the Dead is made up of a number of individual texts and their accompanying illustrations . Most sub @-@ texts begin with the word ro , which can mean mouth , speech , a chapter of a book , spell , utterance , or incantation . This ambiguity reflects the similarity in Egyptian thought between ritual speech and magical power . In the context of the Book of the Dead , it is typically translated as either " chapter " or " spell " . In this article , the word " spell " is used . 
 At present , some 192 spells are known , though no single manuscript contains them all . They served a range of purposes . Some are intended to give the deceased mystical knowledge in the afterlife , or perhaps to identify them with the gods : for instance , Spell 17 , is an obscure and lengthy description of the god Atum . Others are incantations to ensure the different elements of the dead person 's being were preserved and reunited , and to give the deceased control over the world around him . Still others protect the deceased from various hostile forces , or guide him through the underworld past various obstacles . Famously , two spells also deal with the judgement of the deceased in the Weighing of the Heart ritual . 
 Such spells as 26 @-@ 30 , and sometimes spells 6 and 126 relate to the heart , and were inscribed on scarabs . 
 The texts and images of the Book of the Dead were magical as well as religious . Magic was as legitimate an activity as praying to the gods , even when the magic was aimed at controlling the gods themselves . Indeed , there was little distinction for the Ancient Egyptians between magical and religious practice . The concept of magic ( heka ) was also intimately linked with the spoken and written word . The act of speaking a ritual formula was an act of creation ; there is a sense in which action and speech were one and the same thing . The magical power of words extended to the written word . Hieroglyphic script was held to have been invented by the god Thoth , and the hieroglyphs themselves were powerful . Written words conveyed the full force of a spell . This was even true when the text was abbreviated or omitted , as often occurred in later Book of the Dead scrolls , particularly if the accompanying images were present . The Egyptians also believed that knowing the name of something gave power over it ; thus , the Book of the Dead equips its owner with the mystical names of many of the entities he would encounter in the afterlife , giving him power over them . 
 The spells of the Book of the Dead made use of several magical techniques which can also be seen in other areas of Egyptian life . A number of spells are for magical amulets , which would protect the deceased from harm . In addition to being represented on a Book of the Dead papyrus , these spells appeared on amulets wound into the wrappings of a mummy . Everyday magic made use of amulets in huge numbers . Other items in direct contact with the body in the tomb , such as headrests , were also considered to have <unk> value . A number of spells also refer to Egyptian beliefs about the magical healing power of saliva . 
 = = = Organization = = = 
 Almost every Book of the Dead was unique , containing a different mixture of spells drawn from the corpus of texts available . For most of the history of the Book of the Dead there was no defined order or structure . In fact , until Paul <unk> 's 1967 " pioneering study " of common themes between texts , Egyptologists concluded there was no internal structure at all . It is only from the Saite period ( 26th dynasty ) onwards that there is a defined order . 
 The Books of the Dead from the Saite period tend to organize the Chapters into four sections : 
 Chapters 1 – 16 * The deceased enters the tomb , descends to the underworld , and the body regains its powers of movement and speech . 
 Chapters 17 – 63 Explanation of the mythic origin of the gods and places , the deceased are made to live again so that they may arise , reborn , with the morning sun . 
 Chapters 64 – 129 The deceased travels across the sky in the sun ark as one of the blessed dead . In the evening , the deceased travels to the underworld to appear before Osiris . 
 Chapters 130 – 189 Having been vindicated , the deceased assumes power in the universe as one of the gods . This section also includes assorted chapters on protective amulets , provision of food , and important places . 
 = = Egyptian concepts of death and afterlife = = 
 The spells in the Book of the Dead depict Egyptian beliefs about the nature of death and the afterlife . The Book of the Dead is a vital source of information about Egyptian beliefs in this area . 
 = = = Preservation = = = 
 One aspect of death was the disintegration of the various <unk> , or modes of existence . Funerary rituals served to re @-@ integrate these different aspects of being . Mummification served to preserve and transform the physical body into sah , an idealised form with divine aspects ; the Book of the Dead contained spells aimed at preserving the body of the deceased , which may have been recited during the process of mummification . The heart , which was regarded as the aspect of being which included intelligence and memory , was also protected with spells , and in case anything happened to the physical heart , it was common to bury jewelled heart scarabs with a body to provide a replacement . The ka , or life @-@ force , remained in the tomb with the dead body , and required sustenance from offerings of food , water and incense . In case priests or relatives failed to provide these offerings , Spell 105 ensured the ka was satisfied . The name of the dead person , which constituted their individuality and was required for their continued existence , was written in many places throughout the Book , and spell 25 ensured the deceased would remember their own name . The ba was a free @-@ ranging spirit aspect of the deceased . It was the ba , depicted as a human @-@ headed bird , which could " go forth by day " from the tomb into the world ; spells 61 and 89 acted to preserve it . Finally , the shut , or shadow of the deceased , was preserved by spells 91 , 92 and 188 . If all these aspects of the person could be variously preserved , remembered , and satiated , then the dead person would live on in the form of an akh . An akh was a blessed spirit with magical powers who would dwell among the gods . 
 = = = Afterlife = = = 
 The nature of the afterlife which the dead person enjoyed is difficult to define , because of the differing traditions within Ancient Egyptian religion . In the Book of the Dead , the dead were taken into the presence of the god Osiris , who was confined to the subterranean Duat . There are also spells to enable the ba or akh of the dead to join Ra as he travelled the sky in his sun @-@ barque , and help him fight off Apep . As well as joining the Gods , the Book of the Dead also depicts the dead living on in the ' Field of Reeds ' , a <unk> likeness of the real world . The Field of Reeds is depicted as a lush , plentiful version of the Egypt of the living . There are fields , crops , oxen , people and waterways . The deceased person is shown encountering the Great Ennead , a group of gods , as well as his or her own parents . While the depiction of the Field of Reeds is pleasant and plentiful , it is also clear that manual labour is required . For this reason burials included a number of statuettes named shabti , or later <unk> . These statuettes were inscribed with a spell , also included in the Book of the Dead , requiring them to undertake any manual labour that might be the owner 's duty in the afterlife . It is also clear that the dead not only went to a place where the gods lived , but that they acquired divine characteristics themselves . In many occasions , the deceased is mentioned as " The Osiris - [ Name ] " in the Book of the Dead . 
 The path to the afterlife as laid out in the Book of the Dead was a difficult one . The deceased was required to pass a series of gates , caverns and mounds guarded by supernatural creatures . These terrifying entities were armed with enormous knives and are illustrated in grotesque forms , typically as human figures with the heads of animals or combinations of different ferocious beasts . Their names — for instance , " He who lives on snakes " or " He who dances in blood " — are equally grotesque . These creatures had to be pacified by reciting the appropriate spells included in the Book of the Dead ; once pacified they posed no further threat , and could even extend their protection to the dead person . Another breed of supernatural creatures was ' slaughterers ' who killed the unrighteous on behalf of Osiris ; the Book of the Dead equipped its owner to escape their attentions . As well as these supernatural entities , there were also threats from natural or supernatural animals , including crocodiles , snakes , and beetles . 
 = = = Judgment = = = 
 If all the obstacles of the Duat could be negotiated , the deceased would be judged in the " Weighing of the Heart " ritual , depicted in Spell 125 . The deceased was led by the god Anubis into the presence of Osiris . There , the dead person swore that he had not committed any sin from a list of 42 sins , reciting a text known as the " Negative Confession " . Then the dead person 's heart was weighed on a pair of scales , against the goddess Maat , who embodied truth and justice . Maat was often represented by an ostrich feather , the hieroglyphic sign for her name . At this point , there was a risk that the deceased 's heart would bear witness , owning up to sins committed in life ; Spell 30B guarded against this eventuality . If the scales balanced , this meant the deceased had led a good life . Anubis would take them to Osiris and they would find their place in the afterlife , becoming maa @-@ <unk> , meaning " vindicated " or " true of voice " . If the heart was out of balance with Maat , then another fearsome beast called <unk> , the Devourer , stood ready to eat it and put the dead person 's afterlife to an early and unpleasant end . 
 This scene is remarkable not only for its vividness but as one of the few parts of the Book of the Dead with any explicit moral content . The judgment of the dead and the Negative Confession were a representation of the conventional moral code which governed Egyptian society . For every " I have not ... " in the Negative Confession , it is possible to read an unexpressed " Thou shalt not " . While the Ten Commandments of Judeo @-@ Christian ethics are rules of conduct laid down by a perceived divine revelation , the Negative Confession is more a divine enforcement of everyday morality . Views differ among Egyptologists about how far the Negative Confession represents a moral absolute , with ethical purity being necessary for progress to the Afterlife . John Taylor points out the wording of Spells 30B and 125 suggests a pragmatic approach to morality ; by preventing the heart from contradicting him with any inconvenient truths , it seems that the deceased could enter the afterlife even if their life had not been entirely pure . Ogden Goelet says " without an exemplary and moral existence , there was no hope for a successful afterlife " , while Geraldine Pinch suggests that the Negative Confession is essentially similar to the spells protecting from demons , and that the success of the Weighing of the Heart depended on the mystical knowledge of the true names of the judges rather than on the deceased 's moral behaviour . 
 = = Producing a Book of the Dead = = 
 A Book of the Dead papyrus was produced to order by scribes . They were commissioned by people in preparation for their own funeral , or by the relatives of someone recently deceased . They were expensive items ; one source gives the price of a Book of the Dead scroll as one deben of silver , perhaps half the annual pay of a labourer . Papyrus itself was evidently costly , as there are many instances of its re @-@ use in everyday documents , creating palimpsests . In one case , a Book of the Dead was written on second @-@ hand papyrus . 
 Most owners of the Book of the Dead were evidently part of the social elite ; they were initially reserved for the royal family , but later papyri are found in the tombs of scribes , priests and officials . Most owners were men , and generally the vignettes included the owner 's wife as well . Towards the beginning of the history of the Book of the Dead , there are roughly 10 copies belonging to men for every one for a woman . However , during the Third Intermediate Period , 2 / 3 were for women ; and women owned roughly a third of the hieratic <unk> from the Late and Ptolemaic Periods . 
 The dimensions of a Book of the Dead could vary widely ; the longest is 40m long while some are as short as 1m . They are composed of sheets of papyrus joined together , the individual papyri varying in width from 15 cm to 45 cm . The scribes working on Book of the Dead papyri took more care over their work than those working on more mundane texts ; care was taken to frame the text within margins , and to avoid writing on the joints between sheets . The words <unk> em <unk> , or ' coming forth by day ' sometimes appear on the reverse of the outer margin , perhaps acting as a label . 
 Books were often prefabricated in funerary workshops , with spaces being left for the name of the deceased to be written in later . For instance , in the Papyrus of Ani , the name " Ani " appears at the top or bottom of a column , or immediately following a rubric introducing him as the speaker of a block of text ; the name appears in a different handwriting to the rest of the manuscript , and in some places is mis @-@ spelt or omitted entirely . 
 The text of a New Kingdom Book of the Dead was typically written in cursive hieroglyphs , most often from left to right , but also sometimes from right to left . The hieroglyphs were in columns , which were separated by black lines - a similar arrangement to that used when hieroglyphs were carved on tomb walls or monuments . Illustrations were put in frames above , below , or between the columns of text . The largest illustrations took up a full page of papyrus . 
 From the 21st Dynasty onward , more copies of the Book of the Dead are found in hieratic script . The calligraphy is similar to that of other hieratic manuscripts of the New Kingdom ; the text is written in horizontal lines across wide columns ( often the column size corresponds to the size of the papyrus sheets of which a scroll is made up ) . Occasionally a hieratic Book of the Dead contains captions in hieroglyphic . 
 The text of a Book of the Dead was written in both black and red ink , regardless of whether it was in hieroglyphic or hieratic script . Most of the text was in black , with red ink used for the titles of spells , opening and closing sections of spells , the instructions to perform spells correctly in rituals , and also for the names of dangerous creatures such as the demon Apep . The black ink used was based on carbon , and the red ink on ochre , in both cases mixed with water . 
 The style and nature of the vignettes used to illustrate a Book of the Dead varies widely . Some contain lavish colour illustrations , even making use of gold leaf . Others contain only line drawings , or one simple illustration at the opening . 
 Book of the Dead papyri were often the work of several different scribes and artists whose work was literally pasted together . It is usually possible to identify the style of more than one scribe used on a given manuscript , even when the manuscript is a shorter one . The text and illustrations were produced by different scribes ; there are a number of Books where the text was completed but the illustrations were left empty . 
 = = Discovery , translation , interpretation and preservation = = 
 The existence of the Book of the Dead was known as early as the Middle Ages , well before its contents could be understood . Since it was found in tombs , it was evidently a document of a religious nature , and this led to the widespread misapprehension that the Book of the Dead was the equivalent of a Bible or Qur 'an . They didn 't recognize them as a funerary ritual . 
 In 1842 Karl Richard Lepsius published a translation of a manuscript dated to the Ptolemaic era and coined the name " Book of The Dead " . He also introduced the spell numbering system which is still in use , identifying 165 different spells . Lepsius promoted the idea of a comparative edition of the Book of the Dead , drawing on all relevant manuscripts . This project was undertaken by Édouard <unk> , starting in 1875 and completed in 1886 , producing a three @-@ volume work including a selection of vignettes for every one of the 186 spells he worked with , the more significant variations of the text for every spell , and commentary . In 1867 Samuel Birch of the British Museum published the first extensive English translation . In 1876 he published a photographic copy of the Papyrus of <unk> . 
 The work of E. A. Wallis Budge , Birch 's successor at the British Museum , is still in wide circulation – including both his hieroglyphic editions and his English translations of the Papyrus of Ani , though the latter are now considered inaccurate and out @-@ of @-@ date . More recent translations in English have been published by T. G. Allen ( 1974 ) and Raymond O. Faulkner ( 1972 ) . As more work has been done on the Book of the Dead , more spells have been identified , and the total now stands at 192 . 
 In the 1970s , Ursula <unk> @-@ Köhler at the University of Bonn began a working group to develop the history of Book of the Dead texts . This later received sponsorship from the German state of North Rhine @-@ Westphalia and the German Research Foundation , in 2004 coming under the auspices of the German Academies of Sciences and Arts . Today the Book of the Dead Project , as it is called , maintains a database of documentation and photography covering 80 % of extant copies and fragments from the corpus of Book of the Dead texts , and provides current services to Egyptologists . It is housed at the University of Bonn , with much material available online . Affiliated scholars are authoring a series of monograph studies , the Studien zum <unk> <unk> , alongside a series that publishes the manuscripts themselves , <unk> des <unk> <unk> . Both are in print by Harrassowitz Verlag . <unk> has released another series of related monographs , <unk> , focused on analysis , synoptic comparison , and textual criticism . 
 Research work on the Book of the Dead has always posed technical difficulties thanks to the need to copy very long hieroglyphic texts . Initially , these were copied out by hand , with the assistance either of tracing paper or a camera lucida . In the mid @-@ 19th century , hieroglyphic fonts became available and made lithographic reproduction of manuscripts more feasible . In the present day , hieroglyphics can be rendered in desktop publishing software and this , combined with digital print technology , means that the costs of publishing a Book of the Dead may be considerably reduced . However , a very large amount of the source material in museums around the world remains unpublished . 
 = = = Chronology = = = 
 c . 3150 BCE - First preserved hieroglyphs , on small labels in the tomb of a king buried ( in tomb U @-@ j ) at Abydos 
 c . 3000 BCE - The beginning of the numbered dynasties of kings of ancient Egypt 
 'c . 2345 BCE - First royal pyramid , of King Unas , to contain the Pyramid Texts , carved precursors ( intended only for the king ) to the funerary literature from which the Book of the Dead ultimately developed 
 c . 2100 BCE - First Coffin Texts , developed from the Pyramid Texts and for a time painted on the coffins of commoners . Many spells of the Book of the Dead are closely derived from them 
 c . 1600 BCE - Earliest spells of the Book of the Dead , on the coffin of Queen <unk> , a descendent of kings from the New Kingdom 
 c . 1550 BCE - From this time onward to the beginning of the New kingdom , papyrus copies of the Book of the Dead are used instead of inscribing spells on the walls of the tombs 
 c . 600 BCE - Approximately when the order of the spells became standard 
 2nd Century CE - Possibly the last copies of the Book of the Dead were produced , but it is a poorly documented era of history 
 313 CE - Christianity spreads to Egypt 
 1798 - Napoleon 's invasion of Egypt encourages European interests in ancient Egypt ; 1799 , Vivant Denon was handed a copy of the Book of the Dead 
 1805 - J. Marc Cadet makes the first publication , on 18 plates , of a Book of the Dead , <unk> <unk> d 'un <unk> de Papyrus <unk> à <unk> dans un <unk> des Rois , <unk> d 'une notice descriptive , Paris , Levrault 
 1822 - J. François Champollion announces the key to the decipherment of ancient Egyptian hieroglyphic writing , subsequently developed in his later publications , the most extensive after his death in 1832 
 1842 - C.R. Lepsius publishes the first major study of the Book of the Dead , begins the numbering of the spells or chapters , and brings the name ' Book of the Dead ' into general circulation 
 = Thor : The Dark World = 
 Thor : The Dark World is a 2013 American superhero film featuring the Marvel Comics character Thor , produced by Marvel Studios and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures . It is the sequel to 2011 's Thor and the eighth film in the Marvel Cinematic Universe . The film was directed by Alan Taylor , with a screenplay by Christopher Yost and Christopher Markus & Stephen McFeely . It stars Chris Hemsworth , Natalie Portman , Tom Hiddleston , Anthony Hopkins , Stellan Skarsgård , Idris Elba , Christopher Eccleston , Adewale Akinnuoye @-@ Agbaje , Kat Dennings , Ray Stevenson , Zachary Levi , Tadanobu Asano , Jaimie Alexander , and Rene Russo . In Thor : The Dark World , Thor teams up with Loki to save the Nine Realms from the Dark Elves led by the vengeful Malekith , who intends to plunge the universe into darkness . 
 Development of Thor : The Dark World began in April 2011 , when producer Kevin Feige announced plans for a sequel to follow the crossover film The Avengers . In July 2011 , Kenneth Branagh , the director of Thor , withdrew from the project . Brian Kirk and Patty Jenkins were considered to direct the film before Taylor was hired in January 2012 . The supporting cast filled out in August 2012 , with the hiring of Eccleston , Dennings , and Akinnuoye @-@ Agbaje . Principal photography began in September 2012 in Surrey , England with filming continuing in Iceland and London , before wrapping up in December 2012 . Thor : The Dark World was converted to 3D in post @-@ production . 
 Thor : The Dark World premiered at the Odeon Leicester Square in London on October 22 , 2013 . It was released internationally on October 30 , 2013 , and on November 8 , 2013 , in the United States . The film received mixed reviews , but was a commercial success , grossing over $ 644 million worldwide . A third film , Thor : Ragnarok , is set for release on November 3 , 2017 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 <unk> ago , Bor , father of Odin , clashes with the Dark Elf Malekith , who seeks to unleash a weapon known as the Aether on the nine realms . After conquering Malekith 's forces , including enhanced warriors called the <unk> , on their home world of Svartalfheim , Bor safeguards the Aether within a stone column . Unbeknownst to Bor , Malekith , his lieutenant Algrim , and a handful of Dark Elves escape into suspended animation . 
 In present @-@ day Asgard , Loki stands imprisoned for his war crimes on <unk> Meanwhile , Thor , alongside warriors Fandral , Volstagg , and Sif , repel marauders on Vanaheim , home of their comrade Hogun ; it is the final battle in a war to pacify the Nine Realms following the reconstruction of the Bifröst , the " Rainbow Bridge " between realms , which had been destroyed two years <unk> The Asgardians soon learn that the Convergence , a rare alignment of the Nine Realms , is imminent ; as the event approaches , portals linking the worlds appear at random . 
 In London , astrophysicist Dr. Jane Foster and her intern Darcy Lewis travel to an abandoned factory where such portals have appeared , disrupting the laws of physics around them . Separating from the group , Jane is teleported to another world , where she is infected by the Aether . Heimdall alerts Thor that Jane has moved beyond his near all @-@ seeing vision , leading Thor to Earth . When Thor finds Jane , she inadvertently releases an unearthly force , and Thor returns with her to Asgard . Odin , recognizing the Aether , warns that the Aether will not only kill Jane , but that its return heralds a catastrophic prophecy . 
 Malekith , awakened by the Aether 's release , turns Algrim into a <unk> and attacks Asgard . During the battle , Malekith and Algrim search for Jane , sensing that she contains the Aether . Thor 's mother Frigga is killed protecting Jane , and Malekith and Algrim are forced to flee without Jane . Despite Odin 's orders not to leave Asgard , Thor reluctantly enlists the help of Loki , who knows of a secret portal to Svartalfheim , where they will use Jane to lure and confront Malekith , away from Asgard . In return , Thor promises Loki vengeance on Malekith for killing their mother . With Volstagg and Sif stalling Asgardian soldiers and Fandral assisting their escape , Thor , Loki , and Jane head to Svartalfheim . 
 There , Loki tricks Malekith into drawing the Aether out of Jane , but Thor 's attempt to destroy the exposed substance fails . Malekith merges with the Aether and leaves in his ship as Loki is fatally wounded while killing Algrim . Thor , cradling Loki in his arms , promises to tell their father of his sacrifice . Afterwards , Thor and Jane discover another portal in a nearby cave and reunite in London with Darcy and Jane 's mentor Dr. Erik Selvig — who was briefly institutionalized due to the mental trauma he suffered during Loki 's attack on Earth . They learn that Malekith plans to restore the Dark Elves to dominance by unleashing the Aether at the center of the Convergence in Greenwich . Thor battles Malekith through various portals and across multiple worlds until one portal separates them , leaving Malekith unopposed on Earth . Thor returns in time to help his mortal comrades use their scientific equipment to transport Malekith to Svartalfheim , where he is crushed by his own damaged ship . 
 Thor returns to Asgard , where he declines Odin 's offer to take the throne and tells Odin of Loki 's sacrifice . As he leaves , Odin 's form transforms into Loki , who is alive and impersonating Odin . 
 In a mid @-@ credits scene , Volstagg and Sif visit the Collector and entrust the Aether to his care , commenting that with the Tesseract already in Asgard , having two Infinity Stones so close together would be dangerous . As they leave , the Collector remarks , " One down , five to go . " In a post @-@ credits scene , Jane and Thor reunite on Earth while somewhere in London a frost monster from Jotunheim , accidentally transported to Earth during the final battle , continues to run amok . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Chris Hemsworth as Thor : 
 The crown prince of Asgard , based on the Norse mythological deity of the same name . Hemsworth stated that the film addresses unresolved issues regarding Thor 's relationships from previous films , " For Thor and Jane , there are some unanswered questions now , since obviously he didn 't stop in and catch up with her in The Avengers . Thor might have some explaining to do in this one . And with Loki , we get down to the major bones of our conflict with everything that 's come from Thor to Avengers to now . " Hemsworth added , " Thor 's journey I think picks more so up from where we left the first one — About to take on the throne ... and now coming to the realization of what responsibility comes with that . Also , Alan [ Taylor ] keeps talking about the dark side of that responsibility , and the secrets of being king or becoming sort of very political about what people need to know and what they want to know . " Hemsworth especially enjoyed the role of Thor in this film as he was able to , " ... break him down and find his human qualities and his vulnerable side . " 
 Natalie Portman as Jane Foster : 
 An astrophysicist and Thor 's love interest , who is brought from Earth to Asgard by Thor after she is infected with a mysterious energy . Producer Kevin Feige said , " [ W ] hile Thor was a fish out of water on Earth in the first two films ( Thor and The Avengers ) , this time Jane is very much a fish out of water in Asgard . " Portman added , " It was a whole different adventure this time . Because Jane is the fish out of water . I didn 't want to make it like Bill & Ted , or like a valley girl dumped into <unk> . " Portman also said the film finds Jane at a different place in her life , " Jane has moved , so she 's now in London , not in Santa Fe anymore . Obviously she has gone through missing Thor and also being upset at him because he didn 't come knock on her door when he was on her planet . She 's definitely been getting over that and trying to move on . " Hemsworth 's wife Elsa Pataky stood in for Portman during the final kissing scene due to a scheduling conflict . 
 Tom Hiddleston as Loki : 
 Thor 's adoptive brother and nemesis , based on the deity of the same name , who forms an uneasy alliance with Thor against the Dark Elves . On where he wished to take the character in the film , Hiddleston said , " I 'd like to take [ Loki ] to his absolute rock bottom . I 'd like to see him yield , essentially , to his darkest instincts . Then , having hit rock bottom , maybe come back up . I think the fascination for me about playing Loki is that , in the history of the mythology and the comic books and the Scandinavian myths , is he 's constantly dancing on this fault line of the dark side and redemption . " Hiddleston recalled , " When I met Alan [ Taylor ] , he asked me how I thought I could do Loki again without repeating myself and I remembered talking with Kevin Feige when we were on the Avengers promotional tour . I said , ' OK , you 've seen Thor and Loki be antagonistic for two films now . It would be amazing to see them fight side by side . I 've been the bad guy now twice , so I can 't be again , or otherwise I shouldn 't be in the film . So we have to find a new role for me to play . " 
 Anthony Hopkins as Odin : 
 The king of Asgard , father of Thor , and adoptive father of Loki , based on the deity of the same name , who disapproves of Jane Foster being in Asgard . Regarding Thor 's relationship with his father , Hemsworth said , " [ T ] he conflict between Thor and Odin was so great in the first one ... so , certainly they disagree as I think they always will at times but there 's a far greater respect from each other . So it becomes , I guess , a more mature conversation , but there 's more at stake this time , too . It 's not sort of just their individual egos , the whole universe is at stake . " As to his approach Hopkins said , " I just play Odin like a human being , with maybe a little more dimension . I grow a beard , look hopefully impressive and keep it as real as possible . " 
 Stellan Skarsgård as Erik Selvig : 
 Foster 's mentor and colleague . Skarsgård said , the film finds Selvig in a " disrupted mode " explaining , " Having a god in your head for a while creates some psychological problems " , referring to the character 's ordeal following The Avengers . 
 Idris Elba as Heimdall : 
 The all @-@ seeing , all @-@ hearing Asgardian sentry of the Bifröst Bridge , based on the mythological deity of the same name . Elba said he has a larger role in the sequel , " In the new film we 're going to get to know Heimdall the Asgardian a bit better , and we 're going to get to know Asgard a bit better . I can 't say too much , but the expansion of Thor in his world is going to be huge . My part was very small and functional in the first film " . 
 Christopher Eccleston as Malekith : 
 The ruler of the Dark Elves of Svartalfheim . About Malekith 's motivation , Eccleston said , " There is a kind of tragic quality to his quest . Because he 's lost his wife , he 's lost his children . He 's lost everything . And he returns for revenge . And the agent for his revenge is the Aether . If he gets hold of that , he is omnipotent . " Eccleston continued , " What I thought about a great deal was revenge — there 's huge amounts of revenge . One quote is : ' When you seek revenge , be sure to dig two graves . ' I did a film called <unk> Tragedy where I played a guy called <unk> — from the word ' vindictive ' — and he is the distillation of revenge . So , in a way , that was what I had to think of : how revenge can make you absolutely monomaniacal — though you 're still trying to make it recognizably motive @-@ led . It 's just the personification of movie evil . " However Taylor stated that a lot of scenes involving Malekith 's backstory had to be cut from the film to make it more efficient . Eccleston revealed that he speaks an invented language for the film explaining , " The Elvish language is definitely based on European languages . I think there ’ s probably some Finnish in there . It does have its logic and its rhythms . It also has many syllables and it 's very difficult to do while remaining naturalistic . It 's been a particular challenge for us but hopefully it gives the film some complexity and variety . " Eccleston also said the role required six hours of make @-@ up and 45 minutes in wardrobe . 
 Adewale Akinnuoye @-@ Agbaje as Algrim / Kurse : 
 A Dark Elf , and Malekith 's trusted and loyal lieutenant , who is transformed into a monstrous creature in order to destroy Thor . Akinnuoye @-@ Agbaje described Kurse as " an amalgamation of a bull and a lava @-@ like creature . He has very animalistic tendencies but with this insatiable and unstoppable power . As an actor , that 's one of the hardest things to embody . You have to realize you are probably the most powerful thing you could imagine . And you have to be that . You can 't pretend , so that when you face Thor , it 's real . " Akinnuoye @-@ Agbaje stated the role required three hours of make @-@ up a day and had to put on heavy duty prosthetics explaining , " The outfit weighed about 40 pounds . I 'm sure there will be a certain amount of CGI but a good 80 % was me in that suit . " About the character Akinnuoye @-@ Agbaje said , " I suppose Algrim and Kurse would be the quintessential baddies , but in reality they are what I perceive as the scorn and the victims of the story . They are the elves who have basically lost their planet and their race to another race , the Asgardians . Here is a man / alien who places a noble objective beyond his own life and I think there is something extremely inspiring about that because he looks at the bigger picture and sees himself as a means to that end . " Akinnuoye @-@ Agbaje added , " I worked with director Alan Taylor in trying to maintain Algrim 's humanity all the way throughout Kurse 's transformation , so that even when you see Kurse the beast , you can still relate to him as being Algrim inside . And symbolically we did that by keeping the same piercing blue eyes throughout . " 
 Kat Dennings as Darcy Lewis : 
 A political science major who is interning for Foster . Her role in the film was expanded from the comic relief sidekick role she played in the first Thor film . Dennings said her character is " really bad at real science in this first movie . In the second movie , she 's more interested , but she still doesn 't know anything about it . She loves Jane , she really wants Jane and Thor to be together . It 's almost like her own little soap opera that she watches . " 
 Ray Stevenson as Volstagg : 
 A member of the Warriors Three ; a group of three Asgardian adventurers who are among Thor 's closest comrades , known for both his hearty appetite and wide girth . About the character Stevenson said , " He 's got a heart the size of a planet that he wears on his sleeve , so he 's like a big kid . " Regarding Volstagg 's role in this film , Stevenson said , " Volstagg is struggling , he has a brood , they [ the Warriors Three ] are fighting for hearth and home as much as for the idea of Asgard itself . That 's where he has trouble . " Explaining , " He 's all too aware of how potentially threatening this new enemy is on both the home front and the battlefield . " 
 Zachary Levi as Fandral : 
 A member of the Warriors Three , characterized as an irrepressible swashbuckler and romantic . Levi replaced Joshua Dallas in the role due to his commitment on Once Upon a Time . Levi had been up for the role in the first film , but bowed out due to his commitment on Chuck . Levi compared the character to Flynn Rider , the character he played in the animated feature , Tangled , " Fandral is a little similar to Rider in some ways ... He 's like this Lothario . He 's like Errol Flynn . He loves ladies , as do I " . Regarding the dynamic of the Warriors Three , Levi said , " The Warriors Three are here to support Thor . We are his confidants , his best friends . We 've all grown up together in a lot of ways and fought many a battle together , escaped death . To me it 's the way best friends ought to be — they 're there when you need to talk and they 're there if you don 't want to talk , and they 're there if you need to escape from your father 's place in a flying skiff ! " 
 Tadanobu Asano as Hogun : 
 A member of the Warriors Three , a native of Vanaheim primarily identified by his grim demeanor . 
 Jaimie Alexander as Sif : 
 An Asgardian warrior , Thor 's childhood friend and Jane Foster 's romantic rival , based on the deity of the same name . Alexander said there is more character development for Sif and the film explores the Sif @-@ Thor relationship . Alexander elaborated , " I really tried to bring a little bit more vulnerability in this film . Sif is very much in love with Thor and very much cares about his well @-@ being . So she kicks a lot of butt in this movie but she also opens her heart a lot . " Alexander suffered a severe back injury while on the set . About the injury , she said , " It was raining , it was dark outside , it was like 5 in the morning — and I went down a metal staircase and slipped and slipped a disc in my thoracic spine and chipped 11 of my vertebrae . I knocked my left shoulder out of place and tore my rhomboid on my right side ... It took me out of filming for a month " . 
 Rene Russo as Frigga : 
 The wife of Odin , queen of Asgard , mother of Thor and adoptive mother of Loki , based on the mythological deity of the same name . Russo said that her role was expanded and explores Frigga 's relationship with Loki , " You know , they cut me [ down ] in the first film . Kenneth Branagh sent me a nice note , because he understood , he 's an actor . You move on , what are you going to do ? But I think they 're going to need a good mom in the next film . Loki needs his mom . I have a lot of compassion for [ Loki ] . But we might have to have a conversation about what he just did " . 
 Additionally , Alice Krige portrays Eir , an Asgardian physician . Chris O 'Dowd was cast as Richard , a suitor of Jane Foster 's . Benicio del Toro , who plays the Collector in Marvel Studios ' Guardians of the Galaxy , appears in a mid @-@ credits scene with Ophelia Lovibond , who plays his aide Carina . Jonathan Howard plays Ian Boothby , Darcy 's intern . Tony Curran plays Bor , Odin 's father , based on the deity of the same name . Clive Russell plays Tyr , based on the deity of the same name . Richard Brake portrays a captain in the Einherjar . Chris Evans makes an uncredited cameo appearance as Loki masquerading as Captain America , while Thor co @-@ creator Stan Lee makes a cameo appearance as a patient in a mental ward . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 In April 2011 before the release of Thor ( 2011 ) , Marvel Studios president Kevin Feige stated that following The Avengers ( 2012 ) , " Thor will go off into a new adventure . " Kenneth Branagh , director of Thor , responded to his comments , saying , " It is kind of news to me . Here 's what I would say to that : It 's that I 'm thrilled they 're that confident . I shall wait for the audience to tell us whether there should be a second one , and then if that 's a nice conversation to be had [ among ] all of us , that 'd be thrilling . But I 've got too much Irish superstitious blood in me to assume that Thor 2 will happen . But if Marvel says so , then I guess it must be true " . Feige later explained that Marvel Studios would gauge how well Thor did at the box office before announcing sequels , but stated , " Don Payne is working on story ideas for a part two . We 've got various options with Ken [ Branagh ] to discuss coming back , but right now the focus is on the first one . Don is , slowly but surely , thinking about where to take the character next should we be so lucky " . 
 In June 2011 , Walt Disney Studios set a July 26 , 2013 , release date for the Thor sequel with Chris Hemsworth reprising his role as the title hero . It was also reported that Branagh would not be returning as director but would likely be involved in a producing capacity . The Los Angeles Times cited the long commitment necessary for a special effects @-@ heavy epic and the pressure to start the script process right away as reasons for Branagh 's departure , although he was initially enthused by the chance to direct the sequel . Branagh noted , " It was a long time [ making the first film ] and they were way too quick for me to get straight back into another , [ but ] it was a pleasurable experience and a film I 'm very proud of . " The following day , Marvel formally hired Payne , one of the credited writers of the first film , to script the sequel . In August , Brian Kirk entered early negotiations to direct the Thor sequel . The film would have marked Kirk 's first time directing a big @-@ budget motion picture , after having directed television series for HBO , Showtime and the BBC , including Game of Thrones . 
 In September 2011 , Tom Hiddleston confirmed he would return in the sequel , speculating that in the film , " [ Loki will ] have to take responsibility for what he 's done " . Patty Jenkins , the director of Monster and the pilot episode of AMC 's The Killing , entered early negotiations with Marvel Studios and Disney to direct the film , after Kirk had passed due to contractual sticking points that arose during negotiations . Later in the month , Feige stated the sequel would " take Thor literally to other worlds " and would " primarily be the journey of that character , of he and Jane Foster and how the new dynamic with his father is working out , as well as what are the broader stakes for The Nine Worlds " . On October 13 , 2011 , Marvel confirmed that Jenkins would direct the sequel and Natalie Portman would return to star . Disney also moved the release date for the film to November 15 , 2013 . 
 = = = Pre @-@ production = = = 
 In December 2011 , Jenkins exited the project , citing " creative differences " . She stated , " I have had a great time working at Marvel . We parted on very good terms , and I look forward to working with them again . " Three days later , The Hollywood Reporter reported that Marvel was looking at Alan Taylor and Daniel Minahan as prospective directors to replace Jenkins . <unk> also reported that Marvel was in the midst of hiring a writer to rewrite Don Payne 's script and the shortlist of possible writers consists of John Collee , Robert Rodat , and Roger Avary . At the end of the month , Alan Taylor , best known for directing episodes of the HBO fantasy series Game of Thrones , was chosen to direct the sequel . Feige mentioned Taylor 's work on the series Mad Men , Boardwalk Empire and Game of Thrones as reasons for his hiring , saying " With Alan 's direction we got a few more layers of patina , of texture , of reality into our golden realm . " 
 By January 10 , Marvel Studios had commissioned screenwriter Robert Rodat to rewrite the sequel and Hiddleston stated that filming was expected to begin in London in the summer of 2012 . Hemsworth later confirmed that filming was scheduled to begin in August . Hemsworth also revealed that the film would have a more Viking @-@ influenced feel , elaborating " I think the science fiction element to Thor … the danger is it falls a little bit into the world of it 's ' tough to throw a light to . ' I think of big waterfalls and mountains and a Viking influence , where the Norse mythology kind of grew from . Having that in Asgard is going to make it all the more special and that 's what Alan [ Taylor ] wants to bring to it . " Feige said " while the relationship between Loki and Thor certainly has changed [ after the events of the movie The Avengers ] and has progressed , a lot of Thor 2 is picking up where it left off in terms of Jane , who you just saw for a moment on a computer monitor , and also what 's been going on in the nine realms without the Asgardians being able to use the Bifrost . " Feige also said that while Loki has a part , " there will be a different villain , another big villain " . 
 In May 2012 , Mads Mikkelsen began talks to play one of the villains in the film and Anthony Hopkins , who played Odin in the first film , committed to returning in the sequel . At the end of the month , Disney moved up the release date for the film a week ahead of the previous date to November 8 , 2013 . 
 By June 2012 , much of the first film 's supporting cast was confirmed to return , including Idris Elba , Jaimie Alexander , Ray Stevenson and Stellan Skarsgård . Also in June , Joshua Dallas announced that he would not be reprising the role of Fandral . Dallas had initially intended to return , but had to bow out due to his commitment on the television show , Once Upon a Time , and Zachary Levi was cast in his place . Levi was originally up for the role in the first film but scheduling conflicts with Chuck forced him to drop out . 
 In July 2012 , Mikkelsen stated he would not be appearing in the sequel due to prior commitments , " That 's not happening unfortunately . I had a meeting with [ the filmmakers ] , but it was a bit too late and then Hannibal came in ... It 's just not happening " . At the 2012 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International , it was announced that the film would be titled Thor : The Dark World . At the end of the month , residents near Bourne Wood in Surrey , England were notified that a film going by the working title , Thursday Mourning would be filming in the area . 
 In August of that year , Christopher Eccleston entered final negotiations to play Malekith the Accursed , and the film was scheduled to shoot in Iceland , where Taylor shot parts of Game of Thrones . By August 22 , Kat Dennings was hired to reprise her role as Darcy Lewis and Adewale Akinnuoye @-@ Agbaje was cast as Algrim . At the end of the month , film crews for Thursday Mourning began set construction at Stonehenge near Amesbury , England . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography began on September 10 , 2012 , in Bourne Wood , Surrey , England . A few weeks later , Clive Russell was cast as Tyr , and Richard Brake was cast as an Einherjar captain . At the end of the month , Jaimie Alexander was injured on the London film set , after she slipped while walking in the rain . On October 12 , 2012 , production moved to Iceland with filming taking place in <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . Iceland Review described the shoot as being among the most extensive film projects to have ever taken place in Iceland . Three days later , Disney announced that the film would be released in 3D . In late October , filming commenced at the Old Royal Naval College in Greenwich , London . Filming also took place at Shepperton Studios and Longcross Studios in Surrey between October and December 2012 . Other filming locations included Wembley , Borough Market , Hayes and Stonehenge . Alexander tweeted that principal photography wrapped on December 14 , 2012 . Disney spent $ 237 @.@ 6 million on Thor : The Dark World but $ 37 million of this was offset by payments from the UK tax authority . 
 Kramer Morgenthau , who worked with Taylor on Game of Thrones , was brought in as the director of photography . Morgenthau said , " We wanted a grittier , boots @-@ on @-@ the @-@ ground feeling , inspired by what Alan and I had done on Game of Thrones . We wanted the realms to feel grounded , like a real place , while at the same time respecting the magical ' planet of the Gods ' feeling and theme . " Thor : The Dark World was Morgenthau 's first time shooting a feature film digitally . For the film , Morgenthau chose the Arri Alexa Plus , although he tested with the Sony <unk> but found the Alexa to be more pleasing . In addition to the Alexa , Red Epic and Canon EOS 5D Mark II cameras were used for second unit filming . With the Alexa , Morgenthau used Panavision anamorphic lenses . Morgenthau said , " The lenses brought some of the magic and mystery of photochemical back to digital , that big @-@ movie look . " Morgenthau also stated that Thor : The Dark World was easily the most technically complex project that he has worked but said , " It 's all the same concept and the same principles as in a smaller film . You just scale it up . You do a lot more prep . We had three months of prep and loads of time to pre @-@ rig stages . Part of it is having a really good crew — it 's definitely not a one @-@ man show . " 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 In July 2013 , Dennings told reporters that the film was about to head into reshoots . In August , Taylor said he shot extra scenes with Hiddleston and was about to shoot more with Hopkins . Taylor explained that it was all a part of the " Marvel process " saying , " We 're doing full scenes , scenes that were not in the movie before . We 're adding scenes , creating scenes , writing scenes for the first time . The one [ involving Loki ] was a fun connective scene ... We realised how well Loki was working in the movie , and we wanted to do more with him . So it was that kind of thing , it was like , ' Oh , we could do this , we could jam this in here ' because he 's such a wonderful guy to watch do his stuff . " Also in August , IMAX Corporation and Marvel Entertainment announced that the film would be digitally re @-@ mastered into the IMAX 3D format and released into IMAX 3D theatres internationally beginning October 30 , 2013 . 
 Taylor said Marvel 's The Avengers writer / director Joss Whedon rewrote several scenes in the film explaining , " Joss came in to save our lives a couple of times . We had a major scene that was not working on the page at all in London , and he basically got airlifted in , like a SWAT team or something . He came down , rewrote the scene , and before he got back to his plane I sort of grabbed him and said , ' And this scene and this scene ? ' And he rewrote two other scenes that I thought had problems . " In October 2013 , Tony Curran tweeted that he would be portraying Odin 's father , Bor , in a flashback sequence . In November 2013 , Feige stated that the film was intended to be the conclusion of the " Loki trilogy " , which examined the relationship of Thor and Loki throughout Thor , The Avengers and this film . The film 's mid @-@ credits scene was directed by James Gunn , the director of Marvel Studios ' Guardians of the Galaxy . 
 The film 's visual effects were completed by seven special effects studios , including Double Negative and Luma Pictures . Blur Studio was the lead studio behind the film 's prologue sequence taking place 5 @,@ 000 years before the start of the film , on the Dark Elves homeworld of Svartalfheim . The sequence consisted mostly of computer graphics with live @-@ action shots interwoven throughout . The use of CG allowed for greater freedom of movement by the characters as the live @-@ action costumes were too constrictive . 
 Taylor wanted Asgard in this film to have a more natural look than its predecessor . To achieve this , crews filmed the coast of Norway with an Arri Alexa camera for three days in a helicopter , capturing six hours of footage . Double Negative then embedded their CG rendering of Asgard on shots of the natural landscape . Double Negative visual effects supervisor Alex Wuttke said , " The benefit of that is that you have some real world terrain to work with – so you have buildings that have to convey natural features . Then from there we went in there populating the terrain with different buildings . " For scenes taking place on Svartalfheim , production filmed in Iceland with Double Negative adding ruins , mountains , Dark Elf ships , and skies . 
 For the shot of the levitating truck , which was used in the film to demonstrate the strange phenomena brought on by the coming of the alignment of the worlds , filmmakers attached a cement truck to a large hydraulic rig , which could be programmed to change speed and movement . In order to create Algrim 's transformation into Kurse , Double Negative morphed live action performances of Adewale Akinnuoye @-@ Agbaje as both Algrim and Kurse . Double Negative then added in smoke and lava @-@ like effects . 
 The film 's climatic battle sequence takes place through the nine worlds by the use of portals . Visual effects supervisor Jake Morrison said , " We ended up calling this ' time toffee ' , so as you punch through from one realm to another it 's almost like cling film or a slightly gelatinous membrane you have to pass through . It bends a little bit then rips and spits the person out . The other thing we wanted to do was to make sure it was quite fast from an editorial point of view . In the fight scenes there are times when Thor and Malekith are <unk> all over the place , quite frankly . We made sure we always kept up the momentum and never stopped the fight . It was a way of making sure the audience weren 't conscious there was an effect going on . " 
 = = Music = = 
 In August 2012 , Patrick Doyle said that he had discussions with the director about potentially returning to score the film . By April 2013 , Carter Burwell had been hired to compose the score , but by the following month he left the film over creative differences . In June 2013 , Marvel hired Brian Tyler , who scored Iron Man 3 , to replace Burwell . Tyler said the previous film had an " attitude and [ was ] grounded in limitations " whereas the Thor film allowed for " all @-@ out regal themes that could be as epic as I could make them . " The composer described The Dark World as " science fiction meeting classic medieval war " , leading to a score that drew from works of both genres such as Star Wars and The Lord of the Rings . Azam Ali is a featured vocalist on the score . The soundtrack was released digitally on October 28 , 2013 . 
 = = Release = = 
 The world premiere of Thor : The Dark World took place on October 22 , 2013 , at the Odeon Leicester Square in London . The film was released theatrically in the UK eight days later , on October 30 . The film held its North American premiere at the El Capitan Theatre in Hollywood , and was released into U.S. theaters on November 7 , 2013 . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 In March 2013 , Marvel announced the release of a two @-@ issue comic book prelude by writers Craig Kyle and Christopher Yost and artist Scot Eaton in June 2013 . In April 2013 , Marvel released the first trailer for Thor : The Dark World . Forbes said , " This trailer fits nicely into that larger marketing push for Marvel 's brand . It puts all of the recognizable characters from the first film front and center , presents the action as a team event reminiscent of the Avengers , and once again Loki — who was quite popular with audiences — makes an appearance . " The Los Angeles Times said , " Evident throughout the trailer is director Alan Taylor 's influence ; the Game of Thrones director 's hand can be seen in the battle sequences , and Asgard — a bright and shiny kingdom under Thor director Kenneth Branagh — seems grittier in the sequel . " In July at the 2013 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International , Hiddleston introduced footage from the film to audiences in character as Loki . Also in July , Gameloft announced that a mobile video game titled , Thor the Dark World : The Official Game , would be released in conjunction with the release of the film in November . 
 The theatrical poster for the film was released in early August 2013 . Kirsten <unk> of Business Insider criticized the poster for its lack of originality , noting its similarities to one of the posters of Iron Man 3 , both of which included the female lead clinging to the male lead , with both looking in opposite directions , antagonists prominently displayed in the background and supporting characters featured " on the side " . Additionally , Marvel released a second trailer for the film as part of YouTube 's Geek Week . Forbes said , " this 150 @-@ second trailer is basically just an extended version of last April 's 106 @-@ second teaser " and that " this trailer fails to showcase what 's new this time around ... making audiences question if they really don 't have much else to offer . " The Los Angeles Times said , that the trailer suggests " an ominous , epic scale for the sequel " and that " the collaboration between Thor and Loki promises to be especially interesting . " Later in the month , producer Kevin Feige and cast members Tom Hiddleston , Natalie Portman and Anthony Hopkins presented additional footage at Disney 's D23 Expo . 
 Also in August 2013 , Disney announced plans to promote the film with an attraction at Disneyland . The attraction called Thor : Treasures of Asgard , located next to the Stark Industries exhibit inside Innoventions in Tomorrowland , opened on November 1 , 2013 and features displays of Asgardian relics and transports guests to Odin 's throne room , where they are greeted by Thor . The eighth episode of Marvel 's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. , titled " The Well " , takes place in the aftermath of the events of Thor : The Dark World . It first aired on November 19 , 2013 . Jaimie Alexander reprised her role as Sif in the Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. episode " Yes Men " , which aired on March 11 , 2014 . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Thor : The Dark World was released by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment for digital download on February 4 , 2014 , and on Blu @-@ ray Disc and DVD on February 25 , 2014 . The physical media release includes deleted scenes , extended scenes , a gag reel , audio commentary by the cast and crew , and a Marvel One @-@ Shot short film entitled All Hail the King , featuring Ben Kingsley reprising his role as Trevor Slattery from Iron Man 3 . 
 The film was also collected in a 13 @-@ disc box set , titled " Marvel Cinematic Universe : Phase Two Collection " , which includes all of the Phase Two films in the Marvel Cinematic Universe . It was released on December 8 , 2015 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Thor : The Dark World earned $ 206 @.@ 4 million in North America and $ 438 @.@ 2 million in other markets for a worldwide total of $ 644 @.@ 6 million . It surpassed the gross of its predecessor after just 19 days of its release . Deadline.com calculated the net profit of the film to be $ 139 @.@ 4 million , when factoring together all expenses and revenues for the film . 
 = = = = North America = = = = 
 Thor : The Dark World made an estimated $ 7 @.@ 1 million in Thursday night showings , more than double the midnight gross of its predecessor . On Friday , November 7 , 2013 , the film topped the box office with $ 31 @.@ 9 million ( including Thursday night earnings ) , which is 25 % higher than the original film 's opening @-@ day gross . Through Sunday , the film remained at the No. 1 spot with $ 85 @.@ 7 million , which is a 30 % increase over its predecessor 's opening weekend . This was the largest November opening for a film distributed by Disney , surpassing The Incredibles . Thor : The Dark World topped the box office in North America during its first two weekends , before being overtaken by The Hunger Games : Catching Fire in its third weekend . 
 = = = = Outside North America = = = = 
 On its midweek opening day of Wednesday , October 30 , 2013 , Thor : The Dark World earned $ 8 @.@ 2 million from 33 territories , including the UK and France , where it opened higher than its predecessor . During its first three days , the film earned $ 45 @.@ 2 million , and by the end of the weekend , after expanding into three more territories , it totaled $ 109 @.@ 4 million over five days , finishing in first place in all 36 countries . Its largest openings were recorded in China ( $ 21 @.@ 0 million ) , the UK , Ireland and Malta ( $ 13 @.@ 8 million ) and France and the Maghreb region ( $ 9 @.@ 94 million ) . It topped the box office outside North America on its first three weekends of release . In total earnings , its largest markets are China ( $ 55 @.@ 3 million ) , Russia and the CIS ( $ 35 @.@ 4 million ) and the UK , Ireland and Malta ( $ 31 @.@ 4 million ) . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported a 67 % approval rating with an average rating of 6 @.@ 2 / 10 based on 245 reviews . The website 's consensus reads , " It may not be the finest film to come from the Marvel Universe , but Thor : The Dark World still offers plenty of the humor and high @-@ stakes action that fans have come to expect . " Metacritic , which uses a weighted average , assigned a score of 54 out of 100 based on 44 reviews , indicating " mixed or average reviews " . Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an " A- " average , based on a grading scale ranging from A + to F. 
 Ben Child of The Guardian said , " Thanks to Hiddleston and Hemsworth 's impressive collective charisma , Thor : The Dark World is far from a franchise killer . " Justin Chang of Variety wrote , " This robust , impersonal visual @-@ effects showpiece proves buoyant and unpretentious enough to offset its stew of otherwise derivative fantasy / action elements . " Alonso Duralde of The Wrap said , " Thor : The Dark World delivers the goods — action , otherworldly grandiosity , romance , humor — above and beyond its predecessor " . Simon Abrams , writing for RogerEbert.com said , " There 's just enough tension and humor in Thor : The Dark World to make the film 's otherwise listless proceedings worth watching , but only just . " Echoing other critics ' sentiments , Frank Lovece of Film Journal International wrote , " Is it wrong that the best relationship in Thor : The Dark World is between the titular Norse @-@ god superhero and his adoptive brother Loki ? To take nothing away from Oscar @-@ winner Natalie Portman , ... it 's the complicated love @-@ hate between Thor and the trickster god Loki that you can 't turn your eyes from . " 
 Conversely , Tim Robey of The Daily Telegraph said , " It feels entirely made by committee — the definition of house style , without a personal stamp in sight . " Leslie Felperin of The Hollywood Reporter said , " Although director Alan Taylor manages to get things going properly for the final battle in London , the long stretches before that on Asgard and the other branches of Yggdrasil are a drag , like filler episodes of Game of Thrones but without the narrative complexity , mythical heft or all @-@ pervading sexiness . " Michael Phillips of the Los Angeles Times described Thor : The Dark World as having the " same old threats of galaxy annihilation spiced with fairly entertaining fish @-@ out @-@ of @-@ water jokes " . Jeannette Catsoulis of The New York Times said , " the battle scenes are as lacking in heat and coherence as the central love story " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences placed Thor : The Dark World on its shortlist of potential nominees for the Academy Award for Best Visual Effects but ultimately did not nominate it for the award . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 Thor : Ragnarok is scheduled to be released on November 3 , 2017 , directed by Taika Waititi . Stephany Folsom will write the screenplay , with Kevin Feige again producing . Hemsworth , Hiddleston , Alexander , Hopkins and Elba will reprise their roles as Thor , Loki , Sif , Odin , and Heimdall , respectively , while Mark Ruffalo will appear as Bruce Banner / Hulk reprising his role from previous MCU films . Cate Blanchett , Tessa Thompson , Jeff Goldblum and Karl Urban join the cast as Hela , Valkyrie , Grandmaster , and <unk> , respectively . 
 = Curt Roberts = 
 Curtis " Curt " Benjamin Roberts ( August 16 , 1929 – November 14 , 1969 ) was an American baseball second baseman who played three seasons for the Pittsburgh Pirates in Major League Baseball from 1954 to 1956 . He was signed by the Boston Braves as an amateur free agent before the 1951 season , and obtained by Pittsburgh a year later . After two seasons in the Pirates farm system , Roberts was the first black Major League player for the Pirates . After becoming the starting second baseman for the Pirates in his rookie year , Roberts ' playing time decreased and he was out of the Majors within three seasons . He played for multiple teams in the minor leagues before retiring from professional baseball in 1963 . 
 A native of Pineland , Texas , but raised in Oakland , California , Roberts was considered short by Major League standards , standing 5 ft 8 in ( 1 @.@ 73 m ) . Roberts was a skilled defensive player who could not hit with enough proficiency to remain in the major leagues . Roberts died when an automobile struck him while he was changing a tire on his car . His former Pirates teammates only learned of his death 20 years later when being interviewed for a newspaper article . Although Roberts ' career was short , it paved the way for other black players to debut for the Pirates , the most notable of whom was future Baseball Hall of Famer Roberto Clemente . 
 = = Early professional career = = 
 Roberts was born in Pineland , Texas but grew up in Oakland , California . He attended <unk> High School in West Oakland , the same high school future professional athletes Frank Robinson , Vada Pinson , Bill Russell and Curt Flood all went to within a few years of each other . Soon after finishing high school at the age of 17 , Roberts began his professional career with the Kansas City Monarchs in the Negro Leagues . He played four seasons ( 1947 – 1950 ) with the Monarchs , where his teammates included Satchel Paige , Hilton Smith , Buck O 'Neil and Elston Howard . Roberts was signed by the Boston Braves in 1951 by the recommendation of scout Andy Cohen , who saw him play in the Mexican League during the 1950 off @-@ season . They sent Roberts to their minor leagues affiliate in the Western League , the Denver Bears where Cohen was the manager . Prior to the 1952 season , the Bears became an affiliate of the Pittsburgh Pirates , and as part of a working agreement between the Braves and the Pirates , Roberts became a member of the Pirates organization for a $ 10 @,@ 000 sum . Originally a shortstop in the Negro Leagues , he became a second baseman during his tenure with the Bears , and started to build a reputation as an excellent fielder , leading all minor league second basemen in fielding percentage in 1953 . He stayed with the Bears for the next two seasons , playing a combined total of 280 games with 15 home runs and a .285 batting average . 
 = = Major League career = = 
 Prior to the 1954 Pittsburgh Pirates season , the local black community in Pittsburgh pressurized the team to integrate their roster , as other teams such as the Brooklyn Dodgers and New York Giants had done . To speed up the integration , the black community began to protest against the Pirates and boycotted Pirate home games . The general manager of the Pirates at the time was Branch Rickey , who seven years earlier as general manager of the Dodgers signed Jackie Robinson , the first black Major League Baseball player . After playing two years in the Pirates minor league system , Roberts made his major league debut on April 13 , 1954 at Forbes Field , against the Philadelphia Phillies to become the first black player in Pirates ' history . Prior to the game Rickey gave a speech to Roberts and his wife that was similar to that he gave to Robinson before his first game in 1947 . In the speech , Rickey explained to Roberts that he needed to have a " very even temper " in order to succeed in the Major Leagues as racial abuse from the spectators was a common occurrence . Rickey later said that he selected Roberts to become the Pirates first black player owing to his skills and calm demeanor . In his first major league at bat , Roberts tripled against starting pitcher Robin Roberts . He also had a double in the game . Roberts hit his only career home run off St. Louis Cardinals starter Joe <unk> in an 8 – 5 win on June 11 . He scored three runs , including the winning run in an August 6 game against the Cincinnati Reds . On September 8 , Roberts ' two errors against the Milwaukee Braves proved costly , as the Braves won their 10th game in a row . Roberts finished the 1954 season as the primary starter at second base , batting .232 with one home run and 36 runs batted in ( RBI ) in 134 games . 
 Roberts started the 1955 season in a slump . In his first six games , Roberts only had two hits in 18 at @-@ bats for a batting average of <unk> . On April 17 , in one of the few games he started that season , Roberts ' wild throw to third base led to a Brooklyn Dodgers run , the decisive factor in a 3 – 2 Pirates loss . It was thought that the racial pressure on Roberts was affecting his ability , so to help him , Dodgers second baseman Jackie Robinson wrote a letter to Roberts discussing how to handle his emotions and offering words of encouragement . However , Roberts was soon demoted back to the minor leagues and spent the rest of the 1955 season with the Hollywood Stars in the Pacific Coast League . While with the Stars Roberts broke the Pacific Coast League record for most consecutive games without an error at second base with 40 . He also missed playing time after suffering a concussion when he was hit by a pitch delivered by Bubba Church . 
 Roberts and teammate Johnny O 'Brien competed for the second base job prior to the 1956 season . Roberts played 31 games at the beginning of the year , hitting <unk> with four runs batted in , mostly in a backup role , before losing his job to future Baseball Hall of Famer Bill Mazeroski . On May 1 , Roberts succeeded in getting a game @-@ winning , two @-@ RBI , ninth @-@ inning double off " Vinegar Bend " <unk> of the St. Louis Cardinals . Two days later , Roberts made his last career RBI , a double in the fourth inning in a 5 – 1 victory over the Cincinnati Reds . 
 = = Later career = = 
 Roberts was traded to the Kansas City Athletics with pitcher Jack McMahan for Spook Jacobs and $ 5 @,@ 000 cash . He never played a game with the Athletics , who soon sent him to the Columbus Jets of the International League in late June 1956 . Neither Jacobs nor McMahan lasted beyond the 1956 season in the Majors . After being traded to the Athletics , Pittsburgh 's main black newspaper , the Pittsburgh Courier , protested that Roberts never had a real chance in the Majors . However , Pirates general manager Joe L. Brown replied that Roberts was a " fine young man , but a marginal Major Leaguer " . On August 28 , Roberts hit four home runs in one game against the Havana Sugar Kings , becoming only the fifth player in International League history to do so . He had struck only four home runs in 69 previous games with the Jets . Prior to the 1957 season , Roberts was traded to the New York Yankees as the player to be named later in a trade that sent former American League Most Valuable Player Bobby Shantz to the Yankees . In 1957 Roberts played with the New York Yankees minor league affiliate in Denver . At the end of the season , Roberts received several votes in the final tally for Most Valuable Player of the American Association , finishing behind Carl Willey of the Wichita Braves . Roberts never again reached the Majors , becoming a journeyman in the minor leagues and at one point played baseball in Nicaragua . 
 Roberts played with the Montreal Royals of the International League in 1959 , where he led the league in fielding percentage with <unk> and was named the Royals Most Valuable Player . He was also selected to the International League All @-@ Star game that season . In 1960 , Roberts was acquired by the Spokane Indians , a Dodger affiliate after he was made expandable by the Royals when they acquired Chico Carrasquel . He was selected to the Pacific Coast League All @-@ Star squad in 1961 . One week later Roberts suffered a broken leg after colliding with teammate Duke Carmel on the field during a game , practically ending his career . He played two more seasons in the minors , but his playing ability was diminished by the injury and Roberts retired from baseball after the 1963 season . 
 = = Post @-@ baseball and death = = 
 Roberts was married with six children . When his baseball career ended , he worked as a security guard for the University of California , Berkeley . He died at the age of 40 in Oakland , California when he was hit by a drunk driver while changing a flat tire on his car . A major piece written by Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette journalist Ed <unk> discussed Roberts ' career and struggles , calling him a " forgotten pioneer " . Prior to the piece , most of Roberts ' old teammates were unaware that Roberts had died nearly 20 years earlier . His son Curt Roberts Jr. supposedly was working on a book about his father 's life in 1987 . 
 = = Playing style and statistics = = 
 Roberts was considered by critics to be an excellent fielder . By 1960 , Roberts was considered to be one of the best second baseman in the minor leagues , primary because he was a " slick fielder " . Former teammate Nellie King called Roberts the best handler of " chopper [ s ] " ( a slang for a ground out ) he had ever seen . According to King , the main reason why Roberts had a short career in the Majors is that the Pirates " didn 't gave him enough time " to develop his skills . 
 Roberts could not hit with enough proficiency to remain in the Major Leagues . He had a reputation of not " hitting the big @-@ league curve " . In his three seasons with the Pirates , Roberts had a career .223 batting average ( 128 @-@ for @-@ 575 ) with one home run , four runs batted in , 54 runs scored , and an on @-@ base percentage of .299 . In his 164 appearances at second base , he handled 856 out of 883 total chances successfully for a fielding percentage of <unk> , a little lower than the league average during his era . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Despite Roberts ' short major league career , he paved the way for other black players to debut for the Pirates , the most notable of whom was future Baseball Hall of Famer Roberto Clemente . He befriended Clemente , teaching him how to handle the racial abuse and the huge pressure that Roberts had suffered with the Pirates . That helped Clemente ease his transition from the Dodgers minor league system , in which they had a decent number of black and Hispanic players , to the main roster of the Pittsburgh Pirates , in which only he , Roberts and third baseman Gene Baker were black . Journalist Tom Singer of MLB.com mentioned that Roberts ' legacy arose mainly from his unsuccessful career with the Pirates . Singer claimed because Roberts was a " flop " , it showed that the public perception of black players having to be a " superstar " to be a member of a Major League club was incorrect , thus making the integration process more " humanized " and easier for black players . With the eight previous players who broke the color barrier for their respective teams , four were later elected to the Hall of Fame , and the other four were stars in their own right . 
 In 1997 , 28 years after his death , the Pittsburgh Pirates honored Roberts as part of the festivities for Jackie Robinson Day . Roberts was honored again in 2006 for the opening of the Pirates Highmark Legacy Square Negro League exhibit in PNC Park . The families of several Negro League players , including Roberts attended the ceremony . A park in his hometown of Pineland , Texas was dedicated in his honor in 2007 . 
 = Bramhope Tunnel = 
 The Bramhope Tunnel is a railway tunnel 2 @.@ 138 miles ( 3 @.@ 441 km ) long , owned by Network Rail on a route currently operated mainly by Northern Rail . It was constructed during 1845 – 1849 on the Harrogate Line , carrying rural and commuter passengers between Horsforth and Arthington in West Yorkshire , England . It is notable for its length , for its crenellated north portal , which is Grade II listed , and for the deaths of 24 men during its construction , commemorated in Otley churchyard with a castellated replica of the north portal . 
 It was constructed by Thomas Grainger , engineer and James Bray , overseer , who set up two sighting towers and then twenty shafts along the line of the tunnel . Men dug horizontally from these shafts until the diggings joined up in 1848 . Thousands of navvies lived locally in bothies with their families , and dug in dangerous and wet conditions to facilitate the grand opening in 1849 . 
 = = History = = 
 The tunnel was first proposed in 1843 with an estimate of £ 800 @,@ 000 approved in 1845 , though the final cost by 1849 was £ 2 @,@ 150 @,@ 313 and the lives of 24 men . Thomas Grainger was the engineer and James Bray was the contracted overseer in 1845 for the construction of the Horsforth – Arthington tunnel under Bramhope and the ridge between Airedale and Wharfedale . Bray was a Leeds iron and brass founder , and previously constructed the <unk> Tunnel , Bradford . 
 Two sighting towers were built for the engineers to keep the line true , then from 20 October 1845 twenty shafts were sunk to enable access for tunnelling . Tunnelling started after the foundation stone was laid at the bottom of No. 1 <unk> in July 1846 . The separate diggings first joined up into one long tunnel on 27 November 1848 , and it was completed in summer 1849 . 
 The southern entrance or portal is usually described as plain , but is admired by some . The north portal is castellated , and after it was finished was lived in for a while by railway workers . The north portal was listed Grade II in 1988 . The finished tunnel is 2 miles , 243 yd or 2 @.@ 138 miles ( 3 @.@ 441 km ) long ; 25 @.@ 5 feet ( 7 @.@ 8 m ) wide by 25 feet ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) high . It is a double track tunnel , with a gradient of 1 in 94 ( 0 @.@ 01 % ) down from Horsforth to Arthington and at its deepest point , just to the north of Breary Lane , it is 290 feet ( 88 m ) below the surface . The construction was for the Leeds Northern Railway and the East and West Yorkshire Junction Railway , which together later became the North Eastern Railway . The grand opening was 9 July 1849 , but the first train went through on 31 May in the same year , full of Leeds and Thirsk railway officials , and pulled by Bray 's locomotive Stephenson . 
 = = = Working conditions = = = 
 There were possibly up to 2 @,@ 300 navvies plus their families , with 400 horses brought in for the work . That is said to include 188 quarrymen , 102 stonemasons , 732 tunnel men , 738 labourers and 18 carpenters . For four years they lived in 200 wooden bothies with their families in a field opposite Bramhope cemetery , alongside offices and workshops . There were 100 more bothies elsewhere along the line of the tunnel . Day – and night – shifters were said to take turns to use the beds , as was normal for sailors of the time . However , sailors had their own bedding to unroll onto the bare bunk or hammock , whereas many navvies may have had little of their own . This tunnel was built at the height of the Hungry Years , and many poor Irish refugees were working on the railways . 
 Many of the navvies were farm labourers from the Yorkshire Dales , North East England , East Anglia and the Fenlands as well as from Scotland and Ireland . Men were lowered by bucket down the <unk> to dig by candlelight . They were paid £ 1 @.@ 50 per week to shovel 20 tons ( 20 @.@ 32 tonnes ) of rock and earth per 12 – hour shift , seven days a week . Conditions were constantly wet , with foul air and gunpowder fumes plus the danger of roof – collapse . This was because the tunnel cuts through hard sandstone , shale and clay , and there are seven major faults in the rock near the centre point . Metal sheets had to be used to divert water inside the tunnel . A public waterworks scheme with reservoirs and aqueduct was proposed but not implemented . 
 = = = Human cost = = = 
 The work was dangerous because the rock at the Horsforth end was difficult to blast , and there was frequent flooding and subsidence . It is suggested that up to 1 @,@ 563 @,@ 480 @,@ 000 gallons ( 7 @,@ 107 @,@ 580 @,@ 080 litres ) of water were pumped out between 1845 and 1849 . Five men died in 1846 ; 12 died in 1847 ; seven more had died by 1849 , making 24 in total . In Otley churchyard is a monument in the shape of the north portal , dedicated to the 24 men who lost their lives . Records of death and injury were kept from 1847 to 1849 , and Leeds Infirmary had a special spring cart to ferry the injured to hospital from the site to Leeds . 
 The sadness of the harsh conditions of those days is captured by the simple epitaph on the gravestone of James Myers who is buried in the Methodist Cemetery at Yeadon behind the Town Hall . James was a married man just 22 years old who ' died by an accident in the Bramhope Tunnel on the 14th day of April , 1848 ' . Next to him lies the body of his 3 years old daughter who died two weeks later of some unspecified illness . Cllr Philip Sunderland 
 = = = Alcohol and water = = = 
 Drunkenness and fighting was such that Jos <unk> , a railway police inspector , was hired for £ 1 @.@ 25 per week to keep order . At one time he was attacked by a group of men , and at another there was a riot at <unk> Hill in which a man died , all because the contractors tried to cut off the beer supply . 
 Water was taken at first from Bramhope 's town well , opposite St Giles Church , but the excessive demand diminished the supply and spoiled the quality . The tunnellers ' water was then pumped from a site near the Dyneley Arms crossroads . But at the same time the tunnel itself was draining away the local farmers ' natural irrigation , and the source of Bramhope town well . Litigation on this subject continued for some years . 
 = = = Education and religion = = = 
 The number of workers ' children overwhelmed that of the local children in Bramhope 's school – however this was before the Elementary Education Act 1870 which provided for education for all , up to the age of 12 years . Poor children would have been educated at the parochial school in Eastgate , where the memorial gardens are now . The workers and their families attended St <unk> Methodist chapel at Bramhope , and the Methodist chapel at Pool @-@ in @-@ Wharfedale . The Leeds Mission spread Bibles and tracts in the shanty – town . 
 = = What is visible today = = 
 Four of the twenty shafts remain as ventilation shafts . These are : the first to the north of the Leeds – Otley A660 near the Scout hut in Bramhope ; the second behind Park House , Bramhope ; the third opposite Camp House Farm and the fourth near <unk> and Horsforth . The ventilation shafts measure 40 feet ( 12 m ) by 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) – wider than the tunnel itself . One of the two sighting towers remains , in the field opposite Bramhope cemetery . It is a tall , cylindrical structure , two metres in diameter with four vertical slits near the top and flat coping stones . The coursed sandstone tower is a grade II listed structure . The other one , now demolished , was behind Dyneley Hall . 250 @,@ 000 cubic yards ( 190 @,@ 000 m3 ) of spoil still lies along the line of the tunnel . One of a number of tips is in an area around the scout hut to the north of the Leeds – Otley road ; a second is the Knoll near to Parklands and on to the field facing Bramhope cemetery ; a third is on land adjacent to None – Go – Byes Farm . 
 = = = North and south portals = = = 
 The listed southern portal is a plain sandstone horseshoe @-@ shaped arch with rusticated voussoirs below a cornice and parapet . It is approached by a slightly curved 300 @-@ metre cutting faced with retaining walls of sandstone . The listed walls have a concave batter , slightly @-@ projecting piers at regular intervals and are topped with square coping stones . 
 The Gothic north portal was said to have been built to please the landowner William Rhodes , who wanted to use one of the towers as a belvedere . It is built of rock – faced sandstone and has three side towers with turrets , and a horseshoe – shaped archway . The keystone features a portrait of a bearded man who is said to resemble the aforesaid landowner . There is a crenellated parapet with a carved cartouche in the centre featuring a <unk> , fleece and fish . 
 Both portals are on Network Rail land with no public access . 
 = = Accident = = 
 A southbound passenger train and a pilot engine left Arthington station on 19 September 1854 heading for Leeds . A pilot engine had travelled northbound through the tunnel earlier the same day with no problems but this time the train ran into a pile of stone debris and was derailed when it was three @-@ quarters of the way into the tunnel . The debris was from a roof fall that affected both tracks . The train engine collided with the pilot engine tender causing considerable damage . 
 = = Recent repairs = = 
 Trains have been cancelled or delayed frequently in recent years , due to flooding in the Bramhope Tunnel . Water still runs fast into the tunnel , and in the 1960s a train was derailed by a 3 @-@ ton ( 3 @.@ 3 tonne ) icicle . Major repair work was done in 2003 and 2006 , with the Victorian drainage culvert replaced , and the track lowered to allow larger passenger and freight stock , costing £ 10 million . The sixteen closed <unk> were deteriorating and had to be re @-@ capped . In 2003 the excavated material from the works was recycled to shore up the railway embankment near <unk> . 
 = <unk> = 
 The bookwheel ( also written book wheel and sometimes called a reading wheel ) is a type of rotating bookcase designed to allow one person to read a variety of heavy books in one location with ease . The books are rotated vertically similar to the motion of a water wheel , as opposed to rotating on a flat table surface . The design for the bookwheel originally appeared in a 16th @-@ century illustration by Agostino Ramelli , at a time when large books posed practical problems for readers . Ramelli 's design influenced other engineers and , though now obsolete , inspires modern artists and historians . 
 = = History and design = = 
 The bookwheel , in its most commonly seen form , was invented by Italian military engineer Agostino Ramelli in 1588 , presented as one of the 195 designs in Le diverse et <unk> machine del Capitano Agostino Ramelli ( The various and ingenious machines of Captain Agostino Ramelli ) . To ensure that the books remained at a constant angle , Ramelli incorporated an epicyclic gearing arrangement , a complex device that had only previously been used in astronomical clocks . Ramelli 's design is unnecessarily elaborate , as he likely understood that gravity could have worked just as effectively ( as it does with a Ferris wheel , invented centuries later ) , but the gearing system allowed him to display his mathematical prowess . While other people would go on to build <unk> based on Ramelli 's design , Ramelli did not in fact ever construct his own . 
 To what extent <unk> were appreciated for their convenience versus their aesthetic qualities remains a matter of speculation according to modern American engineer Henry <unk> . Ramelli himself described the bookwheel as a " beautiful and ingenious machine , very useful and convenient for anybody who takes pleasure in study , especially for those who are indisposed and tormented by gout . " Ramelli 's reference to gout , a condition that impairs mobility , demonstrates the appeal of a device that allows access to several books while seated . However , <unk> notes that Ramelli 's illustration lacks space for writing and other scholarly work , and that the " fanciful wheel " may not have been appropriate for any activity beyond reading . 
 While the design of the bookwheel is commonly credited to Ramelli , some historians dispute that he was the first to invent such a device . Joseph Needham , a historian of Chinese technology , stated that revolving bookcases , though not vertically oriented , had their origins in China " perhaps a thousand years before Ramelli 's design was taken there . " 
 = = Influence and legacy = = 
 The bookwheel was an early attempt to solve the problem of managing increasingly numerous printed works , which were typically large and heavy in Ramelli 's time . It has been called one of the earliest " information retrieval " devices , and has been considered a precursor to modern technologies , such as hypertext and e @-@ readers , that allow readers to store and cross @-@ reference large amounts of information . Other inventors , such as French inventor Nicolas <unk> de <unk> ( 1596 – 1689 ) , proposed their own variations on Ramelli 's design . 
 In contemporary times , the bookwheel is valued for its historical importance , decorative appeal , and symbolic significance . Ramelli 's design has been recreated by artists such as Daniel Libeskind , and inspired the name of the Smithsonian Library 's blog " Turning the Book Wheel " . 
 The mechanical concept of the epicyclic gears used to keep each book level as it rotates was later used for the Falkirk Wheel boat lift , although its designer claims to have found it independently . 
 = Meteorite ( song ) = 
 " Meteorite " is a song by American singer and songwriter Mariah Carey from her fourteenth studio album , Me . I Am Mariah ... The Elusive Chanteuse ( 2014 ) . It was composed by Carey and Q @-@ Tip . A disco track , it contains a sample of the recording " Goin ' Up in Smoke " written by Allan Felder , Norman Harris , and Ron Tyson , all of whom received songwriting credits for " Meteorite " as a result . It also quotes an observation by Andy Warhol that everyone will achieve fame for 15 minutes . " Meteorite " garnered mostly positive reviews from music critics , many of whom praised the disco influence and highlighted it as one of the album 's best tracks . The song peaked at number 70 on the international download chart in South Korea . Carey performed " Meteorite " at the 2014 World Music Awards , for which she was criticized for arriving over an hour late , and included it on the set list of her 2014 tour , The Elusive Chanteuse Show . 
 = = Production and composition = = 
 In an interview with Fuse in August 2012 , Q @-@ Tip confirmed that he was working with Carey on material for her fourteenth studio album . In April 2014 , Carey confirmed that she and Q @-@ Tip had worked together on a song which was yet to be mixed in an interview with <unk> Of the collaboration , Carey said " He 's angry with me because he thinks that I didn 't allow him to do his mix , but really it 's okay . He loves me , we 're going to make this work . And that 's good because it 's one of my favorite songs . I 'm going to call him soon ... I think we need to get that ready . " She also stated that it was the first time they had worked together since composing " Honey " for Carey 's sixth studio album , Butterfly ( 1997 ) . 
 " Meteorite " was written and produced by Carey and Q @-@ Tip . It was recorded by Brian Garten and Blair Wells at several locations , including Rapture Studios in Bel Air , Metrocity Studios and Jungle City Studios in New York City , and Pon de Islands Studio in Antigua . Rob <unk> served as the assistant during the recording sessions . Manny Marroquin mixed the song at Larrabee Studios in Universal City , and was assisted by Chris Galland and Delbert Bowers . " Meteorite " is a disco song with influences of dance music and 1980s style pop music , which lasts for a duration of three minutes and 59 seconds . Mike Wass of Idolator noted that Carey has dabbled with disco music since the release of " Fantasy " in 1995 , but " never as faithfully " as she does on " Meteorite " and another album track " You Don 't Know What to Do " . The song begins with an observation by Andy Warhol that everyone will achieve 15 minutes of fame which is followed by a rocket launch blast off sound effect . 
 Instrumentation consists of bass performed by Louis Cato , keyboards by Ray Angry and Q @-@ Tip , and Chris <unk> on guitar . Lewis Corner for Digital Spy noted that is also makes use of a " rattling " percussion and a 1970s style " cosmic " synth line . Carey provided her own background vocals . Courtesy of permission granted by Motown Records , the song incorporates a sample of Eddie Kendricks ' 1976 song " Goin ' Up in Smoke " , written by Allan Felder , Norman Harris and Ron Tyson ; all three received songwriting credits for " Meteorite " as a result . Me . I Am Mariah ... The Elusive Chanteuse was available to stream for free on iTunes prior to its release . During this time , an alternate version of the song called the " Meteorite Q @-@ Tip Remix " was released by Q @-@ Tip on May 23 , 2014 to stream on Spotify . It features a different arrangement and mix to that of the version included on the album , and has a " galloping beat " according to Rap @-@ Up . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Meteorite " received mostly positive reviews from contemporary music critics . Eric Henderson for Slant Magazine noted that " Meteorite " , along with " You Don 't Know What to Do " , are two of Carey 's " most serious @-@ minded performances " on the album , describing them as " galaxies away " from her 2008 single " I 'll Be Lovin ' U Long Time " . Of " Meteorite " , he wrote " The chugging midnight soul train to gorgeous ' Meteorite ' burns bright on the still @-@ potent embers of Eddie Kendricks 's urgent masterpiece ' Goin ' Up in Smoke ' " . PopMatters writer Devone Jones complimented Carey taking " a brave step into untouched territory " in recording a 1980s style song . Labeling the track a " breezy banger " and an album highlight , Corner wrote that the song embodies an " oddly other @-@ worldly " feel . 
 Fashion designer Donatella Versace and friend of Carey 's told Vogue that " Meteorite " is " upbeat " and " has the power to lift your mood " . Jim Farber of New York Daily News complimented the track , writing that the disco beat and the Warhol quote was reminiscent of Studio 54 . John Sargent for Pitchfork Media was less impressed with the song , simply commenting that the song " is a gloopy scoop of Cher schmaltz " . AXS writer John Shetler was critical of " Meteorite " and included it on his four worst songs list from the album , writing " ' Meteorite ' gets bonus points for opening with an Andy Warhol quote , but that ’ s not enough to save the non @-@ descript dance track with a grating , repetitive chorus and unimaginative lyrics about shooting stars and burning up the night sky . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Carey opened the 2014 World Music Awards with " Meteorite " in May 2014 . In addition to performing , she was attending the event to collect a Pop Icon award for having sold 200 million records worldwide and for having the most number one songs for a solo artist in the United States . Carey was criticized for arriving at the ceremony over an hour late and delaying the show . Carey performed underneath disco balls while dancers skated around her on roller skates . Both Rap @-@ Up and Vibe described the performance as " dazzling " , with the former writing that " Carey [ lit ] up the stage " . The show was due to air on NBC and was later cancelled by the network , though the ceremony later aired on August 3 through 4Music . " Meteorite " was included on Carey 's 2014 tour , The Elusive Chanteuse Show . 
 = = Charts = = 
 " Meteorite " debuted at number 70 on the South Korea International Download Singles Chart for the week ending May 31 , 2014 , with sales of 3 @,@ 088 units . 
 = Hjúki and Bil = 
 In Norse mythology , Hjúki ( Old Norse , possibly meaning " the one returning to health " ) and Bil ( Old Norse , literally " instant " ) are a brother and sister pair of children who follow the personified moon , Máni , across the heavens . Both Hjúki and Bil are solely attested in the Prose Edda , written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson . Scholarly theories that surround the two concern their nature , their role as potential personifications of the craters on the moon or its phases , and their relation to later folklore in Germanic Europe . Bil has been identified with the Bilwis , an agriculture @-@ associated figure that is frequently attested in the folklore of German @-@ speaking areas of Europe . 
 = = Attestations = = 
 In chapter 11 of the Prose Edda book Gylfaginning , the enthroned figure of High states that two children by the names of Hjúki and Bil were fathered by <unk> . Once while the two were walking from the well <unk> ( Old Norse " <unk> of Something " ) — both of them carrying on their shoulders the pole <unk> ( Old Norse , possibly meaning " eternal " ) that held the pail <unk> between them — Máni took them from the earth , and they now follow Máni in the heavens , " as can be seen from the earth " . 
 Hjúki is otherwise unmentioned , but Bil receives recognition . In chapter 35 of Gylfaginning , at the end of a listing of numerous other goddesses in Norse mythology , both Sól ( the personified sun ) and Bil are listed together as goddesses " whose nature has already been described " . Bil appears twice more in the Prose Edda book Skáldskaparmál . In chapter 75 , Bil appears within another list of goddesses , and her name appears in chapter 47 in a kenning for " woman " . 
 = = Theories = = 
 = = = Identification and representation = = = 
 As the two are otherwise unattested outside of Snorri 's Prose Edda , suggestions have been made that Hjúki and Bil may have been of minor mythic significance , or that they were made up outright by Snorri , while Anne <unk> ( 1945 ) posits that Snorri may have known or had access to a now lost verse source wherein Hjúki and Bil personified the waxing and waning moon . <unk> further theorizes that Bil may have been a dís ( a type of female deity ) . 
 Scholars have theorized that Hjúki and Bil may represent lunar activity , including that they may represent the phases of the moon or may represent the craters of the moon . 19th century scholar Jacob Grimm rejects the suggestion that Hjúki and Bil represent the phases of the moon , and states that Hjúki and Bil rather represent the craters on the moon seen from the earth . Grimm says that the evidence for this " is plain from the figure itself . No change of the moon could suggest the image of two children with a pail slung over their shoulders . Moreover , to this day the Swedish people see in the spots of the moon two persons carrying a big bucket on a pole . " Grimm adds that : 
 What is most important for us , out of the heathen fancy of a kidnapping man of the moon , which , apart from Scandinavia , was doubtless in vogue all over <unk> , if not farther , there has evolved itself since a Christian adaptation . They say the man in the moon is a wood @-@ stealer , who during church time on the holy sabbath committed a trespass in the wood , and was then transported to the moon as a punishment ; there he may be seen with the axe on his back and the bundle of brushwood ( <unk> ) in his hand . Plainly enough the water @-@ pole of the heathen story has been transformed into the axe 's shaft , and the carried pail into the <unk> ; the general idea of theft was retained , but special stress laid on the keeping of the christian holiday ; the man suffers punishment not so much for cutting firewood , as because he did it on Sunday . 
 Grimm gives further examples from Germanic folklore until the time of his writing ( the 19th century ) and notes a potential connection between the German word <unk> ( meaning the full moon ) and the dialectal employment of the word for " brushwood , twigs tied up in a bundle , esp [ <unk> ] fir @-@ twigs , <unk> to tie up brushwood " , and the practice of cutting wood out in the full moon . Benjamin Thorpe agrees with the theory of Hjúki and Bil as the personified shapes of moon craters . 
 Rudolf Simek states that the obscurity of the names of the objects in the tale of Hjúki and Bil may indicate that Snorri derived them from a folktale , and that the form of the tale of the Man in the Moon ( featuring a man with a pole and a woman with a bushel ) is also found in modern folklore in Scandinavia , England , and Northern Germany . 
 In both the story Hjúki and Bil found in the Icelandic Prose Edda and the English nursery rhyme " Jack and Jill " , two children , one male and one female , fetch a pail of water , and the pairs have names that have been perceived as phonetically similar . These elements have resulted in theories connecting the two , and the notion has had some influence , appearing in school books for children from the 19th century and into the 20th century . A traditional form of the rhyme reads : 
 Jack and Jill went up the hill 
 to fetch a pail of water 
 Jack fell down and broke his crown 
 and Jill came tumbling after . 
 Up Jack got and home did trot 
 as fast as he could caper . 
 He went to bed to mind his head 
 with vinegar and brown paper . 
 = = = Bilwis = = = 
 A figure by the name of Bilwis is attested in various parts of German @-@ speaking Europe starting in the 13th century . Scholar Leander Petzoldt writes that the figure seems to stem from the goddess and over time saw many changes , later developing " an elfin , dwarfish aspect and the ability to cripple people or cattle with the shot of an arrow " ( such as in Wolfram von Eschenbach 's 13th century poem " <unk> " ) . Petzoldt further surveys the development of the figure : 
 During the course of the thirteenth century , the Bilwis is less and less frequently treated as the personification of a supernatural power but becomes increasingly identified as a malevolent human being , a witch . Still later , with the rise of the witch persecution at the end of the Middle Ages , the Bilwis was demonized ; she becomes an incarnation of the devil for the witch and sorcerer . A final development has taken place since the sixteenth century , especially in northeast Germany , the Bilwis has been conceived of as a grain spirit bringing wealth ; yet this latest manifestation of the Bilwis has its harmful side , the Bilwis @-@ cutter , who is blamed for the unexplained patterns that are formed among the rows of standing grain . The cutter is a sorcerer or witch that cuts down the corn with sickles that are fastened to its feet . He is classified as an essentially malevolent Corn Spirit . Thus , the Bilwis is exceedingly polymorphous , taking on many appearances and meaning in all German @-@ speaking areas throughout the Middle Ages . The Bilwis is one of the strangest and most mysterious beings in all folklore ; its varying forms reflect the concerns of a farm culture , and it serves to explain the eerie appearance of turned @-@ down rows of plants in cornfields . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The village of Bilsby in Lincolnshire , England ( from which the English surname Billing derives ) has been proposed as having been named after Bil . 
 = Mythmaker = 
 Mythmaker is the tenth studio album by industrial group Skinny Puppy . It was released on January 30 , 2007 . 
 Lead vocalist Nivek Ogre said the band took a simplified approach , but that it was a difficult record to make . It charted on a number of billboard charts , and received mostly positive reviews , with critics focusing on whether it was stylistically similar to previous albums . 
 Tracks from the album were featured in the Saw V soundtrack and Jackass video game . The band supported the album with the Mythrus Tour later the same year it was released . 
 = = Background = = 
 Nivek Ogre stated that making the album was very difficult due to dealing with a personal relationship and other events in Los Angeles during the time the album was being made , but that those events were incorporated into the album <unk> cEvin Key , while acknowledging Ogre 's personal difficulties , said that while the extended writing process of the album could make one feel " stranded within your head space " , having more time to write , and writing more songs than usual , helped the album . 
 Ogre called style of the music on Mythmaker " simplified " and said the band " stayed truer to cEvin 's compositions " . He continued that the album had a new sound , but also retained elements of the " archetypal " Skinny Puppy sound , and the production was superior to previous albums . Key stated that he would write songs , and then send them to Mark Walk , who would make changes and send them back . Key said that it " open [ ed ] a door for me to hear it differently " . Ogre said that album 's themes were control and mythology . 
 Mythmaker marks the third occasion on which a Skinny Puppy album cover was created by an artist other than long @-@ time collaborator Steven R. Gilmore , though he continues to do the sleeve design and layout for the band . The cover uses a painting by Manuel Ocampo entitled " Why I Hate Europeans " , which has been altered for the cover . 
 = = Release = = 
 Mythmaker was released on January 30 , 2007 . The album barely broke into the Billboard 200 at No. 200 , but charted in three other Billboard charts , reaching No. 4 on the Independent Albums Chart , No. 5 on the Dance / Electronic Albums Chart , and No. 17 on the Heatseekers Chart . It peaked in all four charts in the same week of February 17 , 2007 . 
 The soundtrack for the 2008 movie Saw V featured the song " <unk> " . It is the third time a Skinny Puppy song has been used on a soundtrack for a Saw film , with Saw II and Saw IV previously including tracks by the band . The song " <unk> " was featured in the Jackass video game . 
 The " Mythrus Tour " , the title of the Skinny Puppy tour in support of Mythmaker , took place in 2007 in North America and Europe . The live band consisted of Ogre ( vocals and theatrics ) , Key ( keyboards and electronics ) , and Justin Bennett ( percussion ) . " Mythrus " was originally intended to be spelled " Myth @-@ R @-@ Us " , according to Ogre , who stated " the word Mythrus ; I wanted it ' Myth @-@ R @-@ Us , ' like ' Toys @-@ R @-@ Us . ' That idea got shot down , though . " He also said that while the tour was going to be more intimate rather than a spectacle , he still wanted it to be theatrical . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Opinions about the album varied between claims of both little and significant change from previous work . Greg Prato of Allmusic said of Mythmaker , " Skinny Puppy always aligned themselves more with electro @-@ dance , and they continue to do so . " He goes on to say that " Nivek Ogre and cEvin Key obviously know what their following wants to hear , " and finishes by reiterating , " Not a lot has changed in the world of Skinny Puppy circa Mythmaker . " 
 Christa Titus of Billboard said , " ... Mythmaker radiates impending doom . " She notes that certain elements leave the listener " to appreciate how beautiful Skinny Puppy can be when it follows a more emotive , ambient trail , " but comments that there are some " industrial chargers " as well . 
 Ilker Yücel of ReGen Magazine said " Mythmaker certainly continues along the path paved by The Greater Wrong of the Right , representing an embrace of modern electronic music and pushing it to its limits . " Discussing individual songs , he said the first track , " <unk> " , was " a testament to Mark Walk 's impressive abilities to use Ogre 's voice as an instrument unto itself . " Yücel stated that " Jaher " is " full of dark atmosphere that is at once soothing and nightmarish " and called it " arguably the best track " on the album . He called " <unk> " " a somewhat more rock & roll type of track " with " chugs and churns of overdriven synths and guitar @-@ like tones , and a rocking rhythm " that is " sure to be a highlight when played live " . Yücel also said , " Many will still chide the band for not returning to the sound of past successes like Last Rights or Too Dark Park , but it 's this type of purist viewpoint that ultimately <unk> a band 's progress . " 
 Jarosław Jerry <unk> of Metal Storm , in comparing the album to their previous set , said " Mythmaker is basically more of the same . " He stated that while the band was doing a lot of experimenting , something was still missing , but continued that newcomers would probably find the album quite interesting and original . Trey Spencer of Sputnik Music described the album as a blend of elements from many of their previous albums , and also said it would be a good first album for new listeners to buy . 
 Erika Szabo of <unk> said , " Skinny Puppy provides listeners with more of the same thing with the slightest of changes . " She was positive about half the songs , but called the other half " less stimulating " . She also said the album was " expansive and expressive ... even if ... recycled " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Tracks from Allmusic . 
 All music composed by Ogre / Key / Walk . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 All credits from Allmusic . 
