 Pankhurst 's shop never succeeded and he had trouble attracting business in London . With the family 's finances in jeopardy , Richard travelled regularly to northwest England , where most of his clients were . In 1893 the Pankhursts closed the store and returned to Manchester . They stayed for several months in the seaside town of Southport , then moved briefly to the village of Disley and finally settled into a house in Manchester 's Victoria Park . The girls were enrolled in Manchester Girls ' High School , where they felt confined by the large student population and strictly regimented schedule . 
 Pankhurst began to work with several political organisations , distinguishing herself for the first time as an activist in her own right and gaining respect in the community . One biographer describes this period as her " emergence from Richard 's shadow . " In addition to her work on behalf of women 's suffrage , she became active with the Women 's Liberal Federation ( WLF ) , an auxiliary of the Liberal Party . She quickly grew disenchanted with the group 's moderate positions , however , especially its unwillingness to support Irish Home Rule and the aristocratic leadership of Archibald Primrose . 
 In 1888 Pankhurst had met and befriended Keir Hardie , a socialist from Scotland . He was elected to parliament in 1891 and two years later helped to create the Independent Labour Party ( ILP ) . Excited about the range of issues which the ILP pledged to confront , Pankhurst resigned from the WLF and applied to join the ILP . The local branch refused her admission on the grounds of her sex , but she eventually joined the ILP nationally . Christabel later wrote of her mother 's enthusiasm for the party and its organising efforts : " In this movement she hoped there might be the means of righting every political and social wrong . " 
 One of her first activities with the ILP found Pankhurst distributing food to poor men and women through the Committee for the Relief of the Unemployed . In December 1894 she was elected to the position of Poor Law Guardian in Chorlton @-@ on @-@ Medlock . She was appalled by the conditions she witnessed first @-@ hand in the Manchester workhouse : 
 The first time I went into the place I was horrified to see little girls seven and eight years old on their knees scrubbing the cold stones of the long corridors ... bronchitis was epidemic among them most of the time ... I found that there were pregnant women in that workhouse , scrubbing floors , doing the hardest kind of work , almost until their babies came into the world ... Of course the babies are very badly protected ... These poor , unprotected mothers and their babies I am sure were potent factors in my education as a militant . 
 Pankhurst immediately began to change these conditions , and established herself as a successful voice of reform on the Board of Guardians . Her chief opponent was a passionate man named Mainwaring , known for his rudeness . Recognising that his loud anger was hurting his chances of persuading those aligned with Pankhurst , he kept a note nearby during meetings : " Keep your temper ! " 
 After helping her husband with another unsuccessful parliamentary campaign , Pankhurst faced legal troubles in 1896 when she and two men violated a court order against ILP meetings at Boggart Hole Clough . With Richard 's volunteering his time as legal counsel , they refused to pay fines , and the two men spent a month in prison . The punishment was never ordered for Pankhurst , however , possibly because the magistrate feared public backlash against the imprisonment of a woman so respected in the community . Asked by an ILP reporter if she were prepared to spend time in prison , Pankhurst replied : " Oh , yes , quite . It wouldn 't be so very dreadful , you know , and it would be a valuable experience . " Although ILP meetings were eventually permitted , the episode was a strain on Pankhurst 's health and caused loss of income for their family . 
 = = = Richard 's death = = = 
 During the struggle at Boggart Hole Clough , Richard Pankhurst began to experience severe stomach pains . He had developed a gastric ulcer , and his health deteriorated in 1897 . The family moved briefly to <unk> , with the hope that country air would help his condition . He soon felt well again , and the family returned to Manchester in the autumn . In the summer of 1898 he suffered a sudden relapse . Pankhurst had taken their oldest daughter Christabel to Corsier , Switzerland , to visit her old friend Noémie . A telegram arrived from Richard , reading : " I am not well . Please come home , my love . " Leaving Christabel with Noémie , Pankhurst returned immediately to England . On 5 July , while on a train from London to Manchester , she noticed a newspaper announcing the death of Richard Pankhurst . 
 The loss of her husband left Pankhurst with new responsibilities and a significant amount of debt . She moved the family to a smaller house , resigned from the Board of Guardians , and was given a paid position as Registrar of Births and Deaths in Chorlton . This work gave her more insight into the conditions of women in the region . She wrote in her autobiography : " They used to tell me their stories , dreadful stories some of them , and all of them pathetic with that patient and uncomplaining pathos of poverty . " Her observations of the differences between the lives of men and women , for example in relation to illegitimacy , reinforced her conviction that women needed the right to vote before their conditions could improve . In 1900 she was elected to the Manchester School Board and saw new examples of women suffering unequal treatment and limited opportunities . During this time she also re @-@ opened her store , with the hope that it would provide additional income for the family . 
 The individual identities of the Pankhurst children began to emerge around the time of their father 's death . Before long they were all involved in the struggle for women 's suffrage . Christabel enjoyed a privileged status among the daughters , as Sylvia noted in 1931 : " She was our mother 's favourite ; we all knew it , and I , for one , never resented the fact . " Christabel did not share her mother 's fervour for political work , however , until she befriended the suffrage activists Esther Roper and Eva Gore @-@ Booth . She soon became involved with the suffrage movement and joined her mother at speaking events . Sylvia took lessons from a respected local artist , and soon received a scholarship to the Manchester School of Art . She went on to study art in Florence and Venice . The younger children , Adela and Harry , had difficulty finding a path for their studies . Adela was sent to a local boarding school , where she was cut off from her friends and contracted head lice . Harry also had difficulty at school ; he suffered from measles and vision problems . 
 = = Women 's Social and Political Union = = 
 By 1903 Pankhurst believed that years of moderate speeches and promises about women 's suffrage from members of parliament ( MPs ) had yielded no progress . Although suffrage bills in 1870 , 1886 , and 1897 had shown promise , each was defeated . She doubted that political parties , with their many agenda items , would ever make women 's suffrage a priority . She even broke with the ILP when it refused to focus on Votes for Women . It was necessary to abandon the patient tactics of existing advocacy groups , she believed , in favour of more militant actions . Thus on 10 October 1903 Pankhurst and several colleagues founded the Women 's Social and Political Union ( WSPU ) , an organisation open only to women and focused on direct action to win the vote . " Deeds , " she wrote later , " not words , was to be our permanent motto . " 
 The group 's early militancy took non @-@ violent forms . In addition to making speeches and gathering petition signatures , the WSPU organised rallies and published a newsletter called Votes for Women . The group also convened a series of " Women 's Parliaments " to coincide with official government sessions . When a bill for women 's suffrage was filibustered on 12 May 1905 , Pankhurst and other WSPU members began a loud protest outside the Parliament building . Police immediately forced them away from the building , where they regrouped and demanded passage of the bill . Although the bill was never resurrected , Pankhurst considered it a successful demonstration of militancy 's power to capture attention . Pankhurst declared in 1906 : " We are at last recognized as a political party ; we are now in the swim of politics , and are a political force . " 
 Before long , all three of her daughters became active with the WSPU . Christabel was arrested after spitting at a policeman during a meeting of the Liberal Party in October 1905 ; Adela and Sylvia were arrested a year later during a protest outside Parliament . Pankhurst was arrested for the first time in February 1908 , when she tried to enter Parliament to deliver a protest resolution to Prime Minister H. H. Asquith . She was charged with obstruction and sentenced to six weeks in prison . She spoke out against the conditions of her confinement , including vermin , meagre food , and the " civilised torture of solitary confinement and absolute silence " to which she and others were ordered . Pankhurst saw imprisonment as a means to publicise the urgency of women 's suffrage ; in June 1909 she struck a police officer twice in the face to ensure she would be arrested . Pankhurst was arrested seven times before women 's suffrage was approved . During her trial on 21 October 1908 she told the court : " We are here not because we are law @-@ breakers ; we are here in our efforts to become law @-@ makers . " 
 The exclusive focus of the WSPU on votes for women was another hallmark of its militancy . While other organisations agreed to work with individual political parties , the WSPU insisted on separating itself from – and in many cases opposing – parties which did not make women 's suffrage a priority . The group protested against all candidates belonging to the party of the ruling government , since it refused to pass women 's suffrage legislation . This brought them into immediate conflict with Liberal Party organisers , particularly since many Liberal candidates supported women 's suffrage . ( One early target of WSPU opposition was future Prime Minister Winston Churchill ; his opponent attributed Churchill 's defeat in part to " those ladies who are sometimes laughed at . " ) 
 Members of the WSPU were sometimes heckled and derided for spoiling elections for Liberal candidates . On 18 January 1908 , Pankhurst and her associate Nellie Martel were attacked by an all @-@ male crowd of Liberal supporters who blamed the WSPU for costing them a recent by @-@ election to the Conservative candidate . The men threw clay , rotten eggs , and stones packed in snow ; the women were beaten and Pankhurst 's ankle was severely bruised . Similar tensions later formed with Labour . Until party leaders made the vote for women a priority , however , the WSPU vowed to continue its militant activism . Pankhurst and others in the union saw party politics as distracting to the goal of women 's suffrage and criticised other organisations for putting party loyalty ahead of women 's votes . 
 As the WSPU gained recognition and notoriety for its actions , Pankhurst resisted efforts to democratise the organisation itself . In 1907 a small group of members led by Teresa Billington @-@ Greig called for more involvement from the rank @-@ and @-@ file suffragettes at the union 's annual meetings . In response , Pankhurst announced at a WSPU meeting that elements of the organisation 's constitution relating to decision @-@ making were void and cancelled the annual meetings . She also insisted that a small committee chosen by the members in attendance be allowed to co @-@ ordinate WSPU activities . Pankhurst and her daughter Christabel were chosen ( along with Mabel Tuke and Emmeline Pethick Lawrence ) as members of the new committee . Frustrated , several members including Billington @-@ Greig and Charlotte Despard quit to form their own organisation , the Women 's Freedom League . In her 1914 autobiography Pankhurst dismissed criticism of the WSPU 's leadership structure : 
 if at any time a member , or a group of members , loses faith in our policy ; if any one begins to suggest that some other policy ought to be substituted , or if she tries to confuse the issue by adding other policies , she ceases at once to be a member . <unk> ? Quite so . But , you may object , a suffrage organisation ought to be democratic . Well the members of the W. S. P. U. do not agree with you . We do not believe in the effectiveness of the ordinary suffrage organisation . The W. S. P. U. is not hampered by a complexity of rules . We have no constitution and by @-@ laws ; nothing to be amended or tinkered with or quarrelled over at an annual meeting ... The W. S. P. U. is simply a suffrage army in the field . 
 = = = Tactical intensification = = = 
 On 21 June 1908 500 @,@ 000 activists rallied in Hyde Park to demand votes for women ; Asquith and leading MPs responded with indifference . Angered by this intransigence and abusive police activity , some WSPU members increased the severity of their actions . Soon after the rally , twelve women gathered in Parliament Square and tried to deliver speeches for women 's suffrage . Police officers seized several of the speakers and pushed them into a crowd of opponents who had gathered nearby . Frustrated , two WSPU members – Edith New and Mary Leigh – went to 10 Downing Street and hurled rocks at the windows of the Prime Minister 's home . They insisted their act was independent of WSPU command , but Pankhurst expressed her approval of the action . When a magistrate sentenced New and Leigh to two months ' imprisonment , Pankhurst reminded the court of how various male political agitators had broken windows to win legal and civil rights throughout Britain 's history . 
 In 1909 the hunger strike was added to the WSPU 's repertoire of resistance . On 24 June Marion Wallace Dunlop was arrested for writing an excerpt from the Bill of Rights ( 1688 or 1689 ) on a wall in the House of Commons . Angered by the conditions of the jail , Dunlop went on a hunger strike . When it proved effective , fourteen women imprisoned for smashing windows began to fast . WSPU members soon became known around the country for holding prolonged hunger strikes to protest their incarceration . Prison authorities frequently force @-@ fed the women , using tubes inserted through the nose or mouth . The painful techniques ( which , in the case of mouth @-@ feeding , required the use of steel gags to force the mouth open ) brought condemnation from suffragists and medical professionals . 
 These tactics caused some tension between the WSPU and more moderate organisations , which had coalesced into the National Union of Women 's Suffrage Societies ( NUWSS ) . That group 's leader , Millicent Fawcett , originally hailed WSPU members for their courage and dedication to the cause . By 1912 , however , she declared that hunger strikes were mere publicity stunts and that militant activists were " the chief obstacles in the way of success of the suffrage movement in the House of Commons . " The NUWSS refused to join a march of women 's suffrage groups after demanding without success that the WSPU end its support of property destruction . Fawcett 's sister Elizabeth Garrett Anderson later resigned from the WSPU for similar reasons . 
 Press coverage was mixed ; many journalists noted that crowds of women responded positively to speeches by Pankhurst , while others condemned her radical approach to the issue . The Daily News urged her to endorse a more moderate approach , and other press outlets condemned the breaking of windows by WSPU members . In 1906 Daily Mail journalist Charles Hands referred to militant women using the diminutive term " suffragette " ( rather than the standard " suffragist " ) . Pankhurst and her allies seized the term as their own , and used it to differentiate themselves from moderate groups . 
 The last half of the century 's first decade was a time of sorrow , loneliness and constant work for Pankhurst . In 1907 she sold her home in Manchester and began an itinerant lifestyle , moving from place to place as she spoke and marched for women 's suffrage . She stayed with friends and in hotels , carrying her few possessions in suitcases . Although she was energised by the struggle – and found joy in giving energy to others – her constant travelling meant separation from her children , especially Christabel , who had become the national coordinator of the WSPU . In 1909 , as Pankhurst planned a speaking tour of the United States , Harry was paralysed after his spinal cord became inflamed . She hesitated to leave the country while he was ill , but she needed money to pay for his treatment and the tour promised to be lucrative . On her return from a successful tour , she sat by Harry 's bedside as he died on 5 January 1910 . Five days later she buried her son , then spoke before 5 @,@ 000 people in Manchester . Liberal Party supporters who had come to heckle her remained quiet as she addressed the crowd . 
 = = = Conciliation , force @-@ feeding , and arson = = = 
 After the Liberal losses in the 1910 elections , ILP member and journalist Henry Brailsford helped organise a Conciliation Committee for Women 's Suffrage , which gathered 54 MPs from various parties . The group 's Conciliation Bill looked to be a narrowly defined but still significant possibility to achieve the vote for women . Thus the WSPU agreed to suspend its support for window @-@ breaking and hunger strikes while it was being negotiated . When it became clear that the bill would not pass , Pankhurst declared : " If the Bill , in spite of our efforts , is killed by the Government , then ... I have to say there is an end to the truce . " When it was defeated , Pankhurst led a protest march of 300 women to Parliament Square on 18 November . They were met with aggressive police response , directed by Home Secretary Winston Churchill : officers punched the marchers , twisted arms , and pulled on women 's breasts . Although Pankhurst was allowed to enter Parliament , Prime Minister Asquith refused to meet her . The incident became known as Black Friday . 
 As subsequent Conciliation Bills were introduced , WSPU leaders advocated a halt to militant tactics . In March 1912 the second bill was in jeopardy and Pankhurst joined a fresh outbreak of window @-@ smashing . Extensive property damage led police to raid the WSPU offices . Pankhurst and Emmeline Pethick @-@ Lawrence were tried at the Old Bailey and convicted of conspiracy to commit property damage . Christabel , who by 1912 was the chief coordinator for the organisation , was also wanted by police . She fled to Paris , where she directed WSPU strategy in exile . Inside Holloway Prison Emmeline Pankhurst staged her first hunger strike to improve conditions for other suffragettes in nearby cells ; she was quickly joined by Pethick @-@ Lawrence and other WSPU members . She described in her autobiography the trauma caused by force @-@ feeding during the strike : " Holloway became a place of horror and torment . <unk> scenes of violence took place almost every hour of the day , as the doctors went from cell to cell performing their hideous office . " When prison officials tried to enter her cell , Pankhurst raised a clay jug over her head and announced : " If any of you dares so much as to take one step inside this cell I shall defend myself . " 
 Pankhurst was spared further force @-@ feeding attempts after this incident , but she continued to violate the law and – when imprisoned – starve herself in protest . During the following two years she was arrested numerous times but was frequently released after several days because of her ill @-@ health . Later , the Asquith government enacted the Cat and Mouse Act , which allowed similar releases for other suffragettes facing ill @-@ health due to hunger strikes . Prison officials recognised the potential public relations disaster that would erupt if the popular WSPU leader were force @-@ fed or allowed to suffer extensively in jail . Still , police officers arrested her during talks and as she marched . She tried to evade police harassment by wearing disguises and eventually the WSPU established a jujutsu @-@ trained female bodyguard squad to physically protect her against the police . She and other escorts were targeted by police , resulting in violent scuffles as officers tried to detain Pankhurst . 
 In 1912 WSPU members adopted arson as another tactic to win the vote . After Prime Minister Asquith had visited the Theatre Royal in Dublin , suffragette activists Gladys Evans , Mary Leigh , Lizzie Baker and Mabel Capper of Oxford Street , Manchester attempted to cause an explosion using gunpowder and benzine , which resulted in minimal damage . During the same evening Mary Leigh threw an axe at the carriage containing John Redmond , the Lord Mayor , and Prime Minister Asquith . Over the next two years women set fire to a refreshments building in Regent 's Park , an orchid house at Kew Gardens , pillar boxes , and a railway carriage . Although Pankhurst confirmed that these women had not been commanded by her or Christabel , they both assured the public that they supported the arsonist suffragettes . There were similar incidents around the country . One WSPU member , for example , put a small hatchet into the Prime Minister 's carriage inscribed with the words : " Votes for Women , " and other suffragettes used acid to burn the same slogan into golf courses used by MPs . In 1914 Mary Richardson slashed the Velasquez painting Rokeby Venus to protest against Pankhurst 's imprisonment . 
 = = = Defection and dismissal = = = 
 The WSPU 's approval of property destruction led to the departure of several important members . The first were Emmeline Pethick @-@ Lawrence and her husband Frederick . They had long been integral members of the group 's leadership but found themselves in conflict with Christabel about the wisdom of such volatile tactics . After returning from a vacation in Canada they found that Pankhurst had expelled them from the WSPU . The pair found the decision appalling , but to avoid a schism in the movement they continued to praise Pankhurst and the organisation in public . Around the same time , Emmeline 's daughter Adela left the group . She disapproved of WSPU endorsement of property destruction and felt that a heavier emphasis on socialism was necessary . Adela 's relationship with her family – especially Christabel – was also strained as a result . 
 The deepest rift in the Pankhurst family came in November 1913 when Sylvia spoke at a meeting of socialists and trade unionists in support of labour organiser Jim Larkin . She had been working with the East London Federation of Suffragettes ( ELFS ) , a local branch of the WSPU which had a close relationship with socialists and organised labour . The close connection to labour groups and Sylvia 's appearance on stage with Frederick Pethick @-@ Lawrence – who also addressed the crowd – convinced Christabel that her sister was organising a group that might challenge the WSPU in the suffrage movement . The dispute became public , and members of groups including the WSPU , ILP , and ELFS braced themselves for a showdown . 
 In January Sylvia was summoned to Paris , where Emmeline and Christabel were waiting . Their mother had just returned from another tour of the US , and Sylvia had just been released from prison . All three women were exhausted and stressed , which added considerably to the tension . In her 1931 book The Suffrage Movement Sylvia describes Christabel as an unreasonable figure , haranguing her for refusing to toe the WSPU line : 
 She turned to me . " You have your own ideas . We do not want that ; we want all our women to take their instructions and walk in step like an army ! " Too tired , too ill to argue , I made no reply . I was oppressed by a sense of tragedy , grieved by her ruthlessness . Her glorification of autocracy seemed to me remote indeed from the struggle we were waging , the grim fight even now proceeding in the cells . I thought of many others who had been thrust aside for some minor difference . 
 With their mother 's blessing , Christabel ordered Sylvia 's group to dissociate from the WSPU . Pankhurst tried to persuade the ELFS to remove the word " suffragettes " from its name , since it was inextricably linked to the WSPU . When Sylvia refused , her mother switched to fierce anger in a letter : 
 You are unreasonable , always have been & I fear always will be . I suppose you were made so ! ... Had you chosen a name which we could approve we could have done much to launch you & advertise your society by name . Now you must take your own way of doing so . I am sorry but you make your own difficulties by an incapacity to look at situations from other people 's point of view as well as your own . Perhaps in time you will learn the lessons that we all have to learn in life . 
 Adela , unemployed and unsure of her future , had become a worry for Pankhurst as well . She decided that Adela should move to Australia , and paid for her relocation . They never saw one another again . 
 = = First World War = = 
 When the First World War began in August 1914 , Emmeline and Christabel considered that the threat posed by Germany was a danger to all humanity , and that the British government needed the support of all citizens . They persuaded the WSPU to halt all militant suffrage activities until fighting on the European mainland ended . It was no time for dissent or agitation ; Christabel wrote later : " This was national militancy . As Suffragists we could not be pacifists at any price . " A truce with the government was established , all WSPU prisoners were released , and Christabel returned to London . Emmeline and Christabel set the WSPU into motion on behalf of the war effort . In her first speech after returning to Britain , Christabel warned of the " German Peril " . She urged the gathered women to follow the example of their French sisters , who – while the men fought – " are able to keep the country going , to get in the harvest , to carry on the industries " . Emmeline urged men to volunteer for the front lines . 
 Sylvia and Adela , meanwhile , did not share their mother 's enthusiasm for the war . As committed pacifists , they rejected the WSPU 's support for the government . Sylvia 's socialist perspective convinced her that the war was another example of capitalist oligarchs exploiting poor soldiers and workers . Adela , meanwhile , spoke against the war in Australia and made public her opposition to conscription . In a short letter , Emmeline told Sylvia : " I am ashamed to know where you and Adela stand . " She had a similar impatience for dissent within the WSPU ; when long @-@ time member Mary Leigh asked a question during a meeting in October 1915 , Pankhurst replied : " [ T ] hat woman is a pro German and should leave the hall . ... I denounce you as a pro German and wish to forget that such a person ever existed . " Some WSPU members were outraged by this sudden rigid devotion to the government , the leadership 's perceived abandonment of efforts to win the vote for women , and questions about how funds collected on behalf of suffrage were being managed with regard to the organisation 's new focus . Two groups split from the WSPU : The Suffragettes of the Women 's Social and Political Union ( <unk> ) and the Independent Women 's Social and Political Union ( <unk> ) , each dedicated to maintaining pressure toward women 's suffrage . 
 Pankhurst put the same energy and determination she had previously applied to women 's suffrage into patriotic advocacy of the war effort . She organised rallies , toured constantly delivering speeches , and lobbied the government to help women enter the work force while men were overseas fighting . Another issue which concerned her greatly at the time was the plight of so @-@ called war babies , children born to single mothers whose fathers were on the front lines . Pankhurst established an adoption home at Campden Hill designed to employ the Montessori method of childhood education . Some women criticised Pankhurst for offering relief to parents of children born out of wedlock , but she declared indignantly that the welfare of children – whose suffering she had seen firsthand as a Poor Law Guardian – was her only concern . Due to lack of funds , however , the home was soon turned over to Princess Alice . Pankhurst herself adopted four children , whom she renamed Kathleen King , Flora Mary Gordon , Joan <unk> and Elizabeth Tudor . They lived in London , where – for the first time in many years – she had a permanent home , at Holland Park . Asked how , at the age of 57 and with no steady income , she could take on the burden of bringing up four more children , Pankhurst replied : " My dear , I wonder I didn 't take forty . " 
 = = = Russian delegation = = = 
 Pankhurst visited North America in 1916 together with the former Secretary of State for Serbia , <unk> Mijatović , whose nation had been at the centre of fighting at the start of the war . They toured the United States and Canada , raising money and urging the US government to support Britain and its Canadian and other allies . Two years later , after the US entered the war , Pankhurst returned to the United States , encouraging suffragettes there – who had not suspended their militancy – to support the war effort by sidelining activities related to the vote . She also spoke about her fears of communist insurgency , which she considered a grave threat to Russian democracy . 
 By June 1917 the Russian Revolution had strengthened the Bolsheviks , who urged an end to the war . Pankhurst 's translated autobiography had been read widely in Russia , and she saw an opportunity to put pressure on the Russian people . She hoped to convince them not to accept Germany 's conditions for peace , which she saw as a potential defeat for Britain and Russia . UK Prime Minister David Lloyd George agreed to sponsor her trip to Russia , which she took in June . She told one crowd : " I came to Petrograd with a prayer from the English nation to the Russian nation , that you may continue the war on which depends the face of civilisation and freedom . " Press response was divided between left and right wings ; the former depicted her as a tool of capitalism , while the latter praised her devout patriotism . 
 In August she met with Alexander Kerensky , the Russian Prime Minister . Although she had been active with the socialist @-@ leaning ILP in years past , Pankhurst had begun to see leftist politics as disagreeable , an attitude which intensified while she was in Russia . The meeting was uncomfortable for both parties ; he felt that she was unable to appreciate the class @-@ based conflict driving Russian policy at the time . He concluded by telling her that English women had nothing to teach women in Russia . She later told the New York Times that he was the " biggest fraud of modern times " and that his government could " destroy civilisation . " 
 = = Accomplishment of suffrage ( 1918 ) = = 
 When she returned from Russia , Pankhurst was delighted to find that women 's right to vote was finally on its way to becoming a reality . The 1918 Representation of the People Act removed property restrictions on men 's suffrage and granted the vote to women over the age of 30 ( with several restrictions ) . As suffragists and suffragettes celebrated and prepared for its imminent passage , a new schism erupted : should women 's political organisations join forces with those established by men ? Many socialists and moderates supported unity of the sexes in politics , but Emmeline and Christabel Pankhurst saw the best hope in remaining separate . They reinvented the WSPU as the Women 's Party , still open only to women . Women , they said , " can best serve the nation by keeping clear of men 's party political machinery and traditions , which , by universal consent , leave so much to be desired . " The party favoured equal marriage laws , equal pay for equal work , and equal job opportunities for women . These were matters for the post @-@ war era , however . While the fighting continued the Women 's Party demanded no compromise in the defeat of Germany ; the removal from government of anyone with family ties to Germany or pacifist attitudes ; and shorter work hours to forestall labour strikes . This last plank in the party 's platform was meant to discourage potential interest in Bolshevism , about which Pankhurst was increasingly anxious . 
 = = Post @-@ war activities = = 
 In the years after the 1918 Armistice , Pankhurst continued to promote her nationalist vision of British unity . She maintained a focus on women 's empowerment , but her days of fighting with government officialdom were over . She defended the presence and reach of the British Empire : " Some talk about the Empire and Imperialism as if it were something to decry and something to be ashamed of . [ I ] t is a great thing to be the inheritors of an Empire like ours ... great in territory , great in potential wealth . ... If we can only realise and use that potential wealth we can destroy thereby poverty , we can remove and destroy ignorance . " For years she travelled around England and North America , rallying support for the British Empire and warning audiences about the dangers of Bolshevism . 
 Emmeline Pankhurst also became active in political campaigning again when a bill was passed allowing women to run for the House of Commons . Many Women 's Party members urged Pankhurst to stand for election , but she insisted that Christabel was a better choice . She campaigned tirelessly for her daughter , lobbying Prime Minister Lloyd George for his support and at one point delivering a passionate speech in the rain . Christabel lost by a very slim margin to the Labour Party candidate , and the recount showed a difference of 775 votes . One biographer called it " the bitterest disappointment of Emmeline 's life . " The Women 's Party withered from existence soon afterward . 
 As a result of her many trips to North America , Pankhurst became fond of Canada , stating in an interview that " there seems to be more equality between men and women [ there ] than in any other country I know . " In 1922 she applied for Canadian " permission to land " ( a prerequisite to status as a " British Subject with Canadian <unk> " ) and rented a house in Toronto , where she moved with her four adopted children . She became active with the Canadian National Council for Combating <unk> Diseases ( <unk> ) , which worked against the sexual double @-@ standard which Pankhurst considered particularly harmful to women . During a tour of Bathurst , the mayor showed her a new building which would become the Home for Fallen Women . Pankhurst replied : " Ah ! Where is your Home for Fallen Men ? " Before long , however , she grew tired of long Canadian winters , and she ran out of money . She returned to England in late 1925 . 
 Back in London Emmeline was visited by Sylvia , who had not seen her mother in years . Their politics were by now very different , and Sylvia was living , unmarried , with an Italian anarchist . Sylvia described a moment of familial affection when they met , followed by a sad distance between them . Emmeline 's adopted daughter Mary , however , remembered the meeting differently . According to her version , Emmeline set her teacup down and walked silently out of the room , leaving Sylvia in tears . Christabel , meanwhile , had become a convert to <unk> and devoted much of her time to the church . The British press sometimes made light of the varied paths followed by the once indivisible family . 
 In 1926 Pankhurst joined the Conservative Party and two years later ran as a candidate for Parliament in Whitechapel and St George 's . Her transformation from a fiery supporter of the ILP and window @-@ smashing radical to an official Conservative Party member surprised many people . She replied succinctly : " My war experience and my experience on the other side of the Atlantic have changed my views considerably . " Her biographers insist that the move was more complex ; she was devoted to a programme of women 's empowerment and anti @-@ communism . Both the Liberal and Labour parties bore grudges for her work against them in the WSPU , and the Conservative Party had a victorious record after the war and a significant majority . Pankhurst 's membership of the Conservative Party may have had as much to do with ensuring her aims of obtaining the vote for women were achieved as with ideology . 
 = = Illness and death = = 
 Emmeline Pankhurst 's campaign for Parliament was pre @-@ empted by her ill health and a final scandal involving Sylvia . The years of touring , lectures , imprisonment and hunger strikes had taken their toll ; fatigue and illness became a regular part of Pankhurst 's life . Even more painful , however , was the news in April 1928 that Sylvia had given birth out of wedlock . She had named the child Richard Keir Pethick Pankhurst , in memory of her father , her ILP comrade , and her colleagues from the WSPU respectively . Emmeline was further shocked to see a report from a newspaper in the US that declared that " Miss Pankhurst " – a title usually reserved for Christabel – boasted of her child being a triumph of " eugenics , " since both parents were healthy and intelligent . In the article , Sylvia also spoke of her belief that " marriage without legal union " was the most sensible option for liberated women . These offences against the social dignity which Pankhurst had always valued devastated the elderly woman ; to make matters worse , many people believed the " Miss Pankhurst " in newspaper headlines referred to Christabel . After hearing the news , Emmeline spent an entire day crying ; her campaign for Parliament ended with the scandal . 
 As her health went downhill , Emmeline Pankhurst moved into a nursing home in Hampstead . She requested that she be treated by the doctor who attended to her during her hunger strikes . His use of the stomach pump had helped her feel better while in prison ; her nurses were sure that the shock of such treatment would severely wound her , but Christabel felt obligated to carry out her mother 's request . Before the procedure could be carried out , however , she fell into a critical condition from which none expected her to recover . On Thursday 14 June 1928 Pankhurst died , at the age of 69 . She was interred in Brompton Cemetery in London . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 News of Emmeline Pankhurst 's death was announced around the country , and extensively in North America . Her funeral service on 18 June was filled with her former WSPU colleagues and those who had worked beside her in various capacities . The Daily Mail described the procession as " like a dead general in the midst of a mourning army . " Women wore WSPU sashes and ribbons , and the organisation 's flag was carried alongside the Union Flag . Christabel and Sylvia appeared together at the service , the latter with her child . Adela did not attend . Press coverage around the world recognised her tireless work on behalf of women 's right to vote – even if they didn 't agree on the value of her contributions . The New York Herald Tribune called her " the most remarkable political and social agitator of the early part of the twentieth century and the supreme protagonist of the campaign for the electoral enfranchisement of women . " 
 Shortly after the funeral , one of Pankhurst 's bodyguards from her WSPU days , Katherine Marshall , began raising funds for a memorial statue . In spring 1930 her efforts bore fruit , and on 6 March her statue in Victoria Tower Gardens was unveiled . A crowd of radicals , former suffragettes , and national dignitaries gathered as former Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin presented the memorial to the public . In his address , Baldwin declared : " I say with no fear of contradiction , that whatever view posterity may take , Mrs. Pankhurst has won for herself a niche in the Temple of Fame which will last for all time . " Sylvia was the only Pankhurst daughter in attendance ; Christabel , touring North America , sent a telegram which was read aloud . While planning the agenda for the day , Marshall had intentionally excluded Sylvia , who in her opinion had hastened Pankhurst 's death . 
 During the twentieth century Emmeline Pankhurst 's value to the movement for women 's suffrage was debated passionately , and no consensus was achieved . Her daughters Sylvia and Christabel weighed in with books , scornful and laudatory respectively , about their time in the struggle . Sylvia 's 1931 book The Suffrage Movement describes her mother 's political shift at the start of the First World War as the beginning of a betrayal of her family ( especially her father ) and the movement . It set the tone for much of the socialist and activist history written about the WSPU and particularly solidified Emmeline Pankhurst 's reputation as an unreasonable autocrat . Christabel 's " <unk> : The Story of How We Won the Vote , " released in 1959 , paints her mother as generous and selfless to a fault , offering herself completely to the most noble causes . It provided a sympathetic counterpart to Sylvia 's attacks and continued the polarised discussion ; detached and objective assessment has rarely been a part of Pankhurst scholarship . 
 Recent biographies show that historians differ about whether Emmeline Pankhurst 's militancy helped or hurt the movement ; however , there is general agreement that the WSPU raised public awareness of the movement in ways that proved essential . Baldwin compared her to Martin Luther and Jean @-@ Jacques Rousseau : individuals who were not the sum total of the movements in which they took part , but who nevertheless played crucial roles in struggles of social and political reform . In the case of Pankhurst , this reform took place in both intentional and unintentional ways . By defying the roles of wife and mother as the docile companion , Pankhurst paved the way for feminists who would later decry her support for empire and sustainable social values . 
 Emmeline Pankhurst 's importance to the United Kingdom was demonstrated again in 1929 , when a portrait of her was added to the National Portrait Gallery . In 1987 one of her homes in Manchester was opened as the Pankhurst Centre , an all @-@ women gathering space and museum . In 2002 , Pankhurst was placed at number 27 in the BBC 's poll of the 100 Greatest Britons . 
 In January 2016 , following a public vote , it was announced that a statue of Emmeline Pankhurst would be unveiled in Manchester in 2019 ; the first woman to be honoured with a statue in the city since Queen Victoria over 100 years ago . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Pankhurst is mentioned in the lyrics of " Sister Suffragette " sung by Mrs. Banks in the 1964 Walt Disney film Mary Poppins . Mary Poppins is set In Edwardian London , 1910 at the height of the Suffragette movement . The BBC dramatised the life of Emmeline Pankhurst in the six @-@ part serial Shoulder to Shoulder in 1974 , with Welsh actress Siân Phillips in the role . In the 2015 film Suffragette , Pankhurst , played by Meryl Streep , appears in several scenes . 
 = Fidel Castro in the Cuban Revolution = 
 The Cuban communist revolutionary and politician Fidel Castro took part in the Cuban Revolution from 1953 to 1959 . Following on from his early life , Castro decided to fight for the overthrow of Fulgencio Batista 's military junta by founding a paramilitary organisation , " The Movement " . In July 1953 , they launched a failed attack on the Moncada Barracks , during which many militants were killed and Castro was arrested . Placed on trial , he defended his actions and provided his famous " History Will Absolve Me " speech , before being sentenced to 15 years ' imprisonment in the Model Prison on the Isla de Pinos . Renaming his group the " 26th of July Movement " ( MR @-@ 26 @-@ 7 ) , Castro was pardoned by Batista 's government in May 1955 , who no longer considered him a political threat . Restructuring the MR @-@ 26 @-@ 7 , he fled to Mexico with his brother Raul Castro , where he met with Argentine Marxist @-@ Leninist Che Guevara , and together they put together a small revolutionary force intent on overthrowing Batista . 
 In November 1956 , Castro and 81 revolutionaries sailed from Mexico aboard the Granma , crash @-@ landing near to Los Cayuelos . Attacked by Batista 's forces , they fled to the Sierra Maestra mountain range , where the 19 survivors set up an encampment from which they waged guerrilla war against the army . Boosted by new recruits that increased the guerilla army 's numbers to 200 , they co @-@ ordinated their attacks with the actions of other revolutionaries across Cuba , and Castro became an international celebrity after being interviewed by The New York Times . In 1958 , Batista launched a counter @-@ offensive , Operation Verano , but his army 's use of conventional warfare was overwhelmed by Castro 's guerrilla tactics , and the MR @-@ 26 @-@ 7 eventually pushed out of the Sierra Maestra and took control of most of Oriente and Las Villas . Recognising that he was losing the war , Batista fled to the Dominican Republic while military leader Eulogio Cantillo took control of the country . With revolutionary forces controlling most of Cuba , Castro ordered Cantillo 's arrest , before establishing a provisional government with Manuel Urrutia Lleó as President and José Miró Cardona as Prime Minister , ensuring that they enacted laws to erode the power of the Batistanos . 
 = = The Movement and the Moncada Barracks attack : 1952 – 53 = = 
 In March 1952 , Cuban military general Fulgencio Batista seized power in a military coup , with the elected President Carlos Prío Socarrás fleeing to Mexico . Declaring himself president , Batista cancelled the planned presidential elections , describing his new system as " disciplined democracy " ; Castro , like many others , considered it a one @-@ man dictatorship . Batista moved to the right , solidifying ties with both the wealthy elite and the United States , severing diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union , suppressing trade unions and persecuting Cuban socialist groups . Intent on opposing Batista 's administration , Castro brought several legal cases against them , arguing that Batista had committed sufficient criminal acts to warrant imprisonment and accusing various ministers of breaching labor laws . His lawsuits coming to nothing , Castro began thinking of alternate ways to oust the new government . 
 Dissatisfied with the Partido Ortodoxo 's non @-@ violent opposition , Castro formed " The Movement " , a group consisting of both a civil and a military committee . The former agitated through underground newspaper El <unk> ( The Accuser ) , while the latter armed and trained anti @-@ Batista recruits . With Castro as the Movement 's head , the organization was based upon a clandestine cell system , with each cell containing 10 members . A dozen individuals formed the Movement 's nucleus , many also dissatisfied Ortodoxo members , although from July 1952 they went on a recruitment drive , gaining around 1 @,@ 200 members in a year , organized into over a hundred cells , with the majority coming from Havana 's poorer districts . Although he had close ties to revolutionary socialism , Castro avoided an alliance with the communist PSP , fearing it would frighten away political moderates , but kept in contact with several PSP members , including his brother Raúl . He later related that the Movement 's members were simply anti @-@ Batista , and few had strong socialist or anti @-@ imperialist views , something which Castro attributed to " the overwhelming weight of the Yankees ' ideological and advertising machinery " which he believed suppressed class consciousness among Cuba 's working class . 
 Castro stockpiled weapons for a planned attack on the Moncada Barracks , a military garrison outside Santiago de Cuba , Oriente . Castro 's militants intended to dress in army uniforms and arrive at the base on July 25 , the festival of St James , when many officers would be away . The rebels would seize control , raid the armory and escape before reinforcements arrived . Supplied with new weaponry , Castro intended to arm supporters and spark a revolution among Oriente 's impoverished cane cutters . The plan was to then seize control of a Santiago radio station , broadcasting the Movement 's manifesto , hence promoting further uprisings . Castro 's plan emulated those of the 19th century Cuban independence fighters who had raided Spanish barracks ; Castro saw himself as the heir to independence leader and national hero José Martí . 
 Castro gathered 165 revolutionaries for the mission ; 138 stationed in Santiago , the other 27 in Bayamo . Mostly young men from Havana and Pinar del Río , Castro insured that – with the exception of himself – none had children , and ordered his troops not to cause bloodshed unless they met armed resistance . The attack took place on July 26 , 1953 , but ran into trouble ; 3 of the 16 cars that had set out from Santiago failed to get there . Reaching the barracks , the alarm was raised , with most of the rebels pinned down outside the base by machine gun fire . Those that got inside faced heavy resistance , and 4 were killed before Castro ordered a retreat . The rebels had suffered 6 fatalities and 15 other casualties , whilst the army suffered 19 dead and 27 wounded . 
 Meanwhile , some rebels took over a civilian hospital ; subsequently stormed by government soldiers , the rebels were rounded up , tortured and 22 were executed without trial . Those that had escaped , including Fidel and Raúl , assembled at their base where some debated surrender , while others wished to flee to Havana . Accompanied by 19 comrades , Castro decided to set out for Gran Piedra in the rugged Sierra Maestra mountains several miles to the north , where they could establish a guerrilla base . In response to the Moncada attack , Batista 's government proclaimed martial law , ordering a violent crackdown on dissent and imposing strict censorship of the media . Propaganda broadcast misinformation about the event , claiming that the rebels were communists who had killed hospital patients . Despite this censorship , news and photographs soon spread of the army 's use of torture and summary executions in Oriente , causing widespread public and some governmental disapproval . 
 = = Trial and History Will Absolve Me : 1953 = = 
 Over the following days , the rebels were rounded up , with some being executed and others – including Castro – transported to a prison north of Santiago . Believing Castro incapable of planning the attack alone , the government accused Ortodoxo and PSP politicians of involvement , putting 122 defendants on trial on September 21 at the Palace of Justice , Santiago . Although censored from reporting on it , journalists were permitted to attend , which proved an embarrassment for the Batista administration . Acting as his own defense council , Castro convinced the 3 judges to overrule the army 's decision to keep all defendants handcuffed in court , proceeding to argue that the charge with which they were accused – of " organizing an uprising of armed persons against the Constitutional Powers of the State " – was incorrect , for they had risen up against Batista , who had seized power in an unconstitutional manner . When asked who was the intellectual author of the attack , Castro claimed that it was the long deceased national icon José Martí , quoting Martí 's works that justified uprisings . 
 The trial revealed that the army had tortured suspects , utilizing castration and the gouging out of eyes ; the judges agreed to investigate these crimes , embarrassing the army , which tried unsuccessfully to prevent Castro from testifying any further , claiming he was too ill to leave his cell . The trial ended on October 5 , with the acquittal of most defendants ; 55 were sentenced to prison terms of between 7 months and 13 years . Castro was sentenced separately , on October 16 , during which he delivered a speech that would be printed under the title of History Will Absolve Me . Although the maximum penalty for leading an uprising was a 20 years , Castro was sentenced to 15 , being imprisoned in the hospital wing of the Model Prison ( Presidio Modelo ) , a relatively comfortable and modern institution on the Isla de Pinos , 60 miles off of Cuba 's southwest coast . 
 = = Imprisonment and the 26th of July Movement : 1953 – 55 = = 
 Imprisoned with 25 fellow conspirators , Castro renamed " The Movement " the " 26th of July Movement " ( MR @-@ 26 @-@ 7 ) in memory of the Moncada attack 's date . Forming a school for prisoners , the Abel <unk> Ideological Academy , Castro organized five hours a day of teaching in ancient and modern history , philosophy and English . He read widely , enjoying the works of Karl Marx , Vladimir Lenin , and Martí but also reading books by Freud , Kant , Shakespeare , Munthe , Maugham and Dostoyevsky , analyzing them within a Marxist framework . He began reading about Roosevelt 's New Deal , believing that something similar should be enacted in Cuba . Corresponding with supporters outside of prison , he maintained control over the Movement and organized the publication of History Will Absolve Me , with an initial print run of 27 @,@ 500 copies . Initially permitted a relatively high amount of freedom within the prison compared to other inmates , he was locked up in solitary confinement after his comrades sang anti @-@ Batista songs on a visit by the President in February 1954 . Meanwhile , Castro 's wife Mirta gained employment in the Ministry of the Interior , having been encouraged to do so by her brother , a friend and ally of Batista 's . This was kept a secret from Castro , who found out through a radio announcement . Appalled , he raged that he would rather die " a thousand times " than " suffer impotently from such an insult " . Both Fidel and Mirta initiated divorce proceedings , with Mirta taking custody of their son Fidelito ; this angered Castro , who did not want his son growing up in a bourgeois environment . 
 In 1954 , Batista 's government held presidential elections , but no politician had risked standing against him ; he won , but the election was widely considered fraudulent . It had allowed some political opposition to be voiced , and Castro 's supporters had agitated for an amnesty for the Moncada incident 's perpetrators . Some politicians suggested an amnesty would be good publicity , and the Congress and Batista agreed . Backed by the U.S. and major corporations , Batista believed Castro to be no political threat , and on May 15 , 1955 the prisoners were released . Returning to Havana , Castro was carried on the shoulders of supporters , and set about giving radio interviews and press conferences ; the government closely monitored him , curtailing his activities . Now divorced , Castro had sexual affairs with two female supporters , Naty Revuelta and Maria Laborde , each conceiving him a child . Setting about strengthening the MR @-@ 26 @-@ 7 , he established an 11 @-@ person National Directorate ; despite these structural changes , there was still dissent , with some questioning Castro 's autocratic leadership . Castro dismissed calls for the leadership to be transferred to a democratic board , arguing that a successful revolution could not be run by committee . Some then abandoned the MR @-@ 26 @-@ 7 , labeling Castro a caudillo ( dictator ) , although the majority remained loyal . 
 = = Mexico and guerrilla training : 1955 – 56 = = 
 In 1955 , bombings and violent demonstrations led to a crackdown on dissent ; Castro was placed under protective armed guard by supporters , before he and Raúl fled the country . MR @-@ 26 @-@ 7 members remaining in Cuba were left to prepare cells for revolutionary action and await Castro 's return . He sent a letter to the press , declaring that he was " leaving Cuba because all doors of peaceful struggle have been closed to me . Six weeks after being released from prison I am convinced more than ever of the dictatorship 's intention , masked in many ways , to remain in power for twenty years , ruling as now by the use of terror and crime and ignoring the patience of the Cuban people , which has its limits . As a follower of Martí , I believe the hour has come to take our rights and not beg for them , to fight instead of pleading for them . " The Castros and several comrades traveled to Mexico , which had a long history of offering asylum to leftist exiles . Here , Raúl befriended an Argentine doctor and Marxist @-@ Leninist named Ernesto " Che " Guevara , a proponent of guerrilla warfare keen to join Cuba 's Revolution . Fidel liked him , later describing him as " a more advanced revolutionary than I was . " Castro also associated with the Spaniard Alberto Bayo , a Republican veteran of the Spanish Civil War ; Bayo agreed to teach Fidel 's rebels the necessary skills in guerrilla warfare , clandestinely meeting them at Chapultepec for training . 
 Requiring funding , Castro toured the U.S. in search of wealthy sympathizers ; Prío contributed $ 100 @,@ 000 . Castro later claimed that he had been monitored by Batista 's agents , who orchestrated a failed assassination against him . Batista 's government bribed Mexican police to arrest the rebels , however with the support of several Mexican politicians who were sympathetic to their cause , they were soon released . Castro kept in contact with the MR @-@ 26 @-@ 7 in Cuba , where they had gained a large support base in Oriente . Other militant anti @-@ Batista groups had sprung up , primarily from the student movement ; most notable was the <unk> Revolucionario <unk> ( DRE ) , founded by the Federation of University Students ( FEU ) President José Antonio Echevarría . Antonio traveled to Mexico City to meet with Castro , but they disagreed on tactics ; Antonio thought that it was legitimate to assassinate anyone connected to the government , something Castro thought rash and ineffective . 
 After purchasing a decrepit yacht , the Granma , on 25 November 1956 Castro set sail from Tuxpan , Veracruz , with 81 revolutionaries armed with 90 rifles , 3 machine guns , around 40 pistols and 2 hand @-@ held anti @-@ tank guns . The 1 @,@ 200 mile crossing to Cuba was harsh , and in the overcrowded conditions of the ship , many suffered seasickness , and food supplies ran low . At some points they had to bail water caused by a leak , and at another a man fell overboard , delaying their journey . The plan had been for the crossing to take 5 days , and on the ship 's scheduled day of arrival , 30 November , MR @-@ 26 @-@ 7 members under Frank Pais led an armed uprising against government buildings in Santiago , Manzanillo and several other towns . However , the Granma 's journey ultimately lasted 7 days , and with Castro and his men unable to provide reinforcements , Pais and his militants dispersed after two days of intermittent attacks . 
 = = Guerrilla war in the Sierra Maestra : 1956 – 58 = = 
 The Granma crash @-@ landed in a mangrove swamp at Playa Las <unk> , close to Los Cayuelos , on 2 December 1956 . Within a few hours a naval vessel started bombarding the invaders – fleeing inland , they headed for the forested mountain range of Oriente 's Sierra Maestra . At daybreak on 5 December , a detachment of Batista 's Rural Guard attacked them ; the rebels scattered , making their journey to the Sierra Maestra in small groups . Upon arrival , Castro discovered that of the 82 rebels who had arrived on the Granma , only 19 had made it to their destination , the rest having been killed or captured . 
 Setting up an encampment in the jungle , the survivors , including the Castros , Che Guevara , and Camilo Cienfuegos , began launching raids on small army @-@ posts to obtain weaponry . In January 1957 they overran the outpost near to the beach at La Plata ; Guevara treated the soldiers for any injuries , but the revolutionaries executed the local mayoral ( land @-@ company overseer ) <unk> Osorio , whom the local peasants despised and who boasted of killing one of the MR @-@ 26 @-@ 7 rebels several weeks previously . Osorio 's execution aided the rebels in gaining the trust of locals , who typically hated the <unk> as enforcers of the wealthy landowners , although they largely remained unenthusiastic and suspicious of the revolutionaries . As trust grew , some locals joined the rebels , although most new recruits came from urban areas . With increasing numbers of volunteers , who now numbered over 200 , in July 1957 Castro divided his army into three columns , keeping charge of one and giving control of the others to his brother and Guevara . The MR @-@ 26 @-@ 7 members operating in urban areas continued agitation , sending supplies to Castro , and on 16 February 1957 he met with other senior members to discuss tactics ; here he met Celia Sánchez , who would become a close friend . 
 Across Cuba , militant groups rose up against Batista , carrying out bombings and acts of sabotage . Police responded with mass arrests , torture and extrajudicial killings , with corpses hung on trees to intimidate dissidents . In March 1957 , Antonio 's DR launched a failed attack on the presidential palace , with Antonio being shot dead ; his death removed a charismatic rival to Castro 's leadership of the revolution . Frank Pais was also killed , leaving Castro the unchallenged leader of the MR @-@ 26 @-@ 7 . Castro hid his Marxist @-@ Leninist beliefs , in contrast to Guevara and Raúl , whose beliefs were well known ; in doing so , he hoped to gain the support of less radical dissenters , and in 1957 he met with leading members of the Partido Ortodoxo . Castro and Ortodoxo leaders Raúl Chibás and Felipe <unk> drafted and signed the Sierra Maestra Manifesto , in which they laid out their plans for a post @-@ Batista Cuba . Rejecting the rule of a provisional military junta , it demanded the setting up of a provisional civilian government " supported by all " which would implement moderate agrarian reform , industrialization and a literacy campaign before introducing " truly fair , democratic , impartial , elections " . 
 Batista 's government censored the Cuban press , and so Castro contacted foreign media to spread his message . Herbert Matthews , a journalist from The New York Times , interviewed Castro , attracting international interest to the rebel 's cause and turning Castro into a celebrity . Other reporters followed , sent by such news agencies as CBS , while a reporter from Paris Match stayed with the rebels for around 4 months , documenting their routine . Castro 's guerrillas increased their attacks on military outposts , forcing the government to withdraw from the Sierra Maestra region , and by spring 1958 the rebels controlled a hospital , schools , a printing press , slaughterhouse , land @-@ mine factory and a cigar @-@ making factory . 
 = = Batista 's fall and Cantillo 's military junta : 1958 – 1959 = = 
 Batista had come under increasing pressure by 1958 . His army 's military failures , coupled with his press censorship and the police and army 's use of torture and extrajudicial executions , were increasingly criticized both domestically and abroad . Influenced by anti @-@ Batista sentiment among their citizens , the U.S. government ceased supplying him with weaponry , leading him to buy arms from the United Kingdom . The opposition used this opportunity to call a general strike , accompanied by armed attacks from the MR @-@ 26 @-@ 7 . Beginning on 9 April , it received strong support in central and eastern Cuba , but little elsewhere . 
 Batista responded with an all @-@ out @-@ attack on Castro 's guerrillas , Operation Verano ( 28 June to 8 August 1958 ) . The army aerially bombarded forested areas and villages suspected of aiding the militants , while 10 @,@ 000 soldiers under the command of General Eulogio Cantillo surrounded the Sierra Maestra , driving north to the rebel encampments . Despite their numerical and technological superiority , the army had no experience with guerrilla warfare or with the mountainous region . Now with 300 men at his command , Castro avoided open confrontation , using land mines and ambushes to halt the enemy offensive . The army suffered heavy losses and a number of embarrassments ; in June 1958 a battalion surrendered , their weapons were confiscated and they were handed over to the Red Cross . Many of Batista 's soldiers , appalled at the human rights abuses that they were ordered to carry out , defected to Castro 's rebels , who also benefited from popular support in the areas they controlled . In the summer , the MR @-@ 26 @-@ 7 went on the offensive , pushing the army back , out of the mountain range and into the lowlands , with Castro using his columns in a pincer movement to surround the main army concentration in Santiago . By November , Castro 's forces controlled most of Oriente and Las Villas , and tightened their grip around the capitals of Santiago and Santa Clara . Through control of Las Villas , the rebels divided Cuba in two by closing major roads and rail lines , severely disadvantaging Batista 's forces . 
 The U.S. realized that Batista would lose the war , and fearing that Castro would displace U.S. interests with socialist reforms , decided to aid Batista 's removal by supporting a rightist military junta , believing that General Cantillo , then commanding most of the country 's armed forces , should lead it . After being approached with this proposal , Cantillo secretly met with Castro , agreeing that the two would call a ceasefire , following which Batista would be apprehended and tried as a war criminal . Double @-@ crossing Castro , Cantillo warned Batista of the revolutionary 's intentions . Wishing to avoid a tribunal , Batista resigned on 31 December 1958 , informing the armed forces that they were now under Cantillo 's control . With his family and closest advisers , Batista fled into exile to the Dominican Republic with over US $ 300 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . Cantillo then entered Havana 's Presidential Palace , proclaimed the Supreme Court judge Carlos Piedra as the new President , and began appointing new members of the government . 
 Still in Oriente , Castro was furious . Recognizing the establishment of a military junta , he ended the ceasefire and continued on the offensive . The MR @-@ 26 @-@ 7 put together a plan to oust the Cantillo @-@ Piedra junta , freeing the high @-@ ranking military officer Colonel Ramón <unk> from the Isle of Pines prison ( where he had been held captive for plotting to overthrow Batista ) , and commanding him to fly to Havana to arrest Cantillo . Accompanying widespread celebrations as news of Batista 's downfall spread across Cuba on 1 January 1959 , Castro ordered the MR @-@ 26 @-@ 7 to take responsibility for policing the country , in order to prevent widespread looting and vandalism . Whilst Cienfuegos and Guevara led their columns into Havana on 2 January , Castro entered Santiago , accepting the surrender of the Moncada Barracks and giving a speech invoking the wars of independence . He spoke out against the Cantillo @-@ Piedra junta , called for justice against human rights abusers and proclaimed a better era for women 's rights . Heading toward Havana , he met José Antonio Echevarría 's mother , and greeted cheering crowds in every town , giving press conferences and interviews . Foreign journalists commented on the unprecedented level of public adulation , with Castro striking a heroic " Christ @-@ like figure " and wearing a medallion of the Virgin Mary . 
 = = Provisional government : 1959 = = 
 Castro had made his opinion clear that lawyer Manuel Urrutia Lleó should become president , leading a provisional civilian government following Batista 's fall . Politically moderate , Urrutia had defended MR @-@ 26 @-@ 7 revolutionaries in court , arguing that the Moncada Barracks attack was legal according to the Cuban constitution . Castro believed Urrutia would make a good leader , being both established yet sympathetic to the revolution . With the leaders of the junta under arrest , Urrutia was proclaimed provisional president , with Castro erroneously announcing he had been selected by " popular election " ; most of Urrutia 's cabinet were MR @-@ 26 @-@ 7 members . On January 8 , 1959 , Castro 's army entered Havana . Proclaiming himself Representative of the Rebel Armed Forces of the Presidency , Castro – along with close aides and family members – set up home and office in the penthouse of the Havana Hilton Hotel , there meeting with journalists , foreign visitors and government ministers . 
 Officially having no role in the provisional government , Castro exercised a great deal of influence , largely because of his popularity and control of the rebel army . Ensuring the government implemented policies to cut corruption and fight illiteracy , he did not initially force through any radical proposals . Attempting to rid Cuba 's government of Batistanos , the Congress elected under Batista was abolished , and all those elected in the rigged elections of 1954 and 1958 were banned from politics . The government now ruling by decree , Castro pushed the president to issue a temporary ban on all political parties , but repeatedly stated that they would get around to organizing multiparty elections ; this never occurred . He began meeting members of the Popular Socialist Party , believing they had the intellectual capacity to form a socialist government , but repeatedly denied being a communist himself . 
 In suppressing the revolution , Batista 's government had orchestrated mass human rights abuses , with most estimates for the death toll typically placing it at around 20 @,@ 000 . Popular uproar across Cuba demanded that those figures who had been complicit in the widespread torture and killing of civilians be brought to justice . Although remaining a moderating force and opposing the mass reprisal killings advocated by many , Castro helped set @-@ up trials of many Batistanos , resulting in hundreds of executions . Although widely popular domestically , critics – in particular from the U.S. press – argued that many were not fair trials , and condemned Cuba 's government as being more interested in vengeance than justice . In response , Castro proclaimed that " revolutionary justice is not based on legal precepts , but on moral conviction " , organizing the first Havana trial to take place before a mass audience of 17 @,@ 000 at the Sports Palace stadium . He also intervened in other trials to ensure that what he saw as " revolutionary justice " was carried out ; when a group of aviators accused of bombing a village were found not guilty at a trial in Santiago de Cuba , Castro ordered a retrial in which they were found guilty and sentenced to life imprisonment . 
 Acclaimed across Latin America , Castro traveled to Venezuela to attend the first @-@ anniversary celebrations of Marcos Pérez Jiménez 's overthrow . Meeting President @-@ elect Rómulo Betancourt , Castro proposed greater relations between the two nations , unsuccessfully requesting a loan of $ 300 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 and a new deal for Venezuelan oil . Returning home , an argument between Castro and senior government figures broke out ; the government had banned the National Lottery and closed down the casinos and brothels , leaving thousands of waiters , <unk> and prostitutes unemployed , infuriating Castro . As a result , Prime Minister José Miró Cardona resigned , going into exile in the U.S. and joining the anti @-@ Castro movement . 
 = Orjen @-@ class torpedo boat = 
 The Orjen @-@ class was a class of eight motor torpedo boats built for the Royal Yugoslav Navy ( Jugoslavenska <unk> ratna mornarica ; JKRM ) . The boats were built by the <unk> Shipyard based on the German S @-@ 2 motor torpedo boats . At the start of the Axis invasion of Yugoslavia , two boats managed to escape to Alexandria in Egypt where they continued serving with Allied forces . The remaining ones were captured by Italian forces and commissioned in the Regia Marina ( Royal Navy ) . 
 After the Italian Armistice in September 1943 , the boats were taken over by German forces and commissioned in the Kriegsmarine , until they were finally scuttled in October 1944 . The two boats that had escaped to the Allies in 1941 returned to Yugoslavia after the war . They were commissioned in the new Yugoslav Navy and remained in service until the early 1960s . 
 = = Background and description = = 
 During the early 1930s , the Kingdom of Yugoslavia was facing an economic recession brought on by the Great Depression , which was further complicated by internal political instability . In the mid @-@ 1930s the Yugoslav government sought to improve relations with the Kingdom of Italy , and create new economic opportunities by developing closer ties with Nazi Germany . Cooperation with Germany was soon reflected in the acquisition of new ships for the Royal Yugoslav Navy , which had previously been acquired in France and Great Britain . The first such deal came in 1936 when the Navy placed an order for eight motor torpedo boats that were to be built by the <unk> Shipyard , based on the existing German design of the S @-@ 2 class motor torpedo boat . An additional order for two Type II submarines was planned , but never happened . 
 The boats measured 28 m ( 91 ft 10 in ) in length overall , with a 4 @.@ 3 m ( 14 ft 1 in ) beam and a draught of 1 @.@ 51 m ( 4 ft 11 in ) . Fully loaded , they displaced 61 @.@ 7 tonnes ( 60 @.@ 7 long tons ) . Main propulsion consisted of three Daimler @-@ Benz petrol engines rated at 3 @,@ 300 hp ( 2 @,@ 500 kW ) , giving the boats a maximum speed of 31 kn ( 57 km / h ; 36 mph ) . An auxiliary engine of unknown power was also installed . Crew size varied between 16 and 22 , depending on the source . Armament consisted of two 550 mm ( 22 in ) torpedo tubes and a single 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) anti @-@ aircraft gun . 
 = = Boats = = 
 Source : 
 = = Service history = = 
 = = = Royal Yugoslav Navy service = = = 
 At the start of the Axis invasion of Yugoslavia , all eight Orjen @-@ class boats and the two small <unk> @-@ class boats were assigned to the 2nd Torpedo Division in Šibenik . On 11 April , a naval force consisting of several Orjen @-@ class boats , among other ships , was expected to assist ground forces in attacking the Italian enclave of Zara which the Yugoslav High Command feared would be used as a bridgehead during the invasion . The attack , however , never materialized and the Yugoslav ships were instead attacked by Italian bombers forcing them to retreat to Kotor . By 17 April the complete collapse of Yugoslav defences was imminent , prompting the commander of the 3rd Torpedo Boat Division , Ivan Kern , to suggest that Durmitor , Kajmakčalan , Dinara , Triglav , Rudnik and Suvobor sail out of Boka Kotorska to evade capture by the Axis and continue their fight with Allied forces . Kern approached the commanding officers of Durmitor , Kajmakčalan , Rudnik and Suvobor with the idea , only to be rejected by all of them . 
 At the same time , unknown perpetrators sabotaged Triglav causing a fire , further deteriorating crew morale already hampered by desertion while Milan <unk> and Sergej <unk> died blowing up the destroyer Zagreb to prevent it from falling into enemy hands . Following this , Kern decided to sail out with just two boats , Durmitor and Kajmakčalan which he deemed had the most trustworthy crews , leaving Boka Kotorska on 17 April . Because both boats were in poor condition and overloaded with personnel , the maximum speed they could achieve was no more than 29 knots . Before passing through the Strait of Otranto , the boats successfully evaded two groups of Italian ships . They finally arrived at Navarino Bay on 19 April before continuing to Souda Bay where they arrived 22 April . In Souda Bay Durmitor and Kajmakčalan were tasked with escorting a convoy to Alexandria protecting it from possible Stuka attacks . Once in Alexandria they reunited with the remaining JKRM forces that managed to escape , forming the JKRM in exile . The boats were first tasked with patrolling the outside of the harbor in anticipation of an attack by Axis coastal craft . In June they operated against Vichy French forces in Syria . In 1944 they were reported as being tasked with escorting convoys between Alexandria and Port Said . However , with time the serviceability of the boats became a problem because of the lack of spare parts needed for their German @-@ built engines . 
 = = = Axis service = = = 
 The remaining six boats were captured by Italian forces and commissioned in the Regia Marina ( Royal Navy ) , receiving designations MAS 3 — 8 D , with " MAS " standing for <unk> Armato <unk> ( English : Torpedo Armed <unk> ) and the prefix D denoting they were captured in Dalmatia . Their designations were once again changed in July 1942 , with the prefix " MAS " being replaced with " MS " and new numerals from 41 to 46 . During their Italian service the boat 's weapons were also changed . The original torpedo armament was replaced with two 21 @.@ 7 in ( 550 mm ) torpedo tubes , while the original 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) gun was removed in favor of two 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) / 65 guns on MS 41 — 44 or one 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) / 43 gun and one 15 mm ( 0 @.@ 59 in ) / 38 machine gun on MS 45 — 46 . The boats were also equipped to carry 12 to 20 depth charges . 
 Following the Italian Armistice in September 1943 , the majority of the boats were taken over by the Kriegsmarine . MS 41 was scuttled by its crew on 9 September at Monfalcone . Sources are inconsistent regarding the boat 's aftermath ; according to Italian sources it was raised and repaired by German forces before being sunk by a mine between Porto Corsini and Porto Garibaldi in October 1944 . German sources on the other hand , claim it was never commissioned by the Kriegsmarine . MS 45 was also scuttled by its crew just a few days later , on 18 September at Cattolica . The remaining four boats , MS 42 — 44 and MS 46 were commissioned with the Kriegsmarine as S 2 — 5 . All four were sunk in October 1944 at Salonika . 
 = = = Post @-@ war service = = = 
 After the end of the war , Durmitor and Kajmakčalan , along with other JKRM ships and personnel in exile , returned to Šibenik in May 1945 . They were commissioned in the new Yugoslav Navy ( Serbo @-@ Croatian : Jugoslavenska ratna mornarica ; JRM ) as TČ 5 and TČ 6 , later being redesignated as TČ 391 and TČ 392 . Both were stricken in 1963 . 
 = Fantastic Light = 
 Fantastic Light ( foaled February 13 , 1996 ) is a retired Thoroughbred racehorse and active sire . He was foaled in the United States but was trained in England and Dubai during his racing career , which ran from August 1998 to his retirement following the Breeders ' Cup Turf on October 2001 . He raced in six countries , winning Group One / Grade I races in five of them and was a dual winner of the Emirates World Series Racing Championship . He was named United States Champion Male Turf Horse , European Horse of the Year and European Champion Older Horse in 2001 . He was also well known for his two races against the 2001 Epsom Derby winner Galileo . In August 2012 it was announced that he had been pensioned from stallion duty while in Japan and would return to <unk> Hall in England to live out his days as a pensioner . 
 In his early racing career , when trained by Michael Stoute , he won the Sandown Classic Trial , the Great Voltigeur Stakes , the Arc Trial and the Dubai Sheema Classic . In 2000 after his transfer to Godolphin he won the Man O ' War Stakes and the Hong Kong Cup . In his championship season in 2001 Fantastic Light won four of his six races ; the Tattersalls Gold Cup , the Prince of Wales 's Stakes , the Irish Champion Stakes and the Breeders ' Cup Turf . 
 = = Background = = 
 Fantastic Light , a bay horse with an irregular white blaze and three white feet , was bred in Kentucky by Maktoum Al Maktoum 's Gainsborough Stud . 
 His sire , <unk> ( 1985 – 2011 ) , sired the winners of over three hundred races , including more than thirty at Group One / Grade I level . Apart from Fantastic Light , his best progeny have included Noverre , Serena 's Song and Hawksley Hill . Fantastic Light 's dam , <unk> , a daughter of Nijinsky , failed to win a race , but came from a good family , being closely related to Swain . 
 Until early 2000 , Fantastic Light raced in the colours of Maktoum Al Maktoum and was trained by Michael Stoute at Newmarket , Suffolk . His ownership was then transferred to Godolphin Racing , and he was trained from that point on by Saeed bin <unk> . 
 = = Racing career = = 
 = = = 1998 : two @-@ year @-@ old season = = = 
 Fantastic Light never ran in a maiden race , instead making his debut against more experienced colts in a minor stakes race at Sandown in August 1998 . He started slowly and showed his inexperience ( " ran green " ) before taking the lead in the closing stages and winning by one and three quarter lengths from <unk> , with the future Diadem Stakes winner , <unk> Star in third . He followed up in a similar event at the same course three weeks later , beating <unk> by three quarters of a length after leading close to the finish . This performance attracted some attention , with one commentator identifying him as " a promising young <unk> " . On his last start of the year he was moved up to Listed class , and finished last of the three starters in the Stardom Stakes at Goodwood . 
 = = = 1999 : three @-@ year @-@ old season = = = 
 Fantastic Light began his three @-@ year @-@ old season with his first Group race win in the Sandown Classic Trial . Ridden by Daryll Holland , he took the lead a furlong out and was eased in the closing stages to win by a short head . Speculation that he might develop into a Derby contender ended in his next race , when he was stepped up to one and a half miles for the first time and finished fourth of the five runners in the <unk> Derby Trial . 
 Fantastic Light was brought back to a mile and a quarter , and produced placed efforts on his next two starts . At Royal Ascot in June , he was beaten a head by Lear Spear in the Prince of Wales 's Stakes ( then a Group Two race ) , and at Sandown three weeks later he finished third , beaten a neck and half a length behind Compton Admiral and <unk> in the Group One Eclipse Stakes . 
 In August Fantastic Light recorded his first win at Group Two level as he led three furlongs out and ran on to win a strongly contested Great Voltigeur Stakes from <unk> ( Hollywood Turf Cup Stakes , San Juan Capistrano Handicap , Charles Whittingham Memorial Handicap ) and the future St Leger winner <unk> . A month later , he won a third important race by holding off the 1998 Epsom Derby winner High @-@ Rise by three quarters of a length in the Listed Arc Trial at Newbury . 
 On his final start of the season , Fantastic Light was moved up to the highest level for the Prix de l 'Arc de Triomphe and finished a remote eleventh of the thirteen runners behind <unk> . 
 = = = 2000 : four @-@ year @-@ old season = = = 
 Fantastic Light 's first run of 2000 was also his last for the Stoute stable . He was sent to Dubai for the Sheema Classic , in which he faced a field including runners from Britain , France , Germany , Japan , New Zealand and Argentina . Ridden by Kieren Fallon , he took the lead in the straight ( " far too soon " according to his jockey ) and went clear to beat the German horse <unk> by three lengths , with High @-@ Rise third . In winning , Fantastic Light broke the Nad Al Sheba track record for one and a half miles by more than a second . Shortly after the race it was announced that Fantastic Light would not return to Michael Stoute , but would be transferred to Sheikh Mohammed 's Godolphin Racing team and be trained by Saeed Bin <unk> . 
 Fantastic Light was then returned to England for a summer campaign . In the Coronation Cup at Epsom in June he finished second to <unk> and then came fifth of the eight runners behind Giant 's Causeway in the Eclipse Stakes . He was then sent to Ascot for the King George VI and Queen Elizabeth Stakes , where he finished second , reversing the Epsom form with <unk> , but having no chance against the favourite <unk> . 
 In Autumn , Godolphin campaigned Fantastic Light in the United States . At Belmont Park in September he started odds @-@ on favourite and won the Man o ' War Stakes " comfortably " , to record his first Grade I victory . In this race he was ridden by Jerry Bailey , who claimed that he had always had the other runners " at his mercy " despite having to come round the outside of the field . In all his remaining ten starts Fantastic Light was ridden by Frankie Dettori . He disappointed in a return to Belmont for the Turf Classic , finishing fourth to John 's Call , a horse he had beaten in the Man o ' War . He then finished to fifth Kalanisi in the Breeders ' Cup Turf at Churchill Downs , although in this case he had a legitimate excuse , having been blocked twice when Dettori attempted to find space for a challenge . 
 For his last two starts of the year , Fantastic Light was sent to East Asia . In November , in the Japan Cup he stayed on strongly in the closing stages to finish a close third , beaten a neck and a nose by T M Opera O and <unk> <unk> . Dettori reportedly felt that the slow pace was the reason for his defeat . Despite three successive defeats , Fantastic Light still managed to end the season with a major victory . In December he was sent to Sha Tin for the Hong Kong Cup and justified favouritism by leading in the straight and staying on strongly to beat Greek Dance and Jim and Tonic . The win earned Fantastic Light top place in the Emirates World Series , a competition in which points were awarded for performances in a number of international races . 
 = = = 2001 : five @-@ year @-@ old season = = = 
 = = = = Spring = = = = 
 Like a previous Godolphin champion , <unk> , Fantastic Light proved himself to be better than ever as a five @-@ year @-@ old ( see Assessment below ) . 
 In March he attempted to win a second Sheema Classic and almost succeeded , taking the lead a furlong out , but being caught on the line and beaten a nose by the Japanese outsider Stay Gold . Despite the defeat , his connections announced that they were " delighted " with the performance . As in 2000 , Fantastic Light spent the middle of the season racing in Europe . At the end of May he was sent to Ireland where he won the Tattersalls Gold Cup , taking the lead a furlong from the finish and beating Golden Snake by a neck with Kalanisi third . After the race , Godolphin 's racing manager , Simon <unk> , said that Fantastic Light would be aimed at the top middle distance races in Europe , calling him " very special ... a fantastic horse " . 
 = = = = Summer = = = = 
 Despite this result , Kalanisi was made favourite when the horses met again in the Prince of Wales 's Stakes ( by this time a Group One race ) at Royal Ascot , a contest that was expected to be one of the best of the meeting . Fantastic Light raced behind the leaders before being moved up by Dettori to take the lead in the straight . He soon went clear with what the Telegraph described as a " ruthless display of speed " , and although Kalanisi attempted to challenge , Fantastic Light stayed on to win " comfortably " by two and a half lengths . After the race , Sheikh Mohammed talked confidently about a meeting with the unbeaten Derby winner Galileo . 
 Fantastic Light and Galileo did meet at Ascot in the King George VI and Queen Elizabeth Stakes , for which the Aidan O 'Brien @-@ trained three @-@ year @-@ old was sent off the 1 / 2 favourite ahead of Fantastic Light at 7 / 2 . The race was the subject of considerable advance publicity , and was portrayed as a clash between the two most powerful forces in European racing ; Godolphin , represented by Fantastic Light , and Ballydoyle / Coolmore represented by Galileo . As in the Prince of Wales 's Stakes , Dettori settled Fantastic Light in the early stages before moving him out to challenge in the straight . Galileo had already taken the lead but Fantastic Light moved up and went level a furlong out . The two horses raced side @-@ by @-@ side for several strides , but Galileo then pulled ahead to win by two lengths . 
 = = = = Autumn = = = = 
 The second meeting between Fantastic Light and Galileo was scheduled for the Irish Champion Stakes at Leopardstown in September and was highly anticipated . This time Dettori rode Fantastic Light more positively as part of an agreed Godolphin plan , sending him past the Ballydoyle pacemaker to take the lead two furlongs out . Michael Kinane immediately brought Galileo to challenge and the two horses raced alongside each other all the way to the line . Galileo appeared to gain a slight advantage , but Fantastic Light , stayed on strongly under pressure to regain the lead and win by a head in a " thrilling " contest . The British Horseracing Authority described the event as " one of the greatest races witnessed throughout the current decade " , whilst readers of the Racing Post placed it seventh ( the third highest for a flat race ) in their list of the 100 Greatest Races . 
 For Fantastic Light 's final start , he was sent back to America for a second attempt at the Breeders ' Cup , held in October 2001 at Belmont Park . It was expected that he would run against Galileo again in the Classic , while Godolphin 's Prix de l 'Arc de Triomphe winner , Sakhee was aimed for the Breeders ' Cup Turf . Shortly before the race , however , the two Godolphin horses switched targets , the rationale apparently being that Sakhee would be better suited by the dirt surface . In the Turf , Dettori placed Fantastic Light just behind the pace as the race was led first by With Anticipation and then by <unk> . Making his challenge in the straight , Fantastic Light took the lead just over a furlong out and held off the strong late challenge of the St Leger winner Milan to win by three quarters of a length , with the rest of the runners more than five lengths further back . The time of 2 : 24 @.@ 36 was a new course record . Summarising Fantastic Light 's career , <unk> called him " the ultimate modern @-@ day racehorse . " 
 A projected run in the Japan Cup did not materialise and his retirement was announced shortly afterwards . He had already amassed sufficient points to secure a second Emirates World Series . 
 = = Race record = = 
 = = Assessment , honours and awards = = 
 From the mid @-@ 1990s the International Classification Committee ( representing Europe ) and the North American Rating Committee drew up an annual International Classification which included all horses who raced in Europe , North America and Japan . These ratings did not include Southern Hemisphere horses and were not therefore , " World " rankings . 
 In the 2000 International Classification , Fantastic Light was assessed at 124 , placing him fourteenth in the ratings ( eighth in Europe ) , ten pounds below Dubai Millennium . In the 2001 International Classification Fantastic Light was assessed at 129 ( equal with Galileo ) , making him the third highest rated horse behind Sakhee and Point Given . 
 Fantastic Light was assessed at 134 by <unk> . A rating in excess of 130 is considered the mark of an above average Group One winner . 
 In 2001 he was named European Champion Older Horse and European Horse of the Year at the Cartier Racing Awards . 
 In February 2002 Fantastic Light was voted the Eclipse Award for American Champion Male Turf Horse in the Eclipse Awards , beating Val Royal and With Anticipation in the voting . 
 = = Stud career = = 
 Retired at the end of the 2001 racing season , Fantastic Light stood for the Darley Stud stud at <unk> Hall in Newmarket , England , before being moved to their Japanese base in Hokkaido for the 2007 season . 
 He has also been shuttled to stand in Australia for the Southern Hemisphere breeding season . During five seasons at stud in Australia he was the sire of 427 live foals that included Mission Critical , who won the group one Waikato Race Club 's International Stakes . 
 He has sired the winners of more than three hundred races including <unk> , winner of the Winter Derby , the Gran <unk> and the Grand Prix de Chantilly ( Group 2 ) . 
 = = Pedigree = = 
 Although there is no inbreeding visible in the table above , four of the horses in the fourth generation ( <unk> , Hail To Reason , Nearctic and <unk> ) are direct descendants of Nearco , who as a result appears twice in the fifth , and twice in the sixth generation of Fantastic Light 's extended pedigree . 
 = Gjirokastër = 
 Gjirokastër is a town and a municipality in southern Albania . Lying in the historical region of Epirus , it is the capital of Gjirokastër County . Its old town is a World Heritage Site described as " a rare example of a well @-@ preserved Ottoman town , built by farmers of large estate . " Gjirokastër is situated in a valley between the <unk> mountains and the <unk> , at 300 metres above sea level . The city is overlooked by Gjirokastër Fortress , where the Gjirokastër National Folklore Festival is held every five years . Gjirokastër is the birthplace of former Albanian communist leader Enver Hoxha and notable writer Ismail Kadare . It hosts the <unk> <unk> University . 
 The present municipality was formed at the 2015 local government reform by the merger of the former municipalities of <unk> , <unk> , Gjirokastër , <unk> , Lunxhëri , <unk> and <unk> , that became municipal units . The seat of the municipality is the town Gjirokastër . The total population is 25 @,@ 301 ( 2011 census ) , in a total area of 469 @.@ 25 square kilometres ( 181 @.@ 18 sq mi ) . The population of the former municipality at the 2011 census was 19 @,@ 836 . 
 The city appears in the historical record in 1336 by its Greek name , Argyrokastro ( <unk> , often written <unk> or <unk> @-@ Castro ) , as part of the Byzantine Empire . It later became the center of the principality ruled by John Zenevisi ( 1373 @-@ 1417 ) before falling under Ottoman rule for the next five centuries . Taken by the Hellenic Army during the Balkan Wars of 1912 @-@ 3 on account of its large Greek population , it was eventually incorporated into the newly independent state of Albania in 1913 . This proved highly unpopular with the local Greek population , who rebelled ; after several months of guerrilla warfare , the short @-@ lived Autonomous Republic of Northern Epirus was established in 1914 with Gjirokaster as its capital . It was definitively awarded to Albania in 1921 . In more recent years , the city witnessed anti @-@ government protests that lead to the Albanian civil war of 1997 . 
 Alongside Albanians , the city is home to a substantial Greek minority . Gjirokastër , together with Sarandë , is considered one of the centers of the Greek community in Albania , and there is a consulate of Greece . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The city appeared for the first time in historical records under its medieval Greek name of <unk> ( Greek : <unk> ) , as mentioned by John VI Kantakouzenos in 1336 . The name comes from the Medieval Greek <unk> ( <unk> ) , meaning " silver " , and <unk> ( <unk> ) , from the Latin castrum meaning " castle " or " fortress " , thus " silver castle " . The theory that the city took the name of the Princess <unk> , a legendary figure about whom 19th century author Kostas <unk> wrote a short novel and Ismail Kadare wrote a poem in the 1960s . It is considered a folk etymology , since the princess is said to have lived later , in the 15th century . 
 The definite Albanian form of the name of city is <unk> , while in the <unk> Albanian dialect it is known as <unk> , both of which derive from the Greek name . Alternative spellings found in Western sources are <unk> and <unk> . In Aromanian the city is known as <unk> , while in modern Greek it is known <unk> ( Argyrokastro ) . During the Ottoman era the town was known in Turkish as <unk> . 
 = = History = = 
 Archaeological evidence points out that during the Bronze Age the region was inhabited by populations that probably spoke a northwestern Greek dialect . Archaeologists have found pottery objects of the early Iron Age in Gjirokastër , which first appeared in the late Bronze Age in <unk> , Elbasan District , and are found throughout Albania . The earliest recorded inhabitants of the area around Gjirokastër were the Greek tribe of the Chaonians . 
 The city 's walls date from the third century . The high stone walls of the Citadel were built from the sixth to the twelfth century . During this period , Gjirokastër developed into a major commercial center known as <unk> ( Ancient Greek : <unk> , meaning " Silver City " ) or Argyrokastron ( Ancient Greek : <unk> , meaning " Silver Castle " ) . 
 The city was part of the Despotate of Epirus and was first mentioned by the name Argyrokastro by John VI Kantakouzenos in 1336 . During 1386 – 1418 it became the capital of the Principality of Gjirokastër of John Zenevisi . In 1417 it became part of the Ottoman Empire and in 1419 it became the county town of the Sanjak of Albania . During the Albanian Revolt of 1432 – 36 it was besieged by forces under Thopia Zenevisi , but the rebels were defeated by Ottoman troops led by Turahan Bey In 1570s local nobles <unk> <unk> and Panos <unk> , discussed as Greek representative of enslaved Greece and Albania with the head of the Holy League , John of Austria and various other European rulers , the possibility of an anti @-@ Ottoman armed struggle , but this initiative was fruitless . 
 According to Turkish traveller Evliya Çelebi , who visited the city in 1670 , at that time there were 200 houses within the castle , 200 in the Christian eastern neighborhood of <unk> <unk> ( meaning small neighborhood outside the castle ) , 150 houses in the <unk> <unk> ( meaning big neighborhood outside the castle ) , and six additional neighborhoods : <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> Bey , and <unk> Bey , extending on eight hills around the castle . According to the traveller , the city had at that time around 2000 houses , eight mosques , three churches , 280 shops , five fountains , and five inns . 
 In 1811 , Gjirokastër became part of the Pashalik of Yanina , then led by the Albanian @-@ born Ali Pasha , and was transformed into a semi @-@ autonomous fiefdom in the southwestern Balkans until his death in 1822 . After the fall of the <unk> in 1868 , the city was the capital of the sanjak of <unk> ( the Turkish name for Gjirokastër ) . On 23 July 1880 , southern Albanian committees of the League of Prizren held a congress in the city , in which was decided that if Albanian @-@ populated areas of the Ottoman Empire were ceded to neighbouring countries , they would revolt . During the Albanian National Awakening ( 1831 – 1912 ) , the city was a major centre of the movement , and some groups in the city were reported to carry portraits of Skanderbeg , the national hero of the Albanians during this period . 
 Given its large Greek population , the city was claimed and taken by Greece during the First Balkan War of 1912 – 1913 , following the retreat of the Ottomans from the region . However , it was awarded to Albania under the terms of the Treaty of London of 1913 and the Protocol of Florence of 17 December 1913 . 
 This turn of events proved highly unpopular with the local Greek population , and their representatives under Georgios Christakis @-@ Zografos formed the Panepirotic Assembly in Gjirokastër in protest . The Assembly , short of incorporation with Greece , demanded either local autonomy or an international occupation by forces of the Great Powers for the districts of Gjirokastër , Sarandë , and Korçë . 
 In March 1914 , the Northern Epirote Declaration of Independence was announced in Gjirokastër and it was confirmed in the Protocol of Corfu . The Republic , however , was short @-@ lived , as Albania collapsed at the beginning of World War I. The Greek military returned in October – November 1914 , and again captured Gjirokastër , along with <unk> and Korçë . In April 1916 , the territory referred to by Greeks as Northern Epirus , including Gjirokastër , was annexed to Greece . The Paris Peace Conference , 1919 restored the pre @-@ war status quo , essentially upholding the border line decided in the 1913 Protocol of Florence , and the city was again returned to Albanian control . 
 In April 1939 , Gjirokastër was occupied by Italy following the Italian invasion of Albania . In December 8 , 1940 , during the Greco @-@ Italian War , the Hellenic Army entered the city and stayed for a five @-@ month period before capitulating to Nazi Germany in April 1941 and returning the city to Italian command . After the capitulation of Italy in the Armistice of Cassibile in September 1943 , the city was taken by German forces and eventually returned to Albanian control in 1944 . 
 The postwar communist regime developed the city as an industrial and commercial centre . It was elevated to the status of a museum town , as it was the birthplace of the leader of the People 's Socialist Republic of Albania , Enver Hoxha , who had been born there in 1908 . His house was converted into a museum . 
 The demolition of the monumental statue of the authoritarian leader Enver <unk> in Gjirokastër by members of the local Greek community in August 1991 marked the end of the one @-@ party state . Gjirokastër suffered severe economic problems following the end of communist rule in 1991 . In the spring of 1993 , the region of Gjirokastër became a center of open conflict between Greek minority members and the Albanian police . The city was particularly affected by the 1997 collapse of a massive pyramid scheme which destabilised the entire Albanian economy . The city became the focus of a rebellion against the government of Sali Berisha ; violent anti @-@ government protests took place which eventually forced Berisha 's resignation . On 16 December 1997 , Hoxha 's house was damaged by unknown attackers , but subsequently restored . 
 = = Religion and culture = = 
 In 1925 , Albania became the world center of the Bektashi Order , a Muslim sect . The sect was headquartered in Tirana , and Gjirokastër was one of six districts of the Bektashi Order in Albania , with its center at the <unk> of Baba <unk> . The city retains a large Bektashi and Sunni population . Historically there were 15 and <unk> and mosques , of which 13 were functional in 1945 . Only Gjirokastër Mosque has survived ; the remaining 12 were destroyed or closed during the Cultural Revolution of the communist government in 1967 . 
 The city is home to a diocese of the Eastern Orthodox Church , part of the Orthodox Autocephalous Church of Albania . 
 17th @-@ century Ottoman traveller Evliya Çelebi , who visited the city in 1670 , described the city in detail . One Sunday , Çelebi heard the sound of a <unk> , the traditional Albanian lament for the dead , performed by a professional mourner . The traveller found the city so noisy that he dubbed Gjirokastër the " city of wailing " . 
 The novel Chronicle in Stone by Albanian writer Ismail Kadare tells the history of this city during the Italian and Greek occupation in World War I and II , and expands on the customs of the people of Gjirokastër . At the age of twenty @-@ four , Albanian writer <unk> <unk> wrote an 80 @-@ page collection of ten youthful prose tales in her native <unk> dialect : As my old mother tells me ( Albanian : <unk> me <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , Tirana , 1941 . The book tells the day @-@ by @-@ day struggles of women of Gjirokastër , and describes the prevailing mores of the region . 
 Gjirokastër , home to both Albanian and Greek polyphonic singing , is also home to the National Folklore Festival ( Albanian : <unk> <unk> Kombëtar ) that is held every five years . The festival started in 1968 and was most recently held in 2009 , its ninth season . The festival takes place on the premises of Gjirokaster Fortress . Gjirokaster is also where the Greek language newspaper <unk> Vima is published . Founded in 1945 , it was the only Greek @-@ language printed media allowed during the People 's Socialist Republic of Albania . 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 The city is built on the slope surrounding the citadel , located on a dominating plateau . Although the city 's walls were built in the third century and the city itself was first mentioned in the 12th century , the majority of the existing buildings date from 17th and 18th centuries . Typical houses consist of a tall stone block structure which can be up to five stories high . There are external and internal staircases that surround the house . It is thought that such design stems from fortified country houses typical in southern Albania . The lower storey of the building contains a cistern and the stable . The upper storey is composed of a guest room and a family room containing a fireplace . Further upper stories are to accommodate extended families and are connected by internal stairs . Since Gjirokastër 's membership to UNESCO , a number of houses have been restored , though others continue to degrade . 
 Many houses in Gjirokastër have a distinctive local style that has earned the city the nickname " City of Stone " , because most of the old houses have roofs covered with flat dressed stones . A very similar style can be seen in the <unk> district of Greece . The city , along with Berat , was among the few Albanian cities preserved in the 1960s and 1970s from modernizing building programs . Both cities gained the status of " museum town " and are UNESCO World Heritage sites . 
 Gjirokastër Fortress dominates the town and overlooks the strategically important route along the river valley . It is open to visitors and contains a military museum featuring captured artillery and memorabilia of the Communist resistance against German occupation , as well as a captured United States Air Force plane , to commemorate the Communist regime 's struggle against the imperialist powers . Additions were built during the 19th and 20th centuries by Ali Pasha of Ioannina and the government of King Zog I of Albania . Today it possesses five towers and houses a clock tower , a church , water fountains , horse stables , and many more amenities . The northern part of the castle was turned into a prison by Zog 's government and housed political prisoners during the communist regime . 
 Gjirokastër features an old Ottoman bazaar which was originally built in the 17th century ; it was rebuilt in the 19th century after a fire . There are more than 500 homes preserved as " cultural monuments " in Gjirokastër today . The Gjirokastër Mosque , built in 1757 , dominates the bazaar . 
 When the town was first proposed for inclusion on the World Heritage list in 1988 , International Council on Monuments and Sites experts were nonplussed by a number of modern constructions which detracted from the old town 's appearance . The historic core of Gjirokastër was finally inscribed in 2005 , 15 years after its original nomination . 
 = = Climate = = 
 Gjirokastër is situated between the lowlands of western Albania and the highlands of the interior , and has thus a hot @-@ summer Mediterranean climate , though , ( as is normal for Albania ) , much heavier rainfall than usual for this climate type . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Gjirokastër is principally a commercial center with some industries , notably the production of foodstuffs , leather , and textiles . Recently a regional agricultural market that trades locally produced groceries has been built in the city . Given the potential of southern Albania to supply organically @-@ grown products , and its relationship with Greek counterparts of the nearby city of Ioannina , it is likely that the market will dedicate itself to organic farming in the future . However , currently trademarking and marketing of such products are far from European standards . The Chamber of Commerce of the city , created in 1988 , promotes trade with the Greek border areas . As part of the financial support from Greece to Albania , the Hellenic Armed Forces built a hospital in the city . 
 In recent years , many traditional houses are being reconstructed and owners lured to come back , thus revitalizing tourism as a potential revenue source for the local economy . However , some houses continue to degrade from lack of investment , abandonment or inappropriate renovations as local craftsmen are not part of these projects . In 2010 , following the Greek economic crisis , the city was one of the first areas in Albania to suffer , since many Albanian emigrants in Greece are becoming unemployed and thus are returning home . 
 = = Education = = 
 The first school in the city , a Greek language school , was erected in the city in 1663 . It was sponsored by local merchants and functioned under the supervision of the local bishop . In 1821 , when the Greek War of Independence broke out , it was destroyed , but it was reopened in 1830 . In 1727 a madrasa started to function in the city , and it worked uninterruptedly for 240 years until 1967 , when it was closed due to the Cultural Revolution applied in communist Albania . In 1861 – 1862 a Greek language school for girls was founded , financially supported by the local Greek benefactor Christakis Zografos . The first Albanian school in Gjirokastër was opened in 1886 . Today Gjirokastër has seven grammar schools , two general high schools ( of which one is the Gjirokastër Gymnasium ) , and two professional ones . 
 The city is home to the <unk> <unk> University , which opened its doors in 1968 . The university has recently been experiencing low enrollments , and as a result the departments of Physics , Mathematics , Biochemistry , and Kindergarten Education did not function during the 2008 – 2009 academic year . In 2006 , the establishment of a second university in Gjirokastër , a Greek @-@ language one , was agreed upon after discussions between the Albanian and Greek governments . The program had an attendance of 35 students as of 2010 , but was abruptly suspended when the University of Ioannina in Greece refused to provide teachers for the 2010 school year and the Greek government and the <unk> foundation withdrew funding . 
 = = Sports = = 
 Football ( soccer ) is popular in Gjirokastër : the city hosts <unk> Gjirokastër , a club founded in 1929 . The club has competed in international tournaments and played in the Albanian Superliga until 2006 – 2007 . Currently the team plays in the Albanian First Division . The soccer matches are played in Gjirokastër Stadium , which can hold up to 8 @,@ 500 spectators . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 The town has 43 @,@ 000 inhabitants . Gjirokastër is home to an ethnic Greek community that according to one source numbered about 4000 in 1989 , although Greek spokesmen have claimed that up to 34 % of the town is Greek . Gjirokastër is considered the center of the Greek community in Albania . Given the large Greek population in the town and surrounding area , there is a Greek consulate in the town . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Gjirokastër is served by the <unk> Highway , which connects it to Tepelenë in the north and the <unk> region and Greek border 30 km ( 19 mi ) to the south . 
 = = International relations = = 
 = = = Twin towns – Sister cities = = = 
 Gjirokastër is twinned with : 
 Sarandë , Albania 
 = = Notable people = = 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Giant Schnauzer = 
 The Giant Schnauzer is a working breed of dog developed in the 17th century in Germany . It is the largest of the three breeds of Schnauzer — the other two breeds being the Standard Schnauzer and the Miniature Schnauzer . Numerous breeds were used in its development , including the black Great Dane , the Bouvier des Flandres , and the German Pinscher . Originally bred to assist on farms by driving livestock to market and guarding the farmer 's property , the breed eventually moved into the city , where it worked guarding breweries , butchers ' shops , stockyards and factories . It was unknown outside of Bavaria until it became popular as a military dog during World War I and World War II . 
 They have dense coarse coat that protects them from the weather and from vermin . Giant Schnauzers come in two color patterns : Solid black , and a color known as pepper and salt , with banded hairs of alternating white and black , appearing gray hairs at a distance . Where legal , they are shown with cropped ears and docked tails . Like other <unk> , they have a distinct beard and eyebrows . Today , the Giant Schnauzer participates in numerous dog sports , including <unk> . It is also used as a police dog . 
 = = History = = 
 The first Giant Schnauzers emerged from Swabia in the German state of Bavaria , and Württemberg in the 17th century . These original Giant Schnauzers were considered a rough @-@ coated version of the German <unk> breeds , and their hair was thought to help them withstand the harsh German winters and bites from vermin . The origins of the breed are unclear , but sources speculate it originated through some combination of black Great Danes , German Shepherds , Rottweilers , Dobermans , Boxers , Bouvier des Flandres , Thuringian Shepherds , and the Standard Schnauzer . 
 The Giant Schnauzer was originally bred as a multipurpose farm dog for guarding property and driving animals to market . By the turn of the 20th century the Giant Schnauzer was being used as a watchdog at factories , breweries , butcheries , and stockyards throughout Bavaria . It was unknown outside Bavaria until it was used as a military dog in World War I and World War II . The first Giant Schnauzers were imported to America in the 1930s , but they remained rare until the 1960s , when the breed became popular . In 1962 , there were 23 new Giant Schnauzers registered with the American Kennel Club ; in 1974 this number was 386 ; in 1984 it was over 800 and in 1987 it was around 1000 animals . In 2012 , there were 94 new dogs registered , down from 95 in 2011 . 
 In modern times , the Giant Schnauzer is used as a police dog ; is trained for obedience , dog agility , herding , search and rescue , and <unk> ; and is shown in conformation shows . They are also used for carting . In Europe , the breed is considered to be more of a working dog than a show dog . The focus in many European Schnauzer clubs is not so much on conformation shows , but on the working ability of the breed . In several countries , including Germany , dogs must achieve a <unk> Champion title before they can qualify to be a conformation champion . 
 = = Description = = 
 = = = Appearance = = = 
 Although the Giant Schnauzer is called ' Giant ' , this is not in comparison to other large dog breeds such as the Great Dane or the Rottweiler , but instead in comparison to the Standard and Miniature Schnauzers . The AKC breed standard calls for males to stand from 25 @.@ 5 to 27 @.@ 5 inches ( 65 to 70 cm ) at the withers , and for females to stand from 23 @.@ 5 to 25 @.@ 5 inches ( 60 to 65 cm ) . Giant Schnauzers are square in shape , and should resemble a larger version of the Standard Schnauzer . The tail is long and the ears are small button ears carried high on the head . Where it is legal , it is possibly docked and the ears cropped . 
 The head is 1 / 2 the length of the dog 's back , when the back is measured from the withers to the base of the tail . The cheeks are flat , but well muscled . The coat is dense , wiry , and weather resistant . The fur on the Giant Schnauzer 's face forms a distinct " beard " and eyebrows . Its stride is long and crisp . 
 Giant Schnauzers come in two colors : solid black , and a pattern called pepper and salt , where banded hairs of black and white hairs cover the body , giving it the appearance of having been peppered and salted . 
 = = = Temperament = = = 
 Giant Schnauzers are usually a quiet breed . Due to its breeding , the Giant Schnauzer is inherently suspicious of strangers and can be very territorial . Once introduced , it is usually accepting of novel people or situations . It has the potential to be aggressive , but Giant Schnauzers are usually reserved - they are " amiable in repose , and a commanding figure when aroused " 
 Giant Schnauzers have been described as trustworthy with children . They are very intelligent , and can become bored easily . They are also very energetic and highly spirited , which , when coupled with boredom , can lead to unwanted and destructive behavior . They are easily trained , and deeply loyal to their owner . Some breeders believe that pepper and salt colored Giant Schnauzers are more docile than their black @-@ furred counterparts . 
 = = Health = = 
 Giant Schnauzers require regular grooming . Their beard can collect drool and food particles , making frequent cleanings essential . If being shown , their coat needs to be stripped every two to four weeks . If they are simply a companion animal , the coat can be clipped instead . Some Giant Schnauzers have an allergy to shampoo . 
 Hip and elbow dysplasia are common . Giant Schnauzers are also prone to eye problems such as keratoconjunctivitis sicca , glaucoma , cataracts , multifocal retinal dysplasia , and generalized progressive retinal atrophy . They are also prone to skin diseases , such as seasonal flank alopecia , vitiligo , and follicular cysts . Cancer of the skin is common in dark @-@ colored dogs , with the most frequently occurring varieties being melanoma of the limbs and digits , and squamous cell carcinoma of the digit . This susceptibility occurs because melanoma is caused by a defect in the melanocytes , the cells that darken the color of the skin . <unk> skin tumors are also common . 
 Some Giant Schnauzers develop central diabetes insipidus , autosomal recessive hypothyroidism , selective malabsorption of cobalamin , narcolepsy , <unk> , and various seizure disorders . Some are also sensitive to sulphonamides and gold . Bone diseases and joint problems are also an issue . The most common causes of death in Giant Schnauzers are lymphoma and liver cancer , followed by heart attacks and heart failure . 
 = Inchoate offences in English law = 
 Inchoate offences in English law are offences in England and Wales that cover illegal acts which have yet to be committed , primarily attempts to commit crimes , incitement to commit crimes , and conspiracy to commit crimes . Attempts , governed by the Criminal Attempts Act 1981 , are defined as situations where an individual who intends to commit an offence does an act which is " more than merely preparatory " in the offence 's commission . Traditionally this definition has caused problems , with no firm rule on what constitutes a " more than merely preparatory " act , but broad judicial statements give some guidance . Incitement , on the other hand , is an offence under the common law , and covers situations where an individual encourages another person to engage in activities which will result in a criminal act taking place , and intends for this act to occur . As a criminal activity , incitement had a particularly broad remit , covering " a suggestion , proposal , request , exhortation , gesture , argument , persuasion , inducement , goading or the arousal of cupidity " . It was abolished by the Serious Crime Act 2007 , but continues in other offences and as the basis of the new offence of " encouraging or assisting " the commission of a crime . 
 Conspiracy is both a statutory and common law offence . In its statutory form , under the Criminal Law Act 1977 , it consists of any agreement between two or more people to commit a criminal offence . Common law conspiracy , on the other hand , covers " conspiracy to defraud " and " conspiracy to corrupt public morals " , although the latter has no substantive case law and is not seen as an offence that individuals are likely to be prosecuted for . All three inchoate offences require a mens rea of intent , and upon conviction , the defendant is sentenced as if they had succeeded in committing the attempted , incited or conspired crime in question . 
 = = Definition = = 
 Inchoate means " just begun " or " undeveloped " , and is used in English criminal law to refer to situations where , although a substantial offence has not been committed , the defendant has taken steps to commit it , or encouraged others to do so . These situations are generally divided into three categories ; attempts , where the defendant has taken steps " towards carrying out a complete crime " , incitement , where the defendant has encouraged others to commit a crime , and conspiracy , where the defendant has agreed with others to commit a crime . In each case , the defendant " has not himself performed the actus reus but is sufficiently close to doing so , or persuading others to do so , for the law to find it appropriate to punish him " . 
 = = Offences = = 
 = = = Attempt = = = 
 Attempts are governed by the Criminal Attempts Act 1981 , which states that " if , with intent to commit an offence to which [ the act applies ] , a person does an act which is more than merely preparatory to the commission of the offence , he is guilty of attempting to commit the offence " . A required element is intent , or mens rea . In R v Pearman , the Court of Appeal of England and Wales confirmed that the definition of intent in the 1981 Act is the same as the definition in the common law . The common law gives intention " its normal meaning : purpose or aim " , with judges advised not to , in the majority of cases , attempt to complicate the definition . Conditional intent – where somebody has an intent to commit a crime only in certain circumstances – has also been deemed acceptable for an indictment for attempting a crime . In Attorney @-@ General 's Reference ( Nos. 1 and 2 of 1979 ) , the Court of Appeal explained that the intention to steal " anything that was worth stealing could form the basis of an attempt charge if the indictment was drafted carefully " . This was a procedural solution to a previous apparent contradiction , but the suggested drafting may not demonstrate sufficient proximity between the defendant 's actions and what he was planning to steal . A mens rea requirement is added to the attempt of crimes of strict liability ( where there is no intent or merely objective recklessness ) , although the ruling in Attorney General 's Reference ( No. 3 of 1992 ) makes this less certain . 
 Section 1 ( 1 ) also provides that the actus reus must be " more than merely preparatory " . In practice , academic Jonathan Herring notes that " there is no hard and fast rule about when an act may be more than merely preparatory " , although there are several cases which give broad guidance . In R v Geddes , a man entered the toilets in a school in Brighton with a large knife , some rope and a roll of masking tape ; it was alleged that he was intending to kidnap a pupil . The Court of Appeal confirmed that this was not enough for a conviction . However , certain general rules have been laid down ; if the defendant has committed the last act before completing his offence , it constitutes an attempt , as in R v Jones . This is not , however , necessary in all situations , as in R v <unk> . The actus reus of the full offence is also taken into account ; in R v <unk> , the defendant was charged with attempted burglary after trespassing into the victim 's garden and knocking on their door . He was found guilty , because he had entered the property – the actus reus for burglary – and his actions were thus more than merely preparatory . The wording " does an act " prevents liability for omissions , a distinction that the Law Commission has looked to remove , at least in the case of attempted murder . 
 Certain things cannot be attempted . These include conspiracy , under section 1 ( 4 ) of the 1981 Act , assisting a criminal , under section 4 ( 1 ) of the Criminal Law Act 1967 , aiding in the commission of an offence , or most summary offences , with the logic being that they are too minor for attempts to justify a criminal conviction . A small number of separate statutory offences have been created to cover attempts concerning individual summary offences , in which case , usual attempt law and procedure applies . 
 If someone is found guilty of an attempt , they are sentenced under section 4 ( 1 ) of the 1981 Act . This provides that anyone who attempts to commit an offence will be punished with the same period in prison as if they had succeeded ; since theft carries a maximum penalty of seven years in prison , for example , someone convicted of attempted theft would also find themselves sentenced to a maximum of seven years . 
 = = = Encouraging or assisting = = = 
 The offences of " encouraging or assisting a crime " under the Serious Crime Act 2007 are inchoate offences . In each case , the actus reus requirement is that the defendant carry out an act capable of " encouraging or assisting " the commission of another offence . An offence is committed under section 44 , if this is done with intent to do the same ; under section 45 if it is done " believing that the offence will be committed and that the act will encourage or assist its commission " ; or under section 46 where there are multiple possible offences being encouraged or assisted , and at least one is foreseen . There is no need for the defendant to have successfully communicated his thoughts to anyone else . Since this is very wide , the courts will have to narrow it by some criterion , probably by reference to the remoteness of the encouragement to the crime . Failing to act when under a duty to do so would also qualify . 
 " Encouraging " is not defined in the statute and can be considered in the same way as the previous crime of incitement . It does not matter if the encouragement or assistance has no effect . " Assisting " is likely to be considered similar to " aiding " in <unk> liability . Assistance can be provided indirectly , for example through a third person . 
 Whereas incitement can only be committed when the defendant incites the principal offender , the crime of " encouraging or assisting " includes helping an accessory . Whilst a section 44 offence can be committed in relation to other inchoate offences ( including itself ) , sections 45 and 46 cannot . Crimes which are , in fact rather than law , impossible to commit yet – but will be – also fall under this offence . 
 In terms of mens rea , any form of recklessness , including virtual certainty , is insufficient for an offence under Section 44 , in part due to the existence of Section 45 and 46 which aid its interpretation . Offences under Sections 45 and 46 are only committed if the defendant believes that both the crime will be committed , and that the act will encourage or assist the offender : that they might do so is not enough . However , it is also possible to commit these offences if the defendant commits an act capable of encouraging or assisting the commission of a crime , intending or believing that the principal offender would carry out the " act " , where that may not in itself constitute a crime . However , it is necessary that the defendant intend or be reckless to any required circumstances or consequences – for example , that death was a result . Additionally , the prosecution must show that the defendant believed that ( or was reckless to ) whether the act would be done with the required mens rea , or that the defendant himself has the required mens rea for the offence . These amount to very complex provisions . 
 There is no defence of later withdrawing from the act ; however , there is one of " acting reasonably " under Section 50 . This takes two forms : either that the acts themselves were reasonable ; or that the defendant reasonably believed in circumstances which did not exist and acted reasonably under those circumstances . The existence of this defence has been attacked by Andrew Simester and Bob Sullivan on the grounds it may be acting as a " sop " to counteract excess brevity in other sections of the act . Victims are extended the " Tyrell " defence – that one cannot aid , abet , counsel or procure an offence against oneself – although exactly when a victim is protected can be unclear . 
 = = = Incitement = = = 
 The common law offence of inciting the commission of another offence was abolished on 1 October 2008 , except in relation to offences committed wholly or partly before that date . However , the language of incitement is retained in other statutory offences , such as inciting a child under 13 to engage in sexual activity contrary to section 8 of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 . The same rules are applied in these cases as the existing body of law on incitement . 
 The Court of Appeal considers incitement to consist of a situation in which a defendant " incites another to do or cause to be done an act or acts which , if done , will involve the commission of the offence or offences by the other ; and he intends or believes that the other , if he acts as incited , shall or will do so with the fault required for the offence or offences " . Unlike attempts , incitement is a common law offence . Incitement has a particularly broad actus reus ; it has been interpreted to include " a suggestion , proposal , request , exhortation , gesture , argument , persuasion , inducement , goading or the arousal of cupidity " . While it must include an act of incitement , this can be both express and implied . For an offence to be committed , the incited act must be criminal in nature , and an offence not only for the person doing the incitement but the person incited . Some exceptions are made ; under section 5 ( 7 ) of the Criminal Law Act 1977 , incitement to conspire is not an offence , and incitement to an aid or attempt are similarly not specifically given as criminal acts . In terms of mens rea , the defendant must have intended the incited offence to be committed , and also be aware of the likely consequences . It has been suggested that intent should not be necessary ; if the defendant knew that his advice would be followed , and this would result in a crime , he should be found guilty . 
 = = = Conspiracy = = = 
 Statutory conspiracy consists of an agreement between two or more people to commit a criminal offence , under section 5 ( 1 ) and ( 2 ) of the 1977 Act . For statutory conspiracies , there must be three elements : an agreement , to pursue a course of conduct which involves the commission of a crime , where the parties to the agreement intended to commit the crime . Even if the parties later decide not to go through with the plan , since the actus reus is to reach an agreement , they can still be charged . There are certain categories of agreement which cannot amount to a criminal conspiracy , however ; an agreement between a husband and wife is not a conspiracy , under section 2 ( 2 ) ( a ) of the 1977 Act , and neither is an agreement with a person under the age of criminal responsibility , or with the intended victim of the crime . 
 There is no need , under Churchill v Walton , to show that the conspirators knew that their proposed course of conduct amounted to a crime , but they must have intended the consequences ; if two people conspire to put poison in the victim 's tea , this is not a conspiracy to murder unless the poison was intended to kill the victim . The defendants will similarly not be found guilty if they are unaware that a crime will result ; if two people agree to grow plants , unaware that the plants are illegal , they have not engaged in a conspiracy . On the other hand , if the two people believe the plants to be illegal even though they are not , they could be found guilty . 
 Common law conspiracies , on the other hand , fall into two categories ; " conspiracy to defraud " and " conspiracy to corrupt public morals " . A third category which existed at the time of the 1977 Act , " conspiracy to outrage public decency " , has now become a statutory offence . Indeed , corrupting public morals may have become a statutory offence ; the situation is unclear . The standard definition of a conspiracy to defraud was provided by Lord Dilhorne in Scott v Metropolitan Police Commissioner , when he said that 
 it is clearly the law that an agreement by two or more by dishonesty to deprive a person of something which is his or to which he is or would be entitled and an agreement by two or more by dishonesty to injure some proprietary right of his , suffices to constitute the offence of conspiracy to defraud . 
 Conspiracy to defraud therefore contains two key elements ; that the conspiracy involved dishonesty , and that if the conspiracy was undertaken , the victim 's property rights would be harmed . This does not require the defendants ' actions to directly result in the fraud ; in R v Hollinshead , the House of Lords held that producing devices designed to alter electricity meter readings constituted conspiracy to defraud , even though the actual fraud would be carried out by members of the public rather than the conspirators . In two situations , it will not even be necessary for the actions to directly lead to any kind of financial loss for the victim ; these are when the conspirators plan to deceive a person holding public office into acting counter to their duties , and when the conspirators know that their actions put the victim 's property at risk , even if the risk never materialises . Conspiracy to " corrupt public morals " has no definitive case law ; it is unknown whether or not it is a substantive offence , and Herring sees it as unlikely that conspirators will be prosecuted for this offence . 
 = = Defence of impossibility = = 
 Some exceptions are also made for " impossible attempts " , which are divided into legal impossibility , impossibility through ineptitude and physical impossibility . Cases of legal impossibility occur when the defendant attempts to do something which he believes to be illegal , which is in fact not ; this does not constitute a crime . This defence does , however , remain for common law conspiracies . Impossibility through ineptitude is where the defendant attempts to commit a crime with inadequate means , in which case he can be found guilty . However , prosecutors ' discretion is likely to be a factor , since some plans – for example murder through a voodoo doll – may be simply too removed from the attempted crime . Physical impossibility covers situations where not only is the action inadequate , but impossible ; an example is the attempted murder of ( or conspiracy to murder ) someone who is , in fact , already dead . Such actions are governed by section 1 ( 2 ) and 1 ( 3 ) of the 1981 Act , which provides that they do constitute a crime if the actions , were the facts of the case to be as the defendant believed them to be , would have led to a valid attempt ; as Herring states , " if the defendant believes he is dealing in illegal drugs he can be convicted of an attempted drug @-@ dealing offence , even if in fact what he is selling is chalk " . A plan which successfully comes to fruition without the offence the defendant intended coming to pass may also relieve the defendant of liability , although this ruling from Haughton v Smith has proved hard to distinguish from the abolition of other defences of impossibility . 
 = = Theory = = 
 As a general principle of the law , criminal liability is normally only imposed upon " a blameworthy actor who causes a prohibited harm " , and while those who attempt crimes may be blameworthy , it can be argued that there is no harm caused ; attempted burglary , for example , does not lead to anything being stolen . Many theorists who make the distinction between successful and failed attempts do still consider the defendant partially liable , for example advocating a lesser punishment . However , there have been two distinct counterarguments advanced against making such a distinction . The first is that when a crime is attempted , there is a harm , namely a threat to security . Individuals have the right to security , both of themselves and their property , and an attempt to commit a crime infringes on this right . The second is that , regardless of the harm principle , criminal liability for attempts can be justified in utilitarian terms . A person who tries to commit a crime has shown themselves to be dangerous , and must be restrained and rehabilitated to provide a deterrence for them and for others . Although a differing approach is taken in some United States jurisdictions , intervention can happen very early in a conspiracy and the defendants can still be held liable . The earlier the liability , the more controversial . 
 For conspiracy , the standard justification is the " group @-@ danger " rationale , which states that since the objective of the criminal law is to protect harm to the community , and the community is at more risk from a group of people with harmful intentions than an individual with those same intentions , conspiracies themselves must be made a crime . The criminalisation of incitement is justified with the argument that incitement constitutes an attempt at conspiracy ; the <unk> 's objective is to persuade others to engage in criminal acts , with his knowledge and cooperation , and as such is " more dangerous than a direct attempt , because it may give rise to that cooperation among criminals which is a special hazard " . 
 = Sigi Schmid = 
 Siegfried " Sigi " Schmid ( pronounced [ <unk> <unk> <unk> ] ; born March 20 , 1953 ) is a German @-@ American soccer coach who most recently coached Seattle Sounders FC in Major League Soccer ( MLS ) . Born in Tübingen , West Germany , he moved to the United States with his family when he was a child . He played college soccer from 1972 to 1975 at the University of California , Los Angeles ( UCLA ) , where he was a starting midfielder in each of his four years . He coached his former college team , the UCLA Bruins , between 1980 and 1999 . During that period , he became one of the most successful collegiate coaches of all time , leading the Bruins to a record of 322 – 63 – 33 ( wins – losses – draws ) . The team made 16 consecutive playoff appearances from 1983 to 1998 , winning the national championship in 1985 , 1990 , and 1997 . Schmid also worked with US Soccer throughout the 1990s . 
 Schmid coached the Los Angeles Galaxy and the Columbus Crew in MLS , before becoming the head coach of Seattle Sounders FC in 2009 . Despite never having played soccer at a professional level , he has the most coaching wins in MLS history and was the recipient of the MLS Coach of the Year Award in 1999 and 2008 . Throughout his career , Schmid has received praise from critics for his ability to identify new talent . His defensive tactics are also highly regarded in the press and often cited as a factor in his success . However , their deployment in his final two seasons with Los Angeles led directly to the termination of his contract . 
 With a Bachelor of Economics degree from UCLA and a Master of Business Administration degree from the University of Southern California , he was a Certified Public Accountant ( CPA ) before coaching full @-@ time . Schmid and his wife have four children , and he has a younger brother named Roland Schmid . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Sigi Schmid was born in Tübingen , West Germany , on March 20 , 1953 . At the age of four , he moved with his family to the United States ; they took up residence in Torrance , California , in 1962 . Schmid 's father , Fritz , a prisoner of war during World War II , worked at Pabst Brewing ; his mother , Doris , ran a Los Angeles @-@ based German deli , where Schmid worked on weekends . Schmid 's family spoke German at home , making him feel German despite spending so much of his life in America . He began school in the United States with little understanding of English and a stuttering speech disorder he did not overcome until high school . In his youth , Schmid visited Germany every summer , playing soccer with the local children and watching Bundesliga clubs play exhibition matches in neighboring towns . In 1964 , Schmid played for the inaugural American Youth Soccer Organization team , an achievement for which he was inducted into the National Soccer Hall of Fame in 1996 . 
 Despite Schmid 's early soccer experience , his parents thought a career in the sport was unfeasible and encouraged him to pursue business . He enrolled at UCLA in 1972 and was a starting midfielder for the UCLA Bruins from 1972 to 1975 . In his first two seasons , the Bruins were national runners @-@ up in the championships , and advanced to the national semifinals in 1974 . In his senior year , Schmid was selected to the 1975 All Far @-@ West team . Schmid completed his playing career at UCLA ranked 11th in all @-@ time assists at the school . 
 He received his Bachelor of Economics degree in 1976 before earning a Master of Business Administration from the University of Southern California . Between 1978 and 1984 , he worked eight months of the year as a Certified Public Accountant ( CPA ) . 
 = = Coaching career = = 
 = = = UCLA and US Soccer = = = 
 Schmid 's first coaching experience was in 1975 for Bishop Montgomery High School . He also founded and coached a small club called the South Bay Vikings . Between 1977 and 1979 , he served as an assistant coach under Steve Gay at UCLA . Schmid took over as head coach after Gay left the position in 1980 . He began focusing solely on coaching before the 1984 season and was named " Coach of the Year " by the magazine Soccer America . UCLA then won the 1985 NCAA Division I championship by defeating American University 1 – 0 after eight periods of overtime . In his first 10 years as coach , the Bruins won or tied 85 percent of their games . 
 The Bruins won the 1990 national championship by defeating Rutgers 4 – 3 on penalty kicks after a scoreless regulation , two sessions of overtime , and another two periods of sudden @-@ death . During the 22 @-@ game season , UCLA outscored their opponents 61 – 16 . The team continued to thrive in the following season , part of their success coming from Schmid 's decision to move Cobi Jones from a midfield position to forward . Jones later played for Schmid in the MLS and became a top player for the national team . Schmid was named the Mountain Pacific Sports Federation Coach of the Year for three years straight ( 1995 – 97 ) , and NCAA Coach of the Year in 1997 after UCLA defeated the University of Virginia to win a third NCAA championship . A reporter for the Richmond Times @-@ Dispatch wrote that after winning just two titles in 17 postseason appearances , UCLA had finally shed " its ' underachiever ' label " . The writer also applauded Schmid 's decision to move the team 's leading striker into a midfield position which led to the player scoring the winning goal . 
 Schmid spent 19 seasons as the head coach at UCLA , accumulating a record of 322 – 63 – 33 ( wins – losses – draws ) , and reaching 16 consecutive playoffs between 1983 and 1998 . He earned a reputation for producing some of the nation 's best goalkeepers when David <unk> , Brad Friedel , and Matt Reis came through the university . By 1994 , he had coached 16 players at UCLA who were later selected for the US national team . Schmid avoided recruiting foreign talent to bolster his squad . He relied mainly on players from California , whom he believed to be less physically aggressive but more creative and attacking . 
 While coaching at UCLA , Schmid began to work with the US national team . He was the assistant coach at the 1991 World University Games and traveled with the team to Germany in the fall of 1992 . In January 1993 , he was selected as an assistant to Bora Milutinović for the 1994 FIFA World Cup , during which five of Schmid 's UCLA players appeared for the national team . He continued as an assistant during the 1995 Pan American Games . After being appointed US Under @-@ 20 national team coach in January 1998 , Schmid built his squad around defensive tactics . The team achieved second place in their group during the 1999 FIFA World Youth Championship , defeating England and Cameroon , but were eliminated by the eventual champions Spain in the opening knockout round . Schmid returned to coach the U @-@ 20 national team at the 2005 FIFA World Youth Championship . The US won the group in the opening stage of the tournament without conceding a goal , but lost to Italy in the first round of the knockout stage . One of the forwards on the national team , Eric Wynalda , said that Schmid 's organization on the field was disciplined . Wynalda commented that Schmid had a " great handle on the defensive side of the game " while he also admired that the strikers were allowed to be creative . Schmid was inducted into the UCLA Hall of Fame in 2004 after working with UCLA , the national team , and the Los Angeles Galaxy . 
 = = = LA Galaxy = = = 
 Schmid left UCLA to replace Octavio Zambrano as head coach of the Los Angeles Galaxy five games into the 1999 MLS season . At the time , the team was ranked fifth in the Western Conference with a tally of only three goals . Under Schmid in the remainder of the season , the team had a record of 17 – 9 , finished with the second @-@ best record in the league and won their conference , earning him the MLS Coach of the Year Award . The team 's captain , Robin Fraser , gave credit to Schmid 's emphasis on defense after being named the MLS defender of the year . Los Angeles lost 2 – 0 to D.C. United in that year 's MLS Cup . Schmid made critical comments of the referees after the match ; he received a $ 1 @,@ 000 fine and suspension for the first game of the following season . 
 In 2000 , Schmid guided Los Angeles to the playoffs but lost in the semifinals to the Kansas City Wizards . The team also played in that year 's CONCACAF Champions ' Cup , a competition consisting of the best clubs from North America , Central America , and the Caribbean . The Galaxy defeated the Honduran champion Olimpia 3 – 2 to win the Cup . Schmid was forced to play an atypical squad since the final was held during the MLS off @-@ season while adjustments to the following season 's lineup were being made . 
 His successful team of 2001 enjoyed attacking play . The squad included experienced players such as Cobi Jones , Sasha Victorine , Luis Hernández , Simon Elliott , and Mauricio Cienfuegos . The Galaxy won the conference by two points and finished fourth overall with a 14 – 7 – 5 record . The team went on to lose to the San Jose Earthquakes in the MLS Cup , but won the US Open Cup a week later with a 2 – 1 overtime victory against the New England Revolution . 
 Success followed in 2002 when the Galaxy won the Supporters ' Shield for having the best regular season record in the league . Schmid was lauded for his defensive tactics after adjusting the team 's standard formation to a 3 – 5 – 2 early in the season . The shift allowed Alexi Lalas to play as a sweeper without specific marking responsibilities in the three @-@ man defensive line . Schmid also brought Guatemalan forward Carlos Ruiz to the team ; Ruiz won league Most Valuable Player ( MVP ) award that year . Amidst criticism for failing to win in previous years , the franchise won its first MLS Cup with a 1 – 0 overtime victory against New England . The team again reached the Open Cup final but lost to the Columbus Crew . 
 Victory in the MLS Cup earned the team another berth in the 2003 CONCACAF Champions ' Cup . Los Angeles advanced past Motagua in the first round but fell against <unk> in the quarterfinals . In MLS , the club had its first losing season with a 9 – 12 – 9 record and no victories on the road . The Galaxy failed to score goals consistently during the year , managing only a fourth @-@ place finish in the five @-@ team Western Conference . In the first round of the playoffs , Los Angeles defeated San Jose 2 – 0 in the first leg , but during the second leg , conceded five goals in the second half of the match and were eliminated . Schmid was criticized by fans and the press speculated he would not return in 2004 . A local writer put some of the blame on a switch to defensive style of play while some players questioned his tactics . After it was announced that he would remain in his role next season , Schmid expected a year of rebuilding the team . The following year , he was picked to coach the Western Conference in the All @-@ Star game . Midway through the season , with the Galaxy in first place , Schmid was fired after a five @-@ game stretch without any wins , in which the team scored only three goals . General manager Doug Hamilton said that the team had a mission " to compete for and win championships " , and that " a more entertaining and attractive product on the field . " was needed . Schmid left with an overall record of 79 – 53 – 32 with a 16 – 7 – 3 mark in the playoffs . 
 Reflecting on his demeanor in Los Angeles , Lalas said Schmid had " epic explosions " . One reporter called him " combustible " , while another referred to him as " fiery " . Lalas also commented that playing for Schmid in Los Angeles required professionalism on and off the field . 
 = = = Columbus Crew = = = 
 Schmid returned to the league as coach of the Columbus Crew in 2006 , rated by the team 's general manager Mark McCullers as " the best coach in America " . The team contained young talent but lacked depth and had no star players . In August , after a streak of 13 winless matches , Schmid considered resigning . The team suffered from injuries and inconsistent lineups throughout the season , finishing last in the Eastern Conference with just 30 goals , the lowest in the league . 
 By the start of 2007 , Schmid had rebuilt the roster , keeping only three players he had inherited and acquiring Argentine attacker Guillermo Barros Schelotto . Schmid cut the Crew 's goalkeeper , Jon Busch , who had been with the team for five years . Schmid had concerns over Busch 's playing style and fitness . Busch later criticised Schmid 's management skills , and said he would never work for the coach again , but gave credit to Schmid 's tactical approach . <unk> 's contributions were crucial to Columbus 's improvement that season , but the team failed to make the playoffs . A writer for ESPN speculated that the Crew suffered because the team management would not spend more money , while Schmid lamented that he could not attract a foreign star to the little @-@ known city of Columbus . 
 The Crew 's performance improved remarkably in the 2008 season . Schmid adjusted their offensive tactics to be based on ball possession and flank speed . He made Schelotto a central part of the plan in a roaming playmaker position , a role in which Schelotto excelled and the Argentinian was named the league 's MVP . With a 1 – 0 victory over the Houston Dynamo at Crew Stadium on April 26 , Schmid became the second MLS coach to win 100 regular @-@ season games . The Crew went on to win the Supporters ' Shield with the best record in the league . In the playoffs , Columbus defeated the New York Red Bulls 3 – 1 at Schmid 's former home stadium , Los Angeles 's Home Depot Center , to win the MLS Cup . Schmid received the Coach of the Year Award for the second time . Part of the success was attributed to Schmid 's restructuring of the squad in 2006 and 2007 . 
 Schmid declined a contract offer from Columbus after the 2008 season and became coach of Seattle Sounders FC . The Crew 's ownership believed that Schmid had been in contact with Sounders FC despite being denied permission to talk to other teams during the season . It was also alleged that he shared confidential information with Seattle after his contract with the Crew had ended . The MLS ruled that no tampering had occurred , but ordered Sounders FC to financially compensate the Crew . 
 = = = Seattle Sounders FC = = = 
 Schmid was named the first coach of the new expansion franchise , Seattle Sounders FC . In their 2009 inaugural season , Seattle defeated D.C. United to win the US Open Cup . On October 24 , 2009 , Seattle defeated FC Dallas 2 – 1 , giving Schmid his 125th career MLS regular season win ; this win moved Schmid past Bob Bradley for the most wins in MLS history . He led Seattle to the playoffs where , in the first round , the Dynamo defeated the team 1 – 0 in overtime of the second leg . Seattle was the first expansion team to make the playoffs in an inaugural season since the 1998 Chicago Fire , when the league was just two years old . 
 The team began the 2010 MLS season slowly with injuries to key players that impacted Schmid 's starting lineups . The team had a record of 4 – 8 – 3 over the first 15 games . The Sounders also advanced through the preliminary round of the 2010 – 11 CONCACAF Champions League but failed to get past the group stage . The 2010 US Open Cup campaign culminated in Schmid winning his third championship with a 2 – 1 victory over the Crew at Seattle 's Qwest Field . No MLS team had previously won back @-@ to @-@ back Open Cups . The Sounders rebounded in the second half of the regular season with a 10 – 2 – 3 record to qualify for the playoffs . The team faced Bruce Arena 's Galaxy in the two @-@ legged quarter @-@ final . Both coaches are considered to be among the best in the MLS , and it was the first meeting between the two in the playoffs . The Sounders lost by a 3 – 1 aggregate and Arena moved within one game of Schmid 's MLS postseason record of 19 wins . 
 In 2011 , Schmid 's Sounders FC had many setbacks and a slow start to the season ( the club won just 3 of its first 10 matches ) . Schmid signed a long @-@ term contract extension on July 14 , 2011 , which could keep him with the club through the 2015 MLS season . The extension is dependent on some club options and performance triggers . Although some fans had become frustrated with what they saw as tactical inflexibility and mismanagement of players , general manager Adrian Hanauer praised Schmid 's professionalism and success . The Sounders went on to finish the regular season with the second @-@ best record in the league at 18 wins , 9 draws , 7 losses , and qualified for the playoffs for a third consecutive year . Schmid again led his club to the final of the U.S. Open Cup tournament . They defeated the Chicago Fire 2 – 0 to become the first team since 1968 to win the tournament three times consecutively . Seattle also advanced to the knock @-@ out stages of the CONCACAF Champions League . However , in the MLS playoffs , Sounders FC was again eliminated from the MLS Cup playoffs in the conference semifinal round by Real Salt Lake . 
 In 2012 , Seattle lost in the 2 @-@ legged 2011 – 12 CONCACAF Champions League quarter finals by an aggregate score of 7 – 3 to Santos Laguna . The Sounders advanced to the finals of the Open Cup where they were defeated by Sporting Kansas City after penalty kicks . Schmid was furious over what he saw as a controversial call that handed Kansas City the victory . The team finished the regular season with a 15 – 8 – 11 record to make the playoffs where they advanced past Real Salt Lake to reach the conference championship series against the Galaxy . The team played defensive and suffered a 3 – 0 blowout in the first leg . They won on the return leg but lost on aggregate . 
 The Sounders began the 2013 regular season without a win until their sixth match . After advancing through the early stages of the 2012 – 13 CONCACAF Champions League the year prior , Seattle lost in the semifinals to Santos Laguna . The team was knocked out of the 2013 Open Cup in their first match against the lower division Tampa Bay Rowdies . Seattle would rally during the middle of the season to put the Supporter 's Shield and the regional Cascadia Cup in reach . However , the team ended the season on a skid of seven matches without a win that included substantial losses to both Colorado and rival Vancouver . The Sounders beat Colorado in the knockout round of the 2013 MLS Cup Playoffs before losing two matches against arch @-@ rival Portland . At the end of the season , a poll in The Seattle Times showed that many fans wanted to see Schmid fired . Pundits speculated on the possibility of his termination based on what they saw as poor tactics , a history of mismanaging skilled players , and a fan base that had higher expectations . Owner Joe Roth held a post @-@ season meeting with Hanauer and Schmid . Roth later said that the possibility of Schmid losing his job was " close " , but instead opted for personnel changes to the squad . 
 After the collapse of the 2013 season , the coach met with Osvaldo Alonso , Clint Dempsey , and Evans since they were a core group of players . The group agreed on the aforementioned changes to the team . Starting striker Eddie Johnson was later traded while a new central defender , winger , midfielder , goalkeeper , and depth at the forward position were brought in . The team played 2014 with Dempsey and Obafemi Martins playing more through the middle as the Sounders won the US Open Cup and the Supporters Shield . 
 During the first half of the 2016 season , the Sounders failed to meet expectations , placing near the bottom of the league with 6 wins , 12 losses , and 12 draws . After a 3 – 0 loss on July 24 to Sporting Kansas City , in which the Sounders had only one shot , Schmid left the club on mutual terms and replaced by assistant coach Brian Schmetzer . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Schmid lives in Bellevue , Washington , during the football season . He is married to Valerie and has four children : Erik , Lacey , Kurt , and Kyle . Kurt is currently the head scout for Sounders FC . Kyle played as a defender at UC Irvine and was in the USL Premier Development League with Orange County Blue Star . Kyle is now an assistant coach at Cal State Fullerton . Sigi has rarely missed game days in the MLS , but took time off for Lacey and Kurt 's weddings and Kurt 's college graduation . Schmid 's younger brother , Roland , lives in Sammamish , Washington , and having family in the area was one of the factors which persuaded Schmid to accept the job at Seattle . He also has a nephew and a niece named Graham and <unk> . 
 = = Honors = = 
 = = = Individual = = = 
 National Soccer Hall of Fame : 2015 
 NCAA Coach of the Year : 1997 
 MLS Coach of the Year Award : 1999 , 2008 
 UCLA Athletics Hall of Fame inductee : 1996 
 = = = Managerial = = = 
 College Cup : 1985 , 1990 , 1997 
 CONCACAF Champions ' Cup : 2000 
 Lamar Hunt U.S. Open Cup : 2001 , 2009 , 2010 2011 , 2014 
 MLS Supporters ' Shield : 2002 , 2008 , 2014 
 MLS Cup : 2002 , 2008 
 = Michael Scott Paper Company = 
 " Michael Scott Paper Company " is the twenty @-@ third episode of the fifth season of the television series The Office , and the 95th overall episode of the series . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on April 9 , 2009 . 
 In the episode , Michael , Pam and Ryan try to get their new paper company off the ground , but end up bickering among themselves due to the stress and cramped office space . Meanwhile , Jim tries to do a " rundown " for new boss Charles Miner without admitting he does not know what a rundown is , while Dwight and Andy compete for the affections of the new receptionist , Erin , played by Ellie Kemper . 
 The episode was written by Justin Spitzer and directed by Gene Stupnitsky . It included a guest appearance by Idris Elba , who played new Dunder Mifflin vice president Charles Miner . The episode aired the same day as the Office episode " Dream Team " ; the debut episode of the new NBC show Parks and Recreation was shown between the two episodes . " Michael Scott Paper Company " included a new title sequence with footage of the series characters in the new Michael Scott Paper Company office setting , rather than the Dunder Mifflin setting from previous episodes . The episode received mostly positive reviews . According to Nielsen ratings , it was watched by 8 million viewers and captured the most viewers in its time slot for adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . " Michael Scott Paper Company " received a Primetime Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Sound Mixing for a Comedy or Drama Series ( Half @-@ Hour ) and Animation . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Michael ( Steve Carell ) , Pam ( Jenna Fischer ) , and Ryan ( B. J. Novak ) are struggling to adjust to the work environment of the new Michael Scott Paper Company . The office space used to be a closet ; water pipes run through the room , so they can hear the toilets flush from the Dunder Mifflin bathrooms above them . Ryan openly goofs off in front of Pam and Michael and insults both of them in their presence during phone conversations . Pam and Ryan bicker over who is responsible for making copies until Michael separates them into corners . Pam , who joined the company as a saleswoman , is given the corner where the photocopier sits . She is concerned that Michael will force her to be the receptionist , which is why she quit Dunder Mifflin in the first place . She goes upstairs and asks Charles Miner ( Idris Elba ) for her job back , but Charles has already given the job to a new employee , Kelly " Erin " Hannon ( Ellie Kemper ) . 
 Michael hosts a pancake luncheon to introduce the company to potential clients , but only one person and the Dunder Mifflin employees show up . When Michael , Pam , and Ryan come close to giving up , the potential client from the luncheon calls asking for paper . Pam closes the sale and the three cheer in celebration . 
 In the Dunder Mifflin office , Charles asks Jim ( John Krasinski ) for a " rundown " of his client information . Jim does not know what a rundown is , but is too embarrassed to ask because he has been making such a poor impression with Charles . Jim spends much of the day trying to figure out what a rundown is , making several failed attempts to figure it out by chatting vaguely about it with Charles and other coworkers . When he finally finishes what he believes is a rundown , Charles does not look at it and simply asks Jim to fax it to everyone on the distribution list . Jim does not know what the distribution list is either , but rather than asking Charles , he simply faxes the rundown to his father . 
 Meanwhile , Dwight ( Rainn Wilson ) and Andy ( Ed Helms ) plan a hunting trip , but their new friendship is tested by their mutual romantic interest in Erin . Both make passes at her , but eventually agree their friendship is more valuable than a romantic interest . However , they end up trying simultaneously to impress Erin during a competitive duet of John Denver 's " Take Me Home , Country Roads " , with Andy on a banjo and Dwight playing guitar ; both sing , and Dwight sings part of the song in German . Erin is initially impressed with both of them , but winds up awkwardly sneaking out of the room as they play . The loud duet is finally stopped by a frustrated Toby ( Paul Lieberstein ) . Angela ( Angela Kinsey ) is visibly annoyed by Dwight and Andy 's budding friendship . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Michael Scott Paper Company " was written by Justin Spitzer and directed by Gene Stupnitsky . It originally aired April 9 , 2009 , the same day as the episode " Dream Team " ; the debut episode of the new NBC show Parks and Recreation was shown between the two episodes . " Michael Scott Paper Company " was the fourth of six episodes guest starring Idris Elba , best known as Stringer Bell from The Wire . Elba said he did not watch the episode after it aired because " I 'm hypercritical about my work , so I try not to torture myself . " According to the Season 5 DVD episode commentary , B.J. Novak came up with the story idea involving Jim and the " run @-@ down " and worked it into Spitzer 's final script . The episode included a new title sequence with footage of the series characters in the new Michael Scott Paper Company office setting , rather than the Dunder Mifflin setting from the previous episodes . Rainn Wilson and Ed Helms practiced the guitar competition in Ed Helms ' trailer during lunch the day of the filming ; Helms , a proficient bluegrass banjo player , coached Wilson , who is proficient at guitar and drums . Wilson said he proposed doing a full studio cover of the song , with Creed Bratton providing backup guitar and vocals , and selling it on iTunes for charity . Helms said he was happy to have the opportunity to play banjo on screen , but did not feel the instrument made much sense for his character ; Helms said , " It 's so fun and weird , but he 's a Connecticut preppy guy . How did he pick up a banjo ? It 's one of Andy 's many mysteries , not all of which I even understand . " 
 Prior to the episode 's airing , NBC set up a web site for the new Michael Scott Paper Company at <unk> , which included a mission statement for the company , photos of the new office space and a downloadable copy of the coupon for " unparalleled customer service " featured in the episode . The official website for The Office included four cut scenes from " Michael Scott Paper Company " within a week of the episode 's original release . In one 85 @-@ second clip , Dwight and Andy pretend to shoot , stab and throw grenades at each other in pantomime in anticipation of their hunting trip ; they pretend to kill Jim and pester him until he plays dead , after which Charles walks in and believes he is napping . A second one @-@ minute clip includes Pam and Ryan fighting around the new office until they are interrupted by a janitor who believes the room is still a closet and leaves water jugs on the floor . In a third , 40 @-@ second clip , Jim asks Charles directly what a " run @-@ down " is , but when an annoyed Charles asks if this is " one of your pranks " , Jim gives up and leaves . The fourth and final clip , which is 85 seconds long , features Andy and Dwight both making passes at Erin ; Andy discusses how easy it would be to learn sign language , while Dwight tells her to be careful not to get her hair or clothes caught in the nearby paper shredder . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Dwight and Andy sing and perform the John Denver song " Take Me Home , Country Roads " while trying to impress the new receptionist . At one point , Toby is overheard through a vent discussing and praising the FX show Damages while on the phone in a bathroom . He said it is as good as anything on HBO , a premium television channel known for such shows as The Sopranos , Six Feet Under and The Wire . During the workday , Ryan watches a YouTube video of a rap music commercial for Flea Market Montgomery ; the low @-@ budget rap music advertisement for the Montgomery , Alabama flea market gained Internet fame . Michael uses <unk> , social @-@ planning website for creating online invitations , to invite people to his pancake luncheon . On a whiteboard , Michael writes a quote of himself quoting Wayne Gretzky , the popular ice hockey player who said " You miss 100 % of the shots you don ’ t take " The new paper company office included Apple computers and a Nerf basketball hoop . During a phone conversation , Ryan said he wants an iPod music player that also serves as a phone , but not an iPhone , which is essentially that very product ; both items are Apple products . Michael listens to " Just Dance " , a Lady Gaga song , while driving his convertible to work , which he mistakes for a Britney Spears song . Near the end of the episode , when Andy states that every song sounds better a cappella , Dwight asks about the songs " Cherry Pie " by Warrant , " Enter Sandman " by Metallica and " Rebel Yell " by Billy Idol . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast on April 9 , 2009 , " Michael Scott Paper Company " was watched by 8 million overall viewers , according to Nielsen ratings . The episode earned more ratings than " Dream Team " , the other Office episode of the night , which had 7 @.@ 2 million viewers . It also performed better than the Parks and Recreation pilot , which ran between the two Office episodes and had 6 @.@ 8 million viewers . " Michael Scott Paper Company " , as well as " Dream Team " , had the most viewers in its time slot among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . 
 The episode received mostly positive reviews . Travis Fickett of IGN said this and other recent episodes are " proving that the show has plenty of life in it and ( that ) The Office has still got it . " He said the funniest element of the show was the emerging " bro @-@ <unk> " between Dwight and Andy . Will Leitch of New York magazine said , " The Office kind of needed this sort of shake @-@ up , even if it ’ s something as simple as another room to put all our characters in . " Keith Phipps of The A.V. Club said he liked the plot aspects involve the new company , particularly the pancake breakfast and the first successful sales call : " I know the series probably has to revert to something like the old status quo at some point , but I almost wish it could stay in that dank little corner a little longer . " Phipps , who gave the episode a B + grade , said the " rundown " subplot between Jim and Charles was a bit strained by the end . Steven Mullen of The Tuscaloosa News called the episode " stellar " and particularly praised the comedic chemistry between Andy and Dwight . 
 Alan Sepinwall of The Star @-@ Ledger said he was enjoying the new paper company storyline , but that " Michael Scott Paper Company " was not as funny as " Dream Team " , which aired the same day . Sepinwall praised particular scenes such as Dwight and Andy 's competitive duet and Kelly 's plan to make Charles want her . She criticized the cramped new office space jokes as being less funny than those in previous episodes . Sepinwall also said the storyline between Jim and Charles was getting repetitive and , " It would help if the writers ever gave Idris Elba something funny to do . " Margaret Lions of Entertainment Weekly said , " This episode wasn 't one of my favorites ... No bombs , no bits that failed , and by The Office 's standards , nothing even particularly cringe worthy . But ' <unk> ' is more groundwork than payoff . " She said Dwight 's rendition of " Take Me Home , Country Roads " in German was " the absolute funniest moment of the episode " . 
 In her list of the top ten moments from the fifth season of The Office , phillyBurbs.com writer Jen Wielgus ranked Michael 's formation of the Michael Scott Paper Company in the downstairs storage closet as the number one , citing the " Dream Team " , " Michael Scott Paper Company " and " Heavy Competition " episodes in particular . She also said she specifically enjoyed the paper @-@ shaped pancakes from " Michael Scott Paper Company " . " Michael Scott Paper Company " was voted the twelfth highest @-@ rated episode out of 26 from the fifth season , according to an episode poll at the fansite OfficeTally ; the episode was rated 8 @.@ 27 out of 10 . 
 This episode received a Primetime Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Sound Mixing for a Comedy or Drama Series ( Half @-@ Hour ) and Animation . " Michael Scott Paper Company " accounted for one of the ten Primetime Emmy Award nominations The Office received for the show 's fifth season at the 61st Primetime Emmy Awards , which were held on September 20 , 2009 . 
 = Tropical Storm Debby ( 2012 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Debby caused extensive flooding in North Florida and Central Florida during late June 2012 . The fourth tropical cyclone and named storm of the 2012 Atlantic hurricane season , Debby developed from a trough of low pressure in the central Gulf of Mexico on June 23 . The formation into a tropical storm was the earliest formation on record of the fourth named storm within the Atlantic basin until this record was beaten by Tropical Storm Danielle in 2016 . Despite a projected track toward landfall in Louisiana or Texas , the storm headed the opposite direction , moving slowly north @-@ northeast and northeastward . The storm slowly strengthened , and at 1800 UTC on June 25 , attained its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) . Dry air , westerly wind shear , and upwelling of cold waters prevented further intensification over the next 24 hours . Instead , Debby weakened , and by late on June 26 , it was a minimal tropical storm . At 2100 UTC , the storm made landfall near Steinhatchee , Florida with winds of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) . Once inland , the system continued to weaken while crossing Florida , and dissipated shortly after emerging into the Atlantic on June 27 . 
 The storm dropped immense amounts of precipitation near its path . Rainfall peaked at 28 @.@ 78 inches ( 731 mm ) in Curtis Mill , Florida , located in southwestern Wakulla County . The Sopchoppy River , which reached its record height , flooded at least 400 structures in Wakulla County . Additionally , the Suwannee River reached its highest level since Hurricane Dora in 1964 . Further south in Pasco County , the Anclote River and Pithlachascotee River overflowed , flooding communities with " head deep " water and causing damage to 106 homes . An additional 587 homes were inundated after the Black Creek overflowed in Clay County . Several roads and highways in North Florida were left impassable , including Interstate 10 and U.S. Route 90 . U.S. Routes 19 and 98 were also inundated by coastal flooding . In Central and South Florida , damage was primarily caused by tornadoes , one of which caused a fatality . Overall , Debby caused at least $ 250 million in losses and 10 deaths , 8 in Florida and 1 each in Alabama and South Carolina . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 During mid @-@ June , the Intertropical Convergence Zone ( ITCZ ) made its annual migration northward into the southern Gulf of Mexico . Coinciding with a Madden – Julian oscillation , a weak surface low pressure area developed on June 19 , and subsequently moved inland over the Yucatán Peninsula . While the system crossed the peninsula , a tropical wave moved through the northwestern Caribbean Sea on June 18 . The wave reached the Gulf of Mexico on June 20 and merged with the low a few days later , spawning a trough of low pressure on June 22 . Located in the southeastern Gulf of Mexico , moderate vertical wind shear caused the system to remain disorganized . Nonetheless , Air Force Reserve Hurricane Hunter aircraft indicated that the trough acquired a low @-@ level circulation on June 23 , while ships in the area reported tropical storm force winds . Thus , it is estimated that Tropical Storm Debby developed at 1200 UTC on June 23 , centered about 290 miles ( 470 km ) south of mouth of the Mississippi River . 
 Becoming a tropical storm on June 23 , Debby became the earliest fourth named storm in the Atlantic basin , surpassing the old record set by Hurricane Dennis on July 5 , 2005 , however with 2016 's Danielle the record was beaten by three days . Initially , Debby was predicted to curve westward and potentially threaten Texas . A deepening trough would curve the storm westward , while wind shear was predicted to decrease . Although the storm generated very cold cloud tops , much of the convection was located more than 100 miles ( 160 km ) from the center and still displaced to the east . By 1200 UTC on June 24 , the forecast path was shifted from east @-@ central Texas to southeastern Louisiana . Despite persistent wind shear , Debby was strengthening and around that time , the storm attained its maximum sustained wind speed of 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) . Later on June 24 , the National Hurricane Center noted in its next advisory that this " is a very difficult and highly uncertain forecast " , citing Debby 's slow movement and widespread computer forecast models . 
 The forecast track for Debby was shifted significantly to the east late on June 24 , and it was predicted that the storm would move northward and make landfall near Panama City , Florida . Based on a dropsonde estimate , Debby attained its minimum barometric pressure of 990 mbar ( 29 inHg ) at 0000 UTC on June 25 . However , the storm began to weaken due to increasing wind shear , drier air , and upwelling of cold water , caused by Debby 's slow movement . It was initially composed of multiple small swirls , but consolidated into one well @-@ defined low @-@ level circulation by early on June 25 . Due to its excessively slow movement and no prediction for acceleration , the National Hurricane Center remarked that , " the cyclone does not seem to be going anywhere anytime soon . " A burst in deep convection occurred later on June 25 , though adverse environmental conditions prevented re @-@ intensification . Debby began curving east @-@ northeastward and began to speed up on June 26 , in response to a mid @-@ latitude trough digging into the western Atlantic Ocean . While approaching the Florida Big Bend , Debby produced only a small area of deep convection on satellite imagery . 
 At 2100 UTC June 26 , Debby made landfall near Steinhatchee , Florida with winds of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) . The storm weakened quickly after moving inland , and by early on June 27 , it was downgraded to a tropical depression , while located about 35 miles ( 56 km ) north of Gainesville , Florida . Debby maintained tropical cyclone status while crossing Florida , but degenerated into a trough of low pressure by 1800 UTC on June 27 . In the final advisory issued by the National Hurricane Center three hours later , the agency noted that Debby could eventually reacquire tropical characteristics . After its dissipation , however , the remnants did not regenerate into a tropical cyclone , but re @-@ developed a new center of circulation and strengthened slightly due to baroclinic conditions . As it accelerated northward , Debby 's remnants became increasingly frontal in nature , and once again degenerated into an open trough at 1800 UTC on June 30 ; at this time , the disturbance was located south of Newfoundland . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Upon development of Debby on June 23 , a tropical storm warning was issued from the mouth of the Pearl River to Morgan City , Louisiana , excluding New Orleans or Lake Pontchartrain . On the following day , a separate tropical storm warning was put into effect from the Mississippi and Alabama border to the mouth of the Ochlockonee River in Florida . At 1500 UTC on June 24 , the tropical storm warning was extended to the mouth of the Suwannee River . Simultaneously , a tropical storm watch was issued from the Suwannee River to Anclote Key . These were all canceled at 1500 UTC on June 25 , though a tropical storm warning was then implemented from Destin to Englewood , Florida . Early on June 26 , a tropical storm warning was issued from Mexico Beach to Englewood , Florida . By 2100 UTC that day , the tropical storm warning was extended to the mouth of Steinhatchee River in Florida . This was discontinued after Debby became a tropical depression . 
 Several additional preparations took place in addition to tropical cyclone warnings and watches . According to the Federal government of the United States , nearly 25 % of crude oil and natural gas production in the Gulf of Mexico was shutdown . In Louisiana , Governor Bobby Jindal declared a state of emergency . On June 24 , voluntary evacuations were issued for several areas in northwest Florida during the approach of the storm , especially Taylor and Wakulla Counties . Governor of Florida Rick Scott also declared a state of emergency on June 25 . Additionally , mandatory evacuations were issued for St. George Island , Alligator Point , and other low @-@ lying areas of Franklin County . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Throughout the Southeastern United States , nine people were killed in relation to Tropical Storm Debby . Of these , seven took place in Florida and one each in Alabama and South Carolina . Throughout Central and South Florida , the outerbands of the storm spawned 13 tornadoes : five in Collier County , two in Glades County , one in Hardee County , two in Highlands County , one in Miami @-@ Dade County , and two in Palm Beach County . Overall , losses from the storm were estimated to have reached at least $ 250 million . 
 = = = Florida = = = 
 = = = = North Florida and Panhandle = = = = 
 Throughout June 25 , an intense complex of thunderstorms developed to the north of Debby 's center and produced torrential rains over the Florida Panhandle for much of the day . Many areas received rainfall in excess of 15 inches ( 380 mm ) . Precipitation peaked at 28 @.@ 78 inches ( 731 mm ) in Curtis Mill , which is located in Wakulla County . In Panacea , a <unk> station recorded a 24 ‑ hour rainfall of 20 @.@ 63 inches ( 524 mm ) . Rainfall caused numerous small creeks , streams , and rivers to rapidly exceed their banks and flood adjacent communities . The Sopchoppy River crested at 36 @.@ 8 feet ( 11 @.@ 2 m ) , which was a record height . Numerous homes were flooded , some up to the second story . Two bridges were damaged , and numerous roads around the county were washed out or closed . Over 400 structures were affected by flooding , including more than 170 mobile homes and nearly 200 single @-@ family residences . Of these structures , 40 were destroyed , 61 had major flood damage , 41 suffered minor flood damage , and 271 were affected by flooding . Additionally , coastal flooding impacted the county , with a storm surge of 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) and tides up 6 @.@ 5 feet ( 2 @.@ 0 m ) in St. Marks . Numerous roads were underwater and several area businesses received water intrusion in that city . U.S. Route 98 was over @-@ washed just north of St. Marks . As a result , mandatory evacuations were ordered south of U.S. Route 98 and around the Sopchoppy River . In total , 67 people required rescuing . Losses throughout the county were assessed at $ 9 @.@ 09 million . 
 The storm also produced adverse effects in Franklin County . In Apalachicola , a gust of 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) was observed as well as 6 @.@ 03 inches ( 153 mm ) of rainfall on June 24 , resulting in widespread flash flooding . The John Gorrie Memorial Bridge connecting Apalachicola to Eastpoint was closed on June 24 due to high winds . A wind gust of 66 mph ( 106 km / h ) was reported at the Apalachicola Regional Airport . The St. George Island Bridge , a 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) bridge connecting Eastpoint to St. George Island over the Apalachicola Bay , was also closed on June 24 due to high winds . The bridge was opened later that day as both St. George Island and Alligator Point were put under a mandatory evacuation , requiring all people to leave immediately , and those remaining on the islands subject to arrest . St. George Island , a popular resort community and tourist destination , lost all power on June 24 due to high winds destroying three power poles in the Apalachicola Bay ; a Progress Energy spokesperson stated that it could be days before power was restored because the conditions are too unsafe for workers . In Bay County , moderate beach erosion occurred , with a storm surge reaching 1 @.@ 5 feet ( 0 @.@ 46 m ) and storm tide of 2 @.@ 42 feet ( 0 @.@ 74 m ) in Panama City . Flooding forced the closure of a few roads in Jefferson County , including U.S. Route 27 west of U.S. Route 19 . 
 In Madison County , one house was surrounded by in overflowing retention pond near the city of Madison . State Road 51 in Lafayette County flooded , caused by the Steinhatchee River exceeding its banks . In Dixie County , several roads north of Cross City experienced flooding , while water entered at least 40 homes along the Steinhatchee River . Moderate coastal flooding occurred in Horseshoe Beach , due to an estimated storm surge of 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) , with tides reaching 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) above normal . Water entered several homes near the coast and surrounded outbuildings by up to 1 @.@ 5 feet ( 0 @.@ 46 m ) . In Columbia County , preliminary losses were placed in excess of $ 20 million as of July 3 and did not take into account hundreds of homes that remained flooded at the time . Several bridges were washed out due to the heavy rain ; both U.S. Route 319 and U.S. Route 98 were closed due to flooding . In Suwannee County , the Suwannee River at Live Oak reached its highest crest since Hurricane Dora in 1964 . Gainesville received its second @-@ highest daily rain total of 6 @.@ 95 inches ( 177 mm ) on June 24 . In Marion County , up to 10 @.@ 25 inches ( 260 mm ) of rain was reported near Fellowship . As a result , State Road 40 was closed due to high water . Additionally , as many as 52 sinkholes were reported to have formed along roadways in the county . Flooding also occurred in Duval County . The public reported that water entered a home on Rose Street in Jacksonville . Streets were flooded in Orange Park , and water approached the doors of houses , forcing some residents to evacuate . The St. Marys River reached historic heights and flooded a lot homes in Baker and Nassau Counties . 
 = = = = Central Florida = = = = 
 In Levy County , tropical storm force winds were felt along the coast . Heavy rainfall was reported across the county , with the <unk> site near Chiefland of receiving 13 @.@ 42 inches ( 341 mm ) . At Cedar Key , tides reached 6 @.@ 78 feet ( 2 @.@ 07 m ) mean lower low water on June 25 . The highest storm surge was estimated to have peaked at 4 @.@ 49 feet ( 1 @.@ 37 m ) mean lower low water . A few buildings were flooded by the storm surge at Cedar Key and Yankeetown . In total , damage to public property was approximately $ 175 @,@ 000 . Rainfall was generally above 9 inches ( 230 mm ) across Citrus County , and peaked at 12 @.@ 07 inches ( 307 mm ) near Hernando . Several homes were flooded with 1 to 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 30 to 0 @.@ 91 m ) of water . Significant street flooding was reported at Kings Bay , while several streets were inundated by up to 2 feet ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) of water in Homosassa . Overall , damage was minor , reaching about $ 127 @,@ 000 . The storm dropped heavy rainfall in Hernando County , with 15 @.@ 53 inches ( 394 mm ) in Spring Hill . A portion of State Road 589 was shutdown between State Road 50 and U.S. Route 98 , with as much as 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) of standing water on that stretch of the highway . Along the Anclote and Pithlachascotee Rivers in Pasco County , emergency managers ordered mandatory evacuations for 14 @,@ 000 – 20 @,@ 000 people as the rivers rose dramatically . The Anclote River rose from 9 ft ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) to 27 ft ( 8 @.@ 2 m ) , well above major flood stage , leaving surrounding areas in " head @-@ deep " water . At least 106 homes in the county were damaged by flood waters . Additionally , a tornado near New Port Richey caused major damage to five homes . Throughout the county , damage to private property was $ 1 @.@ 5 million , while public property losses were estimated at $ 26 million . 
 A man drowned near Lake Dorr in Lake County after his canoe capsized along a river in Ocala National Forest . In Polk County , a woman died after her car hydroplaned on a flooded road . Another person drowned on a river in the after his canoe capsized ; however , it is unknown whether or not his death was attributable to Debby . Throughout Polk County , 115 homes were damaged , mainly as a result of tornadoes , and losses were estimated at $ 5 million . A tornado in Hardee County felled several trees and damaged a tractor and a barn . In Glades County , one tornado caused minor roof damage to a barn in <unk> , while the other resulted in no effects . In Highlands County , four homes were destroyed and twenty @-@ four more were damaged to varying degrees by two tornadoes . Losses in the county reached approximately $ 1 @.@ 4 million . Several homes were damaged by the two twisters in Highlands County , with one resulting in a fatality near Venus . In St. Petersburg , a gust of 45 mph ( 72 km / h ) was observed , while 1 @.@ 88 inches ( 48 mm ) of rain fell in a one @-@ hour period . With the substantial loss of beaches , tourism in the region is expected to suffer significantly . Portions of Upham Beach in Pinellas County were completely eroded up to the seawall and other areas in that county had lost 20 to 30 ft ( 6 @.@ 1 to 9 @.@ 1 m ) of sand . On Treasure Island , coastal dunes were eroded by 10 to 15 ft ( 3 @.@ 0 to 4 @.@ 6 m ) . In Pass @-@ a @-@ Grille , Debby 's storm surge flooded coastal hotels with ankle @-@ deep water as the dunes were washed away . Throughout St. Pete Beach , 30 – 40 homes were damaged by a tornado spawned by Debby . Losses throughout the city were estimated at $ 1 @.@ 5 million . In Hillsborough County , wind gusts of 39 to 51 mph ( 63 to 82 km / h ) were measured at MacDill Air Force Base . Rainfall was at least 5 inches ( 130 mm ) across much of the county and peaked at 11 @.@ 91 inches ( 303 mm ) near Citrus Park . The storm damage 74 buildings , 6 of which were destroyed . The highest storm surge was estimated to have reached 4 @.@ 07 feet ( 1 @.@ 24 m ) in height . As a result , portions of Bay Shore Boulevard were inundated for three days . 
 On Anna Maria Island in Manatee County , water reached the retention walls of several condos , some of which were undermined , allowing water to enter beach @-@ side pools . The most significant losses were on the south side of the island where up to half of the dunes were lost . In Sarasota County , as much as 10 @.@ 9 inches ( 280 mm ) of rain fell near the city of Sarasota . Wind and floods damaged 52 structures , with losses reaching $ 540 @,@ 000 . At Lido Beach , high water flooded a parking lot . Damage to area beaches from erosion was estimated at $ 1 @.@ 9 million . A state of emergency was declared due to storm surge damage in the county . The first tornado in Collier County caused minor roof damage to a few structures near Naples on June 23 . A second tornado in the county later that day broke light poles and snapped tree limbs in North Naples , with one person being injured by a falling branch . Three others twisters were spawned in Collier County on June 24 , though damage was no more than a few downed trees . The Charlotte County Airport recorded a 55 mph ( 89 km / h ) wind gust , while the highest rainfall total was 5 @.@ 25 inches ( 133 mm ) near Englewood . Damage reached $ 2 @.@ 5 million and was mostly from beach erosion and coastal flooding . In Lee County , rainfall peaked at 4 @.@ 95 inches ( 126 mm ) in Cape Coral . Rough tides and storm surge caused beach erosion and coastal flooding , especially at Captiva and Sanibel Islands . The county suffered approximately $ 2 @.@ 3 million in losses . 
 = = = South Florida and Elsewhere = = = 
 At the Palm Beach International Airport in West Palm Beach , 1 @.@ 51 inches ( 38 mm ) of precipitation fell in only one hour . Further south in Pompano Beach , 4 @.@ 32 inches ( 110 mm ) of rain was reported in a 24 @-@ hour period . A tornado in Palm Beach County damaged a few houses and some vegetation in Lake Worth . The other twister in Palm Beach County snapped some trees , blew a gate across a street , and broke a railroad crossing arm . A waterspout offshore Miami @-@ Dade County moved inland near Golden Beach and twisted three gates and blew open a garage door . Offshore in the Gulf of Mexico , nine oil production platforms and one drilling rig were damaged . Overall , United States oil production decreased by 2 % . On June 25 , 44 % of the daily oil and 33 % of the daily natural gas production in the Gulf of Mexico was shut down . The following day , companies began returning employees to platforms and production was rapidly restored . A man in Orange Beach , Alabama drowned after being swept away by heavy surf . Off the coast of South Carolina , one person went missing and is presumed dead after rescuers failed to find him after several days . Heavy rainfall from Debby extended northward into southern Georgia , peaking at 12 @.@ 7 inches ( 320 mm ) in Fargo . Localized and isolated flooding occurred in nearby Lowndes County , with up to 1 foot ( 0 @.@ 30 m ) of water in the parking lot at a Sonny 's restaurant in Lake Park . The remnants of Debby passed about 90 miles ( 140 km ) north of Bermuda on June 29 and produced tropical storm force winds on the island , but caused no damage . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Following the storm , President of the United States Barack Obama issued a disaster declaration for Baker , Bradford , Citrus , Clay , Columbia , Duval , Franklin , Gilchrist , Hernando , Highlands , Hillsborough , Lafayette , Manatee , Nassau , Pasco , Pinellas , Polk , Sarasota , Suwannee , Taylor , Union , and Wakulla Counties of Florida . In Citrus County , total individual assistance of $ 127 @,@ 000 was paid out to 140 residents , including $ 112 @,@ 000 in damage to housing . A total of 1 @,@ 671 applications for individual assistance were filed in Pinellas County , totaling $ 900 @,@ 000 . 
 = Cloudy catshark = 
 The cloudy catshark ( Scyliorhinus torazame ) is a common species of catshark , belonging to the family Scyliorhinidae . It is a bottom @-@ dweller that inhabits rocky reefs in the northwestern Pacific Ocean , from the shore to a depth of 320 m ( 1 @,@ 050 ft ) . Growing up to 50 cm ( 20 in ) long , this small , slim shark has a narrow head with a short blunt snout , no grooves between the nostrils and mouth , and furrows on the lower but not the upper jaw . It is also characterized by extremely rough skin and coloration consisting of a series of dark brown saddles along its back and tail , along with various darker and lighter spots in larger individuals . 
 The diet of the cloudy catshark consists of molluscs , crustaceans , and bony fishes . It is oviparous , with females laying encapsulated eggs two at a time in nursery areas . The claspers of the male bear numerous hooks that likely serve to facilitate copulation . This harmless shark can be readily maintained in captivity and is used as a model organism for biological research . It is caught incidentally , and generally discarded , by commercial fisheries . These activities do not appear to have negatively affected its population , leading it to be listed under Least Concern by the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The original description of the cloudy catshark was published in 1908 by <unk> Tanaka in the Journal of the Faculty of Science , University of Tokyo . He gave it the specific epithet torazame , which is its Japanese name ( <unk> , literally " tiger shark " ) , and assigned it to the genus Catulus . The type specimen was a 45 cm ( 18 in ) long adult male caught off Misaki , Kanagawa , Japan . Subsequent authors have synonymized Catulus with Scyliorhinus . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cloudy catshark reaches 50 cm ( 20 in ) long and has a thin , deep , and firm body . The narrow head makes up slightly under one @-@ sixth of the total length , and is two @-@ thirds as wide as it is long . The snout is short and rounded . The large nostrils are preceded by small , triangular flaps of skin that do not reach the wide mouth . The medium @-@ sized eyes are horizontally oval , equipped with rudimentary nictitating membranes ( protective third eyelids ) , and followed by moderate spiracles . There are no grooves between the nostrils and the mouth . There are furrows extending from the corners of the mouth over the lower jaw only . The small teeth have a long central cusp typically flanked by two pairs of cusplets . The five pairs of gill slits are short , with the fourth pair over the pectoral fin origins . 
 The two dorsal fins are placed towards the back of the body , with the first originating over the rear of the pelvic fin bases . The first dorsal fin has a rounded apex and is larger than the second dorsal fin , which has a more angular shape . The pectoral and pelvic fins are moderate in size . In males , the inner margins of the pelvic fins are merged to form an " apron " over the long , cylindrical claspers . The origin of the anal fin lies approximately between the dorsal fins . The caudal peduncle is about as deep as the body , and leads to a low caudal fin with an indistinct lower lobe and a ventral notch near the tip of the upper lobe . The skin is thick and very rough due to the dermal denticles , which are large and upright with three backward @-@ pointing teeth . This species is brown on the back and sides , with 6 – 10 indistinct darker dorsal saddles , and plain yellowish on its ventral side . Larger sharks also have many large , irregularly shaped light and dark spots . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The cloudy catshark is common in the northwestern Pacific off Japan , Korea , China , and possibly the Philippines . Bottom @-@ dwelling in nature , this species can be found from the shore out to a depth of 320 m ( 1 @,@ 050 ft ) on the continental shelf and upper continental slope . It favors rocky reefs and does not appear to be migratory . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 The cloudy catshark feeds primarily on molluscs , followed by crustaceans and bony fishes . A predator of both this shark and its egg cases is the blotchy swell shark ( Cephaloscyllium umbratile ) . A known parasite of this species is the myxosporidian <unk> <unk> . Reproduction is oviparous ; adult females have a single functional ovary and two functional oviducts . As a prelude to mating , the male bites at the female 's pectoral fin , side , and gill region . Once he has a grip , he wraps his body around hers and inserts one of his claspers into her cloaca . Copulation may last between 15 seconds and 4 minutes . The claspers of the male are unusual in that each has a row of around a hundred hooks running along the inner margin . These hooks likely serve to anchor the male to the female during copulation . The female is capable of storing sperm within her nidamental gland ( an organ that secretes egg cases ) for many months . 
 Females produce two mature eggs at a time , one per oviduct . The eggs are enclosed in smooth , translucent yellow , vase @-@ shaped capsules measuring 1 @.@ 9 cm ( 0 @.@ 75 in ) across and 5 @.@ 5 cm ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) long . There are long tendrils at the four corners of the capsule . The eggs are laid in defined nursery areas : One such area is located at a depth of 100 m ( 330 ft ) off Hakodate . When the embryo is 3 @.@ 6 cm ( 1 @.@ 4 in ) long , it has external gills , undeveloped fins , and no pigmentation . At an embryonic length of 5 @.@ 8 cm ( 2 @.@ 3 in ) , the external gills have all but disappeared , and a covering of small denticles is present . By a length of 7 @.@ 9 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) , the embryo has well @-@ developed fins and pigmentation , and generally resembles the adult . The eggs take 15 months to hatch at 11 @.@ 3 ° C ( 52 @.@ 3 ° F ) , and 7 – 9 months to hatch at 14 @.@ 5 ° C ( 58 @.@ 1 ° F ) . The newly hatched shark measures 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) long or more . Maturation size tends to increase with decreasing water temperature : Off northerly Hakodate , both sexes mature at over 38 cm ( 15 in ) long , while some females remain immature even at 47 cm ( 19 in ) long . By contrast , off southerly Tsushima Island both sexes mature at around 33 cm ( 13 in ) long . The maximum lifespan is at least 12 years . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 Harmless to humans , the cloudy catshark adapts well to captivity and has reproduced in the aquarium . It is often used as a model organism in physiology research . On September 25 , 1995 , Masuda <unk> and colleagues used this species to perform the first successful artificial insemination of a shark or ray . The cloudy catshark is caught incidentally by commercial fisheries with bottom fishing nets including trawls and gillnets , as well as on bottom longlines . Captured individuals are typically discarded , possibly with a high survival rate due to their hardiness . Some 40 % of the fish discarded in Yamaguchi Prefecture fisheries are of this species . The bottom trawl fishery operating off Fukushima Prefecture may catch over a ton of cloudy catsharks annually , which are also discarded . 
 Despite heavy fishing pressure within its range , the cloudy catshark remains common , perhaps because it may be more biologically productive than most other sharks . As a result , it has been assessed as Least Concern by the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) . Cloudy catsharks from a number of locations off Japan have been found to be contaminated with polychlorinated biphenyls ( PCBs ) and <unk> ( <unk> ) , which they acquire from their food . One likely source of these pollutants is the use of the pesticide DDT by developing nations in southern Asia . 
 = Performance Review = 
 " Performance Review " is the eighth episode of the second season of the American comedy television series The Office , and the show 's fourteenth episode overall . It was written by Larry Wilmore and directed by Paul Feig . It first aired on November 15 , 2005 on NBC . The episode guest stars Melora Hardin as Jan Levinson . 
 The series depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In this episode , Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) conducts job performance reviews with his employees , and struggles to get Jan Levinson ( Melora Hardin ) to talk about their romantic relationship from the previous episode . Meanwhile , Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) and Pam Beesley ( Jenna Fischer ) trick Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) into thinking that it is Friday , when it is in fact Thursday . 
 The episode was originally going to be about " weight loss " and be one of the very first episodes of the second season . Several scenes were created due to onset accidents and ad @-@ libbing , such as Dwight 's fitness orb popping and Michael grabbing Jan 's breast accidentally . " Performance Review " contained several pop culture references . It received mostly positive reviews from critics and earned a Nielsen rating of 3 @.@ 9 in the 18 – 49 demographic , being viewed by 8 million viewers . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) meets with each of his employees to discuss their job performance . He plunders the employee suggestion box for ideas to impress his own boss , Jan Levinson ( Melora Hardin ) , but the ruse backfires and he embarrasses himself . Michael relentlessly pesters Jan about their previous romantic connection but she bluntly rejects him , especially when , during the office 's suggestion box meeting , she discovers that everyone in the Scranton branch is aware of the incident . As Jan storms out of the office , she admonishes Michael before complimenting him and reluctantly stating that she is not ready for a relationship . Meanwhile , the stunned staff listens in . 
 Meanwhile , Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) attempts to have a successful performance review in order to get a raise . He makes elaborate posters , prepares a ridiculous speech , and pumps himself up in the office 's hallway . Unfortunately for him , Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) and Pam Beesley ( Jenna Fischer ) successfully prank him by making him believe that it is a Friday instead of a Thursday . He arrives at the office very late the next day , much to Michael 's annoyance . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 The episode was written by Larry Wilmore , making it his first and only writing contribution to the series . Wilmore had previously guest starred in the series as Mr. Brown , the diversity instructor who gives a presentation to the office in the first season episode " Diversity Day " . The episode was originally going to be about " weight loss " and be one of the very first episodes of the second season aired . However , after " The Dundies " and " The Fire " , series creator and developer Greg Daniels decided to hold the episode off and combine it with elements of " The Client " . When " Performance Review " was being formulated , Wilmore had " four different ideas that were <unk> together to make an episode " . One of the ideas was on a card that said " Thursday Friday " . After inquiring about the meaning , Wilmore loved the idea and noted that it " would be great " in the episode and a " real funny thing to pull on Dwight " . Originally , the episode contained a subplot wherein Pam attempts to get a new chair approved by Michael . The scenes , in fact , were shot , but were never aired . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The episode was directed by Paul Feig , making it his third episode directed for The Office after " Office Olympics " and " Halloween " . During the filming of the episode , Jenna Fischer came down with a cold . Instead of postponing , however , Fischer memorized and performed all her lines , resulting in fellow cast member Angela Kinsey calling her a " trooper " . 
 Several scenes were created due to onset accidents and ad @-@ libbing . In the cold opening , Dwight tries to impress Jim with his recently purchased " fitness orb " . Initially dismissive , Jim pops the ball after Dwight becomes increasingly obnoxious and troublesome . Before filming , the scene had been successfully rehearsed " about ten times " ; each time , when Krasinski punctured the plastic , the ball slowly deflated . However , when it came time to film the scene , Krasinski accidentally hit the ball " right on the seam " , resulting in Wilson quickly — and dramatically — hitting the carpet . In fact , several of the cast members in the background can be seen laughing , due to the unexpected nature of the shot . Initially , the cut was relegated to the blooper reel , but Wilmore pleaded with Daniels to include it in the finished episode . " The accidental boob <unk> " scene was based on a mistake made by Carell during a rehearsal . Originally , he was supposed to pat Hardin 's shoulder . Instead , however , he accidentally brushed past her breast . Hardin , finding the accident " hilarious " , demanded that Carell do it during the actual shooting . Furthermore , several of the scenes were improvised beyond the initial lines given to Steve Carell and Melora Hardin , such as the ending wherein Michael and Jan have a discussion about Michael 's flaws . Wilson recounts that he had to sit at his desk for " an hour and a half " due to the ad libbing . 
 During the suggestion box scene , Larry Wilmore envisioned Dwight as an Ed McMahon @-@ type character , repeating everything Michael said . Paul Lieberstein claimed that figuring out the logistics for the conference room scene was " the heart " of the episode . Hardin recalled that it was extremely difficult to stay in character , due to the humorous nature of the dialogue and the cast members ' reactions . In fact , the cast broke more than usual during filming . During the scene , Michael reads a suggestion from someone named Tom , who asks for better help for people with mental disorders . After inquiring who this mysterious Tom is , Phyllis tells Michael that he worked in accounting several years ago and committed suicide . Wilmore claimed during the DVD commentary for the episode that the writers would be bringing him back in the show 's third season , in which his backstory would be explained , although this never panned out . However , during the Writer 's Block Q & A session at The Office Convention in 2007 , the writers , perhaps sardonically , suggested that Tom 's death was the reason that Ryan was brought in as a temporary worker . Tom 's name is briefly seen on Dwight 's organization chart in the fourth season episode " Did I Stutter " , where his name is revealed to be Tom <unk> . 
 The Season Two DVD contains a number of deleted scenes from this episode . Notable cut scenes include Michael giving Oscar Martinez ( Oscar Nunez ) his performance review , Dwight giving Jim advice for his performance review , an extension of Dwight psyching himself up in the stairwell , Michael calling Jan 's ex @-@ husband and her reaction , and Michael describing the office with a confused metaphor involving organs of the body . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 To summarize why he deserves a raise , Dwight utilizes a Lex Luthor quote from the " Hothead " episode of Smallville . Writer Jason Kessler was tasked with searching on the internet in order to get the right line . Kinsey was pleased with the inclusion of the Smallville quote . In order to trick Dwight into thinking that Thursday was actually Friday , Pam and Jim discuss who Donald Trump fired on The Apprentice , which was in its fourth season at the time the episode aired . Before his review , Dwight pumps himself up by listening to glam metal band Mötley Crüe . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Performance Review " originally aired on NBC in the United States on November 15 , 2005 . The episode was viewed by 8 million viewers and received a 3 @.@ 9 rating / 9 percent share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . This means that it was seen by 3 @.@ 9 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 9 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . An encore presentation of the episode , on June 6 , 2006 , received 2 @.@ 5 rating / 7 percent share and was viewed by over 4 @.@ 7 million viewers . 
 " Miss Alli " from Television Without Pity gave the episode an " A – " rating . Dan Phillips of IGN named " Dwight 's First Day Late " as the tenth greatest prank on the show . He noted , " Seeing a disheveled , unshaven Dwight run desperately towards the office in hopes of saving his perfect performance record was enough to land this prank on the list despite its lack of complexity . " Diane Holloway of the Austin American @-@ Statesman wrote positively of the episode , and cited it as an example of how The Office , along with My Name is Earl , has " restored the comedy hour to NBC " . Michael Sciannamea of <unk> TV wrote that he " liked the idea of having a continuation of a storyline " from " The Client " , but that the subplot of Dwight mistaking a Thursday for a Friday " really didn 't go anywhere . " He also noted that " Dwight 's behavior was over the top again " , a fact which " can really be disconcerting . " Matt Zoller Seitz of Salon named the entry the ninth best episode of the series , praising the comedic confrontation between Michael and Jan , as well as being a " strong Dwight episode " . Furthermore , Seitz praised the cold opening , calling it " a classic Jim prank " . 
 Erik Adams of The A.V. Club awarded the episode a " B " , and wrote that the episode was " squarely invested in advancing the pieces on The Office 's game board — all the while keeping its gaze fixed on the events of the previous episode . " Adams felt that the A @-@ story was largely dramatic , but was successfully balanced by the simplistic yet humorous B @-@ story which " helps that A @-@ story find its best beats . " Ultimately , he felt that " the episode sets up a portion of the season where secrets and snooping become recurring components — fitting for a show grounded in the truth @-@ telling conventions of documentary film . 
 Holloway highlighted Michael 's review of Angela , wherein he tells her " You 're adequate " , as the best line in the episode . TV Fanatic reviewed several of the quotes for the episode . The site ranked Angela 's monologue about how much she loves being judged , as well as Jim 's revelation that Dwight thinks a Thursday is really a Friday , a four out of five . TV Fanatic awarded the conversation between Stanley and Michael — wherein Stanley tells Michael how to properly listen for subtext in a voicemail — as well as Dwight 's frustration that he went out and got drunk with his laser tag team , a five out of five . Wilson later claimed that Dwight 's line about laser tag caused " quite a buzz " online . 
 = Harriet Tubman = 
 Harriet Tubman ( born Araminta Ross ; c . 1822 – March 10 , 1913 ) was an American abolitionist , humanitarian , and an armed scout and spy for the United States Army during the American Civil War . Born into slavery , Tubman escaped and subsequently made some thirteen missions to rescue approximately seventy enslaved families and friends , using the network of antislavery activists and safe houses known as the Underground Railroad . She later helped abolitionist John Brown recruit men for his raid on Harpers Ferry , and in the post @-@ war era was an active participant in the struggle for women 's suffrage . 
 Born a slave in Dorchester County , Maryland , Tubman was beaten and whipped by her various masters as a child . Early in life , she suffered a traumatic head wound when an irate slave owner threw a heavy metal weight intending to hit another slave and hit her instead . The injury caused dizziness , pain , and spells of hypersomnia , which occurred throughout her life . She was a devout Christian and experienced strange visions and vivid dreams , which she ascribed to premonitions from God . 
 In 1849 , Tubman escaped to Philadelphia , then immediately returned to Maryland to rescue her family . Slowly , one group at a time , she brought relatives with her out of the state , and eventually guided dozens of other slaves to freedom . Traveling by night and in extreme secrecy , Tubman ( or " Moses " , as she was called ) " never lost a passenger " . After the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850 was passed , she helped guide fugitives farther north into British North America , and helped newly freed slaves find work . 
 When the Civil War began , Tubman worked for the Union Army , first as a cook and nurse , and then as an armed scout and spy . The first woman to lead an armed expedition in the war , she guided the raid at Combahee Ferry , which liberated more than 700 slaves . After the war , she retired to the family home on property she had purchased in 1859 in Auburn , New York , where she cared for her aging parents . She was active in the women 's suffrage movement until illness overtook her and she had to be admitted to a home for elderly African Americans that she had helped to establish years earlier . After she died in 1913 , she became an icon of American courage and freedom . On April 20 , 2016 , the U.S. Treasury Department announced a plan for Tubman to replace Andrew Jackson as the portrait gracing the $ 20 bill . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Tubman was born Araminta " Minty " Ross to slave parents , Harriet ( " Rit " ) Green and Ben Ross . Rit was owned by Mary Pattison Brodess ( and later her son Edward ) . Ben was held by Anthony Thompson , who became Mary 's second husband , and who ran a large plantation near Blackwater River in Madison , Maryland . As with many slaves in the United States , neither the exact year nor place of Araminta 's birth is known , and historians differ as to the best estimate . Kate Larson records the year as 1822 , based on a midwife payment and several other historical documents , including her runaway advertisement , while Jean Humez says " the best current evidence suggests that Tubman was born in 1820 , but it might have been a year or two later . " Catherine Clinton notes that Tubman reported the year of her birth as 1825 , while her death certificate lists 1815 and her gravestone lists 1820 . In her Civil War widow 's pension records , Tubman claimed she was born in 1820 , 1822 , and 1825 , an indication , perhaps , that she had only a general idea of when she was born . 
 Modesty , Tubman 's maternal grandmother , arrived in the United States on a slave ship from Africa ; no information is available about her other ancestors . As a child , Tubman was told that she was of Ashanti lineage ( from what is now Ghana ) , though no evidence exists to confirm or deny this assertion . Her mother Rit ( who may have had a white father ) was a cook for the Brodess family . Her father Ben was a skilled woodsman who managed the timber work on Thompson 's plantation . They married around 1808 and , according to court records , they had nine children together : <unk> , Mariah Ritty , Soph , Robert , Minty ( Harriet ) , Ben , Rachel , Henry , and Moses . 
 Rit struggled to keep her family together as slavery threatened to tear it apart . Edward Brodess sold three of her daughters ( <unk> , Mariah Ritty , and Soph ) , separating them from the family forever . When a trader from Georgia approached Brodess about buying Rit 's youngest son , Moses , she hid him for a month , aided by other slaves and free blacks in the community . At one point she confronted her owner about the sale . Finally , Brodess and " the Georgia man " came toward the slave quarters to seize the child , where Rit told them , " You are after my son ; but the first man that comes into my house , I will split his head open . " Brodess backed away and abandoned the sale . Tubman 's biographers agree that stories told about this event within the family influenced her belief in the possibilities of resistance . 
 = = Childhood = = 
 Tubman 's mother was assigned to " the big house " and had scarce time for her family ; consequently , as a child Tubman took care of a younger brother and baby , as was typical in large families . When she was five or six years old , Brodess hired her out as a nursemaid to a woman named " Miss Susan " . She was ordered to keep watch on the baby as it slept ; when it woke up and cried , she was whipped . She later recounted a particular day when she was lashed five times before breakfast . She carried the scars for the rest of her life . She found ways to resist , running away for five days , wearing layers of clothing as protection against beatings , and fighting back . 
 As a child , Tubman also worked at the home of a planter named James Cook . She had to check the muskrat traps in nearby marshes , even after contracting measles . She became so ill that Cook sent her back to Brodess , where her mother nursed her back to health . Brodess then hired her out again . She spoke later of her acute childhood homesickness , comparing herself to " the boy on the Swanee River " , an allusion to Stephen Foster 's song " Old Folks at Home " . As she grew older and stronger , she was assigned to field and forest work , driving oxen , plowing , and hauling logs . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 As an illiterate child , she had been told Bible stories by her mother . The particular variety of her early Christian belief remains unclear , but she acquired a passionate faith in God . She rejected the teachings of the New Testament that urged slaves to be obedient and found guidance in the Old Testament tales of deliverance . Tubman was devout , and when she began experiencing visions and vivid dreams , she interpreted them as revelations from God . This religious perspective informed her actions throughout her life . 
 = = = Head injury = = = 
 As a child in Dorchester County , Maryland , Tubman was beaten by masters to whom she was hired out . Early in her life , she suffered a severe head wound when hit by a heavy metal weight . The injury caused disabling epileptic seizures , headaches , powerful visions , and dream experiences , which occurred throughout her life . 
 One day , the adolescent Tubman was sent to a dry @-@ goods store for supplies . There , she encountered a slave owned by another family , who had left the fields without permission . His overseer , furious , demanded that she help restrain him . She refused , and as he ran away , the overseer threw a two @-@ pound weight at him . He struck her instead , which she said " broke my skull " . She later explained her belief that her hair – which " had never been combed and ... stood out like a bushel basket " – might have saved her life . Bleeding and unconscious , she was returned to her owner 's house and laid on the seat of a loom , where she remained without medical care for two days . She was sent back into the fields , " with blood and sweat rolling down my face until I couldn 't see " . Her boss said she was " not worth a sixpence " and returned her to Brodess , who tried unsuccessfully to sell her . She began having seizures and would seemingly fall unconscious , although she claimed to be aware of her surroundings while appearing to be asleep . These episodes were alarming to her family , who were unable to wake her when she fell asleep suddenly and without warning . This condition remained with her for the rest of her life ; Larson suggests she may have suffered from temporal lobe epilepsy as a result of the injury . 
 = = Family and marriage = = 
 By 1840 , Tubman 's father , Ben , was manumitted from slavery at the age of 45 , as stipulated in a former owner 's will , though his actual age was closer to 55 . He continued working as a timber estimator and foreman for the Thompson family , who had held him as a slave . Several years later , Tubman contacted a white attorney and paid him five dollars to investigate her mother 's legal status . The lawyer discovered that a former owner had issued instructions that Rit , like her husband , would be manumitted at the age of 45 . The record showed that a similar provision would apply to Rit 's children , and that any children born after she reached 45 years of age were legally free , but the Pattison and Brodess families had ignored this stipulation when they inherited the slaves . Challenging it legally was an impossible task for Tubman . 
 Around 1844 , she married a free black man named John Tubman . Although little is known about him or their time together , the union was complicated because of her slave status . Since the mother 's status dictated that of children , any children born to Harriet and John would be enslaved . Such blended marriages – free people of color marrying enslaved people – were not uncommon on the Eastern Shore of Maryland , where by this time , half the black population was free . Most African @-@ American families had both free and enslaved members . Larson suggests that they might have planned to buy Tubman 's freedom . 
 Tubman changed her name from Araminta to Harriet soon after her marriage , though the exact timing is unclear . Larson suggests this happened right after the wedding , and Clinton suggests that it coincided with Tubman 's plans to escape from slavery . She adopted her mother 's name , possibly as part of a religious conversion , or to honor another relative . 
 = = Escape from slavery = = 
 In 1849 , Tubman became ill again , which diminished her value as a slave . Edward Brodess tried to sell her , but could not find a buyer . Angry at him for trying to sell her and for continuing to enslave her relatives , Tubman began to pray for her owner , asking God to make him change his ways . She said later : " I prayed all night long for my master till the first of March ; and all the time he was bringing people to look at me , and trying to sell me . " When it appeared as though a sale was being concluded , " I changed my prayer , " she said . " First of March I began to pray , ' Oh Lord , if you ain 't never going to change that man 's heart , kill him , Lord , and take him out of the way . ' " A week later , Brodess died , and Tubman expressed regret for her earlier sentiments . 
 As in many estate settlements , Brodess 's death increased the likelihood that Tubman would be sold and her family broken apart . His widow , Eliza , began working to sell the family 's slaves . Tubman refused to wait for the Brodess family to decide her fate , despite her husband 's efforts to dissuade her . " [ T ] here was one of two things I had a right to , " she explained later , " liberty or death ; if I could not have one , I would have the other . " 
 Tubman and her brothers , Ben and Henry , escaped from slavery on September 17 , 1849 . Tubman had been hired out to Dr. Anthony Thompson , who owned a large plantation in an area called Poplar Neck in neighboring Caroline County ; it is likely her brothers labored for Thompson as well . Because the slaves were hired out to another household , Eliza Brodess probably did not recognize their absence as an escape attempt for some time . Two weeks later , she posted a runaway notice in the Cambridge Democrat , offering a reward of up to 100 dollars for each slave returned . Once they had left , Tubman 's brothers had second thoughts . Ben may have just become a father . The two men went back , forcing Tubman to return with them . 
 Soon afterward , Tubman escaped again , this time without her brothers . Beforehand , she tried to send word to her mother of her plans . She sang a coded song to Mary , a trusted fellow slave , that was a farewell . " I 'll meet you in the morning , " she intoned , " I 'm bound for the promised land . " While her exact route is unknown , Tubman made use of the network known as the Underground Railroad . This informal but well @-@ organized system was composed of free and enslaved blacks , white abolitionists , and other activists . Most prominent among the latter in Maryland at the time were members of the Religious Society of Friends , often called Quakers . The Preston area near Poplar Neck in Caroline County contained a substantial Quaker community , and was probably an important first stop during Tubman 's escape . From there , she probably took a common route for fleeing slaves – northeast along the Choptank River , through Delaware and then north into Pennsylvania . A journey of nearly 90 miles ( 145 kilometers ) , her traveling by foot would have taken between five days and three weeks . 
 Tubman had to travel by night , guided by the North Star , and trying to avoid slave catchers eager to collect rewards for fugitive slaves . The " conductors " in the Underground Railroad used deceptions for protection . At an early stop , the lady of the house ordered Tubman to sweep the yard so as to seem to be working for the family . When night fell , the family hid her in a cart and took her to the next friendly house . Given her familiarity with the woods and marshes of the region , Tubman during the day likely hid in these locales . Tubman only later described her routes because other fugitive slaves used them . 
 Particulars of her first journey remain shrouded in secrecy . She crossed into Pennsylvania with a feeling of relief and awe , and recalled the experience years later : 
 When I found I had crossed that line , I looked at my hands to see if I was the same person . There was such a glory over everything ; the sun came like gold through the trees , and over the fields , and I felt like I was in Heaven . 
 = = Nicknamed " Moses " = = 
 In honor of her courageous efforts to rescue family and friends from slavery , abolitionist William Lloyd Garrison named her " Moses " , alluding to the prophet in the Book of Exodus who led the Hebrews to freedom from Egypt . Though nicknamed " Moses " , Tubman 's daring missions to Maryland remained virtually unknown , and her identity was a carefully guarded secret . She did sing a version of " Go Down Moses " to signal to her refugees along the path to freedom — she changed the tempo to indicate that it was either safe or too dangerous to proceed . Like other Underground Railroad conductors , Tubman used various methods of communication specific to her own needs . Contrary to current popular belief , there were no common " codes " used by conductors . In the north , however , the song " Go Down Moses " was openly sung by Black regiments during the Civil War . After the war , various black @-@ faced minstrels included the song in their acts which helped popularize it . During the 20th century , people of all races sang it as a spiritual to pay tribute to Tubman or to various struggles for freedom . 
 After reaching Philadelphia , Tubman thought of her family . " I was a stranger in a strange land , " she said later . " [ M ] y father , my mother , my brothers , and sisters , and friends were [ in Maryland ] . But I was free , and they should be free . " She worked odd jobs and saved money . The U.S. Congress meanwhile passed the Fugitive Slave Law of 1850 , which heavily punished abetting escape and forced law enforcement officials — even in states that had outlawed slavery — to assist in their capture . The law increased risks for escaped slaves , more of whom therefore sought refuge in Southern Ontario ( then called the United Province of Canada ) , which , as part of the British Empire , had abolished slavery . Racial tensions were also increasing in Philadelphia as waves of poor Irish immigrants competed with free blacks for work . 
 In December 1850 , Tubman was warned that her niece Kessiah and her two children , six @-@ year @-@ old James Alfred , and baby Araminta , soon would be sold in Cambridge . Tubman went to Baltimore , where her brother @-@ in @-@ law Tom Tubman hid her until the sale . Kessiah 's husband , a free black man named John Bowley , made the winning bid for his wife . Then , while the auctioneer stepped away to have lunch , John , Kessiah and their children escaped to a nearby safe house . When night fell , Bowley sailed the family on a log canoe 60 miles ( 97 kilometres ) to Baltimore , where they met with Tubman , who brought the family to Philadelphia . 
 The next spring she returned to Maryland to help guide away other family members . During her second trip , she recovered her brother Moses and two unidentified men . Tubman likely worked with abolitionist Thomas Garrett , a Quaker working in Wilmington , Delaware . Word of her exploits had encouraged her family , and biographers agree that with each trip to Maryland , she became more confident . 
 While being interviewed by author Wilbur Siebert in 1897 , Tubman named some of the people who helped her and places that she stayed along the Underground Railroad . She stayed with Sam Green , a free black minister living in East New Market , Maryland ; she also hid near her parents ' home at Poplar Neck in Caroline County , Maryland . She would travel from there northeast to Sandtown and Willow Grove , Delaware , and to the Camden area where free black agents , William and Nat Brinkley and Abraham Gibbs , guided her north past Dover , Smyrna , and Blackbird , where other agents would take her across the Chesapeake and Delaware Canal to New Castle and Wilmington . In Wilmington , Quaker Thomas Garrett would secure transportation to William Still 's office or the homes of other Underground Railroad operators in the greater Philadelphia area . Still , a famous black agent , is credited with aiding hundreds of freedom seekers escape to safer places farther north in New York , New England , and present @-@ day Southern Ontario . 
 In the fall of 1851 , Tubman returned to Dorchester County for the first time since her escape , this time to find her husband , John . She once again saved money from various jobs , purchased a suit for him , and made her way south . John , meanwhile , had married another woman named Caroline . Tubman sent word that he should join her , but he insisted that he was happy where he was . Tubman at first prepared to storm their house and make a scene , but then decided he was not worth the trouble . Suppressing her anger , she found some slaves who wanted to escape and led them to Philadelphia . John and Caroline raised a family together , until he was killed 16 years later in a roadside argument with a white man named Robert Vincent . 
 Because the Fugitive Slave Law had made the northern United States a more dangerous place for escaped slaves to remain , many escaped slaves began migrating to Southern Ontario . In December 1851 , Tubman guided an unidentified group of 11 fugitives , possibly including the Bowleys and several others she had helped rescue earlier , northward . There is evidence to suggest that Tubman and her group stopped at the home of abolitionist and former slave Frederick Douglass . In his third autobiography , Douglass wrote : " On one occasion I had eleven fugitives at the same time under my roof , and it was necessary for them to remain with me until I could collect sufficient money to get them on to Canada . It was the largest number I ever had at any one time , and I had some difficulty in providing so many with food and shelter .... " The number of travelers and the time of the visit make it likely that this was Tubman 's group . 
 Douglass and Tubman admired one another greatly as they both struggled against slavery . When an early biography of Tubman was being prepared in 1868 , Douglass wrote a letter to honor her . It read in part : 
 You ask for what you do not need when you call upon me for a word of commendation . I need such words from you far more than you can need them from me , especially where your superior labors and devotion to the cause of the lately enslaved of our land are known as I know them . The difference between us is very marked . Most that I have done and suffered in the service of our cause has been in public , and I have received much encouragement at every step of the way . You , on the other hand , have labored in a private way . I have wrought in the day — you in the night . ... The midnight sky and the silent stars have been the witnesses of your devotion to freedom and of your heroism . Excepting John Brown — of sacred memory — I know of no one who has willingly encountered more perils and hardships to serve our enslaved people than you have . 
 = = = Journeys and methods = = = 
 Over eleven years , Tubman returned repeatedly to the Eastern Shore of Maryland , rescuing some 70 slaves in about thirteen expeditions , including her three other brothers , Henry , Ben , and Robert , their wives and some of their children . She also provided specific instructions to 50 to 60 additional fugitives who escaped to the north . Tubman 's dangerous work required tremendous ingenuity ; she usually worked during winter months , to minimize the likelihood that the group would be seen . One admirer of Tubman said : " She always came in the winter , when the nights are long and dark , and people who have homes stay in them . " Once she had made contact with escaping slaves , they left town on Saturday evenings , since newspapers would not print runaway notices until Monday morning . 
 Her journeys into the land of slavery put her at tremendous risk , and she used a variety of subterfuges to avoid detection . Tubman once disguised herself with a bonnet and carried two live chickens to give the appearance of running errands . Suddenly finding herself walking toward a former owner in Dorchester County , she yanked the strings holding the birds ' legs , and their agitation allowed her to avoid eye contact . Later she recognized a fellow train passenger as another former master ; she snatched a nearby newspaper and pretended to read . Since Tubman was known to be illiterate , the man ignored her . 
 Tubman 's religious faith was another important resource as she ventured repeatedly into Maryland . The visions from her childhood head injury continued , and she saw them as divine premonitions . She spoke of " consulting with God " , and trusted that He would keep her safe . Thomas Garrett once said of her , " I never met with any person of any color who had more confidence in the voice of God , as spoken direct to her soul . " Her faith in the divine also provided immediate assistance . She used spirituals as coded messages , warning fellow travelers of danger or to signal a clear path . 
 Tubman also carried a revolver , and was not afraid to use it . The gun afforded some protection from the ever @-@ present slave catchers and their dogs ; however , she also purportedly threatened to shoot any escaped slave who tried to turn back on the journey since that would threaten the safety of the remaining group . Tubman told the tale of one man who insisted he was going to go back to the plantation when morale got low among a group of fugitive slaves . She pointed the gun at his head and said , " You go on or die . " Several days later , he was with the group as they entered the United Province of Canada . 
 <unk> in the region , meanwhile , never knew that " Minty " , the petite , five @-@ foot @-@ tall , disabled slave who had run away years before and never come back , was behind so many slave escapes in their community . By the late 1850s , they began to suspect a northern white abolitionist was secretly enticing their slaves away . They considered that John Brown himself had come to the Eastern Shore to lure slaves away before his ill @-@ fated raid on Harper 's Ferry in October 1859 . 
 While a popular legend persists about a reward of US $ 40 @,@ 000 for Tubman 's capture , this is a manufactured figure . In 1868 , in an effort to drum up support for Tubman 's claim for a Civil War military pension , a former abolitionist named Salley Holley wrote an article claiming US $ 40 @,@ 000 " was not too great a reward for Maryland slaveholders to offer for her " . Such a high reward would have garnered national attention , especially at a time when a small farm could be purchased for a mere US $ 400 . No such reward has been found in period newspapers . ( The federal government offered $ 25 @,@ 000 for the capture of each of John Wilkes Booth 's co @-@ conspirators in Lincoln 's assassination . ) A reward offering of US $ 12 @,@ 000 has also been claimed , though no documentation exists for that figure either . Catherine Clinton suggests that the US $ 40 @,@ 000 figure may have been a combined total of the various bounties offered around the region . 
 Despite the best efforts of the slaveholders , Tubman was never captured , and neither were the fugitives she guided . Years later , she told an audience : " I was conductor of the Underground Railroad for eight years , and I can say what most conductors can 't say – I never ran my train off the track and I never lost a passenger . " One of her last missions into Maryland was to retrieve her aging parents . Her father , Ben , had purchased Rit , her mother , in 1855 from Eliza Brodess for 20 dollars . But even when they were both free , the area became hostile to their presence . Two years later , Tubman received word that her father had harbored a group of eight escaped slaves , and was at risk of arrest . She traveled to the Eastern Shore and led them north to St. Catharines , Ontario , where a community of former slaves ( including Tubman 's brothers , other relatives , and many friends ) had gathered . 
 = = John Brown and Harpers Ferry = = 
 In April 1858 , Tubman was introduced to the abolitionist John Brown , an insurgent who advocated the use of violence to destroy slavery in the United States . Although she never advocated violence against whites , she agreed with his course of direct action and supported his goals . Like Tubman , he spoke of being called by God , and trusted the divine to protect him from the wrath of slaveholders . She , meanwhile , claimed to have had a prophetic vision of meeting Brown before their encounter . 
 Thus , as he began recruiting supporters for an attack on slaveholders , Brown was joined by " General Tubman " , as he called her . Her knowledge of support networks and resources in the border states of Pennsylvania , Maryland and Delaware was invaluable to Brown and his planners . Although other abolitionists like Frederick Douglass and William Lloyd Garrison did not endorse his tactics , Brown dreamed of fighting to create a new state for freed slaves , and made preparations for military action . After he began the first battle , he believed , slaves would rise up and carry out a rebellion across the south . He asked Tubman to gather former slaves then living in present @-@ day Southern Ontario who might be willing to join his fighting force , which she did . 
 On May 8 , 1858 , Brown held a meeting in Chatham @-@ Kent , Ontario , where he unveiled his plan for a raid on Harpers Ferry , Virginia . When word of the plan was leaked to the government , Brown put the scheme on hold and began raising funds for its eventual resumption . Tubman aided him in this effort , and with more detailed plans for the assault . 
 Tubman was busy during this time , giving talks to abolitionist audiences and tending to her relatives . In the autumn of 1859 , as Brown and his men prepared to launch the attack , Tubman could not be contacted . When the raid on Harpers Ferry took place on October 16 , Tubman was not present . Some historians believe she was in New York at the time , ill with fever related to her childhood head injury . Others propose she may have been recruiting more escaped slaves in Ontario , and Kate Clifford Larson suggests she may have been in Maryland , recruiting for Brown 's raid or attempting to rescue more family members . Larson also notes that Tubman may have begun sharing Frederick Douglass 's doubts about the viability of the plan . 
 The raid failed ; Brown was convicted of treason and hanged in December . His actions were seen by abolitionists as a symbol of proud resistance , carried out by a noble martyr . Tubman herself was effusive with praise . She later told a friend : " [ H ] e done more in dying , than 100 men would in living . " 
 = = Auburn and Margaret = = 
 In early 1859 , abolitionist Republican U.S. Senator William H. Seward sold Tubman a small piece of land on the outskirts of Auburn , New York , for US $ 1 @,@ 200 . The city was a hotbed of antislavery activism , and Tubman seized the opportunity to deliver her parents from the harsh Canadian winters . Returning to the U.S. meant that escaped slaves were at risk of being returned to the south under the Fugitive Slave Law , and Tubman 's siblings expressed reservations . Catherine Clinton suggests that anger over the 1857 Dred Scott decision may have prompted Tubman to return to the U.S. Her land in Auburn became a haven for Tubman 's family and friends . For years , she took in relatives and boarders , offering a safe place for black Americans seeking a better life in the north . 
 Shortly after acquiring the Auburn property , Tubman went back to Maryland and returned with her " niece , " an eight @-@ year @-@ old light @-@ skinned black girl named Margaret . The circumstances of this expedition remain clouded in mystery . There is great confusion about the identity of Margaret 's parents , although Tubman indicated they were free blacks . The girl had left behind a twin brother and a loving home in Maryland . Years later , Margaret 's daughter Alice called Tubman 's actions selfish , saying , " she had taken the child from a sheltered good home to a place where there was nobody to care for her . " Indeed , Alice described it as a " kidnapping " . 
 However , both Clinton and Larson present the possibility that Margaret was in fact Tubman 's daughter . Larson points out that the two shared an unusually strong bond , and argues that Tubman – knowing the pain of a child separated from her mother – would never have intentionally caused a free family to be split apart . Clinton presents evidence of strong physical similarities , which Alice herself acknowledged . Both historians agree that no concrete evidence exists for such a possibility , and the mystery of Tubman 's relationship with young Margaret remains to this day . 
 In November 1860 , Tubman conducted her last rescue mission . Throughout the 1850s , Tubman had been unable to effect the escape of her sister , Rachel , and Rachel 's two children , Ben and <unk> . Upon returning to Dorchester County , Tubman discovered that Rachel had died , and the children could be rescued only if she could pay a US $ 30 bribe . She had no money , so the children remained enslaved . Their fates remain unknown . Never one to waste a trip , Tubman gathered another group , including the <unk> family , ready and willing to take the risks of the journey north . It took them weeks to safely get away because of slave catchers , forcing them to hide out longer than expected . The weather was unseasonably cold and they had little food . The children were drugged with <unk> to keep them quiet while slave patrols rode by . They safely reached the home of David and Martha Wright in Auburn , New York , on December 28 , 1860 . 
 = = American Civil War = = 
 When the American Civil War broke out in 1861 , Tubman saw a Union victory as a key step toward the abolition of slavery . General Benjamin Butler , for instance , aided escaped slaves flooding into Fort Monroe . Butler had declared these fugitives to be " contraband " – property seized by northern forces – and put them to work , initially without pay , in the fort . Tubman hoped to offer her own expertise and skills to the Union cause , too , and soon she joined a group of Boston and Philadelphia abolitionists heading to the Hilton Head District in South Carolina . She became a fixture in the camps , particularly in Port Royal , South Carolina , assisting fugitives . 
 Tubman met with General David Hunter , a strong supporter of abolition . He declared all of the " <unk> " in the Port Royal district free , and began gathering former slaves for a regiment of black soldiers . U.S. President Abraham Lincoln , however , was not prepared to enforce emancipation on the southern states , and reprimanded Hunter for his actions . Tubman condemned Lincoln 's response and his general unwillingness to consider ending slavery in the U.S. , for both moral and practical reasons . " God won 't let master Lincoln beat the South till he does the right thing , " she said . 
 Master Lincoln , he 's a great man , and I am a poor negro ; but the negro can tell master Lincoln how to save the money and the young men . He can do it by setting the negro free . Suppose that was an awful big snake down there , on the floor . He bite you . Folks all scared , because you die . You send for a doctor to cut the bite ; but the snake , he rolled up there , and while the doctor doing it , he bite you again . The doctor dug out that bite ; but while the doctor doing it , the snake , he spring up and bite you again ; so he keep doing it , till you kill him . That 's what master Lincoln ought to know . 
 Tubman served as a nurse in Port Royal , preparing remedies from local plants and aiding soldiers suffering from dysentery . She rendered assistance to men with smallpox ; that she did not contract the disease herself started more rumors that she was blessed by God . At first , she received government rations for her work , but newly freed blacks thought she was getting special treatment . To ease the tension , she gave up her right to these supplies and made money selling pies and root beer , which she made in the evenings . 
 = = = Scouting and the Combahee River Raid = = = 
 When President Lincoln finally issued the Emancipation Proclamation in January 1863 , Tubman considered it an important step toward the goal of liberating all black men , women , and children from slavery . She renewed her support for a defeat of the Confederacy , and before long she was leading a band of scouts through the land around Port Royal . The marshes and rivers in South Carolina were similar to those of the Eastern Shore of Maryland ; thus her knowledge of covert travel and subterfuge among potential enemies were put to good use . Her group , working under the orders of Secretary of War Edwin M. Stanton , mapped the unfamiliar terrain and reconnoitered its inhabitants . She later worked alongside Colonel James Montgomery , and provided him with key intelligence that aided the capture of Jacksonville , Florida . 
 Later that year , Tubman became the first woman to lead an armed assault during the Civil War . When Montgomery and his troops conducted an assault on a collection of plantations along the Combahee River , Tubman served as a key adviser and accompanied the raid . On the morning of June 2 , 1863 , Tubman guided three steamboats around Confederate mines in the waters leading to the shore . Once ashore , the Union troops set fire to the plantations , destroying infrastructure and seizing thousands of dollars worth of food and supplies . When the steamboats sounded their whistles , slaves throughout the area understood that it was being liberated . Tubman watched as slaves stampeded toward the boats . " I never saw such a sight , " she said later , describing a scene of chaos with women carrying still @-@ steaming pots of rice , pigs squealing in bags slung over shoulders , and babies hanging around their parents ' necks . Although their owners , armed with handguns and whips , tried to stop the mass escape , their efforts were nearly useless in the tumult . As Confederate troops raced to the scene , steamboats packed full of slaves took off toward Beaufort . 
 More than 750 slaves were rescued in the Combahee River Raid . Newspapers heralded Tubman 's " patriotism , sagacity , energy , [ and ] ability " , and she was praised for her recruiting efforts – most of the newly liberated men went on to join the Union army . Tubman later worked with Colonel Robert Gould Shaw at the assault on Fort Wagner , reportedly serving him his last meal . She described the battle by saying : " And then we saw the lightning , and that was the guns ; and then we heard the thunder , and that was the big guns ; and then we heard the rain falling , and that was the drops of blood falling ; and when we came to get the crops , it was dead men that we reaped . " 
 For two more years , Tubman worked for the Union forces , tending to newly liberated slaves , scouting into Confederate territory , and nursing wounded soldiers in Virginia . She also made periodic trips back to Auburn , to visit her family and care for her parents . The Confederacy surrendered in April 1865 ; after donating several more months of service , Tubman headed home to Auburn , New York . 
 During a train ride to New York , the conductor told her to move into the smoking car . She refused , explaining her government service . He cursed at her and grabbed her , but she resisted and he summoned two other passengers for help . While she clutched at the railing , they muscled her away , breaking her arm in the process . They threw her into the smoking car , causing more injuries . As these events transpired , other white passengers cursed Tubman and shouted for the conductor to kick her off the train . 
 Despite her years of service , she had never received a regular salary and was for years denied compensation . Her unofficial status and the unequal payments offered to black soldiers caused great difficulty in documenting her service , and the U.S. government was slow in recognizing its debt to her . Tubman did not receive a pension for her service in the Civil War until 1899 . Her constant humanitarian work for her family and former slaves , meanwhile , kept her in a state of constant poverty , and her difficulties in obtaining a government pension were especially taxing for her . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Tubman spent her remaining years in Auburn , tending to her family and other people in need . She worked various jobs to support her elderly parents , and took in boarders to help pay the bills . One of the people Tubman took in was a Civil War veteran named Nelson Davis . He began working in Auburn as a bricklayer , and they soon fell in love . Though he was 22 years younger than she was , on March 18 , 1869 , they were married at the Central Presbyterian Church . They spent the next 20 years together , and in 1874 they adopted a baby girl named Gertie . 
 Tubman 's friends and supporters from the days of abolition , meanwhile , raised funds to support her . One admirer , Sarah Hopkins Bradford , wrote an authorized biography entitled Scenes in the Life of Harriet Tubman . The 132 @-@ page volume was published in 1869 , and brought Tubman some US $ 1 @,@ 200 in revenue . Criticized by modern biographers for its artistic license and highly subjective point of view , the book nevertheless remains an important source of information and perspective on Tubman 's life . Bradford released another volume in 1886 called Harriet , the Moses of her People , which presented a less caustic view of slavery and the South . It , too , was published as a way to help alleviate Tubman 's poverty . 
 Facing accumulated debts ( including payments for her property in Auburn ) , Tubman fell prey in 1873 to a swindle involving gold transfer . Two men , one named Stevenson and the other John Thomas , claimed to have in their possession a cache of gold smuggled out of South Carolina . They offered this treasure – worth about US $ 5 @,@ 000 , they claimed – for US $ 2 @,@ 000 in cash . They insisted that they knew a relative of Tubman 's , and she took them into her home , where they stayed for several days . She knew that white people in the South had buried valuables when Union forces threatened the region , and also that black men were frequently assigned to digging duties . Thus the situation seemed plausible , and a combination of her financial woes and her good nature led her to go along with the plan . She borrowed the money from a wealthy friend named Anthony Shimer , and arranged to receive the gold late one night . Once the men had lured her into the woods , however , they attacked her and knocked her out with chloroform , then stole her purse and bound and gagged her . When she was found by her family , she was dazed and injured , and the money was gone . 
 New York responded with outrage to the incident , and while some criticized Tubman for her naïveté , most sympathized with her economic hardship and lambasted the con men . The incident refreshed the public 's memory of her past service and her economic woes . Representatives Clinton D. MacDougall of New York and Gerry W. Hazelton of Wisconsin introduced a bill ( H.R. 2711 / <unk> ) providing that Tubman be paid " the sum of $ 2 @,@ 000 for services rendered by her to the Union Army as scout , nurse , and spy " . It was defeated . 
 = = = Suffragist activism = = = 
 In her later years , Tubman worked to promote the cause of women 's suffrage . A white woman once asked Tubman whether she believed women ought to have the vote , and received the reply : " I suffered enough to believe it . " Tubman began attending meetings of suffragist organizations , and was soon working alongside women such as Susan B. Anthony and Emily Howland . 
 Tubman traveled to New York , Boston , and Washington , D.C. , to speak out in favor of women 's voting rights . She described her actions during and after the Civil War , and used the sacrifices of countless women throughout modern history as evidence of women 's equality to men . When the National Federation of Afro @-@ American Women was founded in 1896 , Tubman was the keynote speaker at its first meeting . 
 This wave of activism kindled a new wave of admiration for Tubman among the press in the United States . A publication called The Woman 's Era launched a series of articles on " Eminent Women " with a profile of Tubman . An 1897 suffragist newspaper reported a series of receptions in Boston honoring Tubman and her lifetime of service to the nation . However , her endless contributions to others had left her in poverty , and she had to sell a cow to buy a train ticket to these celebrations . 
 = = = AME Zion Church , illness , and death = = = 
 At the turn of the 20th century , Tubman became heavily involved with the African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church in Auburn . In 1903 , she donated a parcel of real estate she owned to the church , under the instruction that it be made into a home for " aged and indigent colored people " . The home did not open for another five years , and Tubman was dismayed when the church ordered residents to pay a $ 100 entrance fee . She said : " [ T ] hey make a rule that nobody should come in without they have a hundred dollars . Now I wanted to make a rule that nobody should come in unless they didn 't have no money at all . " She was frustrated by the new rule but was the guest of honor nonetheless when the Harriet Tubman Home for the Aged celebrated its opening on June 23 , 1908 . 
 As Tubman aged , the seizures , headaches , and suffering from her childhood head trauma continued to plague her . At some point in the late 1890s , she underwent brain surgery at Boston 's Massachusetts General Hospital . Unable to sleep because of pains and " buzzing " in her head , she asked a doctor if he could operate . He agreed and , in her words , " sawed open my skull , and raised it up , and now it feels more comfortable " . She had received no anesthesia for the procedure and reportedly chose instead to bite down on a bullet , as she had seen Civil War soldiers do when their limbs were amputated . 
 By 1911 , her body was so frail that she had to be admitted into the rest home named in her honor . A New York newspaper described her as " ill and penniless " , prompting supporters to offer a new round of donations . Surrounded by friends and family members , Harriet Tubman died of pneumonia in 1913 . Just before she died , she told those in the room : " I go to prepare a place for you . " 
 When she died , Tubman was buried with semi @-@ military honors at Fort Hill Cemetery in Auburn . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Harriet Tubman , widely known and well @-@ respected while she was alive , became an American icon in the years after she died . A survey at the end of the 20th century named her as one of the most famous civilians in American history before the Civil War , third only to Betsy Ross and Paul Revere . She inspired generations of African Americans struggling for equality and civil rights ; she was praised by leaders across the political spectrum . 
 When she died , Tubman was buried with semi @-@ military honors at Fort Hill Cemetery in Auburn . The city commemorated her life with a plaque on the courthouse . Although it showed pride for her many achievements , its use of dialect ( " I <unk> run my train off de track " ) , apparently chosen for its authenticity , has been criticized for undermining her stature as an American patriot and dedicated humanitarian . Still , the dedication ceremony was a powerful tribute to her memory , and Booker T. Washington delivered the keynote address . The Harriet Tubman home was abandoned after 1920 , but was later renovated by the AME Zion Church . Today , it welcomes visitors as a museum and education center . 
 Tubman was celebrated in many other ways throughout the nation in the 20th century . Dozens of schools were named in her honor , and both the Harriet Tubman Home in Auburn and the Harriet Tubman Museum in Cambridge serve as monuments to her life . In 1937 the gravestone for Harriet Tubman Davis was erected by the Empire State Federation of Women 's Clubs ; it was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1999 . In 1944 , the United States Maritime Commission launched the SS Harriet Tubman , its first Liberty ship ever named for a black woman . In 1978 , the United States Postal Service issued a stamp in honor of Tubman which made her the first African @-@ American woman to be honored on a US Postage stamp . In March 2013 , President Barack Obama signed a proclamation creating Harriet Tubman Underground Railroad National Monument on the Eastern Shore . 
 Tubman is commemorated together with Elizabeth Cady Stanton , Amelia Bloomer , and Sojourner Truth in the calendar of saints of the Episcopal Church on July 20 . The calendar of saints of the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America remembers Tubman and <unk> Truth on March 10 . 
 In 1999 , the Canadian government designated the Salem Chapel , British Methodist Episcopal Church in St. Catharines a National Historic Site because of its association with Tubman . In the same year , the city of Boston , Massachusetts , erected a statue to Tubman ; it was the first memorial to a woman on city @-@ owned land . 
 In 2002 , scholar Molefi Kete Asante included Harriet Tubman on his list of the 100 Greatest African Americans . In 2008 , Towson University named a new residence hall after Tubman . A statue of Tubman was unveiled in Manhattan in 2008 , and another on the campus of Salisbury University in 2009 . 
 In 2014 the asteroid ( <unk> ) Tubman was named after Harriet Tubman . 
 = = = Historiography = = = 
 Bradford 's biographies were followed by Earl Conrad 's Harriet Tubman : Negro Soldier and Abolitionist . Conrad had experienced great difficulty in finding a publisher – the search took four years – and endured disdain and contempt for his efforts to construct a more objective , detailed account of Tubman 's life for adults . Several highly dramatized versions of Tubman 's life had been written for children , and many more came later , but Conrad wrote in an academic style to document the historical importance of her work for scholars and the nation 's memory . The book was finally published by Carter G. Woodson 's Associated Publishers in 1942 . Despite her popularity and significance , another Tubman biography for adults did not appear for 60 years , until Jean Humez published a close reading of Tubman 's life stories in 2003 , and Larson and Clinton both published their biographies in 2004 . 
 = = = National Historic Site and Person of Canada = = = 
 In southern Ontario , the Salem Chapel BME Church was designated a National Historic Site of Canada in 1999 , on the recommendation of the Historic Sites and Monuments Board of Canada . The chapel , in St. Catharines , Ontario , was a focus of Harriet Tubman 's years in the city , when she lived nearby , in what was a major terminus of the Underground Railroad and center of abolitionist work . In Tubman 's time , the chapel was known as Bethel Chapel , and was initially part of the African Methodist Episcopal ( AME ) Church , prior to a change in 1856 . 
 Tubman , herself , was designated a National Historic Person of Canada after the Historic Sites and Monuments Board recommended it , in 2005 . Several historical markers — two federal , one provincial , and one civic — surround the active chapel , as well as a bust of Tubman . 
 = = = National Park designations = = = 
 As early as 2008 , advocacy groups in Maryland and New York , and their federal representatives , pushed for legislation to establish two national historical parks honoring Harriet Tubman : one to include her place of birth on Maryland 's eastern shore , and sites along the route of the Underground Railroad in Caroline , Dorchester , and Talbot Counties in Maryland ; and a second to include her home in Auburn , NY . For the next six years , bills to do so were introduced , but were never advanced or enacted . Meantime , in 2013 , President Barack Obama used his executive authority to create the Harriet Tubman Underground Railroad National Monument , consisting of federal lands on Maryland 's Eastern Shore at Blackwater National Wildlife Refuge . 
 Subsequently , in December 2014 , authorization for a national historical park designation was incorporated in the 2015 National Defense Authorization Act . Despite opposition from some legislators , the bill passed with bipartisan support , and was signed into law by the President on December 19 , 2014 . 
 As enacted , the legislation authorized establishment of the Harriet Tubman National Historical Park in Cayuga County , New York , pending the acquisition of lands , and created the Harriet Tubman Underground Railroad National Historical Park in Maryland . The latter was created from within the authorized boundary of the national monument , while permitting later additional acquisitions . 
 The Harriet Tubman House in Boston 's South End is a site on the Boston Women 's Heritage Trail . 
 = = = Twenty @-@ dollar bill = = = 
 On April 20 , 2016 , U.S. Treasury Secretary Jack Lew announced plans to add Tubman to the front of the twenty @-@ dollar bill , moving President Andrew Jackson , a slave owner , to the rear of the bill . Lew instructed the Bureau of Engraving and Printing to expedite the redesign process , though the new bill will not enter circulation until after 2020 . 
 = Dirac delta function = 
 In mathematics , the Dirac delta function , or δ function , is a generalized function , or distribution , on the real number line that is zero everywhere except at zero , with an integral of one over the entire real line . The delta function is sometimes thought of as a hypothetical function whose graph is an infinitely high , infinitely thin spike at the origin , with total area one under the spike , and physically represents the density of an idealized point mass or point charge . It was introduced by theoretical physicist Paul Dirac . 
 From a purely mathematical viewpoint , the Dirac delta is not strictly a function , because any extended @-@ real function that is equal to zero everywhere but a single point must have total integral zero . The delta function only makes sense as a mathematical object when it appears inside an integral . From this perspective the Dirac delta can usually be manipulated as though it were a function . The formal rules obeyed by this " function " are part of the operational calculus , a standard tool kit of physics and engineering . The operational calculus , and in particular the delta function , was viewed with suspicion by mathematicians of the early 20th century , until a satisfactory rigorous theory was introduced by Laurent Schwartz in the 1950s . Formally , the delta function must be defined as the distribution that corresponds to a probability measure supported at the origin . In many applications , the Dirac delta is regarded as a kind of limit ( a weak limit ) of a sequence of functions having a tall spike at the origin . The approximating functions of the sequence are thus " approximate " or " nascent " delta functions . 
 In the context of signal processing the delta function is often referred to as the unit impulse symbol ( or function ) . Its discrete analog is the Kronecker delta function , which is usually defined on a discrete domain and takes values 0 and 1 . 
 = = Overview = = 
 The graph of the delta function is usually thought of as following the whole x @-@ axis and the positive y @-@ axis . Despite its name , the delta function is not truly a function , at least not a usual one with range in real numbers . For example , the objects f ( x ) 
 = δ ( x ) and g ( x ) = 
 0 are equal everywhere except at x 
 = 0 yet have integrals that are different . According to Lebesgue integration theory , if f and g are functions such that f = 
 g almost everywhere , then f is integrable if and only if g is integrable and the integrals of f and g are identical . Rigorous treatment of the Dirac delta requires measure theory or the theory of distributions . 
 The Dirac delta is used to model a tall narrow spike function ( an impulse ) , and other similar abstractions such as a point charge , point mass or electron point . For example , to calculate the dynamics of a baseball being hit by a bat , one can approximate the force of the bat hitting the baseball by a delta function . In doing so , one not only simplifies the equations , but one also is able to calculate the motion of the baseball by only considering the total impulse of the bat against the ball rather than requiring knowledge of the details of how the bat transferred energy to the ball . 
 In applied mathematics , the delta function is often manipulated as a kind of limit ( a weak limit ) of a sequence of functions , each member of which has a tall spike at the origin : for example , a sequence of Gaussian distributions centered at the origin with variance tending to zero . 
 = = History = = 
 Joseph Fourier presented what is now called the Fourier integral theorem in his treatise Théorie analytique de la <unk> in the form : 
 <formula> 
 which is tantamount to the introduction of the δ @-@ function in the form : 
 <formula> 
 Later , Augustin Cauchy expressed the theorem using exponentials : 
 <formula> 
 Cauchy pointed out that in some circumstances the order of integration in this result was significant . 
 As justified using the theory of distributions , the Cauchy equation can be rearranged to resemble Fourier 's original formulation and expose the δ @-@ function as : 
 <formula> 
 where the δ @-@ function is expressed as : 
 <formula> 
 A rigorous interpretation of the exponential form and the various limitations upon the function f necessary for its application extended over several centuries . The problems with a classical interpretation are explained as follows : 
 The greatest drawback of the classical Fourier transformation is a rather narrow class of functions ( originals ) for which it can be effectively computed . Namely , it is necessary that these functions decrease sufficiently rapidly to zero ( in the neighborhood of infinity ) in order to ensure the existence of the Fourier integral . For example , the Fourier transform of such simple functions as polynomials does not exist in the classical sense . The extension of the classical Fourier transformation to distributions considerably enlarged the class of functions that could be transformed and this removed many obstacles . 
 Further developments included generalization of the Fourier integral , " beginning with Plancherel 's <unk> L2 @-@ theory ( 1910 ) , continuing with Wiener 's and Bochner 's works ( around 1930 ) and culminating with the amalgamation into L. Schwartz 's theory of distributions ( 1945 ) ... " , and leading to the formal development of the Dirac delta function . 
 An infinitesimal formula for an infinitely tall , unit impulse delta function ( infinitesimal version of Cauchy distribution ) explicitly appears in an 1827 text of Augustin Louis Cauchy . Siméon Denis Poisson considered the issue in connection with the study of wave propagation as did Gustav Kirchhoff somewhat later . Kirchhoff and Hermann von Helmholtz also introduced the unit impulse as a limit of <unk> , which also corresponded to Lord Kelvin 's notion of a point heat source . At the end of the 19th century , Oliver Heaviside used formal Fourier series to manipulate the unit impulse . The Dirac delta function as such was introduced as a " convenient notation " by Paul Dirac in his influential 1930 book The Principles of Quantum Mechanics . He called it the " delta function " since he used it as a continuous analogue of the discrete Kronecker delta . 
 = = Definitions = = 
 The Dirac delta can be loosely thought of as a function on the real line which is zero everywhere except at the origin , where it is infinite , 
 <formula> 
 and which is also constrained to satisfy the identity 
 <formula> 
 This is merely a heuristic characterization . The Dirac delta is not a function in the traditional sense as no function defined on the real numbers has these properties . The Dirac delta function can be rigorously defined either as a distribution or as a measure . 
 = = = As a measure = = = 
 One way to rigorously capture the notion of the Dirac delta function is to define a measure , which accepts as an argument a subset A of the real line R , and returns δ ( A ) 
 = 1 if 0 ∈ A , and δ ( A ) = 
 0 otherwise . If the delta function is conceptualized as modeling an idealized point mass at 0 , then δ ( A ) represents the mass contained in the set A. One may then define the integral against δ as the integral of a function against this mass distribution . Formally , the Lebesgue integral provides the necessary analytic device . The Lebesgue integral with respect to the measure δ satisfies 
 <formula> 
 for all continuous compactly supported functions f . The measure δ is not absolutely continuous with respect to the Lebesgue measure — in fact , it is a singular measure . Consequently , the delta measure has no Radon – Nikodym derivative — no true function for which the property 
 <formula> 
 holds . As a result , the latter notation is a convenient abuse of notation , and not a standard ( Riemann or Lebesgue ) integral . 
 As a probability measure on R , the delta measure is characterized by its cumulative distribution function , which is the unit step function 
 <formula> 
 This means that H ( x ) is the integral of the cumulative indicator function 1 ( − ∞ , x ] with respect to the measure δ ; to wit , 
 <formula> 
 Thus in particular the integral of the delta function against a continuous function can be properly understood as a Stieltjes integral : 
 <formula> 
 All higher moments of δ are zero . In particular , characteristic function and moment generating function are both equal to one . 
 = = = As a distribution = = = 
 In the theory of distributions a generalized function is thought of not as a function itself , but only in relation to how it affects other functions when it is " integrated " against them . In keeping with this philosophy , to define the delta function properly , it is enough to say what the " integral " of the delta function against a sufficiently " good " test function is . If the delta function is already understood as a measure , then the Lebesgue integral of a test function against that measure supplies the necessary integral . 
 A typical space of test functions consists of all smooth functions on R with compact support . As a distribution , the Dirac delta is a linear functional on the space of test functions and is defined by 
 for every test function φ . 
 For δ to be properly a distribution , it must be continuous in a suitable topology on the space of test functions . In general , for a linear functional S on the space of test functions to define a distribution , it is necessary and sufficient that , for every positive integer N there is an integer MN and a constant CN such that for every test function φ , one has the inequality 
 <formula> 
 With the δ distribution , one has such an inequality ( with CN 
 = 1 ) with MN = 
 0 for all N. Thus δ is a distribution of order zero . It is , furthermore , a distribution with compact support ( the support being { 0 } ) . 
 The delta distribution can also be defined in a number of equivalent ways . For instance , it is the distributional derivative of the Heaviside step function . This means that , for every test function φ , one has 
 <formula> 
 Intuitively , if integration by parts were permitted , then the latter integral should simplify to 
 <formula> 
 and indeed , a form of integration by parts is permitted for the Stieltjes integral , and in that case one does have 
 <formula> 
 In the context of measure theory , the Dirac measure gives rise to a distribution by integration . Conversely , equation ( 1 ) defines a Daniell integral on the space of all compactly supported continuous functions φ which , by the Riesz representation theorem , can be represented as the Lebesgue integral of φ with respect to some Radon measure . 
 Generally , when the term " Dirac delta function " is used , it is in the sense of distributions rather than measures , the Dirac measure being among several terms for the corresponding notion in measure theory . Some sources may also use the term Dirac delta distribution . 
 = = = Generalizations = = = 
 The delta function can be defined in n @-@ dimensional Euclidean space Rn as the measure such that 
 <formula> 
 for every compactly supported continuous function f . As a measure , the n @-@ dimensional delta function is the product measure of the 1 @-@ dimensional delta functions in each variable separately . Thus , formally , with x = ( x1 , x2 , ... , xn ) , one has 
 The delta function can also be defined in the sense of distributions exactly as above in the one @-@ dimensional case . However , despite widespread use in engineering contexts , ( 2 ) should be manipulated with care , since the product of distributions can only be defined under quite narrow circumstances . 
 The notion of a Dirac measure makes sense on any set . Thus if X is a set , x0 ∈ X is a marked point , and Σ is any sigma algebra of subsets of X , then the measure defined on sets A ∈ Σ by 
 <formula> 
 is the delta measure or unit mass concentrated at x0 . 
 Another common generalization of the delta function is to a differentiable manifold where most of its properties as a distribution can also be exploited because of the differentiable structure . The delta function on a manifold M centered at the point x0 ∈ M is defined as the following distribution : 
 for all compactly supported smooth real @-@ valued functions φ on M. A common special case of this construction is when M is an open set in the Euclidean space Rn . 
 On a locally compact Hausdorff space X , the Dirac delta measure concentrated at a point x is the Radon measure associated with the Daniell integral ( 3 ) on compactly supported continuous functions φ . At this level of generality , calculus as such is no longer possible , however a variety of techniques from abstract analysis are available . For instance , the mapping <formula> is a continuous embedding of X into the space of finite Radon measures on X , equipped with its vague topology . Moreover , the convex hull of the image of X under this embedding is dense in the space of probability measures on X. 
 = = Properties = = 
 = = = Scaling and symmetry = = = 
 The delta function satisfies the following scaling property for a non @-@ zero scalar α : 
 <formula> 
 and so 
 In particular , the delta function is an even distribution , in the sense that 
 <formula> 
 which is homogeneous of degree − 1 . 
 = = = Algebraic properties = = = 
 The distributional product of δ with x is equal to zero : 
 <formula> 
 Conversely , if <unk> ( x ) = <unk> ( x ) , where f and g are distributions , then 
 <formula> 
 for some constant c . 
 = = = Translation = = = 
 The integral of the time @-@ delayed Dirac delta is given by : 
 <formula> 
 This is sometimes referred to as the sifting property or the sampling property . The delta function is said to " sift out " the value at t = T. 
 It follows that the effect of <unk> a function f ( t ) with the time @-@ delayed Dirac delta is to time @-@ delay f ( t ) by the same amount : 
 This holds under the precise condition that f be a tempered distribution ( see the discussion of the Fourier transform below ) . As a special case , for instance , we have the identity ( understood in the distribution sense ) 
 <formula> 
 = = = Composition with a function = = = 
 More generally , the delta distribution may be composed with a smooth function g ( x ) in such a way that the familiar change of variables formula holds , that 
 <formula> 
 provided that g is a continuously differentiable function with g ′ nowhere zero . That is , there is a unique way to assign meaning to the distribution <formula> so that this identity holds for all compactly supported test functions f . Therefore , the domain must be broken up to exclude the g ′ 
 = 0 point . This distribution satisfies δ ( g ( x ) ) = 
 0 if g is nowhere zero , and otherwise if g has a real root at x0 , then 
 <formula> 
 It is natural therefore to define the composition δ ( g ( x ) ) for continuously differentiable functions g by 
 <formula> 
 where the sum extends over all roots of g ( x ) , which are assumed to be simple . Thus , for example 
 <formula> 
 In the integral form the generalized scaling property may be written as 
 <formula> 
 = = = Properties in n dimensions = = = 
 The delta distribution in an n @-@ dimensional space satisfies the following scaling property instead : 
 <formula> 
 so that δ is a homogeneous distribution of degree − n . Under any reflection or rotation ρ , the delta function is invariant : 
 <formula> 
 As in the one @-@ variable case , it is possible to define the composition of δ with a bi @-@ Lipschitz function g : Rn → Rn uniquely so that the identity 
 <formula> 
 for all compactly supported functions f . 
 Using the <unk> formula from geometric measure theory , one can also define the composition of the delta function with a submersion from one Euclidean space to another one of different dimension ; the result is a type of current . In the special case of a continuously differentiable function g : Rn → R such that the gradient of g is nowhere zero , the following identity holds 
 <formula> 
 where the integral on the right is over g − 1 ( 0 ) , the ( n − 1 ) -dimensional surface defined by g ( x ) = 0 with respect to the Minkowski content measure . This is known as a simple layer integral . 
 More generally , if S is a smooth <unk> of Rn , then we can associate to S the distribution that integrates any compactly supported smooth function g over S : 
 <formula> 
 where σ is the <unk> measure associated to S. This generalization is associated with the potential theory of simple layer potentials on S. If D is a domain in Rn with smooth boundary S , then <unk> is equal to the normal derivative of the indicator function of D in the distribution sense : 
 <formula> 
 where n is the outward normal . For a proof , see e.g. the article on the surface delta function . 
 = = Fourier transform = = 
 The delta function is a tempered distribution , and therefore it has a well @-@ defined Fourier transform . Formally , one finds 
 <formula> 
 Properly speaking , the Fourier transform of a distribution is defined by imposing self @-@ adjointness of the Fourier transform under the duality pairing <formula> of tempered distributions with Schwartz functions . Thus <formula> is defined as the unique tempered distribution satisfying 
 <formula> 
 for all Schwartz functions φ . And indeed it follows from this that <formula> 
 As a result of this identity , the convolution of the delta function with any other tempered distribution S is simply S : 
 <formula> 
 That is to say that δ is an identity element for the convolution on tempered distributions , and in fact the space of compactly supported distributions under convolution is an associative algebra with identity the delta function . This property is fundamental in signal processing , as convolution with a tempered distribution is a linear time @-@ invariant system , and applying the linear time @-@ invariant system measures its impulse response . The impulse response can be computed to any desired degree of accuracy by choosing a suitable approximation for δ , and once it is known , it characterizes the system completely . See <unk> system theory : Impulse response and convolution . 
 The inverse Fourier transform of the tempered distribution f ( ξ ) = 1 is the delta function . Formally , this is expressed 
 <formula> 
 and more rigorously , it follows since 
 <formula> 
 for all Schwartz functions f . 
 In these terms , the delta function provides a suggestive statement of the orthogonality property of the Fourier kernel on R. Formally , one has 
 <formula> 
 This is , of course , shorthand for the assertion that the Fourier transform of the tempered distribution 
 <formula> 
 is 
 <formula> 
 which again follows by imposing self @-@ adjointness of the Fourier transform . 
 By analytic continuation of the Fourier transform , the Laplace transform of the delta function is found to be 
 <formula> 
 = = <unk> derivatives = = 
 The distributional derivative of the Dirac delta distribution is the distribution δ ′ defined on compactly supported smooth test functions φ by 
 <formula> 
 The first equality here is a kind of integration by parts , for if δ were a true function then 
 <formula> 
 The k @-@ th derivative of δ is defined similarly as the distribution given on test functions by 
 <formula> 
 In particular , δ is an infinitely differentiable distribution . 
 The first derivative of the delta function is the distributional limit of the difference quotients : 
 <formula> 
 More properly , one has 
 <formula> 
 where <unk> is the translation operator , defined on functions by <unk> ( x ) = φ ( x + h ) , and on a distribution S by 
 <formula> 
 In the theory of electromagnetism , the first derivative of the delta function represents a point magnetic dipole situated at the origin . Accordingly , it is referred to as a dipole or the doublet function . 
 The derivative of the delta function satisfies a number of basic properties , including : 
 <formula> 
 Furthermore , the convolution of δ ′ with a compactly supported smooth function f is 
 <formula> 
 which follows from the properties of the distributional derivative of a convolution . 
 = = = Higher dimensions = = = 
 More generally , on an open set U in the n @-@ dimensional Euclidean space Rn , the Dirac delta distribution centered at a point a ∈ U is defined by 
 <formula> 
 for all φ ∈ S ( U ) , the space of all smooth compactly supported functions on U. If α = ( α1 , ... , <unk> ) is any multi @-@ index and ∂ α denotes the associated mixed partial derivative operator , then the αth derivative ∂ <unk> of <unk> is given by 
 <formula> 
 That is , the αth derivative of <unk> is the distribution whose value on any test function φ is the αth derivative of φ at a ( with the appropriate positive or negative sign ) . 
 The first partial derivatives of the delta function are thought of as double layers along the coordinate planes . More generally , the normal derivative of a simple layer supported on a surface is a double layer supported on that surface , and represents a laminar magnetic monopole . Higher derivatives of the delta function are known in physics as multipoles . 
 Higher derivatives enter into mathematics naturally as the building blocks for the complete structure of distributions with point support . If S is any distribution on U supported on the set { a } consisting of a single point , then there is an integer m and coefficients <unk> such that 
 <formula> 
 = = Representations of the delta function = = 
 The delta function can be viewed as the limit of a sequence of functions 
 <formula> 
 where ηε ( x ) is sometimes called a nascent delta function . This limit is meant in a weak sense : either that 
 for all continuous functions f having compact support , or that this limit holds for all smooth functions f with compact support . The difference between these two slightly different modes of weak convergence is often subtle : the former is convergence in the vague topology of measures , and the latter is convergence in the sense of distributions . 
 = = = Approximations to the identity = = = 
 Typically a nascent delta function ηε can be constructed in the following manner . Let η be an absolutely integrable function on R of total integral 1 , and define 
 <formula> 
 In n dimensions , one uses instead the scaling 
 <formula> 
 Then a simple change of variables shows that ηε also has integral 1 . One shows easily that ( 5 ) holds for all continuous compactly supported functions f , and so ηε converges weakly to δ in the sense of measures . 
 The ηε constructed in this way are known as an approximation to the identity . This terminology is because the space L1 ( R ) of absolutely integrable functions is closed under the operation of convolution of functions : f ∗ g ∈ L1 ( R ) whenever f and g are in L1 ( R ) . However , there is no identity in L1 ( R ) for the convolution product : no element h such that f ∗ h 
 = f for all f . Nevertheless , the sequence ηε does approximate such an identity in the sense that 
