 PFC Richard I. Trujillo was serving aboard the Battleship USS Nevada ( BB @-@ 36 ) when on December 7 , 1941 , the Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor . The Nevada was among the ships which were in the harbor that day . As her gunners opened fire and her engineers got up steam , she was struck by torpedoes and bombs from the Japanese attackers . Fifty men were killed and 109 wounded . Among those killed was Trujillo , who became the first Hispanic Marine casualty of World War II . 
 After the United States officially entered the war , Hispanic Americans were among the many American citizens who joined the ranks of the United States Marine Corps as volunteers or through the draft . Hispanic Americans in the Marines fought in every major battle in the Pacific Theater of Operations . The battles of Guadalcanal , Tarawa , Saipan , Cape Gloucester , Peleliu , Iwo Jima , and Okinawa saw fierce fighting between U.S. Marines and the Imperial Japanese Army . One Marine of Hispanic descent was awarded the Medal of Honor and 25 Hispanics were awarded the Navy Cross . Fifteen of those Navy Crosses were awarded to Marines . Among them PFC Guy Gabaldon who single @-@ handed captured over 1 @,@ 000 prisoners . It was during this conflict that four Hispanics would also participate as military commanders in the Marine Corps . The two highest @-@ ranking Hispanics in the Marines were Lieutenant General Pedro Augusto del Valle , the first Hispanic to reach the grade of general in the Marines , and Colonel Jaime Sabater , Sr .. 
 Colonel Pedro del Valle ( 1893 – 1978 ) was the Commanding Officer of the 11th Marine Regiment ( artillery ) . Upon the outbreak of World War II , del Valle led his regiment during the seizure and defense of Guadalcanal , providing artillery support for the 1st Marine Division . In the Battle of the Tenaru , the firepower provided by del Valle 's artillery units killed many assaulting Japanese soldiers — almost to the last man — before they reached the Marine positions . As a result of the outcome of the battle the Japanese commander , Colonel Kiyonao Ichiki , committed seppuku shortly afterwards . General Alexander Vandegrift , impressed with del Valle 's leadership , recommended his promotion and on October 1 , 1942 , del Valle became a Brigadier General . Vandegrift retained del Valle as head of the 11th Marines , the only time that the 11th Marines has ever had a general as their commanding officer . In 1943 , he served as Commander of Marine Forces overseeing Guadalcanal , Tulagi , and the Russell and Florida Islands . Sergeant Silvio <unk> was awarded the Navy Cross for their actions in Guadalcanal . 
 Colonel Jaime Sabater , Sr. ( 1904 – 1955 ) , a United States Naval Academy graduate Class of 1927 , commanded the 1st Battalion , 9th Marines , 3rd Marine Division during the Bougainville amphibious operations . On November 1 , 1943 . The Allies intended to establish a beachhead around Cape Torokina , within which an airfield would be built . Allied forces did not plan , at this time , to try to capture the entire island of Bougainville from Japanese forces . An attempt by the Japanese Navy to attack the U.S. landing forces was defeated in the Battle of Empress Augusta Bay , between November 1 and November 2 . A subsequent attempt by Japanese land forces to attack the Allied beachhead was defeated in the Battle of <unk> Lagoon . 
 When the Marines landed in Saipan in 1944 , among the commanders was Lieutenant Colonel Chester J. Salazar . Salazar was the Commanding Officer of the 2d Battalion , 18th Marines . Salazar had in 1943 served as commanding officer of the same unit in the Gilbert Islands which fought in the Battle of Tarawa . During the Battle of Saipan , PFC Guy Gabaldon captured over a 1 @,@ 000 prisoners . 
 PFC Guy Gabaldon ( 1926 – 2006 ) went to live with the parents of his Japanese @-@ American friend at the age of 12 . At the outbreak of World War II , his adoptive family was placed in a relocation camp . Gabaldon joined the Marines when he was only 17 years old ; he was a Private First Class ( PFC ) when his unit was engaged in the Battle of Saipan in 1944 . Gabaldon , who acted as the Japanese interpreter for the Second Marines , working alone in front of the lines , entered enemy caves , pillboxes , buildings , and jungle brush , frequently in the face of hostile fire , and succeeded in not only obtaining vital military information , but in convincing well over 1 @,@ 000 enemy soldiers and civilians to surrender . He was nominated for the Medal of Honor , but was awarded the Silver Star instead . His medal was later upgraded to the Navy Cross . He turned in more enemy soldiers than Sergeant Alvin York , who was awarded the Medal of Honor during World War I for having captured 132 enemy German soldiers . Gabaldon 's actions on Saipan were later memorialized in the film Hell to Eternity , in which he was portrayed by actor Jeffrey Hunter . 
 On April 1 , 1944 , Brigadier General Pedro del Valle , as Commanding General of the Third Corps Artillery , III Marine Amphibious Corps , took part in the Battle of Guam and was awarded a Gold Star in lieu of a second Legion of Merit . The men under his command did such a good job with their heavy artillery that no one man could be singled out for commendation . Instead each man was given a letter of commendation by del Valle , which was carried in his record books . Col. Jaime Sabater who had previously participated in the Bougainville campaign and who was now the Executive officer of the 9th Marines in Guam was wounded in action on July 21 , 1944 and awarded the Purple Heart . PFC Abel <unk> Aragon of Company A 1 / 3 3rd Marine Division was awarded the Navy Cross for his heroic actions in the Battle of Guam . 
 In late October 1944 , Brigadier General Pedro del Valle succeeded Major General William Rupertus as Commanding General of the 1st Marine Division , being personally greeted to his new command by Colonel Lewis Burwell " Chesty " Puller . At the time , the 1st Marine Division was training on the island of Pavuvu for the invasion of Okinawa . 
 The Battle of Iwo Jima was marked by some of the fiercest fighting of the Pacific campaign . The battle was the first American attack on the Japanese home islands and the Imperial soldiers defended their positions tenaciously . Of the 21 @,@ 000 Japanese soldiers present at the beginning of the battle , over 20 @,@ 000 were killed and only 216 taken prisoner . 
 On February 23 , 1945 , Antonio F. Moreno witnessed the first flag raising photographed by staff sergeant Louis R. Lowery and the second flag raising photographed by Joe Rosenthal on Mount Suribachi . On March 8 , 1945 , Moreno , a Marine medical corpsman assigned to the 2d Platoon , Company E , 27th Marine Regiment , tried to save the life of Lt. Jack Lummus after he ( Lummus ) had stepped on a land mine a few feet away from Moreno . Lt. Lummus , was a former Baylor University and New York Giants football player who was posthumously awarded the Medal of Honor . During this battle five men of Hispanic descent were awarded Navy Crosses . Two were members of the 4th Marine Division , PFC 's Lionel A. <unk> and Robert Manuel Ortiz and three of the 5th Marine Division , Pvt. Salvador Vargas and Corporals Rondo G. Abel and Nicholas Hernandez . 
 On May 29 , 1945 , Brigadier General Pedro del Valle participated in one of the most important events that led to victory in Okinawa . After five weeks of fighting , del Valle ordered Company A of the 1st Battalion 5th Marines to capture Shuri Castle , a medieval fortress of the ancient Ryukyuan kings . Seizure of Shuri Castle represented a morale blow for the Japanese and was a milestone in the Okinawa campaign . The fighting in Okinawa would continue for 24 more days . Del Valle was awarded a Distinguished Service Medal for his leadership during the battle and the subsequent occupation and reorganization of Okinawa . PFC Harold Gonsalves of the 6th Marine Division became the only Hispanic Marine in World War II to be awarded the Medal of Honor for gallantly giving his life for his fellow Marines . Two Hispanics who were also from the 6th Marine Division were awarded the Navy Cross , PFC Anthony E. Borgia of Company F 2 / 22 and Corporal Edward J. Ruiz of Headquarters 2 / 4 . 
 PFC Harold Gonsalves ( 1926 – 1945 ) , had enlisted in the Marine Corps Reserve on May 27 , 1943 and was called to active duty on June 17 , 1943 . He was assigned to the 22nd Marines and participated in the assault , capture , and occupation of Engebi and Parry Islands , in the Marshall Islands . PFC Gonsalves accompanied the 22nd Marines to Kwajalein , to Guadalcanal , back to Kwajalein and Eniwetok , then up to Guam in July where he took part in Battle of Guam . 
 After Guam , the regiment went back to Guadalcanal , where in November they were detached from the 22nd Marines and joined the 15th Marines of the 6th Marine Division . It was with that outfit that PFC Gonsalves landed on Okinawa on April 1 , 1945 . 
 Two weeks later , on April 15 , the 19 @-@ year @-@ old Marine was a member of an eight @-@ man forward observer team which was engaged in directing artillery fire in support of an attack by the infantry on Japanese positions on <unk> Peninsula . When it finally became necessary for the team to advance to the actual front lines , the officer in charge took PFC Gonsalves and one other man with him . PFC Gonsalves was acting Scout Sergeant of the team . He and the other Marine were to lay telephone lines for communication with the artillery battalion . 
 As the team advanced to the front , they were brought under heavy enemy rifle , grenade and mortar fire . Just as the three had reached the front lines , a Japanese grenade landed among them . It was less than a foot from the two Marines with PFC Gonsalves . Without a moment 's hesitation , he flung himself on the grenade , taking the full explosion into his own body . He gallantly gave his life for his fellow Marines and his country . The other two were not even touched by grenade fragments and they successfully completed their mission . 
 In 1945 , when Kwajalein of the Marshall Islands was secured by the U.S. forces , Sergeant Fernando Bernacett was among the Marines who were sent to guard various essential military installations . Bernacett , a combat veteran of the Battle of Midway , guarded the airport and prisoners of war , as well as the atomic bomb as it made its way for Japan . 
 The following is a list with the names , ranks , units and date of action of the fifteen Hispanic Marines who were awarded the Navy Cross : 
 Table : Hispanic Navy Cross Recipients for actions during World War II 
 Prior to World War II , traditional Hispanic cultural values expected women to be homemakers , thus they rarely left the home to earn an income . As such , women were discouraged from joining the military . Only a small number of Hispanic women joined the military before World War II . However , with the outbreak of World War II , cultural prohibitions began to change . With the creation of the Marine Corps Women 's Reserve , women such as Corporal Maria ( Torres ) Maes could attend to certain administrative duties left open by the men who were reassigned to combat zones . After completing boot camp at Camp Lejeune , North Carolina , she was sent to Quartermaster School and assigned to the Marine Corps Base at Quantico , Virginia . 
 = = Post World War II = = 
 The American participation in the Asian theater came to an end on August 14 , 1945 " V @-@ J Day " ( Victory over Japan Day ) when the Japanese surrendered by signing the Japanese Instrument of Surrender . Many of the men and women who were discharged after the war returned to their civilian jobs or did as Antonio F. Moreno and made use of the educational benefits of the G.I. Bill . Others continued in the military as career soldiers and went on to serve in the Korean War . General Pedro del Valle was ordered back to Headquarters Marine Corps , where he was named Inspector General , a position which he held until January 1 , 1948 when he retired with the rank of Lieutenant General . Colonel Jaime Sabater was named Commanding officer of the 3rd Marines , Fleet Marine Force , Western Pacific ( formerly the 3rd Battalion , 4th Marines ) from October 1 , 1947 to April 1 , 1948 in Tsingtao , China . 
 Among the Hispanics who graduated from the USNA during the 1940s and who would serve in the Marines during the Korean War were Lieutenants Leon J. Hernandez ( Class of ' 44 ) , Baldomero Lopez ( Class of ' 47 ) and George A. <unk> ( Class of ' 48 ) . 
 = = Korean War = = 
 The Korean War was an escalation of a civil war between two rival Korean regimes , each of which was supported by external powers , with each trying to topple the other through political and guerrilla tactics . The conflict was expanded by the United States and the Soviet Union 's involvement as part of the larger Cold War . The main hostilities were during the period from June 25 , 1950 until the Korean Armistice Agreement was signed on July 27 , 1953 . 
 In July 1950 , there were about 20 @,@ 000 Hispanics in the armed forces . Over the next three years , nearly 148 @,@ 000 Hispanic @-@ Americans volunteered for or were drafted into military service . As in other conflicts , Hispanics fought as members of the Armed Forces , most Hispanic @-@ Americans served in the Army and Marine Corps . On September 15 , 1950 , the 1st Marine Division , under the command of Major General Oliver P. Smith , led the first major United Nations force strike in North Korean @-@ occupied territory , with a surprise amphibious assault at Inchon . On November 27 , 1950 , elements of the Chinese Communist People 's Liberation Army struck Marine positions in force . The Chinese and Marine Corps forces engaged in some of the fiercest fighting of the Korean War . Hispanics in the 1st Marine Division distinguished themselves in combat even though they , and their comrades , lacked warm clothing during the cold and harsh winters . Five Marines of Hispanic descent were posthumously awarded the Medal of Honor in the Korean War . All five were members of the 1st Marine Division . They were PFC Fernando Luis Garcia , PFC Edward Gomez , Staff Sergeant Ambrosio Guillen , First Lieutenant Baldomero Lopez and PFC Eugene Arnold Obregon . Two of the four Marine Navy Cross recipients were also members of the 1st Marine Division . 
 First Lieutenant Baldomero Lopez ( 1925 – 1950 ) enlisted in the Navy on July 8 , 1943 , and served until June 11 , 1944 , whereupon he was given a Fleet appointment to the United States Naval Academy . He graduated from the academy in 1947 . On September 15 , 1950 , Lopez participated in the Inchon invasion in Korea as member of the 1st Battalion , 5th Marines , 1st Marine Division ( Rein . ) . 
 Lopez engaged the enemy immediately after landing with the assault waves . He exposed himself to enemy fire in an attempt to throw a hand grenade into a pillbox whose fire was pinning down that sector of the beach . He was wounded by enemy gun fire and dropped the grenade . Unable to grasp the hand grenade firmly enough to hurl it , he chose to sacrifice himself rather than endanger the lives of his men . He cradled the grenade under him and absorbed the full impact of the explosion , thus saving the lives of his comrades . Lopez was nominated for the Medal of Honor . Lopez however , was not the only Hispanic member of the 5th Marines , 1st Marine Division to be awarded the Medal of Honor . PFC Eugene Arnold Obregon ( 1930 – 1950 ) , who also participated in the Inchon landing , was posthumously awarded the Medal of Honor for his actions 11 days after Lopez gave his life . Obregon was killed in action while using his body to shield a wounded fellow Marine . 
 On September 14 , 1951 , PFC Edward Gomez ( 1932 – 1951 ) , an Ammunition Bearer in Company E , 2nd Battalion , 1st Marines , 1st Marine Division , voluntarily moved down an abandoned trench to search for a new location for his machine gun and , when a hostile grenade landed between himself and his weapon , he shouted a warning to those around him as he grasped the activated charge in his hand . Determined to save his comrades , he unhesitatingly chose to sacrifice himself and , diving into a ditch with the deadly missile , absorbed the violence of the explosion in his own body . 
 PFC Fernando Luis Garcia ( 1929 – 1952 ) , was assigned to Company I , 3rd Battalion , 5th Marines , of the 1st Marine division . On the night of his death , September 5 , 1952 , he was posted about one mile from the enemy lines . The Korean enemies were attacking with grenades , bombs and other types of artillery . Garcia was critically wounded , but he led his team to a supply point to get hand @-@ grenades . An enemy grenade landed nearby , and Garcia covered with his body , sacrificing himself to save the lives of his fellow Marines . Garcia died instantly . Garcia , whose remains were never recovered , became the first Puerto Rican Medal of Honor recipient . 
 On September 8 , 1952 , Private First Class Ramón Núñez @-@ Juarez ( 1932 – 1952 ) who was assigned as an automatic rifleman to Company E of the 2nd Battalion , 1st Marines ( 2 / 1 ) , 1st Marine Division was manning Outpost Siberia with a squad of 15 men . A company @-@ size Chinese Communist Force ( CCF ) struck the outpost and Nuñez @-@ Juarez and the other the riflemen fought off the enemy for nearly half an hour before withdrawing from their position . Nuñez @-@ Juarez , manning a Browning Automatic Rifle ( BAR ) , was able to halt the enemy 's advance long enough for the remainder of his squad to escape . Nuñez @-@ Juarez was struck by enemy gunfire and died as a result of his wounds . For the next several days the Marines tried to retake Outpost Siberia , but were unable to do so . Nuñez @-@ Juarez was listed as Missing in Action and was posthumously awarded the Navy Cross for his heroic actions . 
 Major George A. <unk> ( 1916 – 1961 ) was a Marine fighter pilot who flew an F4U Corsair during the war . He was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross for his actions in combat . The Distinguished Flying Cross is a medal awarded to any officer or enlisted member of the United States armed forces who distinguishes himself or herself in combat in support of operations by " heroism or extraordinary achievement while participating in an aerial flight . He was also the recipient of the Air Medal with 6 Gold Stars . 
 Staff Sergeant Ambrosio Guillen ( 1929 – 1953 ) was posthumously awarded the Medal of Honor two days before the Armistice . He was responsible for turning an overwhelming enemy attack into a disorderly retreat . Guillen , who was assigned to Company F , 2nd Battalion , 7th Marines , 1st Marine Division ( Reinforced ) , participated in the defense of an outpost forward of the main line of resistance on July 25 , 1953 . He maneuvered his platoon over unfamiliar terrain in the face of hostile fire and placed his men in fighting positions . With his unit pinned down when the outpost was attacked under cover of darkness by an estimated force of two enemy battalions supported by mortar and artillery fire , he deliberately exposed himself to the heavy barrage and attacks to direct his men in defending their positions and personally supervise the treatment and evacuation of the wounded . Inspired by his leadership , the platoon quickly rallied and engaged the enemy force in fierce hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat . Although critically wounded during the course of the battle , Staff Sergeant Guillen refused medical aid and continued to direct his men throughout the remainder of the engagement until the enemy attack into a disorderly retreat . 
 Four of those who served in the Korean War were awarded the Navy Cross , they were Private First Class Adolfo Benavides , Private First Class Mario Cardillo , Private First Class Ramon Nunez @-@ Juarez and Private First Class Enrique Romero @-@ Nieves . 
 Table : Hispanic Navy Cross Recipients for actions during the Korean War 
 The Korean War also witnessed an increase in the recruitment of Hispanic women in the Marine Corps . Among them was Rose Franco who became one of the first female Chief Warrant Officers in the U.S. Marine Corps . 
 <unk> Rose Franco , who in 1965 was named Administrative Assistant to the Secretary of the Navy , Paul Henry Nitze by the administration of President Lyndon B. Johnson , surprised her family by announcing that she was leaving college to join the United States Marine Corps upon the outbreak of the Korean War . On February 8 , 1952 , at the age of 20 , Franco enlisted and was sent to Camp Lejeune in North Carolina where she underwent basic training . Upon graduation , she was sent to Camp Lejeune in North Carolina for advanced training . After finishing her advanced training , Rose was assigned to the duties of administrative supply assistant at Camp Pendleton in California . Franco retired from the Marine Corps in 1977 . 
 In the 1950s , three Hispanics who graduated from the United States Naval Academy became Marines and participated in the Vietnam War . They were Lieutenants John Gonzalez ( later Colonel ) , Class of 1955 , Ramiro Saenz ( later Lieutenant Colonel ) , Class of 1959 and Angelo Fernandez ( later Colonel ) , Class of 1959 . 
 = = Vietnam War = = 
 The Marine Corps served an important role in the Vietnam War by participating in such battles as Da Nang , Hue City , and Khe Sanh . Individuals from the USMC operated in the Northern I Corps Regions of South Vietnam . While there , they were constantly engaged in a guerrilla war against the National Front for the Liberation of South Vietnam ( NLF ) and an intermittent conventional war against the North Vietnamese Army ( NVA ) . The U.S. government did not begin keeping separate statistics on Hispanics until 1979 . Therefore , the exact number of Hispanics who served in the Marine Corps during the Vietnam War era is unknown . The statistics that were kept by the Department of Defense , in accordance to the Vietnam War Statistics , included Hispanics among Caucasians . However , it is estimated that 170 @,@ 000 Hispanics served in Vietnam and that 3 @,@ 070 ( 5 @.@ 2 % of total ) died there . This total includes those who served in the Marines . Of the 57 Medals of Honor awarded to Marines for actions during the Vietnam War , six were awarded to Marines of Hispanic descent , of which five were posthumous awards . The six Marines were Sergeant Alfredo " Freddy " Gonzalez , Major Jay R. Vargas Jr . , Lance Corporal Jose Francisco Jimenez , PFC Ralph E. Dias , Lance Corporal Emilio A. De La Garza and Lance Corporal Miguel Keith . Of the 360 Navy Crosses awarded to the Marines , 19 were awarded to men of Hispanic descent . 
 Corporal Angel Mendez ( 1946 – 1967 ) was among the many men who volunteered to join the Marine Corps right after graduating from high school . He was assigned to Company F , 2nd Battalion , 7th Marines , 1st Marine Division on March 16 , 1967 and conducting a search and destroy mission with his company when his company came under attack from a Viet Cong battalion . Half of a platoon was pinned down under enemy fire and Mendez , volunteered to lead a squad to assist the pinned @-@ down Marines in returning to friendly lines with their two dead and two seriously wounded . Mendez exposed himself and opened fire on the enemy . His Platoon Commander , Lieutenant Ronald Castille was seriously wounded and he fell , unable to move . Mendez shielded him with his body as he applied a dressing to the wound , he picked up the Lieutenant and started to carry him to friendly lines , which were more than seventy @-@ five meters away . Mendez was hit in the shoulder , yet he chose to act as rear man and he continued to shield his Lieutenant with his own body until he was mortally wounded . Mendez was posthumously awarded the Navy Cross and promoted to Sergeant . Sergeant Alfredo " Freddy " Gonzalez ( 1946 – 1968 ) served two tours in Vietnam . He was the Platoon Commander of Company A , 1st Battalion , 1st Marines , United States Marine Corps . On February 4 , 1968 , Sgt. Gonzalez and his platoon engaged the Viet Cong , who were holed up in St. Joan of Arc Catholic Church in Hue City , firing at the Americans with rockets and automatic weapons . Almost single @-@ handedly , Sgt. Gonzalez neutralized the enemy with a barrage of LAW rockets . When it became quiet , it was thought that all of the Viet Cong inside the church had been killed . However , one had survived , and he shot and killed Sgt. Gonzalez . 
 On April 30 , 1968 , Captain Jay R. Vargas , who was the commander of Company G , 2nd Battalion , 4th Marines , 9th Marine Amphibious Brigade , was sent with his men to an area around the village of Dai Do where two other Marine companies were in a battle with a North Vietnamese Army regiment . Even though Company G hadn ’ t slept for thirty @-@ six hours , they went ashore at about one in the afternoon . The enemy attacked his men and had one of his platoons pinned down . Vargas went to rescue his platoon with a reserve platoon and was wounded by a grenade . He was able to take out three machine guns nests by himself before leading his men in hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat with the enemy soldiers in the nearby village . 
 He believed that he and his men had secured Dai Do and wasn 't expecting a sudden massive counterattack by the NVA . Company G took cover in the village cemetery and the fight raged through the night . The next morning , the bodies of more than three hundred enemy soldiers lay near their positions . Vargas 's battalion commander arrived on the scene and ordered a renewed assault on the village . He carried to safety a Marine whose arm had been severed , and when the soldier pleaded for his arm , Vargas went back and found it . When the battalion commander , fighting like any other rifleman , was shot in the back three times , Vargas dragged him a hundred yards to an evacuation point , firing at the enemy as he went with an AK @-@ 47 he had picked up on the battlefield . By the end of the third day of battle , the North Vietnamese retreated and Vargas finally allowed himself to be treated for a bullet wound in his side and shrapnel from mortar blasts . 
 Lance Corporal Jose Francisco Jimenez ( 1946 – 1969 ) was assigned to Company K , 3rd Battalion , 7th Marines , 1st Marine Division . On August 28 , 1969 his unit came under heavy attack by North Vietnamese Army soldiers concealed in well @-@ camouflaged emplacements at Quang Nam Province . Jimenez personally destroyed several enemy personnel and silenced an antiaircraft weapon . He then maneuvered to within ten feet of hostile soldiers who were firing automatic weapons from a trench and , in the face of vicious enemy fire , destroyed the position . As he moved to attack another enemy soldier , he was mortally wounded . 
 Lance Corporal Jimenez was not the only Hispanic Marine from the 7th Marines , 1st Marine Division to be awarded the Medal of Honor for his actions in Quang Nam Province . Three months later , on November 12 , 1969 , Private First Class Ralph E. Dias ( 1950 – 1969 ) a Rifleman with Company D , 1st Battalion , 7th Marines , 1st Marine Division , initiated an aggressive assault against an enemy machine gun bunker which was the principal source of hostile fire . He was wounded three times but , was able to crawl and throw a grenade which destroyed the enemy position before he was mortally wounded by another enemy round . 
 On April 11 , 1970 , Lance Corporal Emilio A. De La Garza ( 1949 – 1970 ) , while serving as a machine gunner on a squad size patrol with the 3rd Platoon of Company E , 2nd Battalion , 1st Marines , 1st Marine Division , was mortally wounded approximately four miles south of Da Nang by a grenade as he placed himself between the blast and two fellow Marines . 
 A month later on May 8 , 1970 Lance Corporal Miguel Keith ( 1951 – 1970 ) a rifleman with the 1st Combined Action Group , III Marine Amphibious Force was seriously wounded when his platoon was under heavy attack from a numerically superior enemy in the Quang Ngai Province . Despite his wounds , he advanced on the enemy with machine gun fire , killing 3 of the enemy advancing on the command post and dispersing the others . He was severely wounded by a grenade during this charge . In spite of his wounds and loss of blood , he charged a group of 25 attackers , causing them to retreat for cover . He was mortally wounded by enemy fire . His actions contributed significantly to his platoon 's success in routing the enemy . 
 Lieutenant Colonel Ramiro Saenz , graduated from the United States Naval Academy in 1959 . He served two tours in Vietnam and received the Bronze Star Medal with Combat V and other awards for his service in that war . He retired as a Lieutenant Colonel in 1979 . 
 On April 23 , 1975 , President Gerald Ford gave a televised speech declaring an end to the Vietnam War and all U.S. aid . North Vietnamese tanks breached defenses on the outskirts of Saigon and the song " White Christmas " was broadcast , as the final signal for U.S. withdrawal . Master Sergeant Juan J. Valdez was the noncommissioned officer in charge of the Marine security guard detachment stationed at the US Embassy , Saigon . He had previously served from 1965 to 1967 with Company B , 3d Amphibian Tractor Battalion , attached to 2d Bn , Fourth Marine Regiment and was now on his second tour . On April 30 , 1975 , Valdez was the last U.S. serviceman to leave Vietnam , shutting the embassy gates and boarding the last helicopter out of Saigon . 
 The following nineteen Marines of Hispanic descent in the table were awarded the Navy Cross for their actions in Vietnam . 
 Table : Hispanic Navy Cross Recipients for actions during the Vietnam War 
 Women in the Marine Corps did not participate in active combat duty , most were assigned to administrative duties . In the case of Staff Sergeant Norma Alvarado of El Campo , Texas , who enlisted in the Marine Corps in 1973 , she spent three years as a drill instructor and depot inspector at the Women Recruit Training Command at Parris Island , South Carolina . 
 Joseph V. Medina attended the United States Naval Academy and was commissioned a Second Lieutenant upon his graduation in 1976 . 
 = = 1983 Beirut Bombing = = 
 In 1982 , at the request of the Lebanese government , the United States and France established a peacekeeping force between Muslims and Christians in Beirut , Lebanon . The international peacekeeping forces , however were viewed as enemies and were frequently attacked with artillery and mortar . On October 23 , 1983 a large truck loaded with 2 @,@ 500 pounds of TNT crashed through the main gate of the U.S. Marine Headquarters in Beirut , Lebanon killing 241 servicemen ( mostly made up of U.S. Marines ) and wounding 81 . Marines of Hispanic descent accounted for 16 of the deaths . The attack remains the deadliest single attack on Americans overseas since World War II . The Marines were moved offshore where they could not be targeted . On February 7 , 1984 , President Ronald Reagan ordered the Marines to begin withdrawal from Lebanon . 
 Table : Marines of Hispanic descent who perished in the 1983 Beirut Marine Barracks Bombing 
 = = Gulf War and Operation Restore Hope = = 
 On August 2 , 1990 , Saddam Hussein sent an invading force of Iraqi troops into Kuwait . According to the United States government Hussein 's forces would continue south into Saudi Arabia 's oil fields . The United States military deployment to Saudi Arabia , Operation Desert Shield , grew rapidly to become the largest American deployment since the Vietnam War . 
 On January 22 , 1991 , Captain Manuel Rivera , Jr . ( 1959 – 1991 ) , a Marine aviator , became the first Hispanic soldier to be killed in Operation Desert Shield . Rivera was killed during a support mission over the Persian Gulf when his AV @-@ 8B Harrier smashed into the Omani coastline while approaching the deck of the amphibious assault ship USS Nassau ( LHA @-@ 4 ) for a landing . 
 Major Michael J. Aguilar , an experienced UH @-@ 1E " Huey " and AH @-@ 1 " Super Cobra " attack helicopter pilot , volunteered to fly combat missions in the desert upon Iraq 's invasion of Kuwait . He immediately joined Marine Aircraft Group 70 , the 7th Marine Expeditionary Brigade 's aviation combat element . During Operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm , he was executive officer of Marine Aircraft Group 16 operating out of Al Jubayl , Saudi Arabia , and later up north near Kuwait . Colonel Christopher Cortez was the Commanding Officer of 1st Bn , 5th Marines , his unit was also deployed with 7th Marine Expeditionary Brigade to Saudi Arabia . He sequentially served with the 7th Marines and 3rd Marines during Operation Desert Shield and then with Task Force Ripper ( 7th Marines ) during Operation Desert Storm . Both men were to become generals in the Marines . 
 Also , among those who participated in Operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm were United States Naval Academy graduates and future astronauts , Christopher J. " Gus " Loria , Class of 83 ' and George David Zamka , Class of 84 ' . They flew combat missions in support of allied operations during both operations . Loria flew 42 and Zamka flew 66 combat missions . 
 Operation Restore Hope was an American military operation with the support of the United Nations that was formed to deliver humanitarian aid and restore order to the Northeast African nation of Somalia , which was suffering from a severe famine , anarchy , and domination by a number of warlords following the collapse of Siad Barre 's Marxist government and the outbreak of the Somalian Civil War . On January 30 , 1993 , Private First Class Domingo Arroyo , Jr . ( 1979 – 1993 ) , a Marine from Puerto Rico , became the first of three Marines of Hispanic descent to die in what is known as the Battle of Mogadishu from a total of 45 American soldiers killed during the operation . The other two were Sergeant Lorenzo Ruiz and Lance Corporal Jesus Perez . Ruiz was ambushed in Mogadishu , the capital of Somalia , by Somali warlords . Perez was killed in a training accident involving an <unk> mortar . 
 Colonel Leonardo G. Hernández ( USMC , Retired ) entered the Marine Corps in 1973 as an infantry officer and served thirty @-@ one years on active duty which included combat in Somalia , El Salvador and Bosnia . 
 = = Recent events = = 
 The past 20 years have witnessed dramatic increases in the percentage of Latinos ( of both sexes ) among active duty enlisted personnel . Nearly 15 percent of U.S. Marine Corps enlisted personnel were Hispanic . The various recruitment efforts do have critics , both within and outside the Hispanic community , particularly during this time of war and a growing number of reported Hispanic casualties . 
 In the military campaigns of Afghanistan and Iraq , in what the United States and its allies refer to as the War on Terrorism . Sergeant Rafael Peralta is among those who have perished . 
 During the Iraq War , Sgt. Rafael Peralta ( 1979 – 2004 ) was assigned to 1st Battalion , 3rd Marine Regiment , 3rd Marine Division , III Marine Expeditionary Force . On November 15 , 2004 , Peralta and his team were ordered to clear houses in the Operation Phantom Fury . Peralta led his team through a series of house clearings before charging into the fourth house . He found two rooms empty on the ground floor . Peralta opened a third door and was hit multiple times with AK @-@ 47 fire , leaving him severely wounded . He dropped to the floor and moved aside in order to allow the Marines behind him to return fire . 
 The insurgents responded by throwing a grenade at the Marines . The two Marines with Sgt. Peralta tried to get out of the room but could not . Sgt. Peralta was still conscious on the floor and despite his wounds was able to reach for the grenade and pull it under his body absorbing the majority of the lethal blast and shrapnel which killed him instantly , but saved the lives of his fellow marines . 
 Sgt. Peralta was under consideration to receive the Medal of <unk> but , was awarded the Navy Cross instead . Secretary of Defense Robert Gates rejected the Marine Corps ' recommendation , concluding that his appointed panel unanimously confirmed that his actions did not meet the standard of " without any possibility of error or doubt " . The central argument posed relates to whether the already mortally wounded Peralta could have intentionally reached for a grenade , shielding his fellow Marines from the blast . 
 Six Marines of Hispanic descent have been awarded the Navy Cross , they are : 
 Table : Hispanic Navy Cross Recipients for actions during the Iraq War 
 On June 10 , 2004 , during Operation Iraqi Freedom Brigadier General Joseph V. Medina became the first Marine general ever assigned commander of naval ships . Medina oversaw the manning and equipping of ESG @-@ 3 . From his flagship , the USS Belleau Wood , he then led the Belleau Wood Strike Group ( BWDESG ) through a 6 @-@ month deployment in support of where he was assigned as Commander Task Force 58 . 
 Hispanic women are now more highly represented among enlisted women in the Marine Corps than the other services . Hispanic women are reaching the top echelons of the Marine Corps both in the enlistment and officer ranks . On August 13 , 2004 , MGySgt . Abigail D. Olmos became the first female Master Gunnery Sergeant in the history of the Marine Corps. and on August 2 , 2006 , Brigadier General Angela Salinas , made history when she became the first Hispanic female to obtain a general rank in the Marines . To date servicewomen are still restricted from serving in the following positions : Infantry regiments , artillery battalions , all armored units , combat engineer battalions , reconnaissance units , riverine assault craft units , low altitude air defense units , and fleet anti @-@ terrorism security teams . In Operation Iraqi Freedom female Marines have played a prominent role guarding checkpoints and searching Iraqi women and children . This in turn has exposed many of them to dangerous situations which in some cases could cost them their lives . Two Hispanic female Marines have perished in said conflict , they are Lance Corporal Juana Navarro , assigned to 9th Engineer Support Battalion , 3rd Marine Logistics Group , III Marine Expeditionary <unk> and Corporal Ramona M. Valdez . 
 Corporal Ramona M. Valdez ( 1984 – 2005 ) was assigned to Headquarters Battalion , 2nd Marine Division , II Marine Expeditionary Force . Valdez , whose mother immigrated from the Dominican Republic , was a communications specialist . Valdez 's most significant work was with Division 's Counter Improvised Explosive Device Working Group . The success of the tests conducted by <unk> was in a large part attributed to Valdez 's knowledge of single @-@ channel radios . 
 Valdez , who was stationed at Camp Lejeune , N.C. was deployed with her unit to Iraq in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom . Her convoy was on its way back to Camp Fallujah when a suicide bomber drove his car into the convoy , causing a massive explosion that killed Valdez , two other women , three men , and severely burnt seven other women . She was serving with the Female Search Force when she was killed . The Marine Corps honored her memory naming the II MEF Communications Training Center in Camp Lejeune , N.C. the Valdez Training Facility . 
 = = = Hispanic immigrants in the Marine Corps = = = 
 Since the American Revolution , when they fought alongside Spanish General Bernardo De Galvez to the modern day conflict in Iraq , Hispanic immigrants have played an important role in the military of the United States . 
 On July 3 , 2002 , President George W. Bush issued an order to speed up the process of citizenship for immigrants serving in the nation 's military services . Immigrant service members can now qualify for citizenship after serving honorably for one year in the armed forces or for serving on active duty during an authorized period of conflict , among other qualifications listed under the Immigration and Nationality Act , Section 328 . One of the privileges of U.S. citizenship is the opportunity to become a commissioned officer in the Marine Corps . When there is a draft , a non @-@ citizen can be drafted as a resident alien , or can join in the ranks as a foreigner , but cannot be an officer without U.S. citizenship . Lance Corporal Jose Vasquez , a 28 @-@ year @-@ old Marine who was born near Monterrey , Mexico , to the United States as a 3 @-@ month @-@ old baby , growing up in Houston , Texas . He had permanent resident status , but not citizenship . Vasquez said he needed citizenship to land a job as an aviation electrician . 
 Mexicans comprise the largest immigrant group in the Marine Corps . So far , 59 immigrant casualties have been granted posthumous citizenship . Among those who have been granted posthumous citizenship are three foreign @-@ born Hispanic Marines , Lance Corporal Jesus Suarez del Solar , Corporal Jose Angel Garibay and Lance Corporal Jose Antonio Gutierrez . 
 On March 21 , 2003 , Lance Corporal José Antonio Gutierrez ( 1981 – 2003 ) , member of the 2nd Battalion , 1st Marines was killed by enemy fire while trying to secure Umm Qasr , a port vital for humanitarian aid . 
 Gutierrez was born in Guatemala . His mother died when he was three . Five years later his father was dead . He left school to work a series of odd jobs to buy food for himself and his sister , Engracia . He learned about the U.S. from an American aid worker at a shelter . Gutierrez decided to head for America by stowing away on freight trains . He got stuck in Mexico for a couple of years , crossing into California when he was 14 . He slept on park benches and got food from a shelter . 
 In 2000 , he came to live with Nora and Marcelo Mosquera ( themselves immigrants from Costa Rica and Ecuador ) . A few months after September , 11 , he surprised everyone by announcing he 'd joined the Marines . On March 21 , 2003 , Gutierrez , who come to the United States illegally as a teenager , became one of the first U.S. servicemembers to die in Iraq . He was awarded his American citizenship posthumously . Lance Cpl. José Antonio Gutiérrez is the subject of the 2006 nonfiction film " The Short Life of José Antonio Gutierrez " ; Directed by Heidi <unk> . 
 = = = Further increases likely = = = 
 Hispanics comprise 18 percent of enlisted Marines today up from 15 percent when the Iraq war began . 
 The number of Hispanics in the United States Marine Corps over @-@ represent their percentage of the population . Today the United States Department of Defense faces a nationwide problem in recruiting men for the all volunteer Armed Forces because of the war in Iraq and Afghanistan , yet Hispanic recruiting numbers have not decreased into that service . 
 The United States Marine Corps has implemented an aggressive recruitment programs directed towards this group . One of those programs involves advertising publications and magazines with the principal aim to attract those who speak Spanish . The strategy of Marine Corps Recruiting Command in advertising is to continue to develop a very strong and positive image of the Marine Corps . The Marine Corps ' has also been successful in marketing by using Hispanic recruiters in areas mostly populated by Hispanics . Among the reasons which have led the Marine Corps to target Hispanics aggressive recruitment programs are the following : 
 1 . There is widespread support for military service within the Hispanic community . 
 2 . The propensity to serve in the military ( generally measured by the desires of young people to consider the military as one of their first choices of activities ) – especially in the Marine Corps — is high among Latinos ( Hispanics ) . 
 3 . Hispanics are more likely to complete boot camp , finish their military service , and to reenlist than any other group of Marines . 
 Brigadier General Joseph V. Medina has been quoted as saying : 
 On September 17 , 1968 , President Lyndon B. Johnson designated a week in mid @-@ September as National Hispanic Heritage Week . In 1988 , President Ronald Reagan extended that week to a month @-@ long observance . The National Hispanic Heritage Month is a time for Americans to educate themselves about the influences Hispanic culture has had on society . The Marine Corps has realized that the fastest growing group in both the United States and the Marines are Hispanics , and have joined the rest of the United States in the celebration of the contributions which Hispanics in the United States Marines Corps have made to that military institution by celebrating National Hispanic Heritage Month from September 15 through October 15 . 
 = = High @-@ ranking Hispanics in the Marine Corps = = 
 = = = Highest @-@ ranking enlisted personnel = = = 
 Hispanics are more highly represented among enlisted personnel in the Marine Corps than in the other services . On June 27 , 2003 , Sergeant Major John L. Estrada , originally from the nation of Trinidad and Tobago , became the 15th Sergeant Major of the United States Marine Corps and the first person of Hispanic descent promoted to that rank . Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps is a unique non @-@ commissioned rank in the United States Marine Corps . The holder of this rank and post is the senior enlisted member of the Marine Corps . Estrada enlisted on September 19 , 1973 and has been assigned to various units and positions during the years which he served . From December 2001 to May 2003 , Sergeant Major Estrada served as the Sergeant Major , 3rd Marine Aircraft Wing . During this assignment , he was forward deployed and participated in Operation Southern Watch and Operation Iraqi Freedom . His personal awards include the Bronze Star , the Meritorious Service Medal with three gold stars , the Navy and Marine Corps Commendation Medal , the Joint Service Achievement Medal , and the Navy and Marine Corps Achievement Medal . On April 25 , 2007 , <unk> Estrada stepped down from his post as Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps . 
 Aside from Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps , Master Gunnery Sergeant ( MGySgt ) and Sergeant Major are the highest enlisted ranks in the Marine Corps ; however , there are far fewer Master Gunnery Sergeants than Sergeants Major . One of the major differences between the two E @-@ 9 ranks is that Master Gunnery Sergeants retain their Military Occupational Specialty ( MOS ) , while Sergeants Major are given a new MOS to reflect their general command focus . This reinforces the Master Gunnery Sergeant 's role as a provider of technical military leadership . 
 MGySgt Guadalupe <unk> is an immigrant from Mexico who has served in the Marine Corps for 25 years . <unk> was wounded in combat in Basra , Iraq . During the time that he received treatment for his wounds , he was asked if he had any requests . His answer was that he had two . First , He wanted a promotion for the corporal who helped rescue him , and the second request was that he wanted to be an American citizen . 
 MGySgt Frankie Segarra , a veteran of Operation Desert Shield and Desert Storm , is the first Hispanic and for that matter the first Puerto Rican Master Gunnery Sergeant acting as <unk> chief , Landing Support Company , Combat Logistics Regiment 3 , 3rd Marine Logistics Group in Camp Smedley D. Butler located in Okinawa , Japan . 
 MGySgt Abigail D. Olmos became the first female Master Gunnery Sergeant in the history of the Marine Corps on August 13 , 2004 . Olmos , a native of St. Louis , Missouri , joined the armed services for college money and almost joined the Air Force , but opted for the Marine Corps when she was guaranteed a technical specialty . Her military decoration include four Navy Commendation medals , one Navy Achievement Medal and seven good conducts . 
 Sergeant Major Jorge F. Sosa , is the acting Sergeant Major for 2nd Force Service Support Group . He served in Kuwait as the Sergeant Major for 2nd Transportation Support Battalion . 
 Sergeant Major Jose Luis Santiago , who participated in both Operation Desert Shield and Operation Desert Storm as member of the 1st Light Armored Infantry Battalion , has the distinction of being the 2nd Battalion 9th Marines first Hispanic Sergeant Major and its first Sergeant Major since its reactivation on July 13 , 2007 . 
 Sergeant Major Federico Perez Jr . , has served in the Marine Corps for over 30 years in various positions and is currently the Personnel Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps at Marine Corps Headquarters in Quantico , Virginia . 
 = = = Highest @-@ ranking officers = = = 
 Hispanics have been underrepresented in the all @-@ volunteer armed forces , especially among officers . Despite the fact that Hispanics make up 18 % of the total Marine population they makeup only 5 @.@ 5 % of the officers corps . This is beginning to change , as increasing numbers of Hispanics enter the military . The Marine Corps , realizing its shortage of Hispanics in the officer ranks , has a program to grow its own and sends young enlisted Marines to college while on active duty to obtain a degree and a commission . Prior to the year 2000 , two Marines of Hispanic descent reached the ranks of Brigadier General and above . Since then , seven Hispanics have been promoted to the rank of Brigadier General and above . One of the seven , Joseph V. Medina , was a graduate of the United States Naval Academy . The other six obtained their commissions after enlisting in the Marines upon receiving their college degrees . 
 Brigadier General Michael J. Aguilar ( Ret . ) , was a member of the Marine Corps platoon leaders ' class while attending Long Beach State College and the Officers ' Candidate School program . In July 1971 , he was commissioned a second lieutenant and went on active duty . He was sent directly to the Naval Air Training Command , Pensacola , Florida , for flight training . After serving as a combat pilot in Operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm , he attended the Naval War College and was promoted to Colonel . He served as senior military assistant to the undersecretary of defense for policy at the Pentagon . In 1999 , he was promoted to the rank of Brigadier General , the third Marine of Hispanic descent to reach such rank . On December of that year , he became deputy commander , U.S. Marine Corps Forces South , Miami , and commander of Fleet Marine Forces South . Aguilar retired in 2002 and was selected to oversee and enforce security at San Diego International Airport at Lindbergh Field . 
 Major General Christopher Cortez ( Ret . ) , was a graduate of Marietta College in Ohio , and commissioned a second lieutenant via the Platoon Leaders Program in 1971 . His undergraduate program included one semester at the University of Madrid in Spain . He served in various positions during his career which included Commanding Officer of 1st Bn , 5th Marines with 7th Marine Expeditionary Brigade . He served with 7th Marines and 3rd Marines during Operation Desert Shield and then with Task Force Ripper ( 7th Marines ) during Operation Desert Storm . On December 31 , 2004 , Major General Christopher Cortez relinquished his final command and he retired after 33 years of service to the Marine Corps . Upon his retirement Cortez was the highest @-@ ranking Hispanic American serving in the Corps . During the ceremony , Cortez received the Distinguished Service Medal for his successful tour as the commanding general of Marine Corps Recruiting Command . Cortez joined Microsoft Corp. as Managing Director , Government Industry Team , Worldwide Public Sector , reports Wes <unk> , Chairman of Wesley , Brown & Bartle Co . ( WB & B ) . 
 Major General William D. Catto served concurrently as Commanding General , Marine Corps Warfighting Laboratory and Vice Chief of Naval Research , Office of Naval Research from June 2000 to June 2002 . Catto earned an undergraduate degree from Bethel College and his M.A. from Webster University . From July 2002 to June 2006 , he assumed duties as the Commanding General , Marine Corps Systems Command . Catto is the Commanding General Marine Corps Systems Command , Chief of Staff , United States European Command . 
 On August 2 , 2006 , Major General Angela Salinas , made history when she became the first Hispanic female to obtain a general rank in the Marines . Salinas enlisted into the United States Marine Corps in May 1974 . She was subsequently assigned as a legal services clerk at Marine Corps Base Camp Pendleton , California , Marine Air Reserve Training Detachment , Alameda , California , and the inspector @-@ instructor staff , 4th Reconnaissance Battalion , San Antonio , Texas . In 1977 , she was selected for the Enlisted Commissioning Program and commissioned a second lieutenant after graduation from Dominican College of San Rafael , California with a B.A. in History . She was subsequently assigned to the 2nd Marine Aircraft Wing at MCAS Cherry Point , North Carolina , and served as a legal services officer . Salinas served in various positions prior to her promotion . On August 2 , 2006 , Salinas was promoted to Brigadier General and on August , 4 she assumed command of the Marine Corps Recruit Depot San Diego . She was promoted to the Rank of Major General in 2010 and serves as the Director , Manpower Management , at Headquarters U.S. Marine Corps . 
 Brigadier General Joseph V. Medina , graduated from the United States Naval Academy in 1976 . His academic accomplishments include a Bachelor of Science ( Physics ) and a Master of Science ( Systems Management ) degrees from the University of Southern California . In 2001 , he was promoted to Brigadier General and assumed command of the newly established Expeditionary Strike Group Three ( ESG @-@ 3 ) in San Diego , California which is an integral part of US Third Fleet . Medina became the first Marine general ever assigned commander of naval ships . On June 10 , 2004 , Medina oversaw the manning and equipping of ESG @-@ 3 . From his flagship , the USS Belleau Wood ( LHA @-@ 3 ) , he led 4 @,@ 000 Marines and Sailors into Pearl Harbor for five days of training . He then led the Belleau Wood Strike Group ( BWDESG ) through a 6 @-@ month deployment in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom where he was assigned as Commander Task Force 58 . His mission was to detect , identify , and disrupt international terrorist organizations and foreign fighters . In April 2007 , <unk> . Medina took command of the 3rd Marine Division . 
 Brigadier General David C. Garza is the Deputy Commander , Marine Forces Central Command . He was nominated on January 16 , 2007 , by the Secretary of Defense Robert M. Gates for appointment to the grade of brigadier general . 
 Brigadier General Juan G. Ayala was promoted to his current rank on August 8 , 2008 and is currently the Commanding General of 2nd Marine Logistics Group at Camp Lejeune , North Carolina . He <unk> as the Commanding Officer of 2d Marine Aircraft Wing at Cherry Point , North Carolina , Marine Wing Support Squadron 271 . During this period the Squadron was recognized as the Marine Corps ’ <unk> of the Year for 1998 and received the Marine Corps Aviation Association 's Jim Hatch Award . In 1999 the Squadron 's Aircraft Rescue and Firefighting Section was recognized by the U.S. Navy & Marine Corps Firefighting Association as the best in the Marine Corps and Navy and received the Ogden Award . The Squadron participated in operations and exercises in Lithuania , Norway , Nicaragua , Haiti and counter drug missions along the U.S. Southwest Border . 
 = = Medal of Honor = = 
 Thirteen Marines of Hispanic descent have been awarded the Medal of Honor – the highest military decoration of the United States : 
 This along with the * , indicates that the Medal of Honor was awarded posthumously 
 = = United States Naval Academy = = 
 The United States Naval Academy is an institution in Annapolis , Maryland for the undergraduate education of officers of the United States Navy and United States Marine Corps . The following is a list of Hispanic alumni of the USNA who served in the Marine Corps . 
 = = Notable Marines of Hispanic descent = = 
 The following is a list of Hispanics who served in the United States Marine Corps and have gained fame through previous or subsequent endeavors or successes : 
 Joseph M. Acaba — NASA Astronaut : In May 2004 , he became the first person of Puerto Rican heritage to be named as a NASA astronaut candidate when he was selected as a member of NASA Astronaut Training Group 19 . He completed his training on February 10 , 2006 and was assigned to STS @-@ 119 , which flew from March 15 to March 28 , 2009 to deliver the final set of solar arrays to the International Space Station . <unk> was a Sergeant in the United States Marine Corps Reserves where he served for six years . 
 Enrique Camarena — DEA agent : In 1972 , Camarena joined the United States Marine Corps , where he served for two years . He then joined the DEA at their Calexico , California office . Camarena 's work became well known all over the United States and Latin America before he died . He infiltrated drug trafficking bands and successfully helped break up many of them . He managed to keep his face off the newspapers and other media despite the fact his name was well known . Several movies about him were produced in Mexico , and , in November 1988 , Time magazine had him on their cover . A 1990 U.S television mini @-@ series about Camarena , starring Treat Williams and Benicio del Toro , was produced ( Drug Wars : The Camarena Story ) . 
 Rod Carew — baseball Hall of Famer : Carew joined the Marine Corps in 1965 , and served on active duty with Headquarters Company , 8th Engineer Support Battalion , 2nd <unk> at Camp Lejeune , North Carolina . He completed his Marine Corps career serving in the reserves from 1966 to 1971 . 
 Roberto Clemente — baseball Hall of Famer @-@ He joined the Marine Corps on September 12 , 1958 . At Parris Island , Clemente received his basic training with Platoon 346 of the 3rd Recruit Battalion . As an infantryman he served on active duty at Camp Lejeune until 1959 ; he remained in the reserves until September 1964 . 
 Nicholas <unk> – NYPD Chief of Patrol ( Ret . ) , In 2002 he became the first Puerto Rican and the first Hispanic in the history of the NYPD to reach the three @-@ star rank of Chief of Patrol . He enlisted in the United States Marine Corps during the Vietnam War and was a member of the 3rd Force , Recon Co. of the Marines Recon Force . 
 Freddy Fender – was a Mexican @-@ American musician of Tejano , country , and Rock and Roll music who in 1975 had a hit song " Before the Next Teardrop Falls " which gave him national exposure . Born <unk> Huerta , he joined the Marines in 1953 at the age of 16 and served for three years . 
 Lieutenant Colonel Christopher J. " Gus " Loria — NASA Astronaut — USMC — USNA Class of 1983 : Loria was born on July 9 , 1960 in Belmont , Massachusetts . His educational background include a Bachelor of Science degree in general engineering from the U.S. Naval Academy ( 1983 ) ; 30 credits from Florida Institute of Technology towards completion of a Master of Science degree in aeronautical engineering ; and a Master in Public Administration from John F. Kennedy School of Government , Harvard University ( 2004 ) . Loria flew 42 combat missions in support of allied operations during Operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm . Selected by NASA in April 1996 , Loria completed two years of training and evaluation , he is qualified for flight assignment as a pilot . From September 2002 through July 2003 , he served as the Chief of Flight Test for the Orbital Space Plane Program . 
 Carlos I. Noriega — NASA Astronaut — USMC : Born in Peru , Noriega is a NASA employee , a former NASA astronaut and a retired U.S. Marine Corps Lieutenant Colonel . Noriega flew on STS @-@ 84 in 1997 and STS @-@ 97 in 2000 . He logged over 461 hours in space , including over 19 EVA hours in 3 space walks . Following STS @-@ 97 , Noriega trained as the backup commander for IIS Expedition 6 and later as a member of the crew of STS @-@ 121 . In January 2005 , Noriega retired from the NASA Astronaut Corps , but continued working for NASA as the Manager , Advanced Projects Office , Constellation Program , Johnson Space Center . 
 Lee Trevino — PGA Tour golfer and member of the World Golf Hall of Fame : Trevino enlisted in the Marine Corps on his seventeenth birthday in 1956 and went through recruit training at Marine Corps Recruit Depot San Diego , California . On completion of boot camp and follow @-@ on training , he served as a Machine Gunner with the 9th Marines on Okinawa from July 1957 , until August 1958 , when he was transferred to the 1st Marine Division at Camp Pendleton , California . Trevino served with the division until March 1959 , and was transferred to the 3rd Marine Division . He remained with the 3rd Marine Division until his discharge as a Corporal in November 1960 . 
 Ted Williams , whose mother was of Mexican heritage enlisted on May 22 , 1942 . Williams received his wings and commission in the Marine Corps on May 2 , 1944 . He was in Hawaii awaiting orders as a replacement pilot when the war ended . Williams returned to the States in December and was discharged from the Marines on January 28 , 1946 . On May 2 , 1952 , Williams was recalled to active duty due to the Korean War . After completing jet refresher training in the F9F Panther at Cherry Point , North Carolina , Williams joined VMF @-@ 311 in Korea . He flew 37 combat missions and had a narrow escape when he crash @-@ landed a flak damaged aircraft . Among the decorations he received was the Air Medal with two Gold Stars for meritorious achievement . Williams returned to the States and relieved from active duty with the rank of Captain on July 28 , 1953 . Williams who played professional baseball with the Boston Red Sox was elected to baseball 's Hall of Fame in 1966 . 
 Colonel George David Zamka – NASA Astronaut – USMC – USNA Class of 1984 : Born in Jersey City , New Jersey in 1962 , Zamka was raised in New York City ; Irvington , New York ; Medellín , Colombia ; and Rochester Hills , Michigan . He flew 66 combat missions over occupied Kuwait and Iraq during Operation Desert Storm . In June 1998 , Zamka was selected for the astronaut program , and reported for training in August . Zamka served as lead for the shuttle training and procedures division and as supervisor for the astronaut candidate class of 2004 . Zamka completed his first spaceflight as the pilot of STS @-@ 120 ( October , 13 – November 7 , 2007 ) . STS @-@ 120 ( Discovery ) traveled to the International Space Station to deliver the U.S. Node 2 Module , while also reconfiguring part of the station to prepare it for future assembly missions . 
 = History of Chincoteague , Virginia = 
 The history of human activity in Chincoteague , on the Eastern Shore of Virginia , begins with the Native Americans . Until European settlers possessed the island in the late 17th century , the Chincoteague Indians used it as a place to gather shellfish , but are not known to have lived there ; Chincoteague Island lacked suitable soil for their agriculture . The island 's name derives from those early visitors : by one popular tale , <unk> meant " Beautiful land across the water " in their language . 
 Use of Chincoteague Island by European settlers began in the 17th century , when the island was granted to a Virginia colonist . Legal disputes followed , and it was not until 1691 that title was determined by the courts . Although a few people were living on the island by 1700 , it was primarily used as a place to graze livestock . This was probably the origin of the Chincoteague ponies , feral horses that long roamed in the area . They are no longer present in the wild on Chincoteague Island . During the American Revolutionary War , the islanders supported the new nation 's bid for independence . The local fishing and seafood resources began to be systematically exploited in the early 19th century . 
 In the Civil War , the islanders supported the Union despite being located in a seceded state , and the war touched Chincoteague only lightly . Oysters became a major industry in the postwar years . Chincoteague 's relative isolation ended in 1876 with the arrival of the railroad at Franklin City , Virginia , across Chincoteague Bay from the island , and the initiation of a dedicated steamboat service between the two settlements . Nevertheless , contemporary visitors found Chincoteague primitive . Part of the island was incorporated as the Town of Chincoteague within Accomack County in 1908 ; the municipality annexed the remainder of the island in 1989 . Automobile traffic could reach the island with the completion of a causeway in 1922 . Two devastating fires in that decade caused the establishment of the Chincoteague Fire Department in 1925 ; the new volunteer company took over the traditional pony penning , and soon had ponies from nearby Assateague Island swim the narrow channel between the two islands as part of that roundup . The carnival , pony swim , and subsequent auction constitute a highlight of the town 's calendar , attracting tens of thousands to the island . 
 The seafood and poultry industries thrived through much of the 20th century , but neither is important to the island 's economy today . Chincoteague is a major tourist destination on Virginia 's Eastern Shore , with many coming to enjoy the beaches on Assateague Island . The success of Marguerite Henry 's 1947 children 's book Misty of Chincoteague and its sequels helped publicize Chincoteague , as did the 1961 film , Misty . 
 = = Setting and pre @-@ European use = = 
 Chincoteague is the name of a town , and the barrier island on which it is located , on Virginia 's Eastern Shore , in the United States . The island is about 8 miles ( 13 km ) long and 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) wide . Sand forms its soil , with a thin layer of loam above it away from the water , enough to support pine trees and grass . Chincoteague Inlet , a break in the barrier island system , occurs near Chincoteague Island , at the southern end of Assateague Island . Assateague shelters Chincoteague from the Atlantic and stretches north almost 30 miles ( 48 km ) to Ocean City , Maryland . 
 The local Native Americans , called by Europeans the Chincoteague Indians , did not in fact reside on Chincoteague Island itself , but lived on the mainland , where there was suitable land for hunting and agriculture . They lived near what was at first called Chincoteague Creek , on the mainland , and is today Little Mosquito Creek . The tribe moved to a new village site every few years , and visited Chincoteague Island to obtain shellfish . Although many references state that the name " Chincoteague " is the Native American word for " Beautiful land across the water " , according to local historian Kirk Mariner , this legend is of 20th @-@ century origin , invented to promote a song by that name by an islander . The name , he states , instead derives from the tribe 's word for " large stream " or " inlet " . 
 The Chincoteague Indians gradually withdrew northwards in the late 17th century as European colonization grew ; most settled on a reservation at present @-@ day Snow Hill , Maryland , with allied tribes of Native Americans , though some may have remained in their traditional area . They were later forced from the reservation , and their descendants are among the Nanticoke people in southern Delaware . 
 = = Colonial Chincoteague = = 
 Although Virginia was settled in 1607 with the advent of the Jamestown Colony , it was not until 1680 that Europeans occupied Chincoteague Island . A patent to Chincoteague Island had been granted by the British colonial authorities to Daniel Jenifer in 1671 ; that interest had been transferred to Thomas Welburn , husband of Jenifer 's stepdaughter and prominent local merchant who lived on the mainland side of Chincoteague Bay . To fulfill the terms of the patent and gain title , the holder or his designee had to live on the land for a year — in the contemporary term , to " seat " the land . Welburn and several employees built a house there and cleared land for a small farm . His employee and tenant , Robert Scott , lived there only for the required year . Once it had expired , the house was abandoned , but Welburn , despite considering the land his own , did not register his efforts to perfect title . 
 Unaware that Welburn had seated the land , the authorities declared Chincoteague Island abandoned and issued another patent for the land in December 1684 to John Clayton , who conveyed it to Colonel William Kendall of Northampton . When Welburn learned that Kendall was planning to seat the land himself , he threatened to shoot trespassers on the island . Instead , Welburn sued , and the case dragged on in the Accomack County courts until the local justices transferred it to the General Court in the capital of Williamsburg . Welburn lost the case , as the General Court ruled in 1691 that as Jenifer had never lived on the island , he had not conveyed a valid patent to Welburn . Fresh patents were then issued , dividing the island between Kendall and another prominent citizen of Northampton , Major John Robins , with the dividing line near present @-@ day Church Street . 
 Once ownership of the island was settled , it was used mostly as a place to house livestock , since there was no need for fences or other enclosures to prevent the animals from straying , and they could feed off of the marsh grasses . This usage was most likely the origin of the ponies that have made Chincoteague and Assateague Islands famous , though there are legends that the ponies ' ancestors survived a shipwreck of a Spanish vessel . One such ship did run aground on Assateague Island in 1750 , but according to John <unk> Jr. in his account of his efforts to locate that vessel , " the mystery of the origin of the wild ponies became fused with the oldest memories of the Spanish shipwreck " . 
 An early inhabitant was Henry Towles , who had seated the island for Kendall in 1686 . He bought land from Kendall on the island , lived there , and sold it in 1709 . The first permanent residents were likely George and Hannah Blake , originally tenants ; their son John bought land from Kendall in the 1690s . Blake 's Point , which extends out into Chincoteague Bay , testifies to their residence on the western side of the island . The will of John Robins , recorded in 1709 , documents the presence of horses on Chincoteague — he bequeaths one , and mentions that his livestock were on the island . He also willed a " <unk> [ mulatto boy Charles son of Hannah , which said boy is now on my part of <unk> [ sic ] Island " . Through the 18th century the population slowly expanded until by the end of it about 200 people , mostly tenant farmers and squatters , lived on Chincoteague and Assateague . 
 = = Antebellum period ( 1776 – 1860 ) = = 
 When the Thirteen Colonies broke away from the British Crown in 1776 , early decrees of the provisional Virginia Convention affected Chincoteague . In May 1776 , the body ordered that the coastal islands be stripped of livestock that might be taken by British ships . The islanders , in June , petitioned for a repeal or exemption , as they had , the petition stated , " the most fervent desire to do everything in their power to defeat the ... enemies of American liberty " , as well as a militia of some forty men able to repel British raiders . The convention allowed Chincoteague and other islands along the Atlantic coast to retain their livestock . 
 In mid @-@ 1776 , the Virginia Convention voted to fortify Chincoteague 's harbor — it was then being used by ships evading the British blockade of Chesapeake Bay . <unk> goods were unloaded on the mainland , and taken down the Eastern Shore toward more populated areas . The resulting fort was built on Wallops Island , across the inlet from Chincoteague . The smuggling route maintained its importance as the American Revolutionary War continued , and in August 1779 , the sole action in the area took place — a British privateer , pretending to be a smuggler , disabled the fort 's guns and captured a cargo ship at anchor in Chincoteague Bay . Island legend holds that four men from Chincoteague fought for the Americans at the Battle of Yorktown in October 1781 , and that one was delayed in returning to the island because General George Washington had the soldier transport the battle flag to the general 's home at Mount Vernon . 
 By 1800 , the original large parcels of land on Chincoteague Island were being broken into plots of 30 acres ( 12 ha ) or larger . There were some 200 people living on Chincoteague or Assateague , but there were no stores or other retail enterprises . A school , unusual for Virginia 's Eastern Shore at the time , was erected sometime before 1804 . Three island families were free African @-@ Americans ; two other households had black servants or slaves . One of the free African @-@ Americans , <unk> <unk> , became a major island landowner . Born in Africa and transported by slave ship , he was freed in 1787 and was supposedly 130 years old when he died around 1840 , but was more likely aged about 100 . His holdings included what today are the Carnival Grounds , south of downtown Chincoteague . 
 In the first half of the 19th century , Chincoteague became a source of seafood . As the cities along the eastern seaboard , such as New York and Philadelphia , continued to expand , their local areas could not supply them with enough shellfish . Islanders saw the opportunity , and many abandoned agriculture , instead harvesting the sea . The villagers of Chincoteague petitioned the Virginia General Assembly three times between 1833 and 1851 seeking the repeal of various fishing laws . The first post office was established in 1854 , and the first doctor arrived four years later . By 1860 there were 150 families resident on Chincoteague , 126 oystermen on the island , and others belonging to allied trades . That year , a hotel was operating on the island , located in what today is the downtown area — in the mid @-@ 19th century , that part of the island developed as Chincoteague 's commercial core . 
 The first accounts of pony penning are from an 1835 letter to the editor published in the Farmer 's Register by Thompson Holmes of " Chincoteague " — that is , the mainland opposite the island , then also called by that name . According to his letter , few horses remained wild on Chincoteague Island , and residents would go over to Assateague to build temporary corrals to place the local herds in . Selected horses were branded , gelded , and sold . Holmes told about an earlier practice , to drive the horses directly into the water , which had been abandoned because too many had drowned . Holmes mourned that the pony <unk> of his day were only " a shadow of their former glory " . The <unk> , the letter related , nevertheless attracted crowds from far and near . 
 = = Civil War ( 1861 – 65 ) = = 
 The outbreak of the American Civil War in 1861 left Chincoteague residents with a stark choice . If they left the Union as Virginia sought to do , they might lose access to their seafood markets . Refusal to do so might isolate Chincoteague from the rest of its state . In the referendum on secession held in Virginia on May 23 , 1861 , Northampton County , in the southern Eastern Shore , voted unanimously for secession , and there was also a majority for leaving the Union in Accomack County . Nevertheless , the residents of Chincoteague , along with those on Tangier Island ( part of Accomack ) in the Chesapeake Bay , chose not to leave the Union , in Chincoteague 's case by a vote of 134 or 135 to 1 or 2 — sources differ as to the exact tally . Despite this lopsided tally , some from Chincoteague supported the South , or even fought for it . 
 Even before the vote , commerce between the North and Virginia had been forbidden by Union officials . Residents sent John A.M. Whealton , a merchant and staunch Union loyalist , to Philadelphia to seek the release of confiscated supplies . He was able to gain the support of local officials and sailed cautiously for home with the goods , aware that the permission of Philadelphia 's mayor did not bind the U.S. Navy . He found the Assateague Lighthouse extinguished by southern sympathizers and the bay again used for smuggling . In September , the USS Louisiana , an ironclad , arrived , with orders to secure the area against smugglers , and within days , one smuggler 's ship was burned in the engagement known as the Battle of Cockle Creek , and another captured two days later . The naval vessel received a warm welcome from the islanders , who promptly took oaths of allegiance to the Union . After a petition on behalf of 800 inhabitants of the island was passed up the chain of command , Secretary of the Navy Gideon Welles granted the islanders the right to continue to engage in trade in November 1861 , the same month the Eastern Shore was taken for the North with little bloodshed . 
 The Louisiana was sent away to more troubled waters in December 1861 , arousing fears by the islanders that they would be abused by Confederate loyalists on the mainland . There were some incidents of this sort , but they ceased as the mainlanders adjusted to the military presence , and the war did not again come near Chincoteague . Union soldiers were stationed on Chincoteague Island for about four months in 1863 and 1864 to guard against a rumored attack on Assateague Lighthouse by sympathizers . Maryland militia were initially used , followed by a regiment of African @-@ American soldiers , but in March 1864 , they were removed and local men in the Eastern Shore Volunteers , formed in 1863 but not called into service until the following year , guarded the island and other local points . 
 = = Postwar prosperity ( 1865 – 1908 ) = = 
 The years after the Civil War brought prosperity to Chincoteague with expansion of the oyster trade . As the law required an <unk> to be a Virginia resident for a year before harvesting in Virginia waters , many in that trade bought lots along Main Street , running along the west side of the island , or across the bay in the new village of <unk> , Virginia , just south of the Maryland line . Other new residents on the island were freed African @-@ Americans , or Northerners who sought opportunities in the southern states . Chincoteague oysters , especially those from Tom 's Cove at the southern point of the island , gained a reputation for taste , and , marketed across the country as " Chincoteague salt oysters " , became famous . 
 In 1876 , art student Howard Pyle visited Chincoteague . He wrote of his experiences , including viewing the pony penning ( which took place behind his hotel ) , the following year in Scribner 's Magazine , accompanying the text with the first known contemporary drawings of the event . Pyle was struck by the quaintness of Chincoteague , describing it as " an enchanted island , cut loose from modern progress and left drifting some seventy @-@ five years backward in the ocean of time " . The publicity in a national magazine did nothing to reduce the crowds coming to Chincoteague for the penning . 
 The island 's status as an isolated backwater began to end in 1876 , when a rail line reached Franklin City , on the shores of the bay and only 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) from Chincoteague Island , with a steamship supplying the remaining connection . This improvement gave oystermen an efficient means of getting their wares to market , and also brought early tourists to Chincoteague , seeking respite from the sweltering summers in the city . 
 Due to the popularity of oysters , Chincoteague continued to grow ; commercial buildings were built along Main Street . In 1890 , the island acquired its first barbershop , and about 500 barrels of <unk> oysters were being sent to the mainland daily on the steamer . Gas illumination arrived by 1900 , the first telephone exchange in 1902 , and rural free delivery by the United States Post Office Department in 1905 . Although there were few shops or public buildings , there was a shoe store and a notary public . The roads were made of dirt , covered with sea shells . 
 = = Entering the modern era ( 1908 – 46 ) = = 
 In the early 20th century , according to Mariner , Chincoteague " was a curious mixture of the progressive and the primitive , of worldly @-@ wise townsfolk and isolated country people " . Beginning in about 1900 , the residents sought to be incorporated as a town . Gaining a municipal charter from the General Assembly would allow ordinances to be passed to keep livestock off the streets without seeking redress from the state government in Richmond or the county government in <unk> . In 1908 , the legislature incorporated part of the island as the Town of Chincoteague , and on July 4 , A. Frank Matthews became the first mayor . 
 The 1910 United States Census showed a population of 3 @,@ 295 for the island , of whom 1 @,@ 419 lived in the town . Few resided in the interior of the island ; most lived in single @-@ family houses , facing the water across roads that ran just above the high tide line . The population of the island had increased to about 3 @,@ 600 as of 1916 ; there were about 100 African @-@ Americans , all of whom lived on the same part of the island . Most islanders of working age were part of or supported the seafood trade . At that time , most houses got their water from shallow @-@ dug wells , located in many cases close by primitive privies . Water from such wells was also used to wash the oysters and to make ice to preserve them . Almost all Chincoteague oysters were sent out of state , and the federal Public Health Service intervened in 1916 to get the mayor and town council to order improved sanitation , with islanders living outside the town line agreeing to abide by the ordinances . 
 Although dwarfed in population by the neighboring island , Assateague was still populated by a few families . A penning was still held on Assateague along with one on Chincoteague , but the Assateague event was suspended after 1920 as the largest landowner refused to allow access . Beginning in 1923 , the Assateague herd was transported to Chincoteague for a joint penning , most likely by boat , as the idea of swimming the ponies had not yet been adopted . The refusal of the Assateague landowner to allow islanders to cross his land made it difficult for them to get to work , and Assateague became depopulated , with most of the buildings disassembled and rebuilt on Chincoteague Island . Most of Assateague Island was sold to the federal government in 1943 . 
 In 1919 , John B. Whealton , Chincoteague @-@ born though a Florida resident , persuaded the Virginia General Assembly to grant a charter to his Chincoteague Toll Road and Bridge Company to build a causeway from the mainland to the island . Whealton submitted the winning bid to build the causeway as well as gaining the charter for his company to operate it . The road was originally a toll crossing , and early plans had it reaching the island south of downtown , near the site of today 's Carnival Grounds , but Whealton persuaded the town council to have the terminal point be downtown , near the Atlantic Hotel , the island 's largest . The road was close to completion when a major fire destroyed much of downtown , including the hotel , on February 5 , 1920 . There was then only a small , ill @-@ equipped fire company in Chincoteague , and the fire was fought by men of the Coast Guard from the stations near the island . The hotel was underinsured and not rebuilt , though others took its place , and the council took advantage of the disaster to straighten Main Street . The fire and poor weather in the winters of 1921 and 1922 delayed the causeway , which was officially opened on November 15 , 1922 by Virginia Governor E. Lee Trinkle . Most vehicles on the first day wound up mired in mud once a downpour turned the causeway into a quagmire . Nevertheless , the causeway proved a success , and by year 's end over 100 vehicles were crossing it on an average day . Water from mainland wells was piped along the causeway , allowing the town to offer running water . 
 The second devastating fire in four years destroyed much of downtown Chincoteague on February 25 , 1924 , and caused the town 's leaders to conclude that a better @-@ organized volunteer fire department was needed to replace Chincoteague 's fire brigade . The Chincoteague Volunteer Fire Company was founded in June 1925 , though it needed much equipment , including a fire truck . To raise funds the fire company took over the 1925 Chincoteague pony penning , which had been declining , and sold some horses at fixed prices ( auctioning began not later than 1932 ) . Fifteen thousand people attended the penning and other festivities . The proceeds from the event were over $ 6 @,@ 000 , enabling the department to buy a pump truck . Public fascination with the pony swim , inaugurated that year at the narrowest point of the channel between the two islands , led to increased attendance in the following years . Except during the war years of 1943 and 1944 , the carnival , pony swim and auction have occurred every year since . 
 By 1930 , the year the causeway was purchased by the state and the toll removed , the Town of Chincoteague had a population of 2 @,@ 130 . In the 1930s , poultry farming became popular on the island , and by the 1950s , produced over a million birds per year . Although <unk> was still a common occupation , the trade was increasingly regulated , causing much of the production and canning to be done by large companies , and many watermen turned to fishing , clamming , and crabbing . Others shot ducks and other waterfowl indigenous to the island . Locals carved duck decoys to aid in the hunt ; these remain a popular collectible and souvenir of the island . 
 In 1941 , the United States entered World War II ; early the following year , the Germans torpedoed two merchant ships off the Assateague coast . To guard the coast , the United States Army established two small posts on Virginia 's Eastern Shore , one each at <unk> and Chincoteague . The Navy established the Chincoteague Naval Auxiliary Air Station in 1943 , across from Chincoteague on the mainland . One young pilot being trained there , future president George Herbert Walker Bush , got in trouble for " buzzing " the house of a young woman he had met at a dance . The conclusion of the war , in 1945 , brought celebrations in Chincoteague and the reinstatement of the annual July events , now held at the brand @-@ new Carnival Grounds south of downtown . 
 = = Misty and changes ( 1946 – 62 ) = = 
 In 1946 , children 's author Marguerite Henry came to Chincoteague for the summer , intending to write about the wild horses of Assateague and the pony penning and auction on Chincoteague Island . With her came illustrator Wesley Dennis , with whom she had previously worked , and who would take photographs to be converted to pen @-@ and @-@ ink drawings . 
 Staying at the bed and breakfast of Miss Molly Rowley on Main Street , Henry encountered island horse breeder Clarence Beebe , visited his ranch on the southern portion of the island , and met his grandchildren Maureen and Paul . On the Beebe Ranch , Henry saw a young filly named Misty . Henry fell in love with the horse , and tried to persuade " Grandpa " Beebe to sell the filly , promising to include him and his grandchildren in her book . The breeder eventually agreed , on condition Misty remained on the Beebe Ranch until she was weaned , and that the animal was eventually returned to him from Henry 's Illinois home for breeding . Henry made the purchase , and returned to the Midwest with an outline of her story . Several months later , Misty arrived by rail . In 1947 , Henry 's book Misty of Chincoteague was published , about the desire of the Beebe children to have a pony of their own — Misty , daughter of the untamable Phantom . The book became an immediate best seller , and the following year was designated as a Newbery Honor Book by the American Library Association . Following the book 's appearance and success , a steady stream of articles on Chincoteague began to appear in national magazines . 
 Henry wrote a series of sequels , and hoped to interest the movies , but Hollywood was slow to reach out to the Eastern Shore . It was not until 1960 that filming of Misty began . Almost all of the motion picture was shot locally — though the Beebe Ranch was not used , with a property on the mainland substituted . The film premiered at a Hollywood cinema and at the Roxy Theatre in Chincoteague , with the first showings simultaneous . In a nod to Hollywood , the real @-@ life horse Misty placed her hoof in wet cement outside the Roxy just before the movie ran . 
 Despite the new source of island fame , many young people left Chincoteague in the years after World War II . There was no beach on Chincoteague ; in an effort to provide one for visitors and townsfolk , local promoters sought the construction of a bridge to Assateague Island , where there is a beach along the Atlantic shoreline . They were led by Wyle Maddox , a wealthy chicken farmer who had significant business interests on Chincoteague Island . First proposed around 1950 , the bridge and roadway across Assateague , by then uninhabited and under federal jurisdiction , took over a decade to approve , and finally opened in September 1962 . The bridge to Assateague is at the east end of Maddox Boulevard , that crosses Chincoteague Island north of downtown , and was developed by Wyle Maddox . 
 The town remained busy and prosperous in the postwar years , especially by the standards of the rural Eastern Shore , and the locals took pride in this — in the early 1950s , the town twice finished second in a competition for the cleanest community in America , and then won the award for its size classification in 1954 and 1955 . Main Street was so crowded with cars that parking meters were installed . When oyster parasites and overfishing combined to devastate the oyster industry in the 1950s , clams became the island 's major industry . The Burton <unk> Company promoted itself as the largest in the world , sending 1 @.@ 3 million clams to market on a typical day in 1957 . 
 The final delay in the completion of the Assateague bridge was caused by the Ash Wednesday Storm of March 1962 that devastated both islands , as well as other points along the Atlantic Seaboard . Although no one died on Chincoteague , the storm flooded virtually all buildings on Chincoteague Island and wiped out the poultry industry — not only were an estimated quarter million birds killed , the buildings used in chicken farming were destroyed . An estimated 100 ponies were killed by the storm , both on Assateague Island and at the Beebe Ranch . Misty was pregnant with her third foal ; the <unk> placed her in their kitchen before they were evacuated . Once the ranch could again be reached , Misty was taken to a farm on the mainland just over the Maryland line , where she gave birth to a filly , Stormy . The devastation of the storm brought national attention to Chincoteague , and Stormy 's birth upstaged the visit of Virginia Governor <unk> S. Harrison . Many contributed to the recovery efforts , and Misty — both film and horse — was made available for special benefit showings . 
 = = Tourist destination ( 1962 – present ) = = 
 Until the 1950s , most tourists to the island , except during the annual carnival and pony penning , were sportsmen , there to fish or hunt waterfowl . Publicity generated by the Misty franchise , and the easy access to the beach and recreational facilities on Assateague Island , brought many tourists to Chincoteague who were uninterested in shooting the wildlife except with cameras . Combined with the continued decline of the seafood industry , the economy of Chincoteague gradually shifted from being based on harvesting its waters to tourism . 
 Many souvenir shops and other tourist enterprises were built along Maddox Boulevard , especially in the years after 1962 . At first , the motels were buildings converted from other uses , but by the late 1960s , purpose @-@ built structures were being erected along Maddox Boulevard , some with swimming pools . Although Misty died in 1972 at age 26 , the island continued to be publicized . By the 1990s , tourism was the island 's principal business , bringing in more than $ 100 million annually . National hotel chains , including a Hampton Inn and a Comfort Suites , arrived with the 21st century . 
 The changes to Chincoteague , including the sale of the Beebe Ranch for development in 1989 and the destruction by fire of the ranch house in 1996 , brought local soul @-@ searching . Islanders were divided by such questions as the establishment of a nudist beach on Assateague ( outlawed by Accomack County ordinance in 1984 ) and the building of a McDonald 's near the bridge between the two islands . The modest homes on Chincoteague Island were supplemented by townhouses and condominiums , many occupied by seasonal residents . With increased real estate prices , many from Chincoteague sold their land and moved to less expensive property on the mainland . The seafood industry ceased to be a major factor in the island 's economy : most of the oyster @-@ shucking houses , which had continued in operation using imported shellfish despite the local decline in <unk> , finally closed in the 1980s and 1990s . The clam industry sought bivalves from deeper waters , and Chincoteague by then supplied few shellfish . 
 In 1989 , the town expanded , by agreement with the Accomack County government , bringing all of Chincoteague Island under town jurisdiction . Despite local opposition , the modest bridge between Chincoteague and Assateague was rebuilt into a four @-@ lane structure in 2010 , the better to accommodate the millions of annual visitors to Assateague . The causeway from the mainland was re @-@ routed , moving the terminal point on Chincoteague Island to a point north of downtown , the intersection of Main Street and Maddox Boulevard . From there , visitors may proceed south to downtown and the Carnival Grounds , or east to the tourist strip along Maddox Boulevard and to the bridge to Assateague Island . The tourist stores on Maddox Boulevard sell souvenirs , local artwork , the necessities for a day at the beach , and pony @-@ related T @-@ shirts and books . As of 2009 , the average foal at the auction sold for $ 1 @,@ 344 . Between 60 and 80 are sold annually ; the auction helps keep the herd at a sustainable population of 150 . 
 James <unk> Jr. wrote in his 2008 book about Chincoteague Island , 
 In the book and in real life , the story of Misty is really of those who loved her unconditionally . For that reason Misty today is a symbol for all that is wonderful and beautiful ... From my visits I know that much of the good that Misty represents can still be found on her little island of Chincoteague . 
 = James Temple = 
 James Temple ( 1606 – 1680 ) was a puritan and English Civil War soldier who was convicted of the regicide of Charles I. Born in Rochester , Kent , to a well @-@ connected gentry family , he was the second of two sons of Sir Alexander Temple , although his elder brother died in 1627 . As a child , Temple moved with his father from Rochester to Chadwell St Mary in Essex and then to Etchingham in Sussex , where he settled . 
 Temple gained military experience as a member of the Duke of Buckingham 's expedition to the Isle of Ré in 1627 . As a puritan , he joined the Parliamentary army at the outbreak of the Civil War and fought at the Battle of Edgehill . He rose to become a colonel and commanded Tilbury Fort , an important defensive position on the approach to London by river . He was elected as a Member of Parliament ( MP ) for Bramber in September 1645 to replace an ejected Royalist . He sided with the army in opposing any compromise with the King , and was appointed as a judge at the trial of King Charles I of England . Temple attended most of the court sessions and was the 28th ( of 59 ) to sign the King 's death warrant . After the restoration of Charles II , he was convicted of regicide , but avoided execution and was imprisoned on Jersey , where he died . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Temple was born to Sir Alexander Temple and Mary Sommer while his parents were living in the parish of St. Margaret 's in Rochester , Kent in the house previously owned by his mother 's first husband . His family was closely related to the Temple family of Stowe House . The family belonged to the gentry , having a reasonable income , without being members of the aristocracy . His father had been knighted at the Tower of London by James I following the King 's accession to the English throne - one of many members of the gentry who were knighted during the first years of the King 's reign . 
 Temple had an older brother ( John ) and a sister ( Susan ) . As a result of his mother 's first marriage , he had two half @-@ brothers ( including Sir Thomas Peniston ) and two half @-@ sisters . He was born into a well connected family . His uncles included Sir Thomas Temple , 1st Baronet , of Stowe and William Fiennes , 1st Viscount Saye and Sele . His sister , Susan Temple , Lady Lister , was the mother of Martin Lister and the grandmother of Sarah Churchill , Duchess of Marlborough . 
 In 1607 , following his mother 's death , he moved to Longhouse Place ( now known as Chadwell Place ) in Chadwell St Mary , Essex . Both he and his older brother John , were admitted to Lincoln 's Inn in 1622 . In the same year , Temple was given permission by the privy council to travel abroad for up to three years . He was allowed to take a servant with him , but he was strictly forbidden to visit Rome . 
 While Temple was living in Chadwell St Mary , a number of Temple family portraits were painted by Cornelius Johnson . These may have been part of a family commission . They include Temple 's father ( which hangs in Hagley Hall ) and his sister ( which is in the Tate Gallery ) . These family portraits may have included Temple himself , but no portrait is known to have survived . 
 In the early 1620s , as a result of his father 's marriage to Mary <unk> ( who was previously married to John Busbridge ) , he moved , this time to <unk> Hall in Etchingham , Sussex . His father 's third marriage gave him step siblings , including his stepsister , Mary Busbridge to whom Temple was married in March 1627 . Over the next few years , they had six children . 
 = = = Isle of Ré expedition = = = 
 In June 1627 , George Villiers , 1st Duke of Buckingham led an expedition to the island of Île de Ré to support the Huguenots besieged in La Rochelle by King Louis XIII of France . With no standing army , Buckingham 's forces were largely volunteers and mercenaries . Since public opinion in England ( particularly among extreme Protestants ) supported the Huguenots , a number of well connected gentry came forward . The volunteers to join Buckingham included Temple , his elder brother John and other members of his family . The expedition to the Isle of Ré , was a disaster and altogether , Buckingham lost more than 5 @,@ 000 men in the campaign out of a force of 7 @,@ 000 . Among those who died was Temple 's brother . 
 = = = Life in Sussex = = = 
 When his father died in 1629 , Temple was the main beneficiary of his father 's estate . However , much of his father ’ s property was held via his wife , mortgaged or being used to meet other commitments . Temple had a relatively meagre inheritance - no grand country house , no great estate and certainly no large fortune . His financial affairs were not in good order and were discussed by other members of the family . Margaret Longville , Temple ’ s cousin , wrote to her mother , " my cousin Carew Saunders is broke for forty thousand pounds and is not able to pay five shillings in the pound and James Temple is in too much " . During Charles I 's Personal Rule ( 1629 – 1640 ) , he was part of a network of Puritan gentry in Sussex and in due course became a Sussex Justice of the Peace ( JP ) . 
 = = Civil War = = 
 Temple , like most members of his family , was a puritan and supported Parliament against the King . His uncle Lord Saye and Sele was one of the King 's principal opponents . Temple 's military experience became useful when the First English Civil War broke out in August , 1642 . He was appointed captain of a troop of horse raised by Lord Saye and Sele and commanded by Temple 's cousin , John Fiennes . Temple was related to Oliver Cromwell via his kinsman Edward Whalley and was able to secure a commission for Whalley in his uncle 's unit . He saw action close to the Temple family home at Stowe where both Temple and Whalley fought at the Battle of Edgehill in October 1642 . In March 1643 , Temple had returned to Sussex , and along with his stepbrother , John Busbridge , he was appointed by Parliament to the Sussex committee set for the sequestration ( i.e. seizure and administration ) of the assets of prominent Royalists . In December 1643 , Temple was prominent in the defence of the crossing of the River Adur at Bramber Castle against a Royalist attack during Lord Hopton 's attempt to obtain control of Sussex for the King . His actions were described by Dr <unk> : 
 " Upon the 12th of December I visited a brave soldier of my acquaintance , <unk> Jas Temple , who did that day defend the fort of Bramber against a bold and daring enemy to the wonder of all the country ; and I did not marvel at it , for he is a man that hath his head full of stratagems , his heart full of piety and valour , and his hand as full of success as it is of dexterity . " 
 As the war progressed , Temple was promoted to colonel and became governor of Tilbury Fort in Essex , a post that had previously been held by his father . The fort was close to Temple 's childhood home at Longhouse Place and was of strategic importance because it controlled the approach to London by river . During the Second Civil War , there were Royalist uprisings in Kent and Essex . Temple 's control of Tilbury Fort for Parliament enabled Lord Fairfax 's troops to cross from Gravesend to Tilbury on route to Colchester for the siege of royalists in that town . 
 = = Trial of Charles I and Commonwealth = = 
 In September 1645 , Temple was elected Member of Parliament ( MP ) for Bramber to replace Sir Thomas Bowyer , the royalist member who had been ejected . He belonged to the political and religious group known as Independents who were opposed to any compromise in Parliament 's negotiations with the King . As a result , he was one of the MPs allowed to remain after Pride 's Purge - a military coup that excluded from Parliament roughly three quarters of the MPs , particularly those who were believed to be unsympathetic to the Army . In January 1649 , the army and the Independents decided to bring Charles I to trial . Temple was one of the judges named to the High Court of Justice that conducted the trial . He attended nine sessions of the court in both the Painted Chamber and Westminster Hall . He approved the guilty verdict and signed the King 's death warrant - the 28th of the 59 judges to so . 
 During the early part of the Commonwealth period , he continued to serve on Parliamentary committees . However , he attracted accusations of corruption . In September 1650 , these accusations led to him giving up his post at Tilbury Fort . It was probably around this time that he married his second wife , Joanna van Tromp . 
 Temple attracted a number of other accusations of financial impropriety , although apparently nothing was proved . In 1648 , he was ordered by the House of Commons to respond to the legal action of one Elizabeth Willan who had attempted to serve him with two writs in connection with a bond for £ 400 . He " threw them on the ground and spurned them with his foot " . In 1649 , Temple became the guardian of the daughter of one Mrs Eyre . He apparently " inveigled " her to marry his son , Alexander . As a result , Temple acquired the deeds to property in Ireland which he subsequently refused to return . A few years later , he was accused of improperly benefiting from administering the estate of a prominent Sussex catholic - Sir John Shelley - whose heir was a minor . 
 Following Temple 's marriage , his father had invested in a farming venture by Edward Whalley who was the brother @-@ in @-@ law of Temple 's stepsister - Mary Penistone . Sir Alexander apparently intended this to provide an inheritance for his grandchildren ( the children of James Temple ) . As a younger son himself , Sir Alexander wanted to ensure suitable provision for his own younger son . This investment made by Temple 's father for the benefit of his children had apparently become valueless when Edward Whalley fled to Scotland in the late 1630s . However , in the 1650s , Whalley had become a prominent and successful member of the Puritan establishment and there was a possibility of recovering some money . In the late 1650s , Temple and Whalley went to the Court of Chancery to determine what was due to Temple and his children . However , with the death of Oliver Cromwell and the subsequent restoration of Charles II , both regicides were faced with the possibility of execution and the case appears to have been unresolved . 
 = = Restoration = = 
 Temple returned to Parliament with the recall of the Rump and Long Parliaments by General Monck , but following the Restoration in 1660 , he was excluded from the Indemnity and Oblivion Act , because of his role in the trial and execution of Charles I. He was captured in Warwickshire while trying to travel to Ireland , under his first wife 's maiden name of Busbridge . He was held in the Tower of London before being tried as a regicide . He tried to avoid the death penalty by saying that he had only acted as a judge in Charles I 's trial in order to give information to the Royalists . He went on to claim that he had tried to prevent the King 's execution , begging Oliver Cromwell to spare him . He did avoid execution and was sentenced to life imprisonment . As a result of security concerns , a number of regicides , including Temple were sent to Jersey in the Channel Islands . Initially he was imprisoned in Mont <unk> , and subsequently in Elizabeth Castle , where he is reported to have died on 17 February 1680 . 
 William Winstanley described him as " not so much famous for his valour as his villainy , being remarkable for nothing but this horrible business of the king 's <unk> , for which he came into the pack to have a share in the <unk> . " 
 = St. Mary 's Church , Chesham = 
 St. Mary 's Church is a Grade 1 listed Anglican church in Chesham , Buckinghamshire , and is part of the Diocese of Oxford . Built on the site of a Bronze Age stone circle of <unk> , parts of the church building date to the 12th century . Remodelled in the 15th and 17th centuries , the church is architecturally a mixture of English Gothic styles . Weakened by additions to the church tower and undermined by burials in and around the church , by the 19th century the building was structurally unsound . The church was remodelled and strengthened in the 1860s by George Gilbert Scott and again in the 20th century by Robert Potter . 
 Formerly part of the Diocese of Lincoln , it served what was historically the largest parish in Buckinghamshire , and the church traditionally had two vicars . Initially the advowson ( the right to appoint the vicar ) was held jointly by a pair of prominent local families , but in the wake of the 12th century civil wars of the reign of King Stephen ( 1135 – 1154 ) , the advowsons were granted to the monks of Woburn Abbey and to the Abbey of Saint Mary de Pratis in Leicester , each of whom appointed their own vicars to the parish . After the Dissolution of the Monasteries Woburn Abbey , together with its half of the advowson , was granted to the Earls of Bedford , while the half that had belonged to Leicester Abbey passed through a succession of private owners . In 1769 the Duke of Bedford acquired the Leicester half of the advowson and unified the parish , and from then on the parish was served by a single vicar . 
 The town of Chesham grew rapidly in the 19th century . After the parish was transferred to the Diocese of Oxford , reforms introduced by the Bishop of Oxford , Samuel Wilberforce , led to the parish being partitioned , eventually becoming four independent parishes ( Chesham , Latimer , Waterside and Ashley Green ) . In 1980 it was decided to reverse this decision , and over the 1980s and 1990s three of these parishes ( Chesham , Waterside and Ashley Green ) were reunited under St. Mary 's Church . 
 = = Historical background = = 
 Chesham / <unk> / is a Buckinghamshire town of around 20 @,@ 000 people , located in the Chiltern Hills at the head of the River Chess , about 25 miles ( 40 km ) north @-@ west of London and 11 miles ( 18 km ) south @-@ east of Aylesbury . 
 There is archaeological evidence of human habitation during the Mesolithic period circa 8000 BC , of Neolithic farming circa 2500 BC and of Bronze Age settlement circa 1800 BC , during which time a stone circle of <unk> was built at Chesham . The Catuvellauni tribe occupied and settled the area in around 500 BC , and at nearby Latimer there are remains of a Roman villa and archaeological evidence of Roman vineyards . Following the departure of the Romans the area appears to have been depopulated until Anglo @-@ Saxon colonisation in the 7th century AD . 
 The first recorded mention of Chesham dates from 970 in the will of Lady Ælfgifu ( identified with the former consort of King Eadwig of England ) , bequeathing <unk> , " the water meadow at the pile of stones " , to Abingdon Abbey . The Domesday Book of 1086 lists <unk> as containing four mills and comprising three adjacent estates , the most important of which were held by Odo of Bayeux and Queen Edith , the widow of Edward the Confessor . 
 As with much of England , Chesham suffered serious religious unrest in the 16th and 17th centuries , and in 1532 Lollard radical Thomas Harding was burnt at the stake in the town for heresy . From the 17th century Chesham was a focus for dissenters . The first Baptist chapel in the town opened in 1701 , Quakers have met in Chesham since the late 17th century , and John Wesley preached in Chesham in the 1760s . 
 Chesham Old Town , to the south @-@ east of the present @-@ day town centre , is the oldest part of the town and was the centre of Chesham until the late 19th century ; in 1851 the population stood at 2 @,@ 496 . In 1889 the Metropolitan Railway reached the area as the first phase of a planned extension from Rickmansworth to Berkhamsted , and Chesham railway station was opened to the north @-@ east of the Old Town . Following the Metropolitan Railway 's acquisition of the Aylesbury and Buckingham Railway ( A & B ) in 1891 , the extension to Berkhamsted was abandoned in favour of a connection between the Metropolitan Railway 's station at Chalfont Road ( now Chalfont & Latimer ) to Aylesbury and over the A & B 's route to Verney Junction , and Chesham station was left as the terminus of and sole station on a 3 @.@ 89 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 26 km ) branch from the mainline , a status it retains today . 
 The new town of present @-@ day Chesham grew between the railway station and the Old Town , leaving the architecture of the Old Town almost untouched . In June 2009 the Old Town and the present @-@ day town centre were added to Historic England 's Conservation Areas at Risk Register , although the local authority claimed that this was owing to a misunderstanding of its responses to English Heritage 's questionnaire . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The existence of the stone circle indicates that a pagan place of worship existed in the area since prehistory , and although no archaeological evidence exists of any pre @-@ Conquest structure on the site of the present @-@ day St. Mary 's Church other than the stone circle itself , it is considered likely that a wooden church was built on the site by the Anglo @-@ Saxons . The earliest evidence of there being a church in Chesham is in the registers of the Diocese of Lincoln , whose 1153 registers mention " the church in Chesham " . In 1257 Hugh de Vere was granted the right to hold an annual three @-@ day fair and a weekly market in Chesham by Henry III . The annual fair was to be held on " the eve , the day and the morrow of the Feast of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary " , strongly suggesting that Chesham 's church was already dedicated to Mary . 
 The church is built on the Bronze Age <unk> circle , which has been incorporated into the foundations of the church . Built of knapped flint with limestone dressings , it has a roughly cruciform shape . The present day church building comprises a chancel , a <unk> nave , north and south aisles and transepts and a south porch with a tierceron vault . The church is topped by a square central crenellated steeple with an octagonal wooden spire covered with lead . Although the current stone church of St. Mary 's contains a mixture of architectural styles , mainly Gothic and dating from later periods , a Romanesque window between the north transept and north aisle has been dated to the 12th century , indicating that the church was already a stone building by this time . 
 The building as a whole is 114 feet ( 35 m ) long from east to west and 53 feet ( 16 m ) wide from north to south . The nave ( excluding the aisles ) is 64 feet 6 inches ( 19 @.@ 66 m ) long and 22 feet ( 6 @.@ 7 m ) wide ; English Gothic aisles and the arcades of the nave were added early in the 13th century . The arcades consist of five bays with octagonal piers and arches with half @-@ pyramid shaped <unk> , a design described by Nikolaus Pevsner in 1960 as " baffling " . In 1270 the eastern arch of the tower was widened , and in around 1320 the other arches of the tower were also widened . In about 1370 the chancel was rebuilt in the Decorated Gothic style , and a doorway added in the south aisle at around the same time . 
 = = = 15th- and 17th @-@ century renovation = = = 
 In the 15th century the clerestory was added to the nave , along with the Perpendicular two @-@ storied south porch ; these reconstruction works necessitated the repositioning of the door on the south aisle , and the building of the present @-@ day western wall of the nave , with a great window and door also in the Perpendicular style . Stained glass windows were installed in the clerestory , but their contents were not recorded , and only small fragments of the mediaeval glass survive today : the arms of the Cheyne family , a human figure , and a shield with fragments of coloured glass , possibly the impaled arms of Woburn and Leicester . A staircase in the porch led to a parvise above ; local tradition holds that Thomas Harding was held in the parvise prior to his execution in 1532 . The porch also contains a stoup dating from the late 14th century , which although much damaged has survived all subsequent restorations and <unk> unaltered . 
 While the stone tower was completed in the 15th century , the date of the spire is unknown and has been dated to periods ranging from the 16th to 18th centuries . The church is known to have possessed a ring of bells by the 16th century , as the 1552 inventory of church possessions carried out on the instructions of Edward VI lists " v bells in the <unk> " . A bell cast in around 1450 by John Sturdy is still used as a Sanctus bell and is regarded as having national historic significance . 
 In the chaotic climate of religious upheaval during and following the Reformation of the 16th century many of England 's churches fell into disrepair , including St. Mary 's ; the great door of St. Mary 's was damaged during the Civil War and bullet holes from the conflict remain visible today . In 1606 it was decided to renovate St. Mary 's . Two of the bells were re @-@ cast , the pews were replaced , and " a fair new gallery " was built along the south aisle . In the 18th century two further galleries were added to the church ; a north gallery reserved for the exclusive use of " maids and maidservants " , and a west gallery for the use of St. Mary 's band of musicians and choristers , later used to house the church 's organ . The wooden communion table was sold for 3s and a new table added at a cost of 10s 6d ( about £ 109 as of 2016 ) . 
 = = = 19th @-@ century renovation = = = 
 Since the widening of the tower arches in 1270 and 1320 the tower of St. Mary 's had been structurally weak . The subsequent addition of the bells and belfry and the lead @-@ covered spire added to the weight of the tower , and the number of burials of local notables within the church and of parishioners immediately outside the church building weakened the structure further . By the 18th century the problems had become severe enough that the west arch of the south transept was blocked up in an effort the strengthen the structure , and a hollow pillar which housed the stairway to the rood loft was filled in . The tower continued to weaken , a situation made worse by the addition in 1812 of a new ring of six bells with a 17 cwt ( 860 kg ) tenor bell , cast by Thomas Mears II of the Whitechapel Bell Foundry . Iron bands were wrapped around the tower to strengthen it but these soon snapped , and by the 19th century large cracks , which had appeared in the tower , were filled with broken bricks and rubble and covered over with roughcast as an interim solution . 
 By 1867 , church authorities deemed the problems with the tower as severe enough to warrant a major reconstruction of the church . George Gilbert Scott , who had recently designed the monumental London buildings of the Foreign Office and St. Pancras Station , was chosen to lead the project . Scott was a leading advocate of the Gothic Revival and saw the renovation as a chance to return St. Mary 's to a state nearer to its earlier Gothic design . 
 Scott removed the galleries , the high @-@ sided 1606 pews , and the three @-@ tiered pulpit . The tower was strengthened , the building 's exterior facing of flint and limestone was restored , and the chancel , which had been remodelled in the late 17th century , was restored to its original shape and given a new east window in the Decorated Gothic style , containing Ward and Hughes glass depicting Faith , Hope and Charity , donated by the Duke of Bedford . New wooden pews were installed together with a Gothic style pulpit , and a font of Mansfield Woodhouse stone donated by the Lowndes family . 
 The north transept , which had previously served as a vestry from which the Poor Law was administered , was used to house the church 's William Hill & Son organ , which had been installed in 1852 in the now @-@ removed western gallery ; the south transept , which up to that date had been used as a mausoleum for the Cavendish family and was completely walled off from the rest of the church and accessible only via its own door from the churchyard , was opened up to the church . In 1890 Cambridge Chimes were added to the tower clock , in commemoration of the Diamond Jubilee of Queen Victoria . 
 = = = 20th @-@ century renovation = = = 
 Scott 's alterations proved successful in stabilising the tower and in serving the needs of the church , and the church remained little changed for the next 130 years ; the most notable alterations during this period were the replacement of the glass in the chancel 's two leper windows with stained glass images of Pre @-@ Raphaelite knights by Edward Burne @-@ Jones as a memorial to a young officer killed during the Boer War , and the painting of a mural over the chancel arch by John Ward depicting the events of Holy Week in modern dress and set in the Chilterns . In 1951 the church was Grade A listed . 
 In 1980 the fourth bell of the ring of six was recast , again by the Whitechapel Foundry . By the 1990s the internal design of the church was beginning to be considered impractical for the needs of the community , and the interior was remodelled to a design by Robert Potter , with the works carried out in 1999 . The west gallery was restored to house the 1852 organ , together with a kitchen and toilet facility , and the north transept was converted into a vestry with a room above it . <unk> heating was built below a new marble floor and the chancel step replaced by an ovoid raised marble dais . Meanwhile , Scott 's pews were removed altogether and replaced by wooden chairs . 
 = = Ecclesiastical organisation = = 
 In the 12th and early 13th centuries the advowson ( the right to appoint the vicar ) of the church was held jointly by two local landowning families , the de Bolbec ( or de <unk> ) and <unk> families ; as a very large parish ( generally considered to have been the largest parish in Buckinghamshire ) twin administrations suited the needs of the parish . Following the civil wars of the reign of King Stephen ( 1135 – 1154 ) England underwent a major upsurge in religious activity and saw a significant growth of monasteries . At some point prior to 1221 the de Bolbec family had included their half of the advowson in a grant to the Cistercians of Woburn Abbey , and the <unk> had granted their half to the Augustinian Abbey of Saint Mary de Pratis in Leicester . From then on , Woburn and Leicester were to share the patronage , each appointing their own vicars to the parish , known as Chesham Woburn and Chesham Leicester . 
 Following the Dissolution of the Monasteries in the 16th century the advowson of Chesham Woburn remained attached to Woburn Abbey and was transferred , along with the abbey building , to John Russell , 1st Earl of Bedford . The advowson of Chesham Leicester was sold , and from then on had a succession of owners , eventually coming into the ownership of prominent local landowners the Skottowe family , who purchased it from Sir Francis Whichcote , MP for Cambridgeshire . From 1601 onwards , other than a brief period between 1623 – 1660 , the appointees of Chesham Woburn and Chesham Leicester were the same person , and thus the parish was served by a single vicar , although he continued to be appointed by the holders of each advowson separately . In 1769 John Russell , 4th Duke of Bedford , who had inherited Chesham Woburn , also acquired Chesham Leicester and from then on the parish was served by a single vicar assisted by multiple curates ; in 1767 the two halves of the parish were formally unified by an Act of Parliament . 
 In 1845 Chesham , along with the rest of Buckinghamshire , was transferred from the Diocese of Lincoln , of which for historical reasons it had been a part since the Norman Conquest despite its distance from Lincoln , to the Diocese of Oxford . It thus came under the control of Oxford 's newly appointed dynamic young bishop Samuel Wilberforce , who in turn appointed Adolphus Aylward as vicar in 1847 to oversee the reform of the parish . A second church at Waterside was opened in 1867 , and the huge parish of Chesham was partitioned between St. Mary 's and the new Christ Church , Waterside . As Chesham and the surrounding towns grew following the arrival of the Metropolitan Railway the parish was divided further , leaving a total of four independent parishes : St. Mary 's , Christ Church Waterside , St. John the Evangelist Ashley Green , and Latimer At the end of the 19th century the advowson of the much @-@ reduced parish of St. Mary 's was acquired by the recently created Peache Trust . 
 In 1980 it was decided to reverse the partition of the parish . Over the course of the 1980s and early 1990s three of the four parishes were reunified into a single parish of Great Chesham , administered by a single Rector , also the Vicar of St. Mary 's , and a team of clergy serving five of the other churches ; the sixth , St. Michael 's <unk> Hill , was closed . 
 = = Associated buildings and structures = = 
 In 1712 Secretary to the Treasury William Lowndes rebuilt Chesham 's manor house , The Bury , immediately to the south of the church . The building still stands today , and currently serves as an office building . 
 Owing to its unusual advowson , Chesham historically had two vicarages . The Upper Parsonage , also known as Bury Hill House , was built in the 16th century and attached to Chesham Leicester , and was used as a residence by the Skottowe family following their acquisition of Chesham Leicester ; it was a large mansion house immediately north of St. Mary 's Church . In the early 19th century the house was bought and demolished by the Lowndes family . 
 The Lower Parsonage , attached to Chesham Woburn , stood immediately east of the church , between the church and the Old Town . It was demolished in around 1769 by John Russell , 4th Duke of Bedford , and replaced by a new vicarage for the vicar of the newly unified parish . This vicarage remains attached to the parish , and since the re @-@ amalgamation of the Chesham parishes in the 1980s and 1990s is known as the Rectory . 
 = = = Organ = = = 
 In 1504 the will of Robert <unk> bequeathed funds for a chaplain , provided that he could " organise " and " sing well " . No other reference to an organ at St. Mary 's exists until the installation of the William Hill & Son organ in 1852 in the west gallery . In 1869 the organ was moved to the north transept during Scott 's renovation of the church , and at this time its volume and power were increased . In Potter 's 1999 remodelling of the church the pipes of the organ were moved to the new west gallery and electronically enhanced , and the console installed at the eastern end of the north aisle . 
 = = = Notable graves and memorials = = = 
 The south transept had historically served as the mausoleum for the Cavendish family , who resided at nearby Latimer . During Scott 's renovations of the 1860s the transept was opened up to the church and remodelled , and only one Cavendish tomb survives today , that of John Cavendish , son of William Cavendish , 1st Earl of Devonshire , who had died in 1617 aged 11 . Sculpted by John Bolt the Elder of London , the tomb features ornately carved strapwork above a sarcophagus , flanked by black coupled columns supporting small obelisks , and topped by a double @-@ curved roof . The south transept also holds the 1726 pyramid @-@ shaped tomb of Lady Mary Whichcote , wife of Sir Francis Whichcote who at that time owned Chesham Leicester ; Mary Whichcote 's elaborate funeral bankrupted Sir Francis , leading to his sale of Chesham Leicester to the Skottowe family . 
 Richard <unk> ( c . 1549 – 13 December 1626 ) , who had recorded and audited the restoration project of 1606 , is commemorated by a black marble monument on the north side of the chancel , noting his " faithful service of divers great lords " , and that " part of " him " lyeth here " . 
 On the north wall of the sanctuary is a large memorial to Richard Woodcock , who had served as vicar of both Chesham Woburn and Chesham Leicester from 1607 to 1623 . <unk> by a large painted bust of Woodcock holding a book , a lengthy gilded inscription in Latin and English describes Woodcock as " <unk> Malleus " ( " The hammer of heretics " ) . Woodcock had been a popular local figure , and at his death the parishioners had taken it in turns to carry the coffin to the church . Near the memorial to Woodcock is a memorial to Nicholas Skottowe erected in 1800 . This takes the form of a stone sculpture of a mourning woman kneeling over a sarcophagus , and was described by Pevsner as " [ an ] interpretation of remarkable tenderness " . 
 During Scott 's renovations of the 1860s , all burials within the church itself were removed . However , during the 1999 renovation , a vault was uncovered near the crossing . The vault was marked by a brass plaque inscribed " The Family Vault of Robert Ward " , and was found to contain the coffins of Catherine Julia Ward , wife of novelist and Tory politician Robert Plumer Ward , and of their three @-@ year @-@ old son Charles Robert Ward . The vault has been resealed and remains in place . 
 Adolphus Aylward , the vicar from 1847 to 1872 and overseer of the parish restructuring , is commemorated by a brass plaque on the south @-@ west pillar of the tower , and by a Clayton and Bell window in the north @-@ west chancel . Aylward 's daughter Julia had died in 1862 aged 15 and is buried in the churchyard ; her grave was planted with snowdrops at her mother 's request , which still bloom each spring . Julia Aylward is also commemorated by a piece of Burlison and Grylls glass in the lancet window at the west end of the north aisle . 
 A memorial to Lollard martyr Thomas Harding stands in the churchyard near the south chancel , erected in 1907 by the Protestant Alliance . The base of the cross is inscribed : 
 To the glory of God and to the memory of Thomas Harding Martyr of <unk> Chesham 
 Who in fiery trial at the stake laid down his life for the word of God and for the testimony of Jesus Christ in this parish on May 30 , 1532 
 " The noble army of martyrs praise thee " 
 " God grant to us all grace to ken well and to <unk> well <unk> writ and to suffer <unk> some pain for it at the <unk> . " 
 " None of us liveth to himself and no man <unk> to himself . " 
 Harding was executed at nearby White Hill and is believed to have been held in St. Mary 's parvise prior to his execution . Foxe 's Book of Martyrs describes the execution thus : 
 In 1532 , Thomas Harding , who with his wife , had been accused of heresy , was brought before the Bishop of Lincoln , and condemned for denying the real presence in the Sacrament . He was then chained to a stake , erected for the purpose , at Chesham in the Dell , near <unk> ; and when they had set fire to the <unk> , one of the spectators dashed out his brains with a billet . The priests told the people that whoever brought <unk> to burn heretics would have an indulgence to commit sins for forty days . 
 Near the memorial to Harding by the chancel door is a worn gravestone depicting a teacher and a group of children , believed to be the grave of Daniel King , teacher in Chesham 's first Sunday School . 
 = Mount Cleveland ( Alaska ) = 
 Mount Cleveland ( also known as Cleveland Volcano ) is a nearly symmetrical stratovolcano on the western end of Chuginadak Island , which is part of the Islands of Four Mountains just west of Umnak Island in the Fox Islands of the Aleutian Islands of Alaska . Mt . Cleveland is 1 @,@ 730 m ( 5 @,@ 676 ft ) high , and one of the most active of the 75 or more volcanoes in the larger Aleutian Arc . Aleutian natives named the island after their fire goddess , Chuginadak , who they believed inhabited the volcano . In 1894 a team from the U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey visited the island and gave Mount Cleveland its current name , after then @-@ president Grover Cleveland . 
 One of the most active volcanoes in the Aleutian Arc , Cleveland has erupted at least 22 times in the last 230 years . A VEI 3 eruption in 1944 produced the arc 's only known volcanic fatality . Most recently Mount Cleveland has erupted three times in 2009 , twice in 2010 , and once in 2011 . The volcano 's remoteness limits opportunities for its study , and the Alaska Volcano Observatory relies heavily on satellites for monitoring . The volcano is primarily hazardous to aircraft ; many of the flights over the north Pacific approach the vicinity of the volcano , and volcanic ash released from eruptions can damage sensitive electronic equipment and sensors . 
 = = Geological setting = = 
 Mount Cleveland is located 490 km ( 304 mi ) from the western end of the Aleutian Arc , a long volcanic chain extending off the coast of Alaska . Containing over 75 volcanoes , this volcanic arc occurs above the subduction zone where the Pacific Plate plunges under the North American plate . As the plate moves deeper into the earth , the increasing pressure results in the loss of volatiles , certain elements and compounds with low boiling points , from various hydrous minerals . One of these compounds is water ; its addition to the mantle wedge formed between the subducting and overriding plates lowers the melting point enough to allow magma to form . The melted material then rises to the surface and forms a volcano — in this case , the Aleutian Arc . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The native Aleut name for Mount Cleveland is Chuginadak ( the name currently given to the island as a whole ) , referring to the Aleut fire goddess , thought to reside in the volcano . The volcano 's name is a reference to its constant activity , and shows that it was likely highly active even in the distant past . Aleut oral tradition states that , at one time , the western and eastern halves of Chuginadak were separate islands , and that the isthmus joining them was created by volcanic activity sometime in prehistory . The " Islands of Four Mountains " name , the geographic group name for Cleveland and its neighbors , was given to the islands by Russian cartographers in the 19th century . Its current name , Mount Cleveland , was given to it by a U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey expedition in 1894 , when it was originally observed by the USS Concord ; like the other volcanoes in the Four Islands group , Mount Cleveland was named after prominent American politicians at the time , Cleveland having been named after then @-@ president Grover Cleveland . 
 = = Geography and structure = = 
 Mount Cleveland is an almost symmetrical andesite stratovolcano in the Islands of Four Mountains , a volcanic group in the Aleutian Arc . Like all stratovolcanoes , Mount Cleveland grew as explosive eruptions , effusive eruptions , and lahars built it layer by layer into a concave @-@ up shape . It lies southeast of Mount Carlisle and northeast of Herbert Island . Mount Cleveland forms the western half of Chuginadak Island , a broad and uneven bell @-@ shaped landmass , and is the highest of the four volcanic islands . The island is completely uninhabited ; the nearest settlement is Nikolski on Umnak Island , about 75 km ( 47 mi ) eastward . 
 Mount Cleveland is 8 – 8 @.@ 5 km ( 5 @.@ 0 – 5 @.@ 3 mi ) wide at its base and roughly 29 km3 ( 7 cu mi ) in volume . The volcano 's slope increases markedly with height , from 19 ° at its lower flanks to 35 ° near its summit . Like many other Aleutian volcanoes , Cleveland 's flanks are especially rough up to 300 m ( 984 ft ) , covered by multiple overlapping lava flows and debris fans that form an apron around the mountain . Lava flows are always built on top of debris flows as a result of the snow melt caused by the emission of heat just before an eruption . The flows are generally short , under 1 km ( 0 @.@ 6 mi ) , and thin , less than 10 m ( 33 ft ) thick , and are somewhat vegetated . Although Mount Cleveland is the tallest mountain in the group , it is rarely completely snowed in because of its constant activity disrupts snowfall . A lack of extant erosion shows that Mount Cleveland is likely a Holocene volcano , forming within the last 10 @,@ 000 years . All known events have occurred at Mount Cleveland 's summit vent , but there are at least five small andesite to dacite volcanic domes on the lower flanks . At times Cleveland has had a summit lava dome . The volcano has no caldera . 
 The eastern half of Chuginadak , to which Mount Cleveland is connected by a narrow isthmus , consists of several low @-@ lying volcanic cones and two prominent peaks that have been heavily eroded , partly by glaciers . Known as the Tana volcanic complex , the two features measure 1 @,@ 170 m ( 3 @,@ 839 ft ) and 1 @,@ 093 m ( 3 @,@ 586 ft ) in elevation . A sample of rhyolite has been recovered from Concord Point , the easternmost point on the island . 
 = = Eruptive history = = 
 Eruptions from Mount Cleveland are generally <unk> and strombolian in nature , characterized by short explosive ash clouds sometimes accompanied by a 'a flows , lava fountains , pyroclastic flows , ash and steam emissions , lava dome growth , and the ejection of <unk> bombs . Hot springs were reportedly found on the volcano in the 1800s , and persistent fumarolic activity was observed in the 1980s and 1990s . Mount Cleveland is a site of persistent steam emissions and thermal anomalies that represent constant background activity . During 2011 , a summit lava dome formed , by continuous intrusion of magma at the summit . Late in 2011 , nearly 6 explosions demolished the dome . In June 2012 , another small dome was observed . 
 Little is known about Cleveland 's early eruptive history as its remoteness makes it a difficult area to investigate , and discrepancies in names have caused confusion between events there and those on nearby Carlisle . Even today , not all possible events are confirmed as eruptions by the Alaska Volcano Observatory , and many are listed as " possible . " In observed history , Mount Cleveland may have first erupted in 1744 ; the first confirmed eruption occurred in 1828 . The volcano erupted again in 1836 ( possibly ) , 1893 , 1897 ( possibly ) , 1929 ( possibly ) , 1932 , and 1938 ( possibly ) . 
 The first notable eruption from Mount Cleveland was a Volcanic Explosivity Index ( VEI ) 3 Vulcanian eruption that occurred between June 10 and June 13 , 1944 . Lava flows extended 5 kilometers ( 3 mi ) from the summit , and an ash plume 6 @,@ 000 m ( 19 @,@ 685 ft ) high was produced . Large boulders were reportedly ejected and carried out to sea by eruptive force . The eruption had the distinction of being the only confirmed direct volcanic fatality in Alaska ; a small detachment from the Eleventh Air Force was stationed on the volcano at the time , and one Sergeant Purchase left his post early in the eruption to take a walk and never returned , probably killed by mudslides . At approximately 10 : 20 , a boat sent to search for Purchase witnessed the end of the eruption . The island was abandoned for the remainder of the war . 
 Mount Cleveland erupted more recently in 1951 , 1953 , 1954 ( possibly ) , 1975 ( possibly ) , 1984 through 1987 , 1989 , 1994 , and 1997 . The volcano has received more focused attention in recent times due to its increased activity : it erupted in 2001 , 2005 , three times in 2006 , 2007 , three times in 2009 , and twice in 2010 . Of these , the most significant eruption was the 2001 eruption , which produced a 12 km ( 7 mi ) high ash plume . This plume dispersed 120 to 150 km ( 75 to 93 mi ) across Alaska , an unusual distance that allowed detailed satellite observations to be made . Nikolski and the surrounding region was the site of several hours of ashfall , represented in satellite imagery as areas of discolored snow . This eruption significantly disrupted air traffic in the area . 
 On June 19 , 2012 , a pilot reported an ash @-@ producing explosion on Mount Cleveland . Due to continuing seismic activity , the volcano was placed on the USGS Volcano Watch List in the orange or " watch " category the following day . AVO continues to keep Cleveland on the watch because of a persistent anomaly at the summit . AVO suspects it could be dome growth . Other minor ash producing explosions occurred on June 26 , July 12 , and August 19 . 
 On May 4 , 2013 , the volcano began a low @-@ level eruption , with a plume of ash observed at 15 @,@ 000 feet ( 4 @,@ 600 m ) . 
 The volcano erupted several times in 2014 and 2015 , and a single explosion was detected by the AVO on April 16 , 2016 . 
 In total the volcano has erupted at least 22 times in the last 230 years . 
 = = Monitoring = = 
 Today , the Alaska Volcano Observatory monitors activity at Mount Cleveland using satellite imagery . Cloud cover often obscures the volcano , which makes many events difficult to follow . In addition , the low resolution of the satellite imagery allows minor events , which do not make an impression on the satellite picture , to pass unnoticed . There are no seismic or geophysical instruments on the mountain ( the nearest are in Nikolski ) , and some eruptions are first observed by pilots flying over the volcano . A field study was conducted in late 2001 , and an automatic system based on thermal anomalies was implemented following eruptive events in 2005 . In recent years the Alaska Volcano Observatory has made an effort to expand volcanic coverage westward along the Aleutian Arc . 
 The biggest threat posed by an eruption from Mount Cleveland is its ash plume , which can damage sensitive electronic equipment on overflying planes . Many aircraft traveling over the North Pacific and over the Arctic come within the vicinity of such a plume ; the only way to avoid damage is to reroute the flight , which delays arrival time and adds $ 5 @,@ 500 to $ 6 @,@ 000 in extra fuel costs . Cleveland has therefore been assessed by the United States Geological Survey as a volcano with " [ a ] high aviation threat score and no real @-@ time ground based monitoring at the present time " . 
 = Bury St. Edmunds witch trials = 
 The Bury St Edmunds witch trials were a series of trials conducted intermittently between the years 1599 and 1694 in the town of Bury St Edmunds in Suffolk , England . 
 Two specific trials in 1645 and 1662 became historically well known . The 1645 trial " facilitated " by the Witchfinder General saw 18 people executed in one day . The judgment by the future Lord Chief Justice of England and Wales , Sir Matthew Hale in the 1662 trial acted as a powerful influence on the continuing persecution of witches in England and similar persecutions in the American colonies . 
 = = Jurisdiction = = 
 As well as being the seat of county assizes , Bury St. Edmunds had been a site for both <unk> Courts and court assizes , the latter since the Abbey was given a Liberty , namely the Liberty of St Edmund . For the purposes of civil government the town and the remainder ( or " body " ) of the county were quite distinct , each providing a separate grand jury to the assizes . 
 = = The trials = = 
 The first recorded account of a witch trial at Bury St. Edmunds Suffolk was held in 1599 when <unk> Jordan of <unk> ( Stradbroke ) and Joane Nayler were tried , but there is no record of the charges or verdicts . In the same year , <unk> <unk> of <unk> was executed , for " sending three toads to destroy the rest ( sleep ) of Joan Jordan " . 
 = = = The 1645 trial = = = 
 The trial was instigated by Matthew Hopkins , the self @-@ proclaimed Witchfinder General and conducted at a special court under John Godbolt . On 27 August 1645 , no fewer than 18 " witches " were hanged at Bury St. Edmunds . They were : 
 Anne Alderman , Rebecca Morris and Mary Bacon of <unk> 
 Mary Clowes of <unk> 
 Sarah Spindler , Jane <unk> , Thomas Everard ( cooper ) and his wife Mary of <unk> 
 Mary Fuller of Combs , near <unk> 
 John Lowes , Vicar of Brandeston 
 Susan Manners , Jane Rivet and Mary Skipper of Copdock , near Ipswich 
 Mary Smith of Great <unk> 
 Margery <unk> of Mendham 
 Katherine <unk> of <unk> . 
 Anne Leech and Anne Wright , origin unknown . 
 It has been estimated that all of the English witch trials between the early 15th and early 18th centuries resulted in fewer than 500 executions , so this one trial , with its 18 executions , accounted for 3 @.@ 6 % of that total . 
 According to John Stearn ( e ) known at various times as the witch – hunter , and " witch <unk> " , associate to Matthew Hopkins , in his book A Confirmation and Discovery of Witchcraft there were one hundred and twenty others in gaol awaiting trial , of these 17 were men , Thomas Ady in 1656 writes of " about a hundred " , though others record " almost 200 " . Following a three @-@ week adjournment made necessary by the advancing King 's Army , the second sitting of the court resulted in 68 other " condemnations " ; though reports say – " mass executions of sixty or seventy witches " . Both Hopkins and Stearne treated the search for , and trials of witches as military campaigns , as shown in their choice of language in both seeking support for and reporting their endeavours . There was much to keep the minds of Parliamentarians busy at this time with the Royalist Army heading towards Cambridgeshire , but concern about the events unfolding were being voiced . Prior to the trial a report was carried to the Parliament – " ... as if some <unk> men had made use of some ill Arts to extort such confession ; ... " that a special Commission of Oyer and Terminer was granted for the trial of these Witches . After the trial and execution the Moderate Intelligencer , a parliamentary paper published during the English Civil War , in an editorial of 4 – 11 September 1645 expressed unease with the affairs in Bury : 
 But whence is it that Devils should choose to be conversant with silly Women that know not their right hands from their left , is the great wonder ... The ( y ) will meddle with none but poore old women : as appears by what we receive this day from Bury ... Divers are condemned and some executed and more like to be . Life is precious and there is need of great inquisition before it is taken away . 
 = = = The 1662 trial = = = 
 This took place on 10 March 1662 , when two elderly widows , Rose <unk> and Amy Denny ( or Deny or <unk> ) , living in Lowestoft , were accused of witchcraft by their neighbours and faced 13 charges of the bewitching of several young children between the ages of a few months to 18 years old , resulting in one death . They may have been aware of each other , inhabiting a small town , but <unk> was from a property @-@ owning family , whilst Denny was the widow of a labourer . Their one other link was the fact that they had tried and failed to purchase Herrings from a Lowestoft merchant , Samuel Pacy . His two daughters Elizabeth , and Deborah were " victims " of the accused and , along with their aunt , Samuel Pacy 's sister Margaret , gave evidence against the women . They were tried at the Assize held in Bury St. Edmunds under the auspices of the 1603 Witchcraft Act , by one of England 's most eminent judges of the time Sir Matthew Hale , Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer . The jury found them guilty of the thirteen charges of using malevolent witchcraft , and the judge sentenced them to death . They were hanged in the town on 17 March 1662 . 
 Thomas Browne , the philosopher , physician and author , attended the trial . His reporting of similar events that had occurred in Denmark influenced the jury of the guilt of the accused . He also testified that " the young girls accusing Denny and <unk> were afflicted with organic problems , but that they undoubtedly also had been bewitched " . He had expressed his belief in the existence of witches twenty years earlier , and that only : " they that doubt of these , do not only deny them , but spirits ; and are obliquely , and upon consequence a sort not of infidels , but atheists " in his work Religio Medici , published in 1643 : 
 ... how so many learned heads should so farre forget their <unk> , and destroy the ladder and scale of creatures , as to question the existence of Spirits : for my part , I have ever <unk> , and doe now know , that there are Witches ; 
 The original pamphlet A Tryal of Witches , taken from a contemporary report of the proceedings , erroneously dates the trial as March 1664 , both on the front page and introduction . Original documents in the Public Record Office and other contemporary records clearly states it took place in the 14th year of the reign of Charles II ( 30 January 1662 to 29 January 1663 ) . 
 This case became a model for , and was referenced in , the Salem Witch Trials in Massachusetts , when the magistrates were looking for proof that spectral evidence could be used in a court of law . Reverend John Hale , whose wife was accused at Salem , in his publication , Modest Inquiry into the Nature of Witchcraft , noted how the judges consulted for precedents and lists the 60 @-@ page publication A Tryal of Witches . 
 Cotton Mather , in his 1693 book The Wonders of the Invisible World , concerning the Salem Witch Trials , specifically draws attention to the Suffolk trial , and the Salem judge stated that although spectral evidence should be allowed in order to begin investigations , it should not be admitted as evidence to decide a case . 
 = = = Other trials = = = 
 Another recorded witch trial in Bury St. Edmunds was in 1655 when a mother and daughter by the name of <unk> were tried and said to have been hanged . The last was in 1694 when Lord Chief Justice Sir John Holt , " who did more than any other man in English history to end the prosecution of witches " , forced the acquittal of Mother Munnings ' of <unk> ( <unk> ) on charges of prognostications causing death . The chief charge was 17 years old , the second brought by a man on his way home from an alehouse . Sir John " so well directed the jury that she was acquitted " . 
 = Akhtar Hameed Khan = 
 Akhtar Hameed Khan ( Urdu : <unk> <unk> <unk> , pronounced [ <unk> ̪ ər <unk> ̪ <unk> ] ; 15 July 1914 – 9 October 1999 ) was a Pakistani development practitioner and social scientist . He promoted participatory rural development in Pakistan and other developing countries , and widely advocated community participation in development . His particular contribution was the establishment of a comprehensive project for rural development , the Comilla Model ( 1959 ) . It earned him the Ramon Magsaysay Award from the Philippines and an honorary Doctorate of law from Michigan State University . 
 In the 1980s he started a Bottom Up community development initiative of Orangi Pilot Project , based in the outskirts of Karachi , which became a model of participatory development initiatives . He also directed many programmes , from microcredit to self @-@ finance and from housing provision to family planning , for rural communities and urban slums . It earned him international recognition and high honours in Pakistan . Khan was fluent in at least seven languages and dialects . Apart from many scholarly books and articles , he also published a collection of poems and travelogues in Urdu . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Khan was born on 15 July 1914 in Agra . He was among the four sons and three daughters of <unk> Ameer Ahmed Khan and <unk> Begum . His father , a police inspector , was inspired by the reformist thinking of Syed Ahmed Khan . In his early age , Khan 's mother introduced him to the poetry of Maulana Hali and Muhammad Iqbal , the sermons of Abul Kalam Azad , and the <unk> philosophy of Rumi . This upbringing influenced his interest in historical as well as contemporary social , economic , and political affairs . 
 Khan attended Government High School at Jalam ( Uttar Pradesh ) , and completed his education in 1930 at Agra College where he studied English literature and history . He read English literature , history , and philosophy for a Bachelor of Arts degree at Meerut College in 1932 . At that point , his mother was diagnosed with tuberculosis . She died in the same year at the age of 36 . Khan continued his studies and was awarded a Master of Arts in English Literature from Agra University in 1934 . He worked as a lecturer at Meerut College before joining the Indian Civil Service ( ICS ) in 1936 . As part of the ICS training , he was sent to read literature and history at Magdalene College , Cambridge , England . During the stay , he developed a close friendship with Choudhary Rahmat Ali . 
 Khan married <unk> Begum ( the eldest daughter of Allama <unk> ) in 1940 . Together , they had three daughters ( Mariam , Amina , and <unk> ) and a son ( Akbar ) . After <unk> Begum 's death in 1966 , he married Shafiq Khan and had one daughter , Ayesha . During his ICS career , Khan worked as collector of revenue , a position that brought him into regular contact with living conditions in rural areas of East Bengal . The Bengal famine of 1943 and subsequent inadequate handling of the situation by the colonial rulers led him to resign from the Indian Civil Service in 1945 . He wrote , " I realised that if I did not escape while I was young and vigorous , I will forever remain in the trap , and terminate as a bureaucratic big wig . " During this period , he was influenced by the philosophy of Nietzsche and <unk> , and joined the <unk> Movement . This attachment was brief . He quit the movement and turned to Sufism . According to Khan , " I had a profound personal concern ; I wanted to live a life free from fear and anxiety , a calm and serene life , without turmoil and conflict . [ ... ] when I followed the advice of old Sufis and sages , and tried to curb my greed , my pride and aggression , fears , anxieties and conflict diminished . " 
 For the next two years , Khan worked in <unk> village near Aligarh as a labourer and locksmith , an experience that provided him with firsthand knowledge of the problems and issues of rural communities . In 1947 , he took up a teaching position at the Jamia Millia , Delhi , where he worked for three years . In 1950 , Khan migrated to Pakistan to teach at Islamia College , Karachi . In the same year , he was invited by the Government of Pakistan to take charge as Principal of Comilla Victoria College in East Pakistan , a position he held until 1958 . During this time ( 1950 – 58 ) he also served as President of the East Pakistan Non @-@ Government Teachers ' Association . 
 = = Rural development initiatives = = 
 During his tenure as principal of Comilla Victoria College , Khan developed a special interest in grassroots actions . Between 1954 and 1955 , he took a break to work as director of the Village Agricultural and Industrial Development ( V @-@ AID ) Programme . However , he was not satisfied with the development approach adopted in the programme that was limited to the training of villagers . In 1958 , he went to Michigan State University to acquire education and training in rural development . Returning in 1959 , he established the Pakistan Academy for Rural Development ( PARD ) at Comilla on 27 May 1959 and was appointed as its founding director . He also laid foundations for the Comilla Cooperative Pilot Project in 1959 . In 1963 , he received a Ramon Magsaysay Award from the Government of the Philippines for his services in rural development . Khan became Vice @-@ chairman of the board of Governors of PARD in 1964 , and in the same year , was awarded an honorary Doctorate of law by Michigan State University . In 1969 , he delivered a series of lectures at Woodrow Wilson School , Princeton University , based on his experience with rural cooperatives . During the visit , he established collaborative links with Arthur Lewis . 
 On his return to East Pakistan , Khan remained attached to the Comilla Project until 1971 when East Pakistan became Bangladesh . Eventually , Khan moved to Pakistan . PARD was renamed as Bangladesh Academy for Rural Development ( <unk> ) . 
 = = Advisory roles = = 
 Following his move to Pakistan , Khan was asked to implement the Comilla Model in rural settlements of North @-@ West Frontier Province ( now Khyber Pakhtunkhwa ) , Punjab , and Sindh . He declined the offer on the grounds that the proposals were predominantly motivated by political interests rather than the common well @-@ being . However , he continued to advise the authorities on various aspects of rural development , such as participatory irrigation management . He worked as a research fellow at the University of Agriculture , Faisalabad from 1971 to 1972 , and as Director of Rural Economics Research Project at Karachi University from 1972 to 1973 . Khan went to Michigan State University as a visiting professor in 1973 and remained there until 1979 . During this time , he carried on advising the Rural Development Academy at Bogra in northern Bangladesh , and the Pakistan Academy for Rural Development , Peshawar , on the <unk> Integrated Rural Development Programme . He also traveled extensively during this period in the capacities of speaker , advisor , or consultant on rural development programmes across the world . In 1974 , he was appointed as a World Bank consultant to survey rural development situations in Java , Indonesia . He also briefly worked as a visiting professor at Lund University , Harvard University , and Oxford University . 
 In 1980 , Khan moved to Karachi and started working on the improvement of sanitary conditions in Karachi suburbs . He laid the foundations of the Orangi Pilot Project for the largest squatter community of Orangi in the city . He remained associated with this project until his death in 1999 . Meanwhile , he maintained his support for rural communities around Karachi , and also helped to develop the Aga Khan Rural Support Programme . OPP became a model for participatory bottom @-@ up development initiatives . 
 = = Major development programmes = = 
 = = = Comilla Cooperative Pilot Project = = = 
 The Comilla Model ( 1959 ) was Khan 's initiative in response to the failure of a Village Agricultural and Industrial Development ( V @-@ AID ) programme that was launched in 1953 in East and West Pakistan with technical assistance from the US government . V @-@ AID remained a government @-@ level attempt to promote citizen participation in the sphere of rural development . Khan launched the project in 1959 on his return from Michigan , and developed a methodology of implementation in the areas of agricultural and rural development on the principle of grassroots @-@ level participation . Initially , the aim was to provide a development model of programmes and institutions that could be replicated across the country . Advisory support in this respect was provided by experts from Harvard and Michigan State Universities , the Ford Foundation , and USAID . Practical help was also sought from Japan to improve the local farming techniques . 
 Comilla Model simultaneously addressed the problems that were caused by the inadequacy of both local infrastructure and institutions through a range of integrated programmes . The initiatives included the establishment of : a training and development centre ; a road @-@ drainage embankment works programme ; a decentralized , small scale irrigation programme ; and , a two @-@ tiered cooperative system with primary cooperatives operating in the villages , and federations operating at sub @-@ district level . 
 After Khan 's departure from Comilla , the cooperative 's model failed in independent Bangladesh because only a few occupational groups managed to achieve the desired success . By 1979 , only 61 of the 400 cooperatives were functioning . The model actually fell prey to the ineffective internal and external controls , stagnation , and diversion of funds . This prompted the subsequent scholars and practitioners in microfinance , such as Muhammad Yunus of Grameen Bank and Fazle Hasan Abed of BRAC , to abandon the cooperative approach in favour of more centralised control and service delivery structures . The new strategy targeted the poorest villagers , while excluding the ' less poor ' . However , Khan 's leadership skills during the course of his association with the project remained a source of inspiration for these leaders , as well as other participatory development initiatives in the country . 
 = = = Orangi Pilot Project = = = 
 The Orangi poverty alleviation project ( known as the Orangi Pilot Project , or OPP ) was initiated by Khan as an NGO in 1980 . Orangi is located on the northwest periphery of Karachi . At that time , it was the largest of the city 's approximately 650 low @-@ income squatter settlements ( known as <unk> <unk> ) . The locality was first developed in 1963 as a government township of 5 square kilometres ( 1 @,@ 236 acres ) . The influx of migrants after the creation of Bangladesh swelled the settlement to about one million people crowded over an area of more than 32 square kilometres ( 7 @,@ 907 acres ) . The working class multi @-@ ethnic population was predominantly composed of day labourers , skilled workers , artisans , small shopkeepers , peddlers and low @-@ income white collar workers . The project proved an impetus to the socio @-@ economic development of the population of the area . As the project director , Khan proved to be a dynamic and innovative leader . The project initially focused on creating a system of underground sewers , using local materials and labour , and succeeded in laying hundreds of kilometres of drainage pipes along with auxiliary facilities . Within a decade of the initiative , local residents had established schools , health clinics , women 's work centres , cooperative stores and a credit organisation to finance enterprise projects . By 1993 , OPP had managed to provide low @-@ cost sewers to more than 72 @,@ 000 houses . The project subsequently diversified into a number of programmes , including a people 's financed and managed low @-@ cost sanitation programme ; a housing programme ; a basic health and family planning programme ; a programme of supervised credit for small family enterprise units ; an education programme ; and a rural development programme in the nearby villages . 
 Comparing the OPP with Comilla project , Akhtar Hameed Khan once commented : 
 The Orangi Pilot Project was very different from the Comilla Academy . OPP was a private body , dependent for its small fixed budget on another NGO . The vast resources and support of the government , Harvard advisors , MSU , and Ford Foundation was missing . OPP possessed no authority , no sanctions . It may observe and investigate but it could only advise , not enforce . 
 The successful OPP model became an inspiration for other municipalities around the country . In 1999 , Khan helped to create <unk> Pilot Project ( LPP ) to collaborate with <unk> municipal committee . Learning from past experiences , the project extended its scope to the whole town instead of concentrating on low @-@ income settlements only . The municipal partnership was itself a new initiative that ensured wider civic co @-@ operation . 
 The success of OPP did come at a cost for Dr Khan as his liberal views and self @-@ help initiatives were questioned and criticized by certain interest groups . At two occasions , he was accused of blasphemy . However , all allegations against him were acquitted by the courts of law and cleared by independent religious scholars . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 In 1999 , Khan was visiting his family in the United States when he suffered from kidney failure . He died of myocardial infarction on 9 October in Indianapolis at the age of 85 . His body was flown to Karachi on 15 October , where he was buried on the grounds of the OPP office compound . 
 Khan 's ideology and leadership skills were a source of inspiration for his students and colleagues , and continue to serve as guiding principles even after his death . Edgar Owens , who became an admirer of Khan 's ideology while working at USAID 's Asia Bureau , co @-@ authored a book with Robert Shaw as a result of observations and discussions with Khan at Comilla Academy . A later study of various rural development experiences from South Asia , edited by Uphoff and Cambell ( 1983 ) was jointly dedicated to Khan and Owens . 
 Soon after Khan 's death , on 10 April 2000 , the Government of Pakistan renamed the National Centre for Rural Development the Akhtar Hameed Khan National Centre for Rural Development and Municipal Administration . In the same year , the Akhtar Hameed Khan Resource Centre was established in Islamabad , under the auspices of the Institute of Rural Management , as a repository of published and digital resources on rural development . Later in 2005 , the Council of Social Sciences , Pakistan , in collaboration with the National Rural Support Programme and other institutions , announced the Akhtar Hameed Khan Memorial Award . The annual cash award is given on Khan 's birthday to a Pakistani author for a book on issues related to rural and urban development , peace , poverty alleviation , or gender discrimination . At the occasion of the award ceremony in 2006 , a documentary film about the life and times of Akhtar Hameed Khan was premiered . The film includes archival footage and interviews with family members , colleagues , and contributors and beneficiaries of the Comilla and OPP projects . 
 = = Awards and honours = = 
 Khan received the following civil awards : 
 Jinnah Award ( Posthumous , 2004 ) for services to people as founder of the Orangi Pilot Project . 
 Nishan @-@ e @-@ Imtiaz ( Posthumous , 2001 ) for services to the community . 
 Ramon Magsaysay Award ( 31 August 1963 , Manila , Philippines ) for services to rural development . 
 Sitara @-@ e @-@ Pakistan ( 1961 ) for pioneering work in rural development . 
 = = Publications = = 
 Khan was fluent in Arabic , Bengali , English , Hindi , Pali , Persian , and Urdu . He wrote several reports and monographs , mostly relating to rural development in general or his various successful and model initiatives in particular . He also published collections of poems and travelogues in Urdu . 
 = = = In English = = = 
 1956 , Bengal <unk> , vol 1 , 2 & 3 . Comilla Academy ( now the Bangladesh Academy for Rural Development ) , Comilla , Bangladesh . 
 1965 , Rural Development in East Pakistan , Speeches By Akhtar Hameed Khan . Asian Studies Center , Michigan State University . 
 1974 , Institutions for rural development in Indonesia , Pakistan Academy for Rural Development . Karachi . 
 1985 , Rural development in Pakistan . Vanguard Books . Lahore . 
 1994 , What I learnt in Comilla and Orangi . Paper presented at the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation ( <unk> ) seminar . Islamabad . 
 1996 , Orangi Pilot Project : Reminiscences and Reflections . The Oxford University Press : Karachi . ( editions : 1996 , 1999 , 2005 ) . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 
 1997 The sanitation gap : Development 's deadly menace . The Progress of Nations . UNICEF . 
 1998 , Community @-@ Based Schools and the Orangi Project . In <unk> , P ( ed . ) , Education and the State : Fifty Years of Pakistan , Chapter 7 , Karachi : Oxford University Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 
 2000 , Twenty Weeks in America : A Diary , 3 September 1969 – 21 January 1970 . Translated from Urdu by <unk> Ismail . City Press . ISBN 969 @-@ <unk> @-@ 32 @-@ 9 
 = = = In Urdu = = = 
 1972 , <unk> @-@ e @-@ <unk> ki Diary ( A Diary of Travels in America ) . The City Press : Karachi . 
 1988 , <unk> aur <unk> ( Collection of poems in Urdu ) . Saad Publishers . Karachi . 
 = Entre a Mi Mundo = 
 Entre a Mi Mundo ( English : Enter My World ) is the third studio album by American Tejano pop singer Selena . It was released on 6 May 1992 by EMI Latin , and re @-@ released on 22 September 2002 as part of the Selena : 20 Years of Music collection with bonus tracks and spoken liner notes by Selena 's family , friends , and former band . The album 's production was postponed due to Selena 's relationship with guitarist Chris Pérez , which garnered disapproval from her father and manager Abraham Quintanilla , Jr . , who threatened to disband the group . The record 's creation was further complicated by Selena 's Ven Conmigo Tour , which overran slightly as a result of her appearance in the corrido @-@ ballad " Buenos Amigos " with Salvadoran singer Álvaro Torres . Selena 's brother and music producer A.B. Quintanilla returned as the main songwriter for the album , assisted by lead keyboardist Ricky Vela and backup singer Pete Astudillo . 
 Entre a Mi Mundo incorporates mostly Tejano music and rancheras and was critically praised for its musical diversity . " Como La Flor " , which is a Mexican cumbia song , had become Selena 's signature song , and one of her best well @-@ known songs . " Como La Flor " peaked at number four on the US Latin Regional Mexican Airplay chart , and was a springboard for Selena 's success in the Latin music world . " La Carcacha " , which tells the story of a barrio teen romance , peaked at number one on the Latin Regional Mexican Airplay chart for almost six months . Other songs on the album were also remarked upon by several music critics . Entre a Mi Mundo peaked at number one on the Latin Regional Mexican Albums chart for eight consecutive months . The album sold 385 @,@ 000 copies in its first year , more than any other Tejano album by a female vocalist . 
 Entre a Mi Mundo was certified gold ( Latin type ) by the Recording Industry Association of America in 1992 , platinum ( Latin type ) in 1995 , double platinum in 2000 , and sextuple Disco De <unk> in December 2002 , representing shipments of 600 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . It received mostly positive reviews , many critics agreed that it was Selena 's " breakthrough album " , and it helped to gain acceptance in Mexico . Some music critics compared several of Selena 's songs to works by Diana Ross and Leslie Gore . To promote the album , Selena embarked on her first worldwide tour . Entre a Mi Mundo won the prestigious " Album of the Year – Orchestra " award at the 1993 Tejano Music Awards and " Regional / Mexican Album of the Year " at the 1993 Lo Nuestro Awards . 
 = = Production and development = = 
 After Selena released Ven Conmigo on 12 November 1990 , she decided to postpone the recording of songs for her next album . Selena continued her short @-@ lived Ven Conmigo Tour and she was booked for her first performance in El Salvador to sing a duet with Salvadoran singer Álvaro Torres ' corrido @-@ ballad " Buenos Amigos " . At that time , Selena was also involved in a relationship with rock guitarist Chris Pérez , who was asked to join Selena 's backing band , Selena y Los Dinos . Their relationship began soon after Pérez joined the band . Selena 's father and manager Abraham Quintanilla , Jr. did not like Pérez , believing him to be antithesis of his children 's " clean image " , and dismissed Pérez from the band . Selena was warned not to see Pérez or face having Selena y Los Dinos disbanded . Selena ignored her father 's wishes ; she continued to meet Pérez secretly , and they eloped on 2 April 1992 . Quintanilla Jr . , accepted the relationship after she eloped and was remorseful , feeling that he had put pressure on Selena . After Selena had eloped , she decided to release a more Tejano and Mexican music @-@ influenced album . Her brother and the producer of her music , A.B. Quintanilla III had returned as the main songwriter while band members Ricky Vela , the lead keyboardist , and Pete Astudillo , the backup singer , had helped with songwriting on the album . Vela was also in charge of the music sequencing during pre @-@ production of the album . 
 = = Composition = = 
 = = = Song structure and lyrical content = = = 
 " La Carcacha " was written and produced by A.B. Quintanilla III , Pete Astudillo and Bebu Silvetti , and was released as the album 's first promotional single , Quintanilla III had been inspired to write the song after leaving a dry goods store . He saw an old , broken down car and told Joe Ojeda , the band 's keyboardist , that he wanted to write a song about the vehicle . Ojeda then assisted Quintanilla III with the Spanish translation of the phrase " a broken down car " , determining the correct expression to be " Carcacha " . However , the general theme was not inspired until a month later , after Quintanilla III had bought a BMW and was buying dry goods at a corner store . His girlfriend began complaining about the car to him while he was waiting in line . Another girl in the store joined their conversation and commented that she would date Quintanilla III because she felt he had a nice car . Quintanilla III was then inspired to write a comical song with a moral behind it , and it took the band six months to finish the song . " La Carcacha " incorporates conjunto , Mexican cumbia and had regional Latin undertones . The song also has elements of piano and synthesizer woven into the rhythm of the song . Fanny S. Chirinos and Scripps Howard of The Intelligencer & Wheeling News Register stated that Selena catapulted onto the Tejano scene with " La Carcacha " and " Como La Flor " . The San Antonio Express @-@ News stated that the lyrical content of " La Carcacha " had the story lines that Selena never had , which was the tale of a barrio teen romance . 
 " Como La Flor " , released as the lead single of Entre a Mi Mundo , was written and produced by Quintanilla III , Astudillo and Quintanilla Jr , with additional writing contributions from Selena . Quintanilla III stated in an interview that " Como La Flor " was written in Bryan , Texas , while staying in an inelegant hotel for the night before going to Houston the following morning . While at the hotel , Quintanilla III had a melody stuck in his head and liked it . Looking outside , he saw a group of poor bystanders trying to sell plastic flowers to people on the streets which became the basis of the song centering on a flower . Quintanilla III immediately wrote the hook chant " <unk> da da da da da ( como me duele ) " . While on the tour bus , Selena , Quintanilla III , Astudillo and Ojeda had sat down together to work on the song , which took them an hour and 20 minutes to complete . Suzette Quintanilla , Selena 's sister , thought that both " Como La Flor " and " La <unk> " had a distinct style of cumbia to them that could make the band more noticeable when their songs were played on radio stations . Mario Tarradell of The Dallas Morning News said that " Como La Flor " was a " career @-@ launching hit " . Cathy Ragland of Austin American Statesmen wrote that " Como La Flor " was one of Selena 's most popular songs and that " for many , a metaphor for her life- a beautiful , delicate creature " . " Como La Flor " helped Selena to dominate the Latin music charts and become immensely popular in Mexico , where Mexican @-@ Americans are not liked among citizens , which was well received by critics . The song describes a bewildered woman whose ex @-@ boyfriend is in love with another woman and she wants him back . The message of the song was to show people that you should love your partner if they truly love you back . At the 13th Tejano Music Awards , " Como La Flor " was picked as " Best Song " , though <unk> ' single " Lo Voy <unk> Por Ti " had won the award . " Como La Flor " peaked at number @-@ one on the Latin Regional Mexican Airplay chart . " Como La Flor " became the first song recorded by Selena , as a solo act , to peak at number one , and became her signature song soon after . 
 " ¿ Qué Creias ? " , released as the second promotional single of Entre a Mi Mundo , was written and produced by Quintanilla III , Astudillo , and Quintanilla Jr . " ¿ Qué Creias ? " is a ranchera song that hovers the conjunto styles . The song has the harp and violin as its musical instrument foundation . Mario Tarradell of The Dallas Morning News stated that the song was " a heart @-@ wrenching ranchera that boasted an emotional delivery " . Richard Torres of Newsday believed that Selena had an " emotional vocal purity " that helped make " ¿ Qué Creias ? " an international hit . The song describes a bitter woman telling her ex @-@ boyfriend , who broke up with her , to be with a better woman , that she is desperate to get back with him and telling her ex @-@ boyfriend that she is happier without him and that her love was like no other . The song peaked at number 14 on the Hot Latin Tracks and number 16 on the Latin Regional Mexican Airplay charts . 
 " Amame " , released as the third and final promotional single of Entre a Mi Mundo , was written and produced by Selena , Astudillo and Quintanilla III . " Amame " is written in common time and is performed in the key of A minor at 121 beats per minute . The song incorporates rock fusion , soul and contemporary R & B undertones . Mario Tarradell of The Dallas Morning News wrote that " ... " Amame " is well @-@ crafted , catchy and proficiently played ... " The song describes a woman who is constantly fantasizing about being with a man she loves , she is determine to make it a reality but the decision is solely based on the man , which makes the woman anxious and inpatient . " Amame " peaked at number 27 on the Hot Latin Tracks . 
 = = = Other songs = = = 
 Pérez stated in an interview that Quintanilla III had wanted to record " Las Cadenas " as a rock @-@ influenced song on the album , but changed it back to a conjunto style within a few days . Pérez also confessed to " doubling " his guitar solos on the song which he had only done for " Las Cadenas " . Pérez said that Selena had used her own harmony in the song and that it reminded him of being at home and with his family because of the styles used on that track . For " Si La <unk> " , Ricky Vela said that Quintanilla III had gone to Vela 's house and had looked over a few songs Vela had written . Quintanilla III instantly liked the chorus of " Si La Queries " . While on the tour bus , Quintanilla III rewrote the first draft of " Si La <unk> " , and Vela was asked to come up with different scenarios that Quintanilla III liked . Hector <unk> of San Antonio Express @-@ News wrote that " Vuelve A Mi " was a " hot little polka " , while <unk> described the song as a " successful hit " The Denver Post stated that " Missing My Baby " was " the best English song on [ Entre a Mi Mundo ] , an R & B song " . The The Deseret News stated that Selena displays a " Leslie Gore <unk> voice " on " Missing My Baby " and that " Selena displays a wonderful suppleness in her voice " . The Virginian @-@ Pilot said that " Missing My Baby " was built on hooks that recall Diana Ross ' " Missing You " which was a tribute to Marvin Gaye . J.R. Reynolds of Billboard wrote that the song was a " dreamy ballad [ that had ] incorporate [ d ] an R & B @-@ styled melody under Selena 's pop vocals " . " Missing My Baby " peaked at number 16 on the Hot Latin Tracks , and the remix version found on Dreaming of You ( 1995 ) peaked at number 22 on the Rhythmic Airplay Chart . 
 = = Release = = 
 Entre a Mi Mundo was released on 6 May 1992 by EMI Latin and was certified gold ( Latin type ) by the Recording Industry Association of America . According to Stacy Lee 's book Mexico and the United States the album sold 300 @,@ 000 while Maria Celeste <unk> wrote in her book that the album sold 385 @,@ 000 copies in its first year . It became the first Tejano album by a female artist to sell more than 300 @,@ 000 copies . Entre a Mi Mundo sold 200 @,@ 000 copies in Mexico . Selena outsold male artists in the Tejano market with Entre a Mi Mundo . The album was well received by critics and broke a barrier in the male @-@ dominated Latin genre . By July 1995 , Entre a Mi Mundo had sold 12 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 copies , and was certified platinum . Entre a Mi Mundo was certified double platinum ( Latin type ) in 2000 and sextuple Disco De <unk> in December 2002 , representing shipments of 600 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . The album was certified gold ( standard ) for shipments of 500 @,@ 000 copies in the United States in May 1995 . In Mexico , Entre a mi mundo was certified triple gold , representing shipments of 300 @,@ 000 copies . 
 Entre a Mi Mundo peaked at number one on the US Latin Regional Mexican Albums chart in September 1992 for eight consecutive months . After Selena was murdered , Entre a Mi Mundo debuted at number 139 on the Billboard 200 chart , and helped Selena to become the first female artist to place five albums simultaneously on the Billboard 200 . The album peaked at number 97 , and it peaked at number four on the Top Latin Albums chart . In 1995 , Entre a Mi Mundo was positioned at number two on Billboard 's " Latin Regional Mexican Albums all @-@ time chart " . 
 = = Entre a Mi Mundo Tour = = 
 To promote the album , Selena embarked on a worldwide tour , called the Entre a Mi Mundo Tour , which began in Elk City , Oklahoma on 25 May 1992 . Selena performed in two cities in Oklahoma , thirteen cities in Texas , four cities in New Mexico , seven cities in California , two cities in Florida , and one venue each in Louisiana , Tennessee and Nevada . Overall , Selena performed in more venues in her Entre a Mi Mundo Tour than in any of her previous tours . Selena performed in five Mexican cities , the first time that she had toured in that country , where she broke several attendance records . She was also in demand in El Salvador for appearing in " Buenos Amigos " , a duet with <unk> singer Álvaro Torres . Every time Selena performed " ¿ Qué Creias ? " in her concerts , she would always ask for a man to volunteer on stage while Selena acted out the central theme of the song to him . Selena opened the 1993 Tejano Music Awards with her performance of " Siempre Estoy <unk> En Ti " , a duet with backup singer of the band , Pete Astudillo . At the 1994 Tejano Music Awards , Selena performed a short version of " Como La Flor " as part of a collaboration . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Many music critics believed Entre a Mi Mundo was the " breakthrough album " for Selena . Bruce Tomaso of The Dallas Morning News stated that " her brand of infectious Tejano pop [ in Entre a Mi Mundo ] had attracted a sizable audience charmed by her appealing voice " . stated that " Entre a Mi Mundo strengthened the Selena juggernaut " . Mario Tarradell of The Dallas Morning News wrote that " Entre a Mi Mundo , marked her acceptance into the pop side of the Latin music " . Mario Tarradell of The Dallas Morning News stated that " Entre a Mi Mundo did feature Los Dinos as the backing band , but the album was undoubtedly a solo star @-@ making turn for Selena " Roundup Newsletter of Allmusic wrote that " Selena , with her crystal clear vocals and dynamic stage presence , became one of Tex @-@ Mex music 's premier performers in only a few years . She was named Top Female Entertainer and Female Vocalist of the Year for three years straight at the Tejano Music Awards . Tracks include " Si La Quieres , " " Yo Te Sigo <unk> , " and " Las Cadenas " . Joey Guerra of Amazon.com wrote that it was because Selena and her brother grew up listening to classic pop , R & B , and disco that those genres were materialized in Entre a mi mundo . Guerra also stated that the album was " consistently satisfying and wonderfully diverse " . Guerra also gave examples of the songs on the album and their central theme " from the rousing cumbia " La <unk> " ( about a boyfriend 's beat @-@ up old car ) to the spirited mariachi kiss @-@ off anthem " ¿ Qué Creías ? , " which has become a fan favorite , " Missing My Baby " is street @-@ smart R & B , and " Amame " pulses with fiery club rhythms " . Guerra also stated that " Much of the credit should go to Quintanilla [ III ] , who helped Selena challenge the often @-@ stifling boundaries of Tejano music . Entre a Mi Mundo also includes Selena 's first international hit , " Como La Flor , " a lilting cumbia highlighted by a pleading vocal delivery and lost @-@ love lyrics " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are taken from the album 's liner notes . 
 Managerial 
 Performance credits 
 Vocals – Selena 
 Visuals and imagery 
 Instruments 
 Technical and production 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = = Weekly charts = = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = Malcolm Jardine = 
 Malcolm Robert Jardine ( 8 June 1869 – 16 January 1947 ) was an English first @-@ class cricketer who played 46 matches , mainly for Oxford University . Although his first @-@ class record was not impressive , he scored 140 in the University Match of 1892 using an unorthodox batting method . He played a few matches for Middlesex but later went to work in India , in effect ending his English first @-@ class career . He played first @-@ class cricket in India for the Europeans and after a successful legal career , returned to England . His son Douglas went on to play cricket for Oxford , Surrey and England , captaining the latter two and being associated with the use of Bodyline bowling . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Jardine was born in Simla , British India on 8 June 1869 to a family which had been connected with India for many years . He was the second son of William Jardine , a barrister and later a judge in Allahabad who had a successful legal career before he died from cholera aged 32 . He was educated at Fettes College , a boarding school in Edinburgh , making it into the school cricket team for four consecutive years . He established a good reputation and was appointed captain of the side in 1888 . That year , his batting average was 77 @.@ 70 , and he took 24 wickets at an average of 6 @.@ 30 , coming top of both sets of averages for the school . 
 = = First @-@ class cricketer = = 
 = = = Career at Oxford = = = 
 In 1889 , Jardine went to Balliol College , Oxford . He made his first @-@ class debut for Oxford University against the Gentlemen of England . In his third match , against Lancashire , he passed fifty for the first time . Although his next highest score in fifteen innings was just 33 , and he failed to reach double figures eight times , he was awarded his Blue . He had some success with his bowling , taking five wickets for 78 in a Surrey total of 614 . He played in the University Match but failed to score in either innings and Oxford lost heavily . In total , he scored 198 runs at an average of 13 @.@ 20 . The following season , Jardine scored more runs at a higher average , but failed to pass fifty in an innings . He scored 218 runs at an average of 14 @.@ 53 and did not bowl . Although he was more successful in the University Match , scoring 3 and 24 , Oxford lost again after being bowled out for 42 in their first innings . In 1891 , Jardine was appointed captain of the University . He further improved his aggregate and average with 255 runs at an average of 18 @.@ 21 , and took two wickets for five runs in the only innings in which he bowled . In the second and third matches , he scored 62 not out and 70 in consecutive innings against the Gentlemen of England and H Phillipson 's XI , but did not pass fifty again . Playing in the University Match , he scored a duck in the first innings and 15 in the second , and Oxford lost their third successive match , although they took eight wickets before Cambridge reached their target of 93 . 
 Jardine 's final season at Oxford was his most successful ; he recorded his highest aggregate and average despite playing only four matches for the club . At the start of the season , Lionel Palairet took over the captaincy . Jardine 's studies preventing him from playing in any of Oxford 's home games , and he did not appear in the team until June . He only took part in three games before the University Match , although in the last of these he scored 60 against Marylebone Cricket Club ( MCC ) at Lord 's . 
 = = = 1892 University Match = = = 
 In his final University Match , Oxford batted first and Jardine 's innings began after his team had lost two wickets without scoring any runs . He batted for 285 minutes , scoring 140 . Before lunch , he played very carefully but increased his scoring rate afterwards . In total , he hit 21 fours and The Times described his innings as faultless . Wisden noted his strong defence and his powerful leg glance . Critics noted that he frequently hit Stanley Jackson to the leg side , a method of play which was unusual at the time . Players educated at Public School generally considered hitting to leg highly unorthodox and almost unfair . K. S. Ranjitsinhji , who was in the crowd at Lord 's , would develop the leg glance and make it respectable within a few years , but he had not yet made his first @-@ class debut in 1892 . It is likely that Jardine was one of the first players to use this shot . Jackson refused to depart from the orthodox methods of the time , continuing to bowl with seven fielders on the off side and only two on the leg side , making it easier for Jardine to score <unk> Times commented that Cambridge " appeared a little slow to grasp the idea of putting a man on the leg side for [ Jardine ] " . Jardine also hit 39 in the second innings as Oxford chased down a target to win for the only time in his University career . Jardine 's first innings remained his only first @-@ class century . 
 = = = Other first @-@ class cricket = = = 
 In the remainder of the 1892 season , Jardine played for Middlesex . He played six matches , but scored just 102 runs and averaged 12 @.@ 75 with the bat ; hitting a highest score of 32 not out . Subsequently , Jardine 's work as a barrister took him to India , and he played just four more first @-@ class matches in England . These were for the MCC at the beginning of the 1897 season , where he scored 185 runs at an average of 23 @.@ 12 with two fifties and a highest score of 85 . His only other first @-@ class cricket was for the Europeans cricket team in India . He played in the annual Presidency Match against the Parsees between 1894 and 1902 , only missing the 1899 and 1901 games . He scored just one fifty in eight matches , but his batting was admired by critics . 
 Although Jardine did not have an impressive first @-@ class record , critics including <unk> , and Plum Warner considered him a good batsman . C. B. Fry believed that if Jardine had played regular county cricket , he would have played for England . Fry described him as a superb fielder and as " a beautiful player , with a perfect back @-@ stroke and a perfect cut and neat late off drive . " He did not bowl regularly after 1889 , saving his energy for fielding . In 46 first @-@ class matches , he scored 1 @,@ 439 runs at an average of 17 @.@ 76 , took 15 wickets at an average of 14 @.@ 40 and held 42 catches . 
 = = Legal career = = 
 In 1893 , Jardine was called to the Bar by the Middle Temple in 1893 . He returned to India , where he practised at the Bombay Bar until 1916 . At the time , British barristers dominated the Indian legal system , finding considerable financial reward , but causing resentment among the Indian legal profession . At the same time , Jardine held positions of increasing influence in India . He was Perry Professor of Jurisprudence and Roman Law from 1898 to 1902 and then Principal of the Government Law School until 1903 . Subsequently , he was Clerk of the Crown , before being appointed Advocate General of Bombay in 1915 before retiring from India in 1916 . 
 In 1898 , he married Alison Moir and they had one son , Douglas in 1900 , who went on to play first @-@ class and Test cricket for Surrey and England . Eventually , Douglas became a controversial England captain , introducing a form of hostile bowling known as Bodyline . The family lived in a wealthy area of Bombay and were well known in its social and sporting circle . With Douglas at Public School , Jardine and his wife returned to England in 1916 . He took an interest in the Surrey team , becoming a member and later a vice @-@ president . His wife died in 1936 while Jardine died in South Kensington on 16 January 1947 . 
 = Ike 's Wee Wee = 
 " Ike 's Wee Wee " is the third episode of the second season of the animated television series South Park , and the 17th episode of the series overall . It first aired on Comedy Central in the United States on May 20 , 1998 . In the episode , school counselor Mr. Mackey is fired , and turns to drugs . Meanwhile , the boys misconstrue what circumcision entails , and try to save Kyle 's younger brother Ike from his upcoming bris . 
 The episode was written and directed by series co @-@ creator Trey Parker . " Ike 's Wee Wee " satirizes certain attitudes towards drug users , and explores whether family can only mean those who are related by blood . This episode introduced Ike 's backstory as an adopted Canadian child . " Ike 's Wee Wee " received positive responses from fans , as well as critics who especially praised the episode for its touching moments . A line often repeated by Mr. Mackey in this episode , " drugs are bad , m 'kay ? " , has entered popular culture , and has been referenced in various songs , articles , and court documents . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Mr. Mackey , the school counselor , is giving a drug and alcohol prevention lecture for the class , emphasizing that smoking , drinking , marijuana , and LSD " are bad . " He passes a sample of marijuana around the class so that the children can learn its smell , but it is never passed back up to the front . We later see that Mr. Garrison stole it . But as a result , Mackey is fired , and is later kicked out of his house by his landlord , leaving him homeless . A desperate Mackey gives in to trying marijuana one night in an alley , and later , LSD . Soon enough , Mr. Mackey becomes a drug @-@ addled hippie , and meets a hippie woman , with whom he decides to get married . While on honeymoon in India , Mr. Mackey is captured by the A Team , Mr. Garrison and Principal Victoria and is taken into rehab . Mr. Mackey emerges clean from rehab and is given his job back . 
 Meanwhile , Kyle invites Stan , Cartman and Kenny to his younger brother Ike 's bris . When they learn more about what a bris is , and misconstrue it as a party where they are going to " chop off his penis " , Kyle is shocked and tries to find a way to hide his brother from his parents and the circumcision process . Kyle puts Ike on a train to Nebraska and makes an Ike @-@ style doll out of meat bones in an attempt to not arouse his parents ' suspicions . This backfires when the doll is eaten by a dog , and both the dog and doll are run over by a fuel tanker which then explodes in front of the Broflovskis ' house , which leads to them to think that Ike is dead . It is at the funeral that Kyle finds out that Ike is not his biological brother , but was adopted from Canada . Upon discovering this , Kyle decides that Ike is not his " real brother " and he no longer cares about him . His parents are shocked by what has happened , and Ike is retrieved from Nebraska . During the funeral , Kenny falls into an open grave and the gravestone falls on him . 
 The day of the bris arrives , and Kyle is grounded . When the mohel arrives to perform the bris , Ike flees to Kyle 's room in terror . Seeing Ike in distress and some old pictures prompts a change of heart in Kyle , and he defends his brother fiercely before it is explained to him what a circumcision actually is , at which point Stan and Cartman decide they want to be circumcised too . They then watch the process , and Kyle is relieved to see Ike unharmed . The episode ends with Mr. Mackey attempting to explain drugs to the children again , and the boys arguing about whose bris should be the next . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Ike 's Wee Wee " was written and directed by series co @-@ creator Trey Parker . The scene where Mr. Mackey loses the marijuana cigarette in class was inspired by a real event from Parker 's life , where a counselor came into his class in seventh grade , and passed around a lit piece of marijuana , which then disappeared . At the beginning and end of the episode , there are scenes where the kids imitate Mr. Mackey 's voice to him , while he is oblivious to the fact that he is being made fun of . Parker and his classmates used to do the same thing to their counselor in junior high school who was the basis for Mr. Mackey 's character . Parker said that he was especially proud of Chef 's line " There 's a time and a place for everything , and it 's called college " , which is something Parker believes in , noting that if he had a child , he would tell him : " Do whatever you want , just wait till college because you don 't know what the fuck 's up right now . " Chef 's sentence would later return in the season four episode " The Tooth Fairy Tats 2000 " . 
 The episode introduced Ike 's backstory as a Canadian child adopted by the Broflovskis . Ever since the recurring characters Terrance and Phillip were established to be Canadians in the season one finale " Cartman 's Mom Is a Dirty Slut " , and the subsequent season two premiere " Terrance and Phillip in Not Without My Anus " , all Canadian characters on South Park have shared the same simplistic design : having simple beady eyes , and a floppy head made up of two halves . While Ike had been on the show since its first episode , the writers originally did not know that he was going to be Canadian ; he was retroactively made one based on his visual similarity to Terrance and Phillip . Ike 's backstory would play an important role in the movie South Park : Bigger , Longer & Uncut , which involves a fictional American – Canadian war , as well as in future episodes of the series , such as the season seven episode " It 's Christmas in Canada " , in which Ike 's biological parents take him away from the Broflovskis , and bring him back to Canada . 
 " Ike 's Wee Wee " features regular voice acting from series creators Trey Parker and Matt Stone for most characters , Mary Kay Bergman ( credited as Shannen Cassidy ) for female characters , and Isaac Hayes for Chef . Additional dialogue was provided by South Park audio engineer Bruce Howell , while Ike 's lines were uttered by Howell 's then @-@ 5 @-@ year @-@ old son Jesse . 
 = = Themes = = 
 " Ike 's Wee Wee " raises the question of who really can be considered one 's family . At first , Kyle 's implicit idea is that family consists of " those for whom we care that are related by blood " . Based on this viewing of family , he no longer feels the need to help Ike when he learns that they are not related by blood . As the story progresses , Kyle questions his initial beliefs , and forms the episode 's central moral by saying that " Family isn 't about whose blood you have . It 's about who you care about . " Thus , Kyle 's reformed view of family not only includes his adopted brother , but his friends as well . Kyle 's questioning of his own morals has been likened to engaging in the dialectical Socratic method of inquiry . 
 The other plot in " Ike 's Wee Wee " satirizes certain drug subcultures , as well as drug use , and societal attitudes towards drug users . The way the episode portrays Mr. Mackey 's lack of real knowledge about drug use and addiction has been described as an example of South Park satirizing left @-@ wing politics , when " they lead to the sort of hypocrisy inconsistent with a proper open society . " 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Part of the episode revolves around the practice of religious male circumcision in Judaism , and the related ceremony called the brit milah or bris , and the boys ' misunderstanding of the tradition ( to which they refer as " <unk> " ) . The boys believe that circumcision entails the cutting off of one 's penis , which they refer to by the childish colloquial term " wee wee " , except for Cartman , who insists on calling it " fireman " . Cannabis is also referred to by various names , including weed , grass , pot , and marijuana , in which Mr. Mackey constantly pronounces the letter j as / dʒ / ( as in jam ) , which makes Kyle mispronounce the drug as " marry @-@ Jew wanna " . 
 Drug use is often portrayed in conjunction with the hippie subculture , through hippie characters such as the two teenagers that give LSD to Mackey , and the woman that he befriends and eventually marries . Jimbo and Cartman both use the term hippie pejoratively . During their argument , Jimbo tells Mackey that he should just go to a Grateful Dead concert . On two occasions , the episode shows people watching Teletubbies while high on marijuana or in rehab . Teletubbies is a British children 's television show that started in 1997 . In his drug prevention speech , Mackey claims that LSD was made famous by John Lennon and Paul McCartney , former members of The Beatles . Both Lennon and McCartney are known to have experimented with the drug . 
 While walking home , Mr. Mackey drunkenly sings the 1983 Pat Benatar song " Love Is a Battlefield " . During Ike 's supposed funeral , a bagpipe player starts playing the Hebrew folk song " Hava <unk> " . At the funerals , the priest uses the phrase " Ashes to ashes , dust to dust " , from the Anglican burial service . When the townspeople start to harass Mackey , one of them shouts " Now we see what you and Homer Simpson have in common ... Dope ! " This references the famous catchphrase from The Simpsons , " D 'oh ! " , which sounds similar to the word dope , meaning illicit drugs . At Kyle 's house , Kyle 's parents offers the boys a dish called " <unk> " , which is not a real dish . When Mackey is in India , he is captured by members of The A @-@ Team , and driven away in their van . The A @-@ Team is a 1980s action adventure TV series . Mackey is taken to rehabilitation to the Betty Ford Clinic , which is based on a real @-@ life hospital . 
 A common plot device is referenced , where a shoulder angel ( represents conscience ) and a shoulder devil ( representing temptation ) appear near a character . This concept is spoofed in the episode , as both the devil and the angel suggest to Mackey that he should drink the beer . When Stan tells Kyle what he thinks a bris means , a dolly zoom is used , which is an unsettling filmmaking effect often used to show that a character is undergoing a major realization . The hallucinogenic effects of certain drugs are portrayed by different means . When inhaling cannabis , the alley that Mr. Mackey is in suddenly turns very colorful . After taking LSD , Mr. Mackey 's head inflates like a giant balloon , and then literally detaches from his body , and floats away . 
 In the scene when the boys are talking to Chef , he leaves without answering the boys ' sexual question , angrily saying , " Dammit , children , why do I always have to be the one to explain all this stuff to you . Ask your parents for once ! " This is in reference to Chef 's tendency to give advice to the boys . While the children are trying to think of what is the most important thing for a man , Cartman says " Ham ? " , to which Stan angrily replies , " No , not ham , you fat fuck ! " . This exchange was used verbatim between the same characters in The Spirit of Christmas , the 1995 short film that was the precursor to South Park . 
 = = Broadcast , reception , and impact = = 
 Two episodes preceded " Ike 's Wee Wee " in the second season of the show . The episode scheduled for April 1 , 1998 promised to resolve the cliffhanger ending of the first season finale , " Cartman 's Mom Is a Dirty Slut " , regarding the identity of Cartman 's father , but was in fact an April Fools ' Day joke : " Terrance and Phillip in Not Without My Anus " , an entire episode revolving around the two title characters . The April 1 day episode was supposed to be a one @-@ off , with the rest of the season starting in May . However , following overwhelmingly negative fan reaction , the episode resolving the Cartman 's father storyline , " Cartman 's Mom Is Still a Dirty Slut " , was moved from its planned May 20 air date to April 22 . " Ike 's Wee Wee " then kicked off a 6 @-@ episode run of the season when it was broadcast on Comedy Central in the United States on May 20 , 1998 . 
 " Ike 's Wee Wee " was met with favorable reviews . Critics especially praised the episode for its touching moments , in contrast with the off @-@ color humor often employed in the series . In his review of the episode in the Chicago Tribune , Allan Johnson praised the episode , especially in comparison with the first two episodes of the season , and wrote that " ' Ike 's Wee Wee ' ranks with some of the better episodes of ' South Park . ' " Upon the series reaching its 100th episode in 2003 , the same writer also listed " Ike 's Wee Wee " as one of the " top 10 episodes that have made [ South Park ] one of the most provocative comedies on TV . " A South Park review in the Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette said about the series that " [ i ] n the midst of all this potty @-@ mouthed humor , there are moments that are downright touching " , and particularly highlighted the ending of " Ike 's Wee Wee " as an example , explaining that " all 's well in the end , and Kyle and the boys learn a lesson about family values that even Dan Quayle would approve of . " In 2000 , visitors of the Comedy Central website chose " Ike 's Wee Wee " as their favorite episode during a voting called " South Park e @-@ <unk> " , held around the time of the United States presidential election that year . 
 Mr. Mackey 's line " drugs are bad , m 'kay ? " has entered popular culture . The Eminem song " The Kids " – which is featured on the B @-@ side of the single " The Way I Am " and the clean version of The Marshall Mathers LP – is thematically about drug use , and makes numerous references to South Park and impressions of the show 's characters , including an impression of Mr. Mackey 's voice and the repetition of his line . The song " Hip Hop <unk> " by Ludacris , from his album Chicken @-@ n @-@ Beer , also contains the line . In 2008 , the line was referenced in the dissenting opinion of a judge , in a case of the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit . Also , in a 2010 marijuana @-@ related court case at the Maryland Court of Appeals , Judge Clayton Greene , Jr. referenced the episode in his dissenting opinion , calling Mr. Mackey 's words " immortal " . In 2011 , during a judiciary committee hearing about a marijuana @-@ related bill in Denver , Colorado , a representative showed off a potential packaging for edible marijuana products . According to a group called the Cannabis Therapy Institute , the label on the package , which bore the placeholder text " Legal and governmentally approved statement describing that pot is bad , M @-@ ok " , was a reference to the South Park episode . Comedy Central sells a poker chip @-@ shaped keychain that bears Mr. Mackey 's picture , along with his famous line . 
 = = Home release = = 
 " Ike 's Wee Wee " was released on VHS in April 1999 , along with the episode " Chickenlover " , on a video titled South Park : Volume 8 . The episode saw its first DVD release in December 1999 , on a disc called South Park : Volume 4 , which also included " Chickenlover " , as well as " Cartman 's Mom Is a Dirty Slut " and " Cartman 's Mom Is Still a Dirty Slut " . South Park : The Complete Second Season was released on DVD on June 3 , 2003 . On these home releases , " Ike 's Wee Wee " has a humorous introduction by creators Matt Stone and Trey Parker , who are playing music to the elderly in a retirement home . Episodes of season 2 have also been released digitally , on services such as Amazon Video , the iTunes Store , and Xbox Live Marketplace . Like most episodes of South Park , " Ike 's Wee Wee " is available to watch for free on the show 's website , <unk> 
 = Marchantiophyta = 
 The Marchantiophyta / <unk> / are a division of non @-@ vascular land plants commonly referred to as hepatics or liverworts . Like mosses and hornworts , they have a gametophyte @-@ dominant life cycle , in which cells of the plant carry only a single set of genetic information . 
 It is estimated that there are about 9000 species of liverworts . Some of the more familiar species grow as a flattened leafless thallus , but most species are leafy with a form very much like a flattened moss . Leafy species can be distinguished from the apparently similar mosses on the basis of a number of features , including their single @-@ celled rhizoids . Leafy liverworts also differ from most ( but not all ) mosses in that their leaves never have a costa ( present in many mosses ) and may bear marginal cilia ( very rare in mosses ) . Other differences are not universal for all mosses and liverworts , but the occurrence of leaves arranged in three ranks , the presence of deep lobes or segmented leaves , or a lack of clearly differentiated stem and leaves all point to the plant being a liverwort . 
 Liverworts are typically small , usually from 2 – 20 mm wide with individual plants less than 10 cm long , and are therefore often overlooked . However , certain species may cover large patches of ground , rocks , trees or any other reasonably firm substrate on which they occur . They are distributed globally in almost every available habitat , most often in humid locations although there are desert and arctic species as well . Some species can be a nuisance in shady green @-@ houses or a weed in gardens . 
 = = Physical characteristics = = 
 = = = Description = = = 
 Most liverworts are small , usually from 2 – 20 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 08 – 0 @.@ 8 in ) wide with individual plants less than 10 centimetres ( 4 in ) long , so they are often overlooked . The most familiar liverworts consist of a prostrate , flattened , ribbon @-@ like or branching structure called a thallus ( plant body ) ; these liverworts are termed thallose liverworts . However , most liverworts produce flattened stems with overlapping scales or leaves in two or more ranks , the middle rank is often conspicuously different from the outer ranks ; these are called leafy liverworts or scale liverworts . ( See the gallery below for examples . ) 
 Liverworts can most reliably be distinguished from the apparently similar mosses by their single @-@ celled rhizoids . Other differences are not universal for all mosses and all liverworts ; but the lack of clearly differentiated stem and leaves in thallose species , or in leafy species the presence of deeply lobed or segmented leaves and the presence of leaves arranged in three ranks , all point to the plant being a liverwort . Unlike any other embryophytes , most liverworts contain unique membrane @-@ bound oil bodies containing isoprenoids in at least some of their cells , lipid droplets in the cytoplasm of all other plants being unenclosed . The overall physical similarity of some mosses and leafy liverworts means that confirmation of the identification of some groups can be performed with certainty only with the aid of microscopy or an experienced <unk> . 
 Liverworts have a gametophyte @-@ dominant life cycle , with the sporophyte dependent on the gametophyte . Cells in a typical liverwort plant each contain only a single set of genetic information , so the plant 's cells are haploid for the majority of its life cycle . This contrasts sharply with the pattern exhibited by nearly all animals and by most other plants . In the more familiar seed plants , the haploid generation is represented only by the tiny pollen and the ovule , while the diploid generation is the familiar tree or other plant . Another unusual feature of the liverwort life cycle is that sporophytes ( i.e. the diploid body ) are very short @-@ lived , withering away not long after releasing spores . Even in other bryophytes , the sporophyte is persistent and disperses spores over an extended period . 
 = = = Life cycle = = = 
 The life of a liverwort starts from the germination of a haploid spore to produce a <unk> , which is either a mass of thread @-@ like filaments or else a flattened thallus . The <unk> is a transitory stage in the life of a liverwort , from which will grow the mature <unk> ( " gamete @-@ bearer " ) plant that produces the sex organs . The male organs are known as antheridia ( singular : <unk> ) and produce the sperm cells . Clusters of antheridia are enclosed by a protective layer of cells called the perigonium ( plural : <unk> ) . As in other land plants , the female organs are known as <unk> ( singular : archegonium ) and are protected by the thin surrounding <unk> ( plural : <unk> ) . Each archegonium has a slender hollow tube , the " neck " , down which the sperm swim to reach the egg cell . 
 <unk> species may be either dioicous or monoicous . In dioicous liverworts , female and male sex organs are borne on different and separate gametophyte plants . In monoicous liverworts , the two kinds of reproductive structures are borne on different branches of the same plant . In either case , the sperm must move from the antheridia where they are produced to the archegonium where the eggs are held . The sperm of liverworts is <unk> , i.e. they have two tail @-@ like flagellae that enable them to swim short distances , provided that at least a thin film of water is present . Their journey may be assisted by the splashing of raindrops . In 2008 , Japanese researchers discovered that some liverworts are able to fire sperm @-@ containing water up to 15 cm in the air , enabling them to fertilize female plants growing more than a metre from the nearest male . 
 When sperm reach the <unk> , fertilisation occurs , leading to the production of a diploid sporophyte . After fertilisation , the immature sporophyte within the archegonium develops three distinct regions : ( 1 ) a foot , which both anchors the sporophyte in place and receives nutrients from its " mother " plant , ( 2 ) a spherical or ellipsoidal capsule , inside which the spores will be produced for dispersing to new locations , and ( 3 ) a seta ( stalk ) which lies between the other two regions and connects them . When the sporophyte has developed all three regions , the seta elongates , pushing its way out of the archegonium and rupturing it . While the foot remains anchored within the parent plant , the capsule is forced out by the seta and is extended away from the plant and into the air . Within the capsule , cells divide to produce both <unk> cells and spore @-@ producing cells . The elaters are spring @-@ like , and will push open the wall of the capsule to scatter themselves when the capsule bursts . The spore @-@ producing cells will undergo meiosis to form haploid spores to disperse , upon which point the life cycle can start again . 
 = = = = Asexual reproduction = = = = 
 Some liverworts are capable of asexual reproduction ; in bryophytes in general " it would almost be true to say that vegetative reproduction is the rule and not the exception . " For example , in <unk> , when the older parts of the forked thalli die , the younger tips become separate individuals . 
 Some thallose liverworts such as Marchantia polymorpha and <unk> cruciata produce small disc @-@ shaped gemmae in shallow cups . Marchantia gemmae can be dispersed up to 120 cm by rain splashing into the cups . In <unk> , gemmae grow at thallus margins . Marchantia polymorpha is a common weed in greenhouses , often covering the entire surface of containers ; gemma dispersal is the " primary mechanism by which liverwort spreads throughout a nursery or greenhouse . " 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Today , liverworts can be found in many ecosystems across the planet except the sea and excessively dry environments , or those exposed to high levels of direct solar radiation . As with most groups of living plants , they are most common ( both in numbers and species ) in moist tropical areas . Liverworts are more commonly found in moderate to deep shade , though desert species may tolerate direct sunlight and periods of total desiccation . 
 = = Classification = = 
 = = = Relationship to other plants = = = 
 Traditionally , the liverworts were grouped together with other bryophytes ( mosses and hornworts ) in the Division Bryophyta , within which the liverworts made up the class <unk> ( also called Marchantiopsida ) . However , since this grouping makes the Bryophyta paraphyletic , the liverworts are now usually given their own division . The use of the division name Bryophyta sensu lato is still found in the literature , but more frequently the Bryophyta now is used in a restricted sense to include only the mosses . 
 Another reason that liverworts are now classified separately is that they appear to have diverged from all other <unk> plants near the beginning of their evolution . The strongest line of supporting evidence is that liverworts are the only living group of land plants that do not have stomata on the sporophyte generation . Among the earliest fossils believed to be liverworts are compression fossils of <unk> from the Upper Devonian of New York . These fossils resemble modern species in the Metzgeriales . Another Devonian fossil called <unk> also looks like a liverwort , but its relationship to other plants is still uncertain , so it may not belong to the Marchantiophyta . In 2007 , the oldest fossils assignable to the liverworts were announced , <unk> <unk> from the Givetian ( Middle Devonian ) of New York , United States . However , in 2010 , five different types of fossilized liverwort spores were found in Argentina , dating to the much earlier Middle Ordovician , around 470 million years ago . 
 = = = Internal classification = = = 
 <unk> classify liverworts in the division Marchantiophyta . This divisional name is based on the name of the most universally recognized liverwort genus Marchantia . In addition to this taxon @-@ based name , the liverworts are often called <unk> . This name is derived from their common Latin name as Latin was the language in which botanists published their descriptions of species . This name has led to some confusion , partly because it appears to be a taxon @-@ based name derived from the genus Hepatica which is actually a flowering plant of the buttercup family <unk> . In addition , the name <unk> is frequently misspelled in textbooks as <unk> , which only adds to the confusion . 
 Although there is no consensus among <unk> as to the classification of liverworts above family rank , the Marchantiophyta may be subdivided into three classes : 
 The <unk> includes the two orders Metzgeriales ( simple <unk> ) and <unk> ( leafy liverworts ) . 
 The Marchantiopsida includes the three orders <unk> ( complex @-@ thallus liverworts ) , and <unk> ( bottle hepatics ) , as well as the <unk> ( previously placed among the Metzgeriales ) . It also includes the problematic genus <unk> , which is sometimes placed in its own order <unk> . 
 A third class , the <unk> is newly recognized as a basal sister group to the other liverworts ; it comprises the genera <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . 
 An updated classification by Söderström et al . 2016 
 Marchantiophyta Stotler & Crandall @-@ Stotler 2000 
 <unk> Stotler & Crandall @-@ Stotler 1977 
 <unk> Hamlin 1972 
 <unk> Schljakov 1972 
 Marchantiopsida Cronquist , <unk> & Zimmermann 1966 
 <unk> He @-@ Nygrén et al . 2006 
 <unk> Stotler & Crandall @-@ Stotler 2000 
 <unk> Engler 1893 sensu He @-@ Nygrén et al . 2006 
 <unk> Long 2006 
 <unk> <unk> 1910 ( bottle liverworts ) 
 <unk> Long 2006 
 <unk> <unk> 1877 ( complex <unk> ) 
 <unk> Stotler & Crandall @-@ Stotler 1977 
 <unk> He @-@ Nygrén et al . 2006 
 <unk> He @-@ Nygrén et al . 2006 
 <unk> Frey & <unk> 2005 
 <unk> Schljakov 1972 
 <unk> Bartholomew @-@ Began 1990 
 <unk> Schljakov 1972 
 Metzgeriales <unk> 1930 
 <unk> Engler 1893 ( leafy liverworts ) 
 <unk> Schljakov 1972 
 <unk> Schljakov 1972 
 <unk> von <unk> 1858 
 It is estimated that there are about 9000 species of liverworts , at least 85 % of which belong to the leafy group . Despite that fact , no liverwort genomes have been sequenced to date and only few genes identified and characterized . 
 = = Economic importance = = 
 In ancient times , it was believed that liverworts cured diseases of the liver , hence the name . In Old English , the word liverwort literally means liver plant . This probably stemmed from the superficial appearance of some <unk> liverworts ( which resemble a liver in outline ) , and led to the common name of the group as hepatics , from the Latin word <unk> for " belonging to the liver " . An unrelated flowering plant , Hepatica , is sometimes also referred to as liverwort because it was once also used in treating diseases of the liver . This archaic relationship of plant form to function was based in the " Doctrine of <unk> " . 
 Liverworts have little direct economic importance today . Their greatest impact is indirect , through the reduction of erosion along streambanks , their collection and retention of water in tropical forests , and the formation of soil crusts in deserts and polar regions . However , a few species are used by humans directly . A few species , such as <unk> fluitans , are aquatic thallose liverworts sold for use in aquariums . Their thin , slender branches float on the water 's surface and provide habitat for both small invertebrates and the fish that feed on them . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 A small collection of images showing liverwort structure and diversity : 
 = Tai Streets = 
 Tai Lamar Streets ( born April 20 , 1977 ) is a former professional American football wide receiver in the National Football League ( NFL ) . He was selected with the second pick of the sixth round of the 1999 NFL Draft by the San Francisco 49ers . He also played for the Detroit Lions in 2004 . He was the leading receiver for the national champion 1997 Michigan Wolverines football team . Over the course of his career he was notable for fourth quarter performances in various bowl games and NFL playoff games . As a professional athlete , he was known for his modesty . As an amateur athlete , he was known as one of the best high school athletes in the city of Chicago . 
 In high school , he was an All @-@ American in football and as a senior led his team to a 9 – 0 regular season before losing in the playoffs . In basketball , he was an All @-@ State selection by numerous publications and led his team past Kevin Garnett 's high school team to reach the finals of the state championship playoff tournament . Despite losing in the finals , he was the highest <unk> on the All @-@ tournament team . In track , he was a state long jump champion as a junior and runner @-@ up as a senior when he also helped his school 's 4 x 400 metres relay team finish third in the state . In 1995 , he was widely regarded as the best high school athlete in the Chicago metropolitan area , winning athlete of the year awards from the Chicago Tribune , Chicago Sun @-@ Times and Illinois High School Association . He is considered to be one of the greatest three @-@ sport athletes in the history of Illinois . 
 Streets led the Michigan Wolverines football team in receiving yards each season from 1996 – 1998 . He had two touchdown receptions in the 1998 Rose Bowl , which clinched a share of the national championship . During his years as the primary receiver , there were quarterback controversies each year with battles among Brian Griese , Scott Dreisbach , Tom Brady and Drew Henson . As a senior , he was voted football team MVP and All @-@ Big Ten Conference second @-@ team wide receiver . That season , he posted five 100 @-@ yard games and totaled over one thousand yards . He played in the Senior Bowl and was selected for the Hula Bowl . He was injured right before the 1999 draft causing him to slip from a projected second @-@ round selection to a sixth @-@ round choice . As a sophomore , he played part of the season for the 1996 – 97 Michigan Wolverines men 's basketball team , which won the 1997 National Invitation Tournament , but has since vacated the championship due to the University of Michigan basketball scandal . 
 Streets had modest success as a professional in five seasons with the 49ers . He began as a fourth wide receiver on a team with perennial Pro Bowl receivers Jerry Rice and Terrell Owens , but he eventually became a starter before moving on to play his final season with the Lions . His career was highlighted by playoff performances in which he caught at least four receptions for at least 50 yards in all three playoff games . He recorded two fourth quarter playoff touchdowns one of which was the game @-@ winner in a 24 @-@ point comeback victory and the other of which was a game @-@ tying touchdown in a losing effort . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Streets was born in Matteson , Illinois . His mother , Karen Streets , named him after Olympic figure skater Tai <unk> . Streets ' father is Clayton Streets . His mother kept him active in sports as a youth to keep him out of trouble . His mother describes him as a clumsy awkward youth and his father remembers him for his duck @-@ footed stance . However , his father says the first time he saw Tai play youth football , he outran everyone on the other team when running an end reverse . Streets has younger sisters named Aja and Jad . 
 = = High school = = 
 After Streets ' parents separated , he lived with his mother in Matteson . She started him in track , which quickly supplanted baseball , which he last played at age 12 . At Rich South High School of <unk> Park , Illinois he participated initially in basketball and track with basketball in his sights for professional success . As a sophomore , Streets briefly played halfback for the football team , but he broke his ankle in a freak accident after the second game , and vowed never to return . Rich South coach Hud Venerable , who had seen videotapes of Streets , set out to bring him back as a junior . He attempted to recruit Streets by attending his basketball games and track meets . He knew Streets wanted to play wide receiver . He realized football could provide a better college opportunity than basketball , especially for a 6 @-@ foot @-@ 4 @-@ inch ( 1 @.@ 93 m ) athlete such as himself . After he returned to football , he became widely known in all three sports . 
 As a sophomore in 1992 – 93 , Streets scored 20 points and posted 12 rebounds in his first varsity basketball game for Rich South on January 22 , 1993 . The team finished that season with a 14 – 10 record . That same season , Streets won the Amateur Athletic Union ( AAU ) triple jump championship . As a junior , he helped the team compile a 26 – 2 record as it entered the sectional finals . In track , he won the Class AA state championship in the long jump on his final jump of 23 feet 7 inches ( 7 @.@ 19 m ) and was leading in the triple jump with a jump of 49 feet 8 @.@ 25 inches ( 15 @.@ 14 m ) until Byron Topps leapt to a state record of 50 feet 7 inches ( 15 @.@ 42 m ) . During his junior year , he was recognized , along with fellow future professional football player Donovan McNabb , as one of the 16 best boy athletes in the Chicago metropolitan area by the Chicago Sun @-@ Times for his efforts in high school football , basketball and track . That spring he was also selected as one of the ten best football prospects in the Chicago area by high school athlete expert Tom Lemming for his play at wide receiver . College coaches who recruit in the Chicago area selected him as one of the top 16 1994 football prospects . One recruiting service rated him as one of the top five football prospects in Illinois and one of the top three wide receiver prospects in the United States . During the summer between his junior and senior year Streets was selected as to the All @-@ Tournament team for the AAU 17 & under men 's basketball National Invitational Tournament held in Kenner , Louisiana . 
 Streets moved in with his dad and transferred to Thornton Township High School . At the time of his 1994 senior year transfer to Harvey , Illinois 's Thornton , Streets was described by a Chicago Sun @-@ Times journalist as " the best high school athlete in Illinois " . The Sun @-@ Times chose him as one of the six best football prospects in the area and as an All @-@ Area Offensive selection before his senior season . He was a preseason All @-@ American in football . Lemming named him as one of the top 100 senior prospects in the nation . By this time , Lemming considered him to be the best high school wide receiver in Illinois . According to Sporting News , Streets and Randy Moss were among the four best wide receivers in the nation . National Recruiting Advisor listed him fifth behind Peter Warrick , Moss , <unk> Fulcher , and Corey Jones . 
 Streets and sophomore quarterback Antwaan Randle El helped Thornton snap Homewood @-@ <unk> High School 's 44 @-@ game conference winning streak in the <unk> East in football . Over the course of the season he helped Thornton achieve a 9 – 0 record on its way to the Class 6A state playoffs . Although Streets accumulated nine receptions for 145 yards in the playoff game , he only had one touchdown in the waning moments and was kept from making <unk> plays when it mattered . He ended the season as a Chicago Tribune second @-@ team All @-@ state selection . In high school , he aspired to have a broadcasting career after athletics like his role model Ahmad Rashad and also had visions of Olympic Games competition . As late as December of his senior year , he was considering Michigan , Illinois , Notre Dame , Wisconsin and South Carolina . In January 1995 , he selected the University of Michigan because of its tradition of producing National Football League wide receivers such as Anthony Carter , Derrick Alexander , Desmond Howard and Chris Calloway . Streets was part of a Michigan football recruiting class that included Tom Brady and Charles Woodson . Streets was selected to play in the Chicago Public League Football Coaches Association eighth annual Harold Washington All @-@ Star Football Game . In the 12th annual Suburban All @-@ Star Football Classic , Streets caught a 37 @-@ yard fly pattern for the game @-@ winning touchdown . 
 During his senior basketball season , he was named by the Chicago Tribune as a Prep Athlete of the Week for leading Thornton to victory over Champaign , Illinois ' Centennial High School , the 12th ranked school in the state . After the regular season , he was a member of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times All @-@ Area team as well as their Class AA All @-@ State team headlined by Player of the Year Kevin Garnett . He was also selected to the Champaign @-@ Urbana News @-@ Gazette All @-@ state team . Eventually , Streets was named to all five notable All @-@ State teams . In the state playoffs , Streets helped lead Thornton to victory over Garnett 's number @-@ one @-@ ranked Farragut Academy team , which also included Ronnie Fields and Michael Wright , in the Class AA state quarterfinals . In the championship game , Streets had a game @-@ high 15 rebounds in a losing effort against Manual High School as Thornton finished with a 30 – 2 record . Streets was the highest vote @-@ getter on the Associated Press Class AA all @-@ tournament team . He was selected to play in the Illinois Basketball Coaches Association all @-@ star game . Streets scored 12 points and had 10 rebounds in the game . Streets was also selected as a member of the Chicago Suburban All @-@ Stars . He placed fourth in the 1995 Illinois Mr. Basketball selection that Garnett won in a landslide . USA Today recognized him as an honorable mention All @-@ USA selection . He was part of a Michigan Wolverines men 's basketball incoming number @-@ one ranked recruiting class with three McDonald 's All @-@ Americans : Robert Traylor , Albert White , and Louis Bullock . 
 During his 1995 senior track season , he ran a sub @-@ 21 second 200 meter in the <unk> East Conference championship meet . In the sectional state championship meet qualifier , Streets posted a long jump of 24 feet 9 inches ( 7 @.@ 54 m ) and a triple jump of 45 feet 9 @.@ 5 inches ( 13 @.@ 96 m ) . The Illinois High School Association ( IHSA ) championship meet record of 24 feet 6 @.@ 25 inches ( 7 @.@ 47 m ) set in 1969 seemed in jeopardy . On the first day of the long jump competition , Streets posted a 23 feet 6 inches ( 7 @.@ 16 m ) , which was second to the leader 's 24 feet 2 @.@ 5 inches ( 7 @.@ 38 m ) , and neither athlete improved his jump on the second day , leaving Streets as the second @-@ place finisher . Streets also ran a 47 split for his leg of the third @-@ place 4 x 400 metres relay team at the state meet . 
 He graduated in the class of 1995 . His high school basketball teams included future professional athletes Randle El , Melvin Ely , and Napoleon Harris . As a senior , Streets won the Chicago Sun @-@ Times all sport 1994 – 95 high school athlete of the year award . He also was named Chicago Tribune March 1995 Athlete of the Month and 1994 – 95 Chicago Tribune Athlete of the Year , which was awarded June 21 , 1995 at Comiskey Park . Streets was also honored as the IHSA Sports Report Athlete of the Year . Daily Herald of Arlington Heights , Illinois said that Streets would have won their Athlete of the Year award had he competed in their coverage area . Streets was so highly regarded as an athlete that the Thornton baseball coach repeatedly extended him an open offer to pitch for the baseball team . 
 = = College career = = 
 Streets played college football and basketball at the University of Michigan . As a true freshman in the 1995 NCAA Division I @-@ A football season , Streets only caught five passes for the 1995 Michigan Wolverines football team : he caught three in the 52 – 17 October 28 Little Brown Jug rivalry game victory against the Minnesota Golden Gophers and two in the 31 – 23 November 25 Michigan – Ohio State rivalry game with the Ohio State Buckeyes . All five athletes who had more receptions than him that season went on to play professional football ( Mercury Hayes − 48 , Amani Toomer – 44 , Jay Riemersma – 41 , Chris Howard – 14 and Jerame Tuman – 9 ) . Hayes , Toomer and Riemersma , who accounted for 75 percent of the team 's yardage , were all selected in the 1996 NFL Draft , leaving Streets as the leading returning wide receiver ( Howard was a running back and Tuman was a tight end ) . 
 In 1996 , Michigan dealt with a starting quarterback returning from a season @-@ ending injury and a depleted receiving group : Scott Dreisbach had missed the final two @-@ thirds of the season , leaving Brian Griese as the starter and freshman Tom Brady served as an understudy . Streets earned the starting wide receiver job and started in all twelve games . He led the 1996 Michigan Wolverines football team in receptions and reception yardage with 44 receptions for 730 yards . In the first game of the season against Illinois , Streets made the key block on Dreisbach 's 72 @-@ yard touchdown run . Two weeks later he made key catches on both the game @-@ tying and game @-@ winning scoring drives against the Colorado Buffaloes . His best statistical performance came at home in Cook County , Illinois in front of a large gathering of friends and family against Northwestern when he recorded 12 receptions for 150 yards in an October 5 17 – 16 loss . This first appearance in the Chicago area would be his collegiate career @-@ best in terms of single @-@ game receptions . The 12 receptions was a school record , but it was overshadowed by a fumble that changed the momentum of the game . Streets caught two touchdown passes both in rivalry games : the opening score from Dreisbach in the 44 – 10 victory against Minnesota and the only touchdown in a 13 – 9 victory over Ohio State from Griese . In his sophomore year , after the football season ended with the January 1 , 1997 Outback Bowl game , he joined the Michigan Wolverines basketball team in the last week of January and made his debut in a February 1 , 1997 game against Michigan State . The team went on to win the 1997 National Invitation Tournament on March 27 that season , and Streets played a few minutes in four of the five games . However , due to the University of Michigan basketball scandal the championship has been vacated . After the basketball season ended , Streets rejoined the football team for Spring practice , and he led all receivers with four receptions for 125 yards in the annual spring game on April 12 . 
 According to his mother , during the summer prior to his 1997 junior year , Streets dedicated himself to weight training like he never had before in an effort to end a Rose Bowl draught that made the 1997 Wolverines the first since the 1969 team to have no Rose Bowl veterans . Although Streets and Russell Shaw were the starting receivers , it was understood that Charles Woodson , who was regarded as one of the most versatile athletes in college football , was expected to play on offense that season . However , it was not clear whether Dreisbach , Brady or Griese would quarterback the team . Griese was named starter shortly before the season opener . It was believed that a solid season by any of the quarterbacks could lead to a productive season by Streets and the receivers . Streets ' first touchdown of the season was a 41 @-@ yard game @-@ tying catch from Griese in a 21 – 14 September 27 victory in the rivalry game against Notre Dame . During the season , Streets dislocated both thumbs , with the second injury occurring in the November 1 Little Brown Jug game against Minnesota . Streets caught no passes against either Minnesota or Penn State the following week . His production drought was notable and he recovered on November 15 with five catches for 108 yards including a 38 @-@ yard touchdown from Griese on November 15 against Wisconsin . Although the injury @-@ hampered Streets went without a catch in three of the last four regular season tames he caught touchdown passes of 53 and 58 yards and drew a key pass interference penalty in the 1998 Rose Bowl . The Rose Bowl performance was Streets ' season @-@ high with 127 receiving yards and two touchdowns . It helped solidify Michigan 's case as the Bowl Alliance national champion . 
 In 1998 , Streets ' returned for his senior season with several experienced receivers including 1997 All @-@ American tight end Tuman . The 1998 Michigan Wolverines football team entered the season with a quarterback battle between Brady , Driesbach and Drew Henson and wide receiver battle between David Terrell and Marquise Walker . In the season September 5 opening game loss against Notre Dame , Streets caught 8 passes for 101 yards in the first half and Marcus Knight accounted for 126 of Michigan 's 322 passing yards from Brady and Henson . Streets had back @-@ to @-@ back 100 yard games in October : He posted 117 yards on eight receptions in the October 24 homecoming game against Indiana , and he had a career @-@ high 192 yards against Minnesota on October 31 . Against Ohio State , he caught Michigan 's only touchdown in a 31 – 16 November 21 loss as part of a 9 catch and 118 yard effort . In the game @-@ tying touchdown drive in the fourth quarter of the 1999 Florida Citrus Bowl victory over Arkansas , Streets caught a 15 @-@ yard completion on third @-@ and @-@ 11 and the 8 @-@ yarder on fourth @-@ and @-@ 2 on his way to a career @-@ ending 7 @-@ catch 129 @-@ yard effort . Streets caught a fourth @-@ quarter touchdown pass and two @-@ point conversion in the January 23 , 1999 Senior Bowl , and he was on the January 24 , 1999 Hula Bowl roster . 
 As a senior , Streets totalled 1035 yards and 11 touchdowns on 76 receptions , and he was named team Most Valuable Player for the 1998 season . Streets was voted to the All @-@ Big Ten Second Team in 1998 . Streets remains second to Jack Clancy on the all @-@ time Michigan single game receptions yardage list with 192 . Streets led the Michigan receivers statistically for three consecutive years from 1996 – 1998 ( Yards 1996 – 1998 , Receptions 1996 & 1998 , Receiving touchdowns 1997 – 1998 ) . Streets finished his career at Michigan with <unk> yards and 19 touchdowns on 144 receptions . 
 At the March NFL Combine , Streets ran the third fastest 40 @-@ yard dash in a time of 4 @.@ 42 seconds . Streets was regarded as between the 6th and 8th best wide receiver in the 1999 NFL Draft according to most expert analyses in April . However , he ruptured his right achilles tendon in a pickup basketball game prior to the draft and was expected to be sidelined for six to eight months . As a result , he was the twentieth wide receiver selected . Streets , who was on crutches at the time of the draft , was relieved to have been drafted . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = San Francisco 49ers = = = 
 The San Francisco 49ers , who had Jerry Rice , Terrell Owens , and J. J. Stokes , did not need a wide receiver right away and gambled on the projected 2nd @-@ round selection with their sixth round pick . Head coach Steve Mariucci said that the team had evaluated his prospect as an injured athlete and had determined him to be a good selection for later rounds despite his injury . Streets was the only 1999 draftee not to sign in July when the other draftees signed , but he signed just before the end of the month . Just before the season started , Streets was placed on the reserve non @-@ football injury list in order to make roster space for Na 'il Benjamin and Damon Griffin . Streets was activated onto the 53 @-@ man roster prior to week 13 of the season to replace the injured R. W. <unk> . He activated for the gameday roster three weeks later for the final two games . In his second game , he caught his first two NFL receptions on the Monday Night Football season finale . 
 When Streets had the chance to exhibit his skills during the 2000 NFL season for the 2000 49ers , he proved himself to be the only speed receiver with the ability to create big plays downfield , but he remained the fourth receiver . During the season as the number four receiver , Streets caught a total of 19 receptions , and he caught four in both games Owens was inactive . In mid @-@ December , Streets broke his tibia and ended his season two weeks prior to the end of the season . The game was Rice 's last home game as a 49er and the day that Owens set the then @-@ NFL record for single @-@ game receptions , with 20 . 
 In the 2001 NFL season , Rice signed with the Oakland Raiders . Streets became the number three receiver for the 2001 49ers behind Stokes and Owens that season . In the season opener against the Atlanta Falcons , Streets totaled 81 yards receiving as part of a 335 @-@ yard day by Garcia . This was Streets ' single @-@ game season @-@ high yardage total for the season . It included a 52 @-@ yard overtime catch on 3rd @-@ and @-@ 5 in the game @-@ winning drive , the longest reception of Streets ' career and more yards than he would accumulate in any single game the rest of the season . Streets recorded his first career touchdown on December 2 , 2001 against the Buffalo Bills . Over the course of the season Streets started three games and his total receptions and yards compared to the prior season increased from 19 to 28 and 287 to 345 , respectively . The 2001 – 02 NFL playoffs were Streets ' NFL playoff debut . In the team 's only game against Green Bay , Streets tied for the team @-@ high with four receptions and 50 yards , just two yards short of Stokes ' 52 @-@ yard effort . Streets caught a fourth @-@ quarter touchdown and game @-@ tying two @-@ point conversion in the game , but the 49ers yielded ten fourth quarter points to lose 25 – 15 . 
 In the 2002 NFL season , Stokes often performed the role of a tight end , and got injured clearing the way for Streets to start in some games for the 2002 49ers . Streets started a total of 14 games that season . He had eight receptions three times , but recorded no 100 @-@ yard games . The final eight @-@ reception game against the Arizona Cardinals on December 21 would prove to be Streets ' career @-@ high 90 @-@ yard game . The following week on the final Monday Night game of the regular season , Streets posted his first and only two @-@ touchdown effort in a losing cause against the St. Louis Rams . That season , Streets posted his career @-@ highs in yards ( 756 ) and receptions ( 72 ) and totaled five touchdowns for the first time . The 49ers ' season continued into the 2002 – 03 NFL playoffs and Streets caught five receptions in both of the teams ' playoff games , including a game @-@ winning touchdown with one minute remaining in the January 5 , 2003 39 – 38 victory over the New York Giants . The Giants game was memorable for its 24 @-@ point comeback by the 49ers . Despite the natural glory of the game @-@ winning catch , Streets remained a modest footnote in the press and humble with his friends . After the season , Streets was a restricted free agent . He was expected to be signed and traded to another team before the 2003 NFL draft in order to improve the 49ers ' draft position . 
 The team replaced Mariucci with Dennis Erickson in February 2003 . Before the 2003 NFL season , Stokes , who at the end of 2002 had been struggling to hold on to the third receiver position , was signed by the Jacksonville Jaguars . Streets started every game for the 2003 49ers . His best performance in terms of receptions and yards was a December 14 6 @-@ reception 89 @-@ yard day that included a 41 @-@ yard touchdown against the Cincinnati Bengals , which was his longest reception of the season . That season he totaled 47 receptions and 595 yards as well as a career @-@ high seven touchdowns . Over the course of the season he was slowed by knee tendinitis and after the season he wanted to return to the Midwest . Streets along with Owens , starting quarterback Garcia and starting running back Garrison Hearst , and starting offensive linemen Derrick <unk> and Ron Stone were all let go by the team that year . That is regarded as the biggest release of offensive starters in NFL history by a team in a single season . 
 = = = Detroit Lions = = = 
 In March , Streets signed with the Detroit Lions , for the 2004 NFL season . In the 2004 NFL Draft , the Lions drafted wide receiver Roy Williams with the seventh overall selection one year after drafting Rogers in the first round . Williams and Rogers were projected as the starters with Streets considered the third receiver as the season began . Rogers broke his collarbone on the third play of the season and was lost for the entire year . Streets started 12 of the 13 games that he played for the 2004 Lions while accumulating 260 yards on 28 receptions . In the seventh game against the Dallas Cowboys on October 31 , Roy Williams leveled Streets , who did not catch another pass in the game after the second quarter hit . Streets did not return to practice until November 17 . He was in the lineup on November 21 , and caught a pass against the Minnesota Vikings . Streets was listed with an injured knee after the December 26 game against the Chicago Bears . Streets did not appear in the Lions ' final game of the season on January 2 . After the season , he was an unrestricted free agent , due to his years of seniority . The 49ers received a compensatory draft pick in the 2005 NFL Draft for losing Streets to free agency . Instead of re @-@ signing Streets , the Lions signed wide receiver Kevin Johnson in April 2005 . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Streets was active in mentoring and coaching youth basketball while he was a professional football player . He coached a team to the 16 @-@ under national AAU championship . Streets was actively involved in creating and expanding the Chicago @-@ area AAU basketball program . He founded and coaches the <unk> AAU travelling club team , that has included players like Anthony Davis . Streets was also active in coaching local all @-@ star games , such as the spring game sponsored by The Star / Daily Southtown , Balmoral Park Race Track , McDonald 's , Comcast and radio station 99 @.@ 9 FM . 
 = Louisiana Purchase Exposition dollar = 
 The Louisiana Purchase Exposition dollar was a commemorative coin issue in gold dated 1903 . Struck in two varieties , the coins were designed by United States Bureau of the Mint Chief Engraver Charles E. Barber . The pieces were issued to commemorate the Louisiana Purchase Exposition held in 1904 in St. Louis ; one variety depicted former president Thomas Jefferson , and the other , the recently assassinated president William McKinley . Although not the first American commemorative coins , they were the first in gold . 
 Promoters of the Louisiana Purchase Exposition , originally scheduled to open in 1903 , sought a commemorative coin for fundraising purposes . Congress authorized an issue in 1902 , and exposition authorities , including numismatic promoter Farran Zerbe , sought to have the coin issued with two designs , to aid sales . The price for each variety was $ 3 , the same cost whether sold as a coin , or mounted in jewelry or on a spoon . 
 The coins did not sell well , and most were later melted . Zerbe , who had promised to support the issue price of the coins , did not do so as prices dropped once the fair ( rescheduled for 1904 ) closed . This drop , however , did not greatly affect Zerbe 's career , as he went on to promote other commemorative coins and become president of the American Numismatic Association . The coins also recovered , regaining their issue price by 1915 ; they are now worth between a few hundred and several thousand dollars , depending on condition . 
 = = Background = = 
 Much of the area near the Mississippi River was explored by French explorers in the 17th and 18th centuries . In 1682 , René @-@ Robert Cavelier , Sieur de La Salle , claimed the entire area drained by the river for France , naming it Louisiana for Louis XIV . Although most French territory in the Western Hemisphere was lost in the French and Indian War ( 1756 – 1763 ) , the Mississippi basin did not pass to the victors in that war ( primarily the British ) as it had been secretly transferred to Spain by the 1762 Treaty of Fontainebleau . 
 Napoleon came to power in 1799 . Dreaming of a renewed French empire , he secured the return of the Louisiana territory from Spain via the Third Treaty of San Ildefonso the following year , and through other agreements . These pacts were initially secret , and newly inaugurated American President Thomas Jefferson learned of them in 1801 . Fearing that the port of New Orleans would be closed to American shipping , he sent former Virginia senator James Monroe to France to assist American Minister Robert Livingston in purchasing the lower Mississippi ; Congress appropriated $ 2 million for the purpose . 
 When the Americans met with Napoleon , they found that the emperor desired to sell the entire territory , much of which was unmapped and unexplored by white men ; Napoleon was faced with defeat in revolting Haiti and feared that the British would capture New Orleans , meaning he would lose Louisiana with no compensation . After some haggling , they agreed on a price of 60 million francs , plus 20 million more to pay claims by American citizens against France — a total of some $ 15 million , which paid for some 828 @,@ 500 square miles ( 2 @,@ 146 @,@ 000 km2 ) of land . The treaty was signed on April 30 , 1803 , and , although there was some question as to whether there was constitutional power for such a purchase , the American Senate ratified the treaty on October 20 , 1803 . The United States took formal possession two months later . 
 The Louisiana Purchase doubled the size of the United States , and today forms much of the center of the country . <unk> of honoring the centennial of the purchase , Congress passed authorizing legislation for an exposition ; the bill was signed by President William McKinley on March 3 , 1901 . McKinley was assassinated in September of that year . 
 = = Preparation = = 
 The Louisiana Purchase Exposition dollar was authorized by Congress on June 28 , 1902 , when President Theodore Roosevelt signed an appropriations bill that included a $ 5 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 rider to subsidize the Louisiana Purchase Exposition . The bill in question authorized 250 @,@ 000 gold one @-@ dollar pieces to be paid over to the exposition organizers as part of the appropriation , upon their posting a bond that they would fulfill the requirements of the legislation . The bill did not specify the wording or design to be placed on the coins , leaving that to the discretion of the Secretary of the Treasury . 
 Anthony Swiatek and Walter Breen , in their encyclopedia of commemorative coins , suggested that the decision to have multiple designs was " through some unrecorded agreement " . The legislation was ambiguous enough to permit such an interpretation , and numismatist Farran Zerbe urged the Mint to strike more than one type of coin , stating that sales would be increased if this was done . Zerbe was not only a collector ( he would serve as president of the American Numismatic Association from 1908 to 1910 ) , but he also promoted numismatics with his traveling exhibition , " Money of the World " . He was involved in the distribution of commemorative coins from the Columbian half dollar of 1892 to the Panama @-@ Pacific issue of 1915 , and would be the sole distributor of Louisiana Purchase dollars . 
 On August 12 , 1902 , Treasury Secretary Leslie M. Shaw wrote to former Missouri governor David R. Francis , one of the promoters of the exposition , enquiring what design exposition officials would like to see on the reverse of the coins . Although Francis 's response is not extant , Mint authorities originally determined upon an olive branch surrounding a numeral " 1 " . This was apparently disliked by the Director of the Mint , George E. Roberts , for on October 2 , 1902 , Philadelphia Mint Superintendent John Landis wrote to him , enclosing cardboard impressions of the original and revised proposed reverses . The new design had the value spelled out and the letter stated that the changes were being made at Roberts 's suggestion . On October 13 , Barber went to Washington ( where the director 's office was located ) to confer with Roberts about the design . Roberts considered the olive branch " too conspicuous " , given the size of the coin and the lettering , and asked that the branch be reduced in size . This apparently was done . By September 1902 , work upon the dies for the obverses , showing the heads of McKinley and Jefferson , being worked upon by Mint Chief Engraver Charles E. Barber , was well @-@ advanced . 
 In December 1902 , the Philadelphia Mint struck 75 @,@ 080 gold dollars . These were dated 1903 , a violation of normal Mint practice to have the date of striking on the coin . This was not unprecedented ; the 1900 @-@ dated Lafayette dollar had been struck in December 1899 . It is not known which gold dollar was first struck . In January 1903 , an additional 175 @,@ 178 pieces were coined ; the excess of 258 over the authorized mintage was set aside for testing by the annual Assay Commission . There is no difference between those pieces struck in 1902 and those minted in 1903 . Fifty thousand pieces were sent to the St. Louis sub @-@ treasury on December 22 , 1902 , to await the organizing committee 's compliance with other parts of the law , most likely relating to the required posting of a bond . 
 The first 100 specimens of each design were struck in a proof finish . These were mounted on cardboard with presentation certificates and presented to favored insiders and Mint officials ; they were not available to the public . The certificates were signed by Superintendent Landis , and by Rhine R. Freed , Chief Coiner of the Philadelphia Mint . The coin was placed inside a holder with wax paper window , secured into place with heavy string with that mint 's seal . These were the first commemorative gold coins struck by the United States . 
 = = Design = = 
 Barber took the design for the Jefferson obverse from the former president 's Indian Peace Medal , created by engraver John Reich , who used a bust by Jean @-@ Antoine Houdon as his model . The chief engraver modeled the McKinley obverse after his own design for the fallen president 's medal issued by the Mint . Barber 's medal had been modeled from life ; McKinley had sat for the chief engraver . The reverse , for both coins , contains the denomination , a commemorative inscription , and an olive branch above the anniversary dates . 
 Coin dealer B. Max Mehl deemed the issue " the most attractive of all of our commemorative gold dollars " . Others disagreed ; Swiatek and Breen criticized the pieces , stating that Jefferson 's " facial features , inaccurately rendered by Charles E. Barber , have acquired a resemblance to Napoleon Bonaparte , the other party in the Louisiana Purchase transaction . " Stating that McKinley was recognizable by his bow tie , they note of the reverse , " the olive branch — if that is the plant intended — may refer to this 828 @,@ 000 square mile territory 's acquisition by peaceful means " . Numismatic historian Don Taxay criticized Reich 's medal , stating that it " is hardly elegant , with Jefferson hunched unpleasantly in the circle as though placed there by a modern <unk> " . Taxay noted that Barber 's rendition of McKinley for that medal had attracted the insult of " deadly " from the chief engraver 's longtime enemy , sculptor Augustus Saint @-@ Gaudens . 
 Art historian Cornelius Vermeule criticized the Louisiana Purchase Exposition dollar and the Lewis and Clark Exposition dollar issued in 1904 – 1905 : " the lack of spark in these coins , as in so many designs by Barber or [ Assistant Engraver George T. ] Morgan , stems from the fact that the faces , hair , and drapery are flat and the lettering is small , crowded , and even . " He did not believe that the problems he saw were due to the small size of the dollar , stating that the gold dollar of the Panama @-@ Pacific issue , by Charles Keck , is far more beautiful . Vermeule noted that contemporary accounts saw the 1903 issue as an innovation ; a 1904 article in the American Journal of Numismatics stated that they " indicate a popular desire for a new departure from the somewhat monotonous types of Liberty which have characterized our money ... If this tendency could make itself felt on the regular coinage , it would give a new zeal to collectors . " Beginning in 1909 with the Lincoln cent , the Mint would depict an actual person on the circulating coinage ; this would become more common with the 1932 Washington quarter . 
 = = Distribution , aftermath , and collecting = = 
 The fair at St. Louis opened on April 30 , 1904 , a year later than originally planned . It was one of the largest World 's Fairs in area , set over 1 @,@ 272 acres ( 515 ha ) in Forest Park . There were 15 major buildings and a host of smaller exhibits , and it is doubtful if many attendees saw more than a fraction of the attractions — seeing everything in the Agricultural Building alone required a walk of 9 miles ( 14 km ) . Twenty million people attended the exposition , which inspired the popular song , " Meet Me in St. Louis " . 
 The coins were sold at $ 3 each . They were available in a case of issue , or could be purchased mounted in spoons and various sorts of jewelry . Some were mounted with solder , which has impaired their present @-@ day numismatic value ; others were sold with mountings that did not damage the coin . Zerbe had thought of these varied ways of selling the coin , and many of the sales at the fair were in this manner . No additional charge was made for these adornments . 
 Zerbe also promoted the pieces to the numismatic community . Although the $ 3 price was not high by later standards , triple face value was considered excessive by many coin collectors , and the coins did not sell well . Efforts by Zerbe to promote the pieces included proposing that the government produce a billion @-@ dollar gold piece to be exhibited at the fair , and co @-@ ordinating sales with the vendors of near @-@ worthless replicas of tiny gold pieces struck privately in California in pioneer days , which were half price with the purchase of a dollar coin . Thomas L. Elder , a dealer coming into prominence at that time , spoke out against Zerbe , calling him a huckster whose advertising was misleading and who was bringing discredit upon coin dealers . 
 The organizers , including Zerbe , promised to support the $ 3 issue price against the possibility of price drops on the secondary market . Prices of the Columbian half dollar and Lafayette dollar had fallen and remained below their issue prices . By November 1903 , only about 10 @,@ 000 of the gold pieces had been sold , including sales to the fair 's promoters and others interested in it . According to numismatist Q. David Bowers , fairgoers likely accounted for several thousand coins , but the bulk of the distribution was to coin dealers and collectors . Zerbe sold them at his coin exhibit for years afterwards ; coin dealer B. Max Mehl bought thousands from Zerbe at just over face value . These were sold in Mehl 's mail order sales through the 1920s . Despite efforts by Zerbe which Bowers finds " enthusiastic or even heroic " , only about 35 @,@ 000 were sold to the public ; the remaining 215 @,@ 000 were returned to the Mint and melted around 1914 . 
 Numismatist David M. <unk> in 1938 noted that the Mint kept no records of how many of each variety was melted , but that he thought that about 10 % more of the McKinley issue was sold . Bowers , writing about a half century later , opined to the contrary ; that in his experience and in grading service reports , the Jefferson coin was slightly more prevalent . Swiatek , in his 2012 book , prints statistics showing the number of pieces examined by the numismatic grading services , indicating more Jefferson dollars than McKinley . 
 Despite Zerbe 's statement that he would support the issue price of the coins at $ 3 , he did not do so and the price of the dollars fell to about $ 2 by late 1905 . Their market price again reached $ 3 by about 1915 , and thereafter continued to rise . The 2014 edition of R.S. Yeoman 's A Guide Book of United States Coins ( the Red Book ) lists both the Jefferson and the McKinley variety at prices ranging from $ 500 in Almost Uncirculated ( AU @-@ 50 ) condition to $ 2 @,@ 150 in near pristine MS @-@ 66 condition , though the Jefferson is more expensive in some intermediate grades . 
 Zerbe stated in 1905 that he " was the only man to sell 50 @,@ 000 dollars at $ 3 apiece " . In 1923 , he wrote in an article that the Louisiana Purchase dollars had always sold for $ 3 or more " for the particular reason that the one in charge of their sale felt a price protection obligation to every purchaser . " He did not , however , identify himself as " the one in charge of their sale " . 
 = Hans Waldmann ( fighter pilot ) = 
 Hans Peter Waldmann ( 24 September 1922 – 18 March 1945 ) was a German Luftwaffe ( Air Force ) fighter ace and recipient of the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross ( German : Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes ) , an honour that recognised extreme bravery on the battlefield or outstanding military leadership . Waldmann received the award after he had shot down 85 enemy aircraft . In total , he was credited with 134 aerial victories accumulated in 527 combat missions . 
 Born in Braunschweig , Waldmann volunteered for service in the Luftwaffe of Nazi Germany in 1940 . After training at various pilot and fighter @-@ pilot schools , he was posted to Jagdgeschwader 52 ( JG 52 — 52nd Fighter Wing ) , operating on the Eastern Front , in August 1942 . Here Waldmann fought in the aerial battles over Stalingrad , the Caucasus , the Black Sea , and the Crimea . He was credited with 84 aerial victories before briefly being transferred to the Western Front , where he was credited with one aerial victory . Back on the Eastern Front , Waldmann accumulated further victories , bringing his score to 125 victories by end of May 1944 . He then fought in the skies over France after the Western Allied Invasion of Normandy , claiming seven aerial victories , before converting to the Messerschmitt Me 262 jet fighter in late 1944 . Flying the Me 262 , Waldmann shot down two North American P @-@ 51 Mustangs on 22 February 1945 before being killed in a mid @-@ air collision with one of his squadron members on 18 March 1945 near <unk> , Holstein . 
 = = Childhood , education and early career = = 
 Waldmann was born in Braunschweig in the Free State of Brunswick on 24 September 1922 . He was the second son of Ludwig Waldmann , a bank manager , and his wife Maria . Waldmann had an older brother Paul . In 1928 he attended the Volksschule , a primary school , in the Comenius @-@ Street . Over Easter in 1932 he transferred to the humanities @-@ oriented secondary school Wilhelm @-@ Gymnasium . 
 In 1938 , Waldmann applied for a career as an officer in the Luftwaffe for the first time . Travelling to Berlin , he was deemed suitable but at the age of 16 was too young to volunteer for military service . After the outbreak of World War II , while still at school , Waldmann and his fellow students were forced into compulsory labour service ( Reichsarbeitsdienst ) . Waldmann was assigned to the Brunswick Mechanical Engineering Institute . Since Waldmann had intended to study aircraft construction after his military service , he was reassigned to the Institute of Aeronautical Metrology and Flight Meteorology at the Braunschweig @-@ Waggum airfield under the leadership of Prof. Dr. Heinrich <unk> . 
 At the end of March 1940 , Waldmann graduated from school with his Abitur ( diploma ) . After this he was accepted into the Luftwaffe , two years after his initial application . Commencing in July 1940 , he undertook 12 weeks of basic military training with <unk> 72 ( 72nd Flight Training Regiment ) at Fels am Wagram in Austria . Upon completion , Waldmann was transferred to the Flugzeugführerschule A / B 72 ( flight school for the pilot license ) at Markersdorf near Sankt Pölten in early October 1940 . Eight days later his training group returned to Fels am Wagram because Markersdorf was overcrowded with other flight courses . Thus flight training started on the improvised airfield without hangars at Fels am Wagram . His first familiarisation flight was on 16 October 1940 , in a Bücker Bü 131 " Jungmann " biplane marked " <unk> " . Waldmann logged his first solo flight on 13 November 1940 at 09 : 17 in a Bü 131 " <unk> " , landing again after six minutes of flight time . His training group returned to Markersdorf in February 1941 . From here , he conducted his first cross @-@ country flights on the Bü 131 " Jungmann " as well as the Focke @-@ Wulf Fw 44 " Stieglitz " . The majority of the cross @-@ country flights were flown on the Gotha Go 145 . From 4 April to 28 April 1941 he made the round trip from Markersdorf to <unk> , Nürnberg , Ettingshausen , Ingolstadt , Zwickau , Hildesheim , Braunschweig , Mannheim , Karlsruhe , Delmenhorst , Halberstadt and Fürth . At Ettingshausen he received instruction in formation flying and aerobatics . 
 By August 1941 Operation Barbarossa , the German invasion of the Soviet Union , had been underway for two months , and after completing his A / B flight training at Markersdorf Waldmann was transferred to the Jagdfliegerschule 6 ( 6th Fighter Pilot School ) at <unk> @-@ <unk> near Neustadt an der <unk> . He completed the final phase of his fighter pilot training in Gleiwitz , Upper Silesia , from 3 June to 17 August 1942 , before transferring to the front . 
 = = World War II = = 
 Holding the rank of <unk> , a non @-@ commissioned officer similar in rank to sergeant , on 20 August 1942 Waldmann was tasked with shuttling new Messerschmitt Bf @-@ 109Gs from a factory at Krakau to units on the Eastern Front . Along with six other newly trained pilots , he reached Lemberg where the group was scheduled for a stop over . Bad weather closed in and Waldmann was the only one to take off before the group was grounded . Getting away at 17 : 55 , he headed for <unk> . The next day he continued his journey to Uman , 230 kilometres ( 140 mi ) south of Kiev in Ukraine . For the next few days , he was sent back and forth until he finally reached the II . Gruppe ( 2nd group ) of Jagdgeschwader 52 ( JG 52 — 52nd Fighter Wing ) at <unk> , operating in the combat area of Stalingrad . 
 On arrival , Waldmann was approached by Hauptmann ( Captain ) Johannes Steinhoff and asked whether he would like to fly as his wingman . Waldmann then conducted six familiarisation flights on the " Gustav " , as the Bf @-@ 109G @-@ 2 was referred to , on 30 August 1942 . Flying a Bf @-@ 109 marked with a black " Chevron @-@ 2 " , indicating an aircraft of the Stab , he flew his first combat mission on 31 August 1942 in the vicinity of Stalingrad . Steinhoff was impressed by his first performance . At the time , Waldmann was still officially assigned to a transfer squadron , but Steinhoff decided to keep him in his <unk> @-@ Schwarm , flight of four . Here his comrades nicknamed Waldmann " Dackel " , an allusion to his last name . In German , a " Dackel " , or Dachshund , is often named <unk> , a hypocoristic form of Waldmann . 
 = = = War against the Soviet Union = = = 
 On 9 September 1942 Waldmann scored his first aerial victory , and thereafter scored rapidly . After 84 victories on 1 September 1943 , Waldmann was promoted to Leutnant ( second lieutenant ) and assigned to Ergänzungs @-@ Jagdgruppe Ost ( Supplementary Fighter Group East ) . Here he was credited with the destruction of a B @-@ 17 Flying Fortress on 5 January 1944 . This victory , his 85th , was actually a separation @-@ shot — a severely damaged heavy bomber forced to separate from his combat box — which counted as an aerial victory . Waldmann had attacked a 28 @-@ aircraft bomber formation and severely damaged the B @-@ 17 . The aerial @-@ victory commission of Luftflotte 3 also credited the Flak @-@ Regiment 45 of 12 . Flak @-@ Brigade with this victory . Following this aerial victory , he received the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross on 5 February 1944 . The presentation of the award was announced by the Greater German Radio — the official radio station of the Ministry of Public Enlightenment and Propaganda — on the evening of 20 February 1944 . 
 In late February 1944 Waldmann was sent back to the Crimean peninsula on the Eastern Front , where he took command of 4 . / JG 52 ( 4th Squadron of the 52nd Fighter Wing ) as its Staffelkapitän ( squadron leader ) . He continued his success , claiming eight aerial victories in March , and 16 in April of which eight were claimed from 5 – 12 April . On 11 April 1944 he claimed two Yakovlev Yak @-@ 7s as his 99th and 100th opponents shot down . He was the 70th Luftwaffe pilot to achieve the century mark . By 31 May 1944 his score stood at 125 aerial victories . Two Staffeln ( squadrons ) of the II . / JG 52 were transferred to Huși at the Prut River on 27 May 1944 . Here Waldmann claimed his final four victories on the Eastern Front before Gruppenkommandeur ( group commander ) Major Gerhard Barkhorn was ordered to transfer one Staffel to the west in Defence of the Reich . Barkhorn selected Waldmann 's 4th Staffel which was officially assigned to the II . / Jagdgeschwader 3 " Udet " ( JG 3 — 3rd Fighter Wing ) , at the time under the command of Hauptmann Hans @-@ Ekkehard Bob . 
 = = = Invasion of Normandy = = = 
 The Invasion of Normandy , which started on the early morning of 6 June 1944 , was in full swing by the time Waldmann 's Staffel arrived in France . The Western Allies were already breaking out of Normandy in what was codenamed Operation Cobra . II . / JG 3 " Udet " ( 2nd Group of the 3rd Fighter Wing ) was stationed at Nogent @-@ le @-@ Roi , roughly 50 kilometres ( 31 mi ) southwest of Paris . The Gruppe was tasked with ground support missions . In one of these missions against the Allied invasion forces , Waldmann claimed to have damaged a P @-@ 51 Mustang on 31 July 1944 . He was credited with the destruction of numerous trucks during ground support missions over the period of 2 – 5 August 1944 . 
 Waldmann 's claimed his first aerial victory in the west , his 126th in total , over a B @-@ 24 Liberator on 6 August 1944 . Waldmann had taken off at 11 : 43 on a free @-@ fighter sweep mission against heavy bombers . His unit spotted a formation of B @-@ 24s after 45 minutes flying time . Waldmann attacked and with his first pass at an altitude of 5 @,@ 000 metres ( 16 @,@ 000 ft ) had hit one of the B @-@ 24 between the two starboard engines , which immediately set the bomber on fire . The B @-@ 24 was observed to crash 3 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) southeast of Méry . His final tally for August was seven Allied planes , including the B @-@ 24 , one Auster on 7 August , and five P @-@ 47 Thunderbolts ( two on 14 August , two on 18 August and one on 19 August ) . 
 = = = Flying the Messerschmitt Me 262 and death = = = 
 Waldmann learned to fly the Messerschmitt Me 262 " <unk> " , the first operational jet fighter , at Landsberg am Lech and Kaltenkirchen in December 1944 . He was then transferred to 3 . / Jagdgeschwader 7 ( JG 7 — 7th Fighter Wing ) , now flying the " <unk> " , as its Staffelführer ( squadron leader on probation ) . 
 Together with his wingman ‚ Oberfähnrich Günter Schrey , Waldmann took off at 11 : 39 on 22 February 1945 from Oranienburg on an offensive counter @-@ air mission against inbound Allied heavy bombers . The Anglo @-@ American attack was codenamed Operation Clarion . About 20 minutes into the flight , roughly 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) west of Berlin , they spotted an American P @-@ 51 Mustang flying at 7 @,@ 000 metres ( 23 @,@ 000 ft ) . Closing fast , Waldmann shot down the Mustang at 12 : 02 before proceeding west for Magdeburg . Near Oschersleben they spotted another Mustang at 3 @,@ 800 metres ( 12 @,@ 500 ft ) . Waldmann shot it down at 12 : 17 , achieving his 134th and final aerial victory . The Mustang was observed crashing into a forest 25 kilometres ( 16 mi ) northeast of the <unk> , the highest peak of the Harz mountain range . 
 On Sunday , 18 March 1945 , the lower cloud ceiling at Kaltenkirchen was less than 600 metres ( 2 @,@ 000 ft ) and most of the time between 80 – 100 metres ( 260 – 330 ft ) , while the upper cloud ceiling was at 6 @,@ 000 metres ( 20 @,@ 000 ft ) , rendering flight conditions outside the official operational specification for the Me 262 . The jet was not fully cleared for instrument flight , mandating a lower cloud ceiling of more than 800 metres ( 2 @,@ 600 ft ) . Major Erich <unk> , Gruppenkommandeur of the I. / JG 7 , was attending a meeting at the Luftgaukommando in Hamburg @-@ Blankensee , when Oberleutnant Hans Grünberg , the most senior officer on duty and Staffelkapitän of the 1st Staffel , received the order from Major Richter , the Ia ( operations officer ) , to engage inbound heavy bombers . Grünberg initially argued that weather conditions prohibited a safe takeoff but Reichsmarschall Hermann Göring intervened and ordered the jets to engage the enemy . 
 The order resulted in the death of both Waldmann and his wingman Schrey on the following mission . Waldmann was killed following a mid @-@ air collision with Leutnant Hans @-@ Dieter Weihs shortly after takeoff , and Schrey was killed in combat with US fighters . Mindful of the direct order of the Reichsmarschall , Oberleutnant Grünberg ( 1st Staffel ) , Oberleutnant Fritz Stehle ( 2nd Staffel ) and Waldmann ( 3rd Staffel ) had decided that each of them would lead a flight of four Me 262s , taking off and flying around for an hour before returning without trying to engage the enemy . Grünberg 's Schwarm took off first followed by Stehle 's Schwarm . Waldmann chose Weihs , as the most experienced pilot trained in instrument flight , to lead the Schwarm , while Schrey once again served as Waldmann 's wingman . Waldmann 's Me 262 A @-@ 1 " Yellow 3 " ( Werknummer <unk> — factory number ) took off at 12 : 24 and Weihs ordered the Schwarm to form a close formation , flying wing tip to wing tip . 
 Only three Me 262s took off ; Flieger Gerhard Reiher 's Me 262 had experienced engine failure . Four minutes into the flight , having travelled roughly 50 kilometres ( 31 mi ) and flying at less than 800 metres ( 2 @,@ 600 ft ) above the ground , Weihs ' aircraft experienced a heavy blow from below after Waldmann collided with him . His jet in an unrecoverable spin , Weihs bailed out and came down near the Hamburg @-@ Berlin railroad tracks . The airfield at Kaltenkirchen was immediately informed . Waldmann and Schrey were initially believed missing . Waldmann 's body was recovered the next day near <unk> , roughly 1 kilometre ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) away from the crash site of his Me 262 . Apparently he had managed to bail out but failed to deploy his parachute in time , although the injuries sustained during the crash with Weihs ' aircraft may have already been fatal as the recovery party found Waldmann with his upper forehead smashed . Schrey was also found dead . He had bailed out with his parachute , but his body was found riddled by machine @-@ gun bullets . 
 The fallen airmen were buried with full military honours , including a Me 262 flypast , at the cemetery in Kaltenkirchen . Waldmann 's successor as Staffelkapitän , Oberleutnant Walter Wagner , accompanied Waldmann 's mother from Braunschweig to Kaltenkirchen for the funeral . A number of wreaths were laid on his grave , the largest sent by the Reichsmarschall . Waldmann was recommended for the Oak Leaves to the Knight 's Cross , but the recommendation was either not approved or not finalized before the end of the war . 
 = = Aerial victory credits = = 
 Hans Waldmann was credited with 134 aerial victories , claimed in 527 combat missions , 10 on the Western Front and 124 on the Eastern Front . His tally on the Eastern Front includes five bombers , 86 fighters and 33 Il @-@ 2 Sturmovik ground @-@ attack aircraft . On the Western Front he claimed seven fighters , two four @-@ engined bombers and one observation aircraft . He also flew a number of ground attack missions , destroying 33 various vehicles and eight heavy transports . 
 This and the ♠ ( Ace of spades ) indicates those aerial victories which made Waldmann an ace @-@ in @-@ a @-@ day , a term which designates a fighter pilot who has shot down five or more airplanes in a single day . This along with the * ( asterisk ) indicates an Herausschuss ( separation shot ) — a severely damaged heavy bomber forced to separate from his combat box which was counted as an aerial victory . 
 = = Awards = = 
 Iron Cross ( 1939 ) 
 2nd Class ( 25 September 1942 ) 
 1st Class ( 11 November 1942 ) 
 Front Flying Clasp of the Luftwaffe for Fighter Pilots in Gold ( 1 February 1943 ) 
 Ehrenpokal der Luftwaffe on 15 March 1943 as Unteroffizier and pilot 
 German Cross in Gold on 17 April 1943 as Unteroffizier in the 6 . / JG 52 
 Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross on 5 February 1944 as Feldwebel and pilot in the 6 . / JG 52 
 Hans Waldmann may have been awarded a posthumous Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves . Oberst Nicolaus von Below processed such a request between 20 April 1945 and 2 May 1945 , although no official proof exists . 
 = = Translation notes = = 
 = Andy Hedlund = 
 Andy Hedlund ( born May 16 , 1978 , in Osseo , Minnesota ) is an American former professional ice hockey defenseman . He played for the Trenton Titans , Binghamton Senators , Hershey Bears , Krefeld Penguins , Adler Mannheim , DEG Metro Stars and EHC Black Wings Linz in his career . 
 Hedlund began his career playing for the Fargo @-@ Moorhead Ice Sharks of the United States Hockey League before moving onto Minnesota State University , Mankato , for college . Playing in three years for Minnesota State – Mankato , he totaled 15 goals and 18 assists in 111 games . Following college he was signed by the Ottawa Senators and was assigned to the Trenton Titans . He played in 15 games for the Titans for parts of two seasons , recording one goal and an assist before being called up to the Binghamton Senators . Hedlund played three seasons in Binghamton , recording seven goals and 39 assists in 214 games . After going unsigned by an NHL team , Hedlund signed with the Krefeld Penguins of Deutsche Eishockey Liga ( DEL ) in Germany . He spent one season with the Penguins , playing in 52 games and scoring a career @-@ high 12 goals and 22 assists . In June 2006 , Hedlund re @-@ signed with Ottawa and played 56 games with Binghamton scoring six goals , adding 21 assists . Ottawa traded Hedlund to the Washington Capitals midway through the season where he joined the Capitals affiliate . He left the Capitals organization following the season and went back to Germany , playing two seasons for the DEG Metro Stars . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = College = = = 
 Hedlund played collegiately at Minnesota State – Mankato . His first career goal came on February 28 , 1999 , during his sophomore season . He ended that season with four goals , two assists and 58 penalty minutes in 36 games . At the start of his junior season , Hedlund was elevated to first line . Head coach Troy <unk> said of him , " He had a good freshman and sophomore season for us , where maybe he wasn 't counted on to be one of the top two , three guys . This year , he will be and I think he 's ready for that . " In his junior season , Hedlund played in 38 games , scoring six goals with six assists and 64 penalty minutes . As a senior in the 2001 – 02 season , he scored five goals with 10 assists and 48 penalty minutes while playing in 37 games . 
 = = = Professional = = = 
 2001 – 2004 
 After graduating , Hedlund signed with the Trenton Titans of the East Coast Hockey League for the final games of the 2001 – 02 season . He played in two games as a rookie and did not record a stat during the regular season , but in six playoff games he spent six minutes in the penalty box . In the 2002 – 03 season , he played in 13 games for Trenton recording a goal and two assists before he was called up to the American Hockey League 's Binghamton Senators . In Binghamton , he played in 59 games scoring one goal and adding seven assists . On January 16 , 2004 , against the Albany River Rats , Hedlund broke a 17 @-@ game streak in which he had gone scoreless after he recorded his first career overtime goal and his second career game @-@ winner . His previous goal was a game @-@ winning shot against Syracuse . He ended the 2003 – 04 season with four goals and 19 assists in 80 games . Before the 2004 – 05 season , Hedlund spent time in training camp with the Ottawa Senators before he was reassigned to Binghamton . The NHL season would eventually be locked out which saw players such as goaltender Dominik Hasek join the AHL . When Hasek began working out with Binghamton , Hedlund commented , " He 's just one of the guys when he 's here , he just wants to put in his time and get some good work in , and make sure he 's ready to go , so you just got to appreciate a guy like that being here and doing that kind of work , so its pretty fun . " A season preview produced by the website Hockey 's Future commented about Hedlund saying that , " A fan @-@ favorite , Hedlund gives it everything he has despite limited talent . " Against the Manitoba Moose on October 31 , Hedlund scored a goal from the blue line that tied the game , however the Senators ended up losing 5 – 3 . Following the season , he and Philadelphia Phantoms player Ben Stafford were named the AHL 's Men of the Year . During the season he played in 75 games , scoring two goals with 13 assists . In the playoffs , he played in six games recording two assists . 
 2005 – 2007 
 To begin the 2005 season , Hedlund joined the U. S. Men 's National Select Team . After his stint with Team USA , Hedlund left the Senators organization and joined the Krefeld Penguins in Germany . In only one season with Krefeld , Hedlund played in 52 games scoring 12 goals and 22 assists , both career @-@ highs . He also played in five playoff games , recording two assists . 
 Hedlund re @-@ signed with Ottawa on June 20 , 2006 . However , he was waived on October 2 . He cleared waivers a day later and was assigned to Binghamton . Against Syracuse on January 15 , Hedlund helped Binghamton rally to a 3 – 2 lead with a goal in the third period . However , the Senators ended up losing the game in a shootout . In one of his final games for the Senators on February 23 , Hedlund scored a goal against the Wilkes @-@ Barre / Scranton Penguins . Before being traded , Hedlund recorded six goals and 21 assists in 56 games . 
 The Washington Capitals traded for Hedlund and a sixth @-@ round draft pick in the 2007 NHL Entry Draft on February 26 , 2007 , sending Lawrence <unk> to Ottawa . Hedlund recorded eight assists in 21 games for the Bears . He left the team after the season , opting to return to Germany . 
 2007 – 2014 
 Hedlund joined the DEG Metro Stars of the DEL but before joining the team , he rejoined Team USA . Hedlund scored a goal for the team on November 8 that helped the USA defeat Germany , 3 – 2 . He ended the 2007 – 08 season with 12 goals and 23 assists in 55 games for the Metro Stars . In the 2008 – 09 season , Hedlund scored nine goals with 19 assists in 52 games with DEG . Following the season , he left DEG and joined Adler Mannheim . During his two seasons with the Metro Stars , he was a DEL All @-@ Star . 
 Hedlund spent the 2009 @-@ 10 season with Adler Mannheim , scoring six goals with nine assists in 54 games . He returned to DEG after the season . In his final season with the Metro Stars in 2011 – 12 , Hedlund led the DEL with 14 goals amongst defencemen . 
 On May 10 , 2012 , Hedlund left the DEL to sign a one @-@ year contract with EHC Black Wings Linz of the Austrian Hockey League . At the conclusion of his second season with Linz in 2013 – 14 season , Hedlund announced his retirement from professional hockey after 13 seasons . 
 = = Personal = = 
 In July 2008 , Hedlund returned to Minnesota State – Mankato to help out at a hockey camp in which he taught players one @-@ time shooting and passing . Hedlund 's mother works as a special needs teacher , and his sister is a social worker . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 = = Awards = = 
 = Mona Sax = 
 Mona Sax is a fictional character in the neo @-@ noir media franchise Max Payne , where she represents the femme fatale archetype . Mona is a mysterious contract killer in a dangerous relationship with the series ' titular protagonist , the policeman @-@ turned @-@ vigilante Max Payne . The character was portrayed by Kathy Tong and voiced by Julia Murney and Wendy Hoopes in the video games , and was played by Mila Kunis in the film adaptation . 
 Mona appears in the first two games in the series , Max Payne and Max Payne 2 : The Fall of Max Payne . She is the second player character in Max Payne 2 after Max , and her tragic love story with Max is the center of the game 's storyline . Mona also appears as a major character in the 2008 film Max Payne and makes a cameo appearance in the multiplayer mode of Max Payne 3 . The games ' version of the character was perceived highly positively by gaming community and mass media , but her portrayal in the movie received largely negative reviews . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = In video games = = = 
 Mona Sax is a mysterious professional assassin , living in a derelict theme park on Coney Island that she set up as her base . She is introduced in the first Max Payne game as the " evil twin " of her younger sister Lisa , the abused wife of the Mafia boss Angelo Punchinello . Mona is captured by Punchinello 's assassins before she could kill him , but manages to escape . It is revealed that she was employed by Nicole Horne , the renegade member of the secret society calling themselves the Inner Circle who has left the organization and manages the Aesir Industries , a mysterious corporation that is behind the drug Valkyr . Horne ordered to murder Punchinello since he wanted to act independent and out of her orders , a job Mona took because it was personal to her . By the end of the first game , Mona <unk> in the Aesir headquarters elevator after being shot in the head by mercenaries for refusing an order to kill Max . 
 In Max Payne 2 : The Fall of Max Payne , more focus is given to Max and Mona 's relationship , and she becomes one of the game 's two protagonists . Mona reappears as a suspect in the murder of the U.S. Senator Sebastian Gates . The case is assigned to Max Payne 's new partner , detective Valerie Winterson , but despite their past , Max does not inform the authorities that he knows Mona nor does he inform them of her visit to his apartment . During the course of the game , it is revealed that Mona is indeed the killer of Senator Gates . To save her , Max is forced to shoot the corrupt Winterson before she can execute Mona . Mona and Max work together to prevent shadowy hitmen known as Cleaners from eliminating both of them . Eventually , it is revealed that Mona 's employer was Alfred Woden , a U.S. senator and a member of the Inner Circle 's faction warring with the faction of the Russian mob boss Vladimir Lem . In the end , she is shot in the back by Lem , whom Max kills . She dies in Max 's arms as he kisses her , but lives on the game 's hardest difficulty level , " Dead on Arrival " . 
 Mona does not appear in the gameplay of the first Max Payne game , but appears only in its cutscenes . She became playable in four chapters of the first sequel , Max Payne 2 ( " <unk> Her Synapses " , " Out of the Window " , " The Genius of the Hole " and " A Losing Game " ) . In it , Mona 's moves are more acrobatic than Max 's , and her sections involve several sniping sequences where Mona is using an exclusive <unk> semi @-@ automatic rifle , which provides a covering fire for Max . Her other weapon is a .50 caliber Desert Eagle , a handgun that she also uses in the first game . Mona was also included as a playable multiplayer character in the Classic Multiplayer Character Pack of Max Payne 3 Special Edition . 
 = = = Other appearances = = = 
 Mona was portrayed by Mila Kunis in the movie version of Max Payne , whose role was described as " an assassin who teams up with the title character to avenge her sister 's death . " In the film , she is a Russian mobster and Max is the main suspect in the death of her sister Natasha ( an original character similar to the game 's Lisa and portrayed by Olga Kurylenko ) . Eventually , Max and Mona join forces to uncover the vast conspiracy behind the Valkyr drug . The film credits end with a scene of Max meeting Mona at a bar <unk> . 
 She also appears in the flashback sequences in the Marvel digital comic book Max Payne 3 : After the Fall . Her clothes for the Xbox Live Avatar were released by Rockstar Games on the Xbox LIVE Marketplace . 
 = = Portrayal = = 
 Mona 's visual actress in Max Payne 2 was Kathy Tong , a Hollywood model . According to the first two games ' writer Sam Lake , he " did want to switch to Mona [ ... ] but it was problematic . In the end , Max frames those sequences with his narration , saying that he doesn ’ t know exactly what happened , or what Mona did , but it must have been something like this . In other words , when you are playing Mona , you are actually experiencing Max ’ s guess of the events " . Regarding Mona 's possible survival at the end of Max Payne 2 , Rockstar 's Dan Houser stated that Max Payne 3 would " not continue that aspect of the story . We toyed with figuring out some way , or doing something clever , and then [ decided ] ' No , no , just move on from that bit of the story . ' It really didn 't work because there was no way of knowing the choices someone made . " 
 As a self @-@ described method actress , Kunis " took her job seriously " and " insisted on practicing a lot " , but disliked Mona 's outfit in the film , which was different from what the character wore in the games : " The clothes sucked . Oh my God , it was awful . Mark was like bundled up in jackets and wet suits and coats and <unk> and I was in a leather bustier and black pants and 5 inch heels . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Games = = = 
 The video game version of Mona Sax was critically acclaimed for being one of " relatively complex , non @-@ stereotypical female game characters " . She was included on the 2007 list of 50 greatest female characters in video game history by Tom 's Games , where she was described as " a stone @-@ cold killer who 's incredibly tempting but not entirely trustworthy " and " the perfect female accomplice to Max Payne . " In 2008 , PC Games Hardware also listed her as one of the most important female characters in video games . In 2012 , David Sanchez of GameZone proposed that Mona appear in her own spin @-@ off game , calling her " one of the sexiest femme fatales in all of gaming " , and added , " The fact of the matter is that Mona Sax is one hell of a character — one that hasn 't starred in her very own game , but one that could very well do so and deliver an unforgettable experience . " That same year , Austin <unk> of <unk> Thumbs listed Mona among his personal favorites while discussing the portrayals of video game female characters . In 2013 , Complex ranked her as the 20th best supporting character in video games . 
 Much of the positive reception came from the characters 's perceived sex appeal . In 2004 , the staff of TeamXbox ranked Mona as number ten on their list of top " Xbox Babes " , calling her " no princess waiting to be saved " and stating that she had replaced their " bad girl " type " childhood crush on G.I. Joe ’ s Baroness . " Polish edition of GameStar included her in their 2006 poll " Miss of the Video Game World " , in which she was voted at 17th place . The sex scene between Max and Mona , described as " actually one of the most fitting ever seen in a video game " , was ranked as the fifth top sexy moment in gaming by <unk> in 2007 . MSN included her on their 2009 list of gaming 's 12 " hottest babes " and wrote that " smart , sexy and dangerous " Mona was " remarkably presented in the game , being given the cold feel of a hired gun , with no regret or remorse " . Mona was also included on the list of nine " sexiest babes " of action games by The Times of India , who commented that she " fits in perfectly in the dark world of Max Payne . " The affair between Max and Mona was ranked as the tenth top video game romance by Joystick Division 's James Hawkins in 2011 , and as the sixth most disastrous game romance by GamesRadar 's Dave Meikleham that same year . They were also listed among the 25 best video game couples by IGN 's Emma Boyes in 2012 . 
 The character has also received some negative reception . In 2003 , Nick Catucci of The Village Voice called her " a woman carrying more emotional baggage than Witherspoon 's Elle Woods has pink Gucci suitcases " and stated , " And Max 's love interest ? A contract killer who survived being shot in the head , and who you also play : Mona Sax . Who wrote this crap , Ed Wood ? " Tyler Wilde of GamesRadar ranked a cheat to undress Mona nude for her gameplay sections in Max Payne 2 as the fourth rudest cheat in video games . 
 = = = Film = = = 
 Critical reception of the film character has been generally negative . For instance , Richard Corliss of TIME wrote Mila Kunis was " not up to the task " and GameZone 's David Sanchez opined that " Mila Kunis ain 't got nothin ' on Kathy Tong " . In 2011 , Complex ranked Kunis as the tenth most miscast action movie hero , because " her character , Mona Sax , is a heart @-@ attack @-@ serious Russian assassin , a description that brings to mind Amazon woman Brigitte Nielsen back in her Red Sonja days ; Kunis , on the other hand , is petite and angelic @-@ faced . " Nevertheless , Kunis was nominated in the category " Choice Movie Actress : Action Adventure " at Teen Choice Awards 2009 for her portrayal of Mona in the film . She was also ranked as the eighth " hottest game girl " by Phil Hornshaw of GameFront in 2010 because the role , along with her enjoyment of World of Warcraft , earned her " some digital street cred " . 
 = Ibuki @-@ class armored cruiser = 
 The Ibuki class ( <unk> , Ibuki @-@ gata ) , also called the Kurama class ( <unk> , Kurama @-@ gata ) , was a ship class of two large armoured cruisers built for the Imperial Japanese Navy after the Russo @-@ Japanese War of 1904 – 1905 . These ships reflected Japanese experiences during that war as they were designed to fight side @-@ by @-@ side with battleships and were given an armament equal to , or superior to existing Japanese battleships . The development of the battlecruiser the year before Ibuki was completed made her and her sister ship Kurama obsolete before they were completed because the foreign battlecruisers were much more heavily armed and faster . 
 Both ships played a small role in World War I as they unsuccessfully hunted for the German East Asia Squadron and the commerce @-@ raider SMS Emden and protected troop convoys in the Pacific Ocean shortly after the war began . The ships were sold for scrap in 1923 in accordance with the terms of the Washington Naval Treaty . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The Ibuki @-@ class ships were originally ordered during the Russo @-@ Japanese War , on 31 January 1905 , as Tsukuba @-@ class armored cruisers . Before construction began , however , they were redesigned to incorporate 8 @-@ inch ( 203 mm ) guns in four twin turrets rather than the dozen 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) guns in single mounts of the earlier ships . This required a larger hull to fit the turrets and thus more power from additional boilers to keep the same speed as the Tsukuba @-@ class ships . 
 These ships were given battleship @-@ grade armament to overpower existing armored cruisers and were intended to fight in the battleline with battleships , much as had the two Kasuga @-@ class armored cruisers had done in the Battles of the Yellow Sea and Tsushima during the Russo @-@ Japanese War . While more powerful than existing armored cruisers , the appearance of the British Invincible class in 1908 with their armament of eight 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) guns and speed of 25 knots ( 46 km / h ; 29 mph ) rendered these ships obsolete before they were commissioned . They were reclassified as battlecruisers in 1912 . 
 The ships had an overall length of 485 feet ( 147 @.@ 8 m ) and a length between perpendiculars of 450 feet ( 137 @.@ 2 m ) , a beam of 75 feet 6 inches ( 23 @.@ 0 m ) , and a normal draught of 26 feet 1 inch ( 8 @.@ 0 m ) . They displaced 14 @,@ 636 long tons ( 14 @,@ 871 t ) at normal load and 15 @,@ 595 long tons ( 15 @,@ 845 t ) at full load , roughly 900 long tons ( 910 t ) more than the earlier ships . The crew numbered about 845 officers and enlisted men . They had a metacentric height of 2 feet 11 @.@ 5 inches ( 0 @.@ 902 m ) . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 Both ships were intended to be powered by vertical triple @-@ expansion steam engines , but the long construction delays suffered by Ibuki made it possible for her to serve as a test @-@ bed for the steam turbine . Four sets of Curtis turbines were ordered from the Fore River Shipbuilding Co . , two each for Ibuki and the battleship Aki . A month later , the Japanese paid $ 100 @,@ 000 for a manufacturing license for the turbines . 
 Ibuki was equipped with two turbine sets , each driving one shaft , which developed a total of 24 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 18 @,@ 000 kW ) , intended to give a maximum speed of 22 @.@ 5 knots ( 41 @.@ 7 km / h ; 25 @.@ 9 mph ) . They used steam provided by 18 mixed @-@ firing , superheater @-@ equipped Miyabara water @-@ tube boilers , with a working pressure of 17 kg / cm2 ( 1 @,@ 667 kPa ; 242 psi ) , that sprayed fuel oil on the coal to increase its burn rate . Performance during Ibuki 's initial sea trials on 12 August 1909 was unsatisfactory as she only reached 20 @.@ 87 knots ( 38 @.@ 65 km / h ; 24 @.@ 02 mph ) despite the turbines exceeding their power rating with 27 @,@ 353 shp ( 20 @,@ 397 kW ) . The turbines were subsequently modified and the propellers were changed in an attempt to rectify the problem , but with only limited success . The ship ran her full @-@ power trials again on 23 June 1910 and reached a speed of 21 @.@ 16 knots ( 39 @.@ 19 km / h ; 24 @.@ 35 mph ) from 28 @,@ 977 shp ( 21 @,@ 608 kW ) . 
 Kurama used the traditional pair of four @-@ cylinder reciprocating steam engines with a power rating of 22 @,@ 500 indicated horsepower ( 16 @,@ 800 kW ) , 2 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 1 @,@ 500 kW ) more than the older ships . She used the same type of boiler as Ibuki and derived the additional power from the addition of four boilers , for a total of 28 , which required an additional funnel . The ships carried a maximum of 2 @,@ 000 long tons ( 2 @,@ 000 t ) of coal and an additional 215 long tons ( 218 t ) of fuel oil although their range is unknown . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The Ibuki @-@ class armored cruisers were armed with four 45 @-@ caliber 12 @-@ inch 41st Year Type guns , mounted in twin @-@ gun hydraulically powered centreline turrets . The guns had an elevation range of − 3 ° / + 23 ° and normally loaded their rounds at an angle of + 5 ° , although loading at any angle up to + 13 ° was theoretically possible . They fired 850 @-@ pound ( 386 kg ) projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 800 ft / s ( 850 m / s ) ; this provided a maximum range of 24 @,@ 000 yd ( 22 @,@ 000 m ) with armour @-@ piercing ( AP ) shells . The intermediate armament was much heavier than the older ships , with four twin @-@ gun turrets equipped with 45 @-@ calibre 8 @-@ inch 41st Year Type guns mounted on each side . The guns could be elevated to + 30 ° which gave them a maximum range of around 23 @,@ 000 yards ( 21 @,@ 000 m ) . Their 254 @-@ pound ( 115 kg ) projectiles were fired at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 495 ft / s ( 760 m / s ) . 
 Defense against torpedo boats was mainly provided by fourteen 40 @-@ caliber 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch 41st Year Type quick @-@ firing ( QF ) guns , all but two of which were mounted in casemates in the sides of the hull . The gun fired a 45 @-@ pound ( 20 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 150 ft / s ( 660 m / s ) . The ships were also equipped with four 40 @-@ caliber 12 @-@ pounder 12 cwt QF guns and four 23 @-@ caliber 12 @-@ pounder QF guns on high @-@ angle mounts . Both of these guns fired 12 @.@ 5 @-@ pound ( 5 @.@ 67 kg ) shells with muzzle velocities of 2 @,@ 300 ft / s ( 700 m / s ) and 1 @,@ 500 feet per second ( 450 m / s ) respectively . In addition , the cruisers were fitted with three submerged 18 @-@ inch ( 457 mm ) torpedo tubes , one on each broadside and one in the stern . Each tube was provided with one training torpedo and two normal torpedoes . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 Armor in the Ibuki class was improved compared to the earlier ships . The waterline armor belt of Krupp cemented armour was 7 inches ( 178 mm ) thick between the 12 @-@ inch gun turrets although it was only 4 inches ( 102 mm ) thick fore and aft of the turrets . Above it was a strake of 5 @-@ inch ( 127 mm ) armor that extended between the eight @-@ inch gun turrets and protected the two central 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch casemates . In front of those turrets , the armor was 6 inches ( 152 mm ) thick . The ends of the main armor belt were connected to the main gun barbettes by 1 @-@ inch ( 25 mm ) transverse bulkheads . 
 The primary gun turrets were protected by armor plates 9 inches ( 229 mm ) thick and they had a 1 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 38 mm ) roof . The armour for the eight @-@ inch turrets was six inches thick . The main barbettes were protected by seven inches of armour and the secondary barbettes by five inches , although the armor for those thinned to 2 inches ( 51 mm ) behind the upper armor belt . The thickness of the armored decks was two inches throughout the ship . The sides of the forward conning tower were eight inches thick and its communications tube to the main deck was seven inches in thickness . 
 = = Ships = = 
 = = Construction and service = = 
 Construction of both ships was delayed by a lack of facilities at their shipyards , a shortage of appropriately trained workers and their low priority for building . Kurama 's lengthy building time at Yokosuka Naval Arsenal was due to priority given to the building of the battleships Kawachi and Settsu and the repair and reconstruction of the ex @-@ Russian ships captured after the Battle of Tsushima . Ibuki had to wait to have her keel laid until the slipway used by the battleship Aki became available after Aki was launched . Kure Naval Arsenal took advantage of the delay with Ibuki to stockpile material and components and set a record between keel @-@ laying and launching of five months , a figure only bettered by Portsmouth Naval Dockyard when they built the battleship Dreadnought in only four months . The decision to switch from reciprocating engines to turbines in Ibuki and Aki was not made until five days after Ibuki 's launching and thereafter she received priority over the battleship so that she was completed less than two years later , the first ship in the Imperial Japanese Navy to use steam turbines . In fact , construction on Aki was completely halted for about five months in favor of Ibuki because the former 's turbines were late and the cruiser was better suited to serve as the testbed for the new technology . 
 Ibuki sailed to Thailand in 1911 to represent Japan during the coronation ceremony of King Rama VI Vajiravudh . When World War I began in August 1914 , she was commanded by Captain Kanji Katō . The ship was ordered to Singapore and cooperated with the British to hunt down the light cruiser Emden in the East Indies and Indian Ocean . Ibuki was ordered to New Zealand to escort a large troop convoy of ANZAC troops to the Middle East in late September . She was ordered to guard the convoy , over Katō 's protests , when the presence of the Emden was discovered in the Cocos Islands on 9 November . The Australian light cruiser HMAS Sydney was detached from the convoy to sink the Emden instead . With the ending of the threat to the convoy , Ibuki was transferred to the Second South Seas Squadron at Truk in the Caroline Islands . She was refitted at Kure in 1918 , disarmed in 1922 , and stricken from the Navy List the following year and scrapped in accordance with the Washington Naval Treaty . 
 Kurama attended the Coronation Fleet Review of King George V in Spithead on 24 June 1911 . She was at Yokosuka in August 1914 and was assigned to the 1st South Seas Squadron to search for the East Asia Squadron . They departed there on 14 September and reached Truk on 11 October as troops carried by the squadron occupied the Carolines . The squadron was based in Suva , Fiji in November in case the East Asia Squadron decided to double back into the Central Pacific . Kurama was flagship of the 2nd Squadron in 1917 and was transferred to the 5th Squadron the following year . Like her sister , she was disarmed in 1922 , stricken in 1923 and subsequently scrapped . 
 = Pimpin ' ( song ) = 
 " Pimpin ' " is a song by American rapper Tony Yayo , included as a track on his debut studio album Thoughts of a Predicate Felon ( 2005 ) . The song 's production was handled by record producer LT Moe , who also helped in the writing process with Yayo . Musically , " Pimpin ' " is a rap song expressing Yayo 's desire to be able to legally pimp women . It is backed by an upbeat , " bouncy " production containing elements of digital guitar . 
 " Pimpin ' " received generally mixed reviews from music critics : although some praised the song 's upbeat production , others called the song " bland " when compared to Yayo 's previous work , which typically covers a darker subject matter . Despite not being released as a single , the song received considerable airplay on US urban contemporary radio stations , which resulted in the song charting at number sixty @-@ six on the US Billboard Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . An accompanying music video was filmed for the song , directed by production group Fat Cats . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Pimpin ' " was written by Tony Yayo and LT Moe , with Moe also handling production duties . The song was recorded by Moe at Encore Studios – a recording studio in Los Angeles , California . Audio mixing was carried out by Steve Baughman at Right Track Studios , a recording studio in New York City . The song was mastered by Brian " Big Bass " Gardner . It is listed ninth on the track listing for Thoughts of a Predicate Felon and is of three minutes and six seconds in length , consisting of three choruses separated by two verses , all performed by Yayo . 
 Lyrically , the song describes Yayo 's desire to legally pimp women and treat them with a luxurious lifestyle , and refers to how other men simply chase their pleasures . The lyrics are backed by a " bouncy " production which , according to The Michigan Daily writer Ewan McGarvey , consists of " tiny digital @-@ guitar frets " . Some music critics have described the song to be of a less dark and intense nature to many other songs on Thoughts of a Predicate Falcon , such as " Homicide " , " Drama Setter " and " Live by the Gun " , which invariably chronicle subjects such as murder , prison and drugs . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Pimpin ' " received generally mixed reviews from music critics , with some also noting that the song felt out of place on Thoughts of a Predicate Felon when compared to the more intense songs that appear on the album . Allmusic writer David Jeffries named " Pimpin ' " as one of the album 's best songs , along with " So Seductive " , " Drama Setter " and " Dear Suzie " . Pedro Hernandez of RapReviews commended the song 's " bouncy production " , but criticized its concept as " unoriginal " , and for this reason called it a " track that only Yayo fans will appreciate " . Whilst commenting positively on more intense and " brutal " songs such as " Homicide " , Ross McGowan of Stylus Magazine criticized the tempo of " Pimpin ' " , calling it " bland " , and felt that the song 's music video was the only thing making it interesting to listen to , writing that " it ’ s way less fun to hear when it isn 't accompanied by continuous footage of G @-@ Unit ’ s main men wrestling each other for face time " . However , The Michigan Daily writer Ewan McGarvey called " Pimpin ' " one of the " few charming songs " on Thoughts of a Predicate Felon . He noted that " simplicity kind of works for Tony " , but also wrote that " it 's not the real G @-@ Unit manifest destiny " . He concluded that " Yayo 's old mix @-@ tape career gets cannibalized " for the song . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 Despite not being released as a single , " Pimpin ' " debuted at number 11 on the US Billboard Bubbling Under R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Singles chart issue dated August 6 , 2005 : it went on to spend seven weeks the chart , and peaked at number one . The song then debuted , and peaked , at number 66 on the US Billboard Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart for the chart week dated October 1 , 2005 , and went on to spend three weeks on the chart . Chart @-@ position wise , " Pimpin ' " is the second most successful song of Tony Yayo 's career , behind only Thoughts of a Predicate Felon 's first single " So Seductive " , which reached number seven on the corresponding chart and also peaked at number 48 on the US Billboard Hot 100 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Pimpin ' " was released as a double @-@ music video along with the video for Yayo single " Curious " . Both sections of the video were directed by production group Fat Cats . After three minutes and eight seconds , the video segues from the " Curious " section to the " Pimpin ' " section , which lasts for a further one minute and thirty @-@ six seconds . The " Pimpin ' " section of the video is set in a warehouse , and features Yayo rapping the song 's first verse and first two choruses , with this footage alternating with the other members of G @-@ Unit Records members lip @-@ syncing sections of Yayo 's lyrics . Whilst all this occurs , several girls attired in black dance in the background . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 The credits for " Pimpin ' " are adapted from the liner notes of Thoughts of a Predicate Felon . 
 Recording 
 Recorded at Encore Studios , California . 
 Personnel 
 Tony Yayo – songwriting , vocals 
 LT Moe – songwriting , production , recording 
 Steve Baughman – mixing 
