 Brian " Big Bass " Gardner – mastering 
 = = Charts = = 
 = John H. Clifford = 
 John Henry Clifford ( January 16 , 1809 – January 2 , 1876 ) was an American lawyer and politician from New Bedford , Massachusetts . He served as the state 's attorney general for much of the 1850s , retaining the office during administrations dominated by three different political parties . A Whig , he was elected the state 's 21st governor , serving a single term from 1853 to 1854 . He was the first governor of Massachusetts not born in the state . 
 As attorney general Clifford gained fame by leading the prosecution in one of the most sensational trials of the 19th century , the Parkman – Webster murder case . The case , where both victim and assailant were from the upper crust of Boston society , featured the first use of forensic dentistry to secure a conviction . During the American Civil War Clifford supported the Union cause , and was involved in unsuccessful maneuvers to prosecute Confederate President Jefferson Davis after the war . In his later years he served as president of the Boston and Providence Railroad . 
 = = Early years = = 
 John Clifford was born to Benjamin and <unk> ( Wade ) Clifford in Providence , Rhode Island on January 16 , 1809 . He was the sixth of thirteen children . He graduated from Brown University in 1827 , read law with Timothy Coffin in New Bedford , Massachusetts and Theron Metcalf in Dedham , Massachusetts , and then opened a law practice in New Bedford . He maintained that practice , sometimes with partners , for the rest of his life . Clifford married Sarah Parker Allen on January 16 , 1832 . The couple had five children . 
 In 1835 , Clifford was elected to the Massachusetts legislature , where he sat on a committee that revised the state 's statutes . In 1836 he served as an aide to Governor Edward Everett , a position he held until Everett lost the 1839 election . Everett rewarded Clifford for his service by naming him district attorney for the southern district of the state in 1839 , a post he held for ten years . He was concurrently elected state senator representing Bristol County in 1845 . In 1849 he was appointed state attorney general by Governor George N. Briggs . He was the only major appointed Whig official retained by Democrat George S. Boutwell after he took office in 1851 . Boutwell explained in his memoirs that Clifford " was a good officer and an upright man , but he lacked the quality which enables a man to reach conclusions . This peculiarity made him useful to me . He would investigate a subject , give me the authorities and precedents , and leave the conclusions to me . Next , there was no one in the administration party whom I wished to appoint . Mr. [ Benjamin ] Hallett was the candidate most generally supported . He was full of prejudices and he was not well instructed as a lawyer . In these respects Clifford was his opposite . " 
 = = Attorney general and governor = = 
 The first major case that Clifford prosecuted was for the murder of Boston Brahmin George Parkman , and it was one of the most sensational of the 19th century . Parkman had disappeared in November 1849 and Harvard professor John White Webster had been arrested for his murder . The gruesome method of the body 's disposal ( which was not complete ) , the fact that it was a capital crime , and the high status of both victim and accused ensured a great deal of public interest in the case , and the courtroom was packed . Clifford 's case was complicated by the fact that there was no actual body . Assisted by George Bemis , who had been retained by the Parkman family , he resorted instead to dental forensics and strong circumstantial evidence to build the case against Webster . The jury returned a guilty verdict after two and one half hours of deliberation . There was much controversy afterward concerning the jury instructions given by Chief Justice Lemuel Shaw , but Webster was eventually hanged after confessing the crime . The case has continued to interest legal scholars , in part over allegations that the defense ( which included one lawyer lacking significant criminal trial experience ) failed to aggressively dispute the evidence presented , and also did not introduce potentially exculpatory evidence . 
 In 1852 the state Whig Party parlayed his popularity in the Parkman case into a nomination for the governorship , which Clifford reluctantly accepted . The race was a difficult one , dominated by the presidential contest and candidate stands on the state 's temperance " Maine law " . In addition to Whig support , Clifford was nominated by a party opposed to the Maine law , while one of his opponents , Horace Mann , was running with both Free Soil and pro @-@ Maine law nominations . The Whigs had been divided by their reactions to the Compromise of 1850 , and the national election ( held one week before the state election ) saw many Whigs voting for Democrat Franklin Pierce . In a three way race involving Clifford , Mann , and Democrat Henry W. Bishop , Clifford received 45 % of the vote . A majority requirement still in effect for popular election , he was elected by the state senate 29 – 4 over Bishop , although fractious Whigs demanded the replacement of Senator John Davis in exchange for their support for him . 
 After his single term as governor , Clifford refused to stand for reelection , preferring to work as a lawyer . His successor , Governor Emory Washburn , reappointed him to be attorney general , an office he held from 1854 to 1858 . This term of service notably included the tenure of Know Nothing Governor Henry J. Gardner . Gardner , who had politically been a Whig before the advent of the Know Nothings , retained Clifford in the office , and the two of them blunted some of anti @-@ immigrant legislation and ( in their view ) extreme reform proposals of the Know Nothing legislature . During Gardner 's tenure , the state constitution was amended so that the office of attorney general was elected rather than appointed . In the election of 1858 , Stephen Henry Phillips was elected to replace Clifford . 
 = = Later political and legal work = = 
 The state hired Clifford in 1859 to assist Phillips in prosecuting what turned out to be the final stages of a long @-@ running ( 200 year ) series of issues concerning the state 's boundary with Rhode Island . Phillips and Clifford traveled to Washington , DC in January 1861 to make their appearance before the United States Supreme Court . At the time , tensions between North and South were exceptionally high , and United States Attorney General Edwin Stanton expressed to them concern that Washington might be attacked by rebel forces . Their letter to Massachusetts Governor John Albion Andrew was one of the warnings that prompted Andrew to begin organizing Massachusetts volunteer regiments for the American Civil War . 
 Clifford was , like other conservative Whigs , politically opposed to the abolitionist movement ; he was described by former slave Frederick Douglass as " pro @-@ slavery " and " about the most aristocratic gentleman in Bristol County " . However , once the Civil War broke out he supported the Union cause and the state 's participation in the conflict . In 1862 he joined in a call for the formation of an <unk> party to oppose the Republicans . The " People 's Party " was formed primarily by people who had supported the pro @-@ Union Constitutional Union Party of 1860 , and failed to gain traction because of President Abraham Lincoln 's preliminary Emancipation Proclamation issued in September . Clifford was elected to the state senate that year , where he served as its president . Clifford supported Lincoln for reelection in 1864 . In 1868 he was chosen a presidential elector , casting his vote for Ulysses S. Grant . 
 In 1865 Clifford was chosen to act as one of the special counsels prosecuting former Confederate President Jefferson Davis . Davis was to be prosecuted for treason , but for a variety of reasons the charges were eventually dropped after four years of political and legal wrangling . Clifford contributed to a debate in 1866 over the difficulty of prosecuting Davis in Virginia , noting that without essentially packing the jury , a failed prosecution would result in the awkward outcome of a Virginia jury in some sense overturning the outcome of the war . He resigned from these duties in July 1866 . 
 = = Later years = = 
 In 1867 Clifford retired from the legal profession and became president of the Boston and Providence Railroad . During his tenure the railroad constructed a new terminal station in Boston at Park Square . He received the degree of LL.D. from Brown in 1849 , Amherst in 1853 , and Harvard in 1853 . For several years he was president of the Harvard Board of Overseers . After the American Civil War he was appointed by George Peabody to the board of trustees of the Peabody Education Fund , a philanthropic initiative for building educational resources in the post @-@ war South . In his later years he was offered , but turned down , a number of diplomatic postings in Europe , including Ambassador to Russia and Ambassador to the Ottoman Empire . In 1873 and 1875 he traveled to warmer climates in a bid to improve his declining health . 
 In 1875 Clifford was appointed to a diplomatic commission established pursuant to the 1871 Treaty of Washington with the United Kingdom to resolve fishery issues . However , owing to a delay occasioned by the difficulty in selecting a neutral third commissioner , Clifford never assumed his duties . He died of heart disease , after a short illness , on January 2 , 1876 at his home in New Bedford , and was buried in New Bedford 's Rural Cemetery . Clifford 's Greek Revival mansion still stands on Orchard Street in New Bedford , contributing to the County Street Historic District . 
 = = Clifford and Melville = = 
 Clifford had a friendly and collegial relationship with Chief Justice Lemuel Shaw , who was the father @-@ in @-@ law of writer Herman Melville . Clifford and Melville crossed paths on a number of occasions , most notably on Nantucket in the summer of 1852 . On this occasion Clifford recounted to Melville a story about one of his early cases . Melville later wrote him , asking for further details , and Clifford sent Melville journal entries on the case . Melville ended up using the material for Isle of the Cross , a story that was never published . 
 = Homer 's Enemy = 
 " Homer 's Enemy " is the twenty @-@ third episode of the eighth season of the American animated television series The Simpsons . It was first broadcast on the Fox network in the United States on May 4 , 1997 . The episode 's plot centers on the Springfield Nuclear Power Plant 's hiring a new employee named Frank Grimes . Despite Homer 's attempts to befriend him , Grimes is angered and irritated by Homer 's laziness and incompetence despite leading a comfortable life . He eventually declares himself Homer 's enemy . Meanwhile , Bart buys a run @-@ down factory for a dollar . 
 " Homer 's Enemy " was directed by Jim Reardon and the script was written by John Swartzwelder , based on an idea pitched by executive producer Bill Oakley . The episode explores the comic possibilities of a realistic character with a strong work ethic hired for a job where he has to work alongside a man like Homer . He was partially modeled after Michael Douglas as he appeared in the film Falling Down . Hank Azaria provided the voice of Frank Grimes , and based some of the character 's mannerisms on actor William H. Macy . Frank Welker guest stars as the voice of the Executive Vice President dog . 
 In its original broadcast on the Fox network , " Homer 's Enemy " acquired a 7 @.@ 7 Nielsen rating . It was viewed in approximately 7 @.@ 5 million homes , finishing the week ranked 56th . " Homer 's Enemy " is considered to be one of the darkest episodes of The Simpsons , and it split critical opinion . It is a favorite of several members of the production staff , including Bill Oakley , Josh Weinstein and Matt Groening , but it is one of the least favorite of Mike Reiss . Although Grimes makes his only appearance in this episode , he was later named one of the " Top 25 Simpsons Peripheral characters " by IGN . He has since been referenced several times in the show , most notably in the season fourteen episode " The Great Louse Detective " , in which his son plots to kill Homer . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In a new segment of " Kent 's People " , Kent Brockman tells the heartwarming story of Frank Grimes , a man who had to struggle for everything he ever got , including a correspondence degree in nuclear physics . After seeing the show , Springfield Nuclear Power Plant owner Mr. Burns is so touched that he asks Smithers to hire Grimes as his Executive Vice President . However , the following day , Burns sees a sentimental story concerning a heroic dog and demands that it instead be appointed Executive Vice President . Consequently , Grimes is shuffled into Sector 7G , where he must work alongside Homer , Lenny , and Carl . Settling into his new job , Grimes is amazed and aghast at Homer 's bad manners and general irresponsibility . When Grimes prevents Homer from drinking a beaker of sulfuric acid , dramatically slapping it out of Homer 's hands into a wall , a passing Mr. Burns admonishes Grimes for destroying the wall and spilling his acid . Grimes is demoted and later angrily declares to Homer that the two of them are now enemies . 
 Homer attempts to appease Grimes by inviting him to his home for a lobster dinner in order to make him and his enemy co @-@ worker a friend . Grimes ' visit to the Simpson house only fuels his resentment ; he is incensed by Homer 's ability to live such a comfortable life despite his slothful and ignorant ways . Declaring Homer a " fraud " , a bitter Grimes storms away in anger . The following day , Homer , after getting advice from Marge , makes further attempts to earn Grimes ' respect by acting as a model employee , but his efforts fail . Grimes rants about Homer to Lenny and Carl , both of whom insist that Homer is an essentially decent person . To prove Homer 's lack of intelligence , he tricks Homer into entering a nuclear power plant design contest intended for children , by carefully cutting away all references to them in a promotional poster which he leaves at Homer 's control panel . Homer , unaware that the contest is only open to kids , eagerly takes on the challenge to prove his professionalism . At the contest , Grimes is shocked when Homer 's model , which is almost exactly the same as the current power plant with only a few modifications , easily wins against Ralph Wiggum 's Malibu Stacy dream house , and Martin Prince 's futuristic model that supplies power to the room . The audience 's applause and cheers for Homer cause Grimes to finally snap and he runs amok through the plant , mimicking Homer 's habits . Entering Homer 's office , Grimes sees a machine labeled " Extremely High Voltage " , sarcastically declares that he does not need safety gloves , grabs the high voltage wires and is fatally electrocuted . At Grimes ' funeral , Homer falls asleep and in a drowsy state tells Marge to change the TV channel , causing all the attending mourners to laugh as Grimes ' casket is lowered into the ground . 
 Meanwhile , Bart becomes bored during a visit to Springfield Town Hall and buys " 35 Industry Way " for a dollar during a foreclosure auction . It turns out to be a run @-@ down old factory , which he and Milhouse spend the day wrecking it until the next morning Bart returns to find it has collapsed during the night while Milhouse was on watch duty , leaving the rats to swarm Moe 's Tavern . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Homer 's Enemy " was written by John Swartzwelder , directed by Jim Reardon and executive produced by Bill Oakley and Josh Weinstein . One of the goals of Oakley and Weinstein was to create several episodes in each season which would " push the envelope conceptually . " The idea for the episode was first conceived by Bill Oakley who thought that Homer should have an enemy . The thought evolved into the concept of a " real world " co @-@ worker who would either love or hate Homer . The writers chose the latter as they thought it would have funnier results . The result was the character of Grimes , a man who had to work hard all his life with nothing to show for it and is dismayed and embittered by Homer 's success and comfort in spite of his inherent laziness and ignorance . 
 " Homer 's Enemy " explores the comic possibilities of a realistic character with a strong work ethic placed alongside Homer in a work environment . In an essay for the book Leaving Springfield , Robert Sloane describes the episode as " an incisive consideration of The Simpsons 's world . Although The Simpsons is known for its self @-@ reflectivity , the show had never looked at ( or critiqued ) itself as directly as it does in [ ' Homer 's Enemy ' ] . " In the episode , Homer is portrayed as an everyman and the embodiment of the American spirit ; however , in some scenes his negative characteristics and silliness are prominently highlighted . By the close of the episode , Grimes , a hard working and persevering " real American hero , " is relegated to the role of antagonist ; the viewer is intended to be pleased that Homer has emerged victorious . In an interview with Simpsons fan site NoHomers.net , Josh Weinstein said : 
 The animators and character designers had a lot of discussion about what Frank Grimes should look like . He was originally designed as a " burly ex @-@ marine guy with a crew cut " , but would later be modeled after Michael Douglas in the movie Falling Down and director Jim Reardon 's college roommate . Hank Azaria provided the voice of Frank Grimes , even though such a role would normally have been performed by a guest star . The producers decided Azaria was more suitable because the role involved a great deal of frustration and required extensive knowledge of the show . Azaria felt that the role should instead go to William H. Macy . According to Azaria , " I based the character on William Macy . I can 't really copy him vocally , but I tried to get as close as I could and copy his rhythms and the way he has that sort of seething passion underneath that total calm exterior . " The producers worked a lot with Azaria to help him perfect the role , and gave him more guidance than they normally would . Azaria felt that it was the role he worked hardest on , adding " I think it 's the one we did the most takes on , the most emotional , it felt like the one I worked on the hardest from a performance point of view , in preparation and in execution . " 
 Josh Weinstein has expressed regret about killing off Grimes after only one episode , describing him as " such an amazing character . " In an interview with The Believer , producer George Meyer said , " Grimes 's cardinal sin was that he shined a light on Springfield . He pointed out everything that was wrongheaded and idiotic about that world . And the people who do that tend to become martyrs . He said things that needed to be said , but once they were said , we needed to destroy that person . I 'll admit , we took a certain sadistic glee in his downfall . He was such a righteous person , and that somehow made his demise more satisfying . " 
 The subplot , where Bart buys a factory , was added so that there would be some lighter scenes to split up the main plot . According to Weinstein , " We wanted to have a Bart or Lisa kids story to contrast the heaviness and reality of Frank Grimes . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast on the Fox network , " Homer 's Enemy " acquired a 7 @.@ 7 Nielsen rating . It was viewed in approximately 7 @.@ 5 million homes , finishing the week ranked 56th . The Simpsons was the sixth highest rated show on Fox the week it was broadcast , behind The X @-@ Files , a broadcast of the film The Mask , Melrose Place , King of the Hill and Beverly Hills , 90210 . 
 According to Josh Weinstein , when the episode was first broadcast , many fans felt it was too dark , lacked humor and that Homer was portrayed as overly bad @-@ mannered . Weinstein considers this episode one of the most controversial of the seasons he ran , as it involves sharp observational humor which he thinks many fans " didn 't get . " Weinstein also talks about a " generation gap " — he believes the episode was originally panned by viewers , but has since become a favorite among fans who grew up with the show . 
 Critical opinion of the episode is mixed . Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , authors of I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , described the episode as " one of the series ' darkest episodes [ that ] ends on a real downer but is nevertheless also one of the wittiest and cleverest in ages . " In 2007 , Vanity Fair called " Homer 's Enemy " the seventh best episode of The Simpsons . John <unk> said it was , " the darkest Simpsons episode ever ... To see [ Grimes ] fail , and ultimately be destroyed , once he enters Homer 's world is hilarious and satisfying . " Comedian Rick Mercer called it a " great episode , and one of the darkest ever produced . " 
 Jon Bonné of MSNBC used " Homer 's Enemy " as an example of a bad episode of the eighth season and wrote " even now [ in 2000 ] , when subsequent episodes have debased Homer in new and innovative ways , the Grimes episode stands out as painful to watch . " In April 2007 , former Simpsons executive producer Mike Reiss listed " Homer 's Enemy " as one of his two least favorite episodes , stating , " I just think the episode was in bad taste . " 
 Several members of the staff have included the episode among their favorites . In a 2000 Entertainment Weekly article , Matt Groening ranked it as his sixth favorite Simpsons episode . It is a favorite of Josh Weinstein , who cites the scene when Grimes visits the Simpson home as one of his favorite scenes , while The Office creator Ricky Gervais has called it " the most complete episode . " In her autobiography My Life as a 10 @-@ Year @-@ Old Boy , Nancy Cartwright , the voice of Bart , praises Azaria 's performance as Grimes , and uses it as an example of how " Accent , pitch , pacing , range and intention " can allow an actor to voice many characters . She writes , 
 Sometimes [ in voice acting ] , it isn 't even a big change from your regular voice , but the attitude behind it makes all the difference . [ ... ] We were going to have a guest star play Frank Grimes . [ ... ] Hank , at the table @-@ read , just filling in , created such a beautifully crafted character , beautifully psychotic , that no one was used to replace him . 
 In October 2006 , IGN.com released a list of " The Top 25 Simpsons Peripheral characters " , in which they ranked Frank Grimes at number 17 , making him the only one @-@ time character to appear in that list . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Frank Grimes has since been referenced several times in the show , often showing his tombstone , and occasionally mentioning him by name . In the season fourteen episode " The Great Louse Detective " , it is revealed that he fathered a son named Frank Grimes , Jr . , who tries and fails to kill Homer . The footage of Grimes ' death is also shown during that episode . 
 During the nuclear power plant design contest , one of the entrants is Ralph Wiggum , whose entry is rejected by Mr. Burns . When Ralph does not leave the stage , Chief Wiggum says " Ralphie , get off the stage , sweetheart . " This line was later used as the chorus in the song " Ralph Wiggum " by the Bloodhound Gang . In February 2000 , the cast of The Simpsons performed a live reading of the episode script at the US Comedy Arts Festival in Aspen , Colorado . 
 = Stanisław Poniatowski ( 1676 – 1762 ) = 
 Stanisław Poniatowski ( September 15 , 1676 – August 29 , 1762 ) was a Polish military commander , diplomat , and noble . Throughout his career , Poniatowski served in various military offices , and was a general in both the Swedish and Polish @-@ Lithuanian militaries . He also held numerous civil positions , including those of podstoli of Lithuania and Grand Treasurer of the Lithuanian army in 1722 , voivode of the Masovian Voivodeship in 1731 , regimentarz of the Crown Army in 1728 , and castellan of Kraków in 1752 . Throughout his lifetime , he served in many starost positions . 
 Poniatowski was also involved in Commonwealth politics , and was a prominent member of the Familia , a faction led by the Czartoryski family . On a number of occasions he was in service of Stanisław Leszczyński , the principal rival of Augustus II for the throne of Poland . Having served under Leszcyński as a military officer and envoy during the Great Northern War , Poniatowski later embraced the Russian @-@ supported Augustus . Subsequently during the War of the Polish Succession , he returned , with the majority of the Familia , to his earlier allegiance . He later effected a reconciliation with Augustus III , and eventually became one of the new king 's chief advisors . 
 Poniatowski 's fifth son , Stanisław August Poniatowski , reigned as the last king of Poland from 1764 until 1795 , when he abdicated as a result of the Third Partition of Poland by the Russian Empire , the Kingdom of Prussia , and the Holy Roman Empire . His grandson , Prince Józef Antoni Poniatowski , was a Polish general and later a Marshal of the First French Empire , serving under Napoleon I. 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Poniatowski was born on September 15 , 1676 , in the village of <unk> , part of the Lesser Poland Voivodeship . He was the son of Franciszek Poniatowski ( 1640 / 50 - 1691 @-@ 5 ) , <unk> <unk> in 1680 and <unk> <unk> in 1690 , and wife ( 1673 / 4 ) Helena <unk> , and the paternal grandson of one Jan Poniatowski , who died before 1676 , though rumors regarding his parentage claimed that he was the son of Hetman Jan Kazimierz Sapieha by an unknown Polish Ashkenazi Jewish woman , later adopted by Franciszek . 
 He received elementary education in Kraków , at either the Kraków Academy or at the Nowodworski School . At 13 , he was sent to Vienna , capital of the Holy Roman Empire where he spent two years , and afterward traveled to Serbia , then a province of that empire . There , he volunteered to join Imperial forces campaigning against the Ottomans in the Great Turkish War . He served as an adjutant to Michał Franciszek Sapieha , and later commanded a company of cuirassiers . He participated in the Battle of Zenta in 1697 . 
 After the Treaty of Karlowitz of 1699 , which ended the war , he returned to Lithuania . Upon his return , he wed Teresa <unk> @-@ <unk> , but their marriage ended abruptly with her death not long afterward . The union , however , raised his social status . In 1700 , he participated in the Lithuanian Civil War as a supporter of the Sapieha family , fighting in the Battle of <unk> . Here , he was captured , but managed to escape , and he later served as Sapieha 's emissary to Charles XII , king of Sweden . 
 = = = The Great Northern War and subsequent Swedish service = = = 
 In 1702 , Swedish forces invaded the Commonwealth as part of the Great Northern War , which had begun in 1700 between the Swedish Empire and the Tsardom of Russia . Augustus II , king of Poland and Elector of Saxony , was an ally of the Russian tsar Peter I. Augustus 's forces were defeated , and the king himself was forced back to Saxony . He was replaced by Charles with Stanisław Leszczyński , a Polish nobleman and count of the Holy Roman Empire . Poniatowski , serving as a negotiator between the Wielkopolska Confederation and Charles XII , took the side of Leszcyński and distanced himself from the <unk> , formerly his patrons . 
 In 1708 , Leszcyński appointed Poniatowski his personal representative to Charles XII . He participated in the Battle of <unk> that year , and served as an aide to Charles XII during his exile in the Ottoman Empire after the Battle of Poltava in 1709 . Here , he worked to establish an alliance between the Ottomans and the Swedes , aiming to bring the Ottomans into the war against Russia . Due to diplomatic efforts on the part of the French , aligned with Sweden , the Ottomans began to campaign against the Russians in 1710 . With this change in Ottoman foreign policy came the dismissal of <unk> Ali Pasha , Grand Vizier of Ahmed III . His successor , Köprülü Numan Pasha , was an acquaintance of Poniatowski and had been a supporter of an anti @-@ Russian shift in Ottoman politics . 
 Poniatowski accompanied the Ottomans during the Pruth River Campaign , but was dissatisfied with the Treaty of the Pruth , which saw the withdrawal of the Ottomans from the war . His attempts to prolong and inflame the conflict failed , resulting in a loss of his status in the Empire and his eventual departure from it in 1713 . 
 Poniatowski did not return to Poland , as Lesczyński had been forced to retreat to Swedish Pomerania upon the return of Augustus in 1709 . With the support of Russian forces , Augustus had forced Lesczyński from the throne and had retaken the crown in that year . Instead , Poniatowski entered the service of Sweden , serving as a diplomat for both Charles XII and Lesczyński . He was later involved in mediation attempts between Lesczyński and Augustus , and also joined the Swedish army in various campaigns , being wounded during one in 1716 . During the course of his diplomatic activities , he traveled throughout Europe , including to such countries as Prussia , France , and Spain . For his service to Charles XII , he received the position of the governor of the Palatinate @-@ Zweibrücken , then in personal union with Sweden . 
 = = = Later years : Polish politician and magnate = = = 
 Upon Charles 's death in 1718 , he continued to serve <unk> as a diplomat . In 1719 he was briefly imprisoned in Copenhagen , and requested official leave from the Swedish government , which he received that year , thus ending his service as a Swedish diplomat . He returned to the Commonwealth , where he used the title of a general of cavalry . On 14 September 1720 he married Princess Konstancja Czartoryska ; this marriage brought him significant wealth . Over the next few years , he became increasingly involved in the creation of the Familia political faction , and most of his ensuing actions had the goal of increasing the Familia 's political power . On 5 December 1722 he received the office of <unk> of Lithuania ( podstoli litewski ) in 1722 , and 16 December , Grand Treasurer of Lithuanian Army ( <unk> wielki litewski ) , and became increasingly allied with August II On 20 December 1724 he received the military rank of General of the Lithuanian Army ( generał <unk> wojsk <unk> ) . In 1726 he became the Knight of the Order of the White Eagle . He was also promised the position of Grand Crown Hetman by August II , receiving in 1728 the rank of a Crown regimentarz . During a period in which no Crown hetmans were appointed , he acted as de facto commander of the Polish @-@ Lithuanian army . He enjoyed support from the military , but his forays into politics gained him significant opposition among the szlachta , led by the Potocki family . He became the voivode of the Masovian Voivodeship in 1731 . 
 After August II 's death in 1733 , he rekindled his old ties with Leszczyński , but made some attempts to secure his own election to the throne . Eventually , however , he decided to grant Leszczyński his full support , doing so during the convocation sejm of 1733 . He again served as Leszczyński 's diplomat during the following War of the Polish Succession . 
 In 1734 , he switched sides and joined the supported Augustus III . After several years of distrust , August III started treating Poniatowski as one of his major advisers . Over the next few years , throughout the 1740s , he and familiar supported plans for reform and strengthening the Commonwealth , however most of them have failed due to liberum veto disrupting the Sejm proceedings . Those failures likely resulted in the his apathy , and he became much less active on the political scene in the 1750s . On 6 June 1752 he received the office of castellan of Kraków . 
 Near the end of his life , Poniatowski was among the richest magnates in the Commonwealth , with the value of his estates estimated at about 4 million zlotys . He died in <unk> on 29 August 1762 , shortly after having fallen while walking , suffering an injury . 
 = = Family = = 
 He was the son of Franciszek Poniatowski ( 1640 / 1650 – 1691 – 1695 ) , <unk> <unk> in 1680 and <unk> <unk> in 1690 , and his wife Helena <unk> , who he had married in 1673 or 1674 . His older brother Józef Poniatowski ( 1674 – after 1731 ) was a generał wojsk <unk> and married Helena <unk> , without issue . His younger siblings were Michał <unk> Poniatowski , a Dominican , and Zofia Agnieszka Poniatowska , a <unk> Abbess in Kraków . He married firstly shortly after 1701 and divorced Teresa <unk> @-@ <unk> , who died after 1710 , without issue , and secondly Princess Konstancja Czartoryska on 14 September 1720 . They had eight children . 
 He was the father of : 
 Kazimierz Poniatowski ( 15 September 1721 - 13 April 1800 ) , podkomorzy wielki koronny between 1742 and 1773 and generał wojsk <unk> , who was created a Prince on 4 December 1764 and married on 21 January 1751 <unk> <unk> ( 17 January 1736 - 1814 ) and had issue 
 Franciszek Poniatowski ( 1723 - 1749 / 1759 ) , canon and provost in the Cathedral of Kraków ( <unk> i <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , chancellor of Gniezno in 1748 
 Aleksander Poniatowski ( 1725 - killed in action on 29 June 1744 ) , <unk> of Karl von Lothringen 
 Ludwika Maria Poniatowska ( 30 November 1728 - 10 February 1781 ) , who married in 1745 Jan Jakub Zamoyski ( ? - 10 February 1790 ) , <unk> <unk> in 1770 , IX <unk> till in 1780 and starosta <unk> , and had female issue ( Urszula Zamoyska ( c . 1750 - 1808 ) , who married firstly and divorced before 1781 Wincenty Potocki ( ? - 1825 ) , podkomorzy wielki koronny , and married secondly Michal Jerzy Mniszech , <unk> wielki koronny ) 
 Izabella Poniatowska , ( 1 July 1730 – 14 February 1808 ) was a Polish noblewoman , countess and princess . She was a sister of Stanisław Antoni Poniatowski , who in 1764 became King of Poland and Grand Duke of Lithuania , and reigned as Stanisław II Augustus . She married , firstly on November 19 , 1748 as his third wife Hetman Jan Klemens Branicki in 1756 , and secondly the Masovian voivode Andrzej Mokronowski , without issue . 
 Stanisław II August ( Poniatowski ) , the last King of Poland and Grand @-@ Duke of Lithuania , who was crowned in 1764 . 
 Andrzej Poniatowski ( 16 July 1734 / 5 - Vienna , 3 / 5 March 1773 ) , Austrian General @-@ Lieutenant in 1760 , Austrian <unk> in 1771 and starost <unk> , who was created a Prince on 10 December 1765 , and married on 3 May 1761 Maria Teresa , Countess Kinsky von <unk> und Tettau ( 14 February 1740 - 25 September 1806 ) , and had issue 
 Michał Jerzy Poniatowski ( 12 October 1736 - 12 August 1794 ) , <unk> <unk> i <unk> , Bishop of <unk> and <unk> <unk> in 1773 and Archbishop of Gniezno in 1784 , who was created a Prince on 4 December 1764 
 = What You Want ( Evanescence song ) = 
 " What You Want " is a song by American rock band Evanescence . It was released as the lead single from the band 's third eponymous album on August 9 , 2011 through Wind @-@ up Records . The song was written by Amy Lee , Terry Balsamo and Tim McCord and produced by Nick Raskulinecz . Lee described " What You Want " as a departure from the band 's previous sound and said she was inspired to write the song by several experiences she had with her fans . Musically " What You Want " contains a variety of musical elements and it uses drums , guitars , synthesizers and a piano . Lyrically , the song has a theme of freedom . 
 Upon its release , " What You Want " received positive reviews from music critics who praised its instrumentation , Lee 's vocals and the song 's musical hook ; several of them listed it as an album highlight . The song peaked at number 68 on the US Billboard Hot 100 and achieved higher success in its component charts . It also peaked at number 55 on the Canadian Hot 100 , topped the UK Rock Chart and appeared in eight charts in different countries . 
 The music video for " What You Want " was filmed in Brooklyn , New York and it was directed by Meiert Avis . It shows the band performing the song live in a small warehouse and Lee running in various locations . The video received positive response from critics who generally praised the imagery . " What You Want " was performed live for the first time on MTV and later on Jimmy Kimmel Live ! . It was added to the set list of the band 's third world tour , Evanescence Tour ( 2011 @-@ 2012 ) . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 " What You Want " was written by Amy Lee , Terry Balsamo , and Tim McCord in New York City and the production was handled by Nick Raskulinecz . During an interview with MTV News in June , Lee talked about the song saying , " [ ... ] the song that I think is the first single is the song that wraps it all up . It 's got a cool meaning , a lot of great lyrics going on , it also just smacks you right in the face and it 's heavy and it 's great . " She noted that the song was a departure from the band 's previous material and acknowledged that they wanted the new single to be " more than a hit " . 
 Lee stated the song was inspired by and talked about her relationship with the band 's fans , and the realization that following a music career " is what I 'm supposed to do " . She also explained that the theme of the song was freedom , saying that the song 's lyric " Remember who you really are " was " exactly everything you could assume it means " . Another inspiration for the song came from Lee 's life , " That song is me talking to myself about not being afraid and coming back to this thing and living the life I was born to live . Sometimes , it takes a lot to do this . And I do love it very much , but there is always that fear of putting yourself under the microscope . " 
 Speaking about the sound , Lee described " What You Want " as " very danceable " and her own vocals as " fun and snappy and it gives a cool dynamic [ to the song ] " . Lee stated that the process of recording the song was fun for the band as they had excess time . She said that initially the song was conceived while the band was just recording demo , but as time passed it progressed and grew into something more . She wrote a chorus for " What You Want " and played it on the piano . Lee revealed that she was initially embarrassed when she came up with the lyrics and the melody of the song as she thought the members of her band would think she was Janet Jackson due to the usage of a hook . During an interview with M Music & Musicians Lee revealed that she wouldn 't have recorded the song if it had been brought to her before the recording of Evanescence as she would have thought it was " stupid " . 
 = = Release = = 
 On August 22 , 2011 Lee went to Toronto 's Liberty Studios , to preview 5 mastered songs from Evanescence to a selected crowd of thirty people . " What You Want " was one of the five previewed songs . A snippet of " What You Want " premiered on MTV on July 11 , 2011 . During that time it was reported that the band 's new single would be released in early August . After the performance by the band on MTV on August 8 , 2011 , the album version premiered on the channel 's official website . The song was digitally released on August 9 , 2011 exclusively on the iTunes Store , and to all other digital retailers on August 16 . In the United Kingdom , the song was released on August 21 , and a CD single of the song was released on September 9 , 2011 in Germany . The band revealed during an interview that there were a lot of songs they were planning to release as the album 's first single , but it was a " natural choice " to release " What You Want " . To promote the single , the band partnered with <unk> and <unk> . Fans who identified an Evanescence song using the <unk> application and shared it to Twitter , using the hashtag # <unk> , entered themselves to win an album from the band . If fans checked in to Evanescence using <unk> , they unlocked an exclusive sticker . 
 The song was well received by the band 's fans . After James Montgomery from MTV News showed the snippets of the song , he asked the fans on Twitter to share their opinions about it . According to the fans ' tweets , the new songs were well received and praised . Kara Klenk of the same publication also confirmed the positive reception adding , " In the fast @-@ paced music world where artists need to constantly reinvent themselves and pump out music , videos , appearances , and tours to keep their fans happy and interested , it 's rare for a band to take a multi @-@ year hiatus and come back to legions of fans who have anxiously awaited their return . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 " What You Want " contains a variety of musical elements and influences of several music genres : industrial rock , rock gothic pop , nu metal , classic synthpop , electro @-@ pop dance and baroque metal along with a pop hook . Several critics noted that some of the gothic and metal elements were prominent in the band 's previous material , mostly due to their songs ' piano @-@ driven melody . Lewis Corner of the website Digital Spy noted that the classical strings present in the song reinforced the band 's medieval influences . Dane Prokofiev of PopMatters further compared the song with Korn 's music while Rick Florino of Artistdirect noted similarities to works by Depeche Mode . The song 's beat was further described as dynamic , " slamming " and loud . As the song progresses , the melody goes through " dramatic crashes " and crescendos . 
 " What You Want " opens with rapid drums and soon moves into a guitar @-@ driven mode , accompanied by synthesizers . Throughout the song , Lee uses " pseudo operatic " and " poppy " vocals . In the opening lines , she sings : " Do what you , what you want / If you have a dream for better / Do what you , what you want / ' Til you don 't want it anymore . " Those sounds are followed by a hard rock surging guitar and strings which were noted to be part of the band 's characteristic sound . The chorus is instrumentally complete with crashing cymbals , " thrashing , high @-@ wired rawk " guitars , electric guitars , keyboards and piano as Lee sings , " Hello , hello , remember me ? I ’ m everything you can ’ t control / Somewhere beyond the pain there must be a way to believe we can break through . " At the end of the song , Lee shouts the hook " Do what you , what you want , " as her vocals are echoed and eventually fade away . Laurie Tuffrey of NME summarized the song as a " standard goth @-@ pop fare , full of rapid drum breaks , swathes of fuzzy riffing and a catchy , chant @-@ friendly chorus . " <unk> , Scott Shetler of Pop Crush described its production as " polished " . 
 Several critics interpreted the song 's lyrics during their reviews . Its theme was noted to be about freedom . Jason Lipshutz of Billboard said that in the song , Lee is " trying to convince a romantic partner to stop ' spiraling down , down , down ' and help her find a new beginning . " Kerrang ! writer Steve Beebee wrote that Lee reaches a conclusion that " Love will guide you home . " Talking about the lyrical content of the song , Laurie Tuffrey of NME opined : " It 's quite hard to tell what the song 's about , with lots of references to ' the unknown ' and ' the pain ' , and it confusingly switches between suggesting people ' do what you want you want , if you have a dream for better ' in the first verse and the decidedly creepier final chorus where Lee seemingly gets an ex @-@ lover on the blower , only to tell them ' Hello , hello , it ’ s only me , infecting everything you love ' . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Scott Shetler of Pop Crush described the song as a " forceful rock track that reminds fans why the group was one of the most successful crossover acts of the past decade " and praised Lee 's " strong @-@ but @-@ pretty vocals " . James Montgomery from MTV News , praised the song saying that the " elastic @-@ yet @-@ lock @-@ step energy not only makes the song the perfect comeback single for a band that 's been gone for far too long , but it manages to capture the very essence of what inspired them to press on . " Tom Goodwyn of the same publication wrote : " A big thumping drumbeat and driving guitar riff kick things off , before giving way to a stomping chorus written with NFL stadiums in mind . " Karen Bliss of the magazine Rolling Stone praised Lee 's " haunting " and " crystalline " vocals in the " industrial @-@ strength sound " of " What You Want " . Nick Catucci of the same publication gave the song three stars writing , " Amy Lee trades anguish for defiance , <unk> her wail with welcome sass . Still , she 's nearly overrun by the music , a collision of two @-@ ton guitars , strings and piano . " Steven Hyden of The A. V. Club wrote : " Lee really can sing , and the opener ' What You Want ' shows she has the pipes ( and even the submerged spunk ) to become the new Pat Benatar this generation desperately needs . " Rick Florino of Artistdirect gave the song five out of five stars praising the hook as one of the best in the band 's career adding that it managed to make the song " instantly unforgettable " . Florino further called the song " another classic from Evanescence " which will " revive rock music again " and concluded : 
 At the heart of this epic , Lee relays another personal story that impacts intensely , especially as the song breaks during the bridge and her voice takes flight like never before . Lyrics like ' Somewhere beyond the pain there must be a way to believe ' sear and soar , as Lee continues to hypnotize like no other singer in rock or pop for that matter . 
 While reviewing Evanescence as a whole , Catucci of Rolling Stone called the song " pummeling but pretty . " In another review for the same publication , Matthew Perpetua wrote that the " heaviness is less top @-@ heavy " in the song before adding that the band " never sounded so brisk and dynamic " . Camille <unk> of the same publication called " What You Want " a " hair @-@ <unk> grandiose " song . Melissa Maerz of Entertainment Weekly gave the song a B rating and said , " the song 's grinding guitars , massive drums , goth @-@ princess piano frills , and warrior @-@ grrrl vocal rage feel like 2007 all over again . " Melinda Newman of HitFix praised the chorus lines saying that it should have been chosen as a theme song for the film Contagion . 
 Robert Copsey of Digital Spy described the song as a " hefty slab of dramatic rock which includes the band 's trademark electric guitars with melodic choruses " . In another review , he awarded the song four stars out of five stating " electro it certainly ain 't , but the result is as dancefloor @-@ friendly as it is mosh pit @-@ ready . " He further praised the " catchy @-@ as @-@ cholera " chorus and gave a mixed review about the lyrics and the title saying " fortunately their words seemed to have been a touch overzealous ; though it 's clear from the trailer for the group 's third album that they 've been spending a night or two on the tiles . " Lewis Corner of the same publication concluded : " ' What You Want ' proved ... the band 's melodious rock sensibilities remain firmly in tact " . Tamar Anitai of MTV , Theon Weber of Spin , Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic and Edna Gundersen of USA Today chose the song as an album highlight . Entertainment Weekly 's Kyle Anderson also chose it as a highlight , further describing it as " fierce " . Los Angeles Times ' Mikael Wood wrote that " ' What You Want ' rides its central riff with a bulldozer 's efficiency . " Marc Hirsh of The Boston Globe found a " metallic lurch playing off of Lee 's goth @-@ empress vocals " in the song . Hirsh went on to call the song a " strong declaration " announcing the band 's comeback . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 On the chart issue dated August 20 , 2011 , " What You Want " debuted at number 68 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart , selling more than 78 @,@ 000 copies according to SoundScan . The song also debuted at number 32 on the Billboard Rock Songs becoming the " Greatest Gainer " of the week on the same chart . Later , during the digital release of Evanescence , it moved from number 15 to number 13 . It debuted at number 35 on the Billboard Alternative Songs chart in the United States while also peaking at number 7 on the Billboard Mainstream Rock Chart . As of November 2011 , it has sold more than 112 @,@ 000 digital downloads . On the Canadian Hot 100 , " What You Want " debuted at number 55 . 
 " What You Want " peaked at number 30 on the Brazilian Billboard Brasil chart on August 12 , 2011 . On August 22 , 2011 , the song debuted on the German Singles Chart and peaked at number 84 . It charted for three weeks and left the chart on October 2 , 2011 . On September 3 , the song debuted at number one on the UK Rock Chart , removing Evanescence 's own single " My Immortal " ( 2003 ) from the top spot . That achievement helped the song debut at number 72 on the main UK Singles Chart the same day . " What You Want " debuted at number 86 on the ARIA Singles Chart in Australia on April 2 , 2012 . According to the ARIA Charts ' official website , the song debuted in April , though it was released in Australia in August 2011 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background and development = = = 
 The filming of the music video for " What You Want " started on July 30 , 2011 in a warehouse in Brooklyn , New York , and it was directed by Meiert Avis . The video featured the band 's fans who played a crowd on a concert by Evanescence . During an interview , Lee revealed that the music video for the song was one of the band 's " <unk> " videos adding , " [ ... ] this is more a personal video . We 've done a lot in the past that [ were ] very ' fantasy , ' and this is sort of the real us . [ ... ] I just wanted to do something that really felt personal for a change . Obviously , I 'm wearing crazy makeup , and that 's not my everyday , but , you know , I want ... to connect with the fans again . We all do . We miss them . A lot of this record is about them , and that 's why they 're going to be here and be in it , too . " In an interview with MTV News , she described the concept of the video : 
 " This video is sort of , like , the history of the band . This club [ set ] is emulating old shows we used to play in the beginning — we used to play this club called Vino 's in Little Rock [ Arkansas ] — it 's sort of like back then , the gritty , dirty club , sweaty . And basically , it 's also [ about ] New York , where I 've been , [ and ] where [ bassist ] Tim [ McCord ] lived in the past few years since we 've been gone . And it 's sort of about escaping New York and . [ ... ] coming back out into the world . " 
 However , before the filming of the video , the band was still finishing the album and when the time to shoot the video came , Lee didn 't conceive an idea about how it should look like . As she felt the song was different for the band , Lee knew that they didn 't want to " go the classic , sort of fantastic , epic [ thing ] . " Lee asked her sister Carrie to help her around the concept of the video . Her sister said that they should film the video for the song in New York and Lee agreed with her idea , " She just started saying things that were right on . She was like , ' This should be in New York . You guys need to do something different , this song feels different . ' And she started talking about running across the Brooklyn Bridge , and it being where I live , and I was like , ' Oh my God , this is great . ' " However , the final shot of the video filmed at Coney Island was Lee 's own idea . The shot represented the band coming back in the world and " heading into the unknown , coming into a new world " . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The video begins with shots of several skyscrapers in New York , which are followed by scenes of the band performing in a warehouse that has been converted into a stage ( similar to Vino 's bar which is where the band used to regularly perform before they became popular ) . The crowd at the concert is seen singing along with the band . The video continually cuts the singer walking through Brooklyn in a dark dress and makeup . She walks through a train station , streets and the Brooklyn Bridge . During the bridge of the song , Lee runs through the Brooklyn Bridge and jumps on the other side , landing on her feet . At the end of the video , the band meet up and walk to the beach where they walk into the sea . The final shot shows the band walking in the sea as the video fades out . 
 = = = Release and reception = = = 
 A twenty @-@ two second teaser of the video was released on September 9 , 2011 . The video for the song officially premiered online on September 13 , 2011 and it was made available for digital download on the iTunes Store the same day . James Montgomery from MTV News , said that the video was a departure for the band " eschewing the dark fantasy worlds they 've created in previous videos in favor of good old @-@ fashioned realism : the blood , sweat and tears that not only took them to the top , but have fueled their current comeback , too . " Later , he added that the video " recalls the halcyon days of big @-@ ticket rock videos " and some " claustrophobic , cathartic performance footage . " He called it " a true band clip ; it 's artfully autobiographical and , perhaps most notably , features all of Evanescence . " Entertainment Weekly 's Grady Smith , called the video " heavy goth @-@ rock head @-@ banger " and added that the shots of Lee falling from the bridge were similar to the music video for " Bring Me to Life " ( 2003 ) . 
 Melinda Newman of the website HitFix compared the video with the movies The Crow ( 1994 ) and Run Lola Run ( 1998 ) . She further praised the lighting , the photographs and the mood which according to her , were " perfection , especially the city scapes at night and the intense looks on the fans faces , as they are enraptured by Lee . It 's a big budget shoot , the kind we don 't see that much of anymore . " Jason Lipshutz of the magazine Billboard praised the video with its " crystal @-@ clear " shots of the concert and the " hazy " shots of Lee running through New York . Nicole James of MTV <unk> simply said " rock videos + themes = the only kind of math I like " referring to the music video for " What You Want " . A more negative review of the video was given by Laurie Tuffrey of NME who called the video " uninspiring " . He further found CCTV effects and concluded that Lee was " looking for some love to infect " while running through Brooklyn streets . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Evanescence performed the song live for the first time on MTV , on August 8 , 2011 during a broadcast called MTV First : Evanescence . After the performance the band had an exclusive interview with the publication . Writing for the channel 's website , James Montgomery described Lee 's vocals as " powerful " during the performance . On October 15 , 2011 , Evanescence performed the song during a televised appearance on the Jimmy Kimmel Live ! show . 
 They later added the song to the set list on their third worldwide tour in support of Evanescence , titled Evanescence Tour . While reviewing a concert by the band , Rick Florino of Artistdirect wrote that Lee sounded " pristine and powerful " during the chorus of the song . He further praised Tim McCord 's bass and Terry Balsamo 's guitar , " volleying with Troy <unk> as <unk> 's methodical metallic theatrics hypnotized . " He concluded that the song " proved to be an undeniable anthem echoed throughout the room by every voice present . " Evanescence performed the song during their concert at the 2011 Rock in Rio festival on October 2 , 2011 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital download 
 " What You Want " – 3 : 40 
 CD single 
 " What You Want " – 3 : 40 
 " What You Want " ( Elder Jepson Remix ) – 3 : 18 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Mark Steel 's in Town = 
 Mark Steel 's in Town is a stand @-@ up comedy show on BBC Radio 4 , co @-@ written and performed by Mark Steel . The series , that was first broadcast on 18 March 2009 , is recorded in various small towns in the United Kingdom . Each episode is tailored to the town it is recorded in and the show is performed in front of a local audience . 
 The first series of six episodes was recorded in five towns in England ( Skipton , Boston , Lewes , Walsall and the Isle of Portland ) and one in Wales ( Merthyr Tydfil ) . The second series , also of six episodes and first broadcast on 7 April 2010 , was performed in four towns in England ( Dartford , Wilmslow , Penzance and Gateshead ) and two in Scotland ( Dumfries and Kirkwall ) . The third series of six episodes , broadcast between December 2011 and January 2012 , visited four towns in England ( Berwick @-@ upon @-@ Tweed , Basingstoke , Wigan and Bungay ) , one in Wales ( Holyhead ) and one on the Isle of Man ( Douglas ) . A special episode recording during the Edinburgh Festival Fringe covering Leith was broadcast on 21 August 2012 . A fourth series was broadcast between November 2012 and January 2013 . In this series Steel performs in five towns in England ( Whitehaven , Handsworth , Ottery St Mary , Corby and Chipping Norton ) and one in Scotland ( Tobermory ) . A fifth series was broadcast between January and February 2014 and was performed in four towns in England ( Glastonbury , Southall , Birkenhead and Huddersfield ) , one in Wales ( St. Davids ) and one in Northern Ireland ( Derry ) . A sixth series was recorded between March and May 2015 in four towns in England ( Fleetwood , Melton Mowbray , Shrewsbury and Barnard Castle ) , one in Scotland ( Paisley ) and one in the Channel Islands ( Saint Anne , Alderney ) . A Seventh series is planned to air in September 2016 . In this series Steel will perform in five towns in England ( Stockport , Hebden Bridge , Colchester , Kingston Upon Thames & Lynton ) and one in Gibraltar . 
 The programme received positive reviews from critics because of Steel 's observations of the locals , and the fact the series took place in multiple locations , compared to the majority of stand @-@ up shows on radio and television , which are normally recorded in one single location . However , some have also criticised the way he has commented on some locations . In 2010 Mark Steel 's in Town won a Silver Award for " Best Comedy " in the Sony Radio Academy Awards , and in 2012 it won the Gold Award in the same category . Also in 2010 it won the Writers ' Guild of Great Britain Award for " Best Radio Comedy / Light Entertainment " . In series was voted " Best Radio Entertainment Show " in the Comedy.co.uk Awards held by the British Comedy Guide in the 2012 and 2015 awards . 
 = = Format = = 
 Before each episode , Steel researches the history of the town he is going to perform in . His research interests include local notable people , landmarks , customs and humorous anecdotes . The majority of the research sometimes took place close to the actual recording date . For example , Steel carried out almost no research for his episode in Walsall until ten days before the recording . In Merthyr Tydfil he spent three days in the town where he did research and met locals . 
 He then performs a tailor @-@ made show about the town in front of a local audience . The style of the programme is similar to other shows starring Steel such as The Mark Steel Lectures , in which Steel presented a humorous lecture about a famous person in history . 
 = = Production = = 
 Due to the small budget there were certain places the show could not be recorded during the first series . For example , no episodes in the first series were recorded in Scotland . Steel said in an interview : 
 " One of the restrictions we 've got is that the budget for radio we 've got going is so unbelievably , comically tiny , that we couldn 't go to Scotland because the fare is too much . It is like some student fanzine . ' Mum , can I borrow some money because I want to go to <unk> 
 " So , I 'm hoping , if we do another series , because I 'd love to go to the Shetlands . I 'd be really excited at going to the Shetlands . Because it is just like a fascinating place to be at the moment . Or even one of these sort of weird places in Cornwall . But that was too far as well . " 
 The second series did feature two episodes recorded in Scotland . One in Dumfries , on the Scottish border , and other in Kirkwall , Orkney . 
 Other than Steel , Pete Sinclair was the only other writer , providing additional material . Julia McKenzie produced the first 2 series , while Sam Bryant produced series 3 & 4 . Ed <unk> produced Series 5 and Carl Cooper produced series 6 and will produce the upcoming series 7 . Also working on the show were studio manager Jerry Peal , and production co @-@ ordinators Sarah Sharpe and <unk> Stephens . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The majority of the reaction towards Mark Steel 's in Town has been positive . In May 2010 , the programme was given the Silver Award for " Best Comedy " in the Sony Radio Academy Awards . In May 2012 it won the Gold Award in the same category . In November 2010 it won the Writers ' Guild of Great Britain Award for " Best Radio Comedy / Light Entertainment " . In January 2013 it won the " Best Radio Entertainment Show " award in the 2012 Comedy.co.uk Awards held by the British Comedy Guide . It won the same award in the 2015 awards . 
 Chris Campling in The Times wrote a review of a show recorded in Skipton : " A tough gig ? More like shooting fish in a barrel , to judge from the reception he received from the honest burghers of Skipton , North Yorkshire . From the moment he remarked on the fact that the hall in which he was performing was used as a cattle market during the day and was hosed out before the show – and got a roar of approving laughter – Steel must have known that he could do no wrong . " 
 Campling , as well as other critics , have commented that one of the main features of the show is the ability of the locals to laugh at themselves and their eccentricities . Campling wrote of the Skipton show : " The ability to laugh at itself is one of this country 's finest attributes , but the Skipton mob were only too happy to celebrate their insularity . " Elisabeth Mahoney of The Guardian , who reviewed the Dartford episode said : " Going to a place and insulting it takes guts and careful strategies . Steel made use of the fact that he is from nearby Swanley both to signal that he knows the area but also that – whatever he was about to say about Dartford – it was better than his hometown . " Another journalist , reviewing the Penzance episode in the North Devon Journal commented : " Why do we like programmes that laugh at us ? Because , I hope , we laugh at ourselves . We 're not ignorant of our stereotypes . West Cornwall ? <unk> ! " 
 Miranda Sawyer in The Observer also praised the show saying it was , " A simple idea , kindly and wittily executed by another unfashionably humane Englishman . Thank Gaia they still exist . " 
 Hilda Swinney , the Portland correspondent for the Dorset Echo said that at the recording on the Isle of Portland : " The audience , mostly Portlanders , were appreciative and very responsive to his humour and his views on ' their special island ' . They left him in no doubt that a return of Mark Steel 's in Town would be very welcome . " 
 Stuart Morris , a historian who helped to provide research for Steel for the Portland show commented : " I was amazed that he should have absorbed so much of the island 's history in the short period of time that he had . He joked about the Portland winds , saying that in comparison , islanders wouldn 't even have bothered to take out their kites in the face of Hurricane Katrina . He made a few remarks about Portland / Weymouth rivalry and our Weymouth friends present laughed as much as the rest of us . " 
 Ian Wolf from the British Comedy Guide commented that : " The fact that the series moved from town @-@ to @-@ town was very impressive – as it meant Steel had to write a unique half @-@ hour routine for each venue ( compare this to most stand @-@ ups , who only have to come up with about an hour of strong material a year ! ) . " 
 However , at times local journalists have responded negatively to the programme . Lisa Reeves , who reviewed the episode recorded in Wilmslow , commented on how Steel 's socialist political views did not mix with the affluence of Wilmslow and nearby Alderley Edge , which he also visited for the purposes of the recording . Reeves wrote that : " It was an enjoyable evening , with some very funny gags but a large part of the material focused on the champagne lifestyle so often portrayed in the media . " She also said that Steel should have focused more on how good the area was as a place to live in , " but I suppose that wouldn 't make for good comedy . " 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = = = Series 1 = = = 
 = = = Series 2 = = = 
 = = = Series 3 = = = 
 = = = Edinburgh Fringe Special = = = 
 = = = Series 4 = = = 
 = = = Series 5 = = = 
 = = = Series 6 = = = 
 = = = Series 7 = = = 
 = = Merchandise = = 
 The first series of Mark Steel 's in Town was released for download on 1 March 2010 . The series has yet to be released on CD . 
 A book accompanying the series , entitled Mark Steel 's in Town and published by Fourth Estate , was released on 27 October 2011 . 
 = Churches of Christ = 
 Churches of Christ are autonomous Christian congregations associated with one another through common beliefs and practices . They seek to base doctrine and practice on the Bible alone in order to be the church described in the New Testament . Churches of Christ teach that God saves and adds to His church those who believe in Christ , repent of sin , confess Jesus Christ as the Son of God , and are baptized in the name of Jesus Christ for the forgiveness of sins , which grants the gift of the Holy Spirit ( Acts 2 : 36 @-@ 47 ) . 
 Churches of Christ in the United States have heritage in the American Restoration Movement . This evangelistic and Bible @-@ based effort began in various places as several people sought a return to the original teachings and practices of the New Testament . Christian leaders including Robert Sandeman , Abner Jones , Elias Smith , James O 'Kelly , Rice Haggard , Thomas Campbell , Alexander Campbell , Walter Scott , and Barton W. Stone were trailblazers of similar movements that impacted the eventual phenomenon known as the American Restoration Movement . 
 The Restoration ideal was also similar and somewhat connected to earlier restoration efforts in Europe ( such as those of John Glas , Robert Haldane , and James Haldane ) , as well as Puritan movements in colonial America . Though differing somewhat in details , each group consisted of like @-@ minded Christians who , although often independent of one another , had declared independence from their various denominations and the traditional creeds , seeking a fresh start to return to the doctrines and practices of the New Testament church . They did not see themselves as establishing a new church , but rather sought " the unification of all Christians in a single body patterned after the original church of the New Testament . " The names " Church of Christ , " " Christian Church , " and " Disciples of Christ " were adopted by the movement because they believed these terms to be biblical , rather than denominational . 
 Prior to the U.S. Religious Census of 1906 , all congregations associated with the Restoration Movement had been reported together by the Census Bureau . But as the movement developed , tensions grew between those who emphasized unity and those who emphasized restoration , resulting in a division between those who used musical instruments in worship ( known as the Christian Church ) and those who chose to sing a cappella . The congregations in the a cappella tradition are the subject of this article . While this was the most visible distinction between the two groups , there was also disagreement over the appropriateness of organizational structures above the congregational level such as missionary societies . 
 Both issues highlighted differences in the groups ' underlying approaches to Biblical interpretation . For the Churches of Christ , practices not present in accounts of New Testament worship were not permissible in the church , and they could find no New Testament documentation of the use of instrumental music in worship . For the Christian Churches , any practice not expressly forbidden could be considered . Though not officially recognized as distinct movements until 1906 , the separation of the Churches of Christ and the Christian Churches had been taking place gradually for decades . 
 The Restoration Movement was not a purely North American phenomenon , and active mission efforts began in the 18th century . There are now Churches of Christ in Africa , Asia , Australia , South America , Central America , and Europe . 
 = = Overview = = 
 Members of the church of Christ do not conceive of themselves as a new church started near the beginning of the 19th century . Rather , the whole movement is designed to reproduce in contemporary times the church originally established on Pentecost , A.D. 33 . The strength of the appeal lies in the restoration of Christ 's original church . 
 Modern churches of Christ have their historical roots in the Restoration Movement , which was a converging of Christians across denominational lines in search of a return to an original , " pre @-@ denominational " Christianity . Participants in this movement sought to base their doctrine and practice on the Bible alone , rather than recognizing the traditional councils and denominational hierarchies that had come to define Christianity since the first century A.D. Members of the churches of Christ believe that Jesus founded only one church , that the current divisions among Christians do not express God 's will , and that the only basis for restoring Christian unity is the Bible . They simply identify themselves as " Christians " , without using any other forms of religious or denominational identification . They believe that they are recreating the New Testament church as established by Christ . 
 Churches of Christ generally share the following theological beliefs and practices : 
 Autonomous , congregational church organization without denominational oversight ; 
 Refusal to hold to any formal creeds or informal " doctrinal statements " or " statements of faith " , stating instead a reliance on the Bible alone for doctrine and practice ; 
 Local governance by a plurality of male elders ; 
 Baptism by immersion of consenting believers for the forgiveness of sins ; 
 Weekly observance of the Lord 's Supper on <unk> British congregations , the term " breaking of bread " is commonly used . 
 In American congregations the terms " Communion " , and particularly " Eucharist " , are rarely used . 
 Though doctrinally Churches of Christ hold to the closed communion viewpoint , in practice congregations rarely prohibit visitors from taking communion , on the view that per 1 Corinthians 11 : 28 the visitor must " examine himself " and decide to partake or decline ( i.e. it is not for the minister , elders / deacons , or members to decide who may partake ) ; thus , it is more akin to open communion . 
 All but " a very small segment " of churches use unfermented grape juice instead of wine ) ; and 
 Practice of a cappella singing , and the rejection of instrumental music , in worship . 
 In keeping with their history , the churches of Christ claim the New Testament as their sole rule of faith and practice in deciding matters of doctrine and ecclesiastical structure . [ Col. 2 : 14 ] They view the Old Testament as divinely inspired and historically accurate , but they do not consider its laws to be binding under the New Covenant in Christ ( unless they are repeated in the New Testament ) . They believe that the New Testament demonstrates how a person may become a Christian ( and thus a part of the universal Church of Christ ) and how a church should be collectively organized and carry out its scriptural purposes . 
 = = = Demographics = = = 
 These churches comprise about 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 members in over 40 @,@ 000 individual congregations worldwide . There are approximately 13 @,@ 000 congregations in the United States . Overall U.S. membership was approximately 1 @.@ 8 million in 1990 and 1 @.@ 9 million in 2008 . Estimates of the proportion of the US adult population associated with the Churches of Christ vary from 0 @.@ 8 % to 1 @.@ 5 % . Roughly 1 @,@ 240 congregations , with 172 @,@ 000 members , are predominantly African @-@ American . 240 congregations with 10 @,@ 000 members are Spanish @-@ speaking . The average congregation size is approximately 100 members . In 2000 , the Churches of Christ were the 12th largest religious group in the U.S. based on number of members , but the 4th largest in number of congregations . 
 Within the U.S. , membership in the churches of Christ has grown by approximately 2 % over the period from 1980 through 2007 . Membership grew in 33 states and declined in 17 . The current retention rate of young adults graduating from high school appears to be approximately 60 % . The percentage of members attending services appears to be high relative to that of other Christian groups . Membership is concentrated , with 70 % of the U.S. membership in 13 states . Churches of Christ had a presence in 2 @,@ 429 counties , placing them fifth behind the United Methodist Church , Catholic Church , Southern Baptist Convention and Assemblies of God – but the average number of adherents per county was low at 677 . The divorce rate was 6 @.@ 9 % , much lower than national averages . 
 = = Name = = 
 " Church of Christ " is the most common name used by this group . In keeping with their non @-@ denominational focus , recently some congregations have identified themselves primarily as community churches and secondarily as Churches of Christ . A much earlier tradition is to identify a congregation as " the church " at a particular location , with no other description or qualifiers . A primary motivation behind the name is the desire to use a scriptural or Biblical name – to identify the church using a name that is found in the New Testament . Adherents are also referred to as <unk> by academics and other denominations due to their following of the teachings of Alexander Campbell , similar to Lutherans or Calvinists , but the term is sometimes offensive . 
 Alexander Campbell said the goal was to " [ c ] all Bible things by Bible names , " which became an early slogan of the Restorationist Movement . These congregations generally avoid names that associate the church with a particular man ( other than Christ ) or a particular doctrine or theological point of view ( e.g. , Lutheran , Wesleyan , Reformed ) . They believe that Christ established only one church , and that the use of denominational names serves to foster division among Christians . Thomas Campbell expressed an ideal of unity in his Declaration and Address : " The church of Jesus Christ on earth is essentially , intentionally , and constitutionally one . " 
 Other terms have been recognized as scriptural , based on their use in the New Testament : " church of God " , " church of the Lord " , " churches of Christ " , " church of the first @-@ born " , " church of the living God " , " the house of God " , and " the people of God " . While recognized as scriptural , terms such as Church of God are avoided to avoid confusion or identification with other groups that use those designations . As a practical matter , use of a common term is seen as a way to help individual Christians find congregations with a similar approach to the scriptures . Members understand that a scriptural name can be used in a " denominational " or " sectarian " way . Trying to use the term " Church of Christ " exclusively has been criticized as identifying a denomination . Many congregations and individuals do not capitalize the word " church " in the phrases " church of Christ " and " churches of Christ " . This is based on the understanding that the term " church of Christ " is used in the New Testament as a descriptive phrase , indicating that the church belongs to Christ , rather than as a proper name . 
 = = Church organization = = 
 = = = Congregational autonomy and leadership = = = 
 Church government is congregational rather than denominational . Churches of Christ purposefully have no central headquarters , councils , or other organizational structure above the local church level . Rather , the independent congregations are a network with each congregation participating at its own discretion in various means of service and fellowship with other congregations ( see Sponsoring church ( Churches of Christ ) ) . Churches of Christ are linked by their shared commitment to restoration principles . Congregations which do not participate with other church congregations and which refuse to pool resources in order to support outside causes ( such as mission work , orphan homes , Bible colleges , etc . ) are sometimes called " non @-@ institutional . " 
 Congregations are generally overseen by a plurality of elders who are sometimes assisted in the administration of various works by deacons . Elders are generally seen as responsible for the spiritual welfare of the congregation , while deacons are seen as responsible for the non @-@ spiritual needs of the church . Deacons serve under the supervision of the elders , and are often assigned to direct specific ministries . Successful service as a deacon is often seen as preparation for the eldership . Elders and deacons are appointed by the congregation based on the qualifications found in 1 Timothy 3 and Titus 1 , including that the persons must be male ( female elders and <unk> are not recognized ) . Congregations look for elders who have a mature enough understanding of scripture to enable them to supervise the minister and to teach , as well as to perform " governance " functions . In the absence of willing men who meet these qualifications , congregations are sometimes overseen by the congregation 's men in general . 
 While the early Restoration Movement had a tradition of itinerant preachers rather than " located Preachers " , during the 20th century a long @-@ term , formally trained congregational minister became the norm among Churches of Christ . Ministers are understood to serve under the oversight of the elders and may or may not also be qualified as an elder . While the presence of a long @-@ term professional minister has sometimes created " significant de facto ministerial authority " and led to conflict between the minister and the elders , the eldership has remained the " ultimate locus of authority in the congregation " . There is , however , a small segment of Churches of Christ who oppose the " located minister " concept ( see below ) . 
 Churches of Christ hold to the priesthood of all believers . No special titles are used for preachers or ministers that would identify them as " clergy " . Many ministers have undergraduate or graduate education in religion , or specific training in preaching through a non @-@ college school of preaching . Churches of Christ emphasize that there is no distinction between " clergy " and " laity " and that every member has a gift and a role to play in accomplishing the work of the church . 
 = = = Variations within Churches of Christ = = = 
 While there is an identifiable mainstream within the Churches of Christ , there are also significant variations within the fellowship . The approach taken to restoring the New Testament church has focused on " methods and procedures " such as church organization , the form of worship , and how the church should function . As a result , most divisions among Churches of Christ have been the result of " methodological " disputes . These are meaningful to members of this movement because of the seriousness with which they take the goal of " restoring the form and structure of the primitive church " . 
 Three quarters of the congregations and 87 % of the membership are described by the The Encyclopedia of the Stone @-@ Campbell Movement as " mainstream " , sharing a general consensus on practice and theology . 
 There are a few congregations which allow hand @-@ clapping and / or that use musical instruments in worship , a notable departure from the a cappella style of singing which is one of the notable practices of the Churches of Christ . 
 The remaining congregations may be grouped into four categories which generally differ from the mainstream consensus in specific practices , rather than in theological perspectives , and tend to have smaller congregations on average . 
 The largest of these four categories is the " non @-@ institutional " churches of Christ . This group is notable for opposing congregational support of institutions such as orphans homes and Bible colleges . Approximately 2 @,@ 055 congregations fall in this category . 
 The remaining three groups , whose congregations are generally considerably smaller than those of the mainstream or " non @-@ institutional " groups , also oppose institutional support , but differ from the " non @-@ institutional " group by other beliefs and practices : 
 One group opposes separate " Sunday School " classes ; this group consists of approximately 1 @,@ 100 congregations . These groups generally overlap with the " one @-@ cup " group and may overlap with the " mutual edification " group . 
 Another group opposes the use of multiple communion cups ( the term " one @-@ cup " is often used , sometimes pejoratively as " one @-@ <unk> " , to describe this group ) ; there are approximately 550 congregations in this group . Congregations in this group differ as to whether " the wine " should be fermented or unfermented , and whether " the bread " can be broken ahead of time or must be broken by the individual participant during Lord 's Supper time . 
 The last and smallest group " emphasize [ s ] mutual edification by various leaders in the churches and oppose [ s ] one person doing most of the preaching " ( the term " mutual edification " is often used to describe this group ) ; the group includes roughly 130 congregations . 
 = = Beliefs = = 
 If it 's not in the Bible , then these folks aren 't going to do it . 
 Churches of Christ seek to practice the principle of the Bible being the only source to find doctrine ( known elsewhere as sola <unk> ) . The Bible is generally regarded as inspired and <unk> . Churches of Christ generally see the Bible as historically accurate and literal , unless scriptural context obviously indicates otherwise . Regarding church practices , worship , and doctrine , there is great liberty from congregation to congregation in interpreting what is biblically permissible , as congregations are not controlled by a denominational hierarchy . Their approach to the Bible is driven by the " assumption that the Bible is sufficiently plain and simple to render its message obvious to any sincere believer " . Related to this is an assumption that the Bible provides an understandable " blueprint " or " constitution " for the church . 
 Historically , three hermeneutic approaches have been used among Churches of Christ . 
 Analysis of commands , examples , and necessary inferences ; 
 <unk> analysis distinguishing between Patriarchal , Mosaic and Christian dispensations ; and 
 <unk> @-@ historical analysis . 
 The relative importance given to each of these three strategies has varied over time and between different contexts . The general impression in the current Churches of Christ is that the group 's hermeneutics are entirely based on the command , example , inference approach . In practice , interpretation has been deductive , and heavily influenced by the group 's central commitment to ecclesiology and soteriology . Inductive reasoning has been used as well , as when all of the conversion accounts from the book of Acts are collated and analyzed to determine the steps necessary for salvation . One student of the movement summarized the traditional approach this way : " In most of their <unk> , however , my impression is that spokespersons in the Churches of Christ reason from Scripture in a deductive manner , arguing from one premise or hypothesis to another so as to arrive at a conclusion . In this regard the approach is much like that of science which , in practice moves <unk> from one hypothesis to another , rather than in a Baconian inductive manner . " In recent years , changes in the degree of emphasis placed on ecclesiology and soteriology has spurred a reexamination of the traditional hermeneutics among some associated with the Churches of Christ . 
 A debate arose during the 1980s over the use of the command , example , necessary inference model for identifying the " essentials " of the New Testament faith . Some argued that it fostered legalism , and advocated instead a hermeneutic based on the character of God , Christ and the Holy Spirit . Traditionalists urged the rejection of this " new hermeneutic " . Use of this tripartite formula has declined as congregations have shifted to an increased " focus on ' spiritual ' issues like discipleship , <unk> , family and praise " . Relatively greater emphasis has been given to Old Testament studies in congregational Bible classes and at affiliated colleges in recent decades . While it is still not seen as authoritative for Christian worship , church organization , or regulating the Christian 's life , some have argued that it is theologically authoritative . 
 Many scholars associated with the Churches of Christ embrace the methods of modern Biblical criticism but not the associated anti @-@ <unk> views . More generally , the classical <unk> @-@ historical method is prevalent , which provides a basis for some openness to alternative approaches to understanding the scriptures . 
 = = = Doctrine of salvation ( soteriology ) = = = 
 Churches of Christ are strongly anti @-@ Calvinist in their understanding of salvation and generally present conversion as " obedience to the proclaimed facts of the gospel rather than as the result of an emotional , Spirit @-@ initiated conversion " . Churches of Christ hold the view that humans of accountable age are lost because they have committed sins . These lost souls can be redeemed because Jesus Christ , the Son of God , offered Himself as the atoning sacrifice . Children too young to understand right from wrong and make a conscious choice between the two , are believed to be innocent of sin . There is no set " age " for this to occur ; it is only when the child learns the difference between right and wrong that they are accountable ( James 4 : 17 ) . Congregations differ in their interpretation of the age of accountability . 
 Churches of Christ generally teach that the process of salvation involves the following steps : 
 One must be properly taught , and hear ( Romans 10 : 14 ) ; 
 One must believe or have faith ( Hebrews 11 : 6 ) ; 
 One must repent , which means turning from one 's former lifestyle and choosing God 's ways ( Acts 17 : 30 ) ; 
 One must confess belief that Jesus is the son of God ( Acts 8 : 36 – 37 ) ; 
 One must be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ ( Acts 2 : 38 ) ; and 
 One must live faithfully as a Christian ( 1 Peter 2 : 9 ) . 
 Beginning in the 1960s , many preachers began placing more emphasis on the role of grace in salvation , instead of focusing exclusively on implementing all of the New Testament commands and examples . This was not an entirely new approach , as others had actively " affirmed a theology of free and unmerited grace " , but it did represent a change of emphasis with grace becoming " a theme that would increasingly define this tradition " . 
 = = = = Baptism = = = = 
 Baptism has been recognized as an important rite throughout the history of the Christian Church , but Christian groups differ over the manner in which baptism is administered , the meaning and significance of baptism , its role in salvation , and who is a candidate for baptism . 
 Baptism in Churches of Christ is performed only by bodily immersion , based on the Koine Greek verb <unk> ( <unk> ) which is understood to mean to dip , immerse , submerge or plunge . Immersion is seen as more closely conforming to the death , burial , and resurrection of Jesus than other modes of baptism . Churches of Christ argue that historically immersion was the mode used in the first century , and that pouring and sprinkling emerged later . Over time these secondary modes came to replace immersion . Only those mentally capable of belief and repentance are baptized ( i.e. , infant baptism is not practiced because the New Testament has no precedent for it ) . 
 Churches of Christ have historically had the most conservative position on baptism among the various branches of the Restoration Movement , understanding baptism by immersion to be a necessary part of conversion . The most significant disagreements concerned the extent to which a correct understanding of the role of baptism is necessary for its validity . David Lipscomb consistently argued that if a believer was baptized out of a desire to obey God , the baptism was valid , even if the individual did not fully understand the role baptism plays in salvation . Austin McGary argued strongly that to be valid , the convert must also understand that baptism is for the forgiveness of sins . McGary 's view became the prevailing one in the early 20th century , but the approach advocated by Lipscomb never totally disappeared . More recently , the rise of the International Churches of Christ , who " <unk> some who came into their fellowship , even those previously immersed ' for remission of sins ' in a Church of Christ , " has caused some to reexamine the question of rebaptism . 
 Churches of Christ consistently teach that in baptism a believer surrenders his life in faith and obedience to God , and that God " by the merits of Christ 's blood , cleanses one from sin and truly changes the state of the person from an alien to a citizen of God 's kingdom . Baptism is not a human work ; it is the place where God does the work that only God can do . " Baptism is a passive act of faith rather than a meritorious work ; it " is a confession that a person has nothing to offer God " . While Churches of Christ do not describe baptism as a " sacrament " , their view of it can legitimately be described as " sacramental " . They see the power of baptism coming from God , who chose to use baptism as a vehicle , rather than from the water or the act itself , and understand baptism to be an integral part of the conversion process , rather than as only a symbol of conversion . A recent trend is to emphasize the transformational aspect of baptism : instead of describing it as nothing more than a legal requirement or sign of something that happened in the past , it is seen as " the event that places the believer ' into Christ ' where God does the ongoing work of transformation " . There is a minority that downplays the importance of baptism in order to avoid sectarianism , but the broader trend is to " reexamine the richness of the biblical teaching of baptism and to reinforce its central and essential place in Christianity " . 
 Because of the belief that baptism is a necessary part of salvation , some Baptists hold that the Churches of Christ endorse the doctrine of baptismal regeneration . However members of the Churches of Christ reject this , arguing that since faith and repentance are necessary , and that the cleansing of sins is by the blood of Christ through the grace of God , baptism is not an inherently redeeming ritual . One author describes the relationship between faith and baptism this way , " Faith is the reason why a person is a child of God ; baptism is the time at which one is incorporated into Christ and so becomes a child of God " ( italics are in the source ) . Baptism is understood as a confessional expression of faith and repentance , rather than a " work " that earns salvation . 
 = = = A cappella worship = = = 
 The Churches of Christ generally combine the lack of any historical evidence that the early church used musical instruments in worship and the belief that there is no scriptural support for using instruments in the church 's worship service to decide that instruments should not be used today in worship . Churches of Christ have historically practiced a cappella music in worship services . 
 The use of musical instruments in worship was a divisive topic within the Stone @-@ Campbell Movement from its earliest years , when some adherents opposed the practice on scriptural grounds , while others may have relied on a cappella simply because they lacked access to musical instruments . Alexander Campbell opposed the use of instruments in worship . As early as 1855 , some Restoration Movement churches were using organs or pianos , ultimately leading the Churches of Christ to separate from the groups that condoned instrumental music . 
 Scriptural backing given by members for the practice of a cappella includes : 
 Matt . 26 : 30 : " And when they had sung a hymn , they went out to the Mount of Olives . " 
 Rom . 15 : 9 : " Therefore I will praise thee among the Gentiles , and sing to thy name " ; 
 Eph . 5 : 18 @,@ 19 : " ... be filled with the Spirit , addressing one another in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs , singing and making melody to the Lord with all your heart , " 
 1 Cor . 14 : 15 : " I will sing with the Spirit , and I will sing with the understanding also . " 
 Col. 3 : 16 : " Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly ; in all wisdom teaching and admonishing one another with psalms and hymns and spiritual songs , singing with grace in your hearts unto God . " 
 Heb . 2 : 12 : " I will declare thy name unto my brethren , in the midst of the church will I sing praise unto thee . " 
 There are congregations that permit hand @-@ clapping and a few that use musical instruments in worship . Some of the latter describe themselves as a " Church of Christ ( Instrumental ) " . 
 = = = Other theological tendencies = = = 
 Churches of Christ avoid the term " theology " , preferring instead the term " doctrine " : theology is what humans say about the Bible ; doctrine is simply what the Bible says . 
 Many leaders argue that the Churches of Christ only follow the Bible and have no " theology " . Christian theology as classically understood – the systematic development of the classical doctrinal topics – is relatively recent and rare among this movement . Because Churches of Christ reject all formalized creeds on the basis that they add to or detract from Scripture , they generally reject most conceptual doctrinal positions out of hand . Churches of Christ do tend to elaborate certain " driving motifs " . These are scripture ( hermeneutics ) , the church ( ecclesiology ) and the " plan of salvation " ( soteriology ) . The importance of theology , understood as teaching or " doctrine " , has been defended on the basis that an understanding of doctrine is necessary to respond intelligently to questions from others , to promote spiritual health , and to draw the believer closer to God . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 Regarding eschatology ( a branch of theology concerned with the final events in the history of the world or of humankind ) , Churches of Christ are generally <unk> , their originally prevalent <unk> ( evident in Alexander Campbell 's Millennial Harbinger ) having dissipated around the era of the First World War . Before then , many leaders were " moderate historical <unk> " who did not advocate specific historical interpretations . Churches of Christ have moved away from <unk> as <unk> millennialism has come more to fore in Protestant evangelical circles . <unk> and <unk> are the prevailing views today . 
 <unk> was a focus of controversy during the first half of the 20th century . One of the most influential advocates for that point of view was Robert Henry Boll , whose eschatological views came to be most singularly opposed by Foy E. Wallace Jr . By the end of the 20th century , however , the divisions caused by the debate over <unk> were diminishing , and in the 2000 edition of the directory Churches of Christ in the United States , published by Mac Lynn , congregations holding premillennial views were no longer listed separately . 
 = = = = Work of the Holy Spirit = = = = 
 During the late 19th century , the prevailing view in the Restoration Movement was that the Holy Spirit currently acts only through the influence of inspired scripture . This rationalist view was associated with Alexander Campbell , who was " greatly affected by what he viewed as the excesses of the emotional camp meetings and revivals of his day " . He believed that the Spirit draws people towards salvation but understood the Spirit to do this " in the same way any person moves another — by persuasion with words and ideas " . This view came to prevail over that of Barton W. Stone , who believed the Spirit had a more direct role in the life of the Christian . Since the early 20th century , many , but not all , among the Churches of Christ have moved away from this " word @-@ only " theory of the operation of the Holy Spirit . As one scholar of the movement puts it , " [ f ] or better or worse , those who champion the so @-@ called word @-@ only theory no longer have a hold on the minds of the constituency of Churches of Christ . Though relatively few have adopted outright charismatic and third wave views and remained in the body , apparently the spiritual waves have begun to erode that rational rock . " 
 = = = = Church history = = = = 
 The fundamental idea of " restoration " or " Christian Primitivism " is that problems or deficiencies in the church can be corrected by using the primitive church as a " normative model . " The call for restoration is often justified on the basis of a " falling away " that corrupted the original purity of the church . This falling away is identified with the development of Catholicism and denominationalism . New Testament verses that discuss future apostasy ( 2 Thessalonians 2 : 3 ) and heresy ( e.g. , Acts 20 : 29 , 1 Timothy 4 : 1 , 2 Tim 4 : l @-@ 4 : 4 ) are understood to predict this falling away . The logic of " restoration " could imply that the " true " church completely disappeared and thus lead towards exclusivism . Another view of restoration is that the " true Church ... has always existed by grace and not by human engineering " ( italics in the original ) . In this view the goal is to " help Christians realize the ideal of the church in the New Testament – to restore the church as conceived in the mind of Christ " ( italics in the original ) . Early Restoration Movement leaders did not believe that the church had ceased to exist , but instead sought to reform and reunite the church . A number of congregations ' web sites explicitly state that the true church never disappeared . The belief in a general falling away is not seen as inconsistent with the idea that a faithful remnant of the church never entirely disappeared . Some have attempted to trace this remnant through the intervening centuries between the New Testament and the beginning of the Restoration Movement in the early 1800s . 
 One effect of the emphasis placed on the New Testament church is a " sense of <unk> " that sees the intervening history between the 1st century and the modern church as " irrelevant or even abhorrent . " Authors within the brotherhood have recently argued that a greater attention to history can help guide the church through modern @-@ day challenges . 
 = = History in the United States = = 
 = = = Early Restoration Movement history = = = 
 The Restoration Movement originated with the convergence of several independent efforts to go back to apostolic Christianity . Two were of particular importance to the development of the movement . The first , led by Barton W. Stone began at Cane Ridge , Kentucky and called themselves simply " Christians " . The second began in western Pennsylvania and was led by Thomas Campbell and his son , Alexander Campbell ; they used the name " Disciples of Christ " . Both groups sought to restore the whole Christian church on the pattern set forth in the New Testament , and both believed that creeds kept Christianity divided . 
 The Campbell movement was characterized by a " systematic and rational reconstruction " of the early church , in contrast to the Stone movement which was characterized by radical freedom and lack of dogma . Despite their differences , the two movements agreed on several critical issues . Both saw restoring the early church as a route to Christian freedom , and both believed that unity among Christians could be achieved by using apostolic Christianity as a model . The commitment of both movements to restoring the early church and to uniting Christians was enough to motivate a union between many in the two movements . While emphasizing that the Bible is the only source to seek doctrine , an acceptance of Christians with diverse opinions was the norm in the quest for truth . " In essentials , unity ; in non @-@ essentials , liberty ; in all things , love " was an oft @-@ quoted slogan of the period . The Stone and Campbell movements merged in 1832 . 
 The Restoration Movement began during , and was greatly influenced by , the Second Great Awakening . While the Campbells resisted what they saw as the spiritual manipulation of the camp meetings , the Southern phase of the Awakening " was an important matrix of Barton Stone 's reform movement " and shaped the evangelistic techniques used by both Stone and the Campbells . 
 = = = Christian churches and churches of Christ separation = = = 
 Nothing in life has given me more pain in heart than the separation from those I have heretofore worked with and loved 
 In 1906 , the U.S. Religious Census listed the Christian Churches and the Churches of Christ as separate and distinct groups for the first time . This was the recognition of a division that had been growing for years under the influence of conservatives such as Daniel Sommer , with reports of the division having been published as early as 1883 . The most visible distinction between the two groups was the rejection of musical instruments in the Churches of Christ . The controversy over musical instruments began in 1860 with the introduction of organs in some churches . More basic were differences in the underlying approach to Biblical interpretation . For the Churches of Christ , any practices not present in accounts of New Testament worship were not permissible in the church , and they could find no New Testament documentation of the use of instrumental music in worship . For the Christian Churches , any practices not expressly forbidden could be considered . Another specific source of controversy was the role of missionary societies , the first of which was the American Christian Missionary Society , formed in October 1849 . While there was no disagreement over the need for evangelism , many believed that missionary societies were not authorized by scripture and would compromise the autonomy of local congregations . This disagreement became another important factor leading to the separation of the Churches of Christ from the Christian Church . Cultural factors arising from the American Civil War also contributed to the division . 
 In 1968 , at the International Convention of Christian Churches ( Disciples of Christ ) , those Christian Churches that favored a denominational structure , wished to be more ecumenical , and also accepted more of the modern liberal theology of various denominations , adopted a new " provisional design " for their work together , becoming the Christian Church ( Disciples of Christ ) . Those congregations that chose not to be associated with the new denominational organization continued as <unk> Christian churches and churches of Christ , completing a separation that had begun decades before . The instrumental Christian churches and churches of Christ in some cases have both organizational and <unk> differences with the Churches of Christ discussed in this article . For example , they have a loosely organized convention and view scriptural silence on an issue more <unk> , but they are more closely related to the Churches of Christ in their theology and ecclesiology than they are with the Disciples of Christ denomination . Some see divisions in the movement as the result of the tension between the goals of restoration and ecumenism , with the a cappella Churches of Christ and Christian churches and churches of Christ resolving the tension by stressing Bible authority , while the Christian Church ( Disciples of Christ ) resolved the tension by stressing ecumenism . 
 = = = Race relations = = = 
 To object to any child of God participating in the service on account of his race , social or civil state , his color or race , is to object to Jesus Christ and to cast him from our association . It is a fearful thing to do . I have never attended a church that negroes did not attend . 
 Early Restoration Movement leaders varied in their views of slavery , reflecting the range of positions common in the antebellum U.S. Barton W. Stone was a strong opponent of slavery , arguing that there was no Biblical justification for the form of slavery then being practiced in the United States and calling for immediate emancipation . Alexander Campbell represented a more " Jeffersonian " opposition to slavery , writing of it as more of a political problem than as a religious or moral one . Having seen Methodists and Baptists divide over the issue of slavery , Campbell argued that scripture regulated slavery rather than prohibited it , and that abolition should not be allowed to become an issue over which Christians would break fellowship with each other . Like the country as a whole , the assumption of white racial superiority was almost universal among those on all sides of the issue , and it was common for congregations to have separate seating for black members . 
 After the Civil War , black Christians who had been worshiping in mixed @-@ race Restoration Movement congregations formed their own congregations . White members of Restoration Movement congregations shared many of the racial prejudices of the times . Among the churches of Christ , Marshall Keeble became a prominent African @-@ American evangelist . He estimated that by January 1919 he had " traveled 23 @,@ 052 miles , preached 1 @,@ 161 sermons , and baptized 457 converts " . 
 During the Civil Rights Movement of the 1950s and 1960s the churches of Christ struggled with changing racial attitudes . Some leaders , such as Foy E. Wallace Jr . , railed against racial integration . Others , including the influential evangelist , Jimmy Allen from Harding University , opposed segregation and encouraged those working with his evangelistic campaigns to " Treat them exactly the same way you treat white people . " Schools and colleges associated with the movement were at the center of the debate . Abilene Christian College first admitted black undergraduate students in 1962 ( graduate students had been admitted in 1961 ) . Desegregation of other campuses followed . 
 Efforts to address racism continued through the following decades . A national meeting of prominent leaders from the churches of Christ was held in June 1968 . Thirty @-@ two participants signed a set of proposals intended to address discrimination in local congregations , church affiliated activities and the lives of individual Christians . An important symbolic step was taken in 1999 when the president of Abilene Christian University " confessed the sin of racism in the school 's past segregationist policies " and asked black Christians for forgiveness during a lectureship at Southwestern Christian College , a historically black school affiliated with the churches of Christ . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The tradition of a capella congregational singing in the Churches of Christ has stimulated the creation of many new hymns . Notable Churches of Christ hymn writers have included Albert Brumley ( " I 'll Fly Away " ) and <unk> S. <unk> ( " Worthy Art Thou " ) . Church of Christ hymns commonly are in the style of gospel <unk> . The hymnal Great Songs of the Church , which was first published in 1921 and has had many subsequent editions , is widely used . 
 = = = Institutional controversy = = = 
 After World War II , Churches of Christ began sending ministers and humanitarian relief to war @-@ torn Europe and Asia . A doctrinal conflict ensued about how this work was to be done . Eventually , the funding and control of outreach programs in the United States such as homes for orphans , nursing homes , mission work , setting up new congregations , Bible colleges or seminaries , and large @-@ scale radio and television programs became part of the controversy . Congregations which participate in pooling funds for these institutional activities are said to be " sponsoring church " congregations . Congregations which have traditionally opposed these organized sponsorship activities are said to be " non @-@ institutional " congregations . This " Institutional Controversy " resulted in the largest division among Churches of Christ in the 20th century . 
 = = = Separation of the International Churches of Christ = = = 
 The International Churches of Christ had their roots in a " discipling " movement that arose among the mainline Churches of Christ during the 1970s . This discipling movement developed in the campus ministry of Chuck Lucas . 
 In 1967 , Chuck Lucas was minister of the 14th Street Church of Christ in Gainesville , Florida ( later renamed the Crossroads Church of Christ ) . That year he started a new project known as Campus Advance ( based on principles borrowed from the Campus Crusade and the <unk> Movement ) . Centered on the University of Florida , the program called for a strong evangelical outreach and an intimate religious atmosphere in the form of soul talks and prayer partners . Soul talks were held in student residences and involved prayer and sharing overseen by a leader who delegated authority over group members . Prayer partners referred to the practice of pairing a new Christian with an older guide for personal assistance and direction . Both procedures led to " in @-@ depth involvement of each member in one another 's lives " , and critics accused Lucas of fostering <unk> . 
 The Crossroads Movement later spread into some other Churches of Christ . One of Lucas ' converts , Kip McKean , moved to the Boston area in 1979 and began working with " would @-@ be disciples " in the Lexington Church of Christ . He asked them to " redefine their commitment to Christ , " and introduced the use of discipling partners . The congregation grew rapidly , and was renamed the Boston Church of Christ . In the early 1980s , the focus of the movement moved to Boston , Massachusetts where Kip McKean and the Boston Church of Christ became prominently associated with the trend . With the national leadership located in Boston , during the 1980s it commonly became known as the " Boston movement " . A formal break was made from the mainline Churches of Christ in 1993 with the organization of the International Churches of Christ . This new designation formalized a division that was already in existence between those involved with the Crossroads / Boston Movement and " mainline " Churches of Christ . Other names that have been used for this movement include the " Crossroads movement , " " <unk> Ministries , " the " <unk> Movement " and the " Boston Church of Christ " . 
 Kip McKean resigned as the " World Mission Evangelist " in November 2002 . Some <unk> leaders began " tentative efforts " at reconciliation with the Churches of Christ during the Abilene Christian University Lectureship in February 2004 . 
 = = = Restoration Movement timeline = = = 
 = = Churches of Christ outside the United States = = 
 Most members of the Churches of Christ live outside the United States . There are more than 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 members of the Churches of Christ in Africa , approximately 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in India , and 50 @,@ 000 in Central and South America . Total worldwide membership is over 3 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 , with approximately 1 @,@ 300 @,@ 000 in the U.S. 
 = = = Africa = = = 
 There are believed to be 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 or more members of the Churches of Christ in Africa . The total number of congregations is approximately 14 @,@ 000 . The most significant concentrations are in " Nigeria , Malawi , Ghana , Zambia , Zimbabwe , Ethiopia , South Africa and Kenya " . 
 = = = Asia = = = 
 India has historically been a target for missionary efforts ; estimates are that there are 2 @,@ 000 or more Restoration Movement congregations in India , with a membership of approximately 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . More than 100 congregations exist in the Philippines . Growth in other Asian countries has been smaller but is still significant . 
 = = = Australia and New Zealand = = = 
 Historically , Restoration Movement groups from Great Britain were more influential than those from the United States in the early development of the movement in Australia . Churches of Christ grew up independently in several locations . While early Churches of Christ in Australia saw creeds as divisive , towards the end of the 19th century they began viewing " summary statements of belief " as useful in tutoring second generation members and converts from other religious groups . The period from 1875 through 1910 also saw debates over the use of musical instruments in worship , Christian Endeavor Societies and Sunday Schools . Ultimately , all three found general acceptance in the movement . Currently , the Restoration Movement is not as divided in Australia as it is in the United States . There have been strong ties with the Christian Church ( Disciples of Christ ) , but many conservative ministers and congregations associate with the Christian churches and churches of Christ instead . Others have sought support from non @-@ instrumental Churches of Christ , particularly those who felt that " conference " congregations had " departed from the restoration ideal " . 
 = = = Canada = = = 
 A relatively small proportion of total membership come from Canada . A growing portion of the Canadian demographic is made up of immigrant members of the church . This is partly the result of Canadian demographics as a whole , and partly due to decreased interest amongst late generation Canadians . The largest concentration of active congregations in Canada are in Southern Ontario , with notable congregations gathering in Beamsville , Bramalea , Niagara Falls , Vineland , Toronto ( several ) , and Waterloo . Although many congregations of various sizes ( typically under 300 members ) meet all across Canada . 
 = = = Great Britain = = = 
 In the early 1800s , Scottish Baptists were influenced by the writings of Alexander Campbell in the Christian Baptist and Millennial Harbinger . A group in Nottingham withdrew from the Scotch Baptist church in 1836 to form a Church of Christ . James Wallis , a member of that group , founded a magazine named the British Millennial Harbinger in 1837 . In 1842 the first Cooperative Meeting of Churches of Christ in Great Britain was held in Edinburgh . Approximately 50 congregations were involved , representing a membership of 1 @,@ 600 . The name " Churches of Christ " was formally adopted at an annual meeting in 1870 . Alexander Campbell influenced the British Restoration Movement indirectly through his writings ; he visited Britain for several months in 1847 , and " presided at the Second Cooperative Meeting of the British Churches at Chester " . At that time the movement had grown to encompass 80 congregations with a total membership of 2 @,@ 300 . Annual meetings were held after 1847 . 
 The use of instrumental music in worship was not a source of division among the Churches of Christ in Great Britain before World War I. More significant was the issue of pacifism ; a national conference was established in 1916 for congregations that opposed the war . A conference for " Old Paths " congregations was first held in 1924 . The issues involved included concern that the Christian Association was compromising traditional principles in seeking ecumenical ties with other organizations and a sense that it had abandoned Scripture as " an all @-@ sufficient rule of faith and practice " . Two " Old Paths " congregations withdrew from the Association in 1931 ; an additional two withdrew in 1934 , and nineteen more withdrew between 1943 and 1947 . 
 Membership declined rapidly during and after the First World War . The Association of Churches of Christ in Britain disbanded in 1980 . Most Association congregations ( approximately 40 ) united with the United Reformed Church in 1981 . In the same year , twenty @-@ four other congregations formed a Fellowship of Churches of Christ . The Fellowship developed ties with the Christian churches and churches of Christ during the 1980s . 
 The Fellowship of Churches of Christ and some Australian and New Zealand Churches advocate a " <unk> " emphasis with an ideal of " Five Fold Leadership " . Many people in more traditional Churches of Christ see these groups as having more in common with Pentecostal churches . The main publishing organs of traditional Churches of Christ in Britain are The Christian Worker magazine and the Scripture Standard magazine . A history of the Association of Churches of Christ , Let Sects and Parties Fall , was written by David M Thompson . Further information can be found in the Historical Survey of Churches of Christ in the British Isles , edited by Joe Nisbet . 
 = = = South America = = = 
 In Brazil there are above 600 congregations and 100 @,@ 000 members from the Restoration Movement . Most of them were established by Lloyd David Sanders . 
 = Don Geiss , America and Hope = 
 " Don Geiss , America , and Hope " is the fifteenth episode of the fourth season of the American television comedy series 30 Rock , and the 73rd overall episode of the series . It was directed by Stephen Lee Davis , and written by Jack Burditt and Tracey Wigfield . The episode originally aired on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) network in the United States on March 18 , 2010 . Guest stars in " Don Geiss , America and Hope " include John Anderson , Scott Bryce , Marceline Hugot , James Rebhorn , and Michael Sheen . 
 In the episode , Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) attempts to avoid running into Wesley Snipes ( Sheen ) after they fail to hit it off in their first encounter , but fate seems to want them together . At the same time , Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) deals with the impending purchase of NBC . Finally , Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) does damage control after his former nanny publishes a tell @-@ all book . 
 The episode continued a story arc involving Wesley as a love interest for Liz , which began in the previous episode . " Don Geiss , America and Hope " makes reference to the real @-@ life acquisition of NBC Universal by cable company Comcast , as well as that of professional golfer Tiger Woods ' extramarital affairs scandal . 
 This episode of 30 Rock has received generally positive reviews from television critics . According to the Nielsen Media Research , it was watched by 6 @.@ 857 million households during its original broadcast , and received a 3 @.@ 0 rating / 9 share among viewers in the 18 – 49 demographic . For his performance in " Don Geiss , America and Hope " , Alec Baldwin received a Primetime Emmy Award nomination in the category for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Comedy Series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) , outgoing Vice President of East Coast Television and Microwave Oven Programming for General Electric ( GE ) , researches company Kabletown ( which recently purchased the NBC network as a charitable , tax @-@ deductible act ) , to find a way he can contribute in the corporation 's development . NBC page Kenneth Parcell ( Jack McBrayer ) lets it slip that he may have been living forever , when he shows concern that Kabletown may impose new rules for " age limits and age verification " for pages . A former colleague , Dave Hess ( Scott Bryce ) , who left NBC for Kabletown , reveals that Kabletown 's success comes from running pay @-@ per @-@ view adult channels ; the company runs " the perfect business " and needs no investment in new services or products . On learning this , Jack is horrified at the prospect of no longer making things . Later , however , while giving a eulogy at former GE CEO Don Geiss 's ( Rip Torn ) funeral , he has an epiphany and proposes to Kabletown executives that they produce " porn for women " ( specifically , channels featuring attractive men who " listen " while women blather on ) . 
 Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) tries to avoid meeting with Wesley ( Michael Sheen ) , the British man she met and flirted with while under the influence of anesthesia . Liz finds him to be annoying , but they continually run into each other , which leads them to believe they are meant to be together . However , after visiting the dentist office where they met , Liz and Wesley come to terms with the fact that the anesthesia was the cause of whatever they experienced , and agree to stop seeing each other . But when they run into each other yet again , Wesley suggests that they should probably just " settle " for one another . Liz is horrified at this prospect and consults Jack for advice , but he is still disconsolate at the prospect of " settling " for a company without upward momentum , and cannot help her . Later , Liz meets Wesley to tell him her answer is no , and she believes both of them can do better than being with each other ; she is further dismayed to learn he shares his name with actor Wesley Snipes . 
 Meanwhile , Tracy Jordan 's ( Tracy Morgan ) nanny publishes a tell @-@ all book , revealing that he has never actually had an affair with anyone , a secret he had shared only with Jack in " The Ones " . In order to restore his womanizing persona , Tracy holds a press conference announcing he is leaving show business to spend more time with a stripper , but no one is convinced . To make matters worse , women begin to come forward and admit that they did not have sex with Tracy . His wife Angie even advises him to have an affair in order to save his career , a suggestion which Jenna Maroney ( Jane Krakowski ) urges him to take seriously . Tracy attempts to proposition Liz , but is unable to pretend he wants to cheat on his wife . Liz rebuffs Tracy 's advances , admitting she envies his happy marriage and urging him to embrace his monogamy . 
 At the end of the episode , Liz is seen watching and being intrigued by some of the " porn for women " content , which somehow features her fantasy boyfriend Astronaut Mike Dexter . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Don Geiss , America and Hope " was directed by series first assistant director Stephen Lee Davis , and written by Jack Burditt and Tracey Wigfield . This was Burditt 's first written episode for the season , as he had moved to Los Angeles , California , to become a staff writer on the CBS comedy show The New Adventures of Old Christine . Overall , this was Burditt 's twelfth writing credit . This was Wigfield 's third writing credit , and was Davis 's first directed episode . " Don Geiss , America and Hope " originally aired in the United States on March 18 , 2010 , on NBC as the fifteenth episode of the show 's fourth season and the 73rd overall episode of the series . This episode of 30 Rock was filmed on January 25 and January 27 , 2010 . 
 In January 2010 , it was announced that Welsh actor Michael Sheen would guest star as a love interest for series creator Tina Fey 's character , Liz Lemon . He made his debut as Wesley in the previous episode , " Future Husband " . Actor Scott Bryce guest starred as Dave Hess , a former colleague of Jack Donaghy 's . Bryce first appeared in the season three episode " Flu Shot " as a different character named Michael Templeton . Actress Marceline Hugot made her ninth appearance as Kathy Geiss , the daughter of GE CEO Don Geiss . In the episode , Kathy performs the song " Ave Maria " with a trumpet at her father 's funeral . Dr. Kaplan was played by actor James Rebhorn , who first guest starred as the character in " Future Husband " . At the end of " Don Geiss , America and Hope " , where Liz is shown watching one of the " porn for women " channels , the man depicted as speaking to her was portrayed by actor John Anderson , who has guest starred previously on the show as Astronaut Mike Dexter . At the end of the credits , Anderson is credited as Astronaut Mike Dexter . Jack learns from former GE CEO Jack Welch , in the last episode , that current GE CEO Don Geiss ( Rip Torn ) has died . In " Don Geiss , America and Hope " , a funeral service is held for Geiss . Television critic Bob Sassone of TV Squad , in his recap of this episode , wondered if Torn was written out of the series due to an alcohol @-@ related incident that occurred to Torn in January 2010 . 
 This episode was inspired by the real @-@ life acquisition of NBC Universal by cable company Comcast in November 2009 . After winning her fourth Screen Actors Guild Award as her 30 Rock character at the 16th Screen Actors Guild Awards ceremony in January 2010 , Fey was asked whether or not the show would make reference to the Comcast acquisition to which she said that it would be dealt with . " The sale of NBC to another company is integral to our show and it will be hard for Jack . " In the episode , Kabletown — a fictional Philadelphia company network — has taken over GE Sheinhardt NBC Universal , and Jack tries to contribute his ideas to the company . In April 2010 , the NBC network created a website for the Kabletown company . When asked by a contributor from The Philadelphia Inquirer why the characters on 30 Rock refer to the network 's new owner as " Kabletown , with a K " , co @-@ showrunner and executive producer Robert Carlock revealed that the reason for this was that the staff writers came up with the name " <unk> " , however , they later learned that there was a real company with a similar name , so NBC 's legal team department " wanted to emphasize the difference , and after a while , everyone just liked the sound of it . " 
 Tracy Jordan 's storyline in which his former nanny writes a tell @-@ all book revealing that he has never actually had an affair with anyone mirrored — though in reversal — the real life of professional golfer Tiger Woods ' extramarital affairs scandal that occurred in late 2009 . In one scene , it is revealed that women have come forward admitting to never have had a sexual relationship with Tracy ; After news broke of Woods 's infidelities , numerous women came forward admitting to having affairs with the golfer . To re @-@ establish his womanizing persona , Tracy holds a press conference announcing he is leaving show business to spend more time with a stripper ; In December 2009 , Woods announced he would take an indefinite leave from professional golf to focus on his marriage after he admitted infidelity . Other women , who Tracy did not have a relationship with , have released voice mails to the news media . In one of them , Tracy leaves a message to his wife , Angie ( Sherri Shepherd ) , in which he is loving and sincere in the message ; One of Woods 's mistress produced voice and text messages as evidence of a relationship with the golfer . As a result of him being outed as monogamous , Tracy loses various endorsements ; After admitting to his affairs , Woods lost various endorsement deals with different companies . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 In the beginning of the episode , Jack announces at a staff meeting that NBC has been bought by Kabletown , a company network from Philadelphia . Immediately , Jack and Liz exchange opinions about Philadelphia and Boston ; Liz , who grew up near Philadelphia , declares " Go Eagles ! Philly rules ! <unk> ! Bobby Clarke ! Will Smith ! [ Boston ] sucks ! " . Jack , who is from Boston , responds " Boston is the greatest city in the world . Boston Tea Party . Boston cream pie . Boston Rob Mariano . Birthplace of Benjamin Franklin . " Liz interjects " Yeah , then [ Franklin ] looked around , realized it sucked , and moved to Philadelphia ! " Jack and the New York staff then deride the city of Los Angeles , provoking an NBC executive teleconferencing in from Los Angeles to assert that " LA rules : Michael Bay , freeways , Legoland — " before Jack shuts off his feed . While meeting with Kabletown executives , Jack learns that they focus on adult films and sees their list of features , including <unk> , The Lovely <unk> , The Hind Side , and Fresh @-@ Ass : Based on the Novel Tush by <unk> , puns on the 2009 films Avatar , The Lovely Bones , The Blind Side , and Precious : Based on the Novel " Push " by Sapphire . 
 Jenna claims to Tracy that she " ate the pig that played Babe , " in a reference to the 1995 film Babe based on the British novel The Sheep @-@ Pig . At Don Geiss 's funeral , the trumpet solo that his daughter Kathy Geiss ( Marceline Hugot ) performs is Ellens <unk> Gesang by Franz Schubert , a melody best known as a setting for the Latin Catholic prayer Ave Maria . 
 When Liz tells Tracy that he has a life with his family and should enjoy it , after Tracy tries to have sex with her in order to restore his womanizing reputation , she tells him " You know what I have ? A Sims family that keeps getting murdered . " The Sims is a video game in which players create virtual people called " Sims " and places them in houses and helps direct their moods and satisfy their desires . Tracy responds " One day , you will have what I have because you are an amazing , strong , intelligent woman , like Hilary ... from Fresh Prince of Bel @-@ Air . " The Fresh Prince of Bel @-@ Air was a series that previously aired on NBC , and the Hilary character was a dull @-@ witted individual who lacked intelligence . Before going their separate ways , Liz discovers that Wesley 's last name is Snipes , but Wesley tells her that it is a name more fitting for a " pale English guy " , than actor Wesley Snipes . Liz and Wesley also attend a second run of the movie Hot Tub Time Machine , which provokes arguments between them despite their mutual enjoyment of the film . 
 Star Wars is frequently referenced in 30 Rock , beginning with the pilot episode in 2006 where Tracy is seen shouting that he is a Jedi . Liz admits to being a huge fan of Star Wars , saying that she had watched it many times with Pete Hornberger ( Scott Adsit ) , and dressed up as the Star Wars character Princess Leia during four recent Halloweens , and while trying to get out of jury duty in Chicago and New York . Star Wars is also referenced when Tracy takes on the identity of the character Chewbacca . In this episode , at Don Geiss 's funeral , he is shown to be frozen in carbonite similar to that of Star Wars character Han Solo in the 1980 film The Empire Strikes Back . Fey , a fan of Star Wars herself , said that the weekly Star Wars joke or reference " started happening organically " when the crew realized that they had a Star Wars reference " in almost every show " . Fey said that from then on " it became a thing where [ they ] tried to keep it going " , and that even though they could not include one in every episode , they still had a " pretty high batting average " . Fey attributed most of the references to executive producer and writer Robert Carlock , whom she described as " the resident expert " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 According to the Nielsen Media Research , " Don Geiss , America and Hope " was watched by 6 @.@ 857 million viewers during its original United States broadcast . The rating was a 3 percent increase in viewership from the previous week 's episode , " Future Husband " , which was seen by 5 @.@ 894 million American viewers . The show claimed a 3 @.@ 0 rating / 9 share among viewers aged 18 to 49 , meaning that 3 @.@ 0 percent of all people in that group , and 9 percent of all people from that group watching television at the time , watched the episode . For his work in this episode , Alec Baldwin received a Primetime Emmy Award nomination in the category for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Comedy Series at the 62nd Primetime Emmy Awards , but lost it to actor Jim Parsons . 
 Television columnist Alan Sepinwall of The Star @-@ Ledger wrote that despite " Don Geiss , America and Hope " not being " strong " as the last episode it had " many funny moments scattered throughout " that he was satisfied with . He noted that the uncomfortable relationship between Liz and Wesley " worked better " here than previously . Sepinwall said it " was a good story " for Jack 's character , and that it was " nice " to see 30 Rock " fearless about mocking their future Comcast overlords as they are at making fun of NBC " . The A.V. Club 's Nathan Rabin enjoyed Michael Sheen 's return , said that every part of Liz and Wesley 's story was " brilliant " . He observed that Jack 's midlife crisis here was " poignant as well as funny . " Overall , Rabin gave it a B + rating , and concluded " ... it was a rock @-@ solid episode " . Despite enjoying Sheen 's role on the show , Time contributor James Poniewozik confessed he had a problem with his story arc with Tina Fey 's Liz . " I assume that [ Sheen ] is not going to become a permanent cast member , and so however much I might enjoy parts of this story , I can never forget that this is probably one more relationship that Liz will go through and end up at status quo ante . " Bob Sassone of AOL 's TV Squad was complimentary towards the NBC / Kabletown deal , enjoyed Tracy 's subplot , noting it gave the character " something important to do ... it also shined some new light on the Tracy Morgan character . " Adam Mersel for TV Guide reasoned " I can officially say that almost no episode of 30 Rock falls flat for me , and this one certainly didn 't [ ... ] All in all , this is one of my favorite episodes of the season . " Paste magazine contributor Sean Gandert was favorable to it , noting " I 'm not sure when the last time I thought every plot in a 30 Rock episode was a winner , but ' Don Geiss , Hope and America ' delivered on the exuberant claims of the episode 's title " . Nick Catucci of New York magazine wrote that Jack trying to fit in at Kabletown , along with his suggestion of " porn for women " , was " meh " , Liz dealing with Wesley and Tracy " dealing with the world 's discovery of his fidelity to his wife " were all " quite comfortably situated in the show 's wheelhouse " . 
 Not all reviews were positive . IGN contributor Robert Canning felt that " Don Geiss , American and Hope " felt " a bit rudderless as well . The main stories eventually crossed over in meaningful ways , but aside from those connections , their direction was a bit weak and unsure . They all had a great bit or two ... but the general feel of the episode was mostly blah . That could likely be the result of the main characters coming off as mostly blah . " In conclusion , Canning gave it a 7 @.@ 5 out of 10 rating . Meredith Blake , a contributor for the Los Angeles Times , was not positive towards Fey and Sheen 's story here , explaining that the premise of the two characters settling for one another " fell flat " and " it just wasn 't as funny as it could have been . " 
 = Lightning ( Final Fantasy ) = 
 Lightning ( ライトニング , Raitoningu ) is a fictional character from Square Enix 's Final Fantasy series . She first appeared as a playable character and protagonist in the role @-@ playing video game Final Fantasy XIII , in which she features as a resident of the artificial world of Cocoon . After her sister Serah is declared an enemy of Cocoon , Lightning attempts to save her : she and others are then chosen by the fal 'Cie , a divided race of demigods who rule the worlds of Gran Pulse and Cocoon , to destroy Cocoon . Lightning reappears as a supporting character in Final Fantasy XIII @-@ 2 , acting as protector of the Goddess Etro . She is the sole playable character in Lightning Returns : Final Fantasy XIII , wherein she sets out to save her world , which is destined to end in thirteen days . She has featured in other Final Fantasy games , most notably the crossover game Dissidia 012 Final Fantasy . 
 Lightning was created by Motomu Toriyama , the director and scenario writer of XIII , and designed by Tetsuya Nomura , a regular character artist for the Final Fantasy series . Their idea was to create a strong female protagonist who was adept at combat and less feminine than previous Final Fantasy heroines . Aspects of her early design and personality were later altered , or transferred to other characters . After XIII , Lightning 's design was revised several times to reflect her role and development in each game , particularly in Lightning Returns . Her name in Japanese , Éclair Farron ( エクレール ・ ファロン , Ekurēru Faron ) , was originally a placeholder . Because of its similarity to the name of a pastry , her first name was changed to " Claire " in other countries . 
 Lightning has received mixed commentary from critics — much of it relating to her cold personality , which was compared to that of Final Fantasy VII 's protagonist Cloud Strife . She was criticized for her relative absence in XIII @-@ 2 . Her role in Lightning Returns had a mixed reception : some critics saw her as underdeveloped and unlikable , while others found her better developed and more human than in previous games . Lightning later appeared on lists , compiled by video game publications , of the best characters in the Final Fantasy series and in video games as a whole . She has been received favorably in polls of public opinion by Famitsu , Square Enix , and other organizations . 
 = = Character design = = 
 Lightning was designed by regular Final Fantasy character designer Tetsuya Nomura , who had previously served as the character designer for Final Fantasy VIII and X. Nomura has said that multiple designs — including some by staff members other than himself — were considered for Lightning , while Toriyama has claimed that Nomura 's first draft " looked so cool and strong that there was no need for any retakes . " Because of the graphical capacities of Final Fantasy XIII 's prospective platforms , Nomura was able to include far more detail in Lightning 's design than in his previous character designs , such as her cape and facial features . This necessitated far more effort on his part . Commenting on an early form of her design , Nomura explained that she is essentially a " cool character " , in that she is serious and unforgiving . However , he could not make the character too masculine for fear of losing player empathy . Characteristics from earlier versions of the design included blond or silver hair and Asian @-@ looking facial features . Her final art was made less Asian @-@ looking than these early drafts and her hair color changed to pink , while Hope Estheim was given silver hair . Lightning 's final hair color and hairstyle were intended to reflect her femininity , and to counterbalance her athletic body . Creating her promotional CG render was fairly easy due to the amount of details available concerning her . 
 Lightning 's real name is Claire Farron in English and Éclair Farron ( エクレール ・ ファロン , Ekurēru Faron ) in Japanese . During the early stages of production , Lightning 's real name was <unk> : " Eclair " was used to keep this name secret , but it was eventually chosen as her official name . Her English name , Claire , was chosen because the name " Eclair " is closely associated with a type of pastry . The name " Lightning " was not chosen by Nomura but by other members of the development team : Nomura had wanted to abandon the tradition of naming Final Fantasy protagonists after weather events , and was surprised by the choice . Several models of Lightning 's house were constructed for XIII but were removed due to space issues . Her weapon in XIII , the <unk> Saber ( known as Blaze Edge ( <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) in the Japanese version ) was designed to mirror the ability of the game 's summoned monsters , the Eidolons , to transform into <unk> , human- and vehicle @-@ like shapes . The game 's version of Odin , Lightning 's Eidolon and a recurring summoned monster in the Final Fantasy series , was intended to present Lightning as a knight on horseback . He was written as a father figure for Lightning . In later games in the XIII series , Odin was developed into a friend to whom Lightning could show her deeper feelings . Daisuke Watanabe , while writing the script for XIII , paid particular attention to fleshing out Lightning 's non @-@ romantic relationship with Snow Villiers and to showing her development as a person while protecting Hope . 
 Due to global demand and the development staff 's desire to further Lightning 's character , development began for a sequel to XIII . The game tackles the question of whether Lightning is happy after the events of XIII . Even before a sequel was greenlit , Toriyama had wanted to create a truly happy ending for the character . Lightning 's outfit in XIII @-@ 2 was designed by Isamu Kamikokuryo . He worked from a rough sketch by Nomura of how Lightning should appear . The outfit was redone several times by Kamikokuryo : a <unk> and a science fiction @-@ inspired design were both discarded because they clashed with the game 's atmosphere . The final design was inspired by the valkyries of Norse mythology . The outfit was meant to reflect the environment around Lightning . It features a feather motif to represent Lightning 's light , delicate side and her growing powers . She was depicted as having transcended her human limits , making it difficult to depict her as a normal person . 
 Her outfit in Lightning Returns was designed by Nomura . He was told by Toriyama to create something representative of her final battle , with " strength " as the main guideline . The resultant outfit , which resembles a leather bodysuit , has spinal column patterns on its sleeves and is primarily colored red and white . Nomura later commented that he felt " a strong reaction within [ himself ] " while creating Lightning 's final look . Nomura 's design was Kamikokuryo 's favorite out of the many outfits created for the character . Her other outfits for the game were designed by Kamikokuryo , Toshiyuki Itahana , and Toshitaka Matsuda : many of them drew inspiration from the character designs of regular Final Fantasy artist Yoshitaka Amano . In addition to the new costumes , Lightning 's in @-@ game model was rebuilt from the ground @-@ up . Her breasts were enlarged and several of her outfits were designed to present her in a more feminine way . For the game 's epilogue , Toriyama wished for Lightning to appear in an everyday setting and normal clothes . The team considered ending the game with Lightning either meeting or speaking with her allies , but Toriyama wished the story to begin and end with her alone . He has claimed that Lightning , with her solo role in Lightning Returns , was the Final Fantasy series ' " first female protagonist " . 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 Toriyama wanted Lightning to be a type of female character previously unseen in Final Fantasy games , one with an athlete 's body and a less feminine nature . His guideline to Nomura was to make her strong , beautiful , and " like a female version of Cloud [ Strife ] from [ Final Fantasy VII ] " . Commenting on the resemblance , Toriyama stated that the similarities between the characters only extend to their cold personalities and their military backgrounds , and that otherwise " Lightning really [ is ] her own person . " Nomura compared the two shortly before the Japanese release of Lightning Returns , saying that he had " desired for her to be carefully developed and loved for a long time , like Cloud . " Toriyama has said that , among the characters he had been involved in creating , Lightning was his favorite female character from a video game , alongside Yuna from Final Fantasy X and Yoyo from Bahamut Lagoon . 
 = = = Personality = = = 
 In contrast to other characters in the Final Fantasy series , whose personality traits were molded to fit a story , Toriyama conceived Lightning 's basic personality before XIII 's narrative had been finalized . She has a cold demeanor , which was meant to clash in an entertaining way with Snow 's outspokenness . Nomura commented that Lightning has " a strong element of mystery about her character " . She originally had a flirtatious aspect to her personality , which was transferred to Oerba Yun Fang when Fang was changed from male to female . For Lightning Returns , the developers wanted to portray Lightning in several different lights , in contrast to her static personalities in prior appearances . One of their highest priorities was to make Lightning a character who had lost much in her life and become deeply vulnerable as a result . Designer Yuji Abe elaborated that , because of her losses and newfound vulnerability , Lightning came across as darker , slightly numbed to her surroundings , and " like a puppet , like someone who doesn 't quite have her real self inside . " He elaborated that this effect shows " the kind of vulnerability she has , and it 's the point from which she starts to change afterward . " The decision to expand her personality in this way was originally suggested by Yoshinori Kitase , who was concerned that Lightning 's coolness in previous games had made it difficult for players to bond with her . 
 Across her speaking appearances , Lightning is voiced by Ali Hillis in English and Maaya Sakamoto in Japanese . Sakamoto was impressed by Lightning , whom she called " cold " and " strong " . She was asked to portray Lightning 's strength and to betray the character 's hidden vulnerabilities . She initially found it strange to voice Lightning , as she was used to gentler roles such as Aerith Gainsborough , a central character in Final Fantasy VII and its companion media . Commenting on the difficulty of balancing Lightning 's depiction as a woman and a professionally trained warrior , Kitase noted that Sakamoto 's acting helped to bring out Lightning 's femininity . Hillis was given the role of Lightning after speaking a few of the character 's lines during audition , and was then given a book about the Final Fantasy XIII universe , which she found a little " overwhelming " when she read it . One of the challenges Hillis faced was recapturing the emotion and energy of Sakamoto 's Japanese performance in the character 's English rendition . She tried to help the staff of the XIII games portray Lightning as a real person : " I think that was my main priority , to make sure that Lightning had every single layer of who she was as a person , not just a game character , but a real person with layers and history and relationships to every single character in the game ... even the Chocobo ! " Over the course of the XIII trilogy , Hillis felt that Lightning becomes " a little more sarcastic ... a little more hardened to everything that 's going on around her and ... [ evolves ] into a real warrior " . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = Final Fantasy XIII series = = = 
 Lightning , along with her sister Serah , is a resident of Cocoon , an artificial world hovering above the planet Gran Pulse . Each of these regions is controlled by a sect of the fal 'Cie , a race of demigods whose two factions , the " Sanctum " population on Cocoon and the " Pulse " fal 'Cie from Gran Pulse , are hostile toward one another . In Final Fantasy XIII : Episode Zero : Promise , a novel set before the events of XIII , it is revealed that Lightning and Serah 's parents died when their children were young , and that Lightning resolved to become her sister 's protector but ended up neglecting her in the process . She grows to resent Snow 's romantic relationship with Serah and the anti @-@ government activities of his group NORA . Lightning discovers too late that Serah has been branded as a l 'Cie — a human cursed with magical powers and a task to complete — by the Gran Pulse fal 'Cie Anima : Lightning initially thinks that Serah is using her condition as an excuse to marry Snow . Lightning then resigns from the service as a member of the Guardian Corps and volunteers herself for the Purge , a forced relocation of citizens who have come into contact with Anima , to save her sister . 
 In Final Fantasy XIII , Lightning reaches Anima along with Hope , Sazh Katzroy , and Oerba Dia Vanille , three of the surviving Purge exiles . When they find Serah , she turns to crystal . Lightning and the party fight Anima and are marked as l 'Cie when PSICOM , Cocoon 's main military force , destroys Anima . Skeptical of Snow 's resolve to save her sister , Lightning abandons him and Serah , both of whom are then rescued by Oerba Yun Fang and a rogue Cocoon military force called the Cavalry . Lightning ends up traveling with Hope . During their time together , Lightning inadvertently summons Odin , and she unknowingly supports Hope 's plan to assassinate Snow by protecting and training him . Throughout the game , Lightning struggles to deal with her nature as a l 'Cie , her anger at being made Cocoon 's enemy , and her guilt at disbelieving Serah 's story . After overcoming these issues , she acknowledges Snow 's relationship with Serah and his faith that they will restore her . When they kill the Sanctum fal 'Cie Orphan to save Cocoon , Lightning , Serah and the party except for Vanille and Fang are allowed to return to their normal lives : Vanille and Fang form a crystal pillar to stop Cocoon from colliding with Gran Pulse . 
 Final Fantasy XIII : Episode I , a short novel set immediately after XIII , shows Lightning uneasy about whether her battle is over or not . She leaves to save Fang and Vanille , but first gives her blessing to Snow and Serah 's marriage . Eventually , Lightning finds herself caught in a dark void , but she decides to keep moving forward . 
 In Final Fantasy XIII @-@ 2 , Lightning has disappeared , and all but Serah believe that she died with Vanille and Fang to save Cocoon . In reality , Lightning was brought to Valhalla , capital of the Goddess Etro , as a direct result of Etro 's releasing her and the others from their condition as l 'Cie . These events had distorted time and erased Lightning from history after Cocoon 's fall . Hoping to atone for the deaths she caused as a l 'Cie , Lightning chooses to stay in Valhalla and protect the dying Etro from Caius Ballad , an immortal man with a grudge against Etro . Lightning eventually asks Noel Kreiss and Serah to help her stop Caius from ending time , which he plans to do by releasing " chaos " , a supernatural energy controlled by Etro , into the mortal world . Serah and Noel travel forward in time to fix distortions in history caused by Caius ' interference , and Serah eventually dies when history is restored . In the DLC episode Requiem of the Goddess , Lightning is defeated by Caius and loses hope after learning of her role in Serah 's death . Lightning is comforted by Serah 's spirit , who asks not to be forgotten . Vowing to preserve Serah 's memory , Lightning turns to crystal , which prevents her from being affected when Etro 's death releases chaos . 
 In Lightning Returns : Final Fantasy XIII , Lightning is revived after 500 years by the god Bhunivelze . The world is set to end in thirteen days , and Lightning is chosen as the Savior , a spiritual guide for humanity , which has ceased to age due to the influence of chaos . In return for Lightning 's help , Serah will be resurrected . Aided by Hope , Lightning frees her former allies of emotional burdens , reunites with Odin in the form of a white Chocobo , and frequently crosses paths with Lumina , the physical manifestation of Lightning 's suppressed vulnerabilities . Lightning begins to doubt her humanity , and , when she learns that Bhunivelze stole Serah 's soul and manipulated Lightning 's memories , she plans to betray him after he has finished building the new world . When the end of the world arrives , Lightning fights Bhunivelze , who wants to transform humanity into his ideal image and has been shaping Lightning as Etro 's replacement . Although she is prepared to fulfill her new role and abandon her human life , Lightning instead chooses to call for help and to accept Lumina as a part of herself . Everyone she has saved , including Serah , unites with her and defeats Bhunivelze . Lightning then witnesses the creation of a new universe , into which she goes with her allies and the souls of humanity . In the epilogue , she is seen traveling to reunite with one of her friends . 
 = = = Other appearances = = = 
 Beyond the XIII games , Lightning has appeared in several spin @-@ offs within the Final Fantasy franchise . In the fighting game Dissidia 012 Final Fantasy , Lightning is one of the warriors summoned by the goddess Cosmos . She was meant to debut in Dissidia Final Fantasy , but the idea was scrapped as Final Fantasy XIII had yet to be released and Square Enix did not want to reveal her abilities ahead of time . During Dissidia 012 , Lightning 's group is confronted by beings called Manikins , which inflict permanent death on those they defeat , thereby threatening the world 's cycle of rebirth . She leads an expedition to the portal from which the Manikins are emerging , and the group sacrifices its life to close it . Lightning has three alternate outfits in the game . She again appeared as a playable character in the 2015 sequel for arcades . 
 The character was featured in a series of special player events in Final Fantasy XIV : A Realm Reborn : Lightning and monsters from her world appeared in the land of Eorzea while she was in crystal stasis between XIII @-@ 2 and Lightning Returns . It is hinted that she was sent to Eorzea by Bhunivelze to hone her skills in preparation for future battles in her world . After the events were completed , Lightning met up with the player one last time , saying that she was thankful for the time spent in Eorzea . As she was summoned back to her world , she asked the player to remember her time there . Players who participated in the events received gear and outfits modeled after items , weapons and clothing from the XIII games . Lightning also plays a role as an ally in World of Final Fantasy , appearing in her Lightning Returns outfit . 
 In the rhythm game Theatrhythm Final Fantasy and its sequel Curtain Call , Lightning is a playable character representing the Final Fantasy XIII games . She is featured , sporting her XIII @-@ 2 design , in Final Fantasy Airborne Brigade . Lightning is a playable character in the mobile crossover games Final Fantasy : All the Bravest and Final Fantasy : Record Keeper , a powered @-@ up character form in Final Fantasy Explorers , a chibi figure in Final Fantasy in Itadaki Street Mobile , and a character card in Final Fantasy Artniks . In response to speculation about her continued role in the Final Fantasy series after Lightning Returns ' release , Kitase clarified in 2013 that she would appear in spin @-@ off titles , but that her role in the main series had ended . Outside the Final Fantasy franchise , Lightning features in a minigame in Kingdom Hearts Re : coded , was part of a collaboration between the Final Fantasy series and Puzzle & Dragons alongside other established series characters , and versions of her outfit from XIII may be worn by protagonist Aya Brea in The 3rd Birthday and a character from arcade shooter Gunslinger Stratos 2 . Maaya Sakamoto , who portrays both Aya and Lightning , voiced Aya to sound like Lightning when the outfit is equipped . 
 = = = In merchandise and promotion = = = 
 Lightning has been featured in Final Fantasy XIII @-@ themed merchandise produced by Square Enix . The two pieces directly inspired by the character are necklaces and a mild perfume called " Lightning eau de toilette " . Action figures of Lightning in her three main iterations were produced by Play Arts Kai , a company often hired to make figurines of characters and creatures from the Final Fantasy series . Cards depicting the character are available in the Final Fantasy Trading Card Game . Lightning appears in a live @-@ action PlayStation commercial titled " Michael " , alongside characters such as Nathan Drake , Kratos and Cole McGrath . An actress portrayed the character at the Final Fantasy 25th Anniversary Event during Asia Game Show 2013 . She was portrayed again in a Japanese live @-@ action / CGI TV commercial for Lightning Returns : Final Fantasy XIII . In April 2012 , Lightning and other characters from XIII @-@ 2 were used to showcase Prada designs in a 12 @-@ page section in the male fashion magazine Arena Homme + . To promote Lightning Returns , Lightning was featured on the packaging of snacks produced by Ezaki Glico . In 2015 , she was used in a CGI advertising video by French fashion house Louis Vuitton . The video was animated by Visual Works , designed by Nomura and directed by Louis <unk> ’ s Nicolas <unk> . 
 = = Reception = = 
 While Final Fantasy XIII was in development , Todd Ciolek of Anime News Network was unimpressed by Lightning , whom he called a " businesslike blank " . Reviewing the finished game , Ciolek opined that Lightning is initially " far too distant and cold , as though the writers were so intent on creating a tough , competent heroine that they forgot to make her at all compelling " . However , he admitted that Lightning becomes a more appealing lead character by the game 's end . Wesley Yin @-@ Poole of VideoGamer.com simply referred to Lightning as a female version of Cloud . 1UP.com 's Jeremy Parrish commented that , barring scenes in which Lightning shows a thoughtful side , she is " your typical , sullen [ Square Enix ] protagonist " . Conversely , GameSpot 's Kevin VanOrd called Lightning a " likeable , strong @-@ willed beauty " . Martin Robinson of IGN UK said that Lightning " instantly endears herself " in comparison with Hope or Snow , but he found that , when Lightning 's backstory " gets bogged down in generic swash " , Sazh becomes the more appealing character . GamesRadar 's <unk> Gudmundson was unenthusiastic : she opined that , while Lightning 's narrative has its merits , it " certainly isn 't above and beyond what we 'd typically expect " . She commented that this lack of originality makes Lightning " one @-@ dimensional and boring " . Gamasutra writer Christian Nutt believed that Lightning 's relationships with the cast add humanity to the narrative . 
 For XIII @-@ 2 , Game Informer 's Joe Juba was disappointed that Lightning had been transferred to a supporting role in favor of Serah and Hope , whom he saw as weaker characters than Lightning . Simon Parkin of Eurogamer found that the story suffers without the driving force of Lightning 's single @-@ minded determination . VanOrd was disappointed that Lightning and Caius Ballad have relatively limited screen @-@ time , since they come off as stronger characters than the protagonists . 
 In Lightning Returns , Juba criticized Lightning 's lack of personal growth during the narrative , and IGN 's Marty Silva felt that her increased coldness makes her " downright unlikable . " VanOrd argued that Lightning is not " interesting in and of herself " and that she had turned into " a vessel for holding and pouring plot devices " , whose stoicism makes it difficult for the player to connect with her . Parrish , writing for USGamer , stated that Lightning had become " downright apathetic " , showing " no personality whatsoever " , and that this clashed with the ability to dress her in costumes . By contrast , Parkin commented that certain side quests , such as herding sheep or retrieving a girl 's doll , helped to humanize Lightning and make her likable . Similarly , Destructoid 's Dale North found that the costumes and dialogue lighten her character : he argued that these elements make her less " flat and lifeless now , which is a big improvement . " Dave Riley of Anime News Network felt that Lightning 's stoic attitude , although out of place in XIII and XIII @-@ 2 , fit her role as a god 's servant in Lightning Returns . Tech Reviewer , in a feature about the portrayal of female characters in video games , was impressed with the character 's depth and portrayal . 
 In a VideoGamer.com list of the ten best Final Fantasy characters , Lightning was placed sixth ; writer Yin Poole found her interesting in her own right despite her similarities to Cloud . In 2011 , IGN ranked Lightning among the best characters in the Final Fantasy series , saying that she demonstrated that " a delicate balance can exist between strength and tenderness , even in the midst of ... incredible acrobatic feats . " Lightning was ranked eighth in a similar list by GameZone 's Heath Hooker : points of praise were her visual appearance and determination , which made her " one of the strongest female leaders of the Final Fantasy series " in Hooker 's opinion . Cheat Code Central listed her as one of the top ten " badass " women of video games for her independence , which the writer felt distanced her from previous Final Fantasy heroines . Lightning ranked second in AfterEllen 's list of the " hottest " video game characters . In Game Informer 's list of top ten heroes of 2010 , Lightning was ranked eighth and praised as the only protagonist in Final Fantasy XIII who " seemed capable of taking on the corrupt government of Cocoon " : another comment was that her " no @-@ nonsense approach to her mission makes her the game 's standout hero " . She was included in two lists by Complex , which ranked her as the 19th greatest Final Fantasy character and the 39th greatest heroine in video game history . 
 In 2010 , Lightning placed 34th in a Famitsu poll regarding the most popular video game character in Japan . She was voted the best @-@ liked female Final Fantasy character in a 2013 poll by Square Enix , and , in that year 's Dengeki PlayStation Awards , she was voted best video game character of the year for her appearance in Lightning Returns . She came first in a Microsoft poll to determine the most popular character of the Final Fantasy XIII games . In 2014 , readers of IGN voted her the best character in XIII . At PAX Prime 2013 , she took third place in a list , compiled by journalists and game developers , of the top female characters in western and Japanese role @-@ playing video games . 
 = Farm to Market Road 1528 = 
 Farm to Market Road 1528 ( FM 1528 ) is a farm @-@ to @-@ market road located in the western and central portions of Delta County in the U.S. state of Texas . The highway is approximately 11 @.@ 4 miles ( 18 @.@ 3 km ) in length , and travels through mainly rural portions of Delta County . The roadway begins at an intersection with FM 64 in the community of Antioch . The highway proceeds southward , passing through the former community of Gough , before bending east . The highway proceeds east , running concurrently with State Highway 24 ( SH 24 ) for a short distance . The road travels northeast , parallel to Cooper Lake , before bending north and entering Cooper , where it terminates at SH 154 . 
 Early roads existed in the place of FM 1528 by 1936 , and a short section of highway between SH 27 ( now SH 24 ) and Klondike was designated as Loop 39 in 1939 , and FM 1528 was designated in 1949 . The route of the highway has been altered since its designation , including rerouting due to the construction of Cooper Lake . 
 = = Route description = = 
 FM 1528 begins at an intersection with FM 64 in the unincorporated community of Antioch as a two @-@ lane , paved road . The highway proceeds southward , entering rural areas and intersecting several small roads . The road continues , entering the former community of Gough and intersects FM 2068 . FM 1528 turns due eastward and continues , exiting the Gough area . The roadway proceeds east , intersecting several county roads and traveling past several small houses . The highway bends southward and travels a short distance before it intersects SH 24 . The highway runs concurrently with SH 24 for a short distance before splitting off , proceeding into the community of Klondike . The road turns northeast , after it proceeds through Klondike and intersects FM 2890 . The roadway continues northeastward , passing through the Cooper Wildlife Management Area , as well as traveling over a creek leading to Cooper Lake before it reenters rural areas . It continues , passing over another creek before it bends eastward . At the southern edge of Cooper , the route intersects FM 1880 . The road bends northward , entering the city of Cooper . The roadway passes several small buildings in the community before reaching its eastern terminus , an intersection with SH 154 and State Highway 24 Business . 
 The Texas Department of Transportation ( TxDOT ) publishes yearly reports of the highway 's annual average daily traffic ( AADT ) , with counts usually taken near intersections . In 2011 , FM 1528 's highest traveled point was within the city proper of Cooper , with a daily average of 1550 vehicles . Just outside Cooper , the count drops to around 800 vehicles . In Klondike , the AADT is around 300 vehicles , while just west of Klondike , the count is just over 100 . The highway 's least traveled point is near its western terminus , with an average of just 90 vehicles . No portion of the highway is listed on the National Highway System , a network of roads important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 The first segments of road in the location of what would become FM 1528 existed by the year of 1936 . On September 26 , 1939 , a portion of road traveling from SH 24 to the community of Klondike was designated as Loop Highway 39 ( Loop 39 ) . and on September 28 , 1949 , through the order of the Texas Transportation Board , FM 1528 was designated , and Loop 39 was redesignated as part of the highway . In 1961 , the highway had a bituminous surface , a combination of gravel and asphalt . By 1987 , the highway had been minorly rerouted and straightened , and the entire length had been paved . Between 1986 and 1991 , the highway 's route was minorly rerouted between Klondike and Cooper , due to the construction of Cooper Lake . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire road is in Delta County . 
 = History of evolutionary thought = 
 Evolutionary thought , the conception that species change over time , has roots in antiquity - in the ideas of the ancient Greeks , Romans , and Chinese as well as in medieval Islamic science . With the beginnings of modern biological taxonomy in the late 17th century , two opposed ideas influenced Western biological thinking : 
 essentialism , the belief that every species has essential characteristics that are unalterable , a concept which had developed from medieval Aristotelian metaphysics , and that fit well with natural theology 
 the development of the new anti @-@ Aristotelian approach to modern science : as the Enlightenment progressed , evolutionary cosmology and the mechanical philosophy spread from the physical sciences to natural history 
 Naturalists began to focus on the variability of species ; the emergence of paleontology with the concept of extinction further undermined static views of nature . In the early 19th century Jean @-@ Baptiste Lamarck ( 1744 – 1829 ) proposed his theory of the transmutation of species , the first fully formed theory of evolution . 
 In 1858 Charles Darwin and Alfred Russel Wallace published a new evolutionary theory , explained in detail in Darwin 's On the Origin of Species ( 1859 ) . Unlike Lamarck , Darwin proposed common descent and a branching tree of life , meaning that two very different species could share a common ancestor . Darwin based his theory on the idea of natural selection : it synthesized a broad range of evidence from animal husbandry , biogeography , geology , morphology , and embryology . 
 Debate over Darwin 's work led to the rapid acceptance of the general concept of evolution , but the specific mechanism he proposed , natural selection , was not widely accepted until it was revived by developments in biology that occurred during the 1920s through the 1940s . Before that time most biologists regarded other factors as responsible for evolution . Alternatives to natural selection suggested during " the eclipse of Darwinism " ( circa 1880 to 1920 ) included inheritance of acquired characteristics ( neo @-@ Lamarckism ) , an innate drive for change ( orthogenesis ) , and sudden large mutations ( saltationism ) . Mendelian genetics , a series of 19th Century experiments with pea plant variations rediscovered in 1900 , was integrated with natural selection by Ronald Fisher during the 1910s to 1930s , and along with J. B. S. Haldane and Sewall Wright he founded the new discipline of population genetics . During the 1930s and 1940s population genetics became integrated with other biological fields , resulting in a widely applicable theory of evolution that encompassed much of biology — the modern evolutionary synthesis . 
 Following the establishment of evolutionary biology , studies of mutation and genetic diversity in natural populations , combined with biogeography and systematics , led to sophisticated mathematical and causal models of evolution . Paleontology and comparative anatomy allowed more detailed reconstructions of the evolutionary history of life . After the rise of molecular genetics in the 1950s , the field of molecular evolution developed , based on protein sequences and immunological tests , and later incorporating RNA and DNA studies . The gene @-@ centered view of evolution rose to prominence in the 1960s , followed by the neutral theory of molecular evolution , sparking debates over <unk> , the unit of selection , and the relative importance of genetic drift versus natural selection as causes of evolution . In the late 20th @-@ century , DNA sequencing led to molecular phylogenetics and the reorganization of the tree of life into the three @-@ domain system by Carl Woese . In addition , the newly recognized factors of <unk> and horizontal gene transfer introduced yet more complexity into evolutionary theory . Discoveries in evolutionary biology have made a significant impact not just within the traditional branches of biology , but also in other academic disciplines ( for example : anthropology and psychology ) and on society at large . 
 = = Antiquity = = 
 = = = Greeks = = = 
 Proposals that one type of animal , even humans , could descend from other types of animals , are known to go back to the first pre @-@ Socratic Greek philosophers . Anaximander of Miletus ( c . 610 – 546 BC ) proposed that the first animals lived in water , during a wet phase of the Earth 's past , and that the first land @-@ dwelling ancestors of mankind must have been born in water , and only spent part of their life on land . He also argued that the first human of the form known today must have been the child of a different type of animal , because man needs prolonged nursing to live . Empedocles ( c . 490 – 430 BC ) , argued that what we call birth and death in animals are just the mingling and separations of elements which cause the countless " tribes of mortal things . " Specifically , the first animals and plants were like disjointed parts of the ones we see today , some of which survived by joining in different combinations , and then intermixing , and wherever " everything turned out as it would have if it were on purpose , there the creatures survived , being accidentally compounded in a suitable way . " Other philosophers who became more influential in the Middle Ages , including Plato ( c . 428 / 427 – 348 / 347 BC ) , Aristotle ( 384 – 322 BC ) , and members of the Stoic school of philosophy , believed that the species of all things , not only living things , were fixed by divine design . 
 Plato was called by biologist Ernst Mayr " the great antihero of evolutionism , " because he promoted belief in essentialism , which is also referred to as the theory of Forms . This theory holds that each natural type of object in the observed world is an imperfect manifestation of the ideal , form or " species " which defines that type . In his Timaeus for example , Plato has a character tell a story that the <unk> created the cosmos and everything in it because , being good , and hence , " ... free from jealousy , He desired that all things should be as like Himself as they could be . " The creator created all conceivable forms of life , since " ... without them the universe will be incomplete , for it will not contain every kind of animal which it ought to contain , if it is to be perfect . " This " principle of plenitude " — the idea that all potential forms of life are essential to a perfect creation — greatly influenced Christian thought . However some historians of science have questioned how much influence Plato 's essentialism had on natural philosophy by stating that many philosophers after Plato believed that species might be capable of transformation and that the idea that biologic species were fixed and possessed unchangeable essential characteristics did not become important until the beginning of biological taxonomy in the 17th and 18th centuries . 
 Aristotle , the most influential of the Greek philosophers in Europe in the Middle Ages , was a student of Plato and is also the earliest natural historian whose work has been preserved in any real detail . His writings on biology resulted from his research into natural history on and around the island of Lesbos , and have survived in the form of four books , usually known by their Latin names , De anima ( On the Soul ) , Historia animalium ( History of Animals ) , De generatione animalium ( Generation of Animals ) , and De partibus animalium ( On the Parts of Animals ) . Aristotle 's works contain some remarkably astute observations and interpretations — along with sundry myths and mistakes — reflecting the uneven state of knowledge during his time . However , for Charles Singer , " Nothing is more remarkable than [ Aristotle 's ] efforts to [ exhibit ] the relationships of living things as a scala naturae . " This scala naturae , described in Historia animalium , classified organisms in relation to a hierarchical " Ladder of Life " or " great chain of being , " placing them according to their complexity of structure and function , with organisms that showed greater vitality and ability to move described as " higher organisms . " Aristotle believed that features of living organisms showed clearly that they must have had what he called a final cause , that is to say that they had been designed for a purpose . He explicitly rejected the view of Empedocles that living creatures might have originated by chance . 
 Other Greek philosophers , such as Zeno of Citium ( 334 – 262 BC ) the founder of the Stoic school of philosophy , agreed with Aristotle and other earlier philosophers that nature showed clear evidence of being designed for a purpose ; this view is known as teleology . The Roman Stoic philosopher Cicero ( 106 – 43 BC ) wrote that Zeno was known to have held the view , central to Stoic physics , that nature is primarily " directed and concentrated ... to secure for the world ... the structure best fitted for survival . " 
 Epicurus ( 341 – 270 BC ) anticipated the idea of natural selection . The Roman philosopher and <unk> Lucretius ( c . 99 – 55 BC ) explicated these ideas in his poem De rerum natura ( On the Nature of Things ) . In the Epicurean system , it was assumed that many species had been spontaneously generated from Gaia in the past , but that only the most functional forms survived to have offspring . The Epicureans do not seem to have anticipated the full theory of evolution as we now know it and seem to have postulated separate <unk> events for each species rather than postulating a single <unk> event coupled with the differentiation of species over time from a single ( or small number of ) originating parent organism ( s ) . 
 = = = Chinese = = = 
 Ancient Chinese thinkers such as Zhuang Zhou ( c . 369 – 286 BC ) , a Taoist philosopher , expressed ideas on changing biologic species . According to Joseph Needham , Taoism explicitly denies the fixity of biological species and Taoist philosophers speculated that species had developed differing attributes in response to differing environments . Taoism regards humans , nature and the heavens as existing in a state of " constant transformation " known as the Tao , in contrast with the more static view of nature typical of Western thought . 
 = = = Romans = = = 
 Lucretius ' poem De rerum natura provides the best surviving explanation of the ideas of the Greek Epicurean philosophers . It describes the development of the cosmos , the Earth , living things , and human society through purely naturalistic mechanisms , without any reference to supernatural involvement . De rerum natura would influence the cosmological and evolutionary speculations of philosophers and scientists during and after the Renaissance . This view was in strong contrast with the views of Roman philosophers of the Stoic school such as Cicero , Seneca the Younger ( c . 4 BC – AD 65 ) , and Pliny the Elder ( 23 – 79 AD ) who had a strongly teleological view of the natural world that influenced Christian theology . Cicero reports that the peripatetic and Stoic view of nature as an agency concerned most basically with producing life " best fitted for survival " was taken for granted among the Hellenistic elite . 
 = = = = Augustine of Hippo = = = = 
 In line with earlier Greek thought , the 4th @-@ century bishop and theologian , Augustine of Hippo , wrote that the creation story in the Book of Genesis should not be read too literally . In his book De <unk> ad <unk> ( On the Literal Meaning of Genesis ) , he stated that in some cases new creatures may have come about through the " decomposition " of earlier forms of life . For Augustine , " plant , fowl and animal life are not perfect ... but created in a state of potentiality , " unlike what he considered the theologically perfect forms of angels , the firmament and the human soul . Augustine 's idea ' that forms of life had been transformed " slowly over time " ' prompted Father Giuseppe <unk> @-@ Nitti , Professor of Theology at the Pontifical Santa Croce University in Rome , to claim that Augustine had suggested a form of evolution . 
 Henry Fairfield Osborn wrote in From the Greeks to Darwin ( 1894 ) : 
 " If the orthodoxy of Augustine had remained the teaching of the Church , the final establishment of Evolution would have come far earlier than it did , certainly during the eighteenth instead of the nineteenth century , and the bitter controversy over this truth of Nature would never have arisen . ... Plainly as the direct or instantaneous Creation of animals and plants appeared to be taught in Genesis , Augustine read this in the light of primary causation and the gradual development from the imperfect to the perfect of Aristotle . This most influential teacher thus handed down to his followers opinions which closely conform to the progressive views of those theologians of the present day who have accepted the Evolution theory . " 
 In A History of the Warfare of Science with Theology in Christendom ( 1896 ) , Andrew Dickson White wrote about Augustine 's attempts to preserve the ancient evolutionary approach to the creation as follows : 
 " For ages a widely accepted doctrine had been that water , filth , and carrion had received power from the Creator to generate worms , insects , and a multitude of the smaller animals ; and this doctrine had been especially welcomed by St. Augustine and many of the fathers , since it relieved the Almighty of making , Adam of naming , and Noah of living in the ark with these innumerable despised species . " 
 In Augustine 's De <unk> contra <unk> , on Genesis he says : " To suppose that God formed man from the dust with bodily hands is very childish . ... God neither formed man with bodily hands nor did he breathe upon him with throat and lips . " Augustine suggests in other work his theory of the later development of insects out of carrion , and the adoption of the old emanation or evolution theory , showing that " certain very small animals may not have been created on the fifth and sixth days , but may have originated later from putrefying matter . " Concerning Augustine 's De Trinitate ( On the Trinity ) , White wrote that Augustine " ... develops at length the view that in the creation of living beings there was something like a growth — that God is the ultimate author , but works through secondary causes ; and finally argues that certain substances are endowed by God with the power of producing certain classes of plants and animals . " 
 = = Middle Ages = = 
 = = = Islamic philosophy and the struggle for existence = = = 
 Although Greek and Roman evolutionary ideas died out in Europe after the fall of the Roman Empire , they were not lost to Islamic philosophers and scientists . In the Islamic Golden Age of the 8th to the 13th centuries , philosophers explored ideas about natural history . These ideas included transmutation from non @-@ living to living : " from mineral to plant , from plant to animal , and from animal to man . " 
 In the medieval Islamic world , the scholar al @-@ <unk> ( 776 – c . 868 ) wrote his Book of Animals in the 9th century . Conway Zirkle , writing about the history of natural selection in 1941 , said that an excerpt from this work was the only relevant passage he had found from an Arabian scholar . He provided a quotation describing the struggle for existence , citing a Spanish translation of this work : " The rat goes out for its food , and is clever in getting it , for it eats all animals inferior to it in strength , " and in turn , it " has to avoid snakes and birds and serpents of prey , who look for it in order to devour it " and are stronger than the rat . Mosquitoes " know instinctively that blood is the thing which makes them live " and when they see an animal , " they know that the skin has been fashioned to serve them as food . " In turn , flies hunt the mosquito " which is the food that they like best , " and predators eat the flies . " All animals , in short , can not exist without food , neither can the hunting animal escape being hunted in his turn . Every weak animal devours those weaker than itself . Strong animals cannot escape being devoured by other animals stronger than they . And in this respect , men do not differ from animals , some with respect to others , although they do not arrive at the same extremes . In short , God has disposed some human beings as a cause of life for others , and likewise , he has disposed the latter as a cause of the death of the former . " Al @-@ <unk> also wrote descriptions of food chains . 
 Some of Ibn <unk> 's thoughts , according to some commentators , anticipate the biological theory of evolution . In 1377 , Ibn <unk> wrote the Muqaddimah in which he asserted that humans developed from " the world of the monkeys , " in a process by which " species become more numerous " In chapter 1 he writes : " This world with all the created things in it has a certain order and solid construction . It shows <unk> between causes and things caused , combinations of some parts of creation with others , and transformations of some existent things into others , in a pattern that is both remarkable and endless . " 
 The Muqaddimah also states in chapter 6 : 
 " We explained there that the whole of existence in ( all ) its simple and composite worlds is arranged in a natural order of ascent and descent , so that everything constitutes an uninterrupted continuum . The essences at the end of each particular stage of the worlds are by nature prepared to be transformed into the essence adjacent to them , either above or below them . This is the case with the simple material elements ; it is the case with palms and vines , ( which constitute ) the last stage of plants , in their relation to snails and shellfish , ( which constitute ) the ( lowest ) stage of animals . It is also the case with monkeys , creatures combining in themselves cleverness and perception , in their relation to man , the being who has the ability to think and to reflect . The preparedness ( for transformation ) that exists on either side , at each stage of the worlds , is meant when ( we speak about ) their connection . " 
 = = = = <unk> al @-@ Dīn <unk> = = = = 
 In his <unk> @-@ i @-@ Nasri , Tusi put forward a basic theory for the evolution of species almost 600 years before Charles Darwin , the English naturalist credited with advancing the idea , was born . He begins his theory of evolution with the universe once consisting of equal and similar elements . According to Tusi , internal contradictions began appearing , and as a result , some substances began developing faster and differently from other substances . He then explains how the elements evolved into minerals , then plants , then animals , and then humans . Tusi then goes on to explain how hereditary variability was an important factor for biological evolution of living things : 
 " The organisms that can gain the new features faster are more variable . As a result , they gain advantages over other creatures . [ ... ] The bodies are changing as a result of the internal and external interactions . " 
 Tusi discusses how organisms are able to adapt to their environments : 
 " Look at the world of animals and birds . They have all that is necessary for defense , protection and daily life , including strengths , courage and appropriate tools [ organs ] [ ... ] Some of these organs are real weapons , [ ... ] For example , horns @-@ spear , teeth and claws @-@ knife and needle , feet and hoofs @-@ cudgel . The thorns and needles of some animals are similar to arrows . [ ... ] Animals that have no other means of defense ( as the gazelle and fox ) protect themselves with the help of flight and cunning . [ ... ] Some of them , for example , bees , ants and some bird species , have united in communities in order to protect themselves and help each other . " 
 Tusi recognized three types of living things : plants , animals , and humans . He wrote : 
 " Animals are higher than plants , because they are able to move consciously , go after food , find and eat useful things . [ ... ] There are many differences between the animal and plant species , [ ... ] First of all , the animal kingdom is more complicated . Besides , reason is the most beneficial feature of animals . Owing to reason , they can learn new things and adopt new , non @-@ inherent abilities . For example , the trained horse or hunting falcon ... is at a higher point of development in the animal world . The first steps of human perfection begin from here . " 
 Tusi then explains how humans evolved from advanced animals : 
 " Such humans [ probably anthropoid apes ] live in the Western Sudan and other distant corners of the world . They are close to animals by their habits , deeds and behavior . [ ... ] The human has features that distinguish him from other creatures , but he has other features that unite him with the animal world , vegetable kingdom or even with the inanimate bodies . [ ... ] Before [ the creation of humans ] , all differences between organisms were of the natural origin . The next step will be associated with spiritual perfection , will , observation and knowledge . [ ... ] All these facts prove that the human being is placed on the middle step of the evolutionary stairway . According to his inherent nature , the human is related to the lower beings , and only with the help of his will can he reach the higher development level . " 
 = = = Christian philosophy and the great chain of being = = = 
 During the Early Middle Ages , Greek classical learning was all but lost to the West . However , contact with the Islamic world , where Greek manuscripts were preserved and expanded , soon led to a massive spate of Latin translations in the 12th century . Europeans were re @-@ introduced to the works of Plato and Aristotle , as well as to Islamic thought . Christian thinkers of the scholastic school , in particular Peter Abelard ( 1079 – 1142 ) and Thomas Aquinas ( 1225 – 1274 ) , combined Aristotelian classification with Plato 's ideas of the goodness of God , and of all potential life forms being present in a perfect creation , to organize all inanimate , animate , and spiritual beings into a huge interconnected system : the scala naturae , or great chain of being . 
 Within this system , everything that existed could be placed in order , from " lowest " to " highest , " with Hell at the bottom and God at the top — below God , an angelic hierarchy marked by the orbits of the planets , mankind in an intermediate position , and worms the lowest of the animals . As the universe was ultimately perfect , the great chain of being was also perfect . There were no empty links in the chain , and no link was represented by more than one species . Therefore , no species could ever move from one position to another . Thus , in this Christianized version of Plato 's perfect universe , species could never change , but remained forever fixed , in accordance with the text of the Book of Genesis . For humans to forget their position was seen as sinful , whether they behaved like lower animals or aspired to a higher station than was given them by their Creator . 
 Creatures on adjacent steps were expected to closely resemble each other , an idea expressed in the saying : natura non <unk> <unk> ( " nature does not make leaps " ) . This basic concept of the great chain of being greatly influenced the thinking of Western civilization for centuries ( and still has an influence today ) . It formed a part of the argument from design presented by natural theology . As a classification system , it became the major organizing principle and foundation of the emerging science of biology in the 17th and 18th centuries . 
 = = = Thomas Aquinas on creation and natural processes = = = 
 While the development of the great chain of being and the argument from design by Christian theologians contributed to the view that the natural world fit into an unchanging designed hierarchy , some theologians were more open to the possibility that the world might have developed through natural processes . Thomas Aquinas went even farther than Augustine of Hippo in arguing that scriptural texts like Genesis should not be interpreted in a literal way that conflicted with or constrained what natural philosophers learned about the workings of the natural world . He felt that the autonomy of nature was a sign of God 's goodness and that there was no conflict between the concept of a divinely created universe , and the idea that the universe may have evolved over time through natural mechanisms . However , Aquinas disputed the views of those like the ancient Greek philosopher Empedocles who held that such natural processes showed that the universe could have developed without an underlying purpose . Rather holding that : " Hence , it is clear that nature is nothing but a certain kind of art , i.e. , the divine art , impressed upon things , by which these things are moved to a determinate end . It is as if the shipbuilder were able to give to timbers that by which they would move themselves to take the form of a ship . " 
 = = Renaissance and Enlightenment = = 
 In the first half of the 17th century , René Descartes ' mechanical philosophy encouraged the use of the metaphor of the universe as a machine , a concept that would come to characterise the scientific revolution . Between 1650 and 1800 , some naturalists , such as Benoît de Maillet , produced theories that maintained that the universe , the Earth , and life , had developed mechanically , without divine guidance . In contrast , most contemporary theories of evolution , such of those of Gottfried Leibniz and Johann Gottfried Herder , regarded evolution as a fundamentally spiritual process . In 1751 , Pierre Louis Maupertuis veered toward more materialist ground . He wrote of natural modifications occurring during reproduction and accumulating over the course of many generations , producing races and even new species , a description that anticipated in general terms the concept of natural selection . 
 Maupertuis ' ideas were in opposition to the influence of early taxonomists like John Ray . In the late 17th century , Ray had given the first formal definition of a biological species , which he described as being characterized by essential unchanging features , and stated the seed of one species could never give rise to another . The ideas of Ray and other 17th @-@ century taxonomists were influenced by natural theology and the argument from design . 
 The word evolution ( from the Latin <unk> , meaning " to unroll like a scroll " ) was initially used to refer to embryological development ; its first use in relation to development of species came in 1762 , when Charles Bonnet used it for his concept of " pre @-@ formation , " in which females carried a miniature form of all future generations . The term gradually gained a more general meaning of growth or progressive development . 
 Later in the 18th century , the French philosopher Georges @-@ Louis Leclerc , Comte de Buffon , one of the leading naturalists of the time , suggested that what most people referred to as species were really just well @-@ marked varieties , modified from an original form by environmental factors . For example , he believed that lions , tigers , leopards and house cats might all have a common ancestor . He further speculated that the 200 or so species of mammals then known might have descended from as few as 38 original animal forms . Buffon 's evolutionary ideas were limited ; he believed each of the original forms had arisen through spontaneous generation and that each was shaped by " internal moulds " that limited the amount of change . Buffon 's works , Histoire naturelle ( 1749 – 1789 ) and Époques de la nature ( 1778 ) , containing well @-@ developed theories about a completely materialistic origin for the Earth and his ideas questioning the fixity of species , were extremely influential . Another French philosopher , Denis Diderot , also wrote that living things might have first arisen through spontaneous generation , and that species were always changing through a constant process of experiment where new forms arose and survived or not based on trial and error ; an idea that can be considered a partial anticipation of natural selection . Between 1767 and 1792 , James Burnett , Lord <unk> , included in his writings not only the concept that man had descended from primates , but also that , in response to the environment , creatures had found methods of transforming their characteristics over long time intervals . Charles Darwin 's grandfather , Erasmus Darwin , published Zoonomia ( 1794 – 1796 ) which suggested that " all warm @-@ blooded animals have arisen from one living filament . " In his poem Temple of Nature ( 1803 ) , he described the rise of life from minute organisms living in mud to all of its modern diversity . 
 = = Early 19th century = = 
 = = = Paleontology and geology = = = 
 In 1796 , Georges Cuvier published his findings on the differences between living elephants and those found in the fossil record . His analysis identified mammoths and mastodons as distinct species , different from any living animal , and effectively ended a long @-@ running debate over whether a species could become extinct . In 1788 , James Hutton described gradual geological processes operating continuously over deep time . In the 1790s , William Smith began the process of ordering rock strata by examining fossils in the layers while he worked on his geologic map of England . Independently , in 1811 , Cuvier and Alexandre Brongniart published an influential study of the geologic history of the region around Paris , based on the stratigraphic succession of rock layers . These works helped establish the antiquity of the Earth . Cuvier advocated catastrophism to explain the patterns of extinction and faunal succession revealed by the fossil record . 
 Knowledge of the fossil record continued to advance rapidly during the first few decades of the 19th century . By the 1840s , the outlines of the geologic timescale were becoming clear , and in 1841 John Phillips named three major eras , based on the predominant fauna of each : the Paleozoic , dominated by marine invertebrates and fish , the Mesozoic , the age of reptiles , and the current Cenozoic age of mammals . This progressive picture of the history of life was accepted even by conservative English geologists like Adam Sedgwick and William Buckland ; however , like Cuvier , they attributed the progression to repeated catastrophic episodes of extinction followed by new episodes of creation . Unlike Cuvier , Buckland and some other advocates of natural theology among British geologists made efforts to explicitly link the last catastrophic episode proposed by Cuvier to the biblical flood . 
 From 1830 to 1833 , geologist Charles Lyell published his multi @-@ volume work Principles of Geology , which , building on Hutton 's ideas , advocated a uniformitarian alternative to the catastrophic theory of geology . Lyell claimed that , rather than being the products of cataclysmic ( and possibly supernatural ) events , the geologic features of the Earth are better explained as the result of the same gradual geologic forces observable in the present day — but acting over immensely long periods of time . Although Lyell opposed evolutionary ideas ( even questioning the consensus that the fossil record demonstrates a true progression ) , his concept that the Earth was shaped by forces working gradually over an extended period , and the immense age of the Earth assumed by his theories , would strongly influence future evolutionary thinkers such as Charles Darwin . 
 = = = Transmutation of species = = = 
 Jean @-@ Baptiste Lamarck proposed , in his Philosophie Zoologique of 1809 , a theory of the transmutation of species ( " <unk> " ) . Lamarck did not believe that all living things shared a common ancestor but rather that simple forms of life were created continuously by spontaneous generation . He also believed that an innate life force drove species to become more complex over time , advancing up a linear ladder of complexity that was related to the great chain of being . Lamarck recognized that species adapted to their environment . He explained this by saying that the same innate force driving increasing complexity caused the organs of an animal ( or a plant ) to change based on the use or disuse of those organs , just as exercise affects muscles . He argued that these changes would be inherited by the next generation and produce slow adaptation to the environment . It was this secondary mechanism of adaptation through the inheritance of acquired characteristics that would become known as Lamarckism and would influence discussions of evolution into the 20th century . 
 A radical British school of comparative anatomy that included the anatomist Robert Edmond Grant was closely in touch with Lamarck 's French school of <unk> . One of the French scientists who influenced Grant was the anatomist Étienne Geoffroy Saint @-@ Hilaire , whose ideas on the unity of various animal body plans and the homology of certain anatomical structures would be widely influential and lead to intense debate with his colleague Georges Cuvier . Grant became an authority on the anatomy and reproduction of marine invertebrates . He developed Lamarck 's and Erasmus Darwin 's ideas of transmutation and evolutionism , and investigated homology , even proposing that plants and animals had a common evolutionary starting point . As a young student , Charles Darwin joined Grant in investigations of the life cycle of marine animals . In 1826 , an anonymous paper , probably written by Robert Jameson , praised Lamarck for explaining how higher animals had " evolved " from the simplest worms ; this was the first use of the word " evolved " in a modern sense . 
 In 1844 , the Scottish publisher Robert Chambers anonymously published an extremely controversial but widely read book entitled Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation . This book proposed an evolutionary scenario for the origins of the Solar System and of life on Earth . It claimed that the fossil record showed a progressive ascent of animals , with current animals branching off a main line that leads progressively to humanity . It implied that the transmutations lead to the unfolding of a preordained plan that had been woven into the laws that governed the universe . In this sense it was less completely materialistic than the ideas of radicals like Grant , but its implication that humans were only the last step in the ascent of animal life incensed many conservative thinkers . The high profile of the public debate over Vestiges , with its depiction of evolution as a progressive process , would greatly influence the perception of Darwin 's theory a decade later . 
 Ideas about the transmutation of species were associated with the radical materialism of the Enlightenment and were attacked by more conservative thinkers . Cuvier attacked the ideas of Lamarck and Geoffroy , agreeing with Aristotle that species were immutable . Cuvier believed that the individual parts of an animal were too closely correlated with one another to allow for one part of the anatomy to change in isolation from the others , and argued that the fossil record showed patterns of catastrophic extinctions followed by repopulation , rather than gradual change over time . He also noted that drawings of animals and animal mummies from Egypt , which were thousands of years old , showed no signs of change when compared with modern animals . The strength of Cuvier 's arguments and his scientific reputation helped keep transmutational ideas out of the mainstream for decades . 
 In Great Britain , the philosophy of natural theology remained influential . William Paley 's 1802 book Natural Theology with its famous watchmaker analogy had been written at least in part as a response to the transmutational ideas of Erasmus Darwin . Geologists influenced by natural theology , such as Buckland and Sedgwick , made a regular practice of attacking the evolutionary ideas of Lamarck , Grant , and Vestiges . Although Charles Lyell opposed scriptural geology , he also believed in the immutability of species , and in his Principles of Geology , he criticized Lamarck 's theories of development . Idealists such as Louis Agassiz and Richard Owen believed that each species was fixed and unchangeable because it represented an idea in the mind of the creator . They believed that relationships between species could be discerned from developmental patterns in embryology , as well as in the fossil record , but that these relationships represented an underlying pattern of divine thought , with progressive creation leading to increasing complexity and culminating in humanity . Owen developed the idea of " archetypes " in the Divine mind that would produce a sequence of species related by anatomical homologies , such as vertebrate limbs . Owen led a public campaign that successfully marginalized Grant in the scientific community . Darwin would make good use of the homologies analyzed by Owen in his own theory , but the harsh treatment of Grant , and the controversy surrounding Vestiges , showed him the need to ensure that his own ideas were scientifically sound . 
 = = = Anticipations of natural selection = = = 
 It is possible to look through the history of biology from the ancient Greeks onwards and discover anticipations of almost all of Charles Darwin 's key ideas . For example , Loren <unk> has found isolated passages written by Buffon suggesting he was almost ready to piece together a theory of natural selection , but such anticipations should not be taken out of the full context of the writings or of cultural values of the time which could make Darwinian ideas of evolution unthinkable . 
 When Darwin was developing his theory , he investigated selective breeding and was impressed by Sebright 's observation that " A severe winter , or a scarcity of food , by destroying the weak and the unhealthy , has all the good effects of the most skilful selection " so that " the weak and the unhealthy do not live to propagate their infirmities . " Darwin was influenced by Charles Lyell 's ideas of environmental change causing ecological shifts , leading to what Augustin de Candolle had called a war between competing plant species , competition well described by the botanist William Herbert . Darwin was struck by Thomas Robert Malthus ' phrase " struggle for existence " used of warring human tribes . 
 Several writers anticipated evolutionary aspects of Darwin 's theory , and in the third edition of On the Origin of Species published in 1861 Darwin named those he knew about in an introductory appendix , An Historical Sketch of the Recent Progress of Opinion on the Origin of Species , which he expanded in later editions . 
 In 1813 , William Charles Wells read before the Royal Society essays assuming that there had been evolution of humans , and recognising the principle of natural selection . Darwin and Alfred Russel Wallace were unaware of this work when they jointly published the theory in 1858 , but Darwin later acknowledged that Wells had recognised the principle before them , writing that the paper " An Account of a White Female , part of whose Skin resembles that of a Negro " was published in 1818 , and " he distinctly recognises the principle of natural selection , and this is the first recognition which has been indicated ; but he applies it only to the races of man , and to certain characters alone . " 
 Patrick Matthew wrote in the obscure book On Naval Timber and Arboriculture ( 1831 ) of " continual balancing of life to circumstance . ... [ The ] progeny of the same parents , under great differences of circumstance , might , in several generations , even become distinct species , incapable of co @-@ reproduction . " Charles Darwin discovered this work after the initial publication of the Origin . In the brief historical sketch that Darwin included in the 3rd edition he says " Unfortunately the view was given by Mr. Matthew very briefly in scattered passages in an Appendix to a work on a different subject ... He clearly saw , however , the full force of the principle of natural selection . " 
 However , as historian of science Peter J. Bowler says , " Through a combination of bold theorizing and comprehensive evaluation , Darwin came up with a concept of evolution that was unique for the time . " Bowler goes on to say that simple priority alone is not enough to secure a place in the history of science ; someone has to develop an idea and convince others of its importance to have a real impact . Thomas Henry Huxley said in his essay on the reception of On the Origin of Species : 
 " The suggestion that new species may result from the selective action of external conditions upon the variations from their specific type which individuals present — and which we call " spontaneous , " because we are ignorant of their causation — is as wholly unknown to the historian of scientific ideas as it was to biological specialists before 1858 . But that suggestion is the central idea of the ' Origin of Species , ' and contains the quintessence of Darwinism . " 
 = = = Natural selection = = = 
 The biogeographical patterns Charles Darwin observed in places such as the Galápagos Islands during the second voyage of HMS Beagle caused him to doubt the fixity of species , and in 1837 Darwin started the first of a series of secret notebooks on transmutation . Darwin 's observations led him to view transmutation as a process of divergence and branching , rather than the ladder @-@ like progression envisioned by Jean @-@ Baptiste Lamarck and others . In 1838 he read the new 6th edition of An Essay on the Principle of Population , written in the late 18th century by Thomas Robert Malthus . Malthus ' idea of population growth leading to a struggle for survival combined with Darwin 's knowledge on how breeders selected traits , led to the inception of Darwin 's theory of natural selection . Darwin did not publish his ideas on evolution for 20 years . However , he did share them with certain other naturalists and friends , starting with Joseph Dalton Hooker , with whom he discussed his unpublished 1844 essay on natural selection . During this period he used the time he could spare from his other scientific work to slowly refine his ideas and , aware of the intense controversy around transmutation , amass evidence to support them . In September 1854 he began full @-@ time work on writing his book on natural selection . 
 Unlike Darwin , Alfred Russel Wallace , influenced by the book Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation , already suspected that transmutation of species occurred when he began his career as a naturalist . By 1855 , his biogeographical observations during his field work in South America and the Malay Archipelago made him confident enough in a branching pattern of evolution to publish a paper stating that every species originated in close proximity to an already existing closely allied species . Like Darwin , it was Wallace 's consideration of how the ideas of Malthus might apply to animal populations that led him to conclusions very similar to those reached by Darwin about the role of natural selection . In February 1858 , Wallace , unaware of Darwin 's unpublished ideas , composed his thoughts into an essay and mailed them to Darwin , asking for his opinion . The result was the joint publication in July of an extract from Darwin 's 1844 essay along with Wallace 's letter . Darwin also began work on a short abstract summarising his theory , which he would publish in 1859 as On the Origin of Species . 
 = = 1859 – 1930s : Darwin and his legacy = = 
 By the 1850s , whether or not species evolved was a subject of intense debate , with prominent scientists arguing both sides of the issue . The publication of Charles Darwin 's On the Origin of Species fundamentally transformed the discussion over biological origins . Darwin argued that his branching version of evolution explained a wealth of facts in biogeography , anatomy , embryology , and other fields of biology . He also provided the first cogent mechanism by which evolutionary change could persist : his theory of natural selection . 
 One of the first and most important naturalists to be convinced by Origin of the reality of evolution was the British anatomist Thomas Henry Huxley . Huxley recognized that unlike the earlier transmutational ideas of Jean @-@ Baptiste Lamarck and Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation , Darwin 's theory provided a mechanism for evolution without supernatural involvement , even if Huxley himself was not completely convinced that natural selection was the key evolutionary mechanism . Huxley would make advocacy of evolution a cornerstone of the program of the X Club to reform and professionalise science by displacing natural theology with naturalism and to end the domination of British natural science by the clergy . By the early 1870s in English @-@ speaking countries , thanks partly to these efforts , evolution had become the mainstream scientific explanation for the origin of species . In his campaign for public and scientific acceptance of Darwin 's theory , Huxley made extensive use of new evidence for evolution from paleontology . This included evidence that birds had evolved from reptiles , including the discovery of Archaeopteryx in Europe , and a number of fossils of primitive birds with teeth found in North America . Another important line of evidence was the finding of fossils that helped trace the evolution of the horse from its small five @-@ toed ancestors . However , acceptance of evolution among scientists in non @-@ English speaking nations such as France , and the countries of southern Europe and Latin America was slower . An exception to this was Germany , where both August Weismann and Ernst Haeckel championed this idea : Haeckel used evolution to challenge the established tradition of metaphysical idealism in German biology , much as Huxley used it to challenge natural theology in Britain . Haeckel and other German scientists would take the lead in launching an ambitious programme to reconstruct the evolutionary history of life based on morphology and embryology . 
 Darwin 's theory succeeded in profoundly altering scientific opinion regarding the development of life and in producing a small philosophical revolution . However , this theory could not explain several critical components of the evolutionary process . Specifically , Darwin was unable to explain the source of variation in traits within a species , and could not identify a mechanism that could pass traits faithfully from one generation to the next . Darwin 's hypothesis of pangenesis , while relying in part on the inheritance of acquired characteristics , proved to be useful for statistical models of evolution that were developed by his cousin Francis Galton and the " biometric " school of evolutionary thought . However , this idea proved to be of little use to other biologists . 
 = = = Application to humans = = = 
 Charles Darwin was aware of the severe reaction in some parts of the scientific community against the suggestion made in Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation that humans had arisen from animals by a process of transmutation . Therefore , he almost completely ignored the topic of human evolution in On the Origin of Species . Despite this precaution , the issue featured prominently in the debate that followed the book 's publication . For most of the first half of the 19th century , the scientific community believed that , although geology had shown that the Earth and life were very old , human beings had appeared suddenly just a few thousand years before the present . However , a series of archaeological discoveries in the 1840s and 1850s showed stone tools associated with the remains of extinct animals . By the early 1860s , as summarized in Charles Lyell 's 1863 book Geological Evidences of the Antiquity of Man , it had become widely accepted that humans had existed during a prehistoric period — which stretched many thousands of years before the start of written history . This view of human history was more compatible with an evolutionary origin for humanity than was the older view . On the other hand , at that time there was no fossil evidence to demonstrate human evolution . The only human fossils found before the discovery of Java Man in the 1890s were either of anatomically modern humans or of Neanderthals that were too close , especially in the critical characteristic of cranial capacity , to modern humans for them to be convincing intermediates between humans and other primates . 
 Therefore , the debate that immediately followed the publication of On the Origin of Species centered on the similarities and differences between humans and modern apes . Carolus Linnaeus had been criticised in the 18th century for grouping humans and apes together as primates in his ground breaking classification system . Richard Owen vigorously defended the classification suggested by Georges Cuvier and Johann Friedrich Blumenbach that placed humans in a separate order from any of the other mammals , which by the early 19th century had become the orthodox view . On the other hand , Thomas Henry Huxley sought to demonstrate a close anatomical relationship between humans and apes . In one famous incident , which became known as the Great Hippocampus Question , Huxley showed that Owen was mistaken in claiming that the brains of gorillas lacked a structure present in human brains . Huxley summarized his argument in his highly influential 1863 book Evidence as to Man 's Place in Nature . Another viewpoint was advocated by Lyell and Alfred Russel Wallace . They agreed that humans shared a common ancestor with apes , but questioned whether any purely materialistic mechanism could account for all the differences between humans and apes , especially some aspects of the human mind . 
 In 1871 , Darwin published The Descent of Man , and Selection in Relation to Sex , which contained his views on human evolution . Darwin argued that the differences between the human mind and the minds of the higher animals were a matter of degree rather than of kind . For example , he viewed morality as a natural outgrowth of instincts that were beneficial to animals living in social groups . He argued that all the differences between humans and apes were explained by a combination of the selective pressures that came from our ancestors moving from the trees to the plains , and sexual selection . The debate over human origins , and over the degree of human uniqueness continued well into the 20th century . 
 = = = Alternatives to natural selection = = = 
 The concept of evolution was widely accepted in scientific circles within a few years of the publication of Origin , but the acceptance of natural selection as its driving mechanism was much less widespread . The four major alternatives to natural selection in the late 19th century were theistic evolution , neo @-@ Lamarckism , orthogenesis , and saltationism . 
 Theistic evolution was the idea that God intervened in the process of evolution , to guide it in such a way that the living world could still be considered to be designed . The term was promoted by Charles Darwin 's greatest American advocate Asa Gray . However , this idea gradually fell out of favor among scientists , as they became more and more committed to the idea of methodological naturalism and came to believe that direct appeals to supernatural involvement were scientifically unproductive . By 1900 , theistic evolution had largely disappeared from professional scientific discussions , although it retained a strong popular following . 
 In the late 19th century , the term neo @-@ Lamarckism came to be associated with the position of naturalists who viewed the inheritance of acquired characteristics as the most important evolutionary mechanism . Advocates of this position included the British writer and Darwin critic Samuel Butler , the German biologist Ernst Haeckel , and the American paleontologist Edward Drinker Cope . They considered Lamarckism to be philosophically superior to Darwin 's idea of selection acting on random variation . Cope looked for , and thought he found , patterns of linear progression in the fossil record . Inheritance of acquired characteristics was part of Haeckel 's recapitulation theory of evolution , which held that the embryological development of an organism repeats its evolutionary history . Critics of neo @-@ Lamarckism , such as the German biologist August Weismann and Alfred Russel Wallace , pointed out that no one had ever produced solid evidence for the inheritance of acquired characteristics . Despite these criticisms , neo @-@ Lamarckism remained the most popular alternative to natural selection at the end of the 19th century , and would remain the position of some naturalists well into the 20th century . 
 <unk> was the hypothesis that life has an innate tendency to change , in a <unk> fashion , towards ever @-@ greater perfection . It had a significant following in the 19th century , and its proponents included the Russian biologist Leo S. Berg and the American paleontologist Henry Fairfield Osborn . <unk> was popular among some paleontologists , who believed that the fossil record showed a gradual and constant unidirectional change . 
 <unk> was the idea that new species arise as a result of large mutations . It was seen as a much faster alternative to the Darwinian concept of a gradual process of small random variations being acted on by natural selection , and was popular with early geneticists such as Hugo de Vries , William Bateson , and early in his career , Thomas Hunt Morgan . It became the basis of the mutation theory of evolution . 
 = = = Mendelian genetics , biometrics , and mutation = = = 
 The rediscovery of Gregor Mendel 's laws of inheritance in 1900 ignited a fierce debate between two camps of biologists . In one camp were the <unk> , who were focused on discrete variations and the laws of inheritance . They were led by William Bateson ( who coined the word genetics ) and Hugo de Vries ( who coined the word mutation ) . Their opponents were the biometricians , who were interested in the continuous variation of characteristics within populations . Their leaders , Karl Pearson and Walter Frank Raphael Weldon , followed in the tradition of Francis Galton , who had focused on measurement and statistical analysis of variation within a population . The biometricians rejected Mendelian genetics on the basis that discrete units of heredity , such as genes , could not explain the continuous range of variation seen in real populations . Weldon 's work with crabs and snails provided evidence that selection pressure from the environment could shift the range of variation in wild populations , but the <unk> maintained that the variations measured by biometricians were too insignificant to account for the evolution of new species . 
 When Thomas Hunt Morgan began experimenting with breeding the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster , he was a <unk> who hoped to demonstrate that a new species could be created in the lab by mutation alone . Instead , the work at his lab between 1910 and 1915 reconfirmed Mendelian genetics and provided solid experimental evidence linking it to chromosomal inheritance . His work also demonstrated that most mutations had relatively small effects , such as a change in eye color , and that rather than creating a new species in a single step , mutations served to increase variation within the existing population . 
 = = 1920s – 1940s = = 
 = = = Population genetics = = = 
 The Mendelian and <unk> models were eventually reconciled with the development of population genetics . A key step was the work of the British biologist and statistician Ronald Fisher . In a series of papers starting in 1918 and culminating in his 1930 book The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection , Fisher showed that the continuous variation measured by the biometricians could be produced by the combined action of many discrete genes , and that natural selection could change gene frequencies in a population , resulting in evolution . In a series of papers beginning in 1924 , another British geneticist , J. B. S. Haldane , applied statistical analysis to real @-@ world examples of natural selection , such as the evolution of industrial melanism in peppered moths , and showed that natural selection worked at an even faster rate than Fisher assumed . 
 The American biologist Sewall Wright , who had a background in animal breeding experiments , focused on combinations of interacting genes , and the effects of inbreeding on small , relatively isolated populations that exhibited genetic drift . In 1932 , Wright introduced the concept of an adaptive landscape and argued that genetic drift and inbreeding could drive a small , isolated sub @-@ population away from an adaptive peak , allowing natural selection to drive it towards different adaptive peaks . The work of Fisher , Haldane and Wright founded the discipline of population genetics . This integrated natural selection with Mendelian genetics , which was the critical first step in developing a unified theory of how evolution worked . 
 = = = Modern evolutionary synthesis = = = 
 In the first few decades of the 20th century , most field naturalists continued to believe that Lamarckian and <unk> mechanisms of evolution provided the best explanation for the complexity they observed in the living world . But as the field of genetics continued to develop , those views became less tenable . Theodosius Dobzhansky , a postdoctoral worker in Thomas Hunt Morgan 's lab , had been influenced by the work on genetic diversity by Russian geneticists such as Sergei <unk> . He helped to bridge the divide between the foundations of microevolution developed by the population geneticists and the patterns of macroevolution observed by field biologists , with his 1937 book Genetics and the Origin of Species . Dobzhansky examined the genetic diversity of wild populations and showed that , contrary to the assumptions of the population geneticists , these populations had large amounts of genetic diversity , with marked differences between sub @-@ populations . The book also took the highly mathematical work of the population geneticists and put it into a more accessible form . In Britain , E. B. Ford , the pioneer of ecological genetics , continued throughout the 1930s and 1940s to demonstrate the power of selection due to ecological factors including the ability to maintain genetic diversity through genetic polymorphisms such as human blood types . Ford 's work would contribute to a shift in emphasis during the course of the modern synthesis towards natural selection over genetic drift . 
 Evolutionary biologist Ernst Mayr was influenced by the work of the German biologist Bernhard <unk> showing the influence of local environmental factors on the geographic distribution of sub @-@ species and closely related species . Mayr followed up on Dobzhansky 's work with the 1942 book Systematics and the Origin of Species , which emphasized the importance of allopatric speciation in the formation of new species . This form of speciation occurs when the geographical isolation of a sub @-@ population is followed by the development of mechanisms for reproductive isolation . Mayr also formulated the biological species concept that defined a species as a group of interbreeding or potentially interbreeding populations that were reproductively isolated from all other populations . 
 In the 1944 book Tempo and Mode in Evolution , George Gaylord Simpson showed that the fossil record was consistent with the irregular non @-@ directional pattern predicted by the developing evolutionary synthesis , and that the linear trends that earlier paleontologists had claimed supported orthogenesis and neo @-@ Lamarckism did not hold up to closer examination . In 1950 , G. Ledyard Stebbins published Variation and Evolution in Plants , which helped to integrate botany into the synthesis . The emerging cross @-@ disciplinary consensus on the workings of evolution would be known as the modern evolutionary synthesis . It received its name from the 1942 book Evolution : The Modern Synthesis by Julian Huxley . 
 The evolutionary synthesis provided a conceptual core — in particular , natural selection and Mendelian population genetics — that tied together many , but not all , biological disciplines . It helped establish the legitimacy of evolutionary biology , a primarily historical science , in a scientific climate that favored experimental methods over historical ones . The synthesis also resulted in a considerable narrowing of the range of mainstream evolutionary thought ( what Stephen Jay Gould called the " hardening of the synthesis " ) : by the 1950s , natural selection acting on genetic variation was virtually the only acceptable mechanism of evolutionary change ( <unk> ) , and macroevolution was simply considered the result of extensive microevolution . 
 = = 1940s – 1960s : Molecular biology and evolution = = 
 The middle decades of the 20th century saw the rise of molecular biology , and with it an understanding of the chemical nature of genes as sequences of DNA and of their relationship — through the genetic code — to protein sequences . At the same time , increasingly powerful techniques for analyzing proteins , such as protein electrophoresis and sequencing , brought biochemical phenomena into realm of the synthetic theory of evolution . In the early 1960s , biochemists Linus Pauling and Emile <unk> proposed the molecular clock hypothesis ( MCH ) : that sequence differences between homologous proteins could be used to calculate the time since two species diverged . By 1969 , Motoo Kimura and others provided a theoretical basis for the molecular clock , arguing that — at the molecular level at least — most genetic mutations are neither harmful nor helpful and that mutation and genetic drift ( rather than natural selection ) cause a large portion of genetic change : the neutral theory of molecular evolution . Studies of protein differences within species also brought molecular data to bear on population genetics by providing estimates of the level of heterozygosity in natural populations . 
 From the early 1960s , molecular biology was increasingly seen as a threat to the traditional core of evolutionary biology . Established evolutionary biologists — particularly Ernst Mayr , Theodosius Dobzhansky , and George Gaylord Simpson , three of the architects of the modern synthesis — were extremely skeptical of molecular approaches , especially when it came to the connection ( or lack thereof ) to natural selection . The molecular @-@ clock hypothesis and the neutral theory were particularly controversial , spawning the neutralist @-@ <unk> debate over the relative importance of mutation , drift and selection , which continued into the 1980s without a clear resolution . 
 = = Late 20th century = = 
 = = = Gene @-@ centered view = = = 
 In the mid @-@ 1960s , George C. Williams strongly critiqued explanations of adaptations worded in terms of " survival of the species " ( group selection arguments ) . Such explanations were largely replaced by a gene @-@ centered view of evolution , epitomized by the kin selection arguments of W. D. Hamilton , George R. Price and John Maynard Smith . This viewpoint would be summarized and popularized in the influential 1976 book The Selfish Gene by Richard Dawkins . Models of the period seemed to show that group selection was severely limited in its strength ; though newer models do admit the possibility of significant multi @-@ level selection . 
 In 1973 , Leigh Van Valen proposed the term " Red Queen , " which he took from Through the Looking @-@ Glass by Lewis Carroll , to describe a scenario where a species involved in one or more evolutionary arms races would have to constantly change just to keep pace with the species with which it was co @-@ evolving . Hamilton , Williams and others suggested that this idea might explain the evolution of sexual reproduction : the increased genetic diversity caused by sexual reproduction would help maintain resistance against rapidly evolving parasites , thus making sexual reproduction common , despite the tremendous cost from the gene @-@ centric point of view of a system where only half of an organism 's genome is passed on during reproduction . 
 However , contrary to the expectations of the Red Queen hypothesis , Hanley et al. found that the prevalence , abundance and mean intensity of mites was significantly higher in sexual geckos than in asexuals sharing the same habitat . Furthermore , Parker , after reviewing numerous genetic studies on plant disease resistance , failed to find a single example consistent with the concept that pathogens are the primary selective agent responsible for sexual reproduction in their host . At an even more fundamental level , Heng and <unk> and Heng reviewed evidence that sex , rather than enhancing diversity , acts as a constraint on genetic diversity . They considered that sex acts as a coarse filter , weeding out major genetic changes , such as chromosomal rearrangements , but permitting minor variation , such as changes at the nucleotide or gene level ( that are often neutral ) to pass through the sexual sieve . The adaptive function of sex , today , remains a major unresolved issue in biology . The competing models to explain the adaptive function of sex were reviewed by Birdsell and Wills . A principal alternative view to the Red Queen hypothesis is that sex arose , and is maintained , as a process for repairing DNA damage , and that genetic variation is produced as a byproduct . 
 The gene @-@ centric view has also led to an increased interest in Charles Darwin 's old idea of sexual selection , and more recently in topics such as sexual conflict and <unk> conflict . 
 = = = Sociobiology = = = 
 W. D. Hamilton 's work on kin selection contributed to the emergence of the discipline of sociobiology . The existence of altruistic behaviors has been a difficult problem for evolutionary theorists from the beginning . Significant progress was made in 1964 when Hamilton formulated the inequality in kin selection known as Hamilton 's rule , which showed how eusociality in insects ( the existence of sterile worker classes ) and many other examples of altruistic behavior could have evolved through kin selection . Other theories followed , some derived from game theory , such as reciprocal altruism . In 1975 , E. O. Wilson published the influential and highly controversial book Sociobiology : The New Synthesis which claimed evolutionary theory could help explain many aspects of animal , including human , behavior . Critics of sociobiology , including Stephen Jay Gould and Richard Lewontin , claimed that sociobiology greatly overstated the degree to which complex human behaviors could be determined by genetic factors . They also claimed that the theories of <unk> often reflected their own ideological biases . Despite these criticisms , work has continued in sociobiology and the related discipline of evolutionary psychology , including work on other aspects of the altruism problem . 
 = = = Evolutionary paths and processes = = = 
 One of the most prominent debates arising during the 1970s was over the theory of punctuated equilibrium . Niles Eldredge and Stephen Jay Gould proposed that there was a pattern of fossil species that remained largely unchanged for long periods ( what they termed stasis ) , interspersed with relatively brief periods of rapid change during speciation . Improvements in sequencing methods resulted in a large increase of sequenced genomes , allowing the testing and refining of evolutionary theories using this huge amount of genome data . Comparisons between these genomes provide insights into the molecular mechanisms of speciation and adaptation . These genomic analyses have produced fundamental changes in the understanding of the evolutionary history of life , such as the proposal of the three @-@ domain system by Carl Woese . Advances in computational hardware and software allow the testing and extrapolation of increasingly advanced evolutionary models and the development of the field of systems biology . One of the results has been an exchange of ideas between theories of biological evolution and the field of computer science known as evolutionary computation , which attempts to mimic biological evolution for the purpose of developing new computer algorithms . Discoveries in biotechnology now allow the modification of entire genomes , advancing evolutionary studies to the level where future experiments may involve the creation of entirely synthetic organisms . 
 = = = Microbiology , horizontal gene transfer , and endosymbiosis = = = 
 Microbiology was largely ignored by early evolutionary theory . This was due to the paucity of morphological traits and the lack of a species concept in microbiology , particularly amongst prokaryotes . Now , evolutionary researchers are taking advantage of their improved understanding of microbial physiology and ecology , produced by the comparative ease of microbial genomics , to explore the taxonomy and evolution of these organisms . These studies are revealing unanticipated levels of diversity amongst microbes . 
 One important development in the study of microbial evolution came with the discovery in Japan in 1959 of horizontal gene transfer . This transfer of genetic material between different species of bacteria came to the attention of scientists because it played a major role in the spread of antibiotic resistance . More recently , as knowledge of genomes has continued to expand , it has been suggested that lateral transfer of genetic material has played an important role in the evolution of all organisms . These high levels of horizontal gene transfer have led to suggestions that the family tree of today 's organisms , the so @-@ called " tree of life , " is more similar to an interconnected web or net . 
 Indeed , the endosymbiotic theory for the origin of organelles sees a form of horizontal gene transfer as a critical step in the evolution of eukaryotes such as fungi , plants , and animals . The endosymbiotic theory holds that organelles within the cells of <unk> such as mitochondria and chloroplasts , had descended from independent bacteria that came to live symbiotically within other cells . It had been suggested in the late 19th century when similarities between mitochondria and bacteria were noted , but largely dismissed until it was revived and championed by Lynn Margulis in the 1960s and 1970s ; Margulis was able to make use of new evidence that such organelles had their own DNA that was inherited independently from that in the cell 's nucleus . 
 = = = Evolutionary developmental biology = = = 
 In the 1980s and 1990s , the tenets of the modern evolutionary synthesis came under increasing scrutiny . There was a renewal of structuralist themes in evolutionary biology in the work of biologists such as Brian Goodwin and Stuart Kauffman , which incorporated ideas from cybernetics and systems theory , and emphasized the self @-@ organizing processes of development as factors directing the course of evolution . The evolutionary biologist Stephen Jay Gould revived earlier ideas of heterochrony , alterations in the relative rates of developmental processes over the course of evolution , to account for the generation of novel forms , and , with the evolutionary biologist Richard Lewontin , wrote an influential paper in 1979 suggesting that a change in one biological structure , or even a structural novelty , could arise incidentally as an accidental result of selection on another structure , rather than through direct selection for that particular adaptation . They called such incidental structural changes " spandrels " after an architectural feature . Later , Gould and Elisabeth Vrba discussed the acquisition of new functions by novel structures arising in this fashion , calling them " exaptations . " 
 Molecular data regarding the mechanisms underlying development accumulated rapidly during the 1980s and 1990s . It became clear that the diversity of animal morphology was not the result of different sets of proteins regulating the development of different animals , but from changes in the deployment of a small set of proteins that were common to all animals . These proteins became known as the " developmental @-@ genetic toolkit . " Such perspectives influenced the disciplines of phylogenetics , paleontology and comparative developmental biology , and spawned the new discipline of evolutionary developmental biology also known as evo @-@ devo . 
 = = 21st century = = 
 = = = <unk> and microevolution = = = 
 One of the tenets of the modern evolutionary synthesis was that macroevolution ( the evolution of phylogenic clades at the species level and above ) was solely the result of the mechanisms of microevolution ( changes in gene frequency within populations ) operating over an extended period of time . During the last decades of the 20th century some paleontologists raised questions about whether other factors , such as punctuated equilibrium and group selection operating on the level of entire species and even higher level phylogenic clades , needed to be considered to explain patterns in evolution revealed by statistical analysis of the fossil record . Near the end of the 20th century some researchers in evolutionary developmental biology suggested that interactions between the environment and the developmental process might have been the source of some of the structural innovations seen in macroevolution , but other evo @-@ devo researchers maintained that genetic mechanisms visible at the population level are fully sufficient to explain all macroevolution . 
 = = = Epigenetic inheritance = = = 
 Epigenetics is the study of heritable changes in gene expression or cellular phenotype caused by mechanisms other than changes in the underlying DNA sequence . By the first decade of the 21st century it had become accepted that epigenetic mechanisms were a necessary part of the evolutionary origin of cellular differentiation . Although epigenetics in multicellular organisms is generally thought to be a mechanism involved in differentiation , with epigenetic patterns " reset " when organisms reproduce , there have been some observations of <unk> epigenetic inheritance . This shows that in some cases <unk> changes to an organism can be inherited and it has been suggested that such inheritance can help with adaptation to local conditions and affect evolution . Some have suggested that in certain cases a form of Lamarckian evolution may occur . 
 = = Unconventional evolutionary theory = = 
 = = = Omega Point = = = 
 Pierre <unk> de Chardin 's metaphysical Omega Point theory , found in his book The Phenomenon of Man ( 1959 ) , describes the gradual development of the universe from subatomic particles to human society , which he viewed as its final stage and goal . 
 = = = Gaia hypothesis = = = 
 <unk> de Chardin 's ideas have been seen by advocates of the Gaia hypothesis proposed by James Lovelock , which holds that the living and nonliving parts of Earth can be viewed as a complex interacting system with similarities to a single organism , as being connected to Lovelock 's ideas . The Gaia hypothesis has also been viewed by Lynn Margulis and others as an extension of endosymbiosis and <unk> . This modified hypothesis postulates that all living things have a regulatory effect on the Earth 's environment that promotes life overall . 
 = Smashed ( film ) = 
 Smashed is a 2012 American drama film directed by James Ponsoldt , written by Ponsoldt and Susan Burke , and starring Mary Elizabeth Winstead and Aaron Paul . Winstead and Paul play a married couple , Kate and Charlie Hannah , both alcoholics . After a series of embarrassing incidents caused by her drinking habit , Kate decides to get sober with the help of a coworker and a sponsor from Alcoholics Anonymous . 
 The script was partly based on Burke 's own experience of giving up alcohol at a young age , since she felt that her narrative had not yet been told on film . She and Ponsoldt wrote the script over six months , and the main roles were cast in September 2011 . The film 's US $ 500 @,@ 000 budget was financed by independent investors including Minnesota Vikings owner <unk> Wilf . It was shot in Los Angeles in October 2011 . It premiered at the 2012 Sundance Film Festival on January 22 , 2012 and was released by Sony Pictures Classics on October 12 , 2012 . The film received positive reviews , with Winstead 's performance receiving unanimous praise , and was nominated for several awards for her acting . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Kate Hannah ( Mary Elizabeth Winstead ) , an elementary school teacher , arrives at work hungover and vomits in front of her class . Asked by a student if she is pregnant , she pretends she is , then continues the lie to the school principal , Mrs. Barnes ( Megan Mullally ) . Her co @-@ worker Dave ( Nick Offerman ) reveals that he knows she has been drinking and she makes him swear not to tell anyone . 
 Attending a party with her husband Charlie ( Aaron Paul ) and his brother Owen ( Kyle Gallner ) , Kate drinks heavily . While leaving , she meets a woman who asks Kate for a ride . Kate is offered crack and the two get high together . The next morning , Kate wakes alone on the street . She finds her car and drives home , where Charlie acknowledges they both are alcoholics . They get intoxicated and have sex before Charlie passes out . Kate heads out alone to buy wine but is turned down by the cashier . She urinates on the floor because the bathroom door is locked , then steals a bottle of wine . 
 Waking up , Kate realizes she has passed out again . At work , Dave , a recovering alcoholic , invites her to an Alcoholics Anonymous ( AA ) meeting . There , she befriends Jenny ( Octavia Spencer ) , who has chosen a passion for food and cooking over alcohol . Kate decides to become sober and change her life . Dave drives Kate home , but bluntly makes an offensive comment which upsets her . When Kate and Charlie visit her estranged alcoholic mother , Rochelle ( Mary Kay Place ) , Kate mentions the AA meetings but Rochelle is skeptical ; Kate 's father left them after getting sober and now lives in another state with his " shiny new family " . 
 Kate is surprised the next day when she is thrown a baby shower by her colleagues . She reconciles with Dave , putting his comments behind them . At home , Kate is angry when it becomes clear Charlie told Owen and his friend about Kate smoking crack . That night , she rebuffs Charlie 's sexual advances . At school , Kate is questioned by a curious student as to why she is not gaining weight . She subsequently feigns a miscarriage and her students accuse her of killing her baby , for which she reprimands them . 
 Kate tells Charlie she feels she must confess to Mrs. Barnes the truth about her faked pregnancy . Charlie discourages her , warning that she will lose her job , and they begin to fight over financial issues . Kate lashes back that she would never depend on Charlie 's parents ' money and that she has struggled her whole life . Kate decides to tell Mrs. Barnes the truth and is fired . In a bar , she relapses . Jenny and Dave drive her home , where she starts an altercation with Charlie . 
 After some time , Kate speaks at an AA meeting , celebrating one year of sobriety , while Charlie gets in trouble for riding a bicycle while drunk . Kate visits Charlie and they play croquet . Charlie asks if she would move back in with him if he begins going to AA meetings . Kate says he must get sober for himself , not for her . Charlie then asks Kate to play another round , to give him a chance to redeem himself . The film ends before Kate gives her answer . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Mary Elizabeth Winstead as Kate Hannah 
 Aaron Paul as Charlie Hannah 
 Octavia Spencer as Jenny 
 Nick Offerman as Dave Davies 
 Megan Mullally as Principal Patricia Barnes 
 Mary Kay Place as Rochelle 
 Kyle Gallner as Owen Hannah 
 Bree Turner as Freda 
 Mackenzie Davis as Millie 
 Richmond Arquette as Arlo 
 Natalie Dreyfuss as Amber 
 Brad Carter as Felix 
 = = Production = = 
 Smashed was conceived by James Ponsoldt and Susan Burke after they had a conversation about things they had done while drunk . Some of the story 's details were based on Burke 's own experience ; she was an alcoholic until she was 24 years old , when she started attending Alcoholics Anonymous meetings . Burke felt that her experiences with alcoholism had not been represented on film before , and so she decided to write about a young woman deciding to become sober . Burke and Ponsoldt discussed the story , characters and tone in detail before they began to write the script . Since they lived on opposite sides of the United States , they communicated by email , dividing the script into 15 @-@ page installments which they wrote alternately . The entire writing process took six months . 
 Casting negotiations for the film 's main roles — played by Mary Elizabeth Winstead , Aaron Paul , Octavia Spencer and Nick Offerman — took place in September 2011 . To prepare for her role , Winstead talked with Burke about her recovery and attended a variety of AA meetings , where she spoke with other young women who had gotten sober . To act drunk , she used Ivana <unk> 's method as described in her book The Power of the Actor . Paul said that in preparation for the film he recorded himself " getting severely intoxicated " and studied the footage . In order to build a rapport together , Winstead and Paul got drunk together the night before filming began , which Winstead described as being " very messy " . 
 Smashed was filmed in Los Angeles over 19 days in October 2011 . It was shot on a $ 500 @,@ 000 budget , which was sourced by producers Jonathan Schwartz and Andrea Sperling of Super Crispy Entertainment from independent financiers , including Minnesota Vikings owner <unk> Wilf . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Smashed premiered at the Sundance Film Festival on January 22 , 2012 . It was also screened at the Deauville American Film Festival , the Toronto International Film Festival , the Athens Film Festival , Jameson <unk> , the Stockholm International Film Festival , and the Hamptons International Film Festival . 
 Sony Pictures Classics bought the film 's distribution rights after its premiere at Sundance and gave it a limited release on October 12 , 2012 . On its opening weekend , the film grossed $ 26 @,@ 943 from four theaters , averaging $ 6 @,@ 736 per theater and ranking number 53 at the box office . The film earned $ 376 @,@ 597 domestically from 13 weeks in release , with a widest release of 50 theaters . It earned $ 123 @,@ 128 internationally for a total gross of $ 499 @,@ 725 . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The film received generally positive reviews from critics . On Rotten Tomatoes , it holds a rating of 84 % based on 102 reviews with an average score of 6 @.@ 9 out of 10 . Metacritic gave the film a score of 71 out of 100 , based on 32 reviews . 
 Variety critic Justin Chang commended Smashed for its " sheer emotional generosity " and Ponsoldt and Burke for their optimistic and sympathetic approach to the story . Stephen Holden of The New York Times praised the film 's neutral and unsentimental tone and its " refus [ al ] to indulge a voyeuristic taste for ... sordid details " . Similarly , Empire magazine 's James White commended the film for avoiding clichés and condescension " by combining a light , frank , comic touch with real emotion and weighty , human performances by all those involved " , and gave it 4 out of 5 stars . In a review for The Hollywood Reporter , Todd McCarthy praised Smashed for its emotional intimacy and realism . 
 Winstead received critical acclaim for her role . Film critic Roger Ebert , who gave the film 3 @.@ 5 stars out of 4 , wrote that she " is sort of wonderful in this movie , worn and warm " and commended her decision not to portray the character as a victim . Rolling Stone 's Peter Travers described Winstead 's performance as " unmissable and unforgettable " , praising the comedy and intellect she simultaneously brought to the role . Mick LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle felt that Winstead was striking as Kate and speculated that Smashed would prove to be " the doorway to great things " in her career . 
 On the other hand , Michael O 'Sullivan , writing for The Washington Post gave the film 2 out of 4 stars , likening it to " a dramatic public service announcement " rather than an insightful narrative . Slant Magazine 's Chris Cabin also opined that the story was underdeveloped and that the film " offers a cheap and easy sort of inspiration in lieu of genuine inquiry " into the recovery process of alcoholics . Marjorie Baumgarten of The Austin Chronicle did not find the film to be insightful , writing that the filmmakers were " preaching to the choir " with their portrayal of alcoholism and recovery . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 When Smashed premiered at the Sundance Film Festival , Ponsoldt was nominated for the Grand Jury Prize in the Dramatic category , while producers Andrea Sperling and Jonathan Schwartz received a nomination for the Special Jury Prize for Excellence in Independent Film Producing . Winstead was nominated for the Independent Spirit Award for Best Female Lead . Octavia Spencer received a nomination for Outstanding Supporting Actress at the Black Reel Awards . For their work on the film , casting directors Avy Kaufman and Kim Coleman were nominated for a Casting Society of America Artios Award for a Low Budget Feature in the Comedy or Drama category . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 A soundtrack to accompany the film was released digitally by Lakeshore Records on October 9 , 2012 . It features a mix of the film 's original score , composed by Andy <unk> and Eric D. Johnson , as well as music from other artists heard throughout various portions of the film . 
 = USS Michigan ( BB @-@ 27 ) = 
 USS Michigan ( BB @-@ 27 ) , a South Carolina @-@ class battleship , was the second ship of the United States Navy to be named in honor of the 26th state . She was the second member of her class , the first dreadnought battleships built for the US Navy . She was laid down in December 1906 , launched in May 1908 ; sponsored by Mrs. F. W. Brooks , daughter of Secretary of the Navy Truman Newberry ; and commissioned into the fleet 4 January 1910 . Michigan and South Carolina were armed with a main battery of eight 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) guns in superfiring twin gun turrets ; they were the first dreadnoughts to feature this arrangement . 
 Michigan spent her career in the Atlantic Fleet . She frequently cruised the east coast of the United States and the Caribbean Sea , and in April 1914 took part in the United States occupation of Veracruz during the Mexican Civil War . After the United States entered World War I in April 1917 , Michigan was employed as a convoy escort and training ship for the rapidly expanding wartime navy . In January 1918 , her forward cage mast collapsed in heavy seas , killing six men . In 1919 , she ferried soldiers back from Europe . The ship conducted training cruises in 1920 and 1921 , but her career was cut short by the Washington Naval Treaty signed in February 1922 , which mandated the disposal of Michigan and South Carolina . Michigan was decommissioned in February 1923 and broken up for scrap the following year . 
 = = Design = = 
 Michigan was 452 ft 9 in ( 138 m ) long overall and had a beam of 80 ft 3 in ( 24 m ) and a draft of 24 ft 6 in ( 7 m ) . She displaced 16 @,@ 000 long tons ( 16 @,@ 257 t ) as designed and up to 17 @,@ 617 long tons ( 17 @,@ 900 t ) at full combat load . The ship was powered by two @-@ shaft vertical triple @-@ expansion engines rated at 16 @,@ 500 ihp ( 12 @,@ 304 kW ) and twelve coal @-@ fired Babcock & Wilcox boilers , generating a top speed of 18 @.@ 5 kn ( 34 km / h ; 21 mph ) . The ship had a cruising range of 5 @,@ 000 nmi ( 9 @,@ 260 km ; 5 @,@ 754 mi ) at a speed of 10 kn ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . She had a crew of 869 officers and men . 
 The ship was armed with a main battery of eight 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) / 45 caliber Mark 5 guns in four twin gun turrets on the centerline , which were placed in two superfiring pairs forward and aft . The secondary battery consisted of twenty @-@ two 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) / 50 guns mounted in casemates along the side of the hull . As was standard for capital ships of the period , she carried a pair of 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) torpedo tubes , submerged in her hull on the broadside . The main armored belt was 12 in ( 305 mm ) thick over the magazines , 10 in ( 254 mm ) over the machinery spaces , and 8 in ( 203 mm ) elsewhere . The armored deck was 1 @.@ 5 to 2 @.@ 5 in ( 38 to 64 mm ) thick . The gun turrets had 12 inch thick faces , while the supporting barbettes had 10 inch thick armor plating . Ten inch thick armor also protected the casemate guns . The conning tower had 12 inch thick sides . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Michigan was laid down on 17 December 1906 at the New York Shipbuilding Corporation . Her completed hull was launched on 26 May 1908 ; she was christened after the 26th state by Mrs. F. W. Brooks , daughter of Secretary of the Navy Truman Newberry . Fitting out work was completed by 4 January 1910 , when she was commissioned into the US Navy . After entering service , she was assigned to the Atlantic Fleet . She then began a shakedown cruise down to the Caribbean Sea that lasted until 7 June . Michigan joined training maneuvers off New England beginning on 29 July . A training cruise to Europe followed ; she departed Boston , Massachusetts on 2 November and stops included Portland in the United Kingdom and Cherbourg , France . She arrived in the latter port on 8 December and remained there until the 30th , when she left for the Caribbean . The ship reached Guantanamo Bay , Cuba on 10 January 1911 and continued on to Norfolk , arriving four days later . During this period , future naval aviation pioneer John Henry Towers served aboard the ship as a spotter for the main guns . The long range of the guns , which could shoot further than the horizon , convinced Towers of the need for spotter aircraft . 
 The ship then cruised the east coast for most of the next two years . On 15 November 1912 , she departed for a longer cruise to the Gulf of Mexico , with stops in Pensacola , Florida , New Orleans , Louisiana , and Galveston , Texas on the way . She then continued further south to Veracruz , Mexico , where she arrived on 12 December . Michigan remained there for two days before beginning the voyage home ; she reached Hampton Roads on 20 December . Patrols off the east coast resumed for the first half of 1913 . On 6 July , she steamed out of Quincy , Massachusetts for another voyage to Mexican waters ; this trip was prompted by the Mexican Civil War , which threatened American interests in the country . She arrived off Tampico on 15 July and thereafter cruised the Mexican coast until 13 January 1914 , when she departed for New York City , arriving seven days later . She then transferred back to Norfolk . 
 On 14 February , she left the port for a short voyage to Guacanayabo Bay , Cuba , and was back in Hampton Roads by 19 March . Michigan began a third cruise to Mexico on 16 April to support the United States occupation of Veracruz . She reached the city on 22 April and landed a battalion of Marines as part of the occupation force . The ship then patrolled the coast before departing for the United States on 20 June . She reached the Delaware Capes six days later . The normal peacetime routine of cruises off the east coast continued for the next three years . In December 1914 , the ship 's crew experimented with fire control directors to aid in gunlaying ; the experimental directors produced significantly improved results in gunnery tests conducted in early 1915 . In 1916 , one of her forward 12 @-@ inch guns exploded during gunnery training . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 On 6 April 1917 , the United States declared war on Germany over its unrestricted submarine warfare campaign . Due to her slow speed , Michigan was assigned to Battleship Force 2 that day , and was tasked with training naval recruits and escorting convoys . As part of the training mission , she participated in fleet maneuvers and gunnery exercises . On 15 January 1918 , Michigan was cruising off Cape Hatteras on a training exercise on 15 January 1918 when a heavy gale and rough seas knocked over the forward cage mast . The ship had rolled to port in the heavy seas before rolling sharply back to starboard . The rapid change in direction caused the mast to snap at its narrowest point , which had been damaged in the 1916 barrel explosion and patched over . The accident killed six men and injured another thirteen . Michigan steamed to Norfolk and transferred the injured men to the hospital ship Solace . She then went to the Philadelphia Navy Yard for repairs , arriving on 22 January . 
 By early April , Michigan was back in service ; for the next several months , she primarily trained gunners in the Chesapeake Bay . While on a convoy escort that had left the United States on 30 September , the ship 's port screw fell off . She was forced to leave the convoy on 8 October and return to port for repairs . She was out of service for the rest of the war . In November 1918 , Germany signed the Armistice that ended the fighting in Europe . Michigan was assigned to the Cruiser and Transport Force in late December 1918 to ferry American soldiers back from Europe . She made two round trips in 1919 during the operation , the first from 18 January to 3 March , and the second from 18 March to 16 April . She brought back 1 @,@ 062 men between the two voyages . 
 = = = Post @-@ war period = = = 
 In May , Michigan was sent to Philadelphia for an overhaul that lasted through June . She thereafter returned to her peacetime training routine . On 6 August , she was reduced to limited commission and stationed at the Philadelphia Navy Yard . On 19 May 1920 , she steamed to Annapolis to pick up a contingent of midshipmen for a major training cruise . After departing Annapolis , the ship steamed south and transited the Panama Canal before proceeding to Honolulu , Hawaii , where she arrived on 3 July . Michigan visited several naval bases on the west coast of the United States through the summer , before returning to Annapolis on 2 September . Three days later , she was back in Philadelphia , where she was temporarily decommissioned . 
 Michigan was reactivated in 1921 for another cruise to the Caribbean , departing on 4 April . She returned to Philadelphia on 23 April ; shortly thereafter , the ship became embroiled in a minor scandal . The ship 's commanding officer at the time , Clark Daniel Stearns , instituted a series of sailors ' committees on 3 May to ease tensions between officers and the crew . The commanders of the Atlantic Fleet and Michigan 's squadron decided that the committees were a threat to discipline and evidence of Marxist influences . They contacted the Edwin Denby , then the Secretary of the Navy , who relieved Stearns of command . On 28 May , she picked up another group of midshipmen for another training cruise . This voyage took the ship to Europe , with stops in a number of ports , including Christiana , Norway , Lisbon , Portugal , and Gibraltar . She returned to Hampton Roads via Guantanamo Bay on 22 August . 
 In the years immediately following the end of the Great War , the United States , Britain , and Japan all launched huge naval construction programs . All three countries decided that a new naval arms race would be ill @-@ advised , and so convened the Washington Naval Conference to discuss arms limitations , which produced the Washington Naval Treaty , signed in February 1922 . Under the terms of Article II of the treaty , Michigan and her sister South Carolina were to be scrapped . Michigan put to sea for the last time on 31 August , bound for the breaker 's yard in Philadelphia . She arrived there on 1 September and was decommissioned on 11 February 1923 . She was stricken from the Naval Vessel Register on 10 November and broken up for scrap the following year . 
 = Guillermo Endara = 
 Guillermo David Endara <unk> ( May 12 , 1936 – September 28 , 2009 ) was President of Panama from 1989 to 1994 . Raised in a family allied to Panameñista Party founder Arnulfo Arias , Endara attended school in exile in the United States and Argentina following Arias 's removal from power . Endara later received a law degree in Panama . He subsequently served as a member of Panama 's National Assembly , and briefly as a government minister before heading into exile again following Arias ' third overthrow . 
 After Arias ' death in 1988 , Endara became a leading opponent of the Manuel Noriega military dictatorship , heading the opposition coalition in the 1989 presidential election . Though his coalition was judged by international observers as having defeated pro @-@ Noriega candidate Carlos Duque , the results were annulled by the government , and Endara and his running mates were attacked in the streets by the paramilitary Dignity Battalions . The assaults received widespread coverage in international media , helping to build support within the U.S. for military action against Noriega . Seven months later , the United States invaded Panama , and swore in Endara as the new president on the first night of the invasion on a U.S. military base . 
 During his presidency , Endara abolished the Panamanian military and replaced it with a national police force . Endara 's term saw steady economic growth and a return of democratic institutions , but also high unemployment rates . His administration was marked by internal fighting and corruption scandals , and his popularity plummeted . He was succeeded by opposition candidate Ernesto Pérez Balladares on September 1 , 1994 . 
 Endara ran for office again in 2004 and 2009 , but lost to Democratic Revolutionary Party party candidate Martin Torrijos and to independent candidate Ricardo Martinelli . He died of a heart attack on September 28 , 2009 , several months after his last campaign . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Endara was born in 1936 in Panama City , Panama . His father , Guillermo Endara <unk> , was an ally of Authentic Panameñista Party founder Arnulfo Arias , and the family went into exile after Arias was overthrown in a 1941 coup . Endara went to school in Argentina and to Black @-@ Foxe Military Institute in Los Angeles in the United States , where he was described as being a " brilliant student " . He later attended the University of Panama Law School , where he graduated first in his class , and New York University . 
 He returned to Panama in 1963 to practice law , and specialized in labor law . He co @-@ founded the firm of Solis , Endara , Delgado and Guevara , one of Panama 's most successful law firms . He won his first public office in 1964 , but declined to take it due to evidence of voter fraud in the election . 
 Endara later served two terms in the National Assembly . In 1968 , Endara served as minister of planning and economic policy during Arias 's very brief third term as president . When Arias was overthrown again in October 1968 , Endara went underground , was jailed briefly in 1971 , and joined Arias in exile until 1977 . Endara remained politically engaged and when Arias died in 1988 , Endara became a leading opposition figure . 
 = = Opposition to Noriega = = 
 In the presidential election of 1989 , Endara ran as the candidate of the Democratic Alliance of Civic Opposition ( ADOC ) , a coalition of parties opposed to military ruler Manuel Noriega . His rival was Carlos Duque , a candidate selected by Noriega . The US government contributed $ 10 million to Panamanian opposition campaigns , though it was unknown whether Endara received any of this money . 
 To safeguard against planned vote @-@ rigging by Noriega , ADOC organized a count of results from the country 's election precincts before they were sent to the district centers . It showed Endara <unk> Duque by a nearly 3 @-@ to @-@ 1 margin . Noriega 's cronies took phony tally sheets to the district centers , but by this time the opposition 's count was already out . International observers led by former US President Jimmy Carter and a separate group of observers appointed by US President George H.W. Bush also agreed that Endara had won a decisive victory . Noriega had planned to declare Duque the winner regardless of the actual results , but Duque refused to go along . Regardless , Noriega annulled the results before counting was complete due to " foreign interference . " 
 The next day , Endara and his running mates , Ricardo Arias Calderón and Guillermo Ford , led a contingent of a thousand supporters to protest the annulment of the elections and urge that the ADOC candidates be recognized as the winners . The protest was attacked by a detachment of Dignity Battalions , a paramilitary group supporting Noriega , and the three candidates were badly beaten . Endara was struck with an iron club , leaving a gash on his head . He was briefly hospitalized and received eight stitches . Images of the attacks on Endara and Ford were carried by media around the world , and were credited with building public support in the US for the invasion that would soon follow . 
 = = Presidency = = 
 The US armed forces overthrew Noriega 's government during the US invasion of Panama in December 1989 . Endara had by this time taken refuge in the military bases under US control . American officials told Noriega that if he did not accept the presidency , the only alternative would be an undisguised American occupation . Though Endara had opposed US military action during his campaign , he accepted the presidency , stating later that , " morally , patriotically , <unk> I had no other choice " . He was certified the winner of the election and inaugurated at Fort Clayton on December 20 , 1989 . Arias was inaugurated as first vice president , and Ford as second vice president . Unlike previous rulers Omar Torrijos and Noriega , Endara appointed only whites to ministerial positions , excluding Panama 's large mestizo population and other ethnicities . 
 Seen as a restorer of democracy , Endara was later noted for having defended freedom of speech and democratic institutions . He also oversaw a reform of the Panamanian Defense Forces , purging Noriega loyalists , asserting the primacy of the civilian government , and returning the group from military to a national police force . In October 1994 , the National Assembly passed an amendment abolishing the military at Endara 's urging , becoming the second Latin American country to do so . 
 In early 1991 , the ADOC coalition began to unravel as Endara , Arias , and Ford publicly criticized one another . On April 8 , accusing Arias 's Christian Democratic Party of not rallying to his support during an impeachment vote , Endara dismissed Arias from the cabinet . Arias resigned from the vice presidency on December 17 , 1992 , stating at a news conference that Endara 's government " does not listen to the people , nor does it have the courage to make changes " . Endara responded that Arias 's resignation was " demagoguery " and " merely starting his 1994 political campaign ahead of time " . 
 Endara 's term in office saw marked economic recovery from the nation 's years of military rule . During his presidency , Panama had an average annual economic growth of 8 % . However , unemployment also rose near 19 % . In February 1990 , the overweight Endara began a hunger strike in the Metropolitan Cathedral to call attention to the nation 's poverty and to pressure US President George H. W. Bush to dispense previously pledged American aid . In the course of the strike , he lost more than thirty of his two hundred and sixty pounds . 
 By May 1992 , Endara 's public approval rating had fallen from its initial 70 % to only 10 % . The Associated Press later described Endara 's administration as being " tarnished by scandal " . Among other financial scandals , Endara 's wife Ana Mae Diaz was accused of reselling food that had been donated by Italy on the streets of Panama City . In 1992 , Diaz won $ 125 @,@ 000 in the national lottery and indicated that she intended to keep the money rather than donating it ; the incident was also cited as an example of the Endara 's administration 's lack of concern for Panama 's poor . 
 = = Later career = = 
 In 2004 , Endara broke with the Arnulfista party over differences of opinion with the party 's leader , Panamanian president Mireya Moscoso , and accused the party of corruption . He ran in the 2004 presidential election as the candidate of the Solidarity Party , on a platform of reducing crime and government corruption . His primary rival was Democratic Revolutionary Party ( PRD ) candidate Martín Torrijos , son of the former military dictator Omar Torrijos . Martín Torrijos ran on a platform of strengthening democracy and negotiating a free trade agreement with the US , and was supported by popular musician and politician Ruben Blades . Endara finished second , receiving 31 % of the vote to Torrijos ' 47 % . 
 He later founded his own political party , the Moral Vanguard of the Fatherland , and in 2009 was again a candidate for the Panamanian general elections . Ricardo Martinelli of the Democratic Change party won the election with 61 % of the vote , while PRD candidate Balbina Herrera won 37 % . Endara placed a distant third , with 2 % of the vote . 
 Just a few months later , on September 28 , 2009 , Endara died at the age 73 in his apartment in Panama City , of a heart attack while preparing dinner . He was given a state funeral on September 30 attended by President Martinelli as well as former presidents Perez Balladares , Moscoso , and Torrijos . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Endara married his first wife Marcela , in 1961 ; the couple had one daughter , <unk> , and three grandchildren , Javier , Marcela Victoria and Jacob . Marcela died of a heart attack in 1989 while Endara was hospitalized from the attack by the Dignity Brigades . He remarried on June 11 , 1990 , at the age of 54 , to Ana Mae Diaz Chen , a 22 @-@ year @-@ old law student of Chinese origin . Endara was reportedly so happy in the marriage that he would even leave cabinet meetings for " a quick cuddle " . The marriage received widespread coverage and mockery in the Panamanian press , including a new nickname for Endara , El Gordo Feliz ( " Happy Fatty " ) . 
 = When Love Was Blind = 
 When Love Was Blind is a 1911 American silent short drama film produced by the Thanhouser Company . The film focuses on young blind woman , May Read , who is saved from her burning home by Frank Larson . In the act of saving her , Frank is disfigured , but the two fall and love , marry and have a child . Two years later , the family physician offers to restore May 's sight through a surgery . Frank consents despite his fears that May will not love him if she gazes upon his disfigured face . The surgery is a success and the doctor tells May not to remove the bandages . May ignores this warning and is permanently blinded after attempting to gaze at her husband , but she is content knowing her baby is beautiful . Directed by Lucius J. Henderson and starred Lucille Younge , the film was a critical success . The film is presumed lost . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The film is focuses on May Read , the daughter of a wealthy widow , who was blinded by an unknown affliction when she was a child . While her mother is away , a fire starts in the house and May is left in the blaze while the servants flee . Frank Larson makes his way into the burning house and brings May out to the safety of the street , but doing so has disfigured him for life . May and Frank fall in love and the couple are married with the blessing of May 's mother . 
 Two years pass and couple have their first child . Their family physician offers to perform an operation to restore May 's sight . Despite Frank 's worries that his wife will not love him if she should see his scarred face , Frank consents to the operation . The operation is a success and the doctor warns May not to remove the bandages as she will lose her sight again . May 's desire to see her child is so strong that she removes the bandages and gazes upon her child . Upon trying to gaze upon her husband , who is standing in strong light , May is permanently blinded . The film concludes with May being content with her blindness and knowing that her baby is as beautiful . 
 = = Production = = 
 Little is known about the production of the work . The film was shot at the Thanhouser Studio in New Rochelle , New York under the direction of Lucius J. Henderson and starred Lucille Younge as May Read . A surviving film still shows the " disfigured husband " , giving the possibility of identifying the actor who played Frank Larson . The film is presumed lost because it is not known to be held in any archive or by any collector . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The single reel film , approximately 960 feet long , was released on January 24 , 1911 . Reviews for the film from critics and industry publications were positive . The Billboard gave the film a positive review for its moving story of true love shown by the actors playing the blind wife and facially disfigured husband . The reviewer also noted that the photography was up to the usual high standard of Thanhouser releases . The Moving Picture World opened with the declaration that , " When this picture is past , the wonder will linger long in the memory whether the wife would have loved her husband just the same if she had seen him in the short time when her affliction was alleviated . And it must be admitted that the producers have added materially to the dramatic interest of the film by leaving that question unanswered . " The New York Dramatic Mirror review praised the film for its photography , setting and acting , but highlighted technical inconsistencies in the progression of the fire and the overly drawn out struggle of the father in the smoke . Walton of The Moving Picture News also praised the film , stating that " The situations are well handled ; the acting of the principals shows the true grip of the characters . The work of this firm of late has been not only artistic but throbbing with that clean , human life which is winning high praise . " In local papers , the film was reviewed positively by theater advertisements , owing to the sentimental nature of the film and the technical execution of the fire scene . 
 = Targeted Killing in International Law = 
 Targeted Killing in International Law is a book about the legality of targeted killing , written by Nils Melzer . It was first published by Oxford University Press in May 2008 . The book explores the history of targeted killing as a government strategy by multiple countries including the United States , the United Kingdom , Israel , Switzerland and Germany ; for both military and law enforcement purposes . Melzer argues that directly after the September 11 attacks in the United States , perceptions of the tactic became more positive . 
 Melzer holds a PhD degree in law from University of Zürich . His dissertation dealt with targeted killing and the book updates and revises that work . He had earlier written on the subject for Yearbook of Humanitarian International Law in 2006 . Melzer serves as a legal advisor for the International Committee of the Red Cross ( ICRC ) . He has lectured at the Master @-@ level at the Geneva Academy of International Humanitarian Law and Human Rights . 
 The book received a favorable reception and was a joint winner of the 2009 Paul Guggenheim Prize in International Law given by the Geneva Graduate Institute . It garnered positive reviews in publications including the International Criminal Justice Review , the European Journal of International Law , the Leiden Journal of International Law , the Australian Yearbook of International Law , the American Journal of International Law , and in the book Legislating the War on Terror : An Agenda for Reform . 
 = = Background = = 
 Nils Melzer graduated summa cum laude from the University of Zürich with a PhD degree in law . Melzer worked for the District Court of <unk> , Zürich , first as a Judicial Clerk and then as Judicial Secretary . Melzer serves as a legal advisor for the International Committee of the Red Cross ( ICRC ) . He lectured at the Master @-@ level at the Geneva Academy of International Humanitarian Law and Human Rights . 
 Prior to the book , Melzer published " Targeted Killing or Less Harmful Means ? – Israel 's High Court Judgment on Targeted Killing and the <unk> Function of Military Necessity " in the Yearbook of Humanitarian International Law in 2006 , and a dissertation in 2007 . Melzer also authored " Interpretive Guidance on the Notion of Direct Participation in Hostilities under International Humanitarian Law " , published in 2009 by ICRC . Melzer 's research was utilized in Section IX of the ICRC 's Interpretive Guidance on the Notion of Direct Participation in Hostilities under International Humanitarian Law . 
 Targeted Killing in International Law is part of the series , Oxford Monographs in International Law . The hardback was first published by Oxford University Press on 29 May 2008 , and subsequently in the United States by Oxford University Press , USA in July 2008 . In January 2009 , the work was published online at Oxford Scholarship Online . On 10 September 2009 , Oxford University Press released a paperback in the UK . Oxford University Press , USA released a paperback on 9 November 2009 . 
 = = Content summary = = 
 Nils Melzer presents an historical , legal and moral examination of targeted killing . The author observes that after September 11 , the Western world grew more supportive of targeted killing than ever before . The book recounts in depth how state @-@ sanctioned targeted killing is perceived in other countries . He defines targeted killing as the premeditated selection of an individual person not yet in custody for elimination by force . Melzer analyzes all areas of the topic . 
 The book discusses related legal practices of countries including the United States , the United Kingdom , Israel , Switzerland and Germany . Israel was the first country to publicly acknowledge the practice — in November 2000 . The author connects this policy initiative with Israel 's ongoing conflict with Palestinian militants . Melzer argues that this policy was controversial — the issue came before the Israeli Supreme Court , where the matter was not decided for almost five years . The court 's judgment was issued on 14 December 2006 , but neither forbade nor endorsed the practice . Melzer asserts that it left multiple important legal <unk> unresolved . Its significance was that it dealt not with a single incident , but rather with the nature of the policy itself and set forth conditions for examining the legality of future episodes . 
 Melzer claims that during the Vietnam War the Central Intelligence Agency used targeted killings as part of the Phoenix Program , attempting to eliminate Vietcong sympathizers . Melzer cites a source who contends that some 40 @,@ 000 individuals may have been killed under this program . The author sees the air raids on Muammar Gaddafi in the 1986 bombing of Libya in response to the Lockerbie bombing as another instance . He argues that after September 11 , 2001 , the policy became more acceptable in the U.S. to adopt targeted killings as a tactic . 
 According to Melzer , after the September 11 attacks , U.S. strategists began to support targeted killings and accepted advice from Israel on how to use such tactics to deal with suicide bombers . Melzer describes an abrupt change where military members were ordered to " shoot to kill " , replacing prior orders to incapacitate . The author asserts that in at least one case in 2005 , a person was killed because they were thought to be a terrorist holding a bomb . It was later revealed that this person suffered from mental illness and may have had a medical history of bipolar disorder . The shooting was determined to be justifiable under the law and criminal charges were not filed . 
 Melzer discusses the shift in perceptions towards acceptance by United Kingdom law enforcement after September 11 . The Metropolitan Police officially endorsed a " shoot to kill " strategy directly after the attack . Melzer finds this policy shift incongruous , due to the fact that targeted killing had never before been acceptable as police strategy . Prior to the attack , targeted killing was a criminal offense . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Targeted Killing in International Law was a joint @-@ winner of the 2009 Paul Guggenheim Prize in International Law given by the Geneva Graduate Institute . In the chapter " Targeted Killing in U.S. Counterterrorism Strategy and Law " authored by Kenneth Anderson as a contributor to the book Legislating the War on Terror : An Agenda for Reform , he characterizes Melzer 's book as an admirable opus on the subject . Anderson describes the book in more depth in a footnote , calling it a complete and thorough academic reference book . He goes on to criticize the perspective of the book for describing and then rejecting objections by the United States to arguments addressed in the work . Anderson writes that the book is both one scholars must have to educate themselves on the subject , while simultaneously lamenting its advocacy for U.S. legal positions . Anderson observes the author covers all facets of targeted killing in the book . 
 In a review of the book for the journal International Criminal Justice Review , Robert M. Worley of Penn State Altoona comments favorably on the comprehensive nature of Melzer 's research and his descriptions of the differences of the practice of targeted killing in varying countries . Worley comments on the relevance of the book to scholars in various fields , including history , law , law enforcement , and terrorism analysis . Worley concludes his review by recommending the book for those with a fascination in researching criminal justice or the law . William Abresch comments favorably on Targeted Killing in International Law , in a review for the European Journal of International Law . He writes that the book is an important addition to the field of scholarship regarding how international law governs the practice of targeted killing . Abresch calls the author 's writing style logical , and praises the book 's organizational structure including its separate sections on use of targeted in war contrasted with use by police . 
 A review of the book in the Leiden Journal of International Law by <unk> Hoffmann recommends the work to multiple potential readers , including those who engage in targeting killing , academics , and students . Hoffmann calls it a well @-@ researched monograph and helpful reference work on the subject . The review places the book within the context of addressing legal issues inherent in debating the murky concept of targeted killing . Hoffmann states the book furthers prior attempts to come to a resolution on the question of the practice 's legality . Helen Durhan praises the writing quality of Melzer 's work , in a review for the Australian Yearbook of International Law . Durhan writes the work is organized in an easily readable format and covers the topic with neutrality . She goes on to call the book a work representing the need for concerned discussion prior to implementing any policy involved in eliminating people . Of the author 's focus throughout the work , Durhan observes that the author handles discussion of the legality of targeted killing in a clear and precise manner . The review concludes Melzer 's thorough analysis goes a long way towards furthering scholars ' impressions of legal issues surrounding when it is permitted for sovereign governments to kill people . 
 Writing in a review for the American Journal of International Law , Michael N. Schmitt observes that the arguments put forth in the book by Melzer are indeed accurate . Schmitt writes that Melzer correctly argues that in the police model sequential events within the legal system lead to precedent for engaging in targeted killing . Schmitt describes the book as an excellent overview of many aspects of law regarding targeted killing . Schmitt concludes , " Targeted Killing in International Law is not just a major contribution to the legal literature , it has justifiably emerged as the premier work on the subject . " 
 = Meteorological history of Hurricane Mitch = 
 Hurricane Mitch 's meteorological history began with its origins over Africa as a tropical wave and lasted until its dissipation as an extratropical cyclone north of the United Kingdom . Tropical Depression Thirteen formed on October 22 , 1998 , over the southwestern Caribbean Sea from a tropical wave that exited Africa on October 10 . It executed a small loop , and while doing so intensified into Tropical Storm Mitch . A weakness in a ridge allowed the storm to track slowly to the north . After becoming disorganized due to wind shear from a nearby upper @-@ level low , Mitch quickly intensified in response to improving conditions which included warm waters and good outflow . It became a hurricane on October 24 and developed an eye . After turning to the west , Mitch rapidly intensified , first into a major hurricane on October 25 and then into a Category 5 on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale the next day . 
 At peak intensity , Mitch maintained maximum sustained winds of 180 mph ( 285 km / h ) while off the northern coast of Honduras . Hurricane Hunters reported a minimum barometric pressure of 905 mbar ( 26 @.@ 7 inHg ) , which at the time was the lowest in the month of October and tied for the fourth lowest for any Atlantic hurricane . Initially , the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) and various tropical cyclone forecast models anticipated a turn to the north , threatening the Yucatán Peninsula . Instead , Mitch turned to the south due to a ridge that was not observed while the storm was active . Land interaction imparted weakening , and the hurricane made landfall on Honduras on October 29 with winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . Turning westward , Mitch slowly weakened over land and maintained deep convection over adjacent waters . After moving across mountainous terrain in Central America , the surface circulation of Mitch dissipated on November 1 . The next day , the remnants reached the Gulf of Mexico and reorganized into a tropical storm on November 3 . Mitch accelerated to the northeast ahead of a cold front , moving across the Yucatán Peninsula before striking southwestern Florida on November 5 . Shortly thereafter , the storm became an extratropical cyclone , which was tracked by the NHC until November 9 . 
 = = Origins = = 
 The origin of Hurricane Mitch can be traced to a tropical wave – an elongated area of low air pressure moving from east to west – that moved through western Africa on October 8 , as evidenced by radiosonde data . On October 10 , the wave exited the coast , and it continued generally westward without development due to strong wind shear . The wave reached the eastern Caribbean Sea on October 18 , and over the subsequent few days developed an organizing area of convection , or thunderstorms . The system organized enough to prompt a Hurricane Hunters investigation , which observed a small circulation center and flight @-@ level tropical storm force winds . As a result , the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) estimated the system had developed into a tropical cyclone by 0000 UTC on October 22 , located 415 mi ( 665 km ) south of Kingston , Jamaica . 
 Upon being classified , Tropical Depression Thirteen was already near tropical storm status , with established outflow . At the time , the circulation was on the northern periphery of the convection . Initially , an upper @-@ level low to the north was shearing the convection , but steady intensification was expected due to generally favorable conditions , with an anticyclone expected to develop aloft . The depression remained nearly stationary in the southwestern Caribbean Sea , eventually executing a small loop about 260 mi ( 420 km ) east of San Andrés island . The convective structure initially was described as " amorphous " , with two rainbands extending from the center . Late on October 22 , the Hurricane Hunters observed flight @-@ level winds of 59 mph ( 95 km / h ) , which indicated surface winds of at least tropical storm @-@ force . Based on the reading , the NHC upgraded the depression to Tropical Storm Mitch . 
 = = Intensification = = 
 When Mitch was upgraded to tropical storm status , it had a small radius of maximum winds , only 9 mi ( 14 km ) at flight @-@ level . A trough moving through the eastern United States weakened a ridge to the north , allowing the storm to move slowly northward . Additional ridging was forecast to build behind the trough , which would turn Mitch to the west to an area near the Yucatán Channel in five days . Significant intensification was initially hampered by the upper @-@ level low to the northwest generating wind shear over Mitch . As a result , the convection weakened on October 23 , despite an otherwise improving cloud pattern . Tropical cyclone forecast models anticipated significant strengthening to winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) once an anticyclone aloft became established , although the NHC noted that " it [ was ] difficult to visualize such intensification with the present poorly defined pattern observed on satellite , and knowing that the global models tend to get rid of westerlies too fast . " After about 12 hours of being disorganized , the thunderstorms reformed early on October 24 , after the upper @-@ level low weakened and shear diminished . An eye quickly formed in the center of the convection . Based on Hurricane Hunter reports of 105 mph ( 169 km / h ) flight @-@ level winds , the NHC upgraded Mitch to hurricane status on October 24 . By that time , the storm was moving slowly to the north , located about 295 mi ( 475 km ) south of Kingston . 
 Shortly after becoming a hurricane , Mitch began undergoing rapid deepening . It developed a strong central dense overcast , fueled by low shear and warm water temperatures . The eye became better organized , and after the anticyclone became established , the hurricane developed well @-@ defined outflow in all directions . Early on October 25 , Mitch intensified into a major hurricane , which is a Category 3 on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . By that time , the hurricane had begun turning to the west , due to an intensifying ridge over the Gulf of Mexico . With what the NHC described as an " ideal environment for strengthening " , Mitch continued rapidly intensifying . In a 24 ‑ hour period ending late on October 25 , the barometric pressure fell 52 mbar ( 1 @.@ 5 inHg ) to 924 mbar ( 27 @.@ 3 inHg ) . While it was strengthening , Mitch made its closest point of approach to Jamaica , passing about 230 mi ( 370 km ) west @-@ southwest of the island . The NHC noted the potential for weak steering currents when the hurricane reached the western Caribbean , and the agency anticipated a general northward turn toward the Yucatán Peninsula . 
 The NHC estimated that Mitch intensified into a Category 5 hurricane at 1200 UTC on October 26 . At 1900 UTC that day , the Hurricane Hunters observed flight @-@ level winds of 193 mph ( 311 km / h ) in the hurricane 's northeastern quadrant , suggesting peak maximum sustained winds of 180 mph ( 285 km / h ) . Around the same time , a dropsonde recorded a minimum pressure of 905 mbar ( 26 @.@ 7 inHg ) . At the time , Mitch was considered the fourth most intense Atlantic hurricane , tied with Hurricane Camille in 1969 , and the strongest in the month of October , surpassing Hurricane Hattie in 1961 . Both records were surpassed by subsequent hurricanes . At the time , the hurricane was located about 100 mi ( 160 km ) off the north coast of Honduras . Its tropical storm force winds extended 175 mi ( 280 km ) from the center , and hurricane force winds reached 60 mi ( 95 km ) from the center . 
 = = Central America landfall = = 
 While Mitch was at peak intensity , the NHC noted that it was " not yet clear which country or countries in the northwest Caribbean are most threatened . " By late on October 26 , the Navy Operational Global Atmospheric Prediction System ( NOGAPS ) had forecast the hurricane to continue to the west and strike Belize , while the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory ( GFDL ) computer model anticipated a general movement to the north in the western Caribbean . Mitch maintained peak winds for about 12 hours , and around that time it moved over Swan Island offshore Honduras . The motion became more westward , despite continued predictions for a northerly turn . The convection around the eye became ragged on October 27 . Gradual weakening occurred due to the southern half of the circulation moving across Honduras , which cut off inflow from the south . The eye became less distinct , and early on October 28 , Mitch weakened below Category 5 status . 
 Due to a weak mid @-@ level anticyclone over the Gulf of Mexico that was not observed operationally , Mitch began a slow southerly motion on October 27 , passing very near Guanaja . The NHC had anticipated the movement to be part of a small loop in the Gulf of Honduras , although the agency noted continued uncertainty . Steadily deteriorating , Mitch weakened below major hurricane intensity late on October 28 , due to land interaction , upwelling , and possibly an eyewall replacement cycle . On October 29 , the hurricane made landfall in Honduras , east of La Ceiba , with winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . Despite being over land , the NHC continued to predict a turn to the north , which would allow for restrengthening . 
 Late on October 29 , Mitch weakened to tropical storm status . It moved slowly across Honduras , turning to the west . The large circulation dropped heavy rainfall throughout Central America , particularly in Honduras and Nicaragua , causing widespread flooding . While over land , Mitch initially maintained an area of deep convection , which allowed it to maintain tropical storm force winds . On October 31 , the circulation became poorly defined while moving over increasingly mountainous terrain ; however , the strongest convection persisted over the adjacent Pacific Ocean , and the NHC noted the potential for Mitch to become a Pacific tropical cyclone . Later that day , Mitch weakened into a tropical depression near the border of Guatemala and Honduras . An approaching trough weakened the ridge in the western Gulf of Mexico , allowing Mitch to make the long @-@ intended turn to the northwest . Convection gradually diminished , and the surface circulation of Mitch dissipated on November 1 near the border of Mexico and Guatemala . 
 = = Regeneration and extratropical transition = = 
 Although the surface low pressure center dissipated , the remnants of Mitch maintained a circulation aloft that reached the Bay of Campeche on November 2 . That day , the system began to trigger convection once again . Late on November 3 , the Hurricane Hunters observed a well @-@ defined low @-@ level center and flight @-@ level winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) . On that basis , the NHC began reissuing advisories on Mitch about 55 mi ( 90 km ) west @-@ southwest of Campeche , Campeche on the Yucatán Peninsula . Upon reforming , Mitch was moving to the east @-@ northeast , influenced by an approaching cold front . Early on November 4 , Mitch made landfall just north of Campeche with winds of about 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) , and it quickly weakened into a tropical depression while crossing the Yucatán Peninsula . 
 While Mitch was over eastern Mexico , it had a rainband of deep convection in the eastern periphery . With moderately warm waters and the potential for baroclinity , re @-@ intensification was expected . After emerging into the Gulf of Mexico for a second time on November 4 , Mitch restrengthened into a tropical storm , although it was not a purely tropical cyclone ; convection was minimal near the core , and the strongest winds were over 230 mi ( 370 km ) from the center . Mitch accelerated toward the coast of Florida as it interacted with the approaching cold front . On November 5 , the circulation became elongated , and the NHC commented that " if [ it ] were not the remnants of Mitch , [ they ] would probably not be calling [ it ] a tropical cyclone . " The storm strengthened to reach winds of 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) before making a final landfall in southwestern Florida near Naples . It quickly crossed the state , producing five tornadoes and tropical storm @-@ force winds , and the storm emerged into the southwestern Atlantic Ocean . Late on November 5 , a Hurricane Hunters flight could not locate a well @-@ defined center associated with Mitch , instead observing an elongated circulation embedded in the cold front . Based on the observations , the NHC declared Mitch as an extratropical cyclone . 
 The extratropical remnants of Mitch continued quickly to the northeast . On November 6 , they passed north of Bermuda , and the following day intensified slightly to winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) . By November 9 , the remnants passed west of the British Isles , and were last monitored by the NHC later that day . 
 = Ernest Shackleton = 
 Sir Ernest Henry Shackleton CVO OBE FRGS ( / <unk> / ; 15 February 1874 – 5 January 1922 ) was a polar explorer who led three British expeditions to the Antarctic , and one of the principal figures of the period known as the Heroic Age of Antarctic Exploration . Born in <unk> , Athy , County Kildare , Ireland , Shackleton and his Anglo @-@ Irish family moved to Sydenham in suburban south London when he was ten . His first experience of the polar regions was as third officer on Captain Robert Falcon Scott 's Discovery Expedition 1901 – 04 , from which he was sent home early on health grounds , after he and his companions Scott and Wilson set a new southern record by marching to latitude 82 ° S. 
 During the second expedition 1907 – 1909 he and three companions established a new record Farthest South latitude at 88 ° S , only 97 geographical miles ( 112 statute miles , 180 km ) from the South Pole , the largest advance to the pole in exploration history . Also , members of his team climbed Mount Erebus , the most active Antarctic volcano . For these achievements , Shackleton was knighted by King Edward VII on his return home . 
 After the race to the South Pole ended in December 1911 with Roald Amundsen 's conquest , Shackleton turned his attention to the crossing of Antarctica from sea to sea , via the pole . To this end he made preparations for what became the Imperial Trans @-@ Antarctic Expedition , 1914 – 17 . Disaster struck this expedition when its ship , Endurance , became trapped in pack ice and was slowly crushed before the shore parties could be landed . The crew escaped by camping on the sea ice until it disintegrated , then by launching the lifeboats to reach Elephant Island and ultimately the inhabited island of South Georgia , a stormy ocean voyage of 720 nautical miles and Shackleton 's most famous exploit . In 1921 , he returned to the Antarctic with the Shackleton @-@ Rowett Expedition , but died of a heart attack while his ship was moored in South Georgia . At his wife 's request he was buried there . 
 Away from his expeditions , Shackleton 's life was generally restless and unfulfilled . In his search for rapid pathways to wealth and security , he launched business ventures which failed to prosper , and he died heavily in debt . Upon his death , he was lauded in the press , but was thereafter largely forgotten , while the heroic reputation of his rival Scott was sustained for many decades . Later in the 20th century , Shackleton was " rediscovered " , and rapidly became a role model for leadership as one who , in extreme circumstances , kept his team together in a survival story described by cultural historian Stephanie Barczewski as " incredible " . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Childhood = = = 
 Ernest Shackleton was born on 15 February 1874 in <unk> near Athy , County Kildare , Ireland , about 46 miles ( 74 km ) from Dublin . Ernest 's father was Henry Shackleton , and his mother was Henrietta Letitia Sophia Gavan . His father 's family was Anglo @-@ Irish , originally from Yorkshire , England . His mother 's family was Irish , from counties Cork and Kerry . Ernest was the second of their ten children and the first of two sons ; the second , Frank , achieved notoriety as a suspect , later exonerated , in the 1907 theft of Ireland 's Crown Jewels . 
 In 1880 , when Ernest was six , Henry Shackleton gave up his life as a landowner to study medicine at Trinity College , Dublin , moving his family into the city . Four years later , the family moved again , from Ireland to Sydenham in suburban London . Partly this was in search of better professional prospects for the newly qualified doctor , but another factor may have been unease about their Anglo @-@ Irish ancestry , following the assassination by Irish nationalists of Lord Frederick Cavendish , the British Secretary for Ireland , in 1882 . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 From early childhood , Shackleton was a voracious reader , a pursuit which sparked a passion for adventure . He was schooled by a governess until the age of eleven , when he began at Fir Lodge Preparatory School in West Hill , Dulwich , in southeast London . At the age of thirteen , he entered Dulwich College . The young Shackleton did not particularly distinguish himself as a scholar , and was said to be " bored " by his studies . He was quoted later as saying : " I never learned much geography at school ... Literature , too , consisted in the dissection , the parsing , the analysing of certain passages from our great poets and prose @-@ writers ... teachers should be very careful not to spoil [ their pupils ' ] taste for poetry for all time by making it a task and an imposition . " In his final term at the school , however , he was still able to achieve fifth place in his class of thirty @-@ one . 
 = = = Merchant Navy officer = = = 
 Shackleton 's restlessness at school was such that he was allowed to leave at 16 and go to sea . The options available were a Royal Naval cadetship at HMS Britannia , which Dr Shackleton could not afford ; the mercantile marine cadet ships Worcester and Conway ; or an apprenticeship " before the mast " on a sailing vessel . The third option was chosen . His father was able to secure him a berth with the North Western Shipping Company , aboard the square @-@ rigged sailing ship Hoghton Tower . 
 During the following four years at sea , Shackleton learned his trade , visiting the far corners of the earth and forming acquaintances with a variety of people from many walks of life , learning to be at home with all kinds of men . In August 1894 , he passed his examination for Second Mate and accepted a post as third officer on a tramp steamer of the Welsh Shire Line . Two years later , he had obtained his First Mate 's ticket , and in 1898 , he was certified as a Master Mariner , qualifying him to command a British ship anywhere in the world . 
 In 1898 , Shackleton joined Union @-@ Castle Line , the regular mail and passenger carrier between Southampton and Cape Town . He was , as a shipmate recorded , " a departure from our usual type of young officer " , content with his own company though not aloof , " spouting lines from Keats [ and ] Browning " , a mixture of sensitivity and aggression but , withal , sympathetic . Following the outbreak of the Boer War in 1899 , Shackleton transferred to the troopship Tintagel Castle where , in March 1900 , he met an army lieutenant , Cedric Longstaff , whose father Llewellyn W. Longstaff was the main financial backer of the National Antarctic Expedition then being organised in London . Shackleton used his acquaintance with the son to obtain an interview with Longstaff senior , with a view to obtaining a place on the expedition . Longstaff , impressed by Shackleton 's keenness , recommended him to Sir Clements Markham , the expedition 's overlord , making it clear that he wanted Shackleton accepted . On 17 February 1901 , his appointment as third officer to the expedition 's ship Discovery was confirmed ; on 4 June he was commissioned into the Royal Navy , with the rank of sub @-@ lieutenant in the Reserves . Although officially on leave from Union @-@ Castle , this was in fact the end of Shackleton 's Merchant Navy service . 
 = = Discovery Expedition , 1901 – 03 = = 
 The National Antarctic Expedition , known as the Discovery Expedition after the ship Discovery , was the brainchild of Sir Clements Markham , president of the Royal Geographical Society , and had been many years in preparation . It was led by Robert Falcon Scott , a Royal Navy torpedo lieutenant lately promoted Commander , and had objectives that included scientific and geographical discovery . 
 Although Discovery was not a Royal Navy unit , Scott required the crew , officers and scientific staff to accept voluntarily the conditions of the Naval Discipline Act , and the ship and expedition were run on Royal Navy lines . Shackleton accepted this , even though his own background and instincts favoured a different , more informal style of leadership . Shackleton 's particular duties were listed as : " In charge of seawater analysis . Ward @-@ room caterer . In charge of holds , stores and provisions [ … ] He also arranges the entertainments . " 
 Discovery departed London on 31 July 1901 , arriving at the Antarctic coast , via Cape Town and New Zealand , on 8 January 1902 . After landing , Shackleton took part in an experimental balloon flight on 4 February . He also participated , with the scientists Edward Wilson and Hartley Ferrar , in the first sledging trip from the expedition 's winter quarters in McMurdo Sound , a journey which established a safe route on to the Great Ice Barrier . During the Antarctic winter of 1902 , in the confines of the iced @-@ in Discovery , Shackleton edited the expedition 's magazine The South Polar Times . 
 According to steward Clarence Hare , he was " the most popular of the officers among the crew , being a good mixer " , though claims that this represented an unofficial rival leadership to Scott 's are unsupported . Scott chose Shackleton to accompany Wilson and himself on the expedition 's southern journey , a march southwards to achieve the highest possible latitude in the direction of the South Pole . This march was not a serious attempt on the Pole , although the attainment of a high latitude was of great importance to Scott , and the inclusion of Shackleton indicated a high degree of personal trust . 
 The party set out on 2 November 1902 . The march was , Scott wrote later , " a combination of success and failure " . A record Farthest South latitude of 82 ° 17 ' was reached , beating the previous record established in 1900 by Carsten Borchgrevink . The journey was marred by the poor performance of the dogs , whose food had become tainted , and who rapidly fell sick . All 22 dogs died during the march . The three men all suffered at times from snow blindness , frostbite and , ultimately , scurvy . On the return journey , Shackleton had by his own admission " broken down " and could no longer carry out his share of the work . 
 He would later deny Scott 's claim in The Voyage of the Discovery , that he had been carried on the sledge . However , he was in a seriously weakened condition ; Wilson 's diary entry for 14 January reads : " Shackleton has been anything but up to the mark , and today he is decidedly worse , very short winded and coughing constantly , with more serious symptoms that need not be detailed here but which are of no small consequence one hundred and sixty miles from the ship " . 
 On 4 February 1903 , the party finally reached the ship . After a medical examination ( which proved inconclusive ) , Scott decided to send Shackleton home on the relief ship Morning , which had arrived in McMurdo Sound in January 1903 . Scott wrote : " He ought not to risk further hardship in his present state of health . " There is conjecture that Scott 's motives for removing him was resentment of Shackleton 's popularity , and that ill @-@ health was used as an excuse to get rid of him . 
 Years after the death of Scott , Wilson and Shackleton , Albert Armitage , the expedition 's second @-@ in @-@ command , claimed that there had been a falling @-@ out on the southern journey , and that Scott had told the ship 's doctor that " if he does not go back sick he will go back in disgrace . " There is no corroboration of Armitage 's story . Shackleton and Scott stayed on friendly terms , at least until the publication of Scott 's account of the southern journey in The Voyage of the Discovery . Although in public they remained mutually respectful and cordial , according to biographer Roland Huntford , Shackleton 's attitude to Scott turned to " smouldering scorn and dislike " ; salvage of wounded pride required " a return to the Antarctic and an attempt to outdo Scott " . 
 = = Between the Discovery and Nimrod expeditions , 1903 – 07 = = 
 After a period of convalescence in New Zealand , Shackleton returned to England via San Francisco and New York . As the first significant person to return from the Antarctic , he found that he was in demand ; in particular , the Admiralty wished to consult him about its further proposals for the rescue of Discovery . With Sir Clements Markham 's blessing , he accepted a temporary post assisting the outfitting of the Terra Nova for the second Discovery relief operation , but turned down the offer to sail with her as chief officer . He also assisted in the equipping of the Argentinean corvette Uruguay , which was being fitted out for the relief of the stranded Swedish Antarctic Expedition under Nordenskiöld . In search of more permanent employment , Shackleton applied for a regular commission in the Royal Navy , via the back @-@ door route of the Supplementary List , but despite the sponsorship of Markham and of the president of the Royal Society , he was not successful . Instead , he became a journalist , working for the Royal Magazine , but he found this unsatisfactory . He was then offered , and accepted , the secretaryship of the Royal Scottish Geographical Society ( RSGS ) , a post which he took up on 11 January 1904 . On 9 April 1904 he married Emily Dorman , with whom he would have three children : Raymond , Cecily , and Edward . 
 In 1905 , Shackleton became a shareholder in a speculative company that aimed to make a fortune transporting Russian troops home from the Far East . Despite his assurances to Emily that " we are practically sure of the contract " , nothing came of this scheme . He also ventured into politics , unsuccessfully standing in the 1906 General Election as the Liberal Unionist Party 's candidate for Dundee in opposition to Irish Home Rule . In the meantime he had taken a job with wealthy Clydeside industrialist William Beardmore ( later Lord <unk> ) , with a roving commission which involved interviewing prospective clients and entertaining Beardmore 's business friends . Shackleton by this time , however , was making no secret of his ambition to return to Antarctica at the head of his own expedition . 
