 Beardmore was sufficiently impressed with Shackleton to offer financial support , but other donations proved hard to come by . Nevertheless , in February 1907 , Shackleton presented to the Royal Geographic Society his plans for an Antarctic expedition , the details of which , under the name British Antarctic Expedition , were published in the Royal Society 's newsletter , Geographic Journal . The aim was the conquest of both the geographical South Pole and the South Magnetic Pole . Shackleton then worked hard to persuade others of his wealthy friends and acquaintances to contribute , including Sir Philip Lee Brocklehurst , who subscribed £ 2 @,@ 000 ( 2011 equivalent £ 157 @,@ 000 ) to secure a place on the expedition ; author Campbell Mackellar ; and Guinness baron Lord Iveagh , whose contribution was secured less than two weeks before the departure of the expedition ship Nimrod . On 4 August 1907 , Shackleton was appointed a Member of the Royal Victorian Order , 4th Class ( MVO ; the present @-@ day grade of Lieutenant ) . 
 = = Nimrod Expedition ( 1907 – 09 ) = = 
 On 1 January 1908 , Nimrod sailed for the Antarctic from Lyttelton Harbour , New Zealand . Shackleton 's original plans had envisaged using the old Discovery base in McMurdo Sound to launch his attempts on the South Pole and South Magnetic Pole . However , before leaving England , he had been pressured to give an undertaking to Scott that he would not base himself in the McMurdo area , which Scott was claiming as his own field of work . Shackleton reluctantly agreed to look for winter quarters at either the Barrier Inlet ( which Discovery had briefly visited in 1902 ) or King Edward VII Land . 
 To conserve coal , the ship was towed 1 @,@ 650 miles ( 2 @,@ 655 km ) by the steamer <unk> to the Antarctic ice , after Shackleton had persuaded the New Zealand government and the Union Steamship Company to share the cost . In accordance with Shackleton 's promise to Scott , the ship headed for the eastern sector of the Great Ice Barrier , arriving there on 21 January 1908 . They found that the Barrier Inlet had expanded to form a large bay , in which were hundreds of whales , which led to the immediate christening of the area as the Bay of Whales . It was noted that ice conditions were unstable , precluding the establishment of a safe base there . An extended search for an anchorage at King Edward VII Land proved equally fruitless , so Shackleton was forced to break his undertaking to Scott and set sail for McMurdo Sound , a decision which , according to second officer Arthur Harbord , was " dictated by common sense " in view of the difficulties of ice pressure , coal shortage and the lack of any nearer known base . 
 Nimrod arrived at McMurdo Sound on 29 January , but was stopped by ice 16 miles ( 26 km ) north of Discovery 's old base at Hut Point . After considerable weather delays , Shackleton 's base was eventually established at Cape Royds , about 24 miles ( 39 km ) north of Hut Point . The party was in high spirits , despite the difficult conditions ; Shackleton 's ability to communicate with each man kept the party happy and focused . 
 The " Great Southern Journey " , as Frank Wild called it , began on 29 October 1908 . On 9 January 1909 , Shackleton and three companions ( Wild , Eric Marshall and Jameson Adams ) reached a new Farthest South latitude of 88 ° 23 ' S , a point only 112 miles ( 180 km ) from the Pole . En route the South Pole party discovered the Beardmore Glacier ( named after Shackleton 's patron ) and became the first persons to see and travel on the South Polar Plateau . Their return journey to McMurdo Sound was a race against starvation , on half @-@ rations for much of the way . At one point , Shackleton gave his one biscuit allotted for the day to the ailing Frank Wild , who wrote in his diary : " All the money that was ever minted would not have bought that biscuit and the remembrance of that sacrifice will never leave me " . They arrived at Hut Point just in time to catch the ship . 
 The expedition 's other main accomplishments included the first ascent of Mount Erebus , and the discovery of the approximate location of the South Magnetic Pole , reached on 16 January 1909 by Edgeworth David , Douglas Mawson , and Alistair Mackay . Shackleton returned to the United Kingdom as a hero , and soon afterwards published his expedition account , Heart of the Antarctic . Emily Shackleton later recorded : " The only comment he made to me about not reaching the Pole was ' a live donkey is better than a dead lion , isn 't it ? ' and I said ' Yes darling , as far as I am concerned ' " . 
 In 1910 , Shackleton made a series of three recordings describing the expedition using an Edison Phonograph . 
 Several mostly intact cases of whisky and brandy left behind in 1909 were recovered in 2010 , for analysis by a distilling company . A revival of the vintage ( and since lost ) formula for the particular brands found has been offered for sale with a portion of the proceeds to benefit the New Zealand Antarctic Heritage Trust which discovered the lost spirits . 
 = = Between expeditions 1909 – 14 = = 
 = = = Public hero = = = 
 On Shackleton 's return home , public honours were quickly forthcoming . King Edward VII received him on 10 July and raised him to a Commander of the Royal Victorian Order ( CVO ) ; in the King 's Birthday Honours list in November , he was made a knight , becoming Sir Ernest Shackleton . He was honoured by the Royal Geographical Society , who awarded him a Gold Medal ; a proposal that the medal be smaller than that earlier awarded to Captain Scott was not acted on . All the members of the Nimrod Expedition shore party received silver Polar Medals on 23 November , with Shackleton receiving a clasp to his earlier medal . Shackleton was also appointed a Younger Brother of Trinity House , a significant honour for British mariners . 
 Besides the official honours , Shackleton 's Antarctic feats were greeted in Britain with great enthusiasm . Proposing a toast to the explorer at a lunch given in Shackleton 's honour by the Royal Societies Club , Lord <unk> , a former Lord Chancellor , said : " When one remembers what he had gone through , one does not believe in the supposed degeneration of the British race . One does not believe that we have lost all sense of admiration for courage [ and ] endurance " . The heroism was also claimed by Ireland : the Dublin Evening Telegraph 's headline read " South Pole Almost Reached By An Irishman " , while the Dublin Express spoke of the " qualities that were his heritage as an Irishman " . Shackleton 's fellow @-@ explorers expressed their admiration ; Roald Amundsen wrote , in a letter to RGS Secretary John Scott Keltie , that " the English nation has by this deed of Shackleton 's won a victory that can never be surpassed " . Fridtjof Nansen sent an effusive private letter to Emily Shackleton , praising the " unique expedition which has been such a complete success in every respect " . The reality was , however , that the expedition had left Shackleton deeply in debt , unable to meet the financial guarantees he had given to backers . Despite his efforts , it required government action , in the form of a grant of £ 20 @,@ 000 ( 2008 : £ 1 @.@ 5 million ) to clear the most pressing obligations . It is likely that many debts were not pressed and were written off . 
 = = = <unk> time = = = 
 In the period immediately after his return , Shackleton engaged in a strenuous schedule of public appearances , lectures and social engagements . He then sought to cash in on his celebrity by making a fortune in the business world . Among the ventures which he hoped to promote were a tobacco company , a scheme for selling to collectors postage stamps overprinted " King Edward VII Land " ( based on Shackleton 's appointment as Antarctic postmaster by the New Zealand authorities ) , and the development of a Hungarian mining concession he had acquired near the city of <unk> , now part of Romania . None of these enterprises prospered , and his main source of income was his earnings from lecture tours . He still harboured thoughts of returning south , even though in September 1910 , having recently moved with his family to Sheringham in Norfolk , he wrote to Emily : " I am never again going South and I have thought it all out and my place is at home now " . He had been in discussions with Douglas Mawson about a scientific expedition to the Antarctic coast between Cape Adare and <unk> , and had written to the RGS about this in February 1910 . 
 Any future resumption by Shackleton of the quest for the South Pole depended on the results of Scott 's Terra Nova Expedition , which left from Cardiff in July 1910 . By the spring of 1912 , the world was aware that the pole had been conquered , by the Norwegian Roald Amundsen . The fate of Scott 's expedition was not then known . Shackleton 's mind turned to a project that had been announced , and then abandoned , by the Scottish explorer William Speirs Bruce , for a continental crossing , from a landing in the Weddell Sea , via the South Pole to McMurdo Sound . Bruce , who had failed to acquire financial backing , was happy that Shackleton should adopt his plans , which were similar to those being followed by the German explorer Wilhelm Filchner . Filchner had left Bremerhaven in May 1911 ; in December 1912 , the news arrived from South Georgia that his expedition had failed . The transcontinental journey , in Shackleton 's words , was the " one great object of Antarctic journeyings " remaining , now open to him . 
 = = Imperial Trans @-@ Antarctic Expedition 1914 – 17 = = 
 = = = Preparations = = = 
 Shackleton published details of his new expedition , grandly titled the " Imperial Trans @-@ Antarctic Expedition " , early in 1914 . Two ships would be employed ; Endurance would carry the main party into the Weddell Sea , aiming for Vahsel Bay from where a team of six , led by Shackleton , would begin the crossing of the continent . Meanwhile , a second ship , the Aurora , would take a supporting party under Captain Aeneas Mackintosh to McMurdo Sound on the opposite side of the continent . This party would then lay supply depots across the Great Ice Barrier as far as the Beardmore Glacier , these depots holding the food and fuel that would enable Shackleton 's party to complete their journey of 1 @,@ 800 miles ( 2 @,@ 900 km ) across the continent . 
 Shackleton used his considerable fund @-@ raising skills , and the expedition was financed largely by private donations , although the British government gave £ 10 @,@ 000 ( about £ 680 @,@ 000 in 2008 terms ) . Scottish jute magnate Sir James Caird gave £ 24 @,@ 000 , Midlands industrialist Frank Dudley Docker gave £ 10 @,@ 000 and tobacco heiress Janet Stancomb @-@ Wills gave an undisclosed but reportedly " generous " sum . Public interest in the expedition was considerable ; Shackleton received more than 5 @,@ 000 applications to join it . His interviewing and selection methods sometimes seemed eccentric ; believing that character and temperament were as important as technical ability , he would ask unconventional questions . Thus physicist Reginald James was asked if he could sing ; others were accepted on sight because Shackleton liked the look of them , or after the briefest of interrogations . Shackleton also loosened some traditional hierarchies , expecting all men , including the scientists , to take their share of ship 's chores . He ultimately selected a crew of 56 , twenty @-@ eight on each ship . 
 Despite the outbreak of the First World War on 3 August 1914 , Endurance was directed by the First Lord of the Admiralty , Winston Churchill , to " proceed " , and left British waters on 8 August . Shackleton delayed his own departure until 27 September , meeting the ship in Buenos Aires . 
 = = = Crew = = = 
 While Shackleton led the expedition , the Endurance was captained by Cpt . F. Worsley DSO . The Aurora was captained by Lt. J. Stenhouse DSC . 
 On the Endurance , the second in command was the experienced explorer Frank Wild . The meteorologist was Cpt . L. Hussey ( also an able banjo player ) . Dr. McIlroy was head of the scientific staff , which included Wordie . Dr. Alexander Macklin was one of two surgeons and also in charge of keeping the 70 dogs healthy . Tom Crean was in more immediate charge as head dog @-@ handler . Other crew included James , Hussey , Greenstreet , a carpenter Henry McNeish , and Clark ( the biologist ) . Of later independent fame was the photographer Frank Hurley . There was a cat named Mrs. Chippy , which should have been called Mr. Chippy , that belonged to the carpenter Henry McNeish . Unfortunately Mrs. Chippy was shot when the Endurance sank , due to the belief it would not have survived the ordeal that followed . 
 The known dogs ' names were Rugby , Upton Bristol , <unk> , <unk> , Sandy , Mack , Mercury , Wolf , Amundsen , Hercules , Hackenschmidt , Samson , Sammy , Skipper , Caruso , Sub , Ulysses , <unk> , Bosun , <unk> , Sadie , Sue , Sally , Jasper , Tim , Sweep , Martin , <unk> , Luke , Saint , Satan , Chips , Stumps , Snapper , Painful , Bob , Snowball , Jerry , Judge , Sooty , Rufus , <unk> , Simeon , <unk> , <unk> , Steamer , Peter , Fluffy , Steward , Slippery , Elliott , Roy , Noel , Shakespeare , Jamie , Bummer , Smuts , <unk> , Spider , and Sailor . 
 = = = Loss of Endurance = = = 
 Endurance departed from South Georgia for the Weddell Sea on 5 December , heading for Vahsel Bay . As the ship moved southward , early ice was encountered , which slowed progress . Deep in the Weddell Sea , conditions gradually grew worse until , on 19 January 1915 , Endurance became frozen fast in an ice floe . On 24 February , realising that she would be trapped until the following spring , Shackleton ordered the abandonment of ship 's routine and her conversion to a winter station . She drifted slowly northward with the ice through the following months . When spring arrived in September , the breaking of the ice and its later movements put extreme pressures on the ship 's hull . 
 Until this point , Shackleton had hoped that the ship , when released from the ice , could work her way back towards Vahsel Bay . On 24 October , however , water began pouring in . After a few days , with the position at 69 ° 5 ' S , 51 ° 30 ' W , Shackleton gave the order to abandon ship , saying , " She 's going down ! " ; and men , provisions and equipment were transferred to camps on the ice . On 21 November 1915 , the wreck finally slipped beneath the surface . 
 For almost two months , Shackleton and his party camped on a large , flat floe , hoping that it would drift towards Paulet Island , approximately 250 miles ( 402 km ) away , where it was known that stores were cached . After failed attempts to march across the ice to this island , Shackleton decided to set up another more permanent camp ( Patience Camp ) on another floe , and trust to the drift of the ice to take them towards a safe landing . By 17 March , their ice camp was within 60 miles ( 97 km ) of Paulet Island but , separated by impassable ice , they were unable to reach it . On 9 April , their ice floe broke into two , and Shackleton ordered the crew into the lifeboats , to head for the nearest land . After five harrowing days at sea , the exhausted men landed their three lifeboats at Elephant Island , 346 miles ( 557 km ) from where the Endurance sank . This was the first time they had stood on solid ground for 497 days . Shackleton 's concern for his men was such that he gave his mittens to photographer Frank Hurley , who had lost his during the boat journey . Shackleton suffered frostbitten fingers as a result . 
 = = = Open @-@ boat journey = = = 
 Elephant Island was an inhospitable place , far from any shipping routes . Consequently , Shackleton decided to risk an open @-@ boat journey to the 720 @-@ nautical @-@ mile @-@ distant South Georgia whaling stations , where he knew help was available . The strongest of the tiny 20 @-@ foot ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) lifeboats , christened James Caird after the expedition 's chief sponsor , was chosen for the trip . Ship 's carpenter Harry McNish made various improvements , including raising the sides , strengthening the keel , building a makeshift deck of wood and canvas , and sealing the work with oil paint and seal blood . Shackleton chose five companions for the journey : Frank Worsley , Endurance 's captain , who would be responsible for navigation ; Tom Crean , who had " begged to go " ; two strong sailors in John Vincent and Timothy McCarthy , and finally the carpenter McNish . Shackleton had clashed with McNish during the time when the party was stranded on the ice , but , while he would not forgive the carpenter 's earlier insubordination , Shackleton recognised his value for this particular job . 
 Shackleton refused to pack supplies for more than four weeks , knowing that if they did not reach South Georgia within that time , the boat and its crew would be lost . The James Caird was launched on 24 April 1916 ; during the next fifteen days , it sailed through the waters of the southern ocean , at the mercy of the stormy seas , in constant peril of capsizing . On 8 May , thanks to Worsley 's navigational skills , the cliffs of South Georgia came into sight , but hurricane @-@ force winds prevented the possibility of landing . The party was forced to ride out the storm offshore , in constant danger of being dashed against the rocks . They would later learn that the same hurricane had sunk a 500 @-@ ton steamer bound for South Georgia from Buenos Aires . On the following day , they were able , finally , to land on the unoccupied southern shore . After a period of rest and recuperation , rather than risk putting to sea again to reach the whaling stations on the northern coast , Shackleton decided to attempt a land crossing of the island . Although it is likely that Norwegian whalers had previously crossed at other points on ski , no one had attempted this particular route before . Leaving McNish , Vincent and McCarthy at the landing point on South Georgia , Shackleton travelled 32 miles ( 51 km ) with Worsley and Crean over mountainous terrain for 36 hours to reach the whaling station at Stromness on 20 May . 
 The next successful crossing of South Georgia was in October 1955 , by the British explorer Duncan <unk> , who travelled much of the same route as Shackleton 's party . In tribute to their achievement , he wrote : " I do not know how they did it , except that they had to — three men of the heroic age of Antarctic exploration with 50 feet of rope between them — and a carpenter 's adze " . 
 = = = Rescue = = = 
 Shackleton immediately sent a boat to pick up the three men from the other side of South Georgia while he set to work to organise the rescue of the Elephant Island men . His first three attempts were foiled by sea ice , which blocked the approaches to the island . He appealed to the Chilean government , which offered the use of Yelcho , a small seagoing tug from its navy . Yelcho , commanded by Captain Luis Pardo , and the British whaler SS Southern Sky reached Elephant Island on 30 August 1916 , at which point the men had been isolated there for four and a half months , and Shackleton quickly evacuated all 22 men . The Yelcho took the crew first to Punta Arenas and after some days to Valparaiso in Chile where crowds warmly welcomed them back to civilisation . 
 There remained the men of the Ross Sea Party , who were stranded at Cape Evans in McMurdo Sound , after Aurora had been blown from its anchorage and driven out to sea , unable to return . The ship , after a drift of many months , had returned to New Zealand . Shackleton travelled there to join Aurora , and sailed with her to the rescue of the Ross Sea party . This group , despite many hardships , had carried out its depot @-@ laying mission to the full , but three lives had been lost , including that of its commander , Aeneas Mackintosh . 
 = = First World War = = 
 When Shackleton returned to England in May 1917 , Europe was in the midst of the First World War . Suffering from a heart condition , made worse by the fatigue of his arduous journeys , and too old to be conscripted , he nevertheless volunteered for the army . Repeatedly requesting posting to the front in France , he was by now drinking heavily . In October 1917 , he was sent to Buenos Aires to boost British propaganda in South America . <unk> as a diplomat , he was unsuccessful in persuading Argentina and Chile to enter the war on the Allied side . He returned home in April 1918 . On 22 July 1918 , he received a temporary army commission in the rank of major . 
 Shackleton was then briefly involved in a mission to Spitzbergen to establish a British presence there under guise of a mining operation . On the way he was taken ill in Tromsø , possibly with a heart attack . Appointment to a military expedition to Murmansk obliged him to return home before departing for northern Russia . 
 = = With the Allied Expeditionary Force in the Russian Civil War = = 
 Four months after the 11 November 1918 Armistice was signed , Shackleton was back in England , full of plans for the economic development of Northern Russia . Specially appointed a temporary honorary major on 25 April 1919 , Shackleton served with the Northern Russia Expeditionary Force in the Russian Civil War under the command of Major @-@ General ( later Field Marshal Lord ) Edmund Ironside . For his " valuable services rendered in connection with Military Operations in North Russia " Shackleton was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire ( OBE ) in the 1919 King 's Birthday Honours , and was also mentioned in despatches by General Ironside . In the midst of seeking capital , however , Shackleton 's plans foundered when Northern Russia fell to Bolshevik control . He was discharged from the army in October 1919 , retaining his rank of major . 
 = = Final expedition and death = = 
 Shackleton returned to the lecture circuit and published his own account of the Endurance expedition , South , in December 1919 . In 1920 , tired of the lecture circuit , Shackleton began to consider the possibility of a last expedition . He thought seriously of going to the Beaufort Sea area of the Arctic , a largely unexplored region , and raised some interest in this idea from the Canadian government . With funds supplied by former schoolfriend John Quiller Rowett , he acquired a 125 @-@ ton Norwegian sealer , named <unk> I which he renamed Quest . The plan changed ; the destination became the Antarctic , and the project was defined by Shackleton as an " oceanographic and sub @-@ <unk> expedition " . The goals of the venture were imprecise , but a circumnavigation of the Antarctic continent and investigation of some " lost " sub @-@ Antarctic islands , such as <unk> , were mentioned as objectives . 
 Rowett agreed to finance the entire expedition , which became known as the Shackleton @-@ Rowett Expedition . On 16 September 1921 , Shackleton recorded a farewell address on a sound @-@ on @-@ film system created by Harry <unk> Matthews , who claimed it was the first " talking picture " ever made . The expedition left England on 24 September 1921 . 
 Although some of his former crew members had not received all their pay from the Endurance expedition , many of them signed on with their former " Boss " . When the party arrived in Rio de Janeiro , Shackleton suffered a suspected heart attack . He refused a proper medical examination , so Quest continued south , and on 4 January 1922 , arrived at South Georgia . 
 In the early hours of the next morning , Shackleton summoned the expedition 's physician , Alexander Macklin , to his cabin , complaining of back pains and other discomfort . According to Macklin 's own account , Macklin told him he had been overdoing things and should try to " lead a more regular life " , to which Shackleton answered : " You are always wanting me to give up things , what is it I ought to give up ? " " Chiefly alcohol , Boss , " replied Macklin . A few moments later , at 2 : 50 a.m. on 5 January 1922 , Shackleton suffered a fatal heart attack . 
 Macklin , who conducted the postmortem , concluded that the cause of death was <unk> of the coronary arteries exacerbated by " overstrain during a period of debility " . Leonard Hussey , a veteran of the Imperial Trans @-@ Antarctic expedition , offered to accompany the body back to Britain ; however , while he was in Montevideo en route to England , a message was received from Emily Shackleton asking that her husband be buried in South Georgia . Hussey returned to South Georgia with the body on the steamer Woodville , and on 5 March 1922 , Shackleton was buried in the Grytviken cemetery , South Georgia , after a short service in the Lutheran church , with Edward Binnie officiating . Macklin wrote in his diary : " I think this is as ' the Boss ' would have had it himself , standing lonely in an island far from civilisation , surrounded by stormy tempestuous seas , & in the vicinity of one of his greatest exploits . " 
 On 27 November 2011 , the ashes of Frank Wild were interred on the right @-@ hand side of Shackleton 's grave site in Grytviken . The inscription on the rough @-@ hewn granite block set to mark the spot reads " Frank Wild 1873 – 1939 , Shackleton 's right @-@ hand man . " 
 Study of diaries kept by Eric Marshall , medical officer to the 1907 – 09 expedition , suggests that Shackleton suffered from an atrial septal defect ( " hole in the heart " ) , a congenital heart defect , which may have been a cause of his health problems . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Early legacy = = = 
 Before the return of Shackleton 's body to South Georgia , there was a memorial service held for him with full military honours at Holy Trinity Church , Montevideo , and on 2 March a service was held at St Paul 's Cathedral , London , at which the King and other members of the royal family were represented . Within a year the first biography , The Life of Sir Ernest Shackleton , by Hugh Robert Mill , was published . This book , as well as being a tribute to the explorer , was a practical effort to assist his family ; Shackleton died some £ 40 @,@ 000 in debt ( 2011 : £ 1 @.@ 6 million ) . A further initiative was the establishment of a Shackleton Memorial Fund , which was used to assist the education of his children and the support of his mother . 
 During the ensuing decades Shackleton 's status as a polar hero was generally outshone by that of Captain Scott , whose polar party had by 1925 been commemorated on more than 30 monuments in Britain alone , including stained glass windows , statues , busts and memorial tablets . A statue of Shackleton designed by Sir Edwin Lutyens was unveiled at the Royal Geographical Society 's Kensington headquarters in 1932 , but public memorials to Shackleton were relatively few . Likewise , the printed word saw much more attention given to Scott – a forty @-@ page booklet on Shackleton , published in 1943 by <unk> as part of a " Great Exploits " series , is described by cultural historian Stephanie Barczewski as " a lone example of a popular literary treatment of Shackleton in a sea of similar treatments of Scott " . This disparity continued into the 1950s . 
 = = = Later legacy = = = 
 In 1959 Alfred Lansing 's Endurance : Shackleton 's Incredible Voyage was published . This was the first of a number of books about Shackleton that began to appear , showing him in a highly positive light . At the same time , attitudes towards Scott were gradually changing as a more critical note was sounded in the literature , culminating in Roland Huntford 's 1979 treatment of him in his dual biography Scott and Amundsen , described by Barczewski as a " devastating attack " . This negative picture of Scott became accepted as the popular truth as the kind of heroism that Scott represented fell victim to the cultural shifts of the late twentieth century . Within a few years he was thoroughly overtaken in public esteem by Shackleton , whose popularity surged while that of his erstwhile rival declined . In 2002 , in a BBC poll conducted to determine the " 100 Greatest Britons " , Shackleton was ranked 11th while Scott was down in 54th place . In 2007 , the Shackleton Foundation was founded to honour the legacy of Ernest Shackleton by supporting inspirational leaders who exemplify his indomitable spirit and strive to make a positive difference to the world . 
 In 2001 Margaret Morrell and Stephanie <unk> presented Shackleton as a model for corporate leadership in their book Shackleton 's Way : Leadership Lessons from the Great Antarctic Explorer . They wrote : " Shackleton resonates with executives in today 's business world . His people @-@ centred approach to leadership can be a guide to anyone in a position of authority " . Other management writers were soon following this lead , using Shackleton as an exemplar for bringing order from chaos . The Centre for Leadership Studies at the University of Exeter ( United Kingdom ) offers a course on Shackleton , who also features in the management education programmes of several American universities . In Boston USA a " Shackleton School " was set up on " Outward Bound " principles , with the motto " The Journey is Everything " . Shackleton has also been cited as a model leader by the US Navy , and in a textbook on Congressional leadership , Peter L <unk> calls Shackleton the archetype of the " <unk> leader " whose " calm , reflective demeanor becomes the antibiotic warning of the toxicity of reactive behaviour " . The Athy Heritage Centre @-@ Museum , Athy , County Kildare , Ireland established in 2001 the Ernest Shackleton Autumn School , which is held annually , to honour the memory of Ernest Shackleton and to commemorate the era of heroic polar exploration . 
 Shackleton 's death marked the end of the Heroic Age of Antarctic Exploration , a period of discovery characterised by journeys of geographical and scientific exploration in a largely unknown continent without any of the benefits of modern travel methods or radio communication . In the preface to his 1922 book The Worst Journey in the World , Apsley Cherry @-@ Garrard , one of Scott 's team on the Terra Nova Expedition , wrote : " For a joint scientific and geographical piece of organisation , give me Scott ; for a Winter Journey , Wilson ; for a dash to the Pole and nothing else , Amundsen : and if I am in the devil of a hole and want to get out of it , give me Shackleton every time " . 
 In 1993 Trevor Potts re @-@ enacted the Boat Journey from Elephant Island to South Georgia in honour of Sir Ernest Shackleton , totally unsupported , in a replica of the James Caird . 
 In 2002 , Channel 4 produced Shackleton , a TV serial depicting the 1914 expedition with Kenneth Branagh in the title role . Broadcast in the United States on the A & E Network , it won two Emmy Awards . In a 2011 Christie 's auction in London , a biscuit that Shackleton gave " a starving fellow traveller " on the 1907 – 09 Nimrod expedition sold for £ 1250 . In January 2013 , a joint British @-@ Australian team set out to duplicate Shackleton 's 1916 trip across the Southern Ocean . Led by explorer and environmental scientist Tim Jarvis , the team was assembled at the request of Alexandra Shackleton , Sir Ernest 's granddaughter , who felt the trip would honour her grandfather 's legacy . In October 2015 , Shackleton 's decorations and medals were auctioned ; the sale raised £ 585 @,@ 000 . 
 Shackleton is the name of one of the halls of residence for Merchant Navy Officer Cadets at Warsash Maritime Academy in Southampton , one of Britain 's Merchant Navy Training Colleges . 
 = = Awards and decorations = = 
 = = = British decorations = = = 
 Polar Medal ( 1904 ; with clasp for Nimrod Expedition : 1909 ) 
 Knight Bachelor ( 1909 ) 
 Commander of the Royal Victorian Order ( CVO , 1909 ; MVO 4th Class : 1907 ) 
 Officer of the Order of the British Empire , Military Division ( OBE , 1918 ) 
 British War Medal ( 1918 ) 
 Allied Victory Medal ( 1918 , with MID ) 
 = = = Other decorations = = = 
 Knight of the Order of the Dannebrog of Denmark ( 1909 ) 
 Knight of the Order of the Polar Star of Sweden ( 1909 ) 
 Knight of the Order of St. Olav of Norway ( 1909 ) 
 Officer of the Legion of Honour of France ( 1909 ) 
 Knight of the Order of the Crown of Italy ( 1910 ) 
 Order of St. Anna , 3rd Class , of Russia ( 1910 ) 
 Order of the Crown of Prussia , 3rd Class ( 1911 ) 
 Officer of the Chilean Order of Merit ( 1916 ) 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Gold Medal of the Royal Geographical Society of Antwerp ( 1909 ) 
 Boston Medal , with bar ( 1910 ) 
 = The Tan Aquatic with Steve Zissou = 
 " The Tan Aquatic with Steve Zissou " is the eleventh episode of the fifth season of Family Guy , which originally aired on February 18 , 2007 . The episode follows Stewie , who develops a tan , but becomes obsessed with his new look and attempts to keep it , eventually stopping after being told by the doctor he may now have cancer . Meanwhile , Peter discovers Chris being tormented by a bully , goes to the bully 's house to speak with him , and ends up beating him up . 
 The episode was written by Mark Hentemann and directed by Julius Wu . It received mostly mixed reviews from critics for its storyline and many cultural references . According to Nielsen ratings , it was viewed in 8 @.@ 53 million homes in its original airing . The episode featured guest performances by Mike Barker , Jeff Bergman , Chris Cox , Michael Clarke Duncan , Keir Gilchrist , Beth Littleford and Rachael MacFarlane , along with several recurring guest voice actors for the series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 While babysitting Stewie , Peter takes him along on an all day golf game and Stewie ends up with a tan all over his body . Stewie decides he likes being tanned and begins frequently to use a tanning bed in his room . He also holds a party for tanned people only . Stewie tells Brian to wake him up after fifteen minutes of tanning but Brian falls asleep and wakes up six and a half hours later . Stewie is extremely sunburned , barely able to move and in great pain . When Stewie eventually begins to peel , Brian spots a mole on Stewie 's stomach . Convinced it is skin cancer , Stewie begins to live out his dying wishes with Brian forced to help him since it was entirely his fault he caused the cancer in the first place . One of Stewie 's requests was to visit the Chicago Museum of Art . As his last request he has Brian record his final thoughts . In the end , Stewie hears from Dr. Hartman that he does not have cancer and gives up tanning . Stewie then sees that Brian drew himself being hanged instead of his final thoughts , prompting the baby to quip " Oh , you are just the worst type of person " . 
 Meanwhile , Chris learns that his best customer , Herbert , has made Kyle , a neighbor 's son and a bully , his new paper boy . Chris decides to confront them both but ends up getting pushed over by Kyle and laughed at by Kyle 's friends subsequently returning home in tears much to Peter and Lois ' concern . Peter goes to talk with Kyle who makes fun of him over and over . Unable to control his anger toward Kyle , Peter beats him up leaving Kyle bleeding and bruised . Kyle ’ s mother agrees not to press charges if Peter apologizes to Kyle which he reluctantly does . Kyle comments on how good bullying makes you feel which encourages Peter to become a bully . Peter splashes a pot of boiling water over Lois and makes her punch herself in the face . He also hits Stewie on his sunburned buttocks , knocks Chris out of his chair , and sticks his large butt out at Meg to fart repeatedly in her face following her backwards around the kitchen table until she finally trips and vomits on the floor at which Peter gets mad with her . When Peter also bullies his friends , such as using Joe as a marionette and pulling Cleveland 's pants down , Lois points out that he is as bad as his old school bully , Randy Fulcher . Deciding he should bully him instead , Peter finds Randy who is now suffering from multiple sclerosis . Thinking , when Randy says “ I have MS , ” that he is bragging that he has a monkey ’ s scrotum , Peter is about to beat up Randy but is stopped by Chris who beats Peter up instead and finally convinces him bullying is wrong . As the event is witnessed by a wrong sounding Kermit the Frog and a wrong sounding Swedish Chef , a wrong sounding Fozzie Bear ( voiced by Michael Clarke Duncan ) asks them if they want to hear a joke as the episode ends . 
 = = Production = = 
 David Goodman comments , regarding the plot partially following Herbert that " there is always a bit of trouble pitching a Herbert storyline to the network . " Samm Levine had originally been selected to voice Kyle , but the character was recast because , as show producer Seth MacFarlane comments , " it seemed a lot funnier when Peter was beating up a kid if he was younger and more defenseless . " A deleted scene had been made which showed Chris asking for money and stating " I spent my last ten bucks on a ham costume , " and Peter replying with " it 's just sitting there right now , but you know what the great thing is , it 's just three months until Halloween and I am done . " Peter 's ancestor shown preparing to wrestle with a kangaroo was described by Seth MacFarlane to be " a very strange gag , " which was added after the other parts of the episode had been created . Quagmire 's profanity @-@ laced tirade during the golf game was bleeped out on TV , but uncensored on DVD . The scene of Stewie remembering the time the Griffins had a nymphomaniac from Wisconsin in their attic was edited as FOX objected to the sounds of the woman having an orgasm being shown over a shot of a wide @-@ awake Stewie . 
 The voice of a guest at the tanning @-@ party which Stewie is hosting was provided by Mike Barker . David A. Goodman comments on the DVD commentary that " It 's nice to hear Mike Barker back on Family Guy . , " as Barker had performed multiple voices of characters in previous episodes . Peter asking " I 'm going to prison , aren 't I ? " when hiding in the tree after beating up Chris 's bully caused a little bit of trouble for the show , though it was never edited when aired on TV . A sketch had been created showing Brian falling asleep when watching Late Night with Bib Fortuna while Stewie was still in the tanning booth , but it did not seem good enough to air , so it was never broadcast . When Stewie is being sprayed by Brian with sun @-@ screen , Ralph Furley enters the room and mistakenly thinks he sees Brian ejaculating on Stewie . The cream was originally intended to keep squirting out of the bottle as if Brian were continuing to ejaculate despite Mr. Furley 's presence , but the animation didn 't look right and was removed . MacFarlane comments that he was amazed that broadcasting standards allowed them to get away with the scene , even though Brian 's line , " This isn 't what it looks like " was edited to keep the ejaculation illusion from being blatant ( the TV version goes from Mr. Furley yelling , " Brian " and Brian reacting to Mr. Furley running out and saying , " Never mind , I 'll come back later ! " ) . A deleted scene was made and designed to happen directly after Peter sickens Meg by farting in her face in which Peter steals Chris 's lunch money and runs for the bus . The gag showing Dick Cheney as a Wal @-@ Mart greeter had Cheney 's greeting , " Go fuck yourself " bleeped out on TV , but not DVD . Peter falling to the floor after being pushed away from hitting Randy by Chris was very difficult to do , as it is difficult to do slow @-@ motion in animation . The DVD version includes an extra scene in the car , in which Peter shows Chris how he looks like an anus by wearing a hoodie , pulling the hood on the drawstring tight around his mouth , and pushing a chocolate candy bar out of the hole to simulate defecation . 
 In addition to Barker and the regular cast , actor Jeff Bergman , voice actor Chris Cox , actor Michael Clarke Duncan , actor Keir Gilchrist , actress Beth Littleford and voice actress Rachael MacFarlane guest starred in the episode . Recurring guest voice actors Chris Sheridan , writer Danny Smith , writer Alec Sulkin and writer John Viener made minor appearances . Actor Patrick Warburton also has a guest appearance as well . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Stewie is listening to the instrumental version of I Say A Little Prayer while tanning . 
 An unused ending to the episode had been similar to the ending of 1984 American comedy film Revenge of the Nerds , but " it never really clicked , " hence , it was not broadcast . 
 Stewie at a party with other tan @-@ obsessed people is a reference to the Tony Lacey scene in Annie Hall . 
 Stewie reciting a poem he wrote to Brian is a reference to non @-@ fiction novel Tuesdays with Morrie . 
 While Peter is confronting Kyle , Kyle begins imitating Peter 's voice in a childish way . Peter replies to this by saying that Kyle makes him sound like Michael Stipe : The then @-@ lead singer of rock band R.E.M. 
 Stewie and Brian visiting the Art Institute of Chicago as one of Stewie 's last wishes is a reference to Ferris Bueller 's Day Off . 
 There is a dispute between Peter and Lois in regards to how different LEGO is from Mega Bloks . 
 While Stewie is tanning , he begins to sing his own version of the Kokomo ( song ) by The Beach Boys . 
 A parody of Kellogg ’ s Frosted Flakes ’ Tony the Tiger called Terry the Tiger is seen in the Griffin kitchen , saying “ They ’ re food ! ” 
 When Lois notices Stewie 's sunburn , she tells Peter that it was similar to the time he fed his Mogwai after midnight . A cutaway scene shows Peter feeding the Mogwai a drumstick , causing it to turn into Fran Drescher , whose head Peter then microwaves . 
 When Lois wipes off Stewie 's fake pencil mustache , Stewie compares the saliva being cleaned on his upper lip to the time he had dinner with Martin Landau . A cutaway shows Martin Landau having a distinct speech pattern by not chewing up his food as he speaks . 
 When Brian advises Stewie to “ wait and see ” whether or not he has cancer , Stewie says “ Jim Henson had a wait and see attitude , and look what happened to him . Now we ’ ve got wrong @-@ sounding Muppets , ” a reference to Henson ’ s deadly Streptococcus pneumoniae infection that was discovered too late which led to his death in 1990 . The scene then cuts to Kermit the Frog and the Swedish Chef in a dialogue sequence , with much different voice tones . The two would later appear at the end of the show , discussing the preceding events , when Fozzie Bear walks in , and says in a deep voice ( supplied by actor Michael Clarke Duncan ) : “ <unk> <unk> . Who wants to hear a funny @-@ ass joke ? ” . 
 When Peter realizes that he should bully Randy Fulcher , he compares this to Dick Cheney being a Wal @-@ Mart greeter . He greets each costumer with " Go fuck yourself " , a reference to a 2004 incident where he said those words to Senator Patrick Leahy , after he asked the vice president about Halliburton 's alleged war profiteering . 
 When Stewie gets off his beach chair during a tan , Stewie is seen drinking a can of TaB , and then slowly looking to the camera – a parody of TaB commercials in the ' 80s . 
 The title of the episode " The Tan Aquatic with Steve Zissou " is a reference to the 2004 Wes Anderson movie " The Life Aquatic with Steve Zissou " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In a significant improvement over the previous week , the episode was viewed in 8 @.@ 53 million homes in its original airing , according to Nielsen ratings . The episode also acquired a 3 @.@ 0 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , being slightly edged out by The Simpsons , while still winning over American Dad ! and King of the Hill . 
 Ahsan Haque of IGN gave " The Tan Aquatic with Steve Zissou " a 7 @.@ 4 / 10 and commented " the random filler jokes just don 't work , especially in this episode as both Jim Henson 's Muppets and Frosted Flakes ' Tony the Tiger are misused as random source material for jokes that simply fail to deliver , " adding that " The idea of Peter going overboard with his newfound desire to bully his family and friends is also not quite as funny as it could have been . " In a negative review by Brett Love of TV <unk> he noted " [ the episode ] was something of the opposite of " Peter 's Two Dads . " Where that one excelled with the structure of the story , this one wasn 't as strong . 
 = Australian Army ship Crusader ( AV <unk> ) = 
 Crusader ( <unk> ) was an Australian Army amphibious operations support ship of World War II . She was launched shortly before the war ended and entered service in late 1945 . From 1945 to 1947 she was mainly used to return Australian Army equipment from the islands off New Guinea . She was also loaned to the Australian Shipping Control Board in early 1947 and transported earth moving equipment and timber between Melbourne and Tasmania . However , the Army did not need a ship with Crusader 's capabilities after the war , and she was sold in 1947 to the Queensland Cement and Lime Company which operated her as a coral barge on the Brisbane River until the mid @-@ 1980s . The ship was scuttled in 1986 and subsequently became a popular dive wreck . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 During late 1944 and early 1945 the Australian Army suffered from a shortage of shipping , leading to delays in moving heavy equipment and small watercraft from Australia to operational areas in the South West Pacific . While several British and United States vessels were eventually made available in mid @-@ 1945 , the Australian Army 's chief engineer , Major General Clive Steele , chose to design and build a heavy lift ship for the Army . Steele personally designed the ship , which was intended to support amphibious operations and transport supplies . He deliberately underestimated the project 's cost in order to gain approval for the ship 's design and construction . 
 The ship 's design incorporated a number of unusual features . Crusader had a shallow draft to allow her to operate close to the shore , as well as four rudders and six engines driving six propellers to give her a high degree of manoeuvrability . While the ship required engines capable of generating a total of 2 @,@ 000 horsepower ( 1 @,@ 500 kW ) , the largest engines which were available in Australia at the time each generated only 220 horsepower ( 160 kW ) horsepower . Only six of these engines could be fitted into the ship , and she was considered under powered during her Army service . Her hold could carry 1 @,@ 500 long tons ( 1 @,@ 500 t ) of stores and an additional 40 vehicles could be embarked on her deck . The ship also had six 30 @-@ long @-@ ton ( 30 t ) cranes to move heavy equipment , as well as six bridge @-@ like structures which were used to embark and disembark vehicles . This equipment allowed her to discharge cargo at the rate of 90 long tons ( 91 t ) at any one time . Crusader had a ' box @-@ like ' appearance , and her design did not impress naval engineers . 
 Crusader was built by the Melbourne Harbour Trust at Williamstown Dockyard in Williamstown , Victoria . She was the largest all @-@ welded steel vessel to have been constructed in Australia at the time , and her final price of £ 124 @,@ 000 was considerably more than Steele 's deliberate underestimate . The ship was launched on 8 August 1945 after being named by Steele 's wife , and later became the largest ship to be commissioned by the Australian Army during World War II . Construction of a sister ship , to be called <unk> Corsair , was also begun , but this ship was cancelled when the war ended . 
 = = Service history = = 
 The ship completed her sea trials in late November 1945 , and subsequently entered service with the Army 's No. 2 Ordnance Craft Park . In February 1946 Crusader sailed to Rabaul in New Britain and later Torokina , Bougainville . During these and later voyages she proved successful in her intended role , and returned supplies and equipment from the islands to Australia . She also transported the bodies of 600 Australian servicemen killed during the fighting in the Solomon Islands to Port Moresby for permanent interment in the war cemetery there . Other unusual tasks undertaken by the vessel included transporting 800 native New Guineans from Aitape , Madang , Torokina and Wewak to a dispersal centre located in Rabaul and moving 44 tanks from Torokina to Sydney . 
 By January 1947 the Army no longer needed a ship with Crusader 's capabilities , and she was loaned to the Australian Shipping Control Board . In February that year she transported a load of earth moving equipment from Melbourne to Launceston , and carried a cargo of timber back to Melbourne . She continued to be manned by an Army crew and made several further trips between Tasmania and the mainland , but in April 1947 it was reported that the ship was to be scrapped on the grounds that she was considered unseaworthy . Gil Duthie , the Federal member for Wilmot , sought to have Crusader retained in service until the shortage of shipping capable of transporting heavy loads to and from Tasmania was rectified . The Shipping Control Board rejected <unk> 's representations on the grounds that Crusader would need extensive alterations before she could be permanently used for commercial trade , and it would take at least a year to complete the necessary works . However , the Board gave a commitment to make other ships available to transport timber from Tasmania . Crusader was subsequently offered for sale , and was purchased by the Queensland Cement and Lime Company ( QCL ) . She arrived at Brisbane on 28 September 1947 and was subsequently renamed Cementco . 
 QCL used Cementco as a self @-@ propelled coral barge . The ship was converted to this role in Brisbane by the firms Evans Deakin , Evans Anderson and Phelan . Modifications included moving the wheel @-@ house from the aft superstructure to about 50 feet ( 15 m ) from the bow and extensively altering the cargo holds to carry up to 2 @,@ 000 long tons ( 2 @,@ 000 t ) of coral . After these works were completed in July 1948 The Courier @-@ Mail reported that they had " made the strangest vessel on the Australian waterfront even stranger " . Cementco 's stern was later extended so that each member of her crew had their own cabin . 
 In her new role the ship carried coral which had been dredged from Moreton Bay by the converted Landing Ship Tank Coral ( the former HMAS LST <unk> ) to QCL 's cement factory at Darra in Brisbane . Like the rest of QCL 's small fleet , Cementco underwent a period of extensive maintenance at the Cairncross dry dock in Brisbane once every three years . During the 1974 Brisbane flood the ship 's crew had to fasten Cementco to the pylons of the Story Bridge to prevent her from being carried down the Brisbane River . 
 Cementco continued to transport coral until the mid @-@ 1980s , when QCL was acquired by the firm <unk> and another ship was purchased to transport clinker to the company 's new factory at Gladstone . She was subsequently laid up at Mary Street Wharf while attempts were made to sell her ; during this period she was renamed Crusader II to avoid confusion with a new ship named Cementco . A buyer was not found , and in 1986 Cementco was sunk at Flinders Reef off Cape Moreton where she later became a popular dive wreck . 
 = Robert Burnell = 
 Robert Burnell ( sometimes spelled Robert Burnel ; c . 1239 – 25 October 1292 ) was an English bishop who served as Lord Chancellor of England from 1274 to 1292 . A native of Shropshire , he served as a minor royal official before entering into the service of Prince Edward , the future King Edward I of England . When Edward went on the Eighth Crusade in 1270 , Burnell stayed in England to secure the prince 's interests . He served as regent after the death of King Henry III of England while Edward was still on crusade . He was twice elected Archbishop of Canterbury , but his personal life — which included a long @-@ term mistress who was rumoured to have borne him four sons — prevented his confirmation by the papacy . In 1275 Burnell was elected Bishop of Bath and Wells , after Edward had appointed him Lord Chancellor in 1274 . 
 Burnell was behind the efforts of the royal officials to enforce royal rights during his term of office as chancellor , including the implementation of the Quo warranto procedures . He also helped with the legislative and legal reforms of Edward 's reign . During Burnell 's tenure the chancellor 's office and records became fixed in London rather than travelling with the king . Burnell went abroad on diplomatic missions for Edward , and for a time governed Gascony . He continued to enjoy the king 's trust until his death in 1292 ; one historian has suggested that Burnell may have been the most important royal official of the 13th century . 
 = = Early life = = 
 By 1198 Burnell 's family had bestowed its name on the village of Acton Burnell in Shropshire , where Burnell was born probably in about 1239 , as he was close in age to King Edward . His father was probably Roger Burnell , who died in about 1259 . He had three brothers , two of whom died fighting the Welsh at the Battle of Moel @-@ y @-@ don in 1282 ; the third , Hugh , died in 1286 . Hugh 's son Philip was Robert 's eventual heir . Burnell worked as a clerk in the royal chancery , the office responsible for the writing of documents , before moving to the household of Prince Edward , later King Edward I of England . By 1257 Burnell was spending most of his time with the prince and the prince 's household . After Simon de Montfort 's victory at the Battle of Lewes in 1264 , Burnell continued to serve Edward , and was named the prince 's clerk in December 1264 . As a reward for his service , Burnell was given the prebend of Holme in the diocese of York some time before 1267 , and was named Archdeacon of York in December 1270 . He also held the office of chancellor to Edward from the time of the Battle of Evesham in 1265 until 1270 , when Edward left on crusade . 
 Prince Edward tried to have Burnell elected to the Archbishopric of Canterbury in 1270 , but was frustrated by the Canterbury cathedral chapter 's members , who instead elected their prior , William Chillenden . Eventually Pope Gregory X set Chillenden aside and installed his own choice in the see , Robert Kilwardby . Burnell did not accompany the prince on crusade in late 1270 , although he had originally planned to do so . Instead , he was appointed one of the four lieutenants who looked after Edward 's interests while the prince was away . Thus he was still in England when Henry III died in November 1272 . Burnell acted as one of the regents of the kingdom until August 1274 , when the prince , now king , returned from Palestine . During the regency Burnell supervised a parliament , dealt with raids on the Welsh Marches and resolved a trade conflict with Flanders . After the king 's return to England Burnell was made chancellor . The historian Richard Huscroft considers that Burnell gained valuable experience governing England during Edward 's absence , ensuring Burnell 's dominance in the English government after Edward 's return . 
 = = Chancellor and bishop = = 
 On 23 January 1275 Burnell was elected to the see of Bath and Wells . He received the temporalities of the see on 19 March 1275 and was consecrated on 7 April 1275 . Three years later Edward once more tried to secure the see of Canterbury for his favourite . Burnell was elected to the archbishopric in June or July 1278 , but the election was quashed by Pope Nicholas III in January 1279 . King Edward sent a deputation , including the eventual appointee , John Peckham , to secure Nicholas ' confirmation of the election . The pope named three cardinals as investigators , and then appointed Peckham instead . The bishop 's second failure to obtain the archbishopric was probably a consequence of his lifestyle , which included keeping a mistress . Edward made one final attempt to promote his friend to a wealthier see in early 1280 , when Burnell was nominated to become Bishop of Winchester , but Pope Nicholas III quashed the election on 28 June 1280 . 
 Burnell was the chief and most influential of Edward I 's advisers during the first half of his reign . As part of his duties Burnell spent most of his time in attendance on the king . He heard many requests and petitions from those who desired patronage or other advancements , and was diligent and active in dealing with routine business . Burnell played a leading role in the legislation introduced by King Edward . The king 's major legislative acts mainly date to Burnell 's tenure of the office of chancellor , from 21 September 1274 until Burnell 's death in 1292 . Burnell was instrumental in the enforcement of royal writs and enactments , including the Statutes of Westminster , enacted in 1275 , 1285 , and 1290 . Those of 1275 attempted to deal with the usurpation of royal rights . Keeping the peace in the realm and the extension of royal jurisdiction to cover rape was dealt with in the statutes from 1285 , along with a number of other issues . The last statute , from 1290 , regulated land law , the result of pressure from the magnates , the leading laymen of England . 
 During Burnell 's time in office Edward and his royal officials made great efforts to reassert royal rights that were felt to have been usurped by the king 's subjects . These efforts were made under writs of Quo warranto , which asked the recipient what royal grant or warrant gives the recipient the authority to exercise a right or a power . They were first issued in 1278 , after earlier attempts to recover royal rights through parliament unintentionally resulted in too much work for that body . Through these writs , attempts were made to enforce the rule that the only correct way to receive a privilege or grant of land was through a written charter , which might have deprived most of the magnates of England of their lands and rights . Most lands at that time were held not by documentary grants , but by the force of custom . By the 1290s the government was forced to back down and permit rights as they had been allowed from " time out of mind " . 
 The distinction between the king 's personal household department of the Wardrobe and the governmental department of the Chancery , which was headed by the chancellor , disappeared almost entirely during Burnell 's period of office . The Wardrobe had developed as a less formal department for the collection and distribution of money , but under Edward had effectively become a treasury for warfare . There was no rivalry between the holders of the Great Seal , the official seal of government and used for formal documents , and the Privy Seal , used to authenticate the king 's less formal letters . During Burnell 's time in office the king only used a Privy Seal warrant , or an informal set of instructions for the chancellor to issue a letter from the Chancery under the Great Seal , when the king and Burnell were apart ; after Burnell 's death the number of Privy Seal warrants increased greatly . 
 Edward had such trust in his chancellor and the chancellor 's clerks that Burnell and the clerks were allowed to dispense with the <unk> system , which required fees for sealing charters to be paid into the <unk> department of the Chancery for disbursal . Robert and his clerks were permitted to enjoy the profits from the fees of their office . Burnell was also responsible for the decision to force the Court of Chancery to settle in London , rather than following the king and his court around the country . A Chancery memorandum of 1280 records that the chancellor , along with the other ministers , now had the duty of sorting the many petitions that came into the government and only passing on the most urgent to the king . 
 As bishop , Burnell had a wall built around the cathedral at Wells , which helped to improve the security of the cathedral and its outlying buildings . He left the court each year at Lent , when he returned to his diocese and attended to its affairs . Peckham appointed Burnell to be his deputy when the archbishop went to Wales in 1282 . It was probably Burnell who suggested a compromise in 1285 over the jurisdictions of the royal and ecclesiastical courts , which allowed royal officials to return cases involving only religious matters to the church courts . 
 = = Foreign service = = 
 Burnell was active in the king 's foreign policy , especially towards France , Scotland and Wales , and undertook a number of diplomatic missions to those countries . Burnell served as the royal spokesman on several of these occasions , one of them being at Paris in 1286 when he made a speech detailing the history of English – French relations since the Treaty of Paris of 1259 . The speech was a prelude to discussions , successfully concluded , involving the homage that Edward owed to King Philip IV of France , for Edward 's land in France . Burnell was employed in Gascony during the late 1280s , helping to administer that duchy and to reorganise its government . He showed himself sensitive to the Gascon desire for independence and did not attempt to impose the same systems of government that were used in England . The historian Michael Prestwich therefore argues that the first half of Edward 's reign was the period when Gascony enjoyed its most successful government under the Plantagenets . Later , in June 1291 , Burnell gave two speeches at the great council of English and Scottish nobles in Norham to decide the succession to the Scottish crown . Edward had been asked to mediate an end to the crisis over the succession , or the Great Cause as it was known in England . 
 In Welsh affairs , Burnell attended a number of councils dealing with Llywelyn ap Gruffudd , Prince of Wales , and in 1277 he escorted Llywelyn to Westminster , where Llywelyn pledged homage to Edward . Burnell was present during Edward 's conquest of Wales in the 1280s ; he witnessed documents in Rhuddlan in 1282 , and subsequently at Conwy and Caernarfon . 
 Sometime before 1290 Burnell vowed to go on crusade to help reinforce the crusader city of Acre , which was threatened by Muslims in the late 1280s , but he never fulfilled his obligation . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Burnell died in Berwick , on 25 October 1292 . His body , without his heart , is interred in the nave of Wells Cathedral ; his heart was buried at Bath Abbey . Although he was usually busy with royal business , Burnell managed to expand his bishopric and provide for his relatives . He amassed great wealth , and acquired numerous estates in Shropshire , Worcestershire , Somerset , Kent , Surrey and elsewhere . At his death , he owned 82 manors over 19 counties , most of them his personal property rather than that of the diocese of Bath and Wells . 
 Even after he became a bishop Burnell kept a mistress , Juliana . Rumours circulated that she bore him four sons , and that he had a number of daughters , all of which Burnell denied . He kept a magnificent household , sufficient for him to be able to host a parliament at his home in Acton Burnell in autumn 1283 . He married off a number of young female relatives , rumoured to be his daughters , to noblemen . <unk> Burnell married a member of a royal justice 's family , and a Joan Burnell was the subject of a guarantee to the bishop that the son of William of Greystoke would marry her . A William Burnell was dean of Wells Cathedral , and was named as one of the bishop 's executors . Robert Burnell 's eventual heir was his nephew , Philip . 
 Burnell built extensively at Acton Burnell Castle , and large parts of his house have survived . It was substantially different in plan from the older hall @-@ style houses , which had the private quarters at the back of a large hall . At Acton Burnell the bishop 's quarters were well away from the building 's main public spaces , and included a latrine . The house was not quite a castle , but it was designed to have some defensive capability . The overall form of the structure was of a fortified hall @-@ house , much like the Norman @-@ era hall @-@ keeps . He also built the chapel and great hall in the Bishop 's Palace in Wells . 
 Burnell was a dominant figure during the first part of Edward 's reign , and he controlled most aspects of royal administration . He was involved not only in domestic issues but also in foreign relations , a responsibility he retained for two decades after Edward 's return to England in 1274 . Huscroft argues that he may have been the most important royal administrator of the 13th century . 
 = India = 
 India , officially the Republic of India ( Sanskrit : <unk> <unk> ) , is a country in South Asia . It is the seventh @-@ largest country by area , the second @-@ most populous country ( with over 1 @.@ 2 billion people ) , and the most populous democracy in the world . Bounded by the Indian Ocean on the south , the Arabian Sea on the south @-@ west , and the Bay of Bengal on the south @-@ east , it shares land borders with Pakistan to the west ; China , Nepal , and Bhutan to the north @-@ east ; and Myanmar ( Burma ) and Bangladesh to the east . In the Indian Ocean , India is in the vicinity of Sri Lanka and the Maldives ; in addition , India 's Andaman and Nicobar Islands share a maritime border with Thailand and Indonesia . 
 Home to the ancient Indus Valley Civilisation and a region of historic trade routes and vast empires , the Indian subcontinent was identified with its commercial and cultural wealth for much of its long history . Four religions — Hinduism , Buddhism , Jainism , and Sikhism — originated here , whereas Zoroastrianism , Judaism , Christianity , and Islam arrived in the 1st millennium CE and also shaped the region 's diverse culture . Gradually annexed by and brought under the administration of the British East India Company from the early 18th century and administered directly by the United Kingdom after the Indian Rebellion of 1857 , India became an independent nation in 1947 after a struggle for independence that was marked by non @-@ violent resistance led by Mahatma Gandhi . 
 Currently , the Indian economy is the world 's seventh @-@ largest by nominal GDP and third @-@ largest by purchasing power parity ( PPP ) . Following market @-@ based economic reforms in 1991 , India became one of the fastest @-@ growing major economies ; it is considered a newly industrialised country . However , it continues to face the challenges of poverty , corruption , malnutrition and inadequate public healthcare . A nuclear weapons state and a regional power , it has the third @-@ largest standing army in the world and ranks sixth in military expenditure among nations . India is a federal republic governed under a parliamentary system and consists of 29 states and 7 union territories . India is a pluralistic , multilingual , and a multi @-@ ethnic society . It is also home to a diversity of wildlife in a variety of protected habitats . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The name India is derived from Indus , which originates from the Old Persian word Sindhi . The latter term stems from the Sanskrit word Sindhu , which was the historical local appellation for the Indus River . The ancient Greeks referred to the Indians as <unk> ( <unk> ) , which translates as " The people of the Indus " . 
 The geographical term Bharat ( <unk> , pronounced [ <unk> ̪ ] ) , which is recognised by the Constitution of India as an official name for the country , is used by many Indian languages in its variations . It is a modernisation of the historical name <unk> , which gained increasing currency from the mid @-@ 19th century onwards as a native name of India . Scholars believe it to be named after the Vedic tribe of <unk> in the second millennium B.C.E. It is also traditionally associated with the rule of the legendary emperor Bharata . <unk> ( literally , people 's State ) is the Sanskrit / Hindi term for " republic " dating back to the ancient times . 
 Hindustan ( [ <unk> ̪ <unk> ̪ <unk> ] ) is an ancient Persian name for India dating to 3 century B.C.E. It was introduced into India by the Mughals and widely used since then , often being thought of as the " Land of the Hindus . " Its meaning varied , referring to a region that encompassed northern India and Pakistan or India in its entirety . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Ancient India = = = 
 The earliest authenticated human remains in South Asia date to about 30 @,@ 000 years ago . Nearly contemporaneous Mesolithic rock art sites have been found in many parts of the Indian subcontinent , including at the <unk> rock shelters in Madhya Pradesh . Around 7000 BCE , the first known Neolithic settlements appeared on the subcontinent in Mehrgarh and other sites in western Pakistan . These gradually developed into the Indus Valley Civilisation , the first urban culture in South Asia ; it flourished during 2500 – 1900 BCE in Pakistan and western India . Centred around cities such as Mohenjo @-@ daro , Harappa , Dholavira , and <unk> , and relying on varied forms of subsistence , the civilisation engaged robustly in crafts production and wide @-@ ranging trade . 
 During the period 2000 – 500 BCE , in terms of culture , many regions of the subcontinent transitioned from the Chalcolithic to the Iron Age . The Vedas , the oldest scriptures of Hinduism , were composed during this period , and historians have analysed these to posit a Vedic culture in the Punjab region and the upper Gangetic Plain . Most historians also consider this period to have encompassed several waves of Indo @-@ Aryan migration into the subcontinent . The caste system arose during this period , creating a hierarchy of priests , warriors , free peasants and traders , and lastly the indigenous peoples who were regarded as impure ; and small tribal units gradually coalesced into monarchical , state @-@ level polities . On the Deccan Plateau , archaeological evidence from this period suggests the existence of a chiefdom stage of political organisation . In southern India , a progression to sedentary life is indicated by the large number of megalithic monuments dating from this period , as well as by nearby traces of agriculture , irrigation tanks , and craft traditions . 
 In the late Vedic period , around the 6th century BCE , the small states and chiefdoms of the Ganges Plain and the north @-@ western regions had consolidated into 16 major oligarchies and monarchies that were known as the <unk> . The emerging urbanisation gave rise to non @-@ Vedic religious movements , two of which became independent religions . Jainism came into prominence during the life of its exemplar , Mahavira . Buddhism , based on the teachings of Gautama Buddha attracted followers from all social classes excepting the middle class ; chronicling the life of the Buddha was central to the beginnings of recorded history in India . In an age of increasing urban wealth , both religions held up renunciation as an ideal , and both established long @-@ lasting monastic traditions . Politically , by the 3rd century BCE , the kingdom of Magadha had annexed or reduced other states to emerge as the Mauryan Empire . The empire was once thought to have controlled most of the subcontinent excepting the far south , but its core regions are now thought to have been separated by large autonomous areas . The Mauryan kings are known as much for their empire @-@ building and determined management of public life as for Ashoka 's renunciation of militarism and far @-@ flung advocacy of the Buddhist <unk> . 
 The Sangam literature of the Tamil language reveals that , between 200 BCE and 200 CE , the southern peninsula was being ruled by the Cheras , the Cholas , and the Pandyas , dynasties that traded extensively with the Roman Empire and with West and South @-@ East Asia . In North India , Hinduism asserted patriarchal control within the family , leading to increased subordination of women . By the 4th and 5th centuries , the Gupta Empire had created in the greater Ganges Plain a complex system of administration and taxation that became a model for later Indian kingdoms . Under the Guptas , a renewed Hinduism based on devotion rather than the management of ritual began to assert itself . The renewal was reflected in a flowering of sculpture and architecture , which found patrons among an urban elite . Classical Sanskrit literature flowered as well , and Indian science , astronomy , medicine , and mathematics made significant advances . 
 = = = Medieval India = = = 
 The Indian early medieval age , 600 CE to 1200 CE , is defined by regional kingdoms and cultural diversity . When Harsha of Kannauj , who ruled much of the Indo @-@ Gangetic Plain from 606 to 647 CE , attempted to expand southwards , he was defeated by the Chalukya ruler of the Deccan . When his successor attempted to expand eastwards , he was defeated by the Pala king of Bengal . When the Chalukyas attempted to expand southwards , they were defeated by the Pallavas from farther south , who in turn were opposed by the Pandyas and the Cholas from still farther south . No ruler of this period was able to create an empire and consistently control lands much beyond his core region . During this time , pastoral peoples whose land had been cleared to make way for the growing agricultural economy were accommodated within caste society , as were new non @-@ traditional ruling classes . The caste system consequently began to show regional differences . 
 In the 6th and 7th centuries , the first devotional hymns were created in the Tamil language . They were imitated all over India and led to both the resurgence of Hinduism and the development of all modern languages of the subcontinent . Indian royalty , big and small , and the temples they patronised , drew citizens in great numbers to the capital cities , which became economic hubs as well . Temple towns of various sizes began to appear everywhere as India underwent another urbanisation . By the 8th and 9th centuries , the effects were felt in South @-@ East Asia , as South Indian culture and political systems were exported to lands that became part of modern @-@ day Myanmar , Thailand , Laos , Cambodia , Vietnam , Philippines , Malaysia , and Java . Indian merchants , scholars , and sometimes armies were involved in this transmission ; South @-@ East Asians took the initiative as well , with many sojourning in Indian seminaries and translating Buddhist and Hindu texts into their languages . 
 After the 10th century , Muslim Central Asian nomadic clans , using swift @-@ horse cavalry and raising vast armies united by ethnicity and religion , repeatedly overran South Asia 's north @-@ western plains , leading eventually to the establishment of the Islamic Delhi Sultanate in 1206 . The sultanate was to control much of North India , and to make many forays into South India . Although at first disruptive for the Indian elites , the sultanate largely left its vast non @-@ Muslim subject population to its own laws and customs . By repeatedly repulsing Mongol raiders in the 13th century , the sultanate saved India from the devastation visited on West and Central Asia , setting the scene for centuries of migration of fleeing soldiers , learned men , mystics , traders , artists , and artisans from that region into the subcontinent , thereby creating a syncretic Indo @-@ Islamic culture in the north . The sultanate 's raiding and weakening of the regional kingdoms of South India paved the way for the indigenous Vijayanagara Empire . Embracing a strong Shaivite tradition and building upon the military technology of the sultanate , the empire came to control much of peninsular India , and was to influence South Indian society for long afterwards . 
 = = = Early modern India = = = 
 In the early 16th century , northern India , being then under mainly Muslim rulers , fell again to the superior mobility and firepower of a new generation of Central Asian warriors . The resulting Mughal Empire did not stamp out the local societies it came to rule , but rather balanced and pacified them through new administrative practices and diverse and inclusive ruling elites , leading to more systematic , centralised , and uniform rule . Eschewing tribal bonds and Islamic identity , especially under Akbar , the Mughals united their far @-@ flung realms through loyalty , expressed through a Persianised culture , to an emperor who had near @-@ divine status . The Mughal state 's economic policies , deriving most revenues from agriculture and mandating that taxes be paid in the well @-@ regulated silver currency , caused peasants and artisans to enter larger markets . The relative peace maintained by the empire during much of the 17th century was a factor in India 's economic expansion , resulting in greater patronage of painting , literary forms , textiles , and architecture . Newly coherent social groups in northern and western India , such as the Marathas , the Rajputs , and the Sikhs , gained military and governing ambitions during Mughal rule , which , through collaboration or adversity , gave them both recognition and military experience . Expanding commerce during Mughal rule gave rise to new Indian commercial and political elites along the coasts of southern and eastern India . As the empire disintegrated , many among these elites were able to seek and control their own affairs . 
 By the early 18th century , with the lines between commercial and political dominance being increasingly blurred , a number of European trading companies , including the English East India Company , had established coastal outposts . The East India Company 's control of the seas , greater resources , and more advanced military training and technology led it to increasingly flex its military muscle and caused it to become attractive to a portion of the Indian elite ; both these factors were crucial in allowing the Company to gain control over the Bengal region by 1765 and sideline the other European companies . Its further access to the riches of Bengal and the subsequent increased strength and size of its army enabled it to annex or subdue most of India by the 1820s . India was then no longer exporting manufactured goods as it long had , but was instead supplying the British Empire with raw materials , and many historians consider this to be the onset of India 's colonial period . By this time , with its economic power severely curtailed by the British parliament and itself effectively made an arm of British administration , the Company began to more consciously enter non @-@ economic arenas such as education , social reform , and culture . 
 = = = Modern India = = = 
 Historians consider India 's modern age to have begun sometime between 1848 and 1885 . The appointment in 1848 of Lord Dalhousie as Governor General of the East India Company set the stage for changes essential to a modern state . These included the consolidation and demarcation of sovereignty , the surveillance of the population , and the education of citizens ( English Education Act 1835 ) . Technological changes — among them , railways , canals , and the telegraph — were introduced not long after their introduction in Europe . However , disaffection with the Company also grew during this time , and set off the Indian Rebellion of 1857 . Fed by diverse resentments and perceptions , including invasive British @-@ style social reforms , harsh land taxes , and summary treatment of some rich landowners and princes , the rebellion rocked many regions of northern and central India and shook the foundations of Company rule . Although the rebellion was suppressed by 1858 , it led to the dissolution of the East India Company and to the direct administration of India by the British government . Proclaiming a unitary state and a gradual but limited British @-@ style parliamentary system , the new rulers also protected princes and landed gentry as a feudal safeguard against future unrest . In the decades following , public life gradually emerged all over India , leading eventually to the founding of the Indian National Congress in 1885 . 
 The rush of technology and the commercialisation of agriculture in the second half of the 19th century was marked by economic setbacks — many small farmers became dependent on the whims of far @-@ away markets . There was an increase in the number of large @-@ scale famines , and , despite the risks of infrastructure development borne by Indian taxpayers , little industrial employment was generated for Indians . There were also salutary effects : commercial cropping , especially in the newly <unk> Punjab , led to increased food production for internal consumption . The railway network provided critical famine relief , notably reduced the cost of moving goods , and helped nascent Indian @-@ owned industry . After World War I , in which approximately one million Indians served , a new period began . It was marked by British reforms but also repressive legislations , by more strident Indian calls for self @-@ rule , and by the beginnings of a nonviolent movement of non @-@ co @-@ operation , of which Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi would become the leader and enduring symbol . During the 1930s , slow legislative reform was enacted by the British ; the Indian National Congress won victories in the resulting elections . The next decade was beset with crises : Indian participation in World War II , the Congress 's final push for non @-@ co @-@ operation , and an upsurge of Muslim nationalism . All were capped by the advent of independence in 1947 , but tempered by the partition of India into two states : India and Pakistan . 
 Vital to India 's self @-@ image as an independent nation was its constitution , completed in 1950 , which put in place a secular and democratic republic . In the 60 years since , India has had a mixed record of successes and failures . It has remained a democracy with civil liberties , an active Supreme Court , and a largely independent press . Economic liberalisation , which was begun in the 1990s , has created a large urban middle class , transformed India into one of the world 's fastest @-@ growing economies , and increased its geopolitical clout . Indian movies , music , and spiritual teachings play an increasing role in global culture . Yet , India is also shaped by seemingly unyielding poverty , both rural and urban ; by religious and caste @-@ related violence ; by Maoist @-@ inspired Naxalite insurgencies ; and by separatism in Jammu and Kashmir and in Northeast India . It has unresolved territorial disputes with China and with Pakistan . The India – Pakistan nuclear rivalry came to a head in 1998 . India 's sustained democratic freedoms are unique among the world 's newer nations ; however , in spite of its recent economic successes , freedom from want for its disadvantaged population remains a goal yet to be achieved . 
 = = Geography = = 
 India comprises the bulk of the Indian subcontinent , lying atop the Indian tectonic plate , and part of the Indo @-@ Australian Plate . India 's defining geological processes began 75 million years ago when the Indian plate , then part of the southern supercontinent Gondwana , began a north @-@ eastward drift caused by seafloor spreading to its south @-@ west , and later , south and south @-@ east . Simultaneously , the vast <unk> oceanic crust , to its northeast , began to subduct under the Eurasian plate . These dual processes , driven by convection in the Earth 's mantle , both created the Indian Ocean and caused the Indian continental crust eventually to under @-@ thrust Eurasia and to uplift the Himalayas . Immediately south of the emerging Himalayas , plate movement created a vast trough that rapidly filled with river @-@ borne sediment and now constitutes the Indo @-@ Gangetic Plain . Cut off from the plain by the ancient Aravalli Range lies the Thar Desert . 
 The original Indian plate survives as peninsular India , the oldest and geologically most stable part of India . It extends as far north as the Satpura and Vindhya ranges in central India . These parallel chains run from the Arabian Sea coast in Gujarat in the west to the coal @-@ rich Chota Nagpur Plateau in Jharkhand in the east . To the south , the remaining peninsular landmass , the Deccan Plateau , is flanked on the west and east by coastal ranges known as the Western and Eastern Ghats ; the plateau contains the country 's oldest rock formations , some over one billion years old . Constituted in such fashion , India lies to the north of the equator between 6 ° 44 ' and 35 ° 30 ' north latitude and 68 ° 7 ' and 97 ° 25 ' east longitude . 
 India 's coastline measures 7 @,@ 517 kilometres ( 4 @,@ 700 mi ) in length ; of this distance , 5 @,@ 423 kilometres ( 3 @,@ 400 mi ) belong to peninsular India and 2 @,@ 094 kilometres ( 1 @,@ 300 mi ) to the Andaman , Nicobar , and Lakshadweep island chains . According to the Indian naval hydrographic charts , the mainland coastline consists of the following : 43 % sandy beaches ; 11 % rocky shores , including cliffs ; and 46 % mudflats or marshy shores . 
 Major Himalayan @-@ origin rivers that substantially flow through India include the Ganges and the Brahmaputra , both of which drain into the Bay of Bengal . Important tributaries of the Ganges include the Yamuna and the Kosi ; the latter 's extremely low gradient often leads to severe floods and course changes . Major peninsular rivers , whose steeper gradients prevent their waters from flooding , include the Godavari , the Mahanadi , the Kaveri , and the Krishna , which also drain into the Bay of Bengal ; and the Narmada and the Tapti , which drain into the Arabian Sea . Coastal features include the marshy Rann of Kutch of western India and the alluvial Sundarbans delta of eastern India ; the latter is shared with Bangladesh . India has two archipelagos : the Lakshadweep , coral atolls off India 's south @-@ western coast ; and the Andaman and Nicobar Islands , a volcanic chain in the Andaman Sea . 
 The Indian climate is strongly influenced by the Himalayas and the Thar Desert , both of which drive the economically and culturally pivotal summer and winter monsoons . The Himalayas prevent cold Central Asian katabatic winds from blowing in , keeping the bulk of the Indian subcontinent warmer than most locations at similar latitudes . The Thar Desert plays a crucial role in attracting the moisture @-@ laden south @-@ west summer monsoon winds that , between June and October , provide the majority of India 's rainfall . Four major climatic groupings predominate in India : tropical wet , tropical dry , subtropical humid , and montane . 
 = = Biodiversity = = 
 India lies within the Indomalaya ecozone and contains three biodiversity hotspots . One of 17 megadiverse countries , it hosts 8 @.@ 6 % of all mammalian , 13 @.@ 7 % of all avian , 7 @.@ 9 % of all reptilian , 6 % of all amphibian , 12 @.@ 2 % of all <unk> , and 6 @.@ 0 % of all flowering plant species . About 21 @.@ 2 % of the country 's landmass is covered by forests ( tree canopy density > 10 % ) , of which 12 @.@ 2 % comprises moderately or very dense forests ( tree canopy density > 40 % ) . Endemism is high among plants , 33 % , and among ecoregions such as the shola forests . Habitat ranges from the tropical rainforest of the Andaman Islands , Western Ghats , and North @-@ East India to the coniferous forest of the Himalaya . Between these extremes lie the moist deciduous sal forest of eastern India ; the dry deciduous teak forest of central and southern India ; and the <unk> @-@ dominated thorn forest of the central Deccan and western Gangetic plain . The medicinal neem , widely used in rural Indian herbal remedies , is a key Indian tree . The luxuriant <unk> fig tree , shown on the seals of Mohenjo @-@ daro , shaded Gautama Buddha as he sought enlightenment . 
 Many Indian species descend from taxa originating in Gondwana , from which the Indian plate separated more than 105 million years before present . Peninsular India 's subsequent movement towards and collision with the Laurasian landmass set off a mass exchange of species . <unk> volcanism and climatic changes 20 million years ago forced a mass extinction . Mammals then entered India from Asia through two <unk> passes flanking the rising Himalaya . Thus , while 45 @.@ 8 % of reptiles and 55 @.@ 8 % of amphibians are endemic , only 12 @.@ 6 % of mammals and 4 @.@ 5 % of birds are . Among them are the Nilgiri leaf monkey and <unk> 's toad of the Western Ghats . India contains 172 IUCN @-@ designated threatened animal species , or 2 @.@ 9 % of endangered forms . These include the Asiatic lion , the Bengal tiger , the snow leopard and the Indian white @-@ rumped vulture , which , by ingesting the carrion of diclofenac @-@ laced cattle , nearly became extinct . 
 The pervasive and ecologically devastating human encroachment of recent decades has critically endangered Indian wildlife . In response the system of national parks and protected areas , first established in 1935 , was substantially expanded . In 1972 , India enacted the Wildlife Protection Act and Project Tiger to safeguard crucial wilderness ; the Forest Conservation Act was enacted in 1980 and amendments added in 1988 . India hosts more than five hundred wildlife sanctuaries and thirteen biosphere reserves , four of which are part of the World Network of Biosphere Reserves ; twenty @-@ five wetlands are registered under the Ramsar Convention . 
 = = Politics = = 
 India is the world 's most populous democracy . A parliamentary republic with a multi @-@ party system , it has six recognised national parties , including the Indian National Congress and the Bharatiya Janata Party ( BJP ) , and more than 40 regional parties . The Congress is considered centre @-@ left in Indian political culture , and the BJP right @-@ wing . For most of the period between 1950 — when India first became a republic — and the late 1980s , the Congress held a majority in the parliament . Since then , however , it has increasingly shared the political stage with the BJP , as well as with powerful regional parties which have often forced the creation of multi @-@ party coalitions at the centre . 
 In the Republic of India 's first three general elections , in 1951 , 1957 , and 1962 , the Jawaharlal Nehru @-@ led Congress won easy victories . On Nehru 's death in 1964 , Lal Bahadur Shastri briefly became prime minister ; he was succeeded , after his own unexpected death in 1966 , by Indira Gandhi , who went on to lead the Congress to election victories in 1967 and 1971 . Following public discontent with the state of emergency she declared in 1975 , the Congress was voted out of power in 1977 ; the then @-@ new Janata Party , which had opposed the emergency , was voted in . Its government lasted just over three years . Voted back into power in 1980 , the Congress saw a change in leadership in 1984 , when Indira Gandhi was assassinated ; she was succeeded by her son Rajiv Gandhi , who won an easy victory in the general elections later that year . The Congress was voted out again in 1989 when a National Front coalition , led by the newly formed Janata Dal in alliance with the Left Front , won the elections ; that government too proved relatively short @-@ lived , lasting just under two years . Elections were held again in 1991 ; no party won an absolute majority . The Congress , as the largest single party , was able to form a minority government led by P. V. Narasimha Rao . 
 A two @-@ year period of political turmoil followed the general election of 1996 . Several short @-@ lived alliances shared power at the centre . The BJP formed a government briefly in 1996 ; it was followed by two comparatively long @-@ lasting United Front coalitions , which depended on external support . In 1998 , the BJP was able to form a successful coalition , the National Democratic Alliance ( NDA ) . Led by Atal Bihari Vajpayee , the NDA became the first non @-@ Congress , coalition government to complete a five @-@ year term . In the 2004 Indian general elections , again no party won an absolute majority , but the Congress emerged as the largest single party , forming another successful coalition : the United Progressive Alliance ( UPA ) . It had the support of left @-@ leaning parties and MPs who opposed the BJP . The UPA returned to power in the 2009 general election with increased numbers , and it no longer required external support from India 's communist parties . That year , Manmohan Singh became the first prime minister since Jawaharlal Nehru in 1957 and 1962 to be re @-@ elected to a consecutive five @-@ year term . In the 2014 general election , the BJP became the first political party since 1984 to win a majority and govern without the support of other parties . The Prime Minister of India is Narendra Modi , who was formerly Chief Minister of Gujarat . 
 = = = Government = = = 
 India is a federation with a parliamentary system governed under the Constitution of India , which serves as the country 's supreme legal document . It is a republic and representative democracy , in which " majority rule is tempered by minority rights protected by law " . Federalism in India defines the power distribution between the federal government and the states . The government abides by constitutional checks and balances . The Constitution of India , which came into effect on 26 January 1950 , states in its preamble that India is a sovereign , socialist , secular , democratic republic . India 's form of government , traditionally described as " quasi @-@ federal " with a strong centre and weak states , has grown increasingly federal since the late 1990s as a result of political , economic , and social changes . 
 The federal government comprises three branches : 
 Executive : The President of India is the head of state and is elected indirectly by a national electoral college for a five @-@ year term . The Prime Minister of India is the head of government and exercises most executive power . Appointed by the president , the prime minister is by convention supported by the party or political alliance holding the majority of seats in the lower house of parliament . The executive branch of the Indian government consists of the president , the vice @-@ president , and the Council of Ministers — the cabinet being its executive committee — headed by the prime minister . Any minister holding a portfolio must be a member of one of the houses of parliament . In the Indian parliamentary system , the executive is subordinate to the legislature ; the prime minister and his council are directly responsible to the lower house of the parliament . 
 Legislative : The legislature of India is the bicameral parliament . It operates under a Westminster @-@ style parliamentary system and comprises the upper house called the Rajya Sabha ( " Council of States " ) and the lower called the Lok Sabha ( " House of the People " ) . The Rajya Sabha is a permanent body that has 245 members who serve in staggered six @-@ year terms . Most are elected indirectly by the state and territorial legislatures in numbers proportional to their state 's share of the national population . All but two of the Lok Sabha 's 545 members are directly elected by popular vote ; they represent individual constituencies via five @-@ year terms . The remaining two members are nominated by the president from among the Anglo @-@ Indian community , in case the president decides that they are not adequately represented . 
 Judicial : India has a unitary three @-@ tier independent judiciary that comprises the Supreme Court , headed by the Chief Justice of India , 24 High Courts , and a large number of trial courts . The Supreme Court has original jurisdiction over cases involving fundamental rights and over disputes between states and the centre ; it has appellate jurisdiction over the High Courts . It has the power both to declare the law and to strike down union or state laws which contravene the constitution , as well as to invalidate any government action it deems unconstitutional . 
 = = = Subdivisions = = = 
 India is a federation composed of 29 states and 7 union territories . All states , as well as the union territories of Puducherry and the National Capital Territory of Delhi , have elected legislatures and governments , both patterned on the Westminster model . The remaining five union territories are directly ruled by the centre through appointed administrators . In 1956 , under the States Reorganisation Act , states were reorganised on a linguistic basis . Since then , their structure has remained largely unchanged . Each state or union territory is further divided into administrative districts . The districts in turn are further divided into tehsils and ultimately into villages . 
 = = Foreign relations and military = = 
 Since its independence in 1947 , India has maintained cordial relations with most nations . In the 1950s , it strongly supported decolonisation in Africa and Asia and played a lead role in the Non @-@ Aligned Movement . In the late 1980s , the Indian military twice intervened abroad at the invitation of neighbouring countries : a peace @-@ keeping operation in Sri Lanka between 1987 and 1990 ; and an armed intervention to prevent a 1988 coup d 'état attempt in Maldives . India has tense relations with neighbouring Pakistan ; the two nations have gone to war four times : in 1947 , 1965 , 1971 , and 1999 . Three of these wars were fought over the disputed territory of Kashmir , while the fourth , the 1971 war , followed from India 's support for the independence of Bangladesh . After waging the 1962 Sino @-@ Indian War and the 1965 war with Pakistan , India pursued close military and economic ties with the Soviet Union ; by the late 1960s , the Soviet Union was its largest arms supplier . 
 Aside from ongoing strategic relations with Russia , India has wide @-@ ranging defence relations with Israel and France . In recent years , it has played key roles in the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation and the World Trade Organisation . The nation has provided 100 @,@ 000 military and police personnel to serve in 35 UN peacekeeping operations across four continents . It participates in the East Asia Summit , the G8 + 5 , and other multilateral forums . India has close economic ties with South America , Asia , and Africa ; it pursues a " Look East " policy that seeks to strengthen partnerships with the ASEAN nations , Japan , and South Korea that revolve around many issues , but especially those involving economic investment and regional security . 
 China 's nuclear test of 1964 , as well as its repeated threats to intervene in support of Pakistan in the 1965 war , convinced India to develop nuclear weapons . India conducted its first nuclear weapons test in 1974 and carried out further underground testing in 1998 . Despite criticism and military sanctions , India has signed neither the Comprehensive Nuclear @-@ Test @-@ Ban Treaty nor the Nuclear Non @-@ Proliferation Treaty , considering both to be flawed and discriminatory . India maintains a " no first use " nuclear policy and is developing a nuclear triad capability as a part of its " minimum credible deterrence " doctrine . It is developing a ballistic missile defence shield and , in collaboration with Russia , a fifth @-@ generation fighter jet . Other indigenous military projects involve the design and implementation of Vikrant @-@ class aircraft carriers and Arihant @-@ class nuclear submarines . 
 Since the end of the Cold War , India has increased its economic , strategic , and military co @-@ operation with the United States and the European Union . In 2008 , a civilian nuclear agreement was signed between India and the United States . Although India possessed nuclear weapons at the time and was not party to the Nuclear Non @-@ Proliferation Treaty , it received waivers from the International Atomic Energy Agency and the Nuclear Suppliers Group , ending earlier restrictions on India 's nuclear technology and commerce . As a consequence , India became the sixth de facto nuclear weapons state . India subsequently signed co @-@ operation agreements involving civilian nuclear energy with Russia , France , the United Kingdom , and Canada . 
 The President of India is the supreme commander of the nation 's armed forces ; with 1 @.@ 325 million active troops , they compose the world 's third @-@ largest military . It comprises the Indian Army , the Indian Navy , and the Indian Air Force ; auxiliary organisations include the Strategic Forces Command and three paramilitary groups : the Assam Rifles , the Special Frontier Force , and the Indian Coast Guard . The official Indian defence budget for 2011 was US $ 36 @.@ 03 billion , or 1 @.@ 83 % of GDP . For the fiscal year spanning 2012 – 2013 , US $ 40 @.@ 44 billion was budgeted . According to a 2008 SIPRI report , India 's annual military expenditure in terms of purchasing power stood at US $ 72 @.@ 7 billion . In 2011 , the annual defence budget increased by 11 @.@ 6 % , although this does not include funds that reach the military through other branches of government . As of 2012 , India is the world 's largest arms importer ; between 2007 and 2011 , it accounted for 10 % of funds spent on international arms purchases . Much of the military expenditure was focused on defence against Pakistan and countering growing Chinese influence in the Indian Ocean . 
 = = Economy = = 
 According to the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) , the Indian economy in 2015 was nominally worth US $ 2 @.@ 183 trillion ; it is the 7th @-@ largest economy by market exchange rates , and is , at US $ 8 @.@ 027 trillion , the third @-@ largest by purchasing power parity , or PPP . With its average annual GDP growth rate of 5 @.@ 8 % over the past two decades , and reaching 6 @.@ 1 % during 2011 – 12 , India is one of the world 's fastest @-@ growing economies . However , the country ranks 140th in the world in nominal GDP per capita and 129th in GDP per capita at PPP . Until 1991 , all Indian governments followed protectionist policies that were influenced by socialist economics . Widespread state intervention and regulation largely walled the economy off from the outside world . An acute balance of payments crisis in 1991 forced the nation to liberalise its economy ; since then it has slowly moved towards a free @-@ market system by emphasising both foreign trade and direct investment inflows . India 's recent economic model is largely capitalist . India has been a member of WTO since 1 January 1995 . 
 The 486 @.@ 6 @-@ million worker Indian labour force is the world 's second @-@ largest , as of 2011 . The service sector makes up 55 @.@ 6 % of GDP , the industrial sector 26 @.@ 3 % and the agricultural sector 18 @.@ 1 % . India 's foreign exchange remittances were US $ 70 billion in year 2014 , the largest in the world , contributed to its economy by 25 million Indians working in foreign countries . Major agricultural products include rice , wheat , oilseed , cotton , jute , tea , sugarcane , and potatoes . Major industries include textiles , telecommunications , chemicals , pharmaceuticals , biotechnology , food processing , steel , transport equipment , cement , mining , petroleum , machinery , and software . In 2006 , the share of external trade in India 's GDP stood at 24 % , up from 6 % in 1985 . In 2008 , India 's share of world trade was 1 @.@ 68 % ; In 2011 , India was the world 's tenth @-@ largest importer and the nineteenth @-@ largest exporter . Major exports include petroleum products , textile goods , jewellery , software , engineering goods , chemicals , and leather manufactures . Major imports include crude oil , machinery , gems , fertiliser , and chemicals . Between 2001 and 2011 , the contribution of petrochemical and engineering goods to total exports grew from 14 % to 42 % . India was the second largest textile exporter after China in the world in calendar year 2013 . 
 Averaging an economic growth rate of 7 @.@ 5 % for several years prior to 2007 , India has more than doubled its hourly wage rates during the first decade of the 21st century . Some 431 million Indians have left poverty since 1985 ; India 's middle classes are projected to number around 580 million by 2030 . Though ranking 51st in global competitiveness , India ranks 17th in financial market sophistication , 24th in the banking sector , 44th in business sophistication , and 39th in innovation , ahead of several advanced economies , as of 2010 . With 7 of the world 's top 15 information technology outsourcing companies based in India , the country is viewed as the second @-@ most favourable outsourcing destination after the United States , as of 2009 . India 's consumer market , the world 's eleventh @-@ largest , is expected to become fifth @-@ largest by 2030 . 
 Driven by growth , India 's nominal GDP per capita has steadily increased from US $ 329 in 1991 , when economic liberalisation began , to US $ 1 @,@ 265 in 2010 , and is estimated to increase to US $ 2 @,@ 110 by 2016 ; however , it has remained lower than those of other Asian developing countries such as Indonesia , Malaysia , Philippines , Sri Lanka , and Thailand , and is expected to remain so in the near future . However , it is higher than Pakistan , Nepal , Afghanistan , Bangladesh and others . 
 According to a 2011 PricewaterhouseCoopers report , India 's GDP at purchasing power parity could overtake that of the United States by 2045 . During the next four decades , Indian GDP is expected to grow at an annualised average of 8 % , making it potentially the world 's fastest @-@ growing major economy until 2050 . The report highlights key growth factors : a young and rapidly growing working @-@ age population ; growth in the manufacturing sector because of rising education and engineering skill levels ; and sustained growth of the consumer market driven by a rapidly growing middle class . The World Bank cautions that , for India to achieve its economic potential , it must continue to focus on public sector reform , transport infrastructure , agricultural and rural development , removal of labour regulations , education , energy security , and public health and nutrition . 
 In 2016 , the Economist Intelligence Unit ( EIU ) released Top 10 cheapest cities in the world which 4 of it were from India : Bangalore ( 2nd ) , Mumbai ( 3rd ) , Chennai ( 6th ) and New Delhi ( 8th ) based on the cost of 160 products and services . 
 = = = Sectors = = = 
 India 's telecommunication industry , the world 's fastest @-@ growing , added 227 million subscribers during the period 2010 – 11 , and after the first quarter of 2013 , India surpassed Japan to become the third largest smartphone market in the world after China and the US 
 Its automotive industry , the world 's second fastest growing , increased domestic sales by 26 % during 2009 – 10 , and exports by 36 % during 2008 – 09 . India 's capacity to generate electrical power is 250 gigawatts , of which 8 % is renewable . At the end of 2011 , the Indian IT industry employed 2 @.@ 8 million professionals , generated revenues close to US $ 100 billion equalling 7 @.@ 5 % of Indian GDP and contributed 26 % of India 's merchandise exports . 
 The pharmaceutical industry in India is among the significant emerging markets for global pharma industry . The Indian pharmaceutical market is expected to reach $ 48 @.@ 5 billion by 2020 . India 's R & D spending constitutes 60 % of the <unk> industry . India is among the top 12 biotech destinations of the world . The Indian biotech industry grew by 15 @.@ 1 % in 2012 – 13 , increasing its revenues from 204 @.@ 4 Billion INR ( Indian Rupees ) to 235 @.@ 24 Billion INR ( 3 @.@ 94 B US $ - exchange rate June 2013 : 1 US $ approx . 60 INR ) . Although hardly 2 % of Indians pay income taxes . 
 = = = Poverty = = = 
 Despite impressive economic growth during recent decades , India continues to face socio @-@ economic challenges . India contains the largest concentration of people living below the World Bank 's international poverty line of US $ 1 @.@ 25 per day , the proportion having decreased from 60 % in 1981 to 42 % in 2005 , and 25 % in 2011 . 30 @.@ 7 % of India 's children under the age of five are underweight . According to a Food and Agriculture Organization report in 2015 , 15 % of Indian population is undernourished . The Mid @-@ Day Meal Scheme attempts to lower these rates . Since 1991 , economic inequality between India 's states has consistently grown : the per @-@ capita net state domestic product of the richest states in 2007 was 3 @.@ 2 times that of the poorest . Corruption in India is perceived to have increased significantly , with one report estimating the illegal capital flows since independence to be US $ 462 billion . 
 India has the highest number of people living in conditions of slavery , 18 million , most of whom are in bonded labour . India has the largest number of child labourers under the age of 14 in the world with an estimated 12 @.@ 6 million children engaged in hazardous occupations . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 With 1 @,@ 210 @,@ 193 @,@ 422 residents reported in the 2011 provisional census report , India is the world 's second @-@ most populous country . Its population grew by 17 @.@ 64 % during 2001 – 2011 , compared to 21 @.@ 54 % growth in the previous decade ( 1991 – 2001 ) . The human sex ratio , according to the 2011 census , is 940 females per 1 @,@ 000 males . The median age was 24 @.@ 9 in the 2001 census . The first post @-@ colonial census , conducted in 1951 , counted 361 @.@ 1 million people . Medical advances made in the last 50 years as well as increased agricultural productivity brought about by the " Green Revolution " have caused India 's population to grow rapidly . India continues to face several public health @-@ related challenges . 
 Life expectancy in India is at 68 years with life expectancy for women being 69 @.@ 6 years and for men being 67 @.@ 3 . There are around 50 physicians per 100 @,@ 000 Indians . The number of Indians living in urban areas has grown by 31 @.@ 2 % between 1991 and 2001 . Yet , in 2001 , over 70 % lived in rural areas . The level of urbanisation increased from 27 @.@ 81 % in 2001 Census to 31 @.@ 16 % in 2011 Census . The slowing down of the overall growth rate of population was due to the sharp decline in the growth rate in rural areas since 1991 . According to the 2011 census , there are 53 million @-@ plus cities in India ; among them Mumbai , Delhi , Bangalore , Hyderabad , Chennai , Ahmedabad , and Kolkata , in decreasing order by population . The literacy rate in 2011 was 74 @.@ 04 % : 65 @.@ 46 % among females and 82 @.@ 14 % among males . The rural urban literacy gap which was 21 @.@ 2 percentage points in 2001 , dropped to 16 @.@ 1 percentage points in 2011 . The improvement in literacy rate in rural area is two times that in urban areas . Kerala is the most literate state with 93 @.@ 91 % literacy ; while Bihar the least with 63 @.@ 82 % . 
 India is home to two major language families : Indo @-@ Aryan ( spoken by about 74 % of the population ) and Dravidian ( 24 % ) . Other languages spoken in India come from the Austroasiatic and Sino @-@ Tibetan language families . India has no national language . Hindi , with the largest number of speakers , is the official language of the government . English is used extensively in business and administration and has the status of a " subsidiary official language " ; it is important in education , especially as a medium of higher education . Each state and union territory has one or more official languages , and the constitution recognises in particular 22 " scheduled languages " . The Constitution of India recognises 212 scheduled tribal groups which together constitute about 7 @.@ 5 % of the country 's population . The 2011 census reported that Hinduism ( 79 @.@ 8 % of the population ) is the largest religion in India , followed by Islam ( 14 @.@ 23 % ) . Other religions or none ( 5 @.@ 97 % of the population ) include Christianity ( 2 @.@ 30 % ) , Sikhism ( 1 @.@ 72 % ) , Buddhism ( 0 @.@ 70 % ) , Jainism , Judaism , Zoroastrianism , and the Bahá 'í Faith . India has the world 's largest Hindu , Sikh , Jain , Zoroastrian , and Bahá 'í populations , and has the third @-@ largest Muslim population and the largest Muslim population for a non @-@ Muslim majority country . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Indian cultural history spans more than 4 @,@ 500 years . During the Vedic period ( c . 1700 – 500 BCE ) , the foundations of Hindu philosophy , mythology , theology and literature were laid , and many beliefs and practices which still exist today , such as <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and mokṣa , were established . India is notable for its religious diversity , with Hinduism , Buddhism , Sikhism , Islam , Christianity , and Jainism among the nation 's major religions . The predominant religion , Hinduism , has been shaped by various historical schools of thought , including those of the Upanishads , the Yoga Sutras , the Bhakti movement , and by Buddhist philosophy . 
 = = = Art and architecture = = = 
 Much of Indian architecture , including the Taj Mahal , other works of Mughal architecture , and South Indian architecture , blends ancient local traditions with imported styles . Vernacular architecture is also highly regional in it flavours . Vastu shastra , literally " science of construction " or " architecture " and ascribed to <unk> Mayan , explores how the laws of nature affect human dwellings ; it employs precise geometry and directional alignments to reflect perceived cosmic constructs . As applied in Hindu temple architecture , it is influenced by the Shilpa Shastras , a series of foundational texts whose basic mythological form is the Vastu @-@ Purusha mandala , a square that embodied the " absolute " . The Taj Mahal , built in Agra between 1631 and 1648 by orders of Emperor Shah Jahan in memory of his wife , has been described in the UNESCO World Heritage List as " the jewel of Muslim art in India and one of the universally admired masterpieces of the world 's heritage " . Indo @-@ Saracenic Revival architecture , developed by the British in the late 19th century , drew on Indo @-@ Islamic architecture . 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 The earliest literary writings in India , composed between 1700 BCE and 1200 CE , were in the Sanskrit language . Prominent works of this Sanskrit literature include epics such as the Mahābhārata and the Ramayana , the dramas of Kālidāsa such as the <unk> ( The Recognition of <unk> ) , and poetry such as the <unk> . <unk> , the famous book about sexual intercourse also originated in India . Developed between 600 BCE and 300 CE in South India , the Sangam literature , consisting of 2 @,@ 381 poems , is regarded as a predecessor of Tamil literature . From the 14th to the 18th centuries , India 's literary traditions went through a period of drastic change because of the emergence of devotional poets such as Kabīr , <unk> , and Guru <unk> . This period was characterised by a varied and wide spectrum of thought and expression ; as a consequence , medieval Indian literary works differed significantly from classical traditions . In the 19th century , Indian writers took a new interest in social questions and psychological descriptions . In the 20th century , Indian literature was influenced by the works of Bengali poet and novelist Rabindranath Tagore . 
 = = = Performing arts = = = 
 Indian music ranges over various traditions and regional styles . Classical music encompasses two genres and their various folk offshoots : the northern Hindustani and southern Carnatic schools . <unk> popular forms include filmi and folk music ; the syncretic tradition of the <unk> is a well @-@ known form of the latter . Indian dance also features diverse folk and classical forms . Among the better @-@ known folk dances are the bhangra of Punjab , the <unk> of Assam , the <unk> of Odisha , West Bengal and Jharkhand , <unk> and <unk> of Gujarat , <unk> of Rajasthan , and the <unk> of Maharashtra . Eight dance forms , many with narrative forms and mythological elements , have been accorded classical dance status by India 's National Academy of Music , Dance , and Drama . These are : <unk> of the state of Tamil Nadu , kathak of Uttar Pradesh , <unk> and <unk> of Kerala , kuchipudi of Andhra Pradesh , <unk> of Manipur , <unk> of Odisha , and the <unk> of Assam . Theatre in India melds music , dance , and improvised or written dialogue . Often based on Hindu mythology , but also borrowing from medieval romances or social and political events , Indian theatre includes the <unk> of Gujarat , the jatra of West Bengal , the <unk> and <unk> of North India , <unk> of Maharashtra , <unk> of Andhra Pradesh , <unk> of Tamil Nadu , and the <unk> of Karnataka . 
 = = = Motion pictures , television = = = 
 The Indian film industry produces the world 's most @-@ watched cinema . Established regional cinematic traditions exist in the Assamese , Bengali , Bhojpuri , Hindi , Kannada , Malayalam , Punjabi , Gujarati , Marathi , Odia , Tamil , and Telugu languages . South Indian cinema attracts more than 75 % of national film revenue . 
 Television broadcasting began in India in 1959 as a state @-@ run medium of communication , and had slow expansion for more than two decades . The state monopoly on television broadcast ended in the 1990s and , since then , satellite channels have increasingly shaped popular culture of Indian society . Today , television is the most penetrative media in India ; industry estimates indicate that as of 2012 there are over 554 million TV consumers , 462 million with satellite and / or cable connections , compared to other forms of mass media such as press ( 350 million ) , radio ( 156 million ) or internet ( 37 million ) . 
 = = = Society = = = 
 Traditional Indian society is sometimes defined by social hierarchy . The Indian caste system embodies much of the social stratification and many of the social restrictions found in the Indian subcontinent . Social classes are defined by thousands of endogamous hereditary groups , often termed as <unk> , or " castes " . India declared untouchability to be illegal in 1947 and has since enacted other anti @-@ discriminatory laws and social welfare initiatives . At the workplace in urban India and in international or leading Indian companies , the caste related identification has pretty much lost its importance . 
 Family values are important in the Indian tradition , and multi @-@ generational patriarchal joint families have been the norm in India , though nuclear families are becoming common in urban areas . An overwhelming majority of Indians , with their consent , have their marriages arranged by their parents or other elders in the family . Marriage is thought to be for life , and the divorce rate is extremely low . As of 2001 , just 1 @.@ 6 percent of Indian women were divorced but this figure was rising due to their education and economic independence . Child marriages are common , especially in rural areas ; many women wed before reaching 18 , which is their legal marriageable age . Female infanticide and female <unk> in the country have caused a discrepancy in the sex ratio , as of 2005 it was estimated that there were 50 million more males than females in the nation . However a report from 2011 has shown improvement in the gender ratio . The payment of dowry , although illegal , remains widespread across class lines . Deaths resulting from dowry , mostly from bride burning , are on the rise . 
 Many Indian festivals are religious in origin . The best known include Diwali , Ganesh Chaturthi , Thai Pongal , Holi , Durga Puja , Eid ul @-@ Fitr , Bakr @-@ Id , Christmas , and Vaisakhi . India has three national holidays which are observed in all states and union territories – Republic Day , Independence Day and Gandhi Jayanti . Other sets of holidays , varying between nine and twelve , are officially observed in individual states . 
 = = = Clothing = = = 
 Cotton was domesticated in India by 4000 BCE . Traditional Indian dress varies in colour and style across regions and depends on various factors , including climate and faith . Popular styles of dress include draped garments such as the sari for women and the dhoti or lungi for men . <unk> clothes , such as the shalwar kameez for women and kurta – pyjama combinations or European @-@ style trousers and shirts for men , are also popular . Use of delicate jewellery , modelled on real flowers worn in ancient India , is part of a tradition dating back some 5 @,@ 000 years ; gemstones are also worn in India as talismans . 
 = = = Sports = = = 
 In India , several traditional indigenous sports remain fairly popular , such as kabaddi , kho kho , <unk> and gilli @-@ danda . Some of the earliest forms of Asian martial arts , such as <unk> , <unk> yuddha , <unk> , and <unk> <unk> , originated in India . Chess , commonly held to have originated in India as <unk> , is regaining widespread popularity with the rise in the number of Indian grandmasters . Pachisi , from which <unk> derives , was played on a giant marble court by Akbar . 
 The improved results garnered by the Indian Davis Cup team and other Indian tennis players in the early 2010s have made tennis increasingly popular in the country . India has a comparatively strong presence in shooting sports , and has won several medals at the Olympics , the World Shooting Championships , and the Commonwealth Games . Other sports in which Indians have succeeded internationally include badminton ( Saina Nehwal is the top ranked female badminton player in the world ) , boxing , and wrestling . Football is popular in West Bengal , Goa , Tamil Nadu , Kerala , and the north @-@ eastern states . India is scheduled to host the 2017 FIFA U @-@ 17 World Cup . 
 Field hockey in India is administered by Hockey India . The Indian national hockey team won the 1975 Hockey World Cup and have , as of 2012 , taken eight gold , one silver , and two bronze Olympic medals , making it the sport 's most successful team in the Olympics . 
 India has also played a major role in popularising cricket . Thus , cricket is , by far , the most popular sport in India . The Indian national cricket team won the 1983 and 2011 Cricket World Cup events , the 2007 ICC World Twenty20 , shared the 2002 ICC Champions Trophy with Sri Lanka , and won 2013 ICC Champions Trophy . Cricket in India is administered by the Board of Control for Cricket in India ( BCCI ) ; the Ranji Trophy , the Duleep Trophy , the <unk> Trophy , the Irani Trophy , and the NKP Salve Challenger Trophy are domestic competitions . The BCCI is also responsible for conducting an annual Twenty20 competition known as the Indian Premier League . 
 India has hosted or co @-@ hosted several international sporting events : the 1951 and 1982 Asian Games ; the 1987 , 1996 , and 2011 Cricket World Cup tournaments ; the 2003 Afro @-@ Asian Games ; the 2006 ICC Champions Trophy ; the 2010 Hockey World Cup ; and the 2010 Commonwealth Games . Major international sporting events held annually in India include the Chennai Open , the Mumbai Marathon , the Delhi Half Marathon , and the Indian Masters . The first Indian Grand Prix featured in late 2011 but has been discontinued from the F1 season calendar since 2014 . 
 India has traditionally been the dominant country at the South Asian Games . An example of this dominance is the basketball competition where Team India won three out of four tournaments to date . The Rajiv Gandhi Khel Ratna and the Arjuna Award are the highest forms of government recognition for athletic achievement ; the <unk> Award is awarded for excellence in coaching . 
 = Atlantic Wall = 
 The Atlantic Wall ( German : <unk> ) was an extensive system of coastal defence and fortifications built by Nazi Germany between 1942 and 1944 along the coast of continental Europe and Scandinavia as a defence against an anticipated Allied invasion of Nazi @-@ occupied Europe from Great Britain during World War II . 
 Hitler ordered the construction of the fortifications in 1942 . Almost a million French workers were drafted to build it . The wall was frequently mentioned in Nazi propaganda , where its size and strength were usually exaggerated . The fortifications included colossal coastal guns , batteries , mortars , and artillery , and thousands of German troops were stationed in its defences . When the Allies eventually invaded the Normandy beaches in 1944 , most of the defences were stormed within hours . Today , ruins of the wall exist in all of the nations where the wall was built , although many structures have fallen into the ocean or have been demolished over the years . 
 = = Background = = 
 World War II in Europe began on 1 September 1939 , with Nazi Germany 's invasion of Poland . Two days later , Britain and France declared war on Germany . Poland 's geographical location , however , prevented the Allies from intervening directly . Four weeks into the attack , the Germans had successfully occupied Poland . 
 Less than a month after this victory , Adolf Hitler issued a directive stating that Germany must be ready for an offensive through France and the Low Countries . However , the Oberkommando der Wehrmacht ( German high command ; OKW ) was convinced that preparations would take at least until the following year . After furious arguments , Hitler reluctantly agreed to wait . In May 1940 , three massive German army groups overran France and the Low Countries in little more than six weeks . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Creation = = = 
 On 23 March 1942 , Hitler issued Führer Directive No. 40 , which called for the creation of an " Atlantic Wall " . He ordered naval and submarine bases to be heavily defended . Fortifications remained concentrated around ports until late in 1943 , when defences were increased in other areas . Nazi propaganda claimed that the wall stretched from the cape of Norway down to the Spanish border . 
 Organisation Todt , which had designed the Siegfried Line during the prewar years along the Franco @-@ German border , was the chief engineering group responsible for the design and construction of the wall 's major gun emplacements and fortifications . The Vichy regime imposed a compulsory labour system , drafting some 600 @,@ 000 French workers to construct these permanent fortifications along the Dutch , Belgian , and French coasts facing the English Channel . 
 = = = British attacks = = = 
 Throughout most of 1942 – 43 , the Atlantic Wall remained a relaxed front for the Axis troops manning it , with only two large @-@ scale British attacks . Operation Chariot , launched near St Nazaire in March 1942 , was an attempt to destroy German pumping machinery and installations . The second attack was the Dieppe Raid , launched near the French port of Dieppe in August 1942 to test the German defences and provide combat experience for Canadian troops . The Germans were defeated at St. Nazaire , but had little difficulty in repulsing the attack at Dieppe , where they inflicted heavy casualties . Although the Dieppe raid was a disaster for the Allies , it alarmed Hitler , who was sure an Allied invasion in the West would shortly follow . Following Dieppe , Hitler gave Field Marshal Gerd von Rundstedt , the overall German Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief in the West , 15 further divisions to shore up the German positions . 
 = = = Reorganisation = = = 
 Early in 1944 , with an Allied invasion of Nazi @-@ occupied Europe becoming ever more likely , Field Marshal Erwin Rommel was assigned to improve the wall 's defences . Believing the existing coastal fortifications to be entirely inadequate , he immediately began strengthening them . Rommel 's main concern was Allied air power . He had seen it first @-@ hand when fighting the British and Americans in North Africa , and it had left a profound impression on him . He feared that any German counterattack would be broken up by Allied aircraft long before it could make a difference . Under his direction , hundreds of reinforced concrete pillboxes were built on the beaches , or sometimes slightly inland , to house machine guns , antitank guns , and light and heavy artillery . Land mines and antitank obstacles were planted on the beaches , and underwater obstacles and naval mines were placed in waters just offshore . The intent was to destroy the Allied landing craft before they could unload on the beaches . 
 = = = D @-@ Day = = = 
 By the time of the Allied invasion , the Germans had laid almost six million mines in Northern France . More gun emplacements and minefields extended inland along roads leading away from the beaches . In likely landing spots for gliders and parachutists , the Germans <unk> slanted poles with sharpened tops , which the troops called Rommelspargel ( " Rommel 's Asparagus " ) . Low @-@ lying river and estuarine areas were intentionally flooded . Rommel believed that Germany would inevitably be defeated unless the invasion could be stopped on the beach , declaring , " It is absolutely necessary that we push the British and Americans back from the beaches . Afterwards it will be too late ; the first 24 hours of the invasion will be decisive . " 
 The Channel Islands were heavily fortified , particularly the island of Alderney , which is closest to Britain . Hitler had decreed that one @-@ twelfth of the steel and concrete used in the Atlantic Wall should go to the Channel Islands , because of the propaganda value of controlling British territory . The islands were some of the most densely fortified areas in Europe , with a host of <unk> tunnels , casemates , and coastal artillery positions . Walcheren Island is considered to be the " strongest concentration of defences the Nazis had ever constructed . " 
 However , as the Channel Islands lacked strategic significance , the Allies bypassed them when they invaded Normandy . As a result , the German garrisons stationed on the islands did not surrender until 9 May 1945 — one day after Victory in Europe Day . The garrison on Alderney did not surrender until 16 May . Because most of their garrisons surrendered peacefully , the Channel Islands are host to some of the best @-@ preserved Atlantic Wall sites . 
 = = Fortresses = = 
 Many major ports and positions were incorporated into the Atlantic Wall , receiving heavy fortifications . Hitler ordered all positions to fight to the end , and some of them remained in German hands until Germany 's unconditional surrender . Several of the port fortresses were resupplied by submarines after being surrounded by Allied Forces . The defenders of these positions included foreign volunteers and SS troops . 
 = = Preservation = = 
 = = = France = = = 
 Immediately after the war , there was little interest in preserving the wall due to the negative memories associated with the Nazi occupation . One of the best preserved parts is the Todt Battery . In 2011 , renewed efforts to preserve the wall were spearheaded by organisations in Germany , the Netherlands , and the United Kingdom . Many of the beach fortifications have toppled or are underwater , while the ones further inland are still mainly extant due to their location . 
 = = = Elsewhere = = = 
 Although the defensive wall was never fully completed , many bunkers still exist near Ostend , Channel Islands , Scheveningen , Den Haag , Katwijk , and in Scandinavia . 
 = = = Printed = = = 
 Ambrose , Stephen ( 1994 ) . D @-@ Day , June 6 , 1944 : The Climactic Battle Of World War II . Simon & Schuster . ISBN 0 @-@ 671 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 Darman , Peter ( 2012 ) . The Allied Invasion Of Europe . Rosen Publishing Group . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 4488 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 <unk> , Patrick ( 2005 ) . Smashing The Atlantic Wall : The Destruction Of Hitler 's Coastal Fortresses . Casemate Publishers . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 84415 @-@ 256 @-@ 8 . 
 Hakim , Joy ( 1995 ) . A History Of Us : War , Peace And All That Jazz . Oxford University . ISBN 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 Hastings , Max ( 2004 ) . Armageddon : The Battle for Germany 1944 – 45 . Macmillan . ISBN 0 @-@ 333 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 Kaufmann , J. E. ; Robert , <unk> ( 2003 ) . Fortress Third Reich : German Fortifications And Defense Systems In World War II . Da Capo Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 306 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 McNab , Chris ( 2014 ) . Hitler ’ s Fortresses : German Fortifications And Defences 1939 – 45 . Osprey Publishing . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 78200 @-@ 828 @-@ 6 . 
 Mountbatten , Chris ( 2007 ) . Combined Operations : The Official Story Of The Commandos . Read Books . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . 
 Pauls , Michael ; <unk> , Dana ( 2007 ) . Cadogan Guide Dordogne , the Lot & Bordeaux . New Holland Publishers . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 354 @-@ 3 . 
 Saunders , Anthony ( 2001 ) . Hitler 's Atlantic Wall : Fortress Europe . University of Michigan . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 
 Stephenson , Charles ; Taylor , Chris ( 2013 ) . The Channel Islands 1941 – 45 : Hitler 's Impregnable Fortress . Osprey Publishing . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 
 Williamson , Louis ( 2012 ) . U @-@ Boat Bases And Bunkers 1941 – 45 . Osprey Publishing . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 78200 @-@ 002 @-@ 0 . 
 Williams , Paul ( 2013 ) . Hitler 's Atlantic Wall : Pas De Calais . Casemate Publishers . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 817 @-@ 7 . 
 <unk> , Mark ( 2009 ) . Terrible Victory : First Canadian Army And The Scheldt Estuary Campaign : September 13 – November 6 , 1944 . D & M Publishers . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 80 @-@ 9 . 
 = = = Online = = = 
 " Assault Plan " . United States Army Center of Military History . Retrieved 22 March 2015 . 
 Schofield , Hugh ( 13 September 2011 ) . " Hitler 's Atlantic Wall : Should France Preserve It ? " . British Broadcasting Corporation . Retrieved 25 March 2015 . 
 " Jersey – My Island – History – German Occupation " . British Broadcasting Corporation . Retrieved 25 March 2015 . 
 = = = Media = = = 
 Lighting War ( television documentary ) . United States : World Media Rights . 2009 . Retrieved 22 March 2015 . 
 The Great Landings ( television documentary ) . France : France 2 . 2009 . Retrieved 22 March 2015 . 
 Overlord ( television documentary ) . United States : World Media Rights . 2009 . Retrieved 22 March 2015 . 
 The Atlantic Wall features in the novel Villa Normandie by Kevin Doherty . 
 The many constructions of the Wall still standing have been photographed by Jonathan Andrew . 
 = Marilyn Monroe = 
 Marilyn Monroe ( born Norma Jeane Mortenson ; June 1 , 1926 – August 5 , 1962 ) was an American actress and model . Famous for playing " dumb blonde " characters , she became one of the most popular sex symbols of the 1950s , emblematic of the era 's attitudes towards sexuality . Although she was a top @-@ billed actress for only a decade , her films grossed $ 200 million by the time of her unexpected death in 1962 . She continues to be considered a major popular culture icon . 
 Born and raised in Los Angeles , Monroe spent most of her childhood in foster homes and an orphanage and married for the first time at the age of sixteen . While working in a factory as part of the war effort in 1944 , she met a photographer and began a successful pin @-@ up modeling career . The work led to short @-@ lived film contracts with Twentieth Century @-@ Fox ( 1946 – 47 ) and Columbia Pictures ( 1948 ) . After a series of minor film roles , she signed a new contract with Fox in 1951 . Over the next two years , she became a popular actress with roles in several comedies , including As Young as You Feel and Monkey Business , and in the dramas Clash by Night and Don 't Bother to Knock . Monroe faced a scandal when it was revealed that she had posed for nude photos before becoming a star , but rather than damaging her career , the story increased interest in her films . 
 By 1953 , Monroe was one of the most bankable Hollywood stars , with leading roles in three films : the noir Niagara , which focused on her sex appeal , and the comedies Gentlemen Prefer Blondes and How to Marry a Millionaire , which established her star image as a " dumb blonde " . Although she played a significant role in the creation and management of her public image throughout her career , she was disappointed at being typecast and underpaid by the studio . She was briefly suspended in early 1954 for refusing a film project , but returned to star in one of the biggest box office successes of her career , The Seven Year Itch ( 1955 ) . When the studio was still reluctant to change her contract , Monroe founded a film production company in late 1954 , Marilyn Monroe Productions ( MMP ) . She dedicated 1955 to building her company and began studying method acting at the Actors Studio . In late 1955 , Fox awarded her a new contract , which gave her more control and a larger salary . After a critically acclaimed performance in Bus Stop ( 1956 ) and acting in the first independent production of MMP , The Prince and the Showgirl ( 1957 ) , she won a Golden Globe for Best Actress for Some Like It Hot ( 1959 ) . Her last completed film was the drama The Misfits ( 1961 ) . 
 Monroe 's troubled private life received much attention . She struggled with addiction , depression , and anxiety . She had two highly publicized marriages , to baseball player Joe DiMaggio and playwright Arthur Miller , which both ended in divorce . She died at the age of 36 from an overdose of barbiturates at her home in Los Angeles on August 5 , 1962 . Although the death was ruled a probable suicide , several conspiracy theories have been proposed in the decades following her death . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = Childhood and first marriage ( 1926 – 44 ) = = = 
 Monroe was born Norma Jeane Mortenson at the Los Angeles County Hospital on June 1 , 1926 , as the third child of Gladys Pearl Baker ( née Monroe , 1902 – 84 ) . Gladys , the daughter of two poor Midwestern migrants to California , was a flapper and worked as a film negative cutter at Consolidated Film Industries . When she was fifteen , she married a man nine years her senior , John Newton Baker , and had two children by him , Robert ( 1917 – 33 ) and <unk> ( born 1919 ) . She filed for divorce in 1921 , and Baker took the children with him to his native Kentucky . Monroe was not told that she had a sister until she was twelve , and met her for the first time as an adult . Gladys married her second husband Martin Edward Mortensen in 1924 , but they separated before she became pregnant with Monroe ; they divorced in 1928 . The identity of Monroe 's father is unknown and Baker was most often used as her surname . 
 Monroe 's early childhood was stable and happy . While Gladys was mentally and financially unprepared for a child , she was able to place Monroe with foster parents Albert and Ida <unk> in the rural town of Hawthorne soon after the birth . They raised their foster children according to the principles of evangelical Christianity . At first , Gladys lived with the <unk> and commuted to work in Los Angeles , until longer work shifts forced her to move back to the city in early 1927 . She then began visiting her daughter on the weekends , often taking her to the cinema and to sightsee in Los Angeles . Although the <unk> wanted to adopt Monroe , by the summer of 1933 , Gladys felt stable enough for Monroe to move in with her and bought a small house in Hollywood . They shared it with lodgers , actors George and Maude Atkinson and their daughter , Nellie . Some months later , in January 1934 , Gladys had a mental breakdown and was diagnosed with paranoid schizophrenia . After several months in a rest home , she was committed to the Metropolitan State Hospital . She spent the rest of her life in and out of hospitals , and was rarely in contact with Monroe . 
 Monroe was declared a ward of the state , and her mother 's friend , Grace McKee Goddard , took responsibility over her and her mother 's affairs . In the following four years , she lived with several foster families , and often switched schools . For the first sixteen months , she continued living with the <unk> ; she was sexually abused during this time . Always a shy girl , she now also developed a stutter and became withdrawn . In the summer of 1935 , she briefly stayed with Grace and her husband Erwin " Doc " Goddard and two other families , until Grace placed her in the Los Angeles Orphans Home in Hollywood in September 1935 . While the orphanage was " a model institution " , and was described in positive terms by her peers , Monroe found being placed there traumatizing , as to her " it seemed that no one wanted me " . 
 Encouraged by the orphanage staff , who thought that Monroe would be happier living in a family , Grace became her legal guardian in 1936 , although she was not able to take her out of the orphanage until the summer of 1937 . Monroe 's second stay with the Goddards lasted only a few months , as Doc molested her . After staying with various of her and Grace 's relatives and friends in Los Angeles and Compton , Monroe found a more permanent home in September 1938 , when she began living with Grace 's aunt , Ana <unk> Lower , in the <unk> district . She was enrolled in Emerson Junior High School and was taken to weekly Christian Science services with Lower . While otherwise a mediocre student , Monroe excelled in writing and contributed to the school 's newspaper . Due to the elderly Lower 's health issues , Monroe returned to live with the Goddards in Van Nuys in either late 1940 or early 1941 . After graduating from Emerson , she began attending Van Nuys High School . 
 In early 1942 , the company that Doc Goddard worked for required him to relocate to West Virginia . California laws prevented the Goddards from taking Monroe out of state , and she faced the possibility of having to return to the orphanage . As a solution , she married their neighbors ' son , 21 @-@ year @-@ old factory worker James " Jim " Dougherty , on June 19 , 1942 , just after her 16th birthday . Monroe subsequently dropped out of high school and became a housewife ; she later stated that the " marriage didn 't make me sad , but it didn 't make me happy , either . My husband and I hardly spoke to each other . This wasn 't because we were angry . We had nothing to say . I was dying of boredom . " In 1943 , Dougherty enlisted in the Merchant Marine . He was initially stationed on Catalina Island , where she lived with him until he was shipped out to the Pacific in April 1944 ; he would remain there for most of the next two years . After Dougherty 's departure , Monroe moved in with his parents and began working at the Radioplane Munitions Factory to participate in the war effort and to earn her own income . 
 = = = Modeling and first film roles ( 1945 – 49 ) = = = 
 In late 1944 , Monroe met photographer David Conover , who had been sent by the U.S. Army Air Forces ' First Motion Picture Unit ( FMPU ) to the factory to shoot morale @-@ boosting pictures of female workers . Although none of her pictures were used by the FMPU , she quit working at the factory in January 1945 and began modeling for Conover and his friends . She moved out of her in @-@ laws ' home , and defying them and her husband , signed a contract with the Blue Book Model Agency in August 1945 . She began to occasionally use the name Jean Norman when working , and had her curly brunette hair straightened and dyed blond to make her more employable . As her figure was deemed more suitable for pin @-@ up than fashion modeling , she was employed mostly for advertisements and men 's magazines . According to the agency 's owner , Emmeline Snively , Monroe was one of its most ambitious and hard @-@ working models ; by early 1946 , she had appeared on 33 magazine covers for publications such as Pageant , U.S. Camera , <unk> , and Peek . 
 Impressed by her success , Snively arranged a contract for Monroe with an acting agency in June 1946 . After an unsuccessful interview with producers at Paramount Pictures , she was given a <unk> by Ben Lyon , a 20th Century @-@ Fox executive . Head executive Darryl F. Zanuck was unenthusiastic about it , but he was persuaded to give her a standard six @-@ month contract to avoid her being signed by rival studio RKO Pictures . Monroe began her contract in August 1946 , and together with Lyon selected the screen name of " Marilyn Monroe " . The first name was picked by Lyon , who was reminded of Broadway star Marilyn Miller ; the last was picked by Monroe after her mother 's maiden name . In September 1946 , she was granted a divorce from Dougherty , who was against her having a career . 
 Monroe had no film roles during the first months of her contract and instead dedicated her days to acting , singing and dancing classes . Eager to learn more about the film industry and to promote herself , she also spent time at the studio lot to observe others working . Her contract was renewed in February 1947 , and she was soon given her first two film roles : nine lines of dialogue as a waitress in the drama Dangerous Years ( 1947 ) and a one @-@ line appearance in the comedy <unk> Hoo ! <unk> Hay ! ( 1948 ) . The studio also enrolled her in the Actors ' Laboratory Theatre , an acting school teaching the techniques of the Group Theatre ; she later stated that it was " my first taste of what real acting in a real drama could be , and I was hooked " . Monroe 's contract was not renewed in August 1947 , and she returned to modeling while also doing occasional odd jobs at the studio . 
 Determined to make it as an actor , Monroe continued studying at the Actors ' Lab , and in October appeared as a blonde vamp in the short @-@ lived play Glamour Preferred at the Bliss @-@ Hayden Theater , but the production was not reviewed by any major publication . To promote herself , she frequented producers ' offices , befriended gossip columnist Sidney <unk> , and entertained influential male guests at studio functions , a practice she had begun at Fox . She also became a friend and occasional sexual partner of Fox executive Joseph M. Schenck , who persuaded his friend Harry Cohn , the head executive of Columbia Pictures , to sign her in March 1948 . 
 While at Fox her roles had been that of a " girl next door " , at Columbia she was modeled after Rita Hayworth . Monroe 's hairline was raised by electrolysis and her hair was bleached even lighter , to platinum blond . She also began working with the studio 's head drama coach , Natasha Lytess , who would remain her mentor until 1955 . Her only film at the studio was the low @-@ budget musical Ladies of the Chorus ( 1948 ) , in which she had her first starring role as a chorus girl who is courted by a wealthy man . During the production , she began an affair with her vocal coach , Fred Karger , who paid to have her slight overbite corrected . Despite the starring role and a subsequent screen test for the lead role in Born Yesterday ( 1950 ) , Monroe 's contract was not renewed . Ladies of the Chorus was released in October and was not a success . 
 After leaving Columbia in September 1948 , Monroe became a protégée of Johnny Hyde , vice president of the William Morris Agency . Hyde began representing her and their relationship soon became sexual , although she refused his proposals of marriage . To advance Monroe 's career , he paid for a silicone prosthesis to be implanted in her jaw and possibly for a rhinoplasty , and arranged a bit part in the Marx Brothers film Love Happy ( 1950 ) . Monroe also continued modeling , and in May 1949 posed for nude photos taken by Tom Kelley . Although her role in Love Happy was very small , she was chosen to participate in the film 's promotional tour in New York that year . 
 = = = Breakthrough ( 1950 – 52 ) = = = 
 Monroe appeared in six films released in 1950 . She had bit parts in Love Happy , A Ticket to Tomahawk , Right Cross and The Fireball , but also made minor appearances in two critically acclaimed films : John Huston 's crime film The Asphalt Jungle and Joseph Mankiewicz 's drama All About Eve . In the former , Monroe played Angela , the young mistress of an aging criminal . Although only on the screen for five minutes , she gained a mention in Photoplay and according to Spoto " moved effectively from movie model to serious actress " . In All About Eve , Monroe played Miss Caswell , a naïve young actress . 
 Following Monroe 's success in these roles , Hyde negotiated a seven @-@ year contract with 20th Century @-@ Fox in December 1950 . He died of a heart attack only days later , leaving her devastated . Despite her grief , 1951 became the year in which she gained more visibility . In March , she was a presenter at the 23rd Academy Awards , and in September , Collier 's became the first national magazine to publish a full @-@ length profile of her . She had supporting roles in four low @-@ budget films : in the MGM drama Home Town Story , and in three moderately successful comedies for Fox , As Young as You Feel , Love Nest , and Let 's Make It Legal . According to Spoto all four films featured her " essentially [ as ] a sexy ornament " , but she received some praise from critics : Bosley Crowther of The New York Times described her as " superb " in As Young As You Feel and Ezra Goodman of the Los Angeles Daily News called her " one of the brightest up @-@ and @-@ coming [ actresses ] " for Love Nest . To further develop her acting skills , Monroe began taking classes with Michael Chekhov and mime Lotte Goslar . Her popularity with audiences was also growing : she received several thousand letters of fan mail a week , and was declared " Miss Cheesecake of 1951 " by the army newspaper Stars and Stripes , reflecting the preferences of soldiers in the Korean War . In her private life , Monroe was in a relationship with director Elia Kazan , and also briefly dated several other men , including directors Nicholas Ray and Yul Brynner and actor Peter Lawford . 
 The second year of the Fox contract saw Monroe become a top @-@ billed actress , with gossip columnist <unk> Muir naming her the year 's " it girl " and Hedda Hopper describing her as the " cheesecake queen " turned " box office smash " . In February , she was named the " best young box office personality " by the Foreign Press Association of Hollywood , and began a highly publicized romance with retired New York Yankee Joe DiMaggio , one of the most famous sports personalities of the era . The following month , a scandal broke when she revealed in an interview that she had posed for nude pictures in 1949 , which were featured in calendars . The studio had learned of the photographs some weeks earlier , and to contain the potentially disastrous effects on her career , they and Monroe had decided to talk about them openly while stressing that she had only posed for them in a dire financial situation . The strategy succeeded in getting her public sympathy and increased interest in her films : the following month , she was featured on the cover of Life as " The Talk of Hollywood " . Monroe added to her reputation as a new sex symbol with other publicity stunts that year , such as wearing a revealing dress when acting as Grand Marshal at the Miss America Pageant parade , and by stating to gossip columnist Earl Wilson that she usually wore no underwear . 
 Regardless of the popularity her sex appeal brought , Monroe wished to present more of her acting range , and in the summer of 1952 appeared in two commercially successful dramas . The first was Fritz Lang 's Clash by Night , for which she was loaned to RKO and played a fish cannery worker ; to prepare , she spent time in a real fish cannery in Monterey . She received positive reviews for her performance : The Hollywood Reporter stated that " she deserves starring status with her excellent interpretation " , and Variety wrote that she " has an ease of delivery which makes her a cinch for popularity " . The second film was the thriller Don 't Bother to Knock , in which she starred as a mentally disturbed babysitter and which Zanuck had assigned for her to test her abilities in a heavier dramatic role . It received mixed reviews from critics , with Crowther deeming her too inexperienced for the difficult role , and Variety blaming the script for the film 's problems . 
 Monroe 's three other films in 1952 continued her typecasting in comic roles which focused on her sex appeal . In We 're Not Married ! , her starring role as a beauty pageant contestant was created solely to " present Marilyn in two bathing suits " , according to its writer Nunnally Johnson . In Howard Hawks ' Monkey Business , in which she was featured opposite Cary Grant , she played a secretary who is a " dumb , childish blonde , innocently unaware of the havoc her sexiness causes around her " . In O. Henry 's Full House , her final film of the year , she had a minor role as a prostitute . 
 During this period Monroe gained a reputation for being difficult on film sets , which worsened as her career progressed : she was often late or did not show up at all , did not remember her lines , and would demand several re @-@ takes before she was satisfied with her performance . A dependence on her acting coaches , first Natasha Lytess and later Paula Strasberg , also irritated directors . Monroe 's problems have been attributed to a combination of perfectionism , low self @-@ esteem , and stage fright ; she disliked the lack of control she had on her work on film sets , and never experienced similar problems during photo shoots , in which she had more say over her performance and could be more spontaneous instead of following a script . To alleviate her anxiety and chronic insomnia , she began to use barbiturates , amphetamines and alcohol , which also exacerbated her problems , although she did not become severely addicted until 1956 . According to Sarah Churchwell , some of Monroe 's behavior especially later in her career was also in response to the condescension and sexism of her male co @-@ stars and directors . Similarly , Lois Banner has stated that she was bullied by many of her directors . 
 = = = Rising star ( 1953 ) = = = 
 Monroe starred in three movies released in 1953 , emerging as a major sex symbol and one of Hollywood 's most bankable performers . The first of these was the Technicolor film noir Niagara , in which she played a femme fatale scheming to murder her husband , played by Joseph Cotten . By then , Monroe and her make @-@ up artist Allan " Whitey " Snyder had developed the make @-@ up look that became associated with her : dark arched brows , pale skin , " glistening " red lips and a beauty mark . According to Sarah Churchwell , Niagara was one of the most overtly sexual films of Monroe 's career , and it included scenes in which her body was covered only by a sheet or a towel , considered shocking by contemporary audiences . Its most famous scene is a 30 @-@ second long shot of Monroe shown walking from behind with her hips swaying , which was heavily used in the film 's marketing . 
 Upon Niagara 's release in January , women 's clubs protested against it as immoral , but it proved popular with audiences , grossing $ 6 million in the box office . While Variety deemed it " clichéd " and " morbid " , The New York Times commented that " the falls and Miss Monroe are something to see " , as although Monroe may not be " the perfect actress at this point ... she can be seductive – even when she walks " . Monroe continued to attract attention with her revealing outfits in publicity events , most famously at the Photoplay awards in January 1953 , where she won the " Fastest Rising Star " award . She wore a skin @-@ tight gold lamé dress , which prompted veteran star Joan Crawford to describe her behavior as " unbecoming an actress and a lady " to the press . 
 While Niagara made Monroe a sex symbol and established her " look " , her second film of the year , the satirical musical comedy Gentlemen Prefer Blondes , established her screen persona as a " dumb blonde " . Based on Anita Loos ' bestselling novel and its Broadway version , the film focuses on two " gold @-@ digging " showgirls , Lorelei Lee and Dorothy Shaw , played by Monroe and Jane Russell . The role of Lorelei was originally intended for Betty Grable , who had been 20th Century @-@ Fox 's most popular " blonde bombshell " in the 1940s ; Monroe was fast eclipsing her as a star who could appeal to both male and female audiences . As part of the film 's publicity campaign , she and Russell pressed their hand and footprints in wet concrete outside Grauman 's Chinese Theatre in June . Gentlemen Prefer Blondes was released shortly after and became one of the biggest box office successes of the year by grossing $ 5 @.@ 3 million , more than double its production costs . Crowther of The New York Times and William <unk> of Variety both commented favorably on Monroe , especially noting her performance of " Diamonds Are a Girl 's Best Friend " ; according to the latter , she demonstrated the " ability to sex a song as well as point up the eye values of a scene by her presence " . 
 In September , Monroe made her television debut in the Jack Benny Show , playing Jack 's fantasy woman in the episode " Honolulu Trip " . Her third movie of the year , How to Marry a Millionaire , co @-@ starred Betty Grable and Lauren Bacall and was released in November . It featured Monroe in the role of a naïve model who teams up with her friends to find rich husbands , repeating the successful formula of Gentlemen Prefer Blondes . It was the second film ever released in CinemaScope , a widescreen format which Fox hoped would draw audiences back to theaters as television was beginning to cause losses to film studios . Despite mixed reviews , the film was Monroe 's biggest box office success so far , earning $ 8 million in world rentals . 
 Monroe was listed in the annual Top Ten Money Making Stars Poll in both 1953 and 1954 , and according to Fox historian Aubrey Solomon became the studio 's " greatest asset " alongside CinemaScope . Monroe 's position as a leading sex symbol was confirmed in December , when Hugh Hefner featured her on the cover and as centerfold in the first issue of Playboy . The cover image was a shot of her at the Miss America Pageant parade in 1952 , and the centerfold featured one of her 1949 nude photographs . 
 = = = Conflicts with 20th Century @-@ Fox and marriage to Joe DiMaggio ( 1954 – 55 ) = = = 
 Although Monroe had become one of 20th Century @-@ Fox 's biggest stars , her contract had not changed since 1950 , meaning that she was paid far less than other stars of her stature and could not choose her projects or co @-@ workers . She was also tired of being typecast , and her attempts to appear in films other than comedies or musicals had been thwarted by Zanuck , who had a strong personal dislike of her and did not think she would earn the studio as much revenue in dramas . When she refused to begin shooting yet another musical comedy , a film version of The Girl in Pink Tights , which was to co @-@ star Frank Sinatra , the studio suspended her on January 4 , 1954 . 
 The suspension was front page news and Monroe immediately began a publicity campaign to counter any negative press and to strengthen her position in the conflict . On January 14 , she and Joe DiMaggio , whose relationship had been subject to constant media attention since 1952 , were married at the San Francisco City Hall . They then traveled to Japan , combining a honeymoon with his business trip . From there , she traveled alone to Korea , where she performed songs from her films as part of a USO show for over 60 @,@ 000 U.S. Marines over a four @-@ day period . After returning to Hollywood in February , she was awarded Photoplay 's " Most Popular Female Star " prize . She reached a settlement with the studio in March : it included a new contract to be made later in the year , and a starring role in the film version of the Broadway play The Seven Year Itch , for which she was to receive a bonus of $ 100 @,@ 000 . 
 The following month saw the release of Otto Preminger 's Western River of No Return , in which Monroe appeared opposite Robert Mitchum . She called it a " Z @-@ grade cowboy movie in which the acting finished second to the scenery and the CinemaScope process " , although it was popular with audiences . The first film she made after returning to Fox was the musical There 's No Business Like Show Business , which she strongly disliked but the studio required her to do in exchange for dropping The Girl in Pink Tights . The musical was unsuccessful upon its release in December , and Monroe 's performance was considered vulgar by many critics . 
 In September 1954 , Monroe began filming Billy Wilder 's comedy The Seven Year Itch , in which she starred opposite Tom Ewell as a woman who becomes the object of her married neighbor 's sexual fantasies . Although the film was shot in Hollywood , the studio decided to generate advance publicity by staging the filming of one scene on Lexington Avenue in New York . In it , Monroe is standing on a subway grate with the air blowing up the skirt of her white dress , which became one of the most famous scenes of her career . The shoot lasted for several hours and attracted a crowd of nearly 2 @,@ 000 spectators , including professional photographers . 
 While the publicity stunt placed Monroe on front pages all over the world , it also marked the end of her marriage to DiMaggio , who was furious about it . The union had been troubled from the start by his jealousy and controlling attitude ; Spoto and Banner have also asserted that he was physically abusive . After returning to Hollywood , Monroe hired famous attorney Jerry Giesler and announced that she was filing for divorce in October 1954 . The Seven Year Itch was released the following June , and grossed over $ 4 @.@ 5 million at the box office , making it one of the biggest commercial successes that year . 
 After filming for Itch wrapped in November , Monroe began a new battle for control over her career and left Hollywood for the East Coast , where she and photographer Milton Greene founded their own production company , Marilyn Monroe Productions ( MMP ) – an action that has later been called " instrumental " in the collapse of the studio system . Announcing its foundation in a press conference in January 1955 , Monroe stated that she was " tired of the same old sex roles . I want to do better things . People have scope , you know . " She asserted that she was no longer under contract to Fox , as the studio had not fulfilled its duties , such as paying her the promised bonus for The Seven Year Itch . This began a year @-@ long legal battle between her and the studio . The press largely ridiculed Monroe for her actions and she was parodied in Itch writer George Axelrod 's Will Success Spoil Rock Hunter ? ( 1955 ) , in which her lookalike Jayne Mansfield played a dumb actress who starts her own production company . 
 Monroe dedicated 1955 to studying her craft . She moved to New York and began taking acting classes with Constance Collier and attending workshops on method acting at the Actors Studio , run by Lee Strasberg . She grew close to Strasberg and his wife Paula , receiving private lessons at their home due to her shyness , and soon became like a family member . She dismissed her old drama coach , Natasha Lytess , and replaced her with Paula ; the <unk> remained an important influence for the rest of her career . Monroe also started undergoing psychoanalysis at the recommendation of Strasberg , who believed that an actor must confront their emotional traumas and use them in their performances . 
 In her private life , Monroe continued her relationship with DiMaggio despite the ongoing divorce proceedings while also dating actor Marlon Brando and playwright Arthur Miller . She had first been introduced to Miller by Kazan in the early 1950s . The affair between Monroe and Miller became increasingly serious after October 1955 , when her divorce from DiMaggio was finalized , and Miller separated from his wife . The studio feared that Monroe would be blacklisted and urged her to end the affair , as Miller was being investigated by the FBI for allegations of communism and had been subpoenaed by the House Un @-@ American Activities Committee . The FBI also opened a file on her . Despite the risk to her career , Monroe refused to end the relationship , later calling the studio heads " born cowards " . 
 By the end of the year , Monroe and Fox had come to an agreement about a new seven @-@ year contract . It was clear that MMP would not be able to finance films alone , and the studio was eager to have Monroe working again . The contract required her to make four movies for Fox during the seven years . The studio would pay her $ 100 @,@ 000 for each movie , and granted her the right to choose her own projects , directors and cinematographers . She would also be free to make one film with MMP per each completed film for Fox . 
 = = = Critical acclaim and marriage to Arthur Miller ( 1956 – 59 ) = = = 
 Monroe began 1956 by announcing her win over 20th Century @-@ Fox ; the press , which had previously derided her , now wrote favorably about her decision to fight the studio . Time called her a " shrewd businesswoman " and Look predicted that the win would be " an example of the individual against the herd for years to come " . She also officially changed her name to Marilyn Monroe in March . Her relationship with Miller prompted some negative comments from the press , including Walter Winchell 's statement that " America 's best @-@ known blonde moving picture star is now the darling of the left @-@ wing intelligentsia . " Monroe and Miller were married at the Westchester County Court in White Plains , New York on June 29 , and two days later had a Jewish ceremony at his agent 's house at <unk> , New York . Monroe converted to Judaism with the marriage , which led Egypt to ban all of her films . The media saw the union as mismatched given her star image as a sex symbol and his position as an intellectual , as demonstrated by Variety 's headline " Egghead Weds Hourglass " . 
 The first film that Monroe chose to make under the new contract was the drama Bus Stop , released in August 1956 . She played <unk> , a saloon singer whose dreams of stardom are complicated by a naïve cowboy who falls in love with her . For the role , she learnt an Ozark accent , chose costumes and make @-@ up that lacked the glamour of her earlier films , and provided deliberately mediocre singing and dancing . Broadway director Joshua Logan agreed to direct , despite initially doubting her acting abilities and knowing of her reputation for being difficult . The filming took place in Idaho and Arizona in early 1956 , with Monroe " technically in charge " as the head of MMP , occasionally making decisions on cinematography and with Logan adapting to her chronic lateness and perfectionism . The experience changed Logan 's opinion of Monroe , and he later compared her to Charlie Chaplin in her ability to blend comedy and tragedy . Bus Stop became a box office success , grossing $ 4 @.@ 25 million , and received mainly favorable reviews . The Saturday Review of Literature wrote that Monroe 's performance " effectively dispels once and for all the notion that she is merely a glamour personality " and Crowther proclaimed : " Hold on to your chairs , everybody , and get set for a rattling surprise . Marilyn Monroe has finally proved herself an actress . " She received a Golden Globe for Best Actress nomination for her performance . 
 In August 1956 , Monroe began filming MMP 's first independent production , The Prince and the Showgirl , at Pinewood Studios in England . It was based on Terence Rattigan 's The Sleeping Prince , a play about an affair between a showgirl and a prince in the 1910s . The main roles had first been played on stage by Laurence Olivier and Vivien Leigh ; he reprised his role and directed and co @-@ produced the film . The production was complicated by conflicts between him and Monroe . He angered her with the patronizing statement " All you have to do is be sexy " , and by wanting her to replicate Leigh 's interpretation . He also disliked the constant presence of Paula Strasberg , Monroe 's acting coach , on set . 
 In retaliation to what she considered Olivier 's " condescending " behavior , Monroe started arriving late and became uncooperative , stating later that " if you don 't respect your artists , they can 't work well . " Her drug use increased and , according to Spoto , she became pregnant and miscarried during the production . She also had arguments with Greene over how MMP should be run , including whether Miller should join the company . Despite the difficulties , the film was completed on schedule by the end of the year . It was released in June 1957 to mixed reviews , and proved unpopular with American audiences . It was better received in Europe , where she was awarded the Italian David di Donatello and the French Crystal Star awards , and was nominated for a BAFTA . 
 After returning to the United States , Monroe took an 18 @-@ month hiatus from work to concentrate on married life on the East Coast . She and Miller split their time between their apartment in New York and an eighteenth @-@ century farmhouse they purchased in Roxbury , Connecticut , and spent the summer in <unk> , Long Island . She became pregnant in mid @-@ 1957 , but it was ectopic and had to be terminated . She suffered a miscarriage a year later . Her gynecological problems were largely caused by endometriosis , a disease from which she suffered throughout her adult life . Monroe was also briefly hospitalized during this time due to a barbiturate overdose . During the hiatus , she dismissed Greene from MMP and bought his share of the company as they could not settle their disagreements and she had begun to suspect that he was embezzling money from the company . 
 Monroe returned to Hollywood in July 1958 to act opposite Jack Lemmon and Tony Curtis in Billy Wilder 's comedy on gender roles , Some Like It Hot . Although she considered the role of Sugar Kane another " dumb blonde " , she accepted it due to Miller 's encouragement and the offer of receiving ten percent of the film 's profits in addition to her standard pay . The difficulties of the film 's production have since become " legendary " . Monroe would demand dozens of re @-@ takes , and could not remember her lines or act as directed – Curtis famously stated that kissing her was " like kissing Hitler " due to the number of re @-@ takes . Monroe herself privately likened the production to a sinking ship and commented on her co @-@ stars and director saying " [ but ] why should I worry , I have no phallic symbol to lose . " Many of the problems stemmed from a conflict between her and Wilder , who also had a reputation for being difficult , on how she should play the character . Monroe made Wilder angry by asking him to alter many of her scenes , which in turn made her stage fright worse , and it is suggested that she deliberately ruined several scenes to act them her way . 
 In the end , Wilder was happy with Monroe 's performance , stating : " Anyone can remember lines , but it takes a real artist to come on the set and not know her lines and yet give the performance she did ! " Despite the difficulties of its production , when Some Like It Hot was released in March 1959 , it became a critical and commercial success . Monroe 's performance earned her a Golden Globe for Best Actress , and prompted Variety to call her " a comedienne with that combination of sex appeal and timing that just can 't be beat " . It has been voted one of the best films ever made in polls by the American Film Institute and Sight & Sound . 
 = = = Career decline and personal difficulties ( 1960 – 62 ) = = = 
 After Some Like It Hot , Monroe took another hiatus until late 1959 , when she returned to Hollywood to star in the musical comedy Let 's Make Love , about an actress and a millionaire who fall in love when performing in a satirical play . She chose George Cukor to direct and Miller re @-@ wrote portions of the script , which she considered weak ; she accepted the part solely because she was behind on her contract with Fox , having only made one of four promised films . Its production was delayed by her frequent absences from set . She had an affair with Yves Montand , her co @-@ star , which was widely reported by the press and used in the film 's publicity campaign . Let 's Make Love was unsuccessful upon its release in September 1960 ; Crowther described Monroe as appearing " rather untidy " and " lacking ... the old Monroe dynamism " , and Hedda Hopper called the film " the most vulgar picture she 's ever done " . Truman Capote lobbied for her to play Holly Golightly in a film adaptation of Breakfast at Tiffany 's , but the role went to Audrey Hepburn as its producers feared that Monroe would complicate the production . 
 The last film that Monroe completed was John Huston 's The Misfits , which Miller had written to provide her with a dramatic role . She played a recently divorced woman who becomes friends with three aging cowboys , played by Clark Gable , Eli Wallach and Montgomery Clift . Its filming in the Nevada desert between July and November 1960 was again difficult . Monroe and Miller 's four @-@ year marriage was effectively over , and he began a new relationship . Monroe disliked that he had based her role partly on her life , and thought it inferior to the male roles ; she also struggled with Miller 's habit of re @-@ writing scenes the night before filming . Her health was also failing : she was in pain from gallstones , and her drug addiction was so severe that her make @-@ up usually had to be applied while she was still asleep under the influence of barbiturates . In August , filming was halted for her to spend a week <unk> in a Los Angeles hospital . 
 Monroe and Miller separated after filming wrapped , and she was granted a quick divorce in Mexico in January 1961 . The Misfits was released the following month , failing at the box office . Its reviews were mixed , with Bosley Crowther calling Monroe " completely blank and unfathomable " and stating that " unfortunately for the film 's structure , everything turns upon her " . Despite the film 's initial failure , in 2015 Geoff Andrew of the British Film Institute described it as a classic . 
 Monroe was next to star in a television adaptation of W. Somerset Maugham 's short story Rain for NBC , but the project fell through as the network did not want to hire her choice of director , Lee Strasberg . Instead of working , she spent the first six months of 1961 preoccupied by health problems , undergoing surgery for her endometriosis and a cholecystectomy , and spending four weeks in hospital care – including a brief stint in a mental ward – for depression . She was helped by her ex @-@ husband Joe DiMaggio , with whom she now rekindled a friendship . In spring 1961 , Monroe also moved back to California after six years on the East Coast . She dated Frank Sinatra for several months , and in early 1962 purchased a house in Brentwood , Los Angeles . 
 Monroe returned to the public eye in spring 1962 : she received a " World Film Favorite " Golden Globe award and began to shoot a new film for 20th Century @-@ Fox , Something 's Got to Give , a re @-@ make of My Favorite Wife ( 1940 ) . It was to be co @-@ produced by MMP , directed by George Cukor and to co @-@ star Dean Martin and Cyd Charisse . Days before filming began , Monroe caught sinusitis ; despite medical advice to postpone the production , Fox began it as planned in late April . Monroe was too ill to work for the majority of the next six weeks , but despite confirmations by multiple doctors , the studio tried to pressurize her by alleging publicly that she was faking it . On May 19 , she took a break to sing " Happy Birthday " on stage at President John F. Kennedy 's birthday celebration at Madison Square Garden in New York . She drew attention with her costume : a beige , skintight dress covered in rhinestones , which made her appear nude . Monroe 's trip to New York caused even more irritation in Fox executives , who had wanted her to cancel it . 
 Monroe next filmed a scene for Something 's Got to Give in which she swam naked in a swimming pool . To generate advance publicity , the press were invited to take photographs of the scene , which were later published in Life ; this was the first time that a major star had posed nude while at the height of their career . When she was again on sick leave for several days , Fox decided that it could not afford to have another film running behind schedule when it was already struggling to cover the rising costs of Cleopatra ( 1963 ) . On June 7 , Monroe was fired and sued for $ 750 @,@ 000 in damages . She was replaced by Lee Remick , but after Martin refused to make the film with anyone other than Monroe , Fox sued him as well and shut down the production . The studio blamed Monroe for the film 's demise and began spreading negative publicity about her , even alleging that she was mentally disturbed . 
 Fox soon regretted its decision , and re @-@ opened negotiations with Monroe later in June ; a settlement about a new contract , including re @-@ commencing Something 's Got to Give and a starring role in the black comedy What a Way to Go ! ( 1964 ) , was reached later that summer . To repair her public image , Monroe engaged in several publicity ventures , including interviews for Life and Cosmopolitan and her first photo shoot for Vogue . For Vogue , she and photographer Bert Stern collaborated for two series of photographs , one a standard fashion editorial and another of her posing nude , which were both later published posthumously with the title The Last Sitting . In the last weeks of her life , she was also planning on starring in a biopic of Jean Harlow . 
 = = Death = = 
 Monroe was found dead in the bedroom of her Brentwood home by her psychiatrist , Dr. Ralph Greenson , in the early morning hours of August 5 , 1962 . Greenson had been called there by her housekeeper Eunice Murray , who was staying overnight and had awoken at 3 : 00 a.m. " sensing that something was wrong " . Murray had seen light from under Monroe 's bedroom door , but had not been able to get a response and found the door locked . The death was officially confirmed by Monroe 's physician , Dr. Hyman Engelberg , who arrived at the house at around 3 : 50 a.m. At 4 : 25 a.m. , they notified the Los Angeles Police Department . 
 The Los Angeles County Coroners Office was assisted in their investigation by experts from the Los Angeles Suicide Prevention Team . It was estimated that Monroe had died between 8 : 30 and 10 : 30 p.m. , and the toxicological analysis concluded that the cause of death was acute barbiturate poisoning , as she had 8 mg % of chloral hydrate and 4 @.@ 5 mg % of pentobarbital ( <unk> ) in her blood , and a further 13 mg % of pentobarbital in her liver . Empty bottles containing these medicines were found next to her bed . The possibility of Monroe having accidentally overdosed was ruled out as the dosages found in her body were several times over the lethal limit . Her doctors and psychiatrists stated that she had been prone to " severe fears and frequent depressions " with " abrupt and unpredictable " mood changes , and had overdosed several times in the past , possibly intentionally . Due to these facts and the lack of any indication of foul play , her death was classified a probable suicide . 
 Monroe 's unexpected death was front @-@ page news in the United States and Europe . According to Lois Banner , " it 's said that the suicide rate in Los Angeles doubled the month after she died ; the circulation rate of most newspapers expanded that month " , and the Chicago Tribune reported that they had received hundreds of phone calls from members of the public requesting information about her death . French artist Jean Cocteau commented that her death " should serve as a terrible lesson to all those , whose chief occupation consists of spying on and tormenting film stars " , her former co @-@ star Laurence Olivier deemed her " the complete victim of <unk> and sensation " , and Bus Stop director Joshua Logan stated that she was " one of the most unappreciated people in the world " . Her funeral , held at the Westwood Village Memorial Park Cemetery on August 8 , was private and attended by only her closest associates . It was arranged by Joe DiMaggio and her business manager Inez Melson . Hundreds of spectators crowded the streets around the cemetery . Monroe was later interred at crypt No. 24 at the Corridor of Memories . 
 Several conspiracy theories about Monroe 's death have been proposed in the decades afterwards , including murder and accidental overdose . The murder speculations first gained mainstream attention with the publication of Norman Mailer 's Marilyn : A Biography in 1973 , and in the following years became widespread enough for the Los Angeles County District Attorney John Van de Kamp to conduct a " threshold investigation " in 1982 to see whether a criminal investigation should be opened . No evidence of foul play was found . 
 = = Screen persona and reception = = 
 When beginning to develop her star image , 20th Century @-@ Fox wanted Monroe to replace the aging Betty Grable , their most popular " blonde bombshell " of the 1940s . While the 1940s had been the heyday of actresses perceived as tough and smart , such as Katharine Hepburn and Barbara Stanwyck , who appealed to women @-@ dominated audiences , the studio wanted Monroe to be a star of the new decade that would draw men to movie theaters . She played a significant part in the creation of her public image from the beginning , and towards the end of her career exerted almost full control over it . Monroe devised many of her publicity strategies , cultivated friendships with gossip columnists such as Sidney <unk> and Louella Parsons , and controlled the use of her images . Besides Grable , she was often compared to another iconic blonde , 1930s film star Jean Harlow . The comparison was partly prompted by Monroe , who named Harlow as her childhood idol , wanted to play her in a biopic , and even employed Harlow 's hair stylist to color her hair . 
 Monroe 's screen persona centered on her blond hair , and the stereotypes associated with it , especially dumbness , naïveté , sexual availability and artificiality . She often used a breathy , childish voice in her films , and in interviews gave the impression that everything she said was " utterly innocent and uncalculated " , parodying herself with double entendres that came to be known as " <unk> " . For example , when she was asked what she had on in the 1949 nude photo shoot , she replied , " I had the radio on " . Having begun her career as a pin @-@ up model , Monroe 's hourglass figure was one of her most often noted features . Film scholar Richard Dyer has written that Monroe was often positioned so that her curvy silhouette was on display , and in her publicity photos often posed like a pin @-@ up . Her distinctive , hip @-@ swinging walk also drew attention to her body , earning her the nickname " the girl with the horizontal walk " . 
 Clothing played an important part in Monroe 's star image . She often wore white to emphasize her <unk> , and drew attention by wearing revealing outfits that showed off her figure . Her publicity stunts often revolved around her clothing exposing large amounts of her body or even malfunctioning , such as when one of the shoulder straps of her dress suddenly snapped during a press conference . In press stories , Monroe was portrayed as the embodiment of the American Dream , as a girl who had risen from a miserable childhood to Hollywood stardom . Stories of her time spent in foster families and an orphanage were exaggerated and even partly fabricated in her studio biographies . 
 Although Monroe 's screen persona as a dim @-@ witted but sexually attractive blonde was a carefully crafted act , audiences and film critics believed it to be her real personality and that she was not acting in her comedies . This became an obstacle in her later career , when she wanted to change her public image and pursue other kinds of roles , or to be respected as a businesswoman . Academic Sarah Churchwell , who has studied narratives about Monroe , has stated : 
 The biggest myth is that she was dumb . The second is that she was fragile . The third is that she couldn 't act . She was far from dumb , although she was not formally educated , and she was very sensitive about that . But she was very smart indeed – and very tough . She had to be both to beat the Hollywood studio system in the 1950s . [ ... ] The dumb blonde was a role – she was an actress , for heaven 's sake ! Such a good actress that no one now believes she was anything but what she portrayed on screen . 
 Lois Banner has written that she often subtly parodied her status as a sex symbol in her films and public appearances . Monroe stated that she was influenced by Mae West , saying that she " learned a few tricks from her – that impression of laughing at , or mocking , her own sexuality " . In the 1950s , she also studied comedy in classes given by mime and dancer Lotte Goslar , famous for her comic stage performances , and had her accompany her on film sets to instruct her . In Gentlemen Prefer Blondes , one of the films in which she played an archetypal dumb blonde , Monroe had the sentence " I can be smart when it 's important , but most men don 't like it " added to her character 's lines in the script . 
 Dyer has stated Monroe 's star image was created mainly for the male gaze and that she usually played " the girl " , who is defined solely by her gender , in her films . Her roles were almost always chorus girls , secretaries , or models ; occupations where " the woman is on show , there for the pleasure of men . " Film scholar Thomas Harris , who analyzed Monroe 's public image in 1957 , wrote that her working class roots and lack of family made her appear more sexually available , " the ideal playmate " , in contrast to her contemporary Grace Kelly , who was also marketed as an attractive blonde , but due to her upper @-@ class background came to be seen as a sophisticated actress , unattainable for the majority of male viewers . 
 According to Dyer , Monroe became " virtually a household name for sex " in the 1950s and " her image has to be situated in the flux of ideas about morality and sexuality that characterised the fifties in America " , such as Freudian ideas about sex , the Kinsey report ( 1953 ) , and Betty Friedan 's The Feminine Mystique ( 1963 ) . By appearing vulnerable and unaware of her sex appeal , Monroe was the first sex symbol to present sex as natural and without danger , in contrast to the 1940s femme fatales . Spoto likewise describes her as the embodiment of " the postwar ideal of the American girl , soft , transparently needy , worshipful of men , naïve , offering sex without demands " , which is echoed in Molly Haskell 's statement that " she was the fifties fiction , the lie that a woman had no sexual needs , that she is there to cater to , or enhance , a man 's needs . " Monroe 's contemporary Norman Mailer wrote that " Marilyn suggested sex might be difficult and dangerous with others , but ice cream with her " , while Groucho Marx characterized her as " Mae West , Theda Bara , and Bo Peep all rolled into one " . According to Haskell , due to her status as a sex symbol , Monroe was less popular with women than with men , as they " couldn 't identify with her and didn 't support her " , although this would change after her death . 
 Dyer has also argued that platinum blonde hair became such a defining feature of Monroe because it made her " racially unambiguous " and exclusively white just as the Civil Rights Movement was beginning , and that she should be seen as emblematic of racism in twentieth @-@ century popular culture . Banner agrees that it may not be a coincidence that Monroe launched a trend of platinum blonde actresses during the Civil Rights Movement , but has also criticized Dyer , pointing out that in her highly publicized private life Monroe associated with people who were seen as " white ethnics " , such as Joe DiMaggio ( Italian @-@ American ) and Arthur Miller ( Jewish ) . According to Banner , she sometimes challenged prevailing racial norms in her publicity photographs ; for example , in an image featured in Look in 1951 , she was shown in revealing clothes while practicing with African @-@ American singing coach Phil Moore . 
 Monroe was perceived as a specifically American star , " a national institution as well known as hot dogs , apple pie , or baseball " according to Photoplay . Banner calls her the symbol of <unk> , a star whose joyful and glamorous public image " helped the nation cope with its paranoia in the 1950s about the Cold War , the atom bomb , and the totalitarian communist Soviet Union " . Historian Fiona Handyside writes that the French female audiences associated whiteness / <unk> with American modernity and cleanliness , and so Monroe came to symbolize a modern , " liberated " woman whose life takes place in the public sphere . Film historian Laura Mulvey has written of her as an endorsement for American consumer culture : 
 If America was to export the democracy of glamour into post @-@ war , impoverished Europe , the movies could be its shop window ... Marilyn Monroe , with her all American attributes and streamlined sexuality , came to epitomise in a single image this complex interface of the economic , the political , and the erotic . By the mid 1950s , she stood for a brand of classless glamour , available to anyone using American cosmetics , <unk> and peroxide . 
 To profit from Monroe 's popularity , 20th Century @-@ Fox cultivated several lookalike actresses , including Jayne Mansfield and Sheree North . Other studios also attempted to create their own Monroes : Universal Pictures with Mamie Van Doren , Columbia Pictures with Kim Novak , and Rank Organisation with Diana Dors . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 According to The Guide to United States Popular Culture , " as an icon of American popular culture , Monroe 's few rivals in popularity include Elvis Presley and Mickey Mouse ... no other star has ever inspired such a wide range of emotions – from lust to pity , from envy to remorse . " Art historian Gail Levin has stated that Monroe may have been " the most photographed person of the 20th century " , and The American Film Institute has named her the sixth greatest female screen legend in American film history . The Smithsonian Institution has included her on their list of " 100 Most Significant Americans of All Time " , and both Variety and VH1 have placed her in the top ten in their rankings of the greatest popular culture icons of the twentieth century . Hundreds of books have been written about Monroe , she has been the subject of films , plays , operas , and songs , and has influenced artists and entertainers such as Andy Warhol and Madonna . She also remains a valuable brand : her image and name have been licensed for hundreds of products , and she has been featured in advertising for multinational corporations such as Max Factor , Chanel , Mercedes @-@ Benz , and Absolut Vodka . 
 Monroe 's enduring popularity is linked to her conflicted public image . On the one hand , she remains a sex symbol , beauty icon and one of the most famous stars of classical Hollywood cinema . On the other , she is also remembered for her troubled private life , unstable childhood , struggle for professional respect , and her death and the conspiracy theories surrounding it . She has been written about by scholars and journalists interested in gender and feminism , such as Gloria Steinem , Jacqueline Rose , Molly Haskell , Sarah Churchwell , and Lois Banner . Some , such as Steinem , have viewed her as a victim of the studio system . Others , such as Haskell , Rose , and Churchwell , have instead stressed Monroe 's proactive role in her career and her participation in the creation of her public persona . 
 Due to the contrast between her stardom and troubled private life , Monroe is closely linked to broader discussions about modern phenomena such as mass media , fame , and consumer culture . According to academic Susanne <unk> , because of her continued relevance to ongoing discussions about modern society , Monroe is " never completely situated in one time or place " but has become " a surface on which narratives of American culture can be ( re- ) constructed " , and " functions as a cultural type that can be reproduced , transformed , translated into new contexts , and enacted by other people " . Similarly , Banner has called Monroe the " eternal shapeshifter " who is re @-@ created by " each generation , even each individual ... to their own specifications " . 
 While Monroe remains a cultural icon , critics are divided on her legacy as an actress . David Thomson called her body of work " insubstantial " and Pauline Kael wrote that she could not act , but rather " used her lack of an actress 's skills to amuse the public . She had the wit or crassness or desperation to turn cheesecake into acting – and vice versa ; she did what others had the ' good taste ' not to do " . In contrast , according to Peter Bradshaw , Monroe was a talented comedian who " understood how comedy achieved its effects " , and Roger Ebert wrote that " Monroe 's eccentricities and neuroses on sets became notorious , but studios put up with her long after any other actress would have been blackballed because what they got back on the screen was magical " . Similarly , Jonathan Rosenbaum stated that " she subtly subverted the sexist content of her material " and that " the difficulty some people have discerning Monroe 's intelligence as an actress seems rooted in the ideology of a repressive era , when <unk> women weren 't supposed to be smart " . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = The World Without Us = 
 The World Without Us is a non @-@ fiction book about what would happen to the natural and built environment if humans suddenly disappeared , written by American journalist Alan Weisman and published by St. Martin 's Thomas Dunne Books . It is a book @-@ length expansion of Weisman 's own February 2005 Discover article " Earth Without People " . Written largely as a thought experiment , it outlines , for example , how cities and houses would deteriorate , how long man @-@ made artifacts would last , and how remaining lifeforms would evolve . Weisman concludes that residential neighborhoods would become forests within 500 years , and that radioactive waste , bronze statues , plastics , and Mount Rushmore would be among the longest @-@ lasting evidence of human presence on Earth . 
 The author of four previous books and numerous articles for magazines , Weisman traveled to interview academics , scientists and other authorities . He used quotations from these interviews to explain the effects of the natural environment and to substantiate predictions . The book has been translated and published in many countries . It was successful in the U.S. , reaching # 6 on the New York Times Best Seller list and # 1 on the San Francisco Chronicle Best @-@ Sellers list in September 2007 . It ranked # 1 on Time and Entertainment Weekly 's top 10 non @-@ fiction books of 2007 . 
 20th Century Fox has purchased the rights to the book with the intent of creating a motion picture . 
 = = Background = = 
 The idea of exploring the effects of the depopulating of the Earth is an old one , having been a regular trope in science fiction novels for decades . Post @-@ apocalyptic literature in general had often tried to imagine the fate of civilization and its artifacts after the end of humanity . Indeed , an extremely popular 1949 novel , Earth Abides , portrayed the breakdown of urban systems and structures after a pandemic , through the eyes of a survivor , who muses at the end of the first chapter : " What would happen to the world and its creatures without man ? That he was left to see . " 
 The World Without Us applies a more ecological view to Earth Abides . Before writing it , the author , Alan Weisman , had written four books , including , Gaviotas : A Village to Reinvent the World , in 1998 , about the eco @-@ village of Gaviotas in Colombia ; and An Echo In My Blood , in 1999 , about his family 's history immigrating from Ukraine to the United States . He has worked as an international journalist for American magazines and newspapers , and at the time of writing the book was an Associate Professor of Journalism and Latin American Studies at the University of Arizona . The position required him to teach only one class in the spring semester , and he was free to travel and conduct research the rest of the year . 
 The idea for The World Without Us was suggested to Weisman in 2004 by Josie <unk> , an editor at Discover . She had pondered the idea for several years and asked Weisman to write a feature on the subject after she re @-@ read " Journey through a Doomed Land " , an article he published in 1994 in Harper 's Magazine about the state of Chernobyl eight years after abandonment . His Discover article , " Earth Without People " , published in the February 2005 issue and re @-@ printed in The Best American Science Writing 2006 anthology , describes how nature has thrived in the abandoned Korean Demilitarized Zone and how nature would overwhelm the built environment of New York City . Using interviews with <unk> , the article speculates that megafauna would return and that forest cover , like the Białowieża Forest , would spread over Europe and the eastern United States . The article raises the prospect of failing power plants , chemical plants , dams , and petroleum tanks . 
 To expand this into a book , Weisman 's agent found an editor and publisher at St. Martin 's Press . Among the 23 @-@ page bibliography are two articles he wrote for the Los Angeles Times Magazine ( " Naked Planet " on persistent organic pollutants , and " The Real Indiana Jones " on the Mayan civilization ) and one published in the Condé Nast Traveler ( " Diamond in the Wild " on diamond mining ) , as well as Discover 's " Earth Without People " . Additional research saw Weisman travel to England , Cyprus , Turkey , Panama , and Kenya . Interviews with academics quoted in the book include biologist E. O. Wilson on the Korean Demilitarized Zone , archaeologist William <unk> on plastics in garbage , forest botanist Oliver Rackham on vegetative cover across Britain , anthropologist Arthur Demarest on the crash of Mayan civilization , <unk> Douglas Erwin on evolution , and philosopher Nick Bostrom on <unk> . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 The book is divided into 27 chapters , with a prelude , coda , bibliography and index . Each chapter deals with a new topic , such as the potential fates of plastics , petroleum infrastructure , nuclear facilities , and artworks . It is written from the point of view of a science journalist with explanations and testimonies backing his predictions . There is no unifying narrative , cohesive single @-@ chapter overview , or thesis . 
 Weisman 's thought experiment pursues two themes : how nature would react to the disappearance of humans and what legacy humans would leave behind . To foresee how other life could continue without humans , Weisman reports from areas where the natural environment exists with little human intervention , like the Białowieża Forest , the Kingman Reef , and the Palmyra Atoll . He interviews biologist E. O. Wilson and visits with members of the Korean Federation for Environmental Movement at the Korean Demilitarized Zone where few humans have penetrated since 1953 . He tries to conceive how life may evolve by describing the past evolution of pre @-@ historic plants and animals , but notes Douglas Erwin 's warning that " we can 't predict what the world will be 5 million years later by looking at the survivors " . Several chapters are dedicated to megafauna , which Weisman predicts would proliferate . He profiles soil samples from the past 200 years and extrapolates concentrations of heavy metals and foreign substances into a future without industrial inputs . Carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere and implications for climatic change are likewise examined . 
 With material from previous articles , Weisman uses the fate of the Mayan civilization to illustrate the possibility of an entrenched society vanishing and how the natural environment quickly conceals evidence . To demonstrate how vegetation could compromise human built infrastructure , Weisman interviewed hydrologists and employees at the Panama Canal , where constant maintenance is required to keep the jungle vegetation and silt away from the dams . To illustrate abandoned cities succumbing to nature , Weisman reports from Chernobyl , Ukraine ( abandoned in 1986 ) and <unk> , Cyprus ( abandoned in 1974 ) . Weisman finds that their structures crumble as weather does unrepaired damage and other life forms create new habitats . In Turkey , Weisman contrasts the construction practices of the rapidly growing Istanbul , as typical for large cities in less developed countries , with the underground cities in Cappadocia . Due to a large demand for housing in Istanbul much of it was developed quickly with whatever material was available and could collapse in a major earthquake or other natural disaster . Cappadocian underground cities were built thousands of years ago out of volcanic tuff , and are likely to survive for centuries to come . 
 Weisman uses New York City as a model to outline how an unmaintained urban area would deconstruct . He explains that sewers would clog , underground streams would flood subway corridors , and soils under roads would erode and cave in . From interviews with members of the Wildlife Conservation Society and the New York Botanical Gardens Weisman predicts that native vegetation would return , spreading from parks and out @-@ surviving invasive species . Without humans to provide food and warmth , rats and cockroaches would die off . 
 Weisman explains that a common house would begin to fall apart as water eventually leaks into the roof around the flashings , erodes the wood and rusts the nails , leading to sagging walls and eventual collapse . After 500 years , all that would be left would be aluminum dishwasher parts , stainless steel cookware , and plastic handles . The longest @-@ lasting evidence on Earth of a human presence would be radioactive materials , ceramics , bronze statues , and Mount Rushmore . In space , the Pioneer plaques , the Voyager Golden Record , and radio waves would outlast the Earth itself . 
 Breaking from the theme of the natural environment after humans , Weisman considers what could lead to the sudden , complete demise of humans without serious damage to the built and natural environment . That scenario , he concludes , is extremely unlikely . He also considers transhumanism , the Voluntary Human Extinction Movement , the Church of Euthanasia and John A. Leslie 's The End of the World : the Science and Ethics of Human Extinction . Weisman concludes the book considering a new version of the one @-@ child policy . While he admits it is a " draconian measure " , he states , " The bottom line is that any species that <unk> its resource base suffers a population crash . Limiting our reproduction would be damn hard , but limiting our consumptive instincts may be even harder . " He responded to criticism of this saying " I knew in advance that I would touch some people 's sensitive spots by bringing up the population issue , but I did so because it 's been missing too long from the discussion of how we must deal with the situation our economic and demographic growth have driven us too ( sic ) " . 
 = = Publication = = 
 The book was first published on July 10 , 2007 , as a hardback in the United States by St. Martin 's Thomas Dunne Books , in United Kingdom by Virgin Books and in Canada by HarperCollins . The paperback was released in July 2008 . It has been translated and published in Denmark by Borgen as Verden <unk> os , France by Groupe Flammarion as Homo <unk> , in Germany by Piper as Die Welt ohne uns , in Portugal by Estrela Polar as O Mundo Sem <unk> , in Italy by <unk> as Il mondo senza di <unk> , in Poland by <unk> as Świat bez nas , and in Japan by Hayakawa Publishing as <unk> ga <unk> sekai . 
 Pete <unk> designed the cover art for the American release , which one critic said was " a thick layer of sugar @-@ coated sweetness in an effort to not alarm potential readers . ' Yes , I am a book about the environment . But I 'm harmless ! No , really ! ' " The Canadian version , designed by Ellen Cipriano , is similar to the American version but with a photo illustration rather than the disarming cartoon illustration . Cover art for the international releases contrast the natural environment with a decaying built environment . Adam Grupper voiced the ten @-@ hour @-@ long , unabridged English language audiobook which was published by Macmillan Audio and BBC Audiobooks , and released simultaneously with the hardcover book . AudioFile gave the audio presentation its Earphones Award , called Grupper 's reading sincere and balanced , and wrote , " Never veering into sensationalism , always objective and phlegmatic , Grupper takes what could be a depressing topic and makes it a book you just can 't stop listening to " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 As the book was released Weisman launched his book tour with stops throughout the United States , Canada and overseas to Lisbon and Brussels . Weisman did television interviews on The Daily Show and The Today Show and radio interviews on Weekend Edition , Talk of the Nation , The Diane Rehm Show , Living on Earth , Marketplace , and As It Happens . Meanwhile , the book debuted on the New York Times Best Seller list for non @-@ fiction hardcovers at # 10 on July 29 and spent nine weeks in the top ten , peaking at # 6 on August 12 and September 9 . In the Canadian market , it spent 10 weeks on The Globe and Mail 's non @-@ fiction best seller list , peaking at # 3 on August 11 . The book reached # 1 on the San Francisco Chronicle Best @-@ Sellers list for non @-@ fiction on September 23 and spent 11 weeks on the USA Today 's Top 150 Best @-@ Selling Books , peaking at # 48 . Reviewers at the Library Journal recommended the book for all environmental collections and the audiobook for most public and academic library audiobook collections . The book ranked # 1 on Time and Entertainment Weekly 's top 10 non @-@ fiction books of 2007 and was listed in the Hudson Booksellers ' " Best Books published in 2007 " . In the Amazon.com " Best Books of 2007 " , it placed # 4 overall in the United States and # 1 in the non @-@ fiction category in Canada . 
 The writing style was positively received as being vivid and well @-@ written , sometimes grim , but with appropriate language . Even an overall negative review by Michael Grunwald in The Washington Post remarked the writing was " always lucid , sometimes elegant " . In The New York Times Book Review Jennifer <unk> said Weisman has a " flirtation with religious language , his occasionally portentous impassivity giving way to the familiar rhetoric of eco @-@ hellfire " . Janet Maslin of The New York Times found the writing had " an arid , plain , what @-@ if style " while being " strangely uniform in tone " . On the reporting techniques , Kamiya wrote that " [ Weisman 's ] science reporting , at once lucid and full of wonder ... is the heart and soul of this book " and that it is " written as if by a compassionate and curious observer on another planet " . The Plain Dealer book editor Karen Long said Weisman " uses the precise , unhurried language of a good science writer and shows a knack for unearthing unexpected sources and provocative facts " . 
 Several critics found the lack of an anthropomorphic point of view hurt the book 's relevance . Robert <unk> in The Boston Globe wrote that it has " no real context ... no rationale for probing this fantasy other than [ Weisman 's ] unsubstantiated premise that people find it fascinating " . Michael Grunwald in The Washington Post also questioned the premise : " Imagining the human footprint on a post @-@ human planet might be fun for dormitory potheads who have already settled the questions of God 's existence and Fergie 's hotness , but it 's not clear why the rest of us need this level of documentary evidence " . On the other hand , Alanna Mitchell in the Globe and Mail review found relevance in the context of society 's passiveness to resource depletion combined with an anthropomorphic vanity . She writes the " book [ is ] designed to help us find the how of survival by shaking us out of our passive dance with death " . 
 The book 's environmental focus was also criticized by some . Christopher <unk> of The American Spectator wrote that it is " a prime example of the wrongheaded , extremist views of the Greens " . <unk> agrees that the book could be " an environmentalist 's nightmare , possibly fueling the cheap shots taken at the green movement ... by critics who say environmentalists care more about nature than people " . Environmentalist Alex Steffen found the book presents nothing new , but that using the sudden and clean disappearance of humans provides a unique framework , although extremely unlikely and insensitive . Two critics who call the book a " <unk> " ultimately gave it a positive review . The Guardian says " we learn during the course of this book , to feel good about the disappearance of humanity from the Earth " . 
 Other critics hailed the environmental perspective . Chauncey Mabe of the South Florida Sun @-@ Sentinel calls the book " one of the most satisfying environmental books of recent memory , one devoid of self @-@ righteousness , alarmism or tiresome <unk> " . Tom Spears of the <unk> News Service concludes " it 's more a portrait of ourselves , taken through an odd lens " and " [ s ] ometimes an obituary is the best biography " . 
 = = Genre = = 
 The book is categorized as non @-@ fiction science but some commentators emphasize it may be better described as speculative fiction . The World Without Us is grounded in environmental and science journalism . Like other environmental books , it discusses the impact that the human race has had on the planet . Weisman 's thought experiment removes the judgments and sufferings of humans by focusing on a hypothetical post @-@ human world . This approach to the genre , which " throw [ s ] the spotlight on the earth itself " , was found to be creative and objective . There have been other books that address similar topics , such as Gregory Benford 's 1999 book Deep Time : How Humanity <unk> Across Millennia . Science fiction writers such as H. G. Wells ( The War of the Worlds , 1898 ) and John Wyndham ( The Day of the Triffids , 1951 ) had earlier touched upon the possible fate of cities and other man @-@ made structures after the sudden removal of their creators . Similar parallels in the decay of civilization are detailed in 1949 post @-@ apocalyptic science fiction novel by Berkeley English professor George R. Stewart , Earth Abides . 
 Addressing his approach , Weisman said that eliminating the human element eliminated the " fear factor " that people are doing something wrong or that they will die ; it is meant to be read as a fantasy , according to the author . Josie Appleton of Spiked related the book to " today 's romanticisation of nature " in that it linked " the decadence and detachment of a modern consumerist society " with an ignorance of the efforts required to produce products so easily disposed . Appleton also felt the book countered the " Nature knows best " notion by highlighting the randomness of natural forces . 
 Weisman 's science journalism style uses interviews with academic and professional authorities to substantiate conclusions , while maintaining the " cool and dispassionate [ tone ] ... of a scientific observer rather than an activist " . Weisman said he purposely avoided the activist label : " Some of our finest science and nature writers only get read by people who already agree with them . It 's nice to get some affirmation for whatever it is you believe is true , even if it 's quite sobering , but I wanted to write something that people would read ... without minimizing the significance of what 's going on , nor trivializing it , nor oversimplifying it . " Richard Fortey compares the book to the works of Jared Diamond , Tim Flannery and E.O. Wilson , and writes that The World Without Us " narrowly avoids engendering the gloom @-@ and @-@ doom ennui that tends to engulf the poor reader after reading a catalogue of human rapacity " . Mark Lynas in the New Statesman noted that " whereas most environmental books sag under the weight of their accumulated bad news , The World Without Us seems refreshingly positive " . Demonstrating the optimism on the grim subject matter Appleton quotes an ecologist from the book saying " if the planet can recover from the Permian , it can recover from the human " . 
 = Mystery Date ( Mad Men ) = 
 " Mystery Date " is the fourth episode of the fifth season of the American television drama series Mad Men and the 56th episode of the series overall . It was written by series creator and executive producer Matthew Weiner and writer Victor Levin , and directed by Matt Shakman . It originally aired on the AMC channel in the United States on April 8 , 2012 . 
 The episode takes place in July 1966 , featuring much discussion among the characters about the then @-@ unsolved Richard Speck murders in Chicago . Don runs into an ex @-@ lover and cannot seem to escape her presence . Joan 's husband , Greg , returns from his tour of duty in Vietnam only to reveal that he is being sent back for another year of service . Sally becomes frightened after reading stories on the Speck murders , leading her step @-@ grandmother to educate her on the concepts of fear and defense . Dawn spends the night at Peggy 's apartment after becoming too afraid to return home because of racial violence near Harlem . 
 The episode 's title is derived from the 1965 Milton Bradley board game for teenage girls , Mystery Date , wherein several female players draw cards to advance to opening a door , hoping to find one of a variety of desirable male dates on the other side , while simultaneously hoping to avoid the lone undesirable one . A vintage television commercial for the game is viewed by Don 's daughter Sally during the episode . 
 The storylines involving Joan , Sally , and Peggy were well received , although some felt the dream sequence was a heavy @-@ handed way to have Don deal with his past infidelities . " Mystery Date " had consistent viewership with the previous week , with 2 @.@ 8 million overall viewers and 1 @.@ 0 million viewers in the 18 @-@ 49 demographic . Critics noted the dark atmosphere of the episode , with Weiner comparing it to a horror movie . The episode carried themes of sexual violence and the concept of masculinity . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Joyce Ramsay walks into Sterling Cooper Draper Pryce with graphic photos of the recently committed murders of eight nurses in Chicago . There were nine possible victims , with the one survivor hiding under the bed until the murderer left . Ginsberg reacts in disgust to the other employees ' fascination with the murder photos . 
 Don Draper , on the elevator to SCDP 's offices with Megan , is coughing profusely , sweaty , and feverish . A flirty former lover , Andrea Rhodes , walks into the elevator and starts to home in on Don before Don introduces Megan as his wife . Don tries to assuage a slightly perturbed Megan , who is upset over how many of Don 's old flames they run into in Manhattan . Don works with new hire Michael Ginsberg and Ken Cosgrove on the pitch to Butler Footwear . Ginsberg goes rogue during the presentation and ends up pitching a commercial based on Cinderella , which the group had earlier rejected as being too cliche - although that was what the executives were expecting , and they reject the pitch they had earlier approved in favor of a Cinderella campaign . Don is enraged and admonishes Ginsberg for the act ; Ginsberg doesn 't seem to realize the seriousness of his transgression until Ken points out he was on the verge of being fired . Afterwards , Don returns home early to an empty house and collapses on his bed in a weakened state . 
 Don awakens to a knock on the door . It 's Andrea , still in her tight yellow dress . Don directs her to leave immediately and forces her to go out through the apartment 's service elevator . After Don returns to bed , Andrea walks into his bedroom again , having entered through the unlocked back door . She seduces Don and the two end up having sex in his bed . In a post @-@ coital moment , Andrea declares to Don that he will continue meeting her for trysts because he can 't change who he is . Don flies off the handle and chokes her to death . Panicking , he kicks her under the bed , but one of her red shoes remains visible , recalling both the visual of Ginsberg 's Cinderella pitch and the lone survivor from the Richard Speck murders . Don awakens the next morning to realize he was having a fever dream . He says nothing of his vision to Megan and tells her she doesn 't need to worry about him . 
 Sally 's overbearing step @-@ grandmother Pauline is babysitting Sally while Betty and Henry are out of town . Sally overhears Pauline having a telephone conversation about the murders in Chicago . After stealing a newspaper out of the garbage and reading about the murder , Sally becomes frightened and unable to sleep . Pauline comforts Sally by suggesting the nurses asked for their fate for presumed lasciviousness . Pauline takes out a butcher knife , intending to use it for protection , and splits a Seconal with Sally . Betty and Henry return home the next day to find Pauline asleep on a couch with the butcher knife on a table by her side . Sally is asleep underneath the couch , once again recalling the visual of the Speck survivor . 
 Roger asks Peggy to devise a new Mohawk Airlines campaign over the weekend , in an attempt to cover for the fact that he had neglected to put the creative team on that task a week earlier . Peggy , realizing that for once she has the upper hand , agrees to the favor only after Roger hands over all the cash in his wallet ( $ 410 , an exorbitant amount in 1966 ) , rejecting the ten dollars which Roger initially offered her ( explaining that " the work is ten dollars ; the lie is extra . " ) . While working late , Peggy discovers Dawn sleeping in Don 's office . Peggy offers Dawn a spot on her couch at home , as Dawn worries about returning to her own home in Harlem due to racial tension in the area . Peggy and Dawn drink beers at Peggy 's apartment , while Peggy reveals insecurity over whether she " acts like a man " or not . While leaving her apartment 's living room , Peggy has an awkward moment with Dawn when Peggy realizes that her purse ( with Roger 's cash still inside ) is alone on the table next to Dawn . Peggy cleans up and leaves the purse next to Dawn . Peggy wakes up the next morning to find a note from Dawn apologizing for inconveniencing Peggy . 
 Joan 's husband Greg returns home from the Vietnam War after a year of service , greeting their new baby boy , and spending an afternoon with Joan in bed . Afterwards , Greg breaks bad news to Joan — he is being shipped back out again for another year . Joan complains about the government 's lies , but Greg backs up his duty to the country . During a dinner at a fancy restaurant with Joan 's mother and Greg 's parents , Greg is forced by his mother to reveal that he in fact volunteered to go back , sending Joan into a rage . She is absolutely horrified that Greg would abandon his duties as a father to head back to war , where he " feels like a good man " . The next morning , Joan sits him down and tells him to leave . Through her teeth , she proclaims that he was " never a good man " , subtly referring to the time he raped her back in the second season . Greg storms out , and Joan informs her mother that " it 's over " . Joan spends the night lying awake next to her sleeping mother and child . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Mystery Date " was written by creator Matthew Weiner and co @-@ executive producer Victor Levin . The episode was also directed by Matt Shakman . Director Matt Shakman had never worked on an episode of Mad Men before this episode . This was also the first episode of the series that co @-@ writer Victor Levin had penned . Levin had actually worked in advertising before becoming a television writer . He was the Associate Creative Director at both the Young and Rubicam advertising agency as well as BBDO . Both agencies had been either mentioned or depicted on Mad Men in the past . Levin also won two Clio awards for his work in advertising , which was an award Don won last season in the episode " Waldorf Stories " . 
 " The theme of sexual violence , of what it means to be a man , is a big part of that episode , " creator Matthew Weiner said of " Mystery Date " . " There 's this idea of this carnal , dangerous impulsive male . Of the dream sequence , Hamm said , " Unlike a lot of things on our show , it 's very visceral and immediate and scary and weird " with Hamm noting that Weiner compared the episode to a horror film . The scene in which Peggy blackmails Roger was one of Elisabeth Moss 's favorite moments , with Moss saying that she was " playing Roger Sterling " in that scene . 
 Weiner was fascinated by the presences of the Richard Speck murders in the media , despite the 40 race riots occurring in America around the same time . " Part of that force is the sex drive . No one wants to be a victim of that , but when you look at Pauline 's interest in the murders , it 's sexual . It 's such a deep touchstone of creepiness , " he noted . 
 The footage of Don returning to bed after kicking Andrea out of the apartment was actually reverse footage of Don getting out of bed only minutes before , which led some to believe that this was a directorial touch by Shakman to help the viewer discern the dream sequence by including unreal footage . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Mystery Date " received steady viewership that was consistent with the ratings for the previous week . It received 2 @.@ 8 million viewers , down only from 2 @.@ 9 from " Tea Leaves " . The episode also received a 1 @.@ 0 rating in the important 18 @-@ 49 demographic , the same rating as the week before . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 While the portions of the episode focusing on Joan , Peggy , and Sally were critically acclaimed , some critics were mixed on the value of the dream sequence . One writer for Zap2it declared the episode one of the best episodes yet . Alan Sepinwall , writing for Hitfix said that the episode was " full of nightmares and self @-@ realizations " as well as " horrifying images " . Sepinwall wrote that the " only way the strangulation scene would have been acceptable to me was with the understanding going in that it was a dream . Had the show not telegraphed that — or had I not figured it out — and Don woke up the next morning with no corpse on the floor , I 'd have been irked . " One writer for Paste Magazine noted that the " brilliantly shot " episode had a " Hitchcockian feel " , and pointed to the use of " reverse point @-@ of @-@ view shots " and " close @-@ ups of hands on doorknobs that added an air of suspense not usually present on Mad Men . " Eric Goldman of IGN declared it the " best episode yet for Season 5 , with some very good material for Joan , Peggy , Don and Sally packed into a busy hour . " Goldman praised the resolution to the Harris marriage , crediting Weiner with mastering " the slow burn on this show , and it was just so gratifying to finally have this issue be dealt with . " 
 Maureen Ryan of The Huffington Post called the episode " deeply unsettling " on purpose . She said that " Violence against women was inescapable in this episode , but what made Mad Men 's exploration of the topic worthwhile and compelling was the fact that two women in this episode asserted their power and control over their lives . It wasn 't a story about helplessness and victimization ; it was an episode about everything from sweaty discomfort to outright terror , and how we deal with those emotions . " John <unk> , writing for Slate , said the episode was a " dud , " with the fever dream a " very obvious ( and not particularly enlightening ) way to depict Don wrestling with his infidelity issues . " Jordan Bartel of the Baltimore Sun compared " Mystery Date " to a Stephen King novel . Meredith Blake of the Los Angeles Times admitted that the dream sequence was " heavy @-@ handed " but that " there ’ s also something terribly convincing about the link ' Mystery Date ' posits between Don ’ s seemingly insatiable sexual appetite and his personal demons . If only these things dissipated as easily as a fever . " Rolling Stone writer Sarene Leeds praised Christina Hendricks ' performance and the dream sequence , asking " even though it wasn 't " real , " what makes Don Draper any different from Richard Speck , the student @-@ nurse murderer ? " 
 = Freida Pinto = 
 Freida Selena Pinto ( born 18 October 1984 ) is an Indian actress who has appeared mainly in American and British films . She was born and raised in Mumbai , India , and decided when young that she would become an actress . As a student at St. Xavier 's College , Mumbai , she took part in amateur plays . After graduation , she briefly worked as a model and then as a television presenter . 
 Pinto rose to prominence through the 2008 British drama Slumdog Millionaire , her first appearance in a film . She won the Breakthrough Performance Award at the Palm Springs International Film Festival and was nominated for various awards at the British Academy Film Awards , the MTV Movie Awards and the Teen Choice Awards . She has appeared in several American and British productions , often playing supporting roles . Her biggest commercial success came with the 2011 science fiction film Rise of the Planet of the Apes . Pinto received major attention for portraying the title character in Michael Winterbottom 's Trishna ( 2011 ) . Her performance in the biographical drama Desert Dancer ( 2014 ) received critical acclaim . 
 Although the Indian media has credited Pinto with breaking the stereotypical image of an Indian woman in foreign films , she has been a lesser @-@ known figure in Indian cinema . Along with her film career , she promotes humanitarian causes and is vocal about women 's empowerment . 
 = = Early life and background = = 
 Pinto was born on 18 October 1984 in Bombay ( now Mumbai ) , into a family of Mangalorean Catholics , a community originating in the former Portuguese colony of Goa . Her mother Sylvia Pinto was the principal of St. John 's Universal School in Goregaon , Mumbai , and her father Frederick Pinto was a senior branch manager for the Bank of Baroda . Her elder sister , Sharon , works for NDTV . 
 Pinto had a middle class upbringing in the suburb of Malad . She first wanted to be an actress when she was five years old , often dressing up and imitating television actors during her childhood . She later recalled being inspired by Sushmita Sen 's victory in the 1994 Miss Universe competition , explaining that " the country was really proud of her , and I was like , one day , I want to do the same " . Pinto attended the Carmel of St. Joseph School in Malad , and then studied at St. Xavier 's College , Mumbai . Her major was in English literature , with minors in psychology and economics . At college , she participated in amateur theatre , but declined acting and modeling assignments until her graduation in 2005 . 
 Despite her interest in acting from an early age , Pinto was undecided on which career path to take until watching Monster ( 2003 ) while at college . She stated : " I guess it was when I watched Monster ... I pretty much knew . I had to find a way . I had to do something like that , something completely transformational . " In 2005 , Pinto began a modeling career and joined Elite Model Management India , with whom she worked for two and a half years . She was featured in several television and print advertisements for products such as Wrigley 's Chewing Gum , Škoda , Vodafone India , Airtel , Visa , eBay , and De Beers . 
 Around the same time , Pinto began going to auditions for films and television shows . She was chosen to host Full Circle , an international travel show that aired on Zee International Asia Pacific between 2006 and 2008 . The show took her to countries all over the world , including Afghanistan , Fiji , Malaysia , Singapore , and Thailand . Her auditions for both Bollywood and Hollywood productions , including for the role of Bond girl Camille Montes in Marc Forster 's Quantum of Solace ( 2008 ) , were largely unsuccessful . Pinto later claimed that it was a good learning experience , stating that she was " glad things happened the way they happened . I needed to be rejected , and I needed to learn that it 's part of the game ... I can have 100 rejections , but I 'm sure there 's going to be one particular thing that is almost destined for me to have . " 
 = = Acting career = = 
 = = = Beginnings and breakthrough ( 2008 – 10 ) = = = 
 In 2007 , Pinto 's modeling agency selected her and six other models to audition for the female lead in Danny Boyle 's film Slumdog Millionaire ( 2008 ) after a request by its casting director . After undergoing six months of extensive auditions , Pinto won the role of <unk> , the love interest of the main character Jamal , played by Dev Patel . During the post @-@ production phase , she attended an acting course at the Barry John Acting Studio in Mumbai . Although the course taught her about the " technical aspects " of acting , she stated that " in terms of the actual experience , there 's nothing like going out there and actually playing the part ... So for me , my favorite acting school was the six months of auditioning with Danny Boyle " . Acclaimed particularly for its plot and soundtrack , Slumdog Millionaire emerged as a sleeper hit ; made on a budget of $ 15 million , the film grossed US $ 377 @.@ 9 million worldwide . It was the most successful film at the 81st Academy Awards : it was nominated for ten awards , of which it won eight , including the award for Best Picture . Pinto won the Breakthrough Performance Award at the Palm Springs International Film Festival , and the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture , along with other cast members from the film . She was also nominated for Best Actress in a Supporting Role at the BAFTA Awards . Pinto 's performance in the film drew little attention from critics as her screen presence in the film was limited . The Telegraph ( Calcutta ) opined " it 's difficult to form an opinion " on her character ; its columnist Bharathi S. Pradhan noted " Slumdog Millionaire wasn 't really a test of Freida 's acting abilities . " 
 Following the success of Slumdog Millionaire , Pinto signed up for two art house productions . In Woody Allen 's comedy @-@ drama You Will Meet a Tall Dark Stranger ( 2010 ) , she acted alongside Antonio Banderas , Josh Brolin , Anthony Hopkins , Anupam Kher and Naomi Watts . She played a " mystery woman " who draws the attention of the character played by Brolin . Premiering at the 2010 Cannes Film Festival , the film received mixed reviews upon its release . Pinto then starred in Julian Schnabel 's Miral ( 2010 ) , based on a semi @-@ biographical novel by Rula <unk> , playing an orphaned Palestinian woman who grew up in a refugee camp in Israel . Before the film 's production began in the Palestinian territories , Pinto prepared for the role by visiting several refugee camps in the area . She stated that she could relate to her character 's experiences because of her knowledge about her relatives ' experiences during the partition of India in the 1940s . The film received largely negative reviews , and Pinto 's performance divided critics : Geoffrey Macnab of The Independent wrote that " Miral ... is played very engagingly by Freida Pinto " , while Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian stated that " [ Pinto ] looks uneasy and miscast " . 
 = = = 2011 – present = = = 
 Pinto had four releases in 2011 . The first was the science fiction film Rise of the Planet of the Apes , a reboot of the Planet of the Apes series . She played the role of Caroline <unk> , a primatologist who falls in love with the main character , played by James Franco . To prepare for her role , she researched the career of English anthropologist Jane Goodall . The film went on to gross US $ 481 @.@ 8 million worldwide ; it remains her highest @-@ grossing film as of April 2016 . Pinto 's character received criticism for being too one @-@ dimensional : Anthony Quinn of The Independent called it a " failure " , and Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter described the character as the most " boringly decorous tag @-@ along girlfriend seen onscreen in years . " Pinto 's second screen appearance of the year was playing the title character in Michael Winterbottom 's Trishna . The film , based on Thomas Hardy 's novel Tess of the d <unk> , gave Pinto the role of a teenage Rajasthani peasant , who leaves her family to work for a British @-@ born Indian hotelier , played by Riz Ahmed . It premiered at the 2011 Toronto International Film Festival and gained a mixed response from critics . Nishat Bari of India Today called Pinto 's role her " most substantial " one to that point . Philip French of The Guardian stated that Pinto " captivates " in the lead role , while Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times called her performance " touchingly beautiful " . In contrast , Manohla Dargis of The New York Times wrote that Pinto is " one of [ the film 's ] loveliest attractions , but she and her director haven 't been able to give Trishna a pulse " . 
 Pinto 's third film role in 2011 was playing Princess <unk> in the poorly received independent film Day of the Falcon , a period drama set in the 1930s Middle East , where she was cast alongside Antonio Banderas , Mark Strong and <unk> <unk> . Despite overall negative reviews , Andy Webster of The New York Times described Pinto and <unk> as " refreshing " and praised their " independent presences amid the <unk> male @-@ dominated milieu " . Pinto 's final screen appearance of the year was in the fantasy @-@ action film Immortals , in which she played the oracle priestess Phaedra . Despite receiving mixed @-@ to @-@ positive reviews from critics , the film grossed US $ 226 @.@ 9 million worldwide . Writing for The Hollywood Reporter , Todd McCarthy remarked that Phaedra was " capably embodied " by Pinto . 
 After 2011 , Pinto had no new film releases for two years . In 2013 , she appeared in the music video for Bruno Mars ' single " Gorilla " . She was criticised by the Indian media for appearing in the video ; The Times of India and Hindustan Times dismissed it as little more than " dirty dancing " . The same year , Pinto was also one of the narrators in the documentary film Girl Rising , produced for the campaign of the same name which promotes access to education for girls all over the world . 
 Pinto 's first cinematic appearance in two years was in the biographical drama Desert Dancer ( 2014 ) , which was about the life of Iranian choreographer Afshin <unk> . She played the heroin @-@ addicted <unk> , the love interest of the lead character played by Reece Ritchie . The role required her to do dance training consisting of eight hours of rehearsals a day for 14 weeks . She also attended a few sessions at rehabilitation centres in the United States to prepare for her role . It received largely negative reviews , although Andy Webster of The New York Times noted that " Pinto , even with an unfocused and underwritten role , is captivating " . 
 Pinto 's first film of 2015 was Terrence Malick 's Knight of Cups , an experimental film that featured an ensemble cast including Christian Bale , Cate Blanchett , Natalie Portman , and Antonio Banderas . She played Helen , a model with whom Bale embarks on a " dalliance " . She talked about acting without a script : " It is definitely a bit nerve @-@ racking on the first day because you don 't know where you are going to go . But once you figure that out , then it doesn 't really matter . It is actually very relaxing . It is fun and liberating . It is an experience that I completely embrace " . Premiering at the competition section of the 65th Berlin International Film Festival , the film received average to mixed reviews from critics . The film was released in the United States in March 2016 . She was among the 100 narrators of Unity ( 2015 ) , a documentary that explores the relationships between Earth 's species . Her third release of that year was the Colombian action film Blunt Force Trauma , in which she starred opposite Ryan <unk> and Mickey Rourke as a woman looking for her brother 's murderer . John DeFore of The Hollywood Reporter criticised the film , stating that it " takes itself much more seriously than viewers will . " As of October 2015 , Pinto is working on Andy Serkis ' Jungle Book , a motion capture adventure fantasy film based on Rudyard Kipling 's The Jungle Book . She will portray Mowgli 's adoptive mother in the film . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Before beginning her film career , Pinto was engaged to Rohan <unk> , who had been her publicist at one point . She ended the relationship in January 2009 and began dating her Slumdog Millionaire co @-@ star Dev Patel , who is six years her junior . In 2012 , Pinto stated that she does not want to act with Patel again as she feels that they would not be able to replicate the " chemistry " they had in their debut film . After a six @-@ year relationship , the couple separated amicably in December 2014 . After the success of Slumdog Millionaire , Pinto had " no fixed address " , but instead split her time between Mumbai , London , and Los Angeles . In a 2015 interview with USA Today , she stated that she lives in Los Angeles . 
 Feminism to me is equality . There is no man over woman and vice versa . Feminism is a very misconstrued and misunderstood topic . As soon as we say feminism , it does not mean all men should become subordinate and women should be the ones who rule the world . The only way we can have a progressive and successful country or world is when men and women treat each other as equals 
 Alongside her acting career , Pinto has been actively involved with several humanitarian causes and is vocal about the uplifting of women and underprivileged children . She has cited Angelina Jolie and Malala Yousafzai as " massive " inspirations in this regard . In 2010 , Pinto joined Andre Agassi and Steffi Graf in support of their philanthropic organisation , the Agassi Foundation . She raised $ 75 @,@ 000 for their annual fund raiser — " The 15th Grand Slam for Children " — which was aimed at providing education for underprivileged children . Two years later , she was appointed as the global ambassador of Plan International 's Because I am a Girl , a campaign that promotes gender equality with the aim of lifting millions of girls out of poverty . 
 In 2013 , Pinto appeared in a video clip for Gucci 's " Chime for Change " campaign to raise funds and awareness of women 's issues in terms of education , health , and justice . The following year , she participated at the " Girls ' rights summit " in London , where she called for more progress toward the end of female genital mutilation and child marriage . In March 2015 , she spoke out against the Indian government 's ban on India 's Daughter , Leslee Udwin 's documentary on the 2012 Delhi gang rape . During its premier at the United States , she said the film needs to reach the public as it is not a " shame @-@ India documentary " . In a 2015 interview , she stated : " This film in no way is propagating violence in order to solve the problem . In fact , what we 're saying is let 's do this in the most civilized possible way ever " . 
 In February 2016 , Pinto announced that she would be a part of a nonprofit organisation called " We Do It Together " , which provides finance for feature films , documentaries , and television shows that focus on women 's empowerment . 
 = = Media image = = 
 Although she played a small role in Slumdog Millionaire , the film catapulted Pinto to widespread recognition . The media has often speculated about her roles and earnings . In March 2009 , The Daily Telegraph reported Pinto as the highest @-@ paid Indian actress , although she had not appeared in a Bollywood film to that point . CNN @-@ IBN called her " India 's best export to [ the ] West " , while The Telegraph ( Calcutta ) described her as " arguably the biggest global star from India " . 
 Pinto has been frequently included in beauty and fashion polls conducted by various magazines . She was featured in People magazine 's annual lists — " World 's Most Beautiful People " and " World 's Best Dressed Women " in 2009 . That year , she was also included in Vogue 's list of the " top ten most stylish women " . In 2011 , Pinto was included as the only Indian celebrity among the " 50 Most Beautiful Women in Film " , a list compiled by Los Angeles Times Magazine . The following year , People named her one of the " Most Beautiful at Every Age " . She was featured in the " Top 99 Most Desirable Women " poll conducted by AskMen , consecutively from 2010 to 2012 . 
 In 2009 , Pinto was made a spokeswoman for L 'Oréal Paris . Two years later , a controversy arose when she appeared in an advert promoting a L 'Oréal product ; it showed Pinto in what was perceived to be a lighter skin tone due to make @-@ up or editing . The company denied claims of retouching Pinto 's picture . 
 A popular actress in Hollywood , Pinto remains a relatively little @-@ known figure in India ; critics and analysts have attributed the fact to the failure of Slumdog Millionaire in the country . Indian sociologist Ashis Nandy remarked : " My periscope does not pick her up " , while journalist Khalid Mohamed stated : " She is not a factor in Mumbai . " The Indian media has criticised her " fluctuating " accents — in Hindi and English — and attributed her inability to find roles in Bollywood to her dark complexion . Despite these criticisms , Pinto has been credited by the media for having avoided being stereotyped as an Indian in Hollywood , as she often plays characters of other nationalities . In a 2012 interview with Hindustan Times , she said she consciously avoids roles that depict stereotypes . 
 Pinto balances out her career by working in " big budget Hollywood blockbusters " alongside " smart independent films " . When asked about her preference for Hollywood , she replied : " I just wanted to become an actor . As an actor , you don 't have to limit yourself to a particular culture or ethnicity . I want to spread my tentacles everywhere and am ready for a film offer from any part of the world . " 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Music video appearances = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = Molecular diagnostics = 
 Molecular diagnostics is a collection of techniques used to analyse biological markers in the genome and proteome — the individual 's genetic code and how their cells express their genes as proteins — by applying molecular biology to medical testing . The technique is used to diagnose and monitor disease , detect risk , and decide which therapies will work best for individual patients . 
 By analysing the specifics of the patient and their disease , molecular diagnostics offers the prospect of personalised medicine . 
 These tests are useful in a range of medical specialisms , including infectious disease , oncology , human leukocyte antigen typing ( which investigates and predicts immune function ) , coagulation , and <unk> — the genetic prediction of which drugs will work best . They overlap with clinical chemistry ( medical tests on bodily fluids ) . 
 = = History = = 
 The field of molecular biology grew in the late twentieth century , as did its clinical application . In 1980 , Yuet Wai Kan et al. suggested a prenatal genetic test for <unk> that did not rely upon DNA sequencing — then in its infancy — but on restriction enzymes that cut DNA where they recognised specific short sequences , creating different lengths of DNA strand depending on which allele ( genetic variation ) the fetus possessed . In the 1980s , the phrase was used in the names of companies such <unk> Diagnostics Incorporated and <unk> Research <unk> Molecular Diagnostics . 
 During the 1990s , the identification of newly discovered genes and new techniques for DNA sequencing led to the appearance of a distinct field of molecular and genomic laboratory medicine ; in 1995 , the Association for Molecular Pathology ( AMP ) was formed to give it structure . In 1999 , the AMP co @-@ founded The Journal of Medical Diagnostics . <unk> Healthcare launched Expert Reviews in Medical Diagnostics in 2001 . From 2002 onwards , the HapMap Project aggregated information on the one @-@ letter genetic differences that recur in the human population — the single nucleotide polymorphisms — and their relationship with disease . In 2012 , molecular diagnostic techniques for <unk> use genetic hybridization tests to identify the specific single nucleotide polymorphism causing an individual 's disease . 
 As the commercial application of molecular diagnostics has become more important , so has the debate about patenting of the genetic discoveries at its heart . In 1998 , the European Union 's Directive 98 / 44 / <unk> that patents on DNA sequences were allowable . In 2010 in the US , AMP sued Myriad Genetics to challenge the latter 's patents regarding two genes , BRCA1 , BRCA2 , which are associated with breast cancer . In 2013 , the U.S. Supreme Court partially agreed , ruling that a naturally occurring gene sequence could not be patented . 
 = = Techniques = = 
 = = = Development from research tools = = = 
 The industrialisation of molecular biology assay tools has made it practical to use them in clinics . <unk> into a single handheld device can bring medical diagnostics into the clinic and into the office or home . The clinical laboratory requires high standards of reliability ; diagnostics may require accreditation or fall under medical device regulations . As of 2011 , some US clinical laboratories nevertheless used assays sold for " research use only " . 
 Laboratory processes need to adhere to regulations , for example Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments , Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act , Good Laboratory Practice , and Food and Drug Administration specifications in the United States . Laboratory Information Management Systems help by tracking these processes . Regulation applies to both staff and supplies . As of 2012 , twelve US states require molecular pathologists to be licensed ; several boards such as the American Board of Medical Genetics and the American Board of Pathology certify technologists , supervisors , and laboratory directors . 
 Automation maximises throughput and reduces the possibility of error or contamination during manual handling . Single devices to do the assay from beginning to end are now available . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Molecular diagnostics uses biological assays such as PCR @-@ ELISA or Fluorescence in situ hybridization . The assay detects a molecule , often in low concentrations , that is a marker of disease or risk in a sample taken from a patient . Preservation of the sample before analysis is critical . Manual handling should be minimised . The fragile RNA molecule poses certain challenges . As part of the cellular process of expressing genes as proteins , it offers a measure of gene expression but it is vulnerable to hydrolysis and breakdown by ever @-@ present <unk> enzymes . Samples can be snap @-@ frozen in liquid nitrogen or incubated in preservation agents . 
 Because molecular diagnostics can detect slighter markers , it is less intrusive than a biopsy . For example , because cell @-@ free nucleic acids exist in human plasma , a simple blood sample can be enough to sample genetic information from tumours , transplants or an unborn fetus . Molecular diagnostics based on nucleic acids use polymerase chain reaction ( PCR ) to vastly increase the number of nucleic acid molecules and amplify the target . The detection of the marker might use real time PCR , direct sequencing , or microarray chips — prefabricated chips that test many markers at once . The same principle applies to the proteome and the genome . High @-@ throughput protein arrays can use complementary DNA or antibodies to bind and hence can detect many different proteins in parallel . 
 = = Applications = = 
 = = = Prenatal = = = 
 Conventional prenatal tests for chromosomal abnormalities such as Down Syndrome rely on analysing the number and appearance of the chromosomes — the karyotype . Molecular diagnostics tests such as microarray comparative genomic hybridisation test a sample of DNA instead , and because of cell @-@ free DNA in plasma , could be less invasive , but as of 2013 it is still an adjunct to the conventional tests . 
 = = = Treatment = = = 
 Some of a patient 's single nucleotide polymorphisms — slight differences in their DNA — can help predict how quickly they will metabolise particular drugs ; this is called <unk> . For example , the enzyme <unk> metabolises several drugs , such as the anti @-@ clotting agent <unk> , into their active forms . Some patients possess polymorphisms in specific places on the <unk> gene that make poor <unk> of those drugs ; physicians can test for these polymorphisms and find out whether the drugs will be fully effective for that patient . Advances in molecular biology have helped show that some syndromes that were previously classed as a single disease are actually multiple subtypes with entirely different causes and treatments . Molecular diagnostics can help diagnose the subtype — for example of infections and cancers — or the genetic analysis of a disease with an inherited component , such as Silver @-@ Russell syndrome . 
 = = = Infectious disease = = = 
 Molecular diagnostics are used to identify infectious diseases such as chlamydia , influenza virus and tuberculosis ; or specific strains such as H1N1 virus . Genetic identification can be swift ; for example a loop @-@ mediated isothermal amplification test diagnoses the malaria parasite and is rugged enough for developing countries . But despite these advances in genome analysis , in 2013 infections are still more often identified by other means — their proteome , bacteriophage , or chromatographic profile . Molecular diagnostics are also used to understand the specific strain of the pathogen — for example by detecting which drug resistance genes it possesses — and hence which therapies to avoid . 
 = = = Disease risk management = = = 
 A patient 's genome may include an inherited or random mutation which affects the probability of developing a disease in the future . For example , Lynch syndrome is a genetic disease that predisposes patients to colorectal and other cancers ; early detection can lead to close monitoring that improves the patient 's chances of a good outcome . Cardiovascular risk is indicated by biological markers and screening can measure the risk that a child will be born with a genetic disease such as Cystic fibrosis . Genetic testing is ethically complex : patients may not want the stress of knowing their risk . In countries without universal healthcare , a known risk may raise insurance premiums . 
 = = = Cancer = = = 
 Cancer is a change in the cellular processes that cause a tumour to grow out of control . <unk> cells sometimes have mutations in oncogenes , such as KRAS and CTNNB1 ( β @-@ catenin ) . Analysing the molecular signature of cancerous cells — the DNA and its levels of expression via messenger RNA — enables physicians to characterise the cancer and to choose the best therapy for their patients . As of 2010 , assays that incorporate an array of antibodies against specific protein marker molecules are an emerging technology ; there are hopes for these multiplex assays that could measure many markers at once . Other potential future biomarkers include micro RNA molecules , which cancerous cells express more of than healthy ones . 
 = Lecrae = 
 Lecrae <unk> Moore ( born October 9 , 1979 ) , mononymously known as Lecrae , is an American Christian hip hop artist , songwriter , record producer and actor . He is the president , co @-@ owner and co @-@ founder of the independent record label Reach Records , and the co @-@ founder and president of the non @-@ profit organization ReachLife Ministries . To date , he has released seven studio albums and three mixtapes as a solo artist , and has released three studio albums , a remix album , and one EP as the leader of the hip hop group 116 Clique . He produced much of his earlier material along with other early Reach Records releases . Lecrae , in reference to his label as a Christian rapper , has stated that his music is just hip hop , though it reflects his Christian faith . In May 2016 , Lecrae signed to Columbia Records in a joint deal between his label and Columbia . 
 Lecrae debuted with Real Talk in 2004 through Reach Records . His third solo album , Rebel , released in 2008 , became the first Christian hip hop album to reach No. 1 on the Billboard Gospel chart . Rehab followed in 2010 , and Lecrae began attracting mainstream attention when he performed at the 2011 BET Hip Hop Awards Cypher and appeared on the Statik <unk> song " Live & Let Live " from Population Control . On May 10 , 2012 , Lecrae released his first mixtape , Church Clothes , which was hosted by DJ Don Cannon . Considered his breakthrough into mainstream hip hop , the mixtape was downloaded over 100 @,@ 000 times in less than 48 hours . His sixth studio album , Gravity , came out on September 4 , 2012 , and has been called the most important album in Christian hip hop history by Rapzilla and Atlanta Daily World . The album debuted as the best @-@ selling album overall in the iTunes Store , No. 3 on the Billboard 200 and won the Grammy Award for Best Gospel Album at the 2013 Grammy Awards , marking the first time that a hip hop artist received this award . Lecrae released his seventh album , Anomaly , on September 9 , 2014 . It debuted at No. 1 on the Billboard 200 with 88 @,@ 587 copies sold through the first week , the first album to top both the Billboard 200 and the Gospel chart simultaneously . 
 Lecrae received nominations for Artist of the Year at the 43rd , 44th , 45th , and 46th GMA Dove Awards , the last of which he won , and for Best Gospel Artist at the 2013 and 2015 BET Awards , the latter of which he won , a first for a rap artist . Lecrae 's filmography includes a role in the television film A Cross to Bear ( 2012 ) and a brief role as Dr. <unk> in the comedy film Believe Me ( 2014 ) . In the social sphere , Lecrae has advocated for the preservation of responsibility and fatherhood as a value among men in the United States , and in 2013 partnered with Dwyane Wade and Joshua DuBois in the multimedia initiative This Is Fatherhood as part of the Obama administration 's Fatherhood and Mentoring Initiative . He has also contributed articles to Billboard discussing racial tension and injustice in the United States , where he has called for willingness to listen to the oppressed as well as pointing out a need for spiritual healing . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Born and raised by his single mother in Southern Houston , Texas , Lecrae moved often early in life , living in San Diego , Denver , and Dallas . He has stated that he would go to church with his Christian grandmother , but considered it for " older people " and said it " wasn 't for me . " Lecrae never met his father , who ended up becoming a drug addict . In the song " Good , Bad , Ugly " , Lecrae reveals that when he was almost eight , a female baby sitter sexually molested him , an incident which Lecrae believes distorted his view of sexuality , influencing his later promiscuous lifestyle . Experiencing abuse and neglect during his childhood , Lecrae used his ability to rap as a source of significance . According to Lecrae , his grandmother would not allow him to watch rap music videos on television , but he would sneak in late at night . It was in these videos that Lecrae found individuals to look up to . Lecrae states that " there were no Martin Luther Kings or Malcolm Xs , they had all passed away so I had Tupac . " After being shown a gun by his uncle , Lecrae began looking up to gangsters and turned to a life of crime . Lecrae remembers taking a BB gun and standing in the street pointing it to a car , frightening the female driver , simply for fun . At the age of 16 , he started taking drugs , fighting , was arrested in high school for stealing , and eventually ended up on a gang list . Lecrae tried " pretty much every drug there was to try " except for heroin and crack cocaine . 
 According to CNN , he became a drug dealer and used the Bible that his grandmother gave him as a good luck charm . After being arrested for drug possession , the officer saw the Bible and let Lecrae go on a promise that he would agree to live by it . He eventually turned from drugs to alcohol consumption and a party lifestyle and became a " misfit of a person . " He has described himself during this period as a thrill @-@ seeker , he would pull stunts such as jumping from a third @-@ story building , and gained the nickname " Crazy ' <unk> " . Encouraged by his concerned mother to read his Bible , Lecrae said that " I remember ripping the pages out of the Bible and throwing it on the floor . I don 't want this Bible . I couldn 't wrap my hands around this being true or real . " He began to drink and smoke more and look for more women " as the emptiness became more profound . " At age 17 , his personal , financial , and relationship troubles convinced him that he was at a " dead end . " Wanting to do what he considered the mature thing , through the influence of his grandmother , he desired to start attending church . A girl Lecrae attended high school with was there , and she invited him to a Bible study , where he met Darragh , his future wife . Lecrae was surprised to find that the members of the Bible study " were just people like me . They read the same books and listened to the same music . Their character was just different . They were loving and that 's really what drew me in . " Lecrae says that it was at age 19 that he finally decided to live for God , though " it wasn 't overnight " and he " spent a lot of time making bad decisions . " 
 = = = = Conversion = = = = 
 Lecrae attended a conference after being invited by a friend , though Lecrae admits that his interest was to meet girls and experience the big city . When he arrived at the conference , Lecrae was awed by the performance of the Christian hip @-@ hop group The Cross Movement . Lecrae says that he saw " guys who had been shot from being in gangs , girls who were extremely promiscuous in the past , I see rappers , dancers and singers ; I see people who came from the same background I came from , and they still embodied who they were culturally , but they were all in love with Jesus and I had never seen that before . " After hearing Pastor James White of Christ Our King Community Church speak on how Christians are bought with a price and the suffering that Jesus underwent in the Crucifixion , Lecrae says that he remembers articulating " God get me out of this , don 't kill me ; do whatever you have to do to get me out of this , just don 't kill me . " Later , Lecrae was driving on a highway when he turned too quickly and his car went into a roll . He had no seatbelt and the roof and windshield of the car caved in , his glasses were molded into the frame of the car , but he survived completely uninjured . Lecrae cites this incident as the one which convinced him to commit his life to Christ . Lecrae went back to his college , the University of North Texas , with a printed version of his testimony to pass out on campus . He started volunteering and performing at a juvenile detention center , and the reception he received convinced him that offering " hope and encouragement " through music was what he wanted to do . However , Lecrae still struggled in his faith − as revealed in " Good , Bad , Ugly " , in 2002 he impregnated a then @-@ girlfriend . Rather than risk scandal , he and his girlfriend had the baby aborted , a decision he says he now deeply regrets . 
 = = = Early career , Real Talk , and After the Music Stops ( 2004 – 07 ) = = = 
 Five years after his conversion , Lecrae teamed up with Ben Washer to found Reach Records , and at the age of 25 he released his first album , Real Talk . The following year it was re @-@ released by Cross Movement Records and reached No. 29 on the Billboard Gospel Albums chart , staying on the chart for 12 weeks . The album later received a nomination at the 2007 Stellar Awards . In 2005 , Lecrae co @-@ founded the non @-@ profit organization ReachLife Ministries , which equips local Christian leaders with tools , media , curriculum , and conferences that are based on the teachings of the Bible and relevant to hip @-@ hop culture . Also in 2005 , the debut album of 116 Clique , The Compilation Album , was released . 
 After the success of Real Talk , Lecrae released his second studio album on August 15 , 2006 . After the Music Stops charted at No. 5 on the Billboard Gospel Albums chart , No. 7 on the Billboard Christian Albums chart and No. 16 on the Billboard Heatseeker Album charts , and received a nomination for a Dove Award , as was the single " Jesus Muzik " , featuring Trip Lee . In 2007 , 116 Clique released its second album , 13 Letters , reaching No. 10 on the Gospel Albums chart and No. 29 on the Christian Albums chart . 116 Clique also released the remix EP Amped , which peaked at No. 24 on the Gospel Albums chart . 
 = = = Rebel ( 2008 – 09 ) = = = 
 On October 8 , 2008 , Lecrae 's third album , Rebel , entered the Billboard charts at No. 60 with 9 @,@ 800 units sold and topped the Billboard Gospel Album charts for two weeks , the first hip @-@ hop album to do so . It also charted at No. 2 on the Christian Albums chart and No. 15 on the Top Independent charts . In 2009 , the album received a nomination at the 40th Dove Awards , as did the Flame song " Joyful Noise " , which featured Lecrae and John Reilly . 2009 also saw Lecrae 's first film role , when he appeared in the documentary <unk> Presents : Word from the Street by the UK @-@ based TV channel <unk> . 
 = = = Rehab series ( 2010 – 11 ) = = = 
 On February 5 , 2010 , Lecrae released a charity single entitled " Far Away " , a tribute to the victims of the 2010 Haiti earthquake . Lecrae promised that all proceeds from the single 's sales would go directly to the Haiti relief effort . 
 On July 7 , Lecrae announced on the Reach Records website that the title of his new album would be Rehab . On August 5 , 2010 , Rapzilla released a new song from Lecrae called " Amp It Up " . Lecrae subsequently clarified on his Twitter account that the song was not a single from Rehab , but rather a theme song for <unk> Kamps , a chain of Christian camps for which he writes songs annually . On August 31 , 2010 , Reach Records revealed the track list for Rehab , released it for preorder , and premiered a promotional video " Idols " . A second promotional video , entitled " I Am Dust " , debuted on September 9 , 2010 . Upon its release , Rehab hit No. 16 on the Billboard 200 chart , making it one of the highest selling Christian hip hop albums at that time . 
 On September 22 , 2010 , Rapzilla reported that the Rehab packaging came with an advertisement encouraging buyers to purchase another upcoming album , Rehab : The Overdose , which saw release on January 11 , 2011 . It included 11 new songs and featured several other Christian artists such as Thi 'sl and Swoope . Rehab : The Overdose debuted at No. 15 on the Billboard 200 . On August 29 , 2011 , Lecrae announced through Twitter that on September 27 , 2011 , he would release a special edition of Rehab , entitled Rehab : Deluxe Edition . On the same day , 116 Clique released their fourth album , entitled Man Up . 
 On September 7 , 2011 , Rapzilla announced that Lecrae would be featured on the BET Hip Hop Awards Cypher on October 11 , 2011 . Lecrae gained popularity after his verse on the cypher trended nationwide on Twitter and was featured on AllHipHop . Lecrae then appeared as a feature on Statik <unk> 's song " Live and Let Live " from his Population Control album . 
 = = = Mainstream breakthrough , Gravity , and Church Clothes series ( 2012 – 13 ) = = = 
 On February 16 , 2012 , Rapzilla announced that Lecrae was preparing to release his first mixtape , Church Clothes . On May 3 , 2012 , Lecrae premiered his music video for the title track of his Church Clothes mixtape online on XXL . The video was noted for including cameos by Kendrick Lamar and DJ Premier , and attracted almost 20 @,@ 000 views in less than a day . Hosted by Don Cannon , the mixtape featured the song Darkest Hour , in which Lecrae collaborated with No Malice of Clipse . Church Clothes was downloaded more than 100 @,@ 000 times in less than 48 hours on <unk> , and in less than a month reached 250 @,@ 000 downloads , a platinum rating on the website . On June 25 , 2012 , a remastered version of the mixtape , without DJ Don Cannon , was released as an EP for sale on iTunes . Due to issues with sampling , this version was much shorter with only seven songs . Upon its release , the EP debuted on the Billboard charts at No. 10 on both the Christian Albums and Gospel Albums charts for the week of July 14 , 2012 . 
 On April 27 , Lecrae announced that his next album , Gravity , was to be released in late 2012 , and recording sessions began in May . On June 21 , 2012 Lecrae appeared live at the Apple Store in Chicago for Black Music Month . The release date for Gravity , September 4 , 2012 , as well as the album artwork was announced on July 19 , 2012 via Rapzilla . 
 On August 30 , 2012 , the rapper Saigon announced that Lecrae would be one of the featured artists on his upcoming album The Greatest Story Never Told Chapter 2 : Bread and Circuses , due November 6 , 2012 . 
 Gravity was released on September 4 , 2012 to critical acclaim . Upon its release , Gravity debuted at No. 3 on the Billboard 200 , with 72 @,@ 000 units sold . The album also debuted at No. 1 on the Christian , Gospel , Independent , and Rap Album charts , No. 3 on the Digital Albums chart , and 24 on the Canadian Albums Chart . After the iTunes deluxe version of the album hit No. 1 on that vendors charts , and the regular version at number No. 2 , Time wrote an article about Lecrae and his success with the album . 
 On November 7 , 2013 , Lecrae released his second mixtape , entitled Church Clothes Vol . 2 , hosted once again by Don Cannon . The mixtape debuted at No. 21 on the Billboard 200 , No. 1 on the Billboard Christian Albums and Gospel Albums charts , and No. 3 on the Rap Albums chart . On <unk> , the album was download over 146 @,@ 000 times by November 26 , 2013 . 
 = = = Anomaly , Church Clothes 3 , first book , and new record deal ( 2014 – present ) = = = 
 On June 3 , 2014 Lecrae announced through social media that his seventh studio album would be titled Anomaly . The album released on September 9 , 2014 . It is supported by the single " Nuthin " . It debuted at No. 1 on the Billboard 200 with over 88 @,@ 000 copies sold through the first week . It is the first time an album tops both the Billboard 200 and the Gospel Albums chart . Lecrae also became the fifth artist following Chris Tomlin ( 2013 ) , TobyMac ( 2012 ) , LeAnn Rimes ( 1997 ) and Bob Carlisle ( 1997 ) to score a number one album on both Christian Albums and the Billboard 200 . Anomaly also marks the sixth time that Lecrae topped the Gospel Albums chart and the fifth time he topped the Christian Albums chart . In its second week of sales , the album sold 31 @,@ 000 copies , bringing the total to 120 @,@ 000 copies sold . In its third week of sales , the album sold another 17 @,@ 000 copies , bringing the total to 137 @,@ 000 copies . As a reward to fans for their support in helping his album go No. 1 on Billboard , Lecrae released a new song , " Non @-@ Fiction " , as a free download on September 17 . The song was subsequently released on October 21 , 2014 in the iTunes store . In August 2015 , Lecrae announced that he will be releasing a memoir titled Unashamed , it was released in May 2016 . On January 15 , 2016 , Lecrae released his third mixtape Church Clothes 3 . In May 2016 , Lecrae signed to Columbia Records , which will release future recordings in conjunction with Reach . 
 = = Influences and musical style = = 
 Lecrae 's musical genre is predominantly Southern hip hop , and has been described as falling under the styles of crunk , gangsta rap , and hardcore hip hop . On his third release , Rebel , Lecrae slowed down his style on many songs . Rehab was noted for its stylistic diversity , particularly on the song " Children of the Light " , which featured <unk> and Sonny Sandoval and incorporated rock , and reggae influences . With the release Gravity , Billboard described Lecrae as incorporating reggae and soul influences into his " signature brash sound . " 
 Regarding which musical artists have influenced him , Lecrae , in an interview with Essence , cited Tupac , Nas , DJ Quik , Scarface , and The Cross Movement . In an interview with The Christian Post , Lecrae listed his top favorite five hip hop artists as Tupac , Nas , The Ambassador , Snoop Dogg , and , though for his business approach rather than his music , Jay Z. Lecrae also names Outkast and Lauryn Hill as major influences , particularly their albums Aquemini and The Miseducation of Lauryn Hill , respectively , and considers Hill 's song " Adam Lives in Theory " as the top song that nourishes him spiritually . In the song " Non @-@ Fiction " , he lists the Tunnel Rats alongside The Cross Movement as an influence when he was newly converted to Christianity . Theologically , Lecrae follows the Reformed tradition of theology and is considered an influential figure in the New Calvinist movement . He cites Tommy Nelson , John MacArthur , and John Piper , among others , as early influences on his Christian faith , and Lecrae even titled one of his hit songs , " Don 't Waste Your Life " , after the book of the same name by Piper . Lecrae explains that through Nelson , MacArthur , and Piper , he subsequently discovered Spurgeon , Calvin , and Francis Schaeffer , the last of whom Lecrae calls his " personal hero " . Other theologians cited by Lecrae include Tim Keller , Andy Crouch , Randy Alcorn , and Abraham Kuyper . He also looks to Martin Luther King , Jr. for inspiration on working out faith in social issues . 
 He frequently tells the press that " My music is not Christian , Lecrae is . " He told Miami New Times 's <unk> that " I think Christian is a wonderful noun , but a terrible adjective . Are there Christian shoes , Christian clothes , Christian plumbers , Christian pipes ? I think if you 're going to , you should label it hip @-@ hop ... hip @-@ hop is a particular poetic style . Labeling it with the faith assumes that the song is going to be some kind of sermon , but there 's a lot of social and political things that I don 't think make it gospel or Christian music . " He also stated , " I like to wrap my mind around a total situation . I 'm a social anthropologist . If I never been homeless , let me try to be homeless for a week and soak up that information . More like a method actor . So for me it 's spending time with people and talking about things from their perspective . " 
 = = Popular culture = = 
 Charlotte Hornets guard Jeremy Lin recommended Lecrae and Hillsong in an interview when asked about his pre @-@ game music . Former NFL quarterback Tim Tebow and professional wrestler Ezekiel Jackson have also endorsed Lecrae . During March 2014 , Lecrae signed a ten @-@ day contract with the Atlanta Hawks , and on April 4 , 2014 , he performed live at Philips Arena after the Hawks game . " Dum Dum , " a song by Tedashii featuring Lecrae , was used on an episode of So You Think You Can Dance . 
 = = Social activism = = 
 In 2011 , 116 Clique and ReachLife Ministries , both headed by Lecrae , launched a media campaign entitled Man Up , intended to mentor male urban youths on fatherhood and biblical manhood . It features concert tours and a curriculum centered on a short film and a studio album , both titled Man Up , and since 2012 has also featured a string of conference events . 
 In May 2013 , Lecrae partnered with NBA player Dwyane Wade , filmmaker Art Hooker , and Joshua DuBois , the former head of the Office of Faith Based and Neighborhood Partnerships under the Obama administration , to create the national media campaign This Is Fatherhood , an initiative " devoted to restoring America 's commitment to healthy fatherhood . " The campaign began on May 1 with a " This is Fatherhood Challenge " , in which contestants could submit videos , songs , and essays about fatherhood through June 10 . The winners received cash prizes and a trip to Washington , D.C. , for a ceremony on Father 's Day . In addition , Lecrae offered studio time and mentoring to the grand prize winner . Lecrae , Wade , DuBois , Jay Z , and U.S. President Barack Obama all made appearances in the campaign 's promotional public service announcements . 
 Lecrae has also contributed op @-@ ed articles to Billboard on the 2014 Ferguson unrest and the 2015 Charleston church shooting , and has called for understanding and empathy across racial divides and willingness to listen to the oppressed , and also pointed out the need for spiritual healing through Jesus Christ . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Lecrae currently resides in Atlanta since relocating there from Memphis in 2009 , and is married to Darragh Moore . The couple has three children together . Darragh handles the administration for Lecrae 's tours . Lecrae is a graduate of University of North Texas . In an interview with Hip Hop DX , Lecrae stated that Clipse member No Malice sought him out as a spiritual advisor . 
 On March 14 , 2016 , Canada Christian College bestowed an honorary Doctorate of Music to Lecrae whilst visiting Toronto on his Higher Learning Tour , making him the youngest recipient of such a degree from the college . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Real Talk ( 2004 ) 
 After the Music Stops ( 2006 ) 
 Rebel ( 2008 ) 
 Rehab ( 2010 ) 
 Rehab : The Overdose ( 2011 ) 
 Gravity ( 2012 ) 
 Anomaly ( 2014 ) 
 = = Production discography = = 
 Self @-@ release – Real Talk ( 2004 ) 
 <unk> – The Seasoning with So Hot Productions and C.I. ( 2005 ) 
 Self @-@ release – After the Music Stops with So Hot Productions , Mac the <unk> , DJ Official , and Tony Stone ( 2006 ) 
 Trip Lee – If They Only Knew with DJ Official , Tony Stone , Mac the <unk> , So Hot Productions ( 2006 ) 
 Tedashii – Kingdom People with Ben Washer ( 2006 ) 
 02 . " Houston We Have a Problem " 
 04 . " Off Da Hook " 
 09 . " Lifestyle " 
 15 . " No More " 
 19 . " In Ya Hood ( <unk> Remix ) " 
 Sho Baraka – Turn My Life Up with Bobby Taylor , DJ Official , <unk> , and So Hot Productions ( 2007 ) 
 Self @-@ release – Rebel ( 2008 ) 
 09 . " Change " 
 Self @-@ release – Gravity ( 2012 ) 
 Self @-@ release – Anomaly ( 2014 ) 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 Lecrae has won many music awards over the space of his career , including two Grammy Awards and seven Dove Awards . In 2013 , he became the first hip hop artist to win the Grammy Award for Best Gospel Album , which was awarded to his sixth album , Gravity , and in 2015 became the first rapper to win the BET Award for Best Gospel Artist . 
 = Cliff Burton = 
 Clifford Lee " Cliff " Burton ( February 10 , 1962 – September 27 , 1986 ) was an American musician , best known as the second bass guitarist for the American thrash metal band Metallica from December 1982 until his death in September 1986 . 
 Burton joined Metallica in 1982 and performed on the band 's first three studio albums : Kill ' Em All , Ride the Lightning and Master of Puppets . He also received a posthumous writing credit for the song " To Live Is to Die " from the band 's fourth studio album , ... And Justice for All . 
 On September 27 , 1986 , Burton was killed in a bus accident in <unk> County , a rural area of southern Sweden , as the band was touring in support of the Master of Puppets album . Burton was replaced by bassist Jason Newsted the following month . He was also posthumously inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame with Metallica on April 4 , 2009 . He was selected as the ninth greatest bassist of all time in an online reader poll organized by Rolling Stone magazine in 2011 . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Clifford Lee Burton was born in Castro Valley , California , to Ray and Jan Burton . He had two elder siblings , Scott and Connie , and a niece , Nicole . Burton 's interest in music began when his father introduced him to classical music and he began taking piano lessons . 
 In his teenage years , Burton had an interest in rock , classical , and eventually heavy metal . He began playing the bass at age 13 , after the death of his brother . His parents quoted him as saying , " I 'm going to be the best bassist for my brother . " He practiced up to six hours per day ( even after he joined Metallica ) . Along with classical and jazz , Burton 's other early influences varied from southern rock and country to the blues . 
 Burton cited Geddy Lee , Geezer Butler , Stanley Clarke , Lemmy Kilmister and Phil Lynott as major influences on his style of bass playing . 
 = = = Career = = = 
 While still a student at Castro Valley High School , Burton formed his first band called EZ @-@ Street . The band took its name from a Bay Area topless bar . Other members of EZ Street included future Faith No More guitarist " Big " Jim Martin as well as Faith No More and Ozzy Osbourne drummer Mike Bordin . Burton and Martin continued their musical collaboration after becoming students at Chabot College in Hayward , California . Their second band , Agents of Misfortune , entered the Hayward Area Recreation Department 's Battle of the Bands contest in 1981 . Their audition was recorded on video and features some of the earliest footage of Burton 's trademark playing style . The video also shows Burton playing parts of what would soon be two Metallica songs : his signature bass solo , " ( Anesthesia ) - Pulling Teeth " , and the chromatic intro to " For Whom the Bell Tolls " . Burton joined his first major band , Trauma , in 1982 . Burton recorded the track " Such a Shame " with the band on the second Metal massacre compilation . 
 In 1982 , Trauma traveled to Los Angeles to perform at the Whisky a Go Go . Among those in attendance were James Hetfield and Lars Ulrich , both members of Metallica , which had formed the previous year . Upon hearing , as Hetfield described it , " this amazing shredding " ( which later became " ( Anesthesia ) - Pulling Teeth " ) , the two went in search of what they thought was an amazing guitar player . When they learned that what they had heard was a bass solo by Burton , they decided to recruit him for their own band . They asked him to replace departed bassist Ron McGovney , and since Burton thought that Trauma was " starting to get a little commercial " , he agreed . The idea of having to move to Los Angeles did not sit well with him , and said he would join only if the band would relocate from Los Angeles to his native San Francisco Bay Area . Metallica , eager to have Burton in the band , left their origin of Los Angeles to make a home in El Cerrito , a town located across the bay from San Francisco . 
 Burton 's first recording with Metallica was the Megaforce demo . A demo tape the band had made prior to Burton 's joining , No Life ' til Leather , managed to come into the hands of John Zazula , owner of Megaforce Records . The band relocated to Old Bridge , New Jersey and quickly secured a recording contract with Zazula 's label . Its debut album , Kill ' Em All , features Burton 's famous solo piece , " ( Anesthesia ) - Pulling Teeth " , which showcased his use of effects , such as a wah @-@ wah pedal , not commonly used by bass guitarists . 
 Metallica 's debut album , Kill ' Em All , was originally intended to inherit the name of one of their earlier demo releases ( predating Burton 's participation ) , which was Metal Up Your Ass , but the record company did not like the title and insisted on changing it . After the band learned of the change , Burton said " We should just kill ' em all , man , " which gave the band members an idea for the new title . The album was released on July 25 , 1983 through Megaforce Records . 
 The band 's second studio album , Ride the Lightning , showcased the band 's increasing musical growth . Burton 's songwriting abilities were growing , and he received credit on six of the album 's eight songs . Burton 's playing style and use of effects is showcased on two tracks : the chromatic intro to " For Whom the Bell Tolls " , and the " lead bass " on " The Call of Ktulu " . 
 The increase of musicianship on Ride the Lightning caught the attention of major record labels . Metallica was signed to Elektra Records , and began working on its third album , Master of Puppets , which is considered by most critics to be a landmark album in heavy metal . Burton is featured heavily on a number of tracks , most notably the instrumental " Orion " , which again featured Burton 's lead bass playing style . The album also contained Burton 's favorite Metallica song " Master of Puppets " . Master of Puppets was the band 's commercial breakthrough , but it would be Burton 's final album with Metallica . 
 Burton 's final performance was in Stockholm , Sweden , at the <unk> Arena on September 26 , 1986 , one day before his death . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 During the European leg of the Damage Inc. tour in support of Master of Puppets , the band complained that the sleeping cubicles on their tour bus were unsatisfactory and uncomfortable . To decide who received pick of the bunks , Kirk Hammett and Burton drew cards . On the evening of September 26 , 1986 , Burton won the game with an ace of spades , thereby getting the first choice of bunk and pointed at Hammett and exclaimed , " I want your bunk ! " Hammett replied , " Fine , take my bunk , I 'll sleep up front , it 's probably better up there anyway . " Burton was sleeping shortly before 7 am on September 27 when , according to the driver , the bus skidded off the road ( the E4 , 12 miles north of <unk> ) , and flipped onto the grass in <unk> County Burton was thrown through the window of the bus , which fell on top of him , resulting in his death . 
 James Hetfield later stated that he first believed the bus flipped because the driver was drunk . Hetfield stated that he walked long distances down the road looking for black ice and found none . Local freelance photographer Lennart <unk> ( who attended the crash scene the following morning ) , later asked in an interview about the likelihood that black ice caused the accident , said it was ' out of the question ' because the road was dry and the temperature around 2 ° C ( 36 ° F ) . This was confirmed by police who found no ice on the road . <unk> detective Arne Pettersson was reported in a local newspaper to have said the tracks at the accident site were exactly like ones seen when drivers fall asleep at the wheel . However , the driver stated under oath that he had slept during the day and was fully rested ; his testimony was confirmed by the driver of a second tour bus that was carrying the band 's crew and equipment . The driver was determined not at fault for the accident and no charges were brought against him . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Burton 's body was cremated and the ashes scattered at the Maxwell Ranch . At the ceremony , the song " Orion " was played . The lyrics " ... cannot the Kingdom of Salvation take me home " from " To Live Is to Die " are written on Burton 's memorial stone . Shortly after Burton 's death , Jason Newsted from Flotsam and Jetsam became Metallica 's new bassist , a position he held until his resignation in 2001 . The role has since been filled by producer and studio musician Bob Rock and by the former bassist of Suicidal Tendencies and Ozzy Osbourne , Robert Trujillo . 
 Metallica wrote a tribute to Burton titled " To Live Is to Die " for ... And Justice for All . Burton also received a writing credit for the lyrics and bass parts that were taken from unused bass recordings done by Burton which were re @-@ recorded by Jason Newsted . A non @-@ Metallica tribute to Burton is the song " In My Darkest Hour " by thrash metal band Megadeth . According to Dave Mustaine , due to hearing of Burton 's death , he sat down and wrote the music for the song in one sitting . The lyrics , however , are unrelated to Burton 's death . Mustaine was Metallica 's lead guitarist in the early days and was a close friend of Burton at the time . 
 On October 3 , 2006 , a memorial stone was unveiled in Sweden near the scene of the fatal crash . It is located by the parking lot to Gyllene <unk> . 
 Thrash metal band Anthrax dedicated its album Among the Living to him , as did Metal Church with The Dark . 
 On April 4 , 2009 , Burton was posthumously inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame , with fellow Metallica bandmates James Hetfield , Lars Ulrich and Kirk Hammett . Future bassists Jason Newsted and Robert Trujillo were inducted as well . During the ceremony , the induction was accepted by his father Ray Burton , who shared the stage with the band and mentioned that Cliff 's mother was actually Metallica 's biggest fan . 
 A biography , To Live Is to Die : The Life and Death of Metallica 's Cliff Burton , written by Joel McIver , was published by Jawbone Press in June 2009 . Hammett provided the book 's foreword . 
 = = Equipment = = 
 = = Cliff Burton Signature Bass = = 
 In January 2013 , guitar manufacturer Aria revealed through Metallica 's official website that they would be releasing a replica of Burton 's bass , called the Aria Pro II Cliff Burton Signature Bass . They had received permission from Burton 's family and former bandmates from Metallica to authorize the production of the instrument . The bass guitar was officially unveiled at Winter NAMM in Anaheim , California . On January 25 , 2013 , Burton 's father Ray attended the press conference where he signed autographs and talked about Burton and the instrument . Current Metallica bassist Robert Trujillo was also present and was the first to try out the bass , playing parts of " ( Anesthesia ) - Pulling Teeth " . It is unknown whether any other members of Metallica attended the event . Ray Burton was quoted as saying , ' " What a beautiful instrument and a wonderful tribute to Cliff . " 
 Specifications 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Studio albums = = = 
 Kill ' Em All ( 1983 ) 
 Ride the Lightning ( 1984 ) 
 Master of Puppets ( 1986 ) 
 ... And Justice for All ( 1988 ) ( Posthumous writing credit on " To Live Is to Die " ) 
 Garage Inc . ( 1998 ) ( Featured on " Am I Evil ? " & " Blitzkrieg " only ) 
 = = = Demos = = = 
 No Life ' til Leather ( 1982 ) ( credited but does not play ) 
 Megaforce ( 1983 ) 
 Ride the Lightning ( 1983 ) 
 Master of Puppets ( 1985 ) 
 = = = Compilations = = = 
 Metal Massacre <unk> ( with Trauma ) 
 = Heather Chasen = 
 Heather Jean Chasen ( born 20 July 1927 ) is a Singapore @-@ born English actress . Chasen is known for her roles in soap operas ; playing Valerie Pollard in the ITV soap opera Crossroads from 1982 – 86 and guest roles in Doctors , Holby City and Family Affairs . Chasen also played many roles in BBC Radio 2 's The Navy Lark from 1959 – 77 , and appeared in the television series Marked Personal from 1973 – 74 . She played Lydia Simmonds in the BBC soap opera EastEnders , a role which received positive reviews from critics , EastEnders cast members and crew . Furthermore , she has appeared extensively in theatre productions and film ; in 2012 , she appeared in a film version of Les Misérables . 
 = = Early and personal life = = 
 Chasen was born on 20 July 1927 , in Singapore . Chasen 's father , F.N. Chasen was an English ornithologist , who fought in World War I under the Norfolk Yeomanry as a trooper . In 1921 , he left England , to work at the Raffles Library and Museum in Singapore , marrying Chasen 's mother , Agnes H <unk> , in 1926 . After Chasen 's birth , her parents had another daughter , Christine Elizabeth , on 4 May 1931 . Her parents split in 1938 , and both remarried . Before the Japanese occupation , which led to the Battle of Singapore during World War II , Chasen and her mother left Singapore on the last boat before the occupation . Her father , on a separate ship , HMS Giang Bee , perished however , when it was sunk by the Japanese on 12 February 1942 , and Chasen 's new stepfather , <unk> Franks , too perished fighting , a month later , on the 22 March . Chasen and her mother moved to England and Chasen trained at Royal Academy of Dramatic Art , where she then acted on stage and went on a tour with Frankie Howerd in Hotel Paradiso . She also appeared with Sybil Thorndike in Call Me Jacky , as well as going on tour with Douglas Fairbanks , Jr. in The Pleasure of his Company , in Toronto . Chasen is good friends with , and previously had a relationship with , Amanda Barrie . In 1949 , she married John Webster in Surrey and has one son with him , Rupert , born in Kensington , 1955 . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Crossroads and EastEnders = = = 
 In 2011 , Chasen was cast as Lydia Simmonds , Janine Butcher ( Charlie Brooks ) ' s maternal grandmother and Norman Simmonds ' ( George Layton ) mother , in the BBC soap opera EastEnders , after the original actress Margaret Tyzack had to pull out of the role due to personal reasons . Two episodes featuring Tyzack had already been broadcast , and she featured in a further one on 14 April . The producers wanted to keep Lydia in the show as they had plans for her , so Chasen was cast and she replaced Tyzack in the role , beginning filming on 15 April for scenes broadcast from 21 April . EastEnders ' executive producer , Bryan Kirkwood , added : " In order to continue the current storyline we 've taken the decision for Heather Chasen to take over the role of Lydia . " The character died on @-@ screen and Chasen made her last appearance on 13 June 2011 , and , though not credited for it , did a voice @-@ over for the 14 and 28 June episodes . Kirkwood later said " Lydia 's storyline was perfect " and that Chasen had made the part her own after Tyzack 's departure . Brooks said of the storyline as a whole , " I absolutely loved exploring Janine 's background . I was really proud with the scenes with Heather Chasen [ Lydia ] . It was really hard work , but worth it . " 
 = = = Other work = = = 
 Chasen has appeared in other television programmes such as The Bill and The Harry Hill Show . She has had guest roles in Z @-@ Cars and Dixon of Dock Green and has voiced a number of characters in the radio show The Navy Lark , most notably WREN Heather Chasen and " battle axe " Ramona Povey . In soaps , she has had four separate stints in the BBC soap opera Doctors , with her most recent stint in 2014 , reprising her role as Grace <unk> from 2012 , played Sylvie Leigh in Holby City and played Madge Bennet in the Channel 5 soap opera , Family Affairs , for five episodes . More earlier credits include , playing " rich bitches " Caroline Kerr , in The Newcomers and Isabel Neal in Marked Personal , alongside Stephanie Beacham . She also played the " evil " headmistress in Schoolgirls in Uniform at the Battersea Arts Centre . In stage and theatre , Chasen appeared in The Rat Trap . Michael Billington from The Guardian described Chasen 's character , Burrage the maid , as " trundling " , rating the play three stars . Other than this , she has appeared in Pardon Ma Prime Minister alongside Gerald Flood and Paul Curran , written by Edward Taylor and John Graham who created the BBC radio series The Men from the Ministry . The Birmingham Mail described the play as " hilarious " and " promising " . One of Chasen 's more recent plays was My Three Angels in which she played Madame Parole , other plays include , The Man Who Came to Dinner , Who Bombed Birmingham playing Margaret Thatcher , and The Lizard of Rock , in which she played the main role , appearing alongside actor Jack Hawkins . Chasen opined that she had a " lovely time " playing Miss Marple in A Murder is Announced alongside Richard Todd and Barbara Murray . In 2009 , Chasen appeared in the award @-@ winning Anglo @-@ Russian feature film Season of Mists , playing Jane . Chasen appeared alongside Marina Blake , Sergei <unk> , Ifan Huw Dafydd and ex @-@ EastEnders actor Dudley Sutton . Other films Chasen has appeared in include , The Kiss of Tosca in 2000 , The <unk> in 2003 and Cat Run , a 2011 film . 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 Chasen was nominated for the Tony Award for Best Performance by a Featured Actress in a Musical , while she appeared in the New York adaptation of A Severed Head between 1963 @-@ 65 . She appeared the cast of the Seasons of Mists which won a number of awards internationally . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 Television 
 Film 
 Radio 
 Stage / Theatre 
 = Roman Republic = 
 The Roman Republic ( Latin : Res publica Romana ; Classical Latin : [ <unk> <unk> <unk> ] ) was the period of ancient Roman civilization beginning with the overthrow of the Roman Kingdom , traditionally dated to 509 BC , and ending in 27 BC with the establishment of the Roman Empire . It was during this period that Rome 's control expanded from the city 's immediate surroundings to hegemony over the entire Mediterranean world . 
 During the first two centuries of its existence , the Roman Republic expanded through a combination of conquest and alliance , from central Italy to the entire Italian peninsula . By the following century , it included North Africa , Spain , and what is now southern France . Two centuries after that , towards the end of the 1st century BC , it included the rest of modern France , Greece , and much of the eastern Mediterranean . By this time , internal tensions led to a series of civil wars , culminating with the assassination of Julius Caesar , which led to the transition from republic to empire . The exact date of transition can be a matter of interpretation . Historians have variously proposed Julius Caesar 's crossing of the Rubicon River in 49 BC , Caesar 's appointment as dictator for life in 44 BC , and the defeat of Mark Antony and Cleopatra at the Battle of Actium in 31 BC . However , most use the same date as did the ancient Romans themselves , the Roman Senate 's grant of extraordinary powers to Octavian and his adopting the title Augustus in 27 BC , as the defining event ending the Republic . 
 Roman government was headed by two consuls , elected annually by the citizens and advised by a senate composed of appointed magistrates . As Roman society was very hierarchical by modern standards , the evolution of the Roman government was heavily influenced by the struggle between the patricians , Rome 's land @-@ holding aristocracy , who traced their ancestry to the founding of Rome , and the plebeians , the far more numerous citizen @-@ commoners . Over time , the laws that gave patricians exclusive rights to Rome 's highest offices were repealed or weakened , and leading plebeian families became full members of the aristocracy . The leaders of the Republic developed a strong tradition and morality requiring public service and patronage in peace and war , making military and political success inextricably linked . Many of Rome 's legal and legislative structures ( later codified into the Justinian Code , and again into the Napoleonic Code ) can still be observed throughout Europe and much of the world in modern nation states and international organizations . 
 = = Military history = = 
 The exact causes and motivations for Rome 's military conflicts and expansions during the republic are subject to wide debate . While they can be seen as motivated by outright aggression and imperialism , historians typically take a much more nuanced view . They argue that Rome 's expansion was driven by short @-@ term defensive and inter @-@ state factors ( that is , relations with city @-@ states and kingdoms outside Rome 's hegemony ) , and the new contingencies that these decisions created . In its early history , as Rome successfully defended itself against foreign threats in central and then northern Italy , neighboring city @-@ states sought the protection a Roman alliance would bring . As such , early republican Rome was not an " empire " or " state " in the modern sense , but an alliance of independent city @-@ states ( similar to the Greek hegemonies of the same period ) with varying degrees of genuine independence ( which itself changed over time ) engaged in an alliance of mutual self @-@ protection , but led by Rome . With some important exceptions , successful wars in early republican Rome generally led not to annexation or military occupation , but to the restoration of the way things were . But the defeated city would be weakened ( sometimes with outright land concessions ) and thus less able to resist <unk> influences , such as Roman settlers seeking land or trade with the growing Roman confederacy . It was also less able to defend itself against its non @-@ Roman enemies , which made attack by these enemies more likely . It was , therefore , more likely to seek an alliance of protection with Rome . 
 This growing coalition expanded the potential enemies that Rome might face , and moved Rome closer to confrontation with major powers . The result was more alliance @-@ seeking , on the part of both the Roman confederacy and city @-@ states seeking membership ( and protection ) within that confederacy . While there were exceptions to this ( such as military rule of Sicily after the First Punic War ) , it was not until after the Second Punic War that these alliances started to harden into something more like an empire , at least in certain locations . This shift mainly took place in parts of the west , such as the southern Italian towns that sided with Hannibal . 
 In contrast , Roman expansion into Spain and Gaul occurred as a mix of alliance @-@ seeking and military occupation . In the 2nd century BC , Roman involvement in the Greek east remained a matter of alliance @-@ seeking , but this time in the face of major powers that could rival Rome . According to Polybius , who sought to trace how Rome came to dominate the Greek east in less than a century , this was mainly a matter of several Greek city @-@ states seeking Roman protection against the Macedonian kingdom and Seleucid Empire in the face of destabilisation created by the weakening of Ptolemaic Egypt . In contrast to the west , the Greek east had been dominated by major empires for centuries , and Roman influence and alliance @-@ seeking led to wars with these empires that further weakened them and therefore created an unstable power vacuum that only Rome could fill . This had some important similarities to ( and important differences from ) the events in Italy centuries earlier , but this time on a global scale . 
 Historians see the growing Roman influence over the east , as with the west , as not a matter of intentional empire @-@ building , but constant crisis management narrowly focused on short @-@ term goals within a highly unstable , unpredictable , and inter @-@ dependent network of alliances and dependencies . With some major exceptions of outright military rule , the Roman Republic remained an alliance of independent city @-@ states and kingdoms ( with varying degrees of independence , both de jure and de facto ) until it transitioned into the Roman Empire . It was not until the time of the Roman Empire that the entire Roman world was organized into provinces under explicit Roman control . 
 = = = Early Republic ( 458 – 274 BC ) = = = 
 = = = = Early Italian campaigns ( 458 – 396 BC ) = = = = 
 The first Roman republican wars were wars of both expansion and defence , aimed at protecting Rome itself from neighbouring cities and nations and establishing its territory in the region . Initially , Rome 's immediate neighbours were either Latin towns and villages , or else tribal Sabines from the Apennine hills beyond . One by one Rome defeated both the persistent Sabines and the local cities , both those under Etruscan control and those that had cast off their Etruscan rulers . Rome defeated Latin cities in the Battle of Lake <unk> in 496 BC , the Battle of Mons <unk> in 458 BC , the Battle of Corbione in 446 BC , the Battle of Aricia , and especially the Battle of the <unk> in 477 BC wherein it fought against the most important Etruscan city of Veii . 
 By the end of this period , Rome had effectively completed the conquest of their immediate Etruscan and Latin neighbours , and also secured their position against the immediate threat posed by the nearby Apennine hill tribes . 
 = = = = Celtic invasion of Italy ( 390 – 387 BC ) = = = = 
 By 390 BC , several Gallic tribes were invading Italy from the north as their culture expanded throughout Europe . The Romans were alerted to this when a particularly warlike tribe invaded two Etruscan towns close to Rome 's sphere of influence . These towns , overwhelmed by the enemy 's numbers and ferocity , called on Rome for help . The Romans met the Gauls in pitched battle at the Battle of Allia River around 390 – 387 BC . The Gauls , led by chieftain Brennus , defeated the Roman army of approximately 15 @,@ 000 troops , pursued the fleeing Romans back to Rome , and sacked the city before being either driven off or bought off . Romans and Gauls continued to war intermittently in Italy for more than two centuries . 
 = = = = Roman expansion into Italy ( 343 – 282 BC ) = = = = 
 After recovering surprisingly fast from the sack of Rome , the Romans immediately resumed their expansion within Italy . The First Samnite War from 343 BC to 341 BC was relatively short : the Romans beat the Samnites in two battles , but were forced to withdraw before they could pursue the conflict further due to the revolt of several of their Latin allies in the Latin War . Rome beat the Latins in the Battle of Vesuvius and again in the Battle of <unk> , after which the Latin cities were obliged to submit to Roman rule . 
 The Second Samnite War , from 327 BC to 304 BC , was much longer and more serious for both Romans and Samnites . The fortunes of the two sides fluctuated throughout its course . But the Romans won the Battle of <unk> , and the tide turned strongly against the Samnites from 314 BC onwards , leading them to sue for peace with progressively less generous terms . By 304 BC , the Romans had effectively annexed the greater degree of the Samnite territory , founding several colonies . 
 Seven years after their defeat , with Roman dominance of the area looking assured , the Samnites rose again and defeated a Roman army in 298 BC , to open the Third Samnite War . Following this success they built a coalition of several previous enemies of Rome . At the Battle of <unk> in 282 BC Rome finished off the last vestiges of Etruscan power in the region . 
 = = = = Pyrrhic War ( 280 – 275 BC ) = = = = 
 By the beginning of the 3rd century , Rome had established itself as a major power on the Italian Peninsula , but had not yet come into conflict with the dominant military powers in the Mediterranean Basin at the time : Carthage and the Greek kingdoms . 
 When a diplomatic dispute between Rome and a Greek colony in Italy erupted into open warfare in a naval confrontation , the Greek colony appealed for military aid to Pyrrhus , ruler of the northwestern Greek kingdom of Epirus . Motivated by a personal desire for military accomplishment , Pyrrhus landed a Greek army of some 25 @,@ 000 men on Italian soil in 280 BC . 
 Despite early victories , Pyrrhus found his position in Italy untenable . Rome steadfastly refused to negotiate with Pyrrhus as long as his army remained in Italy . Facing unacceptably heavy losses from each encounter with the Roman army , Pyrrhus withdrew from the peninsula ( hence the term " Pyrrhic victory " ) . In 275 BC , Pyrrhus again met the Roman army at the Battle of Beneventum . While Beneventum was indecisive , Pyrrhus realised his army had been exhausted and reduced by years of foreign campaigns . Seeing little hope for further gains , he withdrew completely from Italy . 
 The conflicts with Pyrrhus would have a great effect on Rome . Rome had shown it was capable of pitting its armies successfully against the dominant military powers of the Mediterranean , and that the Greek kingdoms were incapable of defending their colonies in Italy and abroad . Rome quickly moved into southern Italia , subjugating and dividing the Greek colonies . Now , Rome effectively dominated the Italian peninsula , and won an international military reputation . 
 = = = Mid @-@ Republic ( 264 – 133 BC ) = = = 
 = = = = Punic Wars ( 264 – 146 BC ) = = = = 
 The First Punic War began in 264 BC when inhabitants of Sicily began to appeal to the two powers between which they lay – Rome and Carthage – to resolve internal conflicts . The war saw land battles in Sicily early on , but the theatre shifted to naval battles around Sicily and Africa . Before the First Punic War there was no Roman navy to speak of . The new war in Sicily against Carthage , a great naval power , forced Rome to quickly build a fleet and train sailors . 
 The first few naval battles were disasters for Rome . However , after training more sailors and inventing a grappling engine , a Roman naval force was able to defeat a Carthaginian fleet , and further naval victories followed . The Carthaginians then hired Xanthippus of Carthage , a Spartan mercenary general , to reorganise and lead their army . He cut off the Roman army from its base by re @-@ establishing Carthaginian naval supremacy . The Romans then again defeated the Carthaginians in naval battle at the Battle of the <unk> Islands and left Carthage with neither a fleet nor sufficient financial means to raise one . For a maritime power the loss of their access to the Mediterranean stung financially and psychologically , and the Carthaginians sued for peace . 
 Continuing distrust led to the renewal of hostilities in the Second Punic War when Hannibal Barca attacked an Iberian town which had diplomatic ties to Rome . Hannibal then crossed the Italian Alps to invade Italy . Hannibal 's successes in Italy began immediately , and reached an early climax at the Battle of Cannae , where 70 @,@ 000 Romans were killed . 
 The Romans held off Hannibal in three battles , but then Hannibal smashed a succession of Roman consular armies . By this time Hannibal 's brother Hasdrubal Barca sought to cross the Alps into Italy and join his brother with a second army . Hasdrubal managed to break through into Italy only to be defeated decisively on the <unk> River . Unable to defeat Hannibal on Italian soil , the Romans boldly sent an army to Africa under Scipio Africanus to threaten the Carthaginian capital . Hannibal was recalled to Africa , and defeated at the Battle of Zama . 
 Carthage never recovered militarily after the Second Punic War , but quickly did so economically and the Third Punic War that followed was in reality a simple punitive mission after the neighbouring Numidians allied to Rome robbed / attacked Carthaginian merchants . Treaties had forbidden any war with Roman allies , and defence against robbing / pirates was considered as " war action " : Rome decided to annihilate the city of Carthage . Carthage was almost defenceless , and submitted when besieged . However , the Romans demanded complete surrender and removal of the city into the ( desert ) inland far off any coastal or harbour region , and the Carthaginians refused . The city was besieged , stormed , and completely destroyed . 
 Ultimately , all of Carthage 's North African and Iberian territories were acquired by Rome . Note that " Carthage " was not an ' empire ' , but a league of Punic colonies ( port cities in the western Mediterranean ) like the 1st and 2nd Athenian ( " Attic " ) leagues , under leadership of Carthage . Punic Carthage was gone , but the other Punic cities in the western Mediterranean flourished under Roman rule . 
 = = = = Kingdom of Macedonia , the Greek poleis , and Illyria ( 215 – 148 BC ) = = = = 
 Rome 's preoccupation with its war with Carthage provided an opportunity for Philip V of the kingdom of Macedonia , located in the north of the Greek peninsula , to attempt to extend his power westward . Philip sent ambassadors to Hannibal 's camp in Italy , to negotiate an alliance as common enemies of Rome . However , Rome discovered the agreement when Philip 's emissaries were captured by a Roman fleet . The First Macedonian War saw the Romans involved directly in only limited land operations , but they ultimately achieved their objective of pre @-@ occupying Philip and preventing him from aiding Hannibal . 
 The past century had seen the Greek world dominated by the three primary successor kingdoms of Alexander the Great 's empire : Ptolemaic Egypt , Macedonia and the Seleucid Empire . In 202 BC , internal problems led to a weakening of Egypt 's position , thereby disrupting the power balance among the successor states . Macedonia and the Seleucid Empire agreed to an alliance to conquer and divide Egypt . Fearing this increasingly unstable situation , several small Greek kingdoms sent delegations to Rome to seek an alliance . The delegation succeeded , even though prior Greek attempts to involve Rome in Greek affairs had been met with Roman apathy . Our primary source about these events , the surviving works of Polybius , do not state Rome 's reason for getting involved . Rome gave Philip an ultimatum to cease his campaigns against Rome 's new Greek allies . Doubting Rome 's strength ( a reasonable doubt , given Rome 's performance in the First Macedonian War ) Philip ignored the request , and Rome sent an army of Romans and Greek allies , beginning the Second Macedonian War . Despite his recent successes against the Greeks and earlier successes against Rome , Philip 's army buckled under the pressure from the Roman @-@ Greek army . In 197 BC , the Romans decisively defeated Philip at the Battle of Cynoscephalae , and Philip was forced to give up his recent Greek conquests . The Romans declared the " Peace of the Greeks " , believing that Philip 's defeat now meant that Greece would be stable . They pulled out of Greece entirely , maintaining minimal contacts with their Greek allies . 
 With Egypt and Macedonia weakened , the Seleucid Empire made increasingly aggressive and successful attempts to conquer the entire Greek world . Now not only Rome 's allies against Philip , but even Philip himself , sought a Roman alliance against the Seleucids . The situation was made worse by the fact that Hannibal was now a chief military advisor to the Seleucid emperor , and the two were believed to be planning an outright conquest not just of Greece , but of Rome itself . The Seleucids were much stronger than the Macedonians had ever been , because they controlled much of the former Persian Empire , and by now had almost entirely reassembled Alexander the Great 's former empire . 
 Fearing the worst , the Romans began a major mobilization , all but pulling out of recently pacified Spain and Gaul . They even established a major garrison in Sicily in case the Seleucids ever got to Italy . This fear was shared by Rome 's Greek allies , who had largely ignored Rome in the years after the Second Macedonian War , but now followed Rome again for the first time since that war . A major Roman @-@ Greek force was mobilized under the command of the great hero of the Second Punic War , Scipio Africanus , and set out for Greece , beginning the Roman @-@ Syrian War . After initial fighting that revealed serious Seleucid weaknesses , the Seleucids tried to turn the Roman strength against them at the Battle of Thermopylae ( as they believed the 300 Spartans had done centuries earlier ) . Like the Spartans , the Seleucids lost the battle , and were forced to evacuate Greece . The Romans pursued the Seleucids by crossing the Hellespont , which marked the first time a Roman army had ever entered Asia . The decisive engagement was fought at the Battle of Magnesia , resulting in a complete Roman victory . The Seleucids sued for peace , and Rome forced them to give up their recent Greek conquests . Although they still controlled a great deal of territory , this defeat marked the decline of their empire , as they were to begin facing increasingly aggressive subjects in the east ( the Parthians ) and the west ( the Greeks ) . Their empire disintegrated into a rump over the course of the next century , when it was eclipsed by Pontus . Following Magnesia , Rome again withdrew from Greece , assuming ( or hoping ) that the lack of a major Greek power would ensure a stable peace . In fact , it did the opposite . 
 In 179 BC Philip died . His talented and ambitious son , Perseus , took the throne and showed a renewed interest in conquering Greece . With her Greek allies facing a major new threat , Rome declared war on Macedonia again , starting the Third Macedonian War . Perseus initially had some success against the Romans . However , Rome responded by sending a stronger army . This second consular army decisively defeated the Macedonians at the Battle of Pydna in 168 BC and the Macedonians duly capitulated , ending the war . 
 Convinced now that the Greeks ( and therefore the rest of the region ) would not have peace if left alone , Rome decided to establish its first permanent foothold in the Greek world , and divided the Kingdom of Macedonia into four client republics . Yet , Macedonian agitation continued . The Fourth Macedonian War , 150 to 148 BC , was fought against a Macedonian pretender to the throne who was again destabilizing Greece by trying to re @-@ establish the old kingdom . The Romans swiftly defeated the Macedonians at the Second battle of Pydna . 
 The Achaean League chose this moment to fight Rome but was swiftly defeated . In 146 BC ( the same year as the destruction of Carthage ) , Corinth was besieged and destroyed , which led to the league 's surrender . After nearly a century of constant crisis management in Greece , which always led back to internal instability and war when she withdrew , Rome decided to divide Macedonia into two new Roman provinces , Achaea and Epirus . 
 = = = Late Republic ( 147 – 30 BC ) = = = 
