 = = = = Jugurthine War ( 111 – 104 BC ) = = = = 
 The Jugurthine War of 111 – 104 BC was fought between Rome and Jugurtha of the North African kingdom of Numidia . It constituted the final Roman pacification of Northern Africa , after which Rome largely ceased expansion on the continent after reaching natural barriers of desert and mountain . Following Jugurtha 's usurpation of the throne of Numidia , a loyal ally of Rome since the Punic Wars , Rome felt compelled to intervene . Jugurtha <unk> bribed the Romans into accepting his usurpation . Jugurtha was finally captured not in battle but by treachery . 
 = = = = Celtic threat ( 121 BC ) and Germanic threat ( 113 – 101 BC ) = = = = 
 In 121 BC , Rome came into contact with two Celtic tribes ( from a region in modern France ) , both of which they defeated with apparent ease . The Cimbrian War ( 113 – 101 BC ) was a far more serious affair than the earlier clashes of 121 BC . The Germanic tribes of the Cimbri and the Teutons migrated from northern Europe into Rome 's northern territories , and clashed with Rome and her allies . At the Battle of Aquae Sextiae and the Battle of Vercellae both tribes were virtually annihilated , which ended the threat . 
 = = = = Internal unrest ( 135 – 71 BC ) = = = = 
 The extensive campaigning abroad by Roman generals , and the rewarding of soldiers with plunder on these campaigns , led to a general trend of soldiers becoming increasingly loyal to their generals rather than to the state . Rome was also plagued by several slave uprisings during this period , in part because vast tracts of land had been given over to slave farming in which the slaves greatly outnumbered their Roman masters . In the 1st century BC at least twelve civil wars and rebellions occurred . This pattern continued until 27 BC , when Octavian ( later Augustus ) successfully challenged the Senate 's authority , and was made princeps ( first citizen ) . 
 Between 135 BC and 71 BC there were three " Servile Wars " involving slave uprisings against the Roman state . The third and final uprising was the most serious , involving ultimately between 120 @,@ 000 and 150 @,@ 000 slaves under the command of the gladiator Spartacus . In 91 BC the Social War broke out between Rome and its former allies in Italy when the allies complained that they shared the risk of Rome 's military campaigns , but not its rewards . Although they lost militarily , the allies achieved their objectives with legal proclamations which granted citizenship to more than 500 @,@ 000 Italians . 
 The internal unrest reached its most serious state , however , in the two civil wars that were caused by the clash between generals Gaius Marius and Lucius Cornelius Sulla starting from 88 BC . In the Battle of the <unk> Gate at the very door of the city of Rome , a Roman army under Sulla bested an army of the Marius supporters and entered the city . Sulla 's actions marked a watershed in the willingness of Roman troops to wage war against one another that was to pave the way for the wars which ultimately overthrew the Republic , and caused the founding of the Roman Empire . 
 = = = = Conflicts with Mithridates ( 89 – 63 BC ) and the Cilician pirates ( 67 BC ) = = = = 
 Mithridates the Great was the ruler of Pontus , a large kingdom in Asia Minor ( modern Turkey ) , from 120 to 63 BC . Mithridates antagonised Rome by seeking to expand his kingdom , and Rome for her part seemed equally eager for war and the spoils and prestige that it might bring . In 88 BC , Mithridates ordered the killing of a majority of the 80 @,@ 000 Romans living in his kingdom . The massacre was the official reason given for the commencement of hostilities in the First Mithridatic War . The Roman general Lucius Cornelius Sulla forced Mithridates out of Greece proper , but then had to return to Italy to answer the internal threat posed by his rival , Gaius Marius . A peace was made between Rome and Pontus , but this proved only a temporary lull . 
 The Second Mithridatic War began when Rome tried to annex a province that Mithridates claimed as his own . In the Third Mithridatic War , first Lucius Licinius Lucullus and then Pompey the Great were sent against Mithridates and his Armenian ally Tigranes the Great . Mithridates was finally defeated by Pompey in the night @-@ time Battle of the Lycus . 
 The Mediterranean had at this time fallen into the hands of pirates , largely from Cilicia . The pirates not only strangled shipping lanes but also plundered many cities on the coasts of Greece and Asia . Pompey was nominated as commander of a special naval task force to campaign against the pirates . It took Pompey just forty days to clear the western portion of the sea of pirates and restore communication between Iberia ( Spain ) , Africa , and Italy . 
 = = = = Caesar 's early campaigns ( 59 – 50 BC ) = = = = 
 During his term as praetor in the Iberian Peninsula ( modern Portugal and Spain ) , Pompey 's contemporary Julius Caesar defeated two local tribes in battle . After his term as consul in 59 BC , he was appointed to a five @-@ year term as the proconsular Governor of Cisalpine Gaul ( part of current northern Italy ) , Transalpine Gaul ( current southern France ) and Illyria ( part of the modern Balkans ) . Not content with an idle governorship , Caesar strove to find reason to invade Gaul ( modern France and Belgium ) , which would give him the dramatic military success he sought . When two local tribes began to migrate on a route that would take them near ( not into ) the Roman province of Transalpine Gaul , Caesar had the barely sufficient excuse he needed for his Gallic Wars , fought between 58 BC and 49 BC . 
 Caesar defeated large armies at major battles 58 and 57 BC . In 55 and 54 BC he made two expeditions into Britain , the first Roman to do so . Caesar then defeated a union of Gauls at the Battle of Alesia , completing the Roman conquest of Transalpine Gaul . By 50 BC , all of Gaul lay in Roman hands . Gaul never regained its Celtic identity , never attempted another rebellion , and , except for the Crisis of the Third Century , remained loyal to Rome until the fall of the empire in 476 . 
 = = = = <unk> and Caesarian ascension ( 53 – 30 BC ) = = = = 
 By 59 BC an unofficial political alliance known as the First Triumvirate was formed between Gaius Julius Caesar , Marcus Licinius Crassus , and Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus ( " Pompey the Great " ) to share power and influence . In 53 BC , Crassus launched a Roman invasion of the Parthian Empire ( modern Iraq and Iran ) . After initial successes , he marched his army deep into the desert ; but here his army was cut off deep in enemy territory , surrounded and slaughtered at the Battle of Carrhae in which Crassus himself perished . The death of Crassus removed some of the balance in the Triumvirate and , consequently , Caesar and Pompey began to move apart . While Caesar was fighting in Gaul , Pompey proceeded with a legislative agenda for Rome that revealed that he was at best ambivalent towards Caesar and perhaps now covertly allied with Caesar 's political enemies . In 51 BC , some Roman senators demanded that Caesar not be permitted to stand for consul unless he turned over control of his armies to the state , which would have left Caesar defenceless before his enemies . Caesar chose civil war over laying down his command and facing trial . 
 By the spring of 49 BC , the hardened legions of Caesar crossed the river Rubicon , the legal boundary of Roman Italy beyond which no commander might bring his army , and swept down the Italian peninsula towards Rome , while Pompey ordered the abandonment of Rome . Afterwards Caesar turned his attention to the Pompeian stronghold of Hispania ( modern Spain ) but decided to tackle Pompey himself in Greece . Pompey initially defeated Caesar , but failed to follow up on the victory , and was decisively defeated at the Battle of Pharsalus in 48 BC , despite outnumbering Caesar 's forces two to one , albeit with inferior quality troops . Pompey fled again , this time to Egypt , where he was murdered . 
 Pompey 's death did not end the civil war , as Caesar 's many enemies fought on . In 46 BC Caesar lost perhaps as much as a third of his army , but ultimately came back to defeat the Pompeian army of Metellus Scipio in the Battle of Thapsus , after which the Pompeians retreated yet again to Hispania . Caesar then defeated the combined Pompeian forces at the Battle of Munda . 
 Caesar was now the primary figure of the Roman state , enforcing and entrenching his powers . His enemies feared that he had ambitions to become an autocratic ruler . Arguing that the Roman Republic was in danger , a group of senators hatched a conspiracy and assassinated Caesar at a meeting of the Senate in March 44 BC . Mark Antony , Caesar 's lieutenant , condemned Caesar 's assassination , and war broke out between the two factions . Antony was denounced as a public enemy , and Caesar 's adopted son and chosen heir , Gaius Octavianus , was entrusted with the command of the war against him . At the Battle of Mutina Mark Antony was defeated by the consuls Hirtius and Pansa , who were both killed . 
 Octavian came to terms with <unk> Antony and Marcus Aemilius Lepidus in 43 BC when the Second Triumvirate was formed . In 42 BC Mark Antony and Octavian fought the Battle of Philippi against Caesar 's assassins Brutus and Cassius . Although Brutus defeated Octavian , Antony defeated Cassius , who committed suicide . Brutus did likewise soon afterwards . 
 However , civil war flared again when the Second Triumvirate of Octavian , Lepidus and Mark Antony failed . The ambitious Octavian built a power base of patronage and then launched a campaign against Mark Antony . At the naval Battle of Actium off the coast of Greece , Octavian decisively defeated Antony and Cleopatra . Octavian was granted a series of special powers including sole " imperium " within the city of Rome , permanent consular powers and credit for every Roman military victory , since all future generals were assumed to be acting under his command . In 27 BC Octavian was granted the use of the names " Augustus " and " Princeps " , indicating his primary status above all other Romans , and he adopted the title " Imperator Caesar " making him the first Roman Emperor . 
 = = Political history = = 
 The constitutional history of the Roman Republic can be divided into five phases . The first phase began with the revolution which overthrew the monarchy in 509 BC . The final phase ended with the transition that transformed the Republic into what would effectively be the Roman Empire , in 27 BC . Throughout the history of the Republic , the constitutional evolution was driven by the conflict of the orders between the aristocracy and the ordinary citizens . 
 = = = Patrician era ( 509 – 367 BC ) = = = 
 The last king of the Roman Kingdom , Lucius Tarquinius Superbus , was overthrown in 509 BC by a group of noblemen led by Lucius Junius Brutus . Tarquin made a number of attempts to retake the throne , including the <unk> conspiracy , the war with Veii and <unk> and finally the war between Rome and Clusium , all of which failed to achieve Tarquin 's objectives . The most important constitutional change during the transition from kingdom to republic involved a new form of chief magistrate . Before the revolution , a king would be elected by the senators for a life term . Now , two consuls were elected by the citizens for an annual term . Each consul would check his colleague , and their limited term in office would open them up to prosecution if they abused the powers of their office . Consular political powers , when exercised conjointly with a consular colleague , were no different from those of the old king . 
 In 494 BC , the city was at war with two neighboring tribes . The plebeian soldiers refused to march against the enemy , and instead seceded to the Aventine Hill . The plebeians demanded the right to elect their own officials . The patricians agreed , and the plebeians returned to the battlefield . The plebeians called these new officials " plebeian tribunes " . The tribunes would have two assistants , called " plebeian aediles " . During the 5th century BC , a series of reforms were passed . The result of these reforms was that any law passed by the plebeian would have the full force of law . In 443 BC , the censorship was created . From 375 BC to 371 BC , the republic experienced a constitutional crisis during which the tribunes used their vetoes to prevent the election of senior magistrates . 
 = = = Conflict of the Orders ( 367 – 287 BC ) = = = 
 In 367 BC a law was passed which required the election of at least one plebeian aedile each year . Also in 366 BC , the praetorship and curule <unk> were created . Shortly after the founding of the Republic , the Comitia Centuriata ( " Assembly of the Centuries " ) became the principal legislative assembly . In this assembly , magistrates were elected and laws were passed . 
 After the consulship had been opened to the plebeians , the plebeians were able to hold both the dictatorship and the censorship . Plebiscites of 342 BC placed limits on political offices ; an individual could hold only one office at a time , and ten years must elapse between the end of his official term and his re @-@ election . Further laws attempted to relieve the burden of debt from plebeians by banning interest on loans . In 337 BC , the first plebeian praetor was elected . During these years , the tribunes and the senators grew increasingly close . The senate realised the need to use plebeian officials to accomplish desired goals . To win over the tribunes , the senators gave the tribunes a great deal of power and the tribunes began to feel obligated to the senate . As the tribunes and the senators grew closer , plebeian senators were often able to secure the tribunate for members of their own families . In time , the tribunate became a stepping stone to higher office . 
 Shortly before 312 BC , the Plebeian Council enacted the <unk> Ovinium . During the early republic , only consuls could appoint new senators . This initiative , however , transferred this power to the censors . It also required the censor to appoint any newly elected magistrate to the senate . By this point , plebeians were already holding a significant number of magisterial offices . Thus , the number of plebeian senators probably increased quickly . However , it remained difficult for a plebeian to enter the senate if he was not from a well @-@ known political family , as a new patrician @-@ like plebeian aristocracy emerged . The old nobility existed through the force of law , because only patricians were allowed to stand for high office . The new nobility existed due to the organization of society . As such , only a revolution could overthrow this new structure . 
 By 287 BC , the economic condition of the average plebeian had become poor . The problem appears to have centered around widespread indebtedness . The plebeians demanded relief , but the senators refused to address their situation . The result was the final plebeian secession . The plebeians seceded to the Janiculum hill . To end the secession , a dictator was appointed . The dictator passed a law ( the Lex Hortensia ) , which ended the requirement that the patrician senators must agree before any bill could be considered by the Plebeian Council . This was not the first law to require that an act of the Plebeian Council have the full force of law . The Plebeian Council acquired this power during a modification to the original Valerian law in 449 BC . The significance of this law was in the fact that it robbed the patricians of their final weapon over the plebeians . The result was that control over the state fell , not onto the shoulders of voters , but to the new plebeian nobility . 
 The plebeians had finally achieved political equality with the patricians . However , the plight of the average plebeian had not changed . A small number of plebeian families achieved the same standing that the old aristocratic patrician families had always had , but the new plebeian aristocrats became as uninterested in the plight of the average plebeian as the old patrician aristocrats had always been . The plebeians rebelled by leaving Rome and refusing to return until they had more rights . The patricians then noticed how much they needed the plebeians and accepted their terms . The plebeians then returned to Rome and continued their work . 
 = = = Supremacy of the New Nobility ( 287 – 133 BC ) = = = 
 The Hortensian Law deprived the patricians of their last weapon against the plebeians , and thus resolved the last great political question of the era . No such important political changes occurred between 287 BC and 133 BC . The important laws of this era were still enacted by the senate . In effect , the plebeians were satisfied with the possession of power , but did not care to use it . The senate was supreme during this era because the era was dominated by questions of foreign and military policy . This was the most militarily active era of the Roman Republic . 
 In the final decades of this era many plebeians grew poorer . The long military campaigns had forced citizens to leave their farms to fight , while their farms fell into disrepair . The landed aristocracy began buying bankrupted farms at discounted prices . As commodity prices fell , many farmers could no longer operate their farms at a profit . The result was the ultimate bankruptcy of countless farmers . Masses of unemployed plebeians soon began to flood into Rome , and thus into the ranks of the legislative assemblies . Their poverty usually led them to vote for the candidate who offered them the most . A new culture of dependency was emerging , in which citizens would look to any populist leader for relief . 
 = = = From the Gracchi to Caesar ( 133 – 49 BC ) = = = 
 The prior era saw great military successes , and great economic failures . The patriotism of the plebeians had kept them from seeking any new reforms . Now , the military situation had stabilised , and fewer soldiers were needed . This , in conjunction with the new slaves that were being imported from abroad , inflamed the unemployment situation further . The flood of unemployed citizens to Rome had made the assemblies quite populist . 
 = = = = The Gracchi = = = = 
 Tiberius Gracchus was elected tribune in 133 BC . He attempted to enact a law which would have limited the amount of land that any individual could own . The aristocrats , who stood to lose an enormous amount of money , were bitterly opposed to this proposal . Tiberius submitted this law to the Plebeian Council , but the law was vetoed by a tribune named Marcus Octavius . Tiberius then used the Plebeian Council to impeach Octavius . The theory , that a representative of the people ceases to be one when he acts against the wishes of the people , was counter to Roman constitutional theory . If carried to its logical end , this theory would remove all constitutional restraints on the popular will , and put the state under the absolute control of a temporary popular majority . His law was enacted , but Tiberius was murdered with 300 of his associates when he stood for reelection to the tribunate . 
 Tiberius ' brother Gaius was elected tribune in 123 BC . Gaius Gracchus ' ultimate goal was to weaken the senate and to strengthen the democratic forces . In the past , for example , the senate would eliminate political rivals either by establishing special judicial commissions or by passing a senatus consultum ultimum ( " ultimate decree of the senate " ) . Both devices would allow the Senate to bypass the ordinary due process rights that all citizens had . Gaius outlawed the judicial commissions , and declared the senatus consultum ultimum to be unconstitutional . Gaius then proposed a law which would grant citizenship rights to Rome 's Italian allies . This last proposal was not popular with the plebeians and he lost much of his support . He stood for election to a third term in 121 BC , but was defeated and then murdered by representatives of the senate with 3 @,@ 000 of his supporters on Capitoline Hill in Rome . Though the senate retained control , the Gracchi had strengthened the political influence of the plebeians . 
 = = = = The populares and the <unk> = = = = 
 In 118 BC , King <unk> of Numidia ( current @-@ day Algeria and Tunisia ) died . He was succeeded by two legitimate sons , Adherbal and <unk> , and an illegitimate son , Jugurtha . <unk> divided his kingdom between these three sons . Jugurtha , however , turned on his brothers , killing <unk> and driving Adherbal out of Numidia . Adherbal fled to Rome for assistance , and initially Rome mediated a division of the country between the two brothers . Eventually , Jugurtha renewed his offensive , leading to a long and inconclusive war with Rome . He also bribed several Roman commanders , and at least two tribunes , before and during the war . His nemesis , Gaius Marius , a legate from a virtually unknown provincial family , returned from the war in Numidia and was elected consul in 107 BC over the objections of the aristocratic senators . Marius invaded Numidia and brought the war to a quick end , capturing Jugurtha in the process . The apparent incompetence of the Senate , and the brilliance of Marius , had been put on full display . The populares party took full advantage of this opportunity by allying itself with Marius . 
 Several years later , in 88 BC , a Roman army was sent to put down an emerging Asian power , king Mithridates of Pontus . The army , however , was defeated . One of Marius ' old quaestors , Lucius Cornelius Sulla , had been elected consul for the year , and was ordered by the senate to assume command of the war against Mithridates . Marius , a member of the " populares " party , had a tribune revoke Sulla 's command of the war against Mithridates . Sulla , a member of the aristocratic ( " <unk> " ) party , brought his army back to Italy and marched on Rome . Sulla was so angry at Marius ' tribune that he passed a law intended to permanently weaken the tribunate . He then returned to his war against Mithridates . With Sulla gone , the populares under Marius and Lucius Cornelius Cinna soon took control of the city . 
 During the period in which the populares party controlled the city , they flouted convention by re @-@ electing Marius consul several times without observing the customary ten @-@ year interval between offices . They also transgressed the established oligarchy by advancing unelected individuals to magisterial office , and by substituting magisterial edicts for popular legislation . Sulla soon made peace with Mithridates . In 83 BC , he returned to Rome , overcame all resistance , and recaptured the city . Sulla and his supporters then slaughtered most of Marius ' supporters . Sulla , having observed the violent results of radical popular reforms , was naturally conservative . As such , he sought to strengthen the aristocracy , and by extension the senate . Sulla made himself dictator , passed a series of constitutional reforms , resigned the dictatorship , and served one last term as consul . He died in 78 BC . 
 = = = = Pompey , Crassus and the <unk> Conspiracy = = = = 
 In 77 BC , the senate sent one of Sulla 's former lieutenants , Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus ( " Pompey the Great " ) , to put down an uprising in Hispania . By 71 BC , Pompey returned to Rome after having completed his mission . Around the same time , another of Sulla 's former lieutenants , Marcus Licinius Crassus , had just put down the Spartacus @-@ led gladiator / slave revolt in Italy . Upon their return , Pompey and Crassus found the populares party fiercely attacking Sulla 's constitution . They attempted to forge an agreement with the populares party . If both Pompey and Crassus were elected consul in 70 BC , they would dismantle the more obnoxious components of Sulla 's constitution . The two were soon elected , and quickly dismantled most of Sulla 's constitution . 
 Around 66 BC , a movement to use constitutional , or at least peaceful , means to address the plight of various classes began . After several failures , the movement 's leaders decided to use any means that were necessary to accomplish their goals . The movement coalesced under an aristocrat named Lucius Sergius <unk> . The movement was based in the town of <unk> , which was a natural hotbed of agrarian agitation . The rural malcontents were to advance on Rome , and be aided by an uprising within the city . After assassinating the consuls and most of the senators , Catiline would be free to enact his reforms . The conspiracy was set in motion in 63 BC . The consul for the year , Marcus Tullius Cicero , intercepted messages that Catiline had sent in an attempt to recruit more members . As a result , the top conspirators in Rome ( including at least one former consul ) were executed by authorisation ( of dubious constitutionality ) of the senate , and the planned uprising was disrupted . Cicero then sent an army , which cut Catiline 's forces to pieces . 
 The most important result of the <unk> conspiracy was that the populares party became discredited . The prior 70 years had witnessed a gradual erosion in senatorial powers . The violent nature of the conspiracy , in conjunction with the senate 's skill in disrupting it , did a great deal to repair the senate 's image . 
 = = = = First Triumvirate = = = = 
 In 62 BC , Pompey returned victorious from Asia . The Senate , elated by its successes against Catiline , refused to ratify the arrangements that Pompey had made . Pompey , in effect , became powerless . Thus , when Julius Caesar returned from a governorship in Spain in 61 BC , he found it easy to make an arrangement with Pompey . Caesar and Pompey , along with Crassus , established a private agreement , now known as the First Triumvirate . Under the agreement , Pompey 's arrangements would be ratified . Caesar would be elected consul in 59 BC , and would then serve as governor of Gaul for five years . Crassus was promised a future consulship . 
 Caesar became consul in 59 BC . His colleague , Marcus Calpurnius Bibulus , was an extreme aristocrat . Caesar submitted the laws that he had promised Pompey to the assemblies . Bibulus attempted to obstruct the enactment of these laws , and so Caesar used violent means to ensure their passage . Caesar was then made governor of three provinces . He facilitated the election of the former patrician Publius Clodius Pulcher to the tribunate for 58 BC . Clodius set about depriving Caesar 's senatorial enemies of two of their more obstinate leaders in Cato and Cicero . Clodius was a bitter opponent of Cicero because Cicero had testified against him in a sacrilege case . Clodius attempted to try Cicero for executing citizens without a trial during the Catiline conspiracy , resulting in Cicero going into self @-@ imposed exile and his house in Rome being burnt down . Clodius also passed a bill that forced Cato to lead the invasion of Cyprus which would keep him away from Rome for some years . Clodius also passed a law to expand the previous partial grain subsidy to a fully free grain dole for citizens . 
 = = = = The end of the First Triumvirate = = = = 
 Clodius formed armed gangs that terrorised the city and eventually began to attack Pompey 's followers , who in response funded counter @-@ gangs formed by Titus Annius Milo . The political alliance of the triumvirate was crumbling . Domitius <unk> ran for the consulship in 55 BC promising to take Caesar 's command from him . Eventually , the triumvirate was renewed at Lucca . Pompey and Crassus were promised the consulship in 55 BC , and Caesar 's term as governor was extended for five years . Crassus led an ill @-@ fated expedition with legions led by his son , Caesar 's lieutenant , against the Kingdom of Parthia . This resulted in his defeat and death at the Battle of Carrhae . Finally , Pompey 's wife , Julia , who was Caesar 's daughter , died in childbirth . This event severed the last remaining bond between Pompey and Caesar . 
 Beginning in the summer of 54 BC , a wave of political corruption and violence swept Rome . This chaos reached a climax in January of 52 BC , when Clodius was murdered in a gang war by Milo . On 1 January 49 BC , an agent of Caesar presented an ultimatum to the senate . The ultimatum was rejected , and the senate then passed a resolution which declared that if Caesar did not lay down his arms by July of that year , he would be considered an enemy of the Republic . Meanwhile , the senators adopted Pompey as their new champion against Caesar . On 7 January of 49 BC , the senate passed a senatus consultum ultimum , which vested Pompey with dictatorial powers . Pompey 's army , however , was composed largely of untested conscripts . On 10 January , Caesar crossed the Rubicon with his veteran army ( in violation of Roman laws ) and marched towards Rome . Caesar 's rapid advance forced Pompey , the consuls and the senate to abandon Rome for Greece . Caesar entered the city unopposed . 
 = = = The period of transition ( 49 – 29 BC ) = = = 
 A period of reform occurred between 49 BC , when Julius Caesar crossed the Rubicon , and 29 BC , when Octavian returned to Rome after Actium . During this period the previous century 's gradual unravelling of republican institutions accelerated rapidly . By 29 BC , Rome had completed its transition from a city @-@ state with a network of dependencies to the capital of a world empire . 
 With Pompey defeated and order restored , Caesar wanted to achieve undisputed control over the government . The powers which he gave himself were later assumed by his imperial successors . His assumption of these powers decreased the authority of Rome 's other political institutions . 
 Caesar held both the dictatorship and the tribunate , and alternated between the consulship and the proconsulship . In 48 BC , Caesar was given permanent tribunician powers . This made his person sacrosanct , gave him the power to veto the senate , and allowed him to dominate the Plebeian Council . In 46 BC , Caesar was given censorial powers , which he used to fill the senate with his own partisans . Caesar then raised the membership of the Senate to 900 . This robbed the senatorial aristocracy of its prestige , and made it increasingly subservient to him . While the assemblies continued to meet , he submitted all candidates to the assemblies for election , and all bills to the assemblies for enactment . Thus , the assemblies became powerless and were unable to oppose him . 
 Near the end of his life , Caesar began to prepare for a war against the Parthian Empire . Since his absence from Rome would limit his ability to install his own consuls , he passed a law which allowed him to appoint all magistrates in 43 BC , and all consuls and tribunes in 42 BC . This transformed the magistrates from representatives of the people to representatives of the dictator . 
 = = = = Caesar 's assassination and the Second Triumvirate = = = = 
 Caesar was assassinated on March 15 , 44 BC . The assassination was led by Gaius Cassius and Marcus Brutus . Most of the conspirators were senators , who had a variety of economic , political , or personal motivations for carrying out the assassination . Many were afraid that Caesar would soon resurrect the monarchy and declare himself king . Others feared loss of property or prestige as Caesar carried out his land reforms in favor of the landless classes . Virtually all the conspirators fled the city after Caesar 's death in fear of retaliation . The civil war that followed destroyed what was left of the Republic . 
 After the assassination , Mark Antony formed an alliance with Caesar 's adopted son and great @-@ nephew , Gaius Octavian . Along with Marcus Lepidus , they formed an alliance known as the Second Triumvirate . They held powers that were nearly identical to the powers that Caesar had held under his constitution . As such , the Senate and assemblies remained powerless , even after Caesar had been assassinated . The conspirators were then defeated at the Battle of Philippi in 42 BC . Eventually , however , Antony and Octavian fought against each other in one last battle . Antony was defeated in the naval Battle of Actium in 31 BC , and he committed suicide with his lover , Cleopatra . In 29 BC , Octavian returned to Rome as the unchallenged master of the Empire and later accepted the title of Augustus ( " Exalted One " ) . He was convinced that only a single strong ruler could restore order in Rome . 
 = = Military = = 
 The structural history of the Roman military describes the major chronological transformations in the organisation and constitution of the Roman armed forces . The Roman military was split into the Roman army and the Roman navy , although these two branches were less distinct than they tend to be in modern defence forces . Within the top @-@ level branches of army and navy , structural changes occurred both as a result of positive military reform and through organic structural evolution . 
 As with most ancient civilizations , Rome 's military served the triple purposes of securing its borders , exploiting peripheral areas through measures such as imposing tribute on conquered peoples , and maintaining internal order . From the outset , Rome 's military typified this pattern and the majority of Rome 's wars were characterized by one of two types . The first is the foreign war , normally begun as a counter @-@ offensive or defense of an ally . The second is the civil war , which plagued the Roman Republic in its final century . Roman armies were not invincible , despite their formidable reputation and host of victories . Over the centuries the Romans " produced their share of incompetents " who led Roman armies into catastrophic defeats . Nevertheless , it was generally the fate of the greatest of Rome 's enemies , such as Pyrrhus and Hannibal , to win early battles but lose the war . The history of Rome 's campaigning is , if nothing else , a history of obstinate persistence overcoming appalling losses . 
 = = = <unk> armies ( 509 – c . 315 BC ) = = = 
 During this period , Roman soldiers seem to have been modelled after those of the Etruscans to the north , who themselves seem to have copied their style of warfare from the Greeks . Traditionally , the introduction of the phalanx formation into the Roman army is ascribed to the city 's penultimate king , Servius Tullius ( ruled 578 to 534 BC ) . According to Livy and Dionysius of Halicarnassus , the front rank was composed of the wealthiest citizens , who were able to purchase the best equipment . Each subsequent rank consisted of those with less wealth and poorer equipment than the one before it . 
 One disadvantage of the phalanx was that it was only effective when fighting in large , open spaces , which left the Romans at a disadvantage when fighting in the hilly terrain of central Italian peninsula . In the 4th century BC , the Romans abandoned the phalanx in favour of the more flexible manipular formation . This change is sometimes attributed to Marcus Furius Camillus and placed shortly after the Gallic invasion of 390 BC ; it is more likely , however , that they were copied from Rome 's Samnite enemies to the south , possibly as a result of Samnite victories during the Second Samnite War ( 326 to 304 BC ) . 
 = = = Manipular legion ( c . 315 – 107 BC ) = = = 
 During this period , an army formation of around 5 @,@ 000 men ( of both heavy and light infantry ) was known as a legion . The manipular army was based upon social class , age and military experience . <unk> were units of 120 men each drawn from a single infantry class . 
 The maniples were typically deployed into three discrete lines based on the three heavy infantry types : 
 1 . Each first line maniple were leather @-@ armoured infantry soldiers who wore a bronze breastplate and a bronze helmet adorned with 3 feathers approximately 30 cm ( 12 in ) in height and carried an iron @-@ clad wooden shield . They were armed with a sword and two throwing spears . 
 2 . The second infantry line was armed and armoured in the same manner as was the first infantry line . The second infantry line , however , wore a lighter coat of mail rather than a solid brass breastplate . 
 3 . The third infantry line was the last remnant of the hoplite @-@ style ( the Greek @-@ style formation used occasionally during the early Republic ) troops in the Roman army . They were armed and armoured in the same manner as were the soldiers in the second line , with the exception that they carried a lighter spear . 
 The three infantry classes may have retained some slight parallel to social divisions within Roman society , but at least officially the three lines were based upon age and experience rather than social class . Young , unproven men would serve in the first line , older men with some military experience would serve in the second line , and veteran troops of advanced age and experience would serve in the third line . 
 The heavy infantry of the maniples were supported by a number of light infantry and cavalry troops , typically 300 horsemen per manipular legion . The cavalry was drawn primarily from the richest class of equestrians . There was an additional class of troops who followed the army without specific martial roles and were deployed to the rear of the third line . Their role in accompanying the army was primarily to supply any vacancies that might occur in the maniples . The light infantry consisted of 1 @,@ 200 unarmoured skirmishing troops drawn from the youngest and lower social classes . They were armed with a sword and a small shield , as well as several light javelins . 
 Rome 's military confederation with the other peoples of the Italian peninsula meant that half of Rome 's army was provided by the Socii , such as the Etruscans , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Samnites , <unk> , <unk> , and the various southern Greek cities . Polybius states that Rome could draw on 770 @,@ 000 men at the beginning of the Second Punic War , of which 700 @,@ 000 were infantry and 70 @,@ 000 met the requirements for cavalry . Rome 's Italian allies would be organized in alae , or wings , roughly equal in manpower to the Roman legions , though with 900 cavalry instead of 300 . 
 A small navy had operated at a fairly low level after about 300 BC , but it was massively upgraded about forty years later , during the First Punic War . After a period of frenetic construction , the navy mushroomed to a size of more than 400 ships on the Carthaginian ( " Punic " ) pattern . Once completed , it could accommodate up to 100 @,@ 000 sailors and embarked troops for battle . The navy thereafter declined in size . 
 The extraordinary demands of the Punic Wars , in addition to a shortage of manpower , exposed the tactical weaknesses of the manipular legion , at least in the short term . In 217 BC , near the beginning of the Second Punic War , Rome was forced to effectively ignore its long @-@ standing principle that its soldiers must be both citizens and property owners . During the 2nd century BC , Roman territory saw an overall decline in population , partially due to the huge losses incurred during various wars . This was accompanied by severe social stresses and the greater collapse of the middle classes . As a result , the Roman state was forced to arm its soldiers at the expense of the state , which it had not had to do in the past . 
 The distinction between the heavy infantry types began to blur , perhaps because the state was now assuming the responsibility of providing standard @-@ issue equipment . In addition , the shortage of available manpower led to a greater burden being placed upon Rome 's allies for the provision of allied troops . Eventually , the Romans were forced to begin hiring mercenaries to fight alongside the legions . 
 = = = The legion after the reforms of Gaius Marius ( 107 – 27 BC ) = = = 
 In process known as the Marian reforms , Roman consul Gaius Marius carried out a programme of reform of the Roman military . In 107 BC , all citizens , regardless of their wealth or social class , were made eligible for entry into the Roman army . This move formalised and concluded a gradual process that had been growing for centuries , of removing property requirements for military service . The distinction between the three heavy infantry classes , which had already become blurred , had collapsed into a single class of heavy legionary infantry . The heavy infantry legionaries were drawn from citizen stock , while non @-@ citizens came to dominate the ranks of the light infantry . The army 's higher @-@ level officers and commanders were still drawn exclusively from the Roman aristocracy . 
 Unlike earlier in the Republic , legionaries were no longer fighting on a seasonal basis to protect their land . Instead , they received standard pay , and were employed by the state on a fixed @-@ term basis . As a consequence , military duty began to appeal most to the poorest sections of society , to whom a salaried pay was attractive . A destabilising consequence of this development was that the proletariat " acquired a stronger and more elevated position " within the state . 
 The legions of the late Republic were , structurally , almost entirely heavy infantry . The legion 's main sub @-@ unit was called a cohort and consisted of approximately 480 infantrymen . The cohort was therefore a much larger unit than the earlier maniple sub @-@ unit , and was divided into six centuries of 80 men each . Each century was separated further into 10 " tent groups " of 8 men each . The cavalry troops were used as scouts and dispatch riders rather than battlefield cavalry . Legions also contained a dedicated group of artillery crew of perhaps 60 men . Each legion was normally partnered with an approximately equal number of allied ( non @-@ Roman ) troops . 
 However , the most obvious deficiency of the Roman army remained its shortage of cavalry , especially heavy cavalry . As Rome 's borders expanded and its adversaries changed from largely infantry @-@ based to largely cavalry @-@ based troops , the infantry @-@ based Roman army began to find itself at a tactical disadvantage , particularly in the East . 
 After having declined in size following the subjugation of the Mediterranean , the Roman navy underwent short @-@ term upgrading and revitalisation in the late Republic to meet several new demands . Under Caesar , an invasion fleet was assembled in the English Channel to allow the invasion of Britannia ; under Pompey , a large fleet was raised in the Mediterranean Sea to clear the sea of Cilician pirates . During the civil war that followed , as many as a thousand ships were either constructed or pressed into service from Greek cities . 
 = = Politics = = 
 The Constitution of the Roman Republic was an unwritten set of guidelines and principles passed down mainly through precedent . The Roman constitution was not formal or even official . It was largely unwritten , uncodified , and constantly evolving . 
 = = = Senate of the Roman Republic = = = 
 The senate 's ultimate authority derived from the esteem and prestige of the senators . This esteem and prestige was based on both precedent and custom , as well as the caliber and reputation of the senators . The senate passed decrees , which were called senatus consulta . These were officially " advice " from the senate to a magistrate . In practice , however , they were usually followed by the magistrates . The focus of the Roman senate was usually directed towards foreign policy . Though it technically had no official role in the management of military conflict , the senate ultimately was the force that oversaw such affairs . The power of the senate expanded over time as the power of the legislative assemblies declined , and the senate took a greater role in ordinary law @-@ making . Its members were usually appointed by Roman Censors , who ordinarily selected newly elected magistrates for membership in the senate , making the senate a partially elected body . During times of military emergency , such as the civil wars of the 1st century BC , this practice became less prevalent , as the Roman Dictator , Triumvir or the senate itself would select its members . 
 = = = Legislative Assemblies = = = 
 The legal status of Roman citizenship was limited and was a vital prerequisite to possessing many important legal rights such as the right to trial and appeal , to marry , to vote , to hold office , to enter binding contracts , and to special tax exemptions . An adult male citizen with the full complement of legal and political rights was called " optimo jure . " The optimo jure elected their assemblies , whereupon the assemblies elected magistrates , enacted legislation , presided over trials in capital cases , declared war and peace , and forged or dissolved treaties . There were two types of legislative assemblies . The first was the comitia ( " committees " ) , which were assemblies of all optimo jure . The second was the <unk> ( " councils " ) , which were assemblies of specific groups of optimo jure . 
 Citizens were organized on the basis of centuries and tribes , which would each gather into their own assemblies . The Comitia Centuriata ( " Centuriate Assembly " ) was the assembly of the centuries ( i.e. soldiers ) . The president of the Comitia Centuriata was usually a consul . The centuries would vote , one at a time , until a measure received support from a majority of the centuries . The Comitia Centuriata would elect magistrates who had imperium powers ( consuls and praetors ) . It also elected censors . Only the Comitia Centuriata could declare war , and ratify the results of a census . It also served as the highest court of appeal in certain judicial cases . 
 The assembly of the tribes ( i.e. the citizens of Rome ) , the Comitia <unk> , was presided over by a consul , and was composed of 35 tribes . The tribes were not ethnic or kinship groups , but rather geographical subdivisions . The order that the thirty @-@ five tribes would vote in was selected randomly by lot . Once a measure received support from a majority of the tribes , the voting would end . While it did not pass many laws , the Comitia <unk> did elect quaestors , curule aediles , and military tribunes . The Plebeian Council was identical to the assembly of the tribes , but excluded the patricians ( the elite who could trace their ancestry to the founding of Rome ) . They elected their own officers , plebeian tribunes and plebeian aediles . Usually a plebeian tribune would preside over the assembly . This assembly passed most laws , and could also act as a court of appeal . 
 = = = Executive Magistrates = = = 
 Each republican magistrate held certain constitutional powers . Only the People of Rome ( both plebeians and patricians ) had the right to confer these powers on any individual magistrate . The most powerful constitutional power was imperium . Imperium was held by both consuls and praetors . Imperium gave a magistrate the authority to command a military force . All magistrates also had the power of coercion . This was used by magistrates to maintain public order . While in Rome , all citizens had a judgement against coercion . This protection was called provocatio ( see below ) . Magistrates also had both the power and the duty to look for omens . This power would often be used to obstruct political opponents . 
 One check on a magistrate 's power was his collegiality . Each magisterial office would be held concurrently by at least two people . Another such check was provocatio . Provocatio was a primordial form of due process . It was a precursor to habeas corpus . If any magistrate tried to use the powers of the state against a citizen , that citizen could appeal the decision of the magistrate to a tribune . In addition , once a magistrate 's one @-@ year term of office expired , he would have to wait ten years before serving in that office again . This created problems for some consuls and praetors , and these magistrates would occasionally have their imperium extended . In effect , they would retain the powers of the office ( as a <unk> ) , without officially holding that office . 
 The consuls of the Roman Republic were the highest ranking ordinary magistrates ; each consul served for one year . Consuls had supreme power in both civil and military matters . While in the city of Rome , the consuls were the head of the Roman government . They would preside over the senate and the assemblies . While abroad , each consul would command an army . His authority abroad would be nearly absolute . Praetors administered civil law and commanded provincial armies . Every five years , two censors were elected for an 18 @-@ month term , during which they would conduct a census . During the census , they could enroll citizens in the senate , or purge them from the senate . Aediles were officers elected to conduct domestic affairs in Rome , such as managing public games and shows . The quaestors would usually assist the consuls in Rome , and the governors in the provinces . Their duties were often financial . 
 Since the tribunes were considered to be the embodiment of the plebeians , they were sacrosanct . Their sacrosanctity was enforced by a pledge , taken by the plebeians , to kill any person who harmed or interfered with a tribune during his term of office . All of the powers of the tribune derived from their sacrosanctity . One consequence was that it was considered a capital offense to harm a tribune , to disregard his veto , or to interfere with a tribune . In times of military emergency , a dictator would be appointed for a term of six months . Constitutional government would be dissolved , and the dictator would be the absolute master of the state . When the dictator 's term ended , constitutional government would be restored . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Life in the Roman Republic revolved around the city of Rome , and its famed seven hills . The city also had several theatres , gymnasiums , and many taverns , baths and brothels . Throughout the territory under Rome 's control , residential architecture ranged from very modest houses to country villas , and in the capital city of Rome , to the residences on the elegant Palatine Hill , from which the word " palace " is derived . The vast majority of the population lived in the city center , packed into apartment blocks . 
 Most Roman towns and cities had a forum and temples , as did the city of Rome itself . <unk> brought water to urban centers and wine and cooking oil were imported from abroad . Landlords generally resided in cities and left their estates in the care of farm managers . To stimulate a higher labor productivity , many landlords freed large numbers of slaves . 
 Beginning in the middle of the 2nd century BC , Greek culture was increasingly ascendant , in spite of tirades against the " softening " effects of Hellenised culture . By the time of Augustus , cultured Greek household slaves taught the Roman young ( sometimes even the girls ) . Greek sculptures adorned Hellenistic landscape gardening on the Palatine or in the villas , and much of ancient Roman cuisine was essentially Greek . Roman writers disdained Latin for a cultured Greek style . 
 = = = Social structure = = = 
 Many aspects of Roman culture were borrowed from the Greeks . In architecture and sculpture , the difference between Greek models and Roman paintings are apparent . The chief Roman contributions to architecture were the arch and the dome . Rome has also had a tremendous impact on European cultures following it . Its significance is perhaps best reflected in its endurance and influence , as is seen in the longevity and lasting importance of works of Virgil and Ovid . Latin , the Republic 's primary language , remains used for liturgical purposes by the Roman Catholic Church , and up to the 19th century was used extensively in scholarly writings in , for example , science and mathematics . Roman law laid the foundations for the laws of many European countries and their colonies . 
 The center of the early social structure was the family , which was not only marked by blood relations but also by the legally constructed relation of patria potestas . The Pater <unk> was the absolute head of the family ; he was the master over his wife , his children , the wives of his sons , the nephews , the slaves and the freedmen , disposing of them and of their goods at will , even putting them to death . Roman law recognised only patrician families as legal entities . 
 Slavery and slaves were part of the social order ; there were slave markets where they could be bought and sold . Many slaves were freed by the masters for services rendered ; some slaves could save money to buy their freedom . Generally , mutilation and murder of slaves was prohibited by legislation . However , Rome did not have a law enforcement arm . All actions were treated as " torts , " which were brought by an accuser who was forced to prove the entire case himself . If the accused were a noble and the victim , not a noble , the likelihood of finding for the accused was small . At most , the accused might have to pay a fine for killing a slave . It is estimated that over 25 % of the Roman population was enslaved . 
 = = = Clothing = = = 
 Men typically wore a toga , and women a stola . The woman 's stola differed in looks from a toga , and was usually brightly coloured . The cloth and the dress distinguished one class of people from the other class . The tunic worn by plebeians , or common people , like shepherds and slaves , was made from coarse and dark material , whereas the tunic worn by patricians was of linen or white wool . A knight or magistrate would wear an <unk> , a tunic bearing small purple studs . Senators wore tunics with broad red stripes , called tunica <unk> . Military tunics were shorter than the ones worn by civilians . Boys , up until the festival of <unk> , wore the toga <unk> , which was a toga with a crimson or purple border . The toga virilis , ( or toga pura ) was worn by men over the age of 16 to signify their citizenship in Rome . The toga picta was worn by triumphant generals and had embroidery of their skill on the battlefield . The toga <unk> was worn when in mourning . 
 Even footwear indicated a person 's social status . Patricians wore red and orange sandals , senators had brown footwear , consuls had white shoes , and soldiers wore heavy boots . The Romans also invented socks for those soldiers required to fight on the northern frontiers , sometimes worn in sandals . 
 = = = Dining = = = 
 The staple foods were generally consumed around 11 o 'clock , and consisted of bread , lettuce , cheese , fruits , nuts , and cold meat left over from the dinner the night before . The Roman poet Horace mentions another Roman favorite , the olive , in reference to his own diet , which he describes as very simple : " As for me , olives , <unk> , and smooth mallows provide sustenance . " The family ate together , sitting on stools around a table . Fingers were used to eat solid foods and spoons were used for soups . 
 Wine was considered the basic drink , consumed at all meals and occasions by all classes and was quite inexpensive . Cato the Elder once advised cutting his rations in half to conserve wine for the workforce . Many types of drinks involving grapes and honey were consumed as well . Drinking on an empty stomach was regarded as boorish and a sure sign for alcoholism , the debilitating physical and psychological effects of which were known to the Romans . An accurate accusation of being an alcoholic was an effective way to discredit political rivals . Prominent Roman alcoholics included Mark Antony , and Cicero 's own son Marcus ( Cicero Minor ) . Even Cato the Younger was known to be a heavy drinker . 
 = = = Education and language = = = 
 Following various military conquests in the Greek East , Romans adapted a number of Greek educational precepts to their own fledgling system . They began physical training to prepare the boys to grow as Roman citizens and for eventual recruitment into the army . Conforming to discipline was a point of great emphasis . Girls generally received instruction from their mothers in the art of spinning , weaving , and sewing . Schooling in a more formal sense was begun around 200 BC . Education began at the age of around six , and in the next six to seven years , boys and girls were expected to learn the basics of reading , writing and counting . By the age of twelve , they would be learning Latin , Greek , grammar and literature , followed by training for public speaking . Oratory was an art to be practiced and learnt , and good orators commanded respect . 
 The native language of the Romans was Latin . Although surviving Latin literature consists almost entirely of Classical Latin , an artificial and highly stylised and polished literary language from the 1st century BC , the actual spoken language was Vulgar Latin , which significantly differed from Classical Latin in grammar , vocabulary , and eventually pronunciation . Rome 's expansion spread Latin throughout Europe , and over time Vulgar Latin evolved and <unk> in different locations , gradually shifting into a number of distinct Romance languages . Many of these languages , including French , Italian , Portuguese , Romanian and Spanish , flourished , the differences between them growing greater over time . Although English is Germanic rather than Roman in origin , English borrows heavily from Latin and Latin @-@ derived words . 
 = = = The arts = = = 
 Roman literature was from its very inception influenced heavily by Greek authors . Some of the earliest works we possess are of historical epics telling the early military history of Rome . As the republic expanded , authors began to produce poetry , comedy , history , and tragedy . Virgil represents the pinnacle of Roman epic poetry . His Aeneid tells the story of flight of Aeneas from Troy and his settlement of the city that would become Rome . Lucretius , in his On the Nature of Things , attempted to explicate science in an epic poem . The genre of satire was common in Rome , and satires were written by , among others , Juvenal and Persius . The rhetorical works of Cicero are considered to be some of the best bodies of correspondence recorded in antiquity . 
 In the 3rd century BC , Greek art taken as booty from wars became popular , and many Roman homes were decorated with landscapes by Greek artists . Portrait sculpture during the period utilised youthful and classical proportions , evolving later into a mixture of realism and idealism . Advancements were also made in relief sculptures , often depicting Roman victories . 
 Music was a major part of everyday life . The word itself derives from Greek <unk> ( <unk> ) , " ( art ) of the Muses " . Many private and public events were accompanied by music , ranging from nightly dining to military parades and manoeuvres . In a discussion of any ancient music , however , non @-@ specialists and even many musicians have to be reminded that much of what makes our modern music familiar to us is the result of developments only within the last 1 @,@ 000 years ; thus , our ideas of melody , scales , harmony , and even the instruments we use may not have been familiar to Romans who made and listened to music many centuries earlier . 
 Over time , Roman architecture was modified as their urban requirements changed , and the civil engineering and building construction technology became developed and refined . The Roman concrete has remained a riddle , and even after more than 2 @,@ 000 years some Roman structures still stand magnificently . The architectural style of the capital city was emulated by other urban centers under Roman control and influence . Roman cities were well planned , efficiently managed and neatly maintained . 
 = = = Sports and entertainment = = = 
 The city of Rome had a place called the Campus Martius ( " Field of Mars " ) , which was a sort of drill ground for Roman soldiers . Later , the Campus became Rome 's track and field playground . In the campus , the youth assembled to play and exercise , which included jumping , wrestling , boxing and racing . Equestrian sports , throwing , and swimming were also preferred physical activities . In the countryside , pastimes included fishing and hunting . Board games played in Rome included dice ( <unk> or Tali ) , Roman Chess ( <unk> ) , Roman Checkers ( <unk> ) , Tic @-@ tac @-@ toe ( Terni <unk> ) , and Ludus duodecim <unk> and Tabula , predecessors of backgammon . Other activities included chariot races , and musical and theatrical performances . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 Roman religious beliefs date back to the founding of Rome , around 800 BC . However , the Roman religion commonly associated with the republic and early empire did not begin until around 500 BC , when Romans came in contact with Greek culture , and adopted many of the Greek religious beliefs . Private and personal worship was an important aspect of religious practices . In a sense , each household was a temple to the gods . Each household had an altar ( <unk> ) , at which the family members would offer prayers , perform rites , and interact with the household gods . Many of the gods that Romans worshiped came from the Proto @-@ Indo @-@ European pantheon , others were based on Greek gods . The two most famous deities were Jupiter ( the king God ) and Mars ( the god of war ) . With its cultural influence spreading over most of the Mediterranean , Romans began accepting foreign gods into their own culture , as well as other philosophical traditions such as Cynicism and Stoicism . 
 = Battle of the Bowling Alley = 
 In the Battle of the Bowling Alley ( August 12 – 25 , 1950 ) , United Nations ( UN ) forces defeated North Korean ( NK ) forces early in the Korean War near the city of Taegu , South Korea . The battle took place in a narrow valley , dubbed the " Bowling Alley " , which was north of Taegu . It followed a week of fighting between the North Korean People 's Army 13th Division and the Republic of Korea Army 's ( ROK ) 1st Division along the latter 's last defensible line in the hills north of the city . Reinforcements , including the US Army 's 27th and 23rd Infantry Regiments were committed to bolster the South Koreans ' defenses . This battle and several others were smaller engagements of the Battle of Pusan Perimeter . 
 For another week , North Korean divisions launched all the troops they had in massed attacks against the ROK and US lines . Their attacks , which usually occurred at night and were supported by armor and artillery , advanced with infantry and tanks in close support of one another . Each North Korean attack ran into well @-@ established UN lines , where US tanks , mines and entrenched infantry were positioned to counter them . Strikes by US aircraft ravaged the attacking North Koreans . The fighting was fierce with many casualties on both sides , particularly where the North and South Koreans fought one another . The repeated attacks eventually broke and pushed back the North Korean forces . They continued their push against the Pusan Perimeter until they were turned back in the Battle of Inchon . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Outbreak of war = = = 
 Following the invasion of the Republic of Korea ( South Korea ) by the Democratic People 's Republic of Korea ( North Korea ) , and the subsequent outbreak of the Korean War on June 25 , 1950 , the United Nations voted to enter the conflict on behalf of South Korea . The United States , a member of the UN , simultaneously committed ground forces to the Korean peninsula with the goal of pushing back the North Korean invasion and preventing South Korea from collapsing . But US forces in the Far East had been steadily decreasing since the end of World War II , five years earlier , and at the time the closest forces were the US 24th Infantry Division , headquartered in Japan . The division was understrength , and most of its equipment was antiquated due to reductions in military spending . Nevertheless , the 24th was ordered to South Korea . 
 The 24th Infantry Division was the first US unit sent into Korea with the mission to take the initial " shock " of North Korean advances , delaying much larger North Korean units to buy time to allow reinforcements to arrive . The division fought for several weeks while the 1st Cavalry , 7th Infantry and 25th Infantry Divisions and Eighth United States Army supporting units were arriving . Advance elements of the 24th were badly defeated in the Battle of Osan on July 5 , the first encounter between American and North Korean forces . For the first month after the defeat at Osan , the 24th Infantry Division was repeatedly defeated and forced south by superior North Korean numbers and equipment . The regiments of the division were systematically pushed south in engagements around Chochiwon , Chonan , and Pyongtaek . The 24th was finally annihilated in the Battle of Taejon , but was able to delay the North Korean forces until July 20 . By that time , the Eighth Army 's force of combat troops were roughly equal to North Korean forces attacking the region , with new UN units arriving every day . 
 = = = North Korean advance = = = 
 After the fight at Taejon , UN forces were pushed back repeatedly before finally halting the North Korean advance in a series of engagements in the southern section of the country . Forces of the 3rd Battalion , 29th Infantry , newly arrived in the country , were wiped out at Hadong in a coordinated ambush by North Korean forces on July 27 , opening a pass to the Pusan area from the west . Soon after , North Korean forces took Chinju , east of Hadong , pushing back the US 19th Infantry Regiment and leaving routes to Pusan open to direct North Korean attacks . The UN formations were subsequently able to defeat the North Koreans in the Battle of the Notch on August 2 , halting their advance from the west . Suffering mounting losses , the Korean People 's Army force withdrew for several days to re @-@ equip and receive reinforcements . This granted both sides a reprieve to prepare for the attack on the Pusan Perimeter . 
 = = = Taegu = = = 
 Meanwhile , the Eighth Army commander Lieutenant General Walton Walker had established Taegu as his headquarters . At the center of the Pusan Perimeter line , Taegu stood at the entrance to the Naktong River valley , an area where North Korean forces could advance in large numbers in close support . The natural barriers provided by the Naktong River to the south and the mountainous terrain to the north converged around Taegu , a transportation hub and the last major South Korean city aside from Pusan itself to remain in UN hands . From south to north , the city was defended by the US 1st Cavalry Division , the ROK 1st Division , and the ROK 6th Division , which were under the command of ROK II Corps . The 1st Cavalry Division was spread out along a long line on the Naktong River to the south , with its 5th Cavalry and 8th Cavalry regiments holding a 24 @,@ 000 @-@ meter ( 79 @,@ 000 ft ) line along the river south of Waegwan , facing west . The 7th Cavalry held position to the east in reserve , along with artillery forces , ready to reinforce anywhere a North Korean crossing could be attempted . The ROK 1st Division held a northwest @-@ facing line in the mountains immediately north of the city while the ROK 6th Division held position to the east , guarding the narrow valley holding the Kunwi road into the Pusan Perimeter area . 
 Five North Korean divisions amassed around Taegu to oppose the UN forces in the city . From south to north , the 10th , 3rd , 15th , 13th , and 1st North Korean Divisions occupied a wide line encircling Taegu from Tuksong @-@ dong and around Waegwan to Kunwi . The North Korean army planned to use the natural corridor of the Naktong River valley from Sangju to Taegu as its main axis of attack for the next push south , so the North Korean divisions all eventually moved through this valley , crossing the Naktong at different areas along the low ground . Elements of the NK 105th Armored Division also supported the attack . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = US forces assemble = = = 
 During mid @-@ August , US 27th Infantry Regiment of the US 25th Infantry Division was mopping up North Korean resistance from the southern part of the Naktong Bulge area to counter a North Korean attack there . The regiment , temporarily attached to the US 24th Infantry Division , was recalled by the Eighth Army when a new North Korean threat formed to the north of Taegu , alarming Walker . Acting on the threat , Walker relieved the regiment from the 24th Infantry Division on August 14 and the next day ordered it northward to Kyongsan as a reserve force . Arriving at Kyongsan on August 16 , Colonel John H. Michaelis , 27th Infantry 's commander , was ordered to reconnoiter routes east , north , northwest , and west of Kyongsan and counter any North Korean attacks from these directions . During the day , two North Korean T @-@ 34 tanks came through the ROK 1st Division lines 12 miles ( 19 km ) north of Taegu at Tabu @-@ dong , but South Korean 3 @.@ 5 @-@ inch bazooka teams knocked out both of them . The ROK 1st Division , also in the area , was ordered to assemble in the hills around the road and wait for reinforcements or make a last stand if needed to prevent the North Koreans from coming any closer to Taegu . To its east was the ROK 6th Division and to its west was the Naktong River . 
 At 12 : 00 the next day , August 17 , Eighth Army ordered the 27th Infantry to move its headquarters and a reinforced battalion " without delay " to a point across the Kumho River 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) north of Taegu on the road from Tabu @-@ dong to Sangju " to secure Taegu from enemy penetration " from that direction . South Korean sources reported a North Korean regiment , led by six T @-@ 34 tanks , had entered the village of Kumhwa , 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) north of Tabu @-@ dong . The 1st Battalion , 27th Infantry , a platoon of the Heavy Mortar Company , and most of the 8th Field Artillery Battalion moved north to Ch <unk> where the ROK 1st Division command post was located . By nightfall , the entire 27th Regiment was north of Taegu on the Tabu @-@ dong road , reinforced by C Company , 73rd Tank Battalion . US Army commanders also ordered the 37th Field Artillery Battalion to move from the area around Kyongju and P 'ohang @-@ dong , where a heavy battle had been in progress for days , for attachment to the US 27th Infantry Regiment in order to reinforce the 8th Field Artillery Battalion above Taegu . It arrived there the next day . At the front , ROK 1st Division commander Brigadier General Paik Sun @-@ yup assumed senior command of the 27th Infantry and the other US units , to the chagrin of Michaelis . 
 = = = NK forces assemble = = = 
 In its engagements during the Perimeter battle , the North Korean 13th Division , with 9 @,@ 500 men , had forced South Korean troops into the Tabu @-@ dong corridor and started advancing on Taegu . This division had battled the ROK 11th and 12th Regiments in the Yuhak @-@ san area for a week before it broke through to the corridor on August 17 . A regimental commander of the division said later it suffered 1 @,@ 500 casualties in the process . On August 18 , the 13th Division was concentrated mostly west of the road just north of Tabu @-@ dong . 
 To the west of the NK 13th Division , the NK 15th Division with 5 @,@ 000 men was also deployed on Yuhak @-@ san . It , too , had begun battling the ROK 1st Division , but thus far only in minor engagements . The North Korean High Command then ordered the NK 15th Division to move from its position northwest of Tabu @-@ dong eastward , to the Yongch 'on front , where the NK 8th Division had tried and failed to advance to the Taegu lateral corridor . The NK 15th Division left the Yuhak @-@ san area on August 20 . Meanwhile , the NK 1st Division , to the east of the 13th , advanced to the Kunwi area , 25 miles ( 40 km ) north of Taegu . The North Korean command ordered it to proceed to the Tabu @-@ dong area and maneuver astride the 13th Division for the attack on Taegu down the Tabu @-@ dong corridor . At the same time , the North Koreans received their only substantial tank reinforcements during the Pusan Perimeter fighting . On August 15 , the NK 105th Armored Division received 21 new T @-@ 34 tanks and 200 troop replacements , which it distributed to the divisions attacking Taegu . The tank regiment with the NK 13th Division reportedly had 14 T @-@ 34 tanks . 
 On August 18 , the NK 13th Division was astride the Sangju – Taegu road just above Tabu @-@ dong and only 13 miles ( 21 km ) from Taegu . The Eighth Army ordered the 27th Infantry Regiment to attack north along the road to counter the threat . At the same time , two regiments of the ROK 1st Division were to attack along high ground on either side of the road . The plan called for a limited @-@ objective attack to restore the ROK 1st Division lines in the vicinity of <unk> , a village 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) north of Tabu @-@ dong . M26 Pershing tanks of C Company , 73rd Tank Battalion , and two batteries of the 37th Field Artillery Battalion were to support the 27th Infantry in the attack . 
 = = = Terrain = = = 
 In front of the 27th Infantry position , the poplar @-@ lined Taegu – Sangju road ran northward in the narrow mountain valley . A stream on the west closely paralleled the road , which was nearly straight on a north @-@ south axis through the 27th Infantry position and for some distance northward . This stretch of the road later became known as the " Bowling Alley . " About 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) in front of the 27th Infantry position the road forked at a small village called Ch <unk> 'yong @-@ dong ; the western prong was the main Sangju road , the eastern one was the road to Kunwi . At the road fork , the Sangju road bends to the northwest in a long curve . The village of <unk> lay on this curve a short distance north of the fork . Hills protected it against direct fire from the 27th Infantry position . It was there that the North Korean tanks remained hidden during the daytime . 
 Rising from the valley on the west side was the Yuhak @-@ san mountain range which swept up to a height of 2 @,@ 700 feet ( 820 m ) . On the east , a similar mountain range rose to a height of 2 @,@ 400 feet ( 730 m ) , culminating 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) southward in a mountain called Ka @-@ san , more than 2 @,@ 900 feet ( 880 m ) high at its walled summit . The Kunwi and Sangju roads from the northeast and northwest entered the natural and easy corridor between Yuhak @-@ san and Ka @-@ san at Ch <unk> 'yong @-@ dong , leading into the Taegu basin . The battles in the Bowling Alley occurred south of this road junction . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Deadlock = = = 
 The ROK 1st Infantry Division , with 7 @,@ 500 men had held the line around the Bowling Alley since August 12 . The Bowling Alley area was selected because of its advantageous high ground which provided natural barriers to funnel North Korean troops into smaller fronts where South Korean defenses could attack them from the high ground in concealed positions . In the meantime , the NK 3rd , 13th , and 15th Divisions were advancing south and preparing to close on Taegu . The North Korean 13th Division converged on the Tabu @-@ dong corridor and a vicious melee ensued between the North and South Korean troops , with ROK 1st Division 's 11th , 12th , and 13th regiments committed against the NK 13th Division 's 19th , 21st and 23rd regiments . The fight became a battle of attrition . As the two sides closed on one another , the battle took a brutal turn by August 15 as supplies ran low and units were locked in close quarters combat with little ammunition for the weapons . Fighting across the entire front became hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat and grenade fights at close range . The two divisions were so evenly matched that neither could make any appreciable gains for days of fighting and huge numbers of casualties . 
 The bloody fighting obliged Paik to call for emergency reinforcements to hold the line . The Eighth Army responded immediately by sending the US 27th Infantry from the US 25th Infantry Division as well as the ROK 10th Regiment from the ROK 8th Division to reinforce the ROK 1st Division 's three regiments . US Air Force aircraft also conducted a carpet bombing campaign against the advancing North Korean positions to undetermined effect . Around that time the NK 15th Division , which had been supporting the NK 13th Division , withdrew from the front to attack elsewhere , leaving the ROK 1st Division , with the US 27th Infantry , and the NK 13th Division as principal opponents in the conflict that followed . 
 = = = US infantry advance = = = 
 As the 27th Infantry 's trucks rolled northward from Tabu @-@ dong and approached their Line of Departure , the men inside could see the North Koreans and South Koreans fighting on the ridges overlooking the road . The infantry dismounted and deployed an attacking line , with the 1st Battalion on the left of the road and the 2nd Battalion on the right . With US tanks leading the infantry on the road , the two battalions crossed the line at 13 : 00 . The tanks opened fire against the mountain escarpments to aid the South Korean infantry engaged there . The US infantry on either side of the road swept the lower hills , as the tanks on the road paced their advance with the infantry . A North Korean outpost line in the valley withdrew and there was almost no North Korean opposition during the first hour of the US advance . North Korean outpost lines were 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) in front of their main positions . The 27th Infantry had reached a point about 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) north of Tabu @-@ dong when Michaelis was informed that neither of the ROK regiments on the high ground flanking the valley road had been able to advance . He was ordered to halt and form a perimeter defense with both battalions astride the road . 
 The two battalions of the 27th Infantry went into a perimeter defense just north of the village of Soi @-@ ri . The 1st Battalion , on the left of the road , took a position with C Company on high ground in front , and with A Company on a ridge behind it . On their right , B Company was placed parallel to A Company , and carried the line across the stream and the narrow valley to the road . There the 2nd Battalion took up the defense line with E Company on the road and F Company on its right , while G Company held a ridge behind F Company . Thus , the two battalions presented a four @-@ company front , with one company holding a refused flank position on either side . A platoon of tanks took positions on the front line , two tanks on the road and two in the stream bed , with four more tanks in reserve . The artillery went into firing positions behind the force . Six bazooka teams took up positions in front of the infantry positions along the road and in the stream bed . At the same time , the ROK 1st Division remained in control of the high ground on either side of the 27th Infantry positions . 
 = = = August 18 attack = = = 
 The first of seven successive North Korean night attacks struck the 27th Infantry defensive perimeter shortly after dark that night , August 18 . North Korean mortars and artillery fired a heavy preparation for the general attack for several hours . Two T @-@ 34 tanks and an SU @-@ 76 self @-@ propelled gun moved out of the village of <unk> 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) in front of the 27th Infantry lines . Infantry followed them , some in trucks and others on foot . The lead tank moved slowly and without firing , apparently observing , while the second one and the SU @-@ 76 fired repeatedly into F Company 's position . As the tanks drew near , a 3 @.@ 5 @-@ inch bazooka team from F Company destroyed the second one in the line . 
 Bazooka teams also hit the lead tank , causing its crew to abandon it . Fire from the 8th Field Artillery Battalion knocked out the self @-@ propelled gun , destroyed two trucks , and killed or wounded an estimated 100 North Korean troops at the point of the advance . US First Lieutenant Lewis Millett , an artillery forward observer and later a Medal of Honor winner after he transferred to the infantry , directed this artillery fire on the North Koreans , even as a T @-@ 34 tank approached within 50 yards ( 46 m ) of his position . Three more North Korean tanks had come down the road but , on realizing that the Americans had effective anti @-@ tank weapons , they switched on their running lights and retreated north without engaging the UN troops . Around 00 : 30 on August 19 the first North Korean attack had stalled and they withdrew . North Korean troops made a second effort , much weaker than the first , around 02 : 30 but artillery and mortar fire dispersed them before they reached the UN lines . 
 Over the course of the next week , the US troops were able to discern the North Koreans ' system of attack and use it to their advantage . The North Koreans used a system of flares to signal various actions and coordinate them . It quickly became apparent to the defending Americans that green flares were used to signal an attack on a given area . So the 27th Infantry obtained its own green flares and then , after the North Korean attack had begun , fired them over its main defensive positions . This confused the attacking forces and often drew them to the points of greatest US strength where they suffered massive casualties from defensive machine @-@ gun crossfire . The US troops also began using land mines in front of their positions to stall the North Koreans . The mines stopped the tanks and the infantry tried to remove them . When this happened , US troops fired flares to illuminate the scene and pre @-@ registered artillery and mortar fire blasted the immobilized North Koreans . This tactic was effective in inflicting further significant casualties . 
 = = = Stalemate = = = 
 On the morning of August 19 , the ROK 11th and 13th Regiments launched counterattacks along the ridges with some gains , however the fight continued to produce heavy casualties for both sides . Walker ordered another reserve unit , a battalion of the ROK 10th Regiment , to the Taegu front to close a gap between the ROK 1st and 6th Divisions . Later in the day , Walker also ordered the US 23rd Infantry Regiment , under command of Colonel Paul L. Freeman , Jr . , to move up and establish a defense perimeter around the 8th and 37th Field Artillery Battalions at their positions 8 miles ( 13 km ) north of Taegu , to protect them from North Korean attack . This was the only occasion during the war that two US regiments were assigned to a South Korean command . The 3rd Battalion , 23rd Infantry took up a defensive position around the artillery while the 2nd Battalion occupied a defensive position on the road behind the 27th Infantry . The next day the two battalions exchanged places . South Korean troops , suffering losses from the fighting , began recruiting students and civilians from nearby villages to fight . 
 There was little fighting on the ground during the day on August 20 . However , US aircraft attacked North Korean positions around Taegu repeatedly during the day , often in close proximity to American ground forces . As night fell , North Korean troops launched a second attack , firing a barrage of 120 – mm. mortar shells into the US 27th Infantry 's Heavy Weapons Company area at 17 : 00 ; several of their tanks also began advancing down the corridor . The US troops responded with artillery and mortar fire , hitting the North Korean column and its accompanying infantry . Waiting Americans held their small arms and machine gun fire until the North Koreans were within 200 yards ( 180 m ) of their positions . The combined fire of all the US weapons repulsed this attack . 
 The next morning , August 21 , a US patrol of two platoons of infantry and M26 Pershing tanks went up the road toward the North Korean positions . White flags had appeared in front of the American line , and civilians in the area said many North Koreans wanted to surrender . The US patrol 's mission was to investigate this situation and to form an estimate of North Koreans losses . The patrol advanced about 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) , engaging small North Korean groups and receiving some artillery fire . On its way it destroyed five disabled North Korean tanks with thermite grenades . The patrol also found a 37 mm anti @-@ tank gun , two SU @-@ 76 self @-@ propelled guns , and a 120 mm mortar among the destroyed North Korean equipment , as well as recognizing a large number of North Korean dead . At the point of farthest advance , the patrol found and destroyed an abandoned T @-@ 34 tank in a village schoolhouse courtyard . 
 = = = August 21 attack = = = 
 That evening , the 27th Infantry placed two belts of antipersonnel mines and trip flares across the road and stream bed 250 yards ( 230 m ) and 150 yards ( 140 m ) in front of its positions in the valley . After dusk , the North Koreans began shelling the general area of the 27th Infantry positions until just before midnight . ROK troops had planned to mount an attack , but it became apparent that the North Koreans would hit first . Then the NK 13th Division launched a major attack against the entire UN front in and around the valley . Nine US tanks supported the infantry troops in the valley . Because it was on higher ground and positioned in front of all the other American units , C Company on the left of the road usually was the first to detect an approaching attack . That evening the C Company commander telephoned the regimental headquarters that he could hear tanks . When the artillery fired an illuminating shell he was able to count 19 North Korean vehicles in the attacking column on the road . The tanks and self @-@ propelled guns approached the American positions , firing rapidly . Most of their shells landed in the rear areas . North Korean infantry moved forward on both sides of the road . Simultaneously , other North Korean units attacked the ROK troops on the high ridges flanking the valley . 
 American artillery and mortar fire bombarded the North Koreans , trying to separate the tanks from the infantry . US machine gun fire opened on the NK infantry only after they had entered the mine field and were at close range . The US Pershing tanks in the front line held their fire until the North Korean tanks came very close . One of the American tanks knocked out the lead North Korean tank and a 3 @.@ 5 @-@ inch bazooka team from F Company knocked out a towed gun , the third vehicle in column . The trapped second tank was disabled by bazooka fire and abandoned by its crew . It was during this fight that the battle received its name . The US troops at the battle noted the tank shells being fired up and down the valley in the dark looked " like bowling balls . " 
 Artillery and 90 mm tank fire destroyed seven more North Korean T @-@ 34 tanks , three more SU @-@ 76 towed guns , and several trucks and personnel carriers . This night battle , which was at times very intense , lasted about five hours . The US B Battery , 8th Field Artillery Battalion alone fired 1 @,@ 661 105 mm rounds , the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ inch mortar platoon fired 902 rounds , the 81 mm mortar platoon fired 1 @,@ 200 rounds , and F Company , 27th Infantry fired 385 60 mm mortar rounds . The North Korean column was completely destroyed . US patrols after daylight estimated the North Koreans had suffered 1 @,@ 300 casualties in the fight . Eleven prisoners captured by the patrol said the action had decimated their units and that the division was only at 25 percent strength . 
 = = = NK flanking moves = = = 
 During the night battle , North Korean forces infiltrated along the high ridge line around the east flank of the 27th Infantry and appeared the next day at about 12 : 00 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) in the rear of that regiment and only 9 miles ( 14 km ) from Taegu . This force was a regiment of the NK 1st Division , and was 1 @,@ 500 men strong . The regiment had just arrived from the Kunwi area to join in the battle for Taegu . It began ambushing supply lines to the American forces in the valley . One of the regiment 's companies attacked the ROK 1st Division 's headquarters with intent to capture Paik , but was repulsed by the ROK 10th Regiment . 
 About this time , Michaelis sent an urgent message to Eighth Army saying that the ROK troops on his left had given way and that " those people are not fighting . " One of the battalions of the ROK 11th Regiment had been driven back and was retreating in disarray . Prisoners told him that about 1 @,@ 000 North Koreans were on his west flank . He asked for an air strike . Had these South Korean troops been driven from this high ground , the perimeter position of the 27th Infantry Regiment would have been untenable . Paik bitterly resented Michaelis ' charge that his men were not fighting , and in the argument , Eighth Army Korean Military Advisory Group advisers visited each ROK unit to ensure they were remaining in position . Paik personally rallied the ROK 11th Regiment for a charge back into its positions , impressing Michaelis . Later , Michaelis apologized to Paik though their relationship for the remainder of the battle remained strained . 
 The afternoon of August 22 , US 2nd Battalion , 23rd Infantry , guarding the support artillery behind the 27th Infantry , came under attack by the NK 1st Division troops that had passed around the forward positions . Freeman reported to Eighth Army at 16 : 40 that the North Koreans had shelled the rear battery of the 37th Field Artillery Battalion , that North Korean infantry were between the US 27th and US 23rd Regiments on the road , and that other North Korean groups had passed around the east side of his forward battalion . An intense artillery barrage began falling on the headquarters area of the 8th Field Artillery Battalion at 16 : 05 , and 25 minutes later two direct hits destroyed the fire direction center , killing four officers and two non @-@ commissioned officers . The individual batteries quickly took over control of the battalion fires and continued to support the infantry , while the battalion Headquarters and Headquarters Company withdrew under fire . 
 UN aircraft launched air strikes on the North Korean @-@ held ridge east of the road and on the valley beyond . That night , Walker released control of the 23rd Infantry , less the 1st Battalion , to the US 1st Cavalry Division with orders for it to clear the North Koreans from the road and the commanding ground overlooking the main supply route . 
 About 10 : 00 , Lieutenant Colonel Chong Pong Uk , commanding the artillery regiment supporting the NK 13th Division , walked up alone to a ROK 1st Division position 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) north of Tabu @-@ dong and defected . Chong , the highest ranking North Korean prisoner of war thus far in the war , gave precise information on the location of his artillery . According to him , there were seven 122 mm howitzers and thirteen 76 mm guns emplaced and camouflaged in an orchard 4 @.@ 5 miles ( 7 @.@ 2 km ) north of Tabu @-@ dong , in a little valley on the north side of Yuhak @-@ san . Upon receiving this information , Eighth Army immediately prepared to destroy the North Korean weapons . Fighter @-@ bombers attacked the orchard site with napalm , and US artillery took the location under fire . Chong was eventually commissioned in South Korea 's armed forces . 
 = = = Final moves = = = 
 During the night of August 22 – 23 , the North Koreans launched a weak attack against the 27th Infantry , which was quickly repulsed . Just before 12 : 00 on August 23 , however , a violent action occurred some distance behind the front line when about 100 North Korean soldiers , undetected , succeeded in reaching the positions of K Company , 27th Infantry and of the 1st Platoon , C Company , 65th Engineer Combat Battalion . They overran parts of these positions before being driven off and suffering 50 killed . Meanwhile , as ordered by Walker , the 2nd Battalion , 23rd Infantry , after repelling several North Korean night attacks , counterattacked at dawn and seized the high ground overlooking the road at the artillery positions . At the same time the 3rd Battalion started an all @-@ day attack that swept a stretch of high ground east of the road . This action largely cleared the North Koreans from the area behind and on the flanks of the 27th Infantry . At 13 : 35 , Michaelis reported from the Bowling Alley to Eighth Army that the NK 13th Division had blown the road to his front , had mined it , and was withdrawing . 
 The next day , August 24 , the 23rd Infantry continued clearing the rear areas and by night it estimated that there were fewer than 200 North Koreans behind the forward positions . The Bowling Alley front was quiet during the day . Shortly after midnight on August 24 the North Koreans launched what had by now become their regular nightly attack down the Bowling Alley . This attack was in an estimated two @-@ company strength supported by a few tanks . The 27th Infantry broke up the attack and two more North Korean tanks were destroyed by the supporting artillery fire . This was the last night the 27th Infantry Regiment spent in the Bowling Alley . 
 With the North Koreans turned back north of Taegu , Walker issued orders for the 27th Infantry to leave the Bowling Alley and return to the 25th Division in the Masan area . The ROK 1st Division was to assume responsibility for the Bowling Alley , but the US 23rd Infantry was to remain north of Taegu in its support . ROK relief of the 27th Infantry began at 18 : 00 , 25 August , and continued throughout the night until completed at 03 : 45 August 26 . Survivors of the 1st Regiment , NK 1st Division , joined the rest of that division in the mountains east of the Taegu – Sangju road near the walled summit of Ka @-@ san . Prisoners reported that the 1st Regiment was down to about 400 men and had lost all its 120 mm mortars , 76 mm howitzers , and antitank guns as a result of its action on the east flank of the NK 13th Division at the Bowling Alley . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The confirmed North Korean losses from August 18 to 25 included 13 T @-@ 34 tanks , five SU @-@ 76 self @-@ propelled guns , and 23 trucks . The NK 13th Division 's troops suffered heavy casualties during the fight with the American unit , with an estimated 3 @,@ 000 killed , wounded and captured . The division withdrew to rebuild . The North Koreans ' total casualties from August 12 to 25 were 5 @,@ 690 killed . 
 US losses during the battle were extremely light ; unusual for fighting at a time in which other UN offensive forces were paying a heavy price when making similar pushes against the North Korean troops . The US infantry forces suffered only five killed and 54 wounded in the 27th Infantry , plus three killed and 16 wounded in the 23rd Infantry . This brought the total American casualty count to 8 dead , 70 wounded . South Korean troops suffered much more heavily during the fight . An estimated 2 @,@ 300 South Korean men were killed in the fighting ; 2 @,@ 244 enlisted men and 56 officers . However , these losses were not crippling , as volunteers poured in from the surrounding countryside to fight for the South Korean Army . 
 = Out of This World Adventures = 
 Out of This World Adventures was a pulp magazine which published two issues , in July and December 1950 . It included several pages of comics as well as science fiction stories . It was edited by Donald A. Wollheim and published by Avon . Sales were weak , and after two issues Avon decided to cancel it . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 The early 1950s saw dramatic changes in the world of U.S. science fiction publishing . At the start of 1949 , all but one of the major magazines in the field were in pulp format ; by the end of 1955 , almost all had either ceased publication or switched to digest format . Despite the rapid decline of the pulp market , several new science fiction magazines were launched in pulp format during these years ; Out of This World Adventures was one of these . 
 In 1947 Avon Books launched the Avon Fantasy Reader , a series of fantasy anthologies in digest format , edited by Donald A. Wollheim . Two years later , Joseph Meyers , Avon 's president , decided to launch a science fiction magazine , and Wollheim purchased six stories for it before it was cancelled for financial reasons . The following year , Avon 's printer , J.W. Clements , suggested to Meyers the idea of a pulp magazine which included a few pages of comics . Meyers asked Wollheim to try the idea , thinking that the additional section might draw comics readers to buy a pulp magazine , and in July 1950 Wollheim duly launched Sparkling Love Stories and Out of This World Adventures . The romance magazine was cancelled after a single issue because of poor sales ; but Out of This World Adventures seemed promising enough to try a second issue , which appeared in December 1950 , along with a third magazine in the part @-@ comic format : Pioneer Western . Neither sold well enough to extend their runs any further . 
 Donald A. Wollheim was the editor for both issues . His editorial policy was slanted towards interplanetary fiction , according to his editorial in the first issue . The magazine included stories by several writers who were either already well @-@ known or who would go on to more success ; the first issue featured A.E. van Vogt , Lester del Rey , Kris Neville , William Tenn , Mack Reynolds , Ray Cummings and A. Bertram Chandler . Science fiction historians Mike Ashley and Wendy Bousfield both regard Tenn 's story , " The Puzzle of <unk> " , as the best in the magazine . The 32 @-@ page comics section , which was taken directly from an existing Avon comic called Out of This World , included comics written by John Michel and Gardner Fox ; the latter , a pastiche of Robert E. Howard 's " Conan " stories , was titled " Crom the Barbarian " and was illustrated by John Giunta . Michel , like Wollheim a member of the Futurians , a group of sf fans and aspiring writers , wrote the lead comic for both issues , though the second issue of the Canadian edition used a different comic section than the U.S. edition . The interior artwork was the responsibility of Avon 's art director , rather than Wollheim , and illustrators such as William McWilliam , who worked on Avon 's comics , were used . 
 = = Bibliographic details = = 
 Out of This World Adventures was intended to be bi @-@ monthly , but only two issues were produced , dated July and December 1950 . It was priced at 25 cents for both issues ; each issue was 128 pages and was in pulp format . The publisher was Avon Periodicals for both issues . A Canadian edition appeared , also priced at 25 cents ; the cover of the Canadian edition omitted the dates , but the issues appeared in November 1950 and April 1951 . 
 = Titanfall = 
 Titanfall is a multiplayer first @-@ person shooter video game developed by Respawn Entertainment and published by Electronic Arts . It was released for Microsoft Windows and Xbox One on March 11 , 2014 ; an Xbox 360 version ported by Bluepoint Games was released April 8 , 2014 . The game was highly anticipated as the debut title from developers formerly behind the successful Call of Duty franchise . 
 In Titanfall , players control " pilots " and their mech @-@ style Titans , and fight in six @-@ on @-@ six matches set in war @-@ torn outer space colonies . The game is optimized for fast @-@ paced , continual action , aided by wall @-@ running abilities and populations of computer @-@ controlled soldiers . Up to 50 characters can be active in a single game , and non @-@ player activity is offloaded to Microsoft 's cloud computing services to optimize local graphical performance . The game 's development team began work on the title in 2011 , and their Titan concept grew from a human @-@ sized suit into a battle tank exoskeleton . The team sought to bring " scale , verticality , and story " to its multiplayer genre through elements traditionally reserved for single @-@ player campaigns . The 65 @-@ person project took inspiration from Blade Runner , Star Wars , Abrams Battle Tank , and Masamune Shirow of Ghost in the Shell . 
 Titanfall won over 60 awards at its E3 2013 reveal , including a record @-@ breaking six E3 Critics Awards and " Best of Show " from several media outlets . It also won official awards at Gamescom and the Tokyo Game Show . Titanfall received generally favorable reviews . Reviewers praised its balance , Smart Pistol weapon , player mobility , and overall accessibility for players of all skill sets , but criticized its thin campaign , disappointing artificial intelligence , and lack of community features and multiplayer modes . Critics considered the game a successful evolution for the first @-@ person shooter genre but did not agree as to whether the game delivered on its anticipation . On March 12 , 2015 , it was announced that a sequel is in production for Microsoft Windows , PlayStation 4 , and Xbox One . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Titanfall is a shooter game played from a first @-@ person perspective . Players fight as free @-@ running foot soldier " pilots " who can command agile , mech @-@ style exoskeletons — " Titans " — to complete team @-@ based objectives . The game is set on derelict and war @-@ torn colonies at the Frontier fringe of space exploration as either the Interstellar Manufacturing Corporation ( IMC ) or the Frontier Militia . Online multiplayer is the sole game mode , but contains single @-@ player elements such as plot , character dialogue , and non @-@ player characters ( NPCs ) . While Titanfall has no offline , single @-@ player , or local splitscreen modes , it supports system link over a local area network ( LAN ) . Respawn founder Vince Zampella described the game as bringing " scale , verticality , and story " to the first @-@ person shooter genre of multiplayer gaming . 
 Up to twelve human players choose their pilot types and are dropped on the map , beginning the game . Titans can be deployed periodically , based on an onscreen timer , which must complete its countdown to zero before a Titan can be summoned . Killing other players reduces the amount of time remaining . When summoned , players are told to " standby for Titanfall " , whereupon a Titan drops from the sky , surrounded by a protective forcefield . Unlike player @-@ characters in games like Call of Duty and Battlefield , pilots are agile and accumulate momentum while running ( similar to Tribes ) . Players run on walls , double jump with a jet pack , vault over obstacles , glide across ziplines , and chain together combos . Pilot and Titan controls are identical except where the pilot 's double jump becomes the Titan 's dash , as Titans cannot jump . The Titans , somewhere between battle tanks and a mecha , are slower than the nimble pilots . Battles include artificial intelligence soldiers ( human grunts and robotic spectres ) that are designed as human player competition , support , and scenery . Games end with a race to the losing team 's evacuation dropship . 
 The pilot 's tactical abilities include x @-@ ray vision , invisibility cloaking , and regenerating speed boosts . Pilots use ten traditional customizable weapons , including a semi @-@ automatic shotgun , machine guns , assault rifles , sniper rifles , and the Smart Pistol Mk5 . The latter locks onto multiple targets before firing multiple shots in a burst . Players generally require three Smart Pistol shots to die . The pistol can also shoot around corners . All pilots have anti @-@ Titan weapons equipped . Pilots can hop on a Titan 's back to " rodeo " and shoot its weak spot , or otherwise use four anti @-@ Titan weapons to take them down . Player @-@ pilots can eject from Titans that take too much damage , and the Titan replacement timer is reset upon the Titan 's death . 
 There are three unique Titan classes , variants of light , medium , and heavy , with inversely related speed and armor : the all @-@ around Atlas , the ponderous Ogre , and the lithe Stryder . The latter two chassis are unlocked upon finishing both faction campaigns and were later made unlockable by leveling up as well . Each chassis has a respective Core power that works on a cooldown timer : respectively , increased damage , increased shields , and unlimited dashes . Titan tactical ability options include stopping enemy ammunition in midair to throw back in their direction , emitting electrified smoke to hurt and repel pilots climbing the Titan 's back , and deploying a defensive wall . Additionally , players can equip two perk kits to customize for their preferred strategy . Their primary weapons include rocket launchers , lightning cannons , and <unk> . Titans can act autonomously when put in guard and follow modes , which directs the Titan either to protect their vicinity or to tail their pilot , respectively . 
 There are 15 multiplayer maps and five multiplayer modes in the base game . In Attrition , a traditional Team Deathmatch , teams compete for the greatest kill count , and bot kills and Titan kills are counted . Pilot Hunter is similar to Attrition , but only counts pilot kills . In <unk> Domination , the object is to capture and defend areas of the map . In Last Titan Standing , players begin the match in Titans and have a single life . There is also a Capture the Flag mode . All modes are team @-@ based and there are no free @-@ for @-@ <unk> . Completing challenges unlocks new abilities , weapons , customization opportunities , and burn cards : single @-@ use , single @-@ life power @-@ ups that bestow a temporary gain , such as reduced Titan drop waits , unlimited grenades weapons , or disguise as a computer @-@ controlled Spectre . Players can bring up to three cards into a match . Through multiplayer matches , players earn experience points that unlock new equipment and perks . Players who reach level 50 can " regenerate " to back to level 1 , trading their rank and unlocks for faster experience gain and a prestige icon next to their names . 
 The game 's " campaign multiplayer " is separate from the game 's regular multiplayer ( called classic internally ) , and serves as an extended tutorial . It plays as multiplayer with single @-@ player elements , such as scripted cinematic sequences , non @-@ playable character dialogue , an in @-@ game soundtrack , and audio briefings . There are separate campaigns for the Militia and IMC factions , and the game randomly assigns the player to one for a series of nine maps . Each mission is paired with a specific game type and map , supplemented by minimal voiceover narration , which was later removed . The Militia are the civilian military of the Frontier and the resistance against IMC use of colony resources . Their most important members include Titan War veteran and former mutiny leader <unk> , intel specialist and engineer Bish , and Marauder Corps leader Sarah . The corporate conglomerate IMC specializes in natural resource extraction , and came to the resource @-@ rich Frontier for business . Their major players are Frontier operations commander @-@ in @-@ chief Vice Admiral Graves , intel specialist <unk> , and artificial intelligence companion Spyglass . 
 = = Development = = 
 Following Call of Duty : Modern Warfare 2 's release , Activision fired Infinity Ward co @-@ founders Jason West and Vince Zampella in March 2010 for " breaches of contract and insubordination " . Their departure resulted in a series of lawsuits and a staff exodus . Later that year , West and Zampella founded a game development company , Respawn Entertainment , composed largely of the former Infinity Ward staff — those responsible for the successful Call of Duty series . The company started with a completely blank slate . The ideas that became Titanfall slowly accreted over the next two years . 
 Pre @-@ production began in 2011 , and Respawn 's first game was originally planned for seventh generation consoles . The idea for the game did not come easily , and the team arrived at its multiplayer @-@ only and human @-@ mech focus after much internal debate . The team started with open collaboration about games and game mechanics they found exciting , and no market research . Respawn artist Joel Emslie recalled starting with a human @-@ sized suit as a " second skin " , which the designers grew in size . As Respawn didn 't have the necessary computers , the artists resorted to kitbashing and model making — Emslie prototyped by putting a figurine inside a plastic model kit . The team progressed to detailed , foot @-@ high " <unk> " made of wood , wire , and plastic , which became the Atlas Titan . Project influences include Blade Runner , Star Wars , Abrams Battle Tank , and Masamune Shirow of Ghost in the Shell . Emslie refers to the aesthetic as a " used future " . Their production was unconventional , similar to Infinity Ward 's old practices , and the game didn 't have design documentation . At E3 2011 , Electronic Arts Labels president Frank <unk> revealed that Respawn 's first project was a science fiction shooter published by Electronic Arts . Two project leads left the company to begin their own studio in mid @-@ 2012 , and West retired in March 2013 . 
 Rather than responding to the outgoing console generation 's technical restrictions with code optimization and a tight release near the end of the consoles ' life cycle , the team decided to focus on the eighth generation with more time to try new ideas . Zampella announced that Respawn would show at E3 2013 via Twitter on February 25 , 2013 . Their planned announcement leaked early through the premature release of Game Informer 's July 2013 issue on Google Play , which revealed their first game 's title , premise , and release date . Other advance public information included the company 's trademark filing for " Titan " in April 2013 , and an April 2013 Kotaku report of the game 's Titan mech gameplay and Xbox One exclusivity . The game was officially announced during Microsoft 's E3 2013 press conference , with expected Windows PC , Xbox 360 , and Xbox One releases in Q1 2014 . The Xbox 360 version was announced as in development with Respawn 's support at another studio , though Bluepoint Games was not announced as the studio until January 2014 . Electronic Arts CFO Blake Jorgensen later added that the Microsoft exclusivity agreement would last " for the life of the title " , such that other consoles , including the PlayStation 4 , will not receive a Titanfall port . In February 2014 , Zampella tweeted that Respawn was discussing an OS X port for release some time after launch . The team 's small size — less than a quarter of similar triple A studios — also contributed to the game 's exclusivity . 
 The 65 @-@ person development team experimented with different gameplay before consolidating to three goals : " player mobility , survivability , and the merging of cinematic design with fast @-@ paced action " . They identified contemporary first @-@ person shooters as restricted to " a single plane of movement " , the cardinal directions and hiding in place , and considered new features to increase mobility , such as a three @-@ story @-@ high jump . Final mobility features include wall running and the pilot 's jump kit , which allows for double jumps . The parkour mechanics came from a similar , basic wall running mod made by a Respawn programmer for Half @-@ Life 2 when testing potential game engines . Additionally , the game does not cordon off parts of the environment . Concerning survivability , Respawn chose to populate the environment with dozens of computer @-@ controlled characters to give players the reward of consecutive kills while reducing the player deaths necessary in return . The team spent significant time balancing the " cat and mouse " combat between pilots and Titans . They annulled advanced sniping techniques known as " <unk> and no @-@ scoping " . Thirdly , the cinematic storytelling segments associated with single @-@ player campaigns were merged into the multiplayer mode . 
 The decision to combine modes allowed Respawn to conserve resources traditionally split between separate teams . Player count changed weekly and was playtested often , more as a question of design than technical feasibility . Early Titanfall playtest players did not realize that they were playing against human opponents for over 45 minutes . Respawn originally tested teams of eight , 12 , and various decreasing sizes before they decided on teams of six Lead designer Justin Hendry said that more human players make the game " uncomfortable " not due to overcrowding but to the intensity of maintaining one 's surroundings against many points of entrance . Producer Drew McCoy wrote that the non @-@ human artificial intelligence ( AI ) players were not bots meant to replace humans , but " a different class of character in the game " . Each team supports up to 12 AI players alongside the human players ' autonomous mode Titans , for close to 50 active characters per game . The AI players were designed to enliven the battlefield environment with a greater sense of scale and drama , and to increase the game 's complexity with new opportunities for strategy and cannon fodder for Titans . McCoy said the team 's foremost goal was to make the game fun . 
 Respawn chose to build Titanfall on the Source game engine early in their production cycle due to their developers ' familiarity and its ability to maintain 60 frames per second on both the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 . In an interview , Respawn software engineer Richard Baker said the company chose Source since Portal 2 performed well on the PlayStation 3 with it , and the console was " the riskiest platform in seventh generation " . The company built upon the engine during development in features such as lighting , rendering , visibility , networking , and tools pipelines . The game also uses Microsoft Azure cloud computing platform for multiplayer servers , physics , and artificial intelligence . Offloading this non @-@ player activity frees the local console for visual rendering tasks and better graphics , and the developers for game development ( instead of backend maintenance ) . This arrangement determines world events in the cloud instead of locally , so position and movement data is downloaded simultaneously by all player @-@ clients . The studio 's cloud server access is considered vital to the game 's viability , and Respawn artist Joel Emslie said they would not have attempted this game without the cloud support . The team ran a small alpha test and followed up with a large beta test to stress test the new Xbox Live compute platform as one of the first games to use the network . The platform broke for seven hours at one point of the test . Lead programmer Jon <unk> figured that the ten problems they found during the test were ten problems they didn 't need to find at launch . Respawn felt that Kinect support did not suit the game and chose not to support the peripheral . The development team reported considerable interest in support for esports competitive play , and while such features were not prioritized for the initial release , Respawn indicated that esports accommodations were under consideration for future iterations . 
 The game was feature complete as of December 2013 , and the Respawn team continued to address game bugs and balancing issues before launch . Respawn ran a closed beta test with an open registration in February 2014 that saw two million unique users . An Xbox One patch to bring support for Twitch streaming video was designed to coincide with Titanfall 's release . Respawn announced that the release version was finalized for distribution ( " gone gold " ) on February 26 , 2014 . 
 = = Audio = = 
 Titanfall 's composer Stephen Barton had previously worked on Call of Duty soundtracks and with Metal Gear Solid composer Harry Gregson @-@ Williams . Barton joined the project in early 2013 . The game 's E3 demo had sparse , placeholder audio and did not feature any final mixes , which were expected to be completed by November 2013 . Barton sought to make the soundtrack " distinctive " , with several main themes that build through the game . The music was designed " as commentary " , to not compete with the action . As a multiplayer game , Barton produced a large number of tracks to avoid repetition . The sound ranges from " a very abused hurdy @-@ gurdy to heavy electronics " to " Morricone @-@ esque baritone guitars " . Barton emphasized " taking sounds out of their context " to match the game 's lawless futuristic setting . The two opposing Titanfall teams each have their own musical identities . Titanfall 's soundtrack was recorded at Abbey Road Studios in London , with some specialty ethnic instrumentation recorded in Los Angeles . 
 = = Release and marketing = = 
 Titanfall was released on Xbox One and Windows PC ( via Origin ) in North America on March 11 , 2014 , in Europe and Australia on 13 , and in the United Kingdom and New Zealand on 14 . The game 's South African release was cancelled due to poor connectivity performance during the beta and no nearby Microsoft Azure data center in the region . Australia , in a similar predicament , used Singapore 's servers at the time of launch . The delayed Xbox 360 release developed by Bluepoint Games was released on April 8 , 2014 in North America , and on April 11 , 2014 in Europe . The Xbox 360 version is functionally identical to the other releases , albeit with lower @-@ quality graphics . A downloadable Xbox Live Games on Demand option was not available at launch but was implemented later . The PC version did not include modding tools at launch , though it did support the Xbox 360 controller . Microsoft hosted over 6 @,@ 000 midnight launch events worldwide to prepare for the release . 
 Respawn produced both free and paid post @-@ release downloadable content and offered a season pass discount for pre @-@ purchasing . Three DLC packs are expected with the season pass . The first Titanfall downloadable content ( DLC ) pack , Expedition , was announced at PAX East 2014 for release in May 2014 . Its story occurs after the campaign in the ancient alien ruins of " <unk> " , water " Runoff " , and training simulator " War Games " maps . Upcoming DLC will likely not change the number of Titan chassis . Electronic Arts designed the game 's digital strategy to coexist with their other shooter , Battlefield 4 , and the game does not use microtransactions . The free updates include features such as private matches that were left out of the original release for time restrictions . The private match feature was added in April 2014 . An additional , free update will bring new burn cards and multiplayer modes , and an upcoming PC patch will add 4K video and Nvidia graphics processing unit support . The company is also planning a companion smartphone app . 
 Following release , Respawn tracked user cheating habits with <unk> software and began to dole out community bans for PC users who used exploits such as " <unk> " and " <unk> " on March 21 , 2014 . <unk> checks gameplay against statistical markers and flags players for graduated penalty levels . <unk> players are restricted to games with other cheaters , as " the Wimbledon of <unk> contests " . Respawn rolled out multiplayer matchmaking tweaks around the same time that prioritized fair matches of player skill . 
 The collector 's edition includes a Titan statue set in a LED @-@ lit diorama , an art book , and a poster . A limited edition Xbox One wireless controller designed after the game 's C @-@ 101 carbine weapon launched alongside the game . It was built to feel like " a piece of military spec hardware transported from the universe of Titanfall ... into players ' hands " . An Xbox One console bundle was released simultaneously with the game , and includes a digital copy of Titanfall and a month of Xbox Live at the price of the standalone console . 
 K <unk> announced a toy marketing tie @-@ in for 2014 . Respawn announced other marketing tie @-@ ins in late January including apparel , Jinx clothing , Mad Catz peripherals ( keyboards , mice , mouse pads , headsets ) , posters , Prima strategy guides , a Titan Books art book , Turtle Beach Xbox One headsets , USB flash drives . Before release , Electronic Arts and Respawn unveiled a browser game collection of three Atari games ( Asteroids , Missile Command , and Centipede ) with an added Titanfall theme . Respawn also announced forthcoming Titanfall live action content from a partnership with Canadian post @-@ production studio <unk> . <unk> manufacturer <unk> announced in March 2014 that they will produce 1 / 12 to 1 / 6 scale models of Titanfall Titans and pilots . A worldwide marketing campaign included large statues of Titans across multiple cities , and an advertising campaign that spanned billboards , television commercials , Twitch , the web , and YouTube . 
 Respawn released a Deluxe Edition for Windows , Xbox One , and Xbox 360 platforms in late 2014 . The expanded game includes all three downloadable content expansions alongside the main game . Around the same time , Respawn announced that over seven million people had played Titanfall across all platforms . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Titanfall took over 60 awards at its E3 2013 reveal , including a record @-@ breaking six E3 Critics Awards : Best in Show , Best Original Game , Best Console Game , Best PC Game , Best Action Game , and Best Online Multiplayer . The game also won Best in Show from IGN , Destructoid , Game Informer , and Electronic Gaming Monthly . Reporting for Polygon at E3 , Arthur Gies praised the " dynamism " between the Titan 's brute force and the pilots ' objective @-@ based stealth as the game 's greatest asset . IGN 's Ryan McCaffrey declared Titanfall both " Microsoft 's killer app " and multiplayer gaming 's " next big thing " , adding , " You will buy an Xbox One for Titanfall , and you should . " Forbes 's Erik Kain similarly predicted the game to be a " huge selling point " for the Xbox One . The game won Best Next Generation Console Game and Best Xbox Game at Gamescom 2013 . The game was introduced to Japan at the 2013 Tokyo Game Show , where the response was " overwhelmingly positive " and it won a Future Award . Titanfall won " Most Anticipated Game " at VGX 2013 . Many critics considered Titanfall to be the next step for the first @-@ person shooter genre , and the game received abundant " hype " and publicity from video game journalists . 
 Titanfall received " generally favorable " reviews , according to video game review aggregator Metacritic . Critics praised the game 's pilot – Titan balance , its Smart Pistol , fast @-@ paced player mobility , and accessibility for players of all skill sets . Reviewers complained that the AI grunts were too unintelligent , that private match and community support features were lacking , and that the game had shipped with too few multiplayer modes . Multiple reviewers cited the Titan 's feeling of grandiosity in the player experience — specifically , the thrill of watching a summoned Titan fall from the sky , but also the feeling of entering the Titan exoskeleton and of scaling a Titan to take it down . 
 Arthur Gies of Polygon wrote that the game 's controls felt streamlined and natural . He felt empowered by his awareness of his potential strengths and vulnerabilities behind his choices . IGN 's Ryan McCaffrey praised the balance between weapons . He called the Smart Pistol his " favorite sidearm since the Halo 1 pistol " , but noted that its range and several @-@ second lock @-@ on balanced the gun 's fairness . GameSpot 's Chris Watters thought the pistol was a " neat twist on the humble sidearm " . Dan Whitehead , writing for Eurogamer , compared the Smart Pistol to the inventive weapons of the Resistance series and otherwise wasn 't impressed with the weapons . Gies of Polygon wished for more customization options and IGN 's McCaffrey praised the maps , which ranged from " very good to great " — from the fast @-@ action ziplines in the very good desert " <unk> " to the great tiny village " Colony " with crowded houses to exchange gunfire across varied heights . 
 VG247 's Dave Cook wrote that simplifying the game as " just Call of Duty with mechs " was unjustified given its freshness and innovation , though The Verge 's Andrew Webster said " just Call of Duty with mechs " is essentially what it is . Cook added that the parkour elements " turn the Call of Duty format on its head " and that Titanfall addressed all issues with Call of Duty 's game balance . Multiple reviewers referred to Titanfall as Call of Duty : Future Warfare or a variant whereof . Edge noted that the parkour elements made them approach at an angle instead of rushing directly at the dots on the mini @-@ map , and GameSpot 's Chris Watters said simple player movement was both a pleasure and a challenge . The Verge 's Vlad Savov wrote that wall running " hasn 't felt this good since ... the Prince of Persia series " . Eurogamer 's Whitehead said other shooters felt " leaden and limited " after playing Titanfall . 
 Reviewers found the campaign poorly executed . Edge called it " nonsense " , and Dan Whitehead of Eurogamer said it was " as clichéd as it is shallow " . IGN 's McCaffrey wrote that the story became " background noise " in an otherwise chaotic game . Writing for The Verge , Adi Robertson compared the plot to the backstory on 1990s CD @-@ ROM user manuals , and OXM 's Mikel Reparaz felt his actions were unimportant to the narrative . Ars Technica 's Peter Bright called the campaign 's voice acting " some of the worst ... [ he 's ] ever heard — flat and uninspired " . Reviewers noted how the game borrowed from games in other genres , such as DOTA and League of Legends . McCaffrey of IGN considered the AI soldiers both a valuable game mechanic and " worthless fodder " at once . Edge called Titanfall " a game of time management " , spent planning when timers will deplete and activate powers . Peter Bright of Ars Technica wrote that the nature of the Titan timers turned every mode into a deathmatch , regardless of objective . IGN 's McCaffrey referred to the experience point " grind " and the Titanfall timer as the game 's " two economies " . He also praised Respawn for not using microtransactions with the game , especially with burn cards . Writing for Edge , Neil Long compared burn cards to FIFA Ultimate Team 's power @-@ ups . Whitehead of Eurogamer wrote that the game begins to drag after level 25 and slows into a grind , though its flow overall is effortlessly cool , like a " first @-@ person Crackdown " . 
 Edge wrote that Titanfall 's major issue was the Xbox One , which performed less admirably compared to the PC version . GameSpot 's Chris Watters acknowledged that the PC 's higher resolution was expected and that the Xbox 360 version had an even lower resolution , frame rate issues , and texture pop @-@ in , though it still handled the game well . Peter Bright of Ars Technica wrote that the game 's visuals were " lacking " , with flat lighting and static environments . OXM 's Mikel Reparaz thought that the title should have been a launch release , where it would have been easier to overlook its sparse content . Minding the processing power behind the battles , the reviewers were not particularly impressed by the graphics . Eurogamer 's Dan Whitehead compared the game 's aesthetics to Pacific Rim and District 9 . 
 Reviewers thought Titanfall was a successful evolution of the genre , with GameSpot 's Chris Watters calling it " a great leap forward for shooters " and EGM 's Chris Holzworth declaring the game " unquestionably worthy of all the praises sung about it " , but Eurogamer 's Whitehead concluded that the game 's " more of a step forward ... than a leap " . Polygon 's Arthur Gies said Titanfall was not the " kind sea change Modern Warfare started " . Peter Bright of Ars Technica wrote that the game 's multiplayer was " not groundbreaking " and did not surpass Call of Duty 's , and Edge decided that Titanfall " might not be Xbox One 's killer app " . Reflecting on a lack of sales data a month after release , Paul Tassi wrote that the " buzz " surrounding Titanfall 's release " seemed to fade abnormally quickly " and that the game hasn 't " capitalized on the goodwill it had ahead of , and even during , launch " . While EA COO Peter Moore told investors on a May 2014 call that the game had sold 925 @,@ 000 retail copies in the United States during its launch month , that number came from an external NPD Group report that Titanfall was March 's top @-@ selling game . NPD Group reported it was April 's top @-@ selling game as well . As of May 2014 , EA had not released figures on Titanfall 's sales , an uncommon practice that drew skepticism from journalists such as Paul Tassi . IGN reported that Titanfall sold ten million copies as of October 2015 , but other sources could not conclude whether the Vince Zampella source tweet meant ten million units sold or unique players . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 Jaz Rignall of USgamer revisited Titanfall in late 2015 and found the game still worthy of its original praise , though he noted that its technical details — namely graphics and framerate — showed some age . He felt that the game 's content issues , apart from the light campaign , were resolved by the free additional maps . Overall , Rignall said that Titanfall had been replaced by newer shooter games . 
 On March 12 , 2015 , Respawn confirmed that a sequel is in development for Windows , PlayStation 4 and Xbox One . Respawn also announced that the company is working with Nexon to develop multiple Titanfall games for iOS and Android on October 29 , 2015 . Unlike its predecessor , Titanfall 2 will have a traditional single @-@ player campaign . On April 11 , 2016 , Respawn released a teaser trailer for Titanfall 2 , stating that more information will be released at E3 2016 . 
 = Elmer Stricklett = 
 Elmer Griffin Stricklett ( August 29 , 1876 – June 7 , 1964 ) was an American professional baseball pitcher . He pitched in Major League Baseball for the Chicago White Sox and Brooklyn Superbas from 1904 through 1907 . Including his time in minor league baseball , Stricklett pitched professionally from 1897 through 1912 . 
 Stricklett is considered one of the pioneers of the spitball . He learned the pitch while playing in the minor leagues . He later taught the spitball to Ed Walsh and Jack Chesbro , both of whom were elected to the National Baseball Hall of Fame . 
 = = Career = = 
 Stricklett attended Santa Clara University , where he played college baseball for the Santa Clara Broncos baseball team . He began his professional career in minor league baseball with the Topeka Colts of the Kansas State League in 1897 . In 1898 , he pitched for the Salina Blues and Atchison Huskers of the Kansas State League , before joining the Dallas Colts of the Class @-@ C Texas League later that year . He pitched for the Rock Island – Moline Islanders of the Class @-@ B Western Association and Kansas City Blues of the Class @-@ A Western League in 1899 . Despite pitching to a 14 – 1 win – loss record in 1899 , Kansas City released Stricklett to the Wheeling Stogies of the Class @-@ B Interstate League in 1900 . 
 Stricklett split the 1900 season with Wheeling and the Toledo Mud Hens , also of the Interstate League , pitching to a 13 @-@ 8 record . In 1901 , Stricklett pitched for the Toledo Swamp Angels of the Western Association and Sacramento Senators of the California League , compiling a 27 @-@ 22 record . In 1902 , he pitched for the Newark Sailors of the Class @-@ A Eastern League and the Sacramento Gilt Edges of the California League , finishing the season with a 23 @-@ 22 record . While pitching for Sacramento , Stricklett mastered the spitball . In 1903 , Stricklett pitched for Los Angeles and the Seattle Chinooks of the Pacific National League , going 24 @-@ 8 . 
 The Chicago White Sox of the American League ( AL ) invited Stricklett to spring training in 1904 , where he roomed with Ed Walsh . Stricklett taught Walsh the spitball . After pitching in one game for the White Sox , allowing eight earned runs in seven IP , he received his release , and pitched for the Milwaukee Brewers of the Class @-@ A American Association for the remainder of the season , where he pitched to a 24 @-@ 11 record in 267 innings pitched ( IP ) . The Boston Americans of the AL purchased the rights to Stricklett in August 1904 , but allowed him to remain in Milwaukee . 
 The Brooklyn Superbas of the National League ( NL ) chose Stricklett from Milwaukee after the 1904 season in the Rule 5 draft . He debuted with the Superbas in the 1905 season , pitching to a 9 – 18 record and a 3 @.@ 34 earned run average ( ERA ) in 237 1 ⁄ 3 IP . His 18 losses were ninth most in the league . Among NL pitchers , only Stricklett and Deacon Phillippe allowed no home runs that season . In 1906 , Stricklett went 14 – 18 with a 2 @.@ 72 ERA in 291 2 ⁄ 3 IP , the ninth most losses and IP in the NL that season . He appeared in 41 games , tied for fifth in the NL with Vic Willis and Jake Weimer , and his 28 complete games and five shutouts were both tied for tenth most in the NL . However , he also allowed 88 earned runs , sixth most in the league . 
 Stricklett pitched on Opening Day for the Superbas in 1907 , a game the Superbas lost . That year , Stricklett had a 12 – 14 record and a 2 @.@ 27 ERA in 229 2 ⁄ 3 IP . His 25 complete games were eighth best in the NL , while his four shutouts tied for tenth . In four MLB seasons , Stricklett went 35 – 51 with a 2 @.@ 84 ERA and 10 shutouts . 
 After the 1907 season , Stricklett returned to the California League to pitch for the San Jose <unk> <unk> and Sacramento <unk> , and refused to report to Brooklyn in 1908 as his wife wanted him to remain closer to their California home . As the California League was not recognized in organized baseball at this time , Stricklett was banned by MLB for four years . Though he applied for reinstatement , his banishment was upheld . Stricklett continued to pitch for San Jose through 1910 , pitching to a 23 @-@ 12 record in 1909 and a 19 @-@ 14 record in 1910 . 
 After the 1910 season , Stricklett he retired from baseball . However , he applied for reinstatement in 1912 , which was granted by the National Commission . Stricklett was fined $ 100 ( $ 2 @,@ 452 in current dollar terms ) for playing outside organized baseball for the previous three years . The Superbas sold his rights to the Binghamton <unk> of the New York State League , and he pitched for the team . In minor league baseball , Stricklett won 20 games in a season at least five times , compiling a 169 @-@ 99 record across nine seasons . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Stricklett denied inventing the spitball , though he claimed to be the first pitcher to master the spitball and to feature it exclusively . To achieve the pitch , he would moisten the ball with a spot the size of two of his fingers . The pitch would act " exactly the same way as reverse English does on a billiard ball " . 
 Stricklett learned the spitball from minor league teammate George Hildebrand in 1902 , who learned about it from Frank <unk> . Stricklett played an important role in popularizing the spitball . Stricklett taught the spitball to Jack Chesbro , who saw him use the pitch while pitching in minor league baseball . Though Chesbro had experimented with the pitch in the minor leagues , Stricklett showed him how to master it in 1904 . Stricklett taught it to Ed Walsh while they roomed together with the White Sox . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Stricklett retired to Mountain View , California , where he grew apricots on a ranch . He died in Santa Cruz , California , at the age of 87 . 
 = Battle of Fort Cumberland = 
 The Battle of Fort Cumberland ( also known as the Eddy Rebellion ) was an attempt by a small number of militia commanded by Jonathan Eddy to bring the American Revolutionary War to Nova Scotia in late 1776 . With minimal logistical support from Massachusetts and four to five hundred volunteer militia and Natives , Eddy attempted to besiege and storm Fort Cumberland in central Nova Scotia ( near the present @-@ day border between Nova Scotia and New Brunswick ) in November 1776 . 
 The fort 's defenders , the Royal Fencible American Regiment led by Joseph Goreham , a veteran of the French and Indian War , successfully repelled several attempts by Eddy 's militia to storm the fort , and the siege was ultimately relieved when the RFA plus Royal Marine reinforcements drove off the besiegers on November 29 . In retaliation for the role of locals who supported the siege , numerous homes and farms were destroyed , and Patriot sympathizers were driven out of the area . The successful defense of Fort Cumberland preserved the territorial integrity of the British Maritime possessions , and Nova Scotia remained loyal throughout the war . 
 = = Background = = 
 Nova Scotia was generally poorly defended in the early stages of the American Revolutionary War , and unrest in the eastern regions provoked fears of an American @-@ led uprising . Although some reinforcements had reached Halifax by early 1776 , the frontiers of the province were only lightly defended . 
 Fort Cumberland was located on the Isthmus of Chignecto , which connects modern mainland Nova Scotia with New Brunswick . The area was strategically important in earlier conflicts between the French colony of Acadia and British @-@ controlled Nova Scotia . Originally built by the French in 1750 as Fort Beauséjour , Fort Cumberland was in deplorable condition . Won from the French in the Battle of Fort Beauséjour in 1755 , the fortifications had been minimally garrisoned by the British after the Seven Years ' War and abandoned in 1768 . As early as June 1775 , Colonel Joseph Goreham had been ordered by General Thomas Gage to raise the Royal Fencible American Regiment of Foot and natives in Nova Scotia for the defense of the province against Patriot activity . Arriving at the fort in the summer of 1776 , Colonel Goreham and a garrison of 200 Loyalist troops of the RFA did what they could to restore the premises to a defensible condition . But Goreham had not been adequately provisioned and his men lacked everything from victuals to uniforms . Furthermore , the locals were generally sympathetic to the Patriot cause , and refused to assist in rehabilitating the fort , even trying to induce members of the garrison to defect . 
 = = Discontent in Nova Scotia = = 
 Jonathan Eddy was a Massachusetts @-@ born resident of Cumberland County , Nova Scotia , where the fort was located . He and John Allan , both of whom served in the provincial assembly , were the prime movers of Patriot activity in the area , which was one of several hotbeds of agitation in Nova Scotia . The other major areas of Patriot activity were Maugerville in the St. John River valley of Sunbury County ( present @-@ day New Brunswick ) , and <unk> , and there were also pockets of activity in Pictou and the Passamaquoddy Bay area , which separates present @-@ day Maine and New Brunswick . Patriots in these communities were in contact with each other , and those of Cumberland and Maugerville were active in trying to interest nearby natives ( Passamaquoddy , Maliseet , and Mi 'kmaq ) in their cause . 
 Eddy believed that with military assistance from the Thirteen Colonies , he might be able to bring down the strongly Loyalist administration of Nova Scotia . Early in 1776 , Eddy went to Massachusetts in an attempt to interest political and military leaders there in supporting action in Nova Scotia , while Allan worked to raise interest in Nova Scotia . Allan 's work was made more difficult by the arrival of Colonel Goreham and his troops to refortify Fort Cumberland , and by the activities of Michael Francklin , a former Lieutenant Governor of Nova Scotia and a vocal Loyalist . Eddy returned empty @-@ handed to Nova Scotia in June 1776 , only to learn that Goreham had put a price on his head . The activities of Goreham 's Fencibles in the Cumberland area were successful enough that Patriot activities there were effectively forced underground ; the center of these activities was shifted to Maugerville in part as a consequence of this . Goreham , a veteran of the French and Indian War , was also able to blunt Patriot inroads in the native communities , where the Mi 'kmaq refused to take sides , and the Maliseet and Passamaquoddy , at first supportive of the Patriots , ultimately did not turn out in the numbers Eddy had hoped for or been promised . 
 Eddy returned to Massachusetts in August . While the Second Continental Congress and George Washington would not authorize , fund , or otherwise support military activities in Nova Scotia , Eddy was able to convince the Massachusetts Provincial Congress to provide some material support ( primarily muskets , ammunition , powder , and other military supplies ) for an attempt on Fort Cumberland . It also allowed Eddy to engage in recruiting in the District of Maine . 
 = = Raising the militia = = 
 Eddy left Boston in September and sailed to Machias , where he recruited about 20 men . On October 13 , this party sailed from Machias for Passamaquoddy Bay . Coincidentally , John Allan , who was working on a longer @-@ term plan for military action , sailed from Campobello Island for Machias the same day . The two parties met at sea , where Allan attempted to dissuade Eddy from his plan , informing him that the Mi 'kmaq ( the largest tribe in Nova Scotia ) would not help him . Allan extracted a promise from Eddy to wait at Campobello while he went to Machias to meet with the council there . When the Machias council learned of how little native support there was , they sent a letter to Eddy urging him to give up the effort . Eddy persisted , and left Campobello , having added nine Passamaquoddy recruits to his band . 
 From Campobello , Eddy sailed up the Saint John River to Maugerville , where 27 men were recruited , and then up to the Maliseet settlement at <unk> ( just upriver from present @-@ day Fredericton ) . There he learned the bad news that Pierre Tomah , the main Maliseet chief , was not interested in taking up the hatchet . Eddy was able to convince Ambroise St. Aubin , one of Tomah 's competitors , and 15 men to join the expedition in exchange for an agreement with the Maugerville community to support the families of those men . In another disappointment , none of the local Acadians joined , contrary to assertions St. Aubin had made to Eddy during a previous visit to the area . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 With a force now numbering about 72 , Eddy sailed up the Bay of Fundy to Shepody Outpost . The exact location of this outpost , established probably by Joseph Goreham in September , is subject to debate . It may have been present @-@ day Hopewell Cape , New Brunswick on the Bay 's western side , or it may have been Fort Folly Point on its eastern side . In any case , it was there that Eddy captured a patrol of Goreham 's Fencibles on October 25 , killing one and wounding another . The prisoners were shipped back to Machias , and Eddy sent some of his men to Cocagne in a largely fruitless effort to enlist Mi <unk> in the cause . Eddy himself continued on to Memramcook , where about two dozen of the Acadian locals joined him . This enlarged force marched to Sackville , where more settlers joined the force , swelling it ( by Eddy 's account ) to about 180 men . Goreham was finally alerted to Eddy 's actions on November 4 , when a boat sent with supplies for the Shepody patrol was informed of Eddy 's activities by locals . Goreham heightened the guard on the fort , but did not immediately attempt to notify Halifax or Windsor , since he was uncertain what routes away from the fort might have been blocked by Eddy . 
 On October 31 , the frigate Juno escorted the supply sloop Polly to Fort Cumberland , where she docked below the fort on the <unk> River . The Polly was laden with supplies to last the fort through the winter , and work began immediately to unload those supplies . Juno , easily visible from Sackville , was a concern to Eddy , since her presence added to the fort 's defenses . Fortunately for Eddy , she sailed on November 3 , leaving Polly docked below the fort . On November 6 , Eddy 's patrols began ranging closer to the fort , alerting Goreham to the approaching force . Goreham took no additional steps to protect the Polly , and any attempts to get word of his predicament out were again delayed by his decision to await the return of scouts he had dispatched earlier . ( The fate of the scouts is uncertain ; they did not return before the fort was invested . ) That evening , thirty of Eddy 's men surprised the sleepy guards aboard the Polly , taking thirteen prisoners . They also seized another ship , owned by a Patriot sympathizer , that happened to be anchored nearby . 
 On the morning of November 7 Goreham decided that it was time to get a message to Windsor . He sent a party of men down to the dock that morning . These men , numbering about 30 , were taken prisoner by Eddy 's men as rapidly as they arrived due to their unawareness that Eddy had control of the ship . The Polly was then sailed to Fort Lawrence , to the east of Fort Cumberland , where the supplies were landed . Sentries in the fort spotted the move , and Goreham , realizing Eddy had taken the ship , fired an ineffectual cannonade against the ship . 
 = = Siege = = 
 Goreham took stock of his situation . Nearly one quarter of his garrison ( more than 60 men ) had been captured by Eddy , along with critical fuel and other supplies that had not been unloaded from the Polly before her seizure . His defenses consisted of a hastily constructed palisade that encompassed most of the fort , and six cannons , for which his men had only completed three mounts . The fort 's military complement was 176 men , including officers and artillerymen . Over the next few days , local militia arrived to raise the garrison 's size to about 200 , although this included individuals not effective for combat due to illness . On both November 7 and 8 he again attempted to get messengers out of Eddy 's cordon , without success . 
 On November 8 Eddy was joined by about 200 men from <unk> and Pictou , and he finally felt ready to act on November 10 . Eddy sent a letter demanding that Goreham surrender his garrison . Goreham refused , suggesting in retort that Eddy surrender . 
 The next day authorities outside the area learned of Eddy 's activities . Michael Francklin , patrolling in the Bay of Fundy for privateers , recovered a ferry that had been taken , and learned from its passengers that Eddy was active . When the news reached Halifax through the efforts of Thomas Dixson , Lieutenant Governor Marriot Arbuthnot responded by dispatching orders on the 15th for any available ship based at Annapolis to go to Fort Edward in Windsor , to convoy troops to relieve the siege . 
 Commodore Sir George Collier had previously dispatched the HMS Vulture into the Bay of Fundy on rumors of privateering activity there , so he ordered the HMS Hope to locate the Vulture so that she could assist . However , the Hope captured a prize and returned to Halifax ; she was then sent out again to accompany a supply ship to Fort Cumberland . In the meantime , the Vulture fortuitously arrived at Windsor , where she took on some marines and Fencibles . 
 Lacking artillery , the rebels attempted to storm the fort on the night of November 12 , attempting a feint to draw Goreham 's strength away from the weak points of the defenses . The experienced Goreham saw through the feint and repulsed the attack . One of Eddy 's Maliseet warriors sneaked into the fort and very nearly opened a gate but was stopped at the last moment . Following the failed attack , Eddy effectively lost control of the expedition , as a council of leaders formed against him . Night attacks ordered by the council on November 22 and 23 succeeded in capturing and burning several buildings , but Goreham grimly held his ground , and the invaders were again repulsed . 
 On November 27 , the Vulture arrived . Rather than retreat in the face of arriving relief , the rebels increased their guard ; Goreham , with some intelligence about the size of the force opposing him , planned a sortie . Early on the morning of November 29 , Major Thomas Batt led 150 men from the Vulture 's Royal Marine contingent and the Royal Fencible Americans , and scattered Eddy 's men , killing and wounding several , at the cost of two dead and three wounded . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Batt 's men chased Eddy 's , but bad weather and the lack of adequate footwear eventually caused him to call off the pursuit . Eddy 's forces scattered , with many retreating overland to Maugerville . Some of the Massachusetts men took more than two months to reach Machias . Homes and farms of rebel supporters were burned in reprisal but British authorities took a lenient approach toward captured rebels , including Richard John Uniacke , who went on to become Attorney General of Nova Scotia . Goreham issued an offer of pardon for those who would surrender their arms , which more than 100 locals accepted . This prompted Major Batt to file charges against Goreham for neglect of duty ; Goreham was exonerated . 
 The victory at Fort Cumberland strengthened the British presence in Nova Scotia , in part by driving Patriot sympathizers like Allan and Eddy out of the province , but also by <unk> those that remained , often by requiring people to make pledges to the Crown . Some unrest continued for the remainder of the war ( e.g. , the Battle at Miramichi ) , although no further large scale military threat occurred . The most significant attempt occurred in the summer of 1777 , when John Allan was authorized by Congress to take actions in Nova Scotia ; however , only a small number of forces were raised for this effort at Saint John , and a British show of force put an end to the attempt . Eddy appears to have been involved with Allan 's work , but his movements prior to August 1777 are uncertain . Commodore Collier followed up by attacking Machias , intending to break Allan 's plans . Eddy led the defense of Machias during the battle on August 13 – 15 , 1777 . ( Collier 's action was in fact unnecessary ; the Massachusetts Provisional Congress had in early August voted to disband forces recruited for Allan 's expedition , because of the imminent threat posed by the army of General John Burgoyne in upstate New York . ) 
 The Battle of Fort Cumberland was poorly documented in 19th @-@ century histories of Nova Scotia and New Brunswick , often receiving only minimal mention . The involvement of local inhabitants ( natives , Acadians , and English @-@ speakers ) in the siege was generally understated or unknown . The site of Fort Cumberland has been preserved as a National Historic Site of Canada , and is administered by Parks Canada . 
 = Pokémon HeartGold and SoulSilver = 
 Pokémon HeartGold Version and SoulSilver Version ( ポケットモンスター ハートゴールド & ソウルシルバー , Poketto Monsutā Hātogōrudo & Sōrushirubā , " Pocket Monsters : HeartGold & SoulSilver ) are enhanced remakes of the 1999 video games Pokémon Gold and Silver , including the features in Pokémon Crystal . The games are part of the Pokémon series of role @-@ playing video games , and were developed by Game Freak and published by Nintendo for the Nintendo DS . First released in Japan on September 12 , 2009 , the games were later released to North America , Australia , and Europe during March 2010 . 
 HeartGold and SoulSilver take place in the Johto region of the franchise 's fictional universe , which features special creatures called Pokémon . The basic goal of the game is to become the best Pokémon trainer in the Johto and Kanto regions , which is done by raising and cataloging Pokémon and defeating other trainers . 
 Game director Shigeki Morimoto aimed to respect the feelings of those who played the previous games , while also ensuring that it felt like a new game to those that were introduced to the series in more recent years . Reception to the games was highly positive , with the two being amongst the highest rated DS games of all time on Metacritic . As of March 2014 , the games ' combined sales have reached 12 @.@ 72 million , putting the titles amongst the best selling Nintendo DS games . 
 = = Plot and setting = = 
 Similar to Pokémon Gold and Silver , HeartGold and SoulSilver take place in the Johto and Kanto regions of the franchise 's fictional universe . The universe centers on the existence of creatures , called Pokémon , with special abilities . The silent protagonist is a young Pokémon trainer who lives in New Bark Town . At the beginning of the games , the player chooses either a Chikorita , Cyndaquil , or <unk> as their starter Pokémon from Professor Elm . After performing a delivery for the professor and obtaining a Pokédex , he decides to let the player keep the Pokémon and start them on a journey . 
 The goal of the game is to become the best trainer in Johto and Kanto , which is done by raising Pokémon , completing a catalogue of Pokémon called a Pokédex , defeating the eight Gym Leaders in Johto for Gym Badges , challenging the best trainers in the region known as the Elite Four and the Champion , and then defeating the eight Gym Leaders in the Kanto region . Finally , the player may face off against Red atop Mt . Silver , who serves as the game 's final boss . 
 Throughout the game , the player will battle against members of Team Rocket , a criminal organization originally from Kanto . They were originally defeated by the protagonist of FireRed and LeafGreen , and have attempted to come back as an organization , while awaiting the return of their leader , Giovanni . To attempt to contact him , they take over the radio tower and broadcast a message calling out to him . 
 While being the remakes of Gold and Silver , the games tie in plot elements of Crystal as well , such as the added emphasis on Suicune over the other legendary beasts , as well as the post @-@ ending Battle Frontier . ( In Crystal , only the Battle Tower was available . ) Additionally , Johto and Kanto were given Generation IV features such as Pal Park . 
 During certain points in the game , the player 's rival will battle the protagonist in a test of skills . Throughout the game , the player encounters Kimono Girls . After battling all of them in a row , they allow the player to encounter a legendary bird specific to each game ( Ho @-@ Oh in HeartGold , and Lugia in SoulSilver ) . As per the originals , the other Pokémon can be obtained later on . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Pokémon HeartGold and SoulSilver are role @-@ playing video games with adventure elements . The basic mechanics of the games are largely the same as their predecessors ' . As with all Pokémon games for hand @-@ held consoles , gameplay is viewed from a third @-@ person overhead perspective , and consists of three basic screens : a field map , in which the player navigates the main character ; a battle screen ; and the menu , in which the player configures his party , items , or gameplay settings . The player begins the game with one Pokémon and can capture more using Poké Balls . The player can also use the Pokémon to battle or deceive others , often forming alliances or trends via the Team Rocket networks . 
 When the player encounters a wild Pokémon or is challenged by a trainer to a battle , the screen switches to a turn @-@ based battle screen where the Pokémon fight . During battle , the player may fight , use an item , switch the active Pokémon , or flee ( the last is not an option in battles against trainers ) . Pokémon have hit points ( HP ) , which is displayed during combat ; when a Pokémon 's HP is reduced to zero , it faints and cannot battle unless taken to a Pokémon Center or healed or revived with a Pokémon skill or item . If the player 's Pokémon defeats the opposing Pokémon ( causes it to faint ) , it receives experience points . After accumulating enough experience points , it will level up ; most Pokémon evolve into a new species of Pokémon when they reach a certain level , or when certain conditions are met ( commonly , how much a Pokémon statistically ' likes ' its trainer ) . 
 = = = New features = = = 
 HeartGold and SoulSilver allow the first Pokémon in the player 's party to follow them , echoing a mechanic in Pokémon Yellow in which Pikachu follows the player . Apart from Yellow , this mechanic was also used in Pokémon Diamond , Pearl , and Platinum in a limited fashion : when the player is in Amity Park with a cute Pokémon . The player may talk to the Pokémon to see or check on how that Pokémon is feeling , and occasionally it may pick up items . A new minigame called the <unk> ( called <unk> in Japan ) uses the Nintendo DS touchscreen and allows Pokémon to compete in events such as hurdling . The Japanese versions retain slot machines found in previous games , while the international releases of the titles replace the slot machines with a new game called " <unk> Flip " , described as a cross between Minesweeper and Picross . Another new item , the GB Sounds , changes the background music to the original 8 @-@ bit music from Pokémon Gold and Silver . 
 = = = Connectivity to other devices = = = 
 HeartGold and SoulSilver can access the Nintendo Wi @-@ Fi Connection to trade , battle , and interact with other players of the games , as well as players of Pokémon Diamond , Pearl , and Platinum . After completing a special Wi @-@ Fi mission download on Pokémon Ranger : Guardian Signs , the player can send a Deoxys to HeartGold and SoulSilver . 
 = = Development = = 
 HeartGold and SoulSilver were released in 2009 , ten years after Gold and Silver 's release for the Game Boy Color . Shigeki Morimoto , the games ' director , commented on the development of the remakes : " The first thing that I knew I needed to bear in mind was to respect the feelings of those people who 'd played Gold and Silver ten years before . I think that players have very strong memories of the game , so they 'd think things like ' Ah , this trainer is still strong ' and ' If I do this here , this is going to happen ' . I knew I needed to respect these feelings . " However , Morimoto also needed to make sure that the games would feel as new games to players who began playing Pokémon in recent years on the Game Boy Advance or the Nintendo DS . An in @-@ game author surrogate of Game Freak 's President in <unk> City states that the team strove to make a game that would appeal to players with fond memories without " redoing the same thing " . He also states that making the game was a " rewarding challenge " . HeartGold and SoulSilver introduced many new features that were absent in the original Gold and Silver . Several of these features came from the previously released Nintendo DS Pokémon games , such as Diamond ( 2006 ) , Pearl ( 2006 ) , and Platinum ( 2008 ) . 
 = = = Marketing and release = = = 
 An initial rumor started in early May 2009 that Nintendo planned to remake Pokémon Gold and Silver after the Japanese television show Pokémon Sunday ended by announcing a " world @-@ exclusive first announcement " that would be made on its next show . Kris Pigna of 1UP.com speculated that this alluded to a possible remake of Gold and Silver for the Nintendo DS , due to gold and silver disco balls hanging in the background . Pigna further reasoned that this would be consistent with the previously released titles Pokémon FireRed and LeafGreen which were enhanced remakes of the original Pokémon Red and Blue . Several days later , Nintendo officially confirmed that Gold and Silver were being remade as HeartGold and SoulSilver and released their official logos . It also announced that the games would contain numerous updates , although declined to reveal any specifics . The games were released for the Nintendo DS on September 12 , 2009 in Japan to coincide with the tenth anniversary of the original Gold and Silver release . Junichi Masuda stated on his blog that " we , Game Freak have spent long and firm time developing above two titles [ sic ] " , and that " ' Pokémon Gold & Silver ' will be back with far more excitement . " 
 At the 2009 Pokémon World Championships , Nintendo stated that HeartGold and SoulSilver would be released in North America between the months of January and March , Europe sometime around May and June , and Australia in April . " Announcing these much @-@ anticipated game launches at The Pokémon World Championships allows us to give the news directly to the legions of fans who represent the true heart and soul of Pokémon , " a spokesperson said . Nintendo updated the official Pokémon English website with information about the new titles , telling readers that the games would feature revamped audiovisual effects , interaction with the DS touch screen , and more " surprises " . From February 27 to March 13 , 2010 , video game retailer GameStop hosted a promotion in which players of Pokémon Diamond , Pearl , or Platinum could use the games ' " Mystery Gift " feature to download a free Jirachi Pokémon to their game . A " Pikachu @-@ colored Pichu " could be downloaded using Wi @-@ Fi that , when taken to the Ilex Forest in @-@ game , unlocked a " Spiky @-@ eared Pichu " . 
 = = Audio = = 
 Nintendo DS Pokémon HeartGold and SoulSilver Music Super Complete ( <unk> <unk> ハートゴールド & ソウルシルバー <unk> ・ <unk> , Nintendō DS Pokemon Hātogōrudo ando Sōrushirubā <unk> Sūpā Konpurīto ) , a three @-@ disc soundtrack featuring music scored by Junichi Masuda , Go Ichinose , Hitomi Sato , Shota Kageyama and Takuto <unk> , was released in Japan on October 28 , 2009 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 In response to the news confirming the development of HeartGold and SoulSilver , fans posted their reactions and commentary on the Internet . In particular , IGN editor Jack DeVries reasoned that the primary reason for the updated games was to be compatible with Pokémon Diamond and Pearl , allowing players to collect old Pokémon species that were previously unobtainable in the new games . He also expressed skepticism that the new titles could match the quality of the originals ; stating , " For me , Gold / Silver were amazing because they introduced so many new features that have since become standards for the series . It was the first , and only , time the Pokémon games have made such a significant expansion . These days we 're lucky if we get a new feature that invisibly changes the strategic elements of the game . " He reminisced over the qualities that made Gold and Silver truly unique , including the full color support , internal clock , Pokémon breeding , and <unk> . Several months later , after DeVries had played through some of the game , he wrote , " so far I like what I see , even if it all feels very familiar and formulaic at this point . " 
 The games ' reception has been highly positive , having an aggregate score of 87 on Metacritic . The titles are among the Top 20 rated DS games in the site 's database . Japanese gaming magazine Famitsu awarded the games a composite score of 37 out of 40 based on four individual reviews , of which the ratings were 9 , 10 , 9 , and 9 . The reviewers praised the games for retaining much of the quality that drew them to the original Gold and Silver . The only drawback mentioned was that the games brought " no major surprises " . Nintendo Power gave the games one of the highest scores , remarking on its replay value though criticizing shortly about no improvement in graphic animation for Pokémon sprites . Official Nintendo Magazine stated that they were the best Pokémon games yet . Game Informer 's Annette Gonzalez stated " Even though the classic Pokémon formula still works as evidenced by HeartGold . I can ’ t help but hope for a new Pokémon title that breaks some new ground . " 
 IGN 's Craig Harris said that the titles were " like a gap filler to make the wait for a new Pokémon game just a little more bearable " . Jim Sterling of Destructoid stated , " While it is , at its core , the same game that you 've played many years ago , it still manages to feel new and the updated features bolster the original experience in a manner that never intrudes and only enhances " . 1UP.com 's Justin Haywald stated that " HeartGold / SoulSilver is easily the best Pokémon game yet " . VideoGamer.com reviewer Jamin Smith said , " With HeartGold and SoulSilver the Pokémon series has reached a point where it can 't get any better . " Eurogamer 's Keza MacDonald gave the games a 9 / 10 , stating " They combine everything that was best about the older Pokémon games " , citing the Pokémon designs and improved graphics and battle system . GamePro 's McKinley Noble stated that " it 's clear that this is a perfect experience for both old @-@ school trainers and the newest generation of Pokémon fans . " GameZone 's Cliff <unk> III said , " There is not a doubt in my mind : Pokémon HeartGold and SoulSilver are the pinnacle of the entire series . " Nathan Meunier of GameSpot gave the games one of the lower scores , criticizing them for a lack of innovation . GamesRadar attributed the game 's success to being a remake of classic games . 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 In Japan , the games sold over 1 @.@ 48 million units within the first two days of release , topping the Japanese sales chart that week . Within two weeks , the games had sold a combined total of over 2 @.@ 00 million units . By December 18 , 2009 , the games ' Japanese sales totals had surpassed 3 @.@ 22 million . In Australia , over 50 @,@ 000 units sold in one week . In the United States , the games managed collective sales of 1 @.@ 73 million in their first month , with the SoulSilver version selling 1 @.@ 01 million and HeartGold selling 0 @.@ 76 million units . The combined sales of the two games made them the highest @-@ selling games of March 2010 . As of May 6 , 2010 , the games sold 8 @.@ 40 million units worldwide . The games reached 10 million sales worldwide by the end of July 2010 . As of March 2014 , the games ' combined sales have reached 12 @.@ 72 million . 
 = Cookie ( video game ) = 
 Cookie is an action @-@ platform video game developed and published by Ultimate Play The Game that was released exclusively for the ZX Spectrum in 1983 . In the game , Charlie the Chef has to bake a cake , however his five ingredients are sentient and attempt to escape his pantry , enabling his quest to re @-@ capture them . 
 The game was written by Chris Stamper , and graphics were designed by Tim Stamper . Cookie was one of the few Spectrum games also available in ROM format for use with the Interface 2 , allowing " instantaneous " loading of the game ( the normal method of cassette loading could take several minutes ) . A version was also created for the BBC Micro , but was not commercially released . The game received mixed reviews upon release , with critics praising the graphics , but criticising the hard difficulty and its similarities to Pssst . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The game is presented from a single , 2D perspective , and the main objective involves Charlie the Chef baking a cake from evil , sentient ingredients . The five ingredients vary from Mixed Peel , Chunky Chocolate , Crafty Cheese , Sneaky Sugar and Colonel Custard , who will all jump out of the pantry and try and avoid the player whenever possible . 
 The player starts the game with three lives . Several ingredients will fly around the screen simultaneously , and if the player touches an ingredient with their body , a life will be deducted . The player 's objective is to put the ingredients into the cooking bowl before they either fall into the dustbins on either side or knock the player into the bowl . As a defence , Charlie the Cook can shoot flour sacks , which will push the ingredients further in the direction they are moving in . Bombs may also spawn in the game , which will allow the player to push the ingredients further than conventional flour sacks . The player has to push the right variety of ingredients into the bowl , which changes for each level . When the right amount of ingredients has been put in the bowl , a cake is baked and a new level begins . 
 = = Background = = 
 Ashby Computers and Graphics was founded by brothers Tim and Chris Stamper , along with Tim 's wife , Carol , in Ashby @-@ de @-@ la @-@ Zouch , England in 1982 . Under the trading name Ultimate Play The Game , they began producing video games for the ZX Spectrum throughout the early 1980s . Prior to founding Ultimate , the Stamper brothers had designed arcade machines , but had no marketing experience in the video game sector . The company was known for its reluctance to reveal details about its operations and upcoming projects . Little was known about their development process except that they used to work in " separate teams " : one team would work on development , while the other would concentrate on other aspects such as sound or graphics . 
 Cookie was one of the few Spectrum games also available in ROM format for use with the Interface 2 , allowing " instantaneous " loading of the game ( the normal method of cassette loading could take several minutes ) . A version was also created for the BBC Micro and was scheduled for release in 1984 ; however , it was never commercially released . The game was released as Crazy Kitchen in Italian markets and as Chef , Lo in Croatia . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Matthew <unk> of Crash praised the game overall , despite thinking it was overshadowed by Ultimate 's Tranz Am , which was bundled with Cookie during its initial release . <unk> stated the gameplay was addictive and challenging , despite thinking it was similar to its predecessor , Pssst . Lloyd <unk> of Crash considered the game to be overlooked and underrated , despite him suggesting that it was the most difficult of all games developed by Ultimate . <unk> praised the graphics as detailed , fast and " amusing " , owing to the game 's sentient ingredients . Reviewers of Home Computing Weekly similarly praised the graphics and sound , stating that they " are well up to Ultimate 's standards " . 
 A reviewer from Sinclair User stated that the graphics were of " arcade and cartoon " quality , and criticised the game 's concept , suggesting that the player would lose interest after completing a few levels . <unk> , however , praised its playability , heralding that it was " great fun " to play and easy to adapt to . Sinclair User opined that first impressions of the game were important to the customer , and stated that the player may feel cheated due to the game 's similarities to Pssst . 
 = Forward exchange rate = 
 The forward exchange rate ( also referred to as forward rate or forward price ) is the exchange rate at which a bank agrees to exchange one currency for another at a future date when it enters into a forward contract with an investor . Multinational corporations , banks , and other financial institutions enter into forward contracts to take advantage of the forward rate for hedging purposes . The forward exchange rate is determined by a parity relationship among the spot exchange rate and differences in interest rates between two countries , which reflects an economic equilibrium in the foreign exchange market under which arbitrage opportunities are eliminated . When in equilibrium , and when interest rates vary across two countries , the parity condition implies that the forward rate includes a premium or discount reflecting the interest rate differential . Forward exchange rates have important theoretical implications for forecasting future spot exchange rates . Financial economists have put forth a hypothesis that the forward rate accurately predicts the future spot rate , for which empirical evidence is mixed . 
 = = Introduction = = 
 The forward exchange rate is the rate at which a commercial bank is willing to commit to exchange one currency for another at some specified future date . The forward exchange rate is a type of forward price . It is the exchange rate negotiated today between a bank and a client upon entering into a forward contract agreeing to buy or sell some amount of foreign currency in the future . Multinational corporations and financial institutions often use the forward market to hedge future <unk> or <unk> denominated in a foreign currency against foreign exchange risk by using a forward contract to lock in a forward exchange rate . <unk> with forward contracts is typically used for larger transactions , while futures contracts are used for smaller transactions . This is due to the customization afforded to banks by forward contracts traded over @-@ the @-@ counter , versus the standardization of futures contracts which are traded on an exchange . Banks typically quote forward rates for major currencies in maturities of one , three , six , nine , or twelve months , however in some cases quotations for greater maturities are available up to five or ten years . 
 = = Relation to covered interest rate parity = = 
 Covered interest rate parity is a no @-@ arbitrage condition in foreign exchange markets which depends on the availability of the forward market . It can be rearranged to give the forward exchange rate as a function of the other variables . The forward exchange rate depends on three known variables : the spot exchange rate , the domestic interest rate , and the foreign interest rate . This effectively means that the forward rate is the price of a forward contract , which derives its value from the pricing of spot contracts and the addition of information on available interest rates . 
 The following equation represents covered interest rate parity , a condition under which investors eliminate exposure to foreign exchange risk ( unanticipated changes in exchange rates ) with the use of a forward contract – the exchange rate risk is effectively covered . Under this condition , a domestic investor would earn equal returns from investing in domestic assets or converting currency at the spot exchange rate , investing in foreign currency assets in a country with a different interest rate , and exchanging the foreign currency for domestic currency at the negotiated forward exchange rate . Investors will be indifferent to the interest rates on deposits in these countries due to the equilibrium resulting from the forward exchange rate . The condition allows for no arbitrage opportunities because the return on domestic deposits , 1 + id , is equal to the return on foreign deposits , [ S / F ] ( 1 + if ) . If these two returns weren 't equalized by the use of a forward contract , there would be a potential arbitrage opportunity in which , for example , an investor could borrow currency in the country with the lower interest rate , convert to the foreign currency at today 's spot exchange rate , and invest in the foreign country with the higher interest rate . 
 <formula> 
 where 
 F is the forward exchange rate 
 S is the current spot exchange rate 
 id is the interest rate in domestic currency ( base currency ) 
 if is the interest rate in foreign currency ( quoted currency ) 
 This equation can be arranged such that it solves for the forward rate : 
 <formula> 
 = = Forward premium or discount = = 
 The equilibrium that results from the relationship between forward and spot exchange rates within the context of covered interest rate parity is responsible for eliminating or correcting for market inefficiencies that would create potential for arbitrage profits . As such , arbitrage opportunities are fleeting . In order for this equilibrium to hold under differences in interest rates between two countries , the forward exchange rate must generally differ from the spot exchange rate , such that a no @-@ arbitrage condition is sustained . Therefore , the forward rate is said to contain a premium or discount , reflecting the interest rate differential between two countries . The following equations demonstrate how the forward premium or discount is calculated . 
 The forward exchange rate differs by a premium or discount of the spot exchange rate : 
 <formula> 
 where 
 P is the premium ( if positive ) or discount ( if negative ) 
 The equation can be rearranged as follows to solve for the forward premium / discount : 
 <formula> 
 In practice , forward premiums and discounts are quoted as annualized percentage deviations from the spot exchange rate , in which case it is necessary to account for the number of days to delivery as in the following example . 
 <formula> 
 where 
 N represents the maturity of a given forward exchange rate quote 
 d represents the number of days to delivery 
 For example , to calculate the 6 @-@ month forward premium or discount for the euro versus the dollar deliverable in 30 days , given a spot rate quote of 1 @.@ 2238 $ / € and a 6 @-@ month forward rate quote of 1 @.@ 2260 $ / € : 
 <formula> 
 The resulting 0 @.@ <unk> is positive , so one would say that the euro is trading at a 0 @.@ <unk> or 2 @.@ 16 % premium against the dollar for delivery in 30 days . Conversely , if one were to work this example in euro terms rather than dollar terms , the perspective would be reversed and one would say that the dollar is trading at a discount against the Euro . 
 = = Forecasting future spot exchange rates = = 
 = = = <unk> hypothesis = = = 
 The unbiasedness hypothesis states that given conditions of rational expectations and risk neutrality , the forward exchange rate is an unbiased predictor of the future spot exchange rate . Without introducing a foreign exchange risk premium ( due to the assumption of risk neutrality ) , the following equation illustrates the unbiasedness hypothesis . 
 <formula> 
 where 
 <formula> is the forward exchange rate at time t 
 <formula> is the expected future spot exchange rate at time t + k 
 k is the number of periods into the future from time t 
 The empirical rejection of the unbiasedness hypothesis is a well @-@ recognized puzzle among finance researchers . Empirical evidence for <unk> between the forward rate and the future spot rate is mixed . Researchers have published papers demonstrating empirical failure of the hypothesis by conducting regression analyses of the realized changes in spot exchange rates on forward premiums and finding negative slope coefficients . These researchers offer numerous rationales for such failure . One rationale centers around the relaxation of risk neutrality , while still assuming rational expectations , such that a foreign exchange risk premium may exist that can account for differences between the forward rate and the future spot rate . 
 The following equation represents the forward rate as being equal to a future spot rate and a risk premium ( not to be confused with a forward premium ) : 
 <formula> 
 The current spot rate can be introduced so that the equation solves for the forward @-@ spot differential ( the difference between the forward rate and the current spot rate ) : 
 <formula> 
 Eugene Fama concluded that large positive correlations of the difference between the forward exchange rate and the current spot exchange rate signal variations over time in the premium component of the forward @-@ spot differential <formula> or in the forecast of the expected change in the spot exchange rate . Fama suggested that slope coefficients in the regressions of the difference between the forward rate and the future spot rate <formula> , and the expected change in the spot rate <formula> , on the forward @-@ spot differential <formula> which are different from zero imply variations over time in both components of the forward @-@ spot differential : the premium and the expected change in the spot rate . Fama 's findings were sought to be empirically validated by a significant body of research , ultimately finding that large variance in expected changes in the spot rate could only be accounted for by risk aversion coefficients that were deemed " unacceptably high . " Other researchers have found that the unbiasedness hypothesis has been rejected in both cases where there is evidence of risk premia varying over time and cases where risk premia are constant . 
 Other rationales for the failure of the forward rate unbiasedness hypothesis include considering the conditional bias to be an exogenous variable explained by a policy aimed at smoothing interest rates and stabilizing exchange rates , or considering that an economy allowing for discrete changes could facilitate excess returns in the forward market . Some researchers have contested empirical failures of the hypothesis and have sought to explain conflicting evidence as resulting from contaminated data and even inappropriate selections of the time length of forward contracts . Economists demonstrated that the forward rate could serve as a useful proxy for future spot exchange rates between currencies with liquidity premia that average out to zero during the onset of floating exchange rate regimes in the 1970s . Research examining the introduction of endogenous breaks to test the structural stability of <unk> spot and forward exchange rate time series have found some evidence to support forward rate unbiasedness in both the short and long term . 
 = <unk> = 
 A turuma ( from the Finnish word " Turunmaa " ) was a type of warship built for the Swedish archipelago fleet in the late 18th century . It was specifically developed for warfare in the Archipelago Sea and along the coasts of Svealand and Finland . The turuma was designed by the prolific naval architect Fredrik Henrik af Chapman for use in an area of mostly shallow waters and groups of islands and islets that extend from Stockholm all the way to the Gulf of Finland . 
 It was designed to replace the galleys that made up the core of the fleets that operated along the coasts and in the archipelagos of the Baltic Sea . The turuma had a bigger draft , was somewhat slower under oars , but offered superior accommodation for its crew , was more seaworthy and had roughly ten times the number of heavy guns . It could be propelled with either sails or oars and was both smaller and more manoeuvrable than most sailing warships which made it suitable for operations in shallow , confined waters . 
 Between 1761 and 1790 , 14 @-@ 15 turumas were built , including Amphion , a modified version used by King Gustav III as both a pleasure craft and command ship . The turuma was among the heaviest in the arsenal of the archipelago fleet and a number of them served in the Russo @-@ Swedish War of 1788 – 90 . It had three masts , two decks and was equipped with 16 – 22 pairs of oars along with a crew of about 220 – 260 . Its length was 35 – 39 m , width 9 m and the draft 3 @,@ 3 m . The armament consisted of 24 – 28 heavy guns with up to 24 swivel guns for close @-@ quarter combat . 
 = = Background = = 
 In the early 18th century , the establishment of Russian naval power in the Baltic challenged the interests of Sweden , at the time one of the major powers in the Baltic . The Swedish Empire at the time included territory in Northern Germany , all of modern Finland and most of the Baltic states , a dominion held together by the Baltic sea routes . Russian Tsar Peter the Great had established a new capital and naval base in Saint Petersburg in 1703 . During the Great Northern War 1700 – 1721 Sweden lost its Baltic state territories , and experienced destructive Russian raiding in Finland and along the chain of islands and archipelagos that stretched all the way from the Gulf of Finland to the capital of Stockholm . The traumatic experience led to the establishment of inshore flotillas of shallow @-@ draft vessels . The first of these consisted mainly of smaller versions of the traditional Mediterranean warship , the galleys . Most of these more akin to galiots and were complemented with gun prams . The disastrous war against Russia 1741 @-@ 43 and the minor involvement in Prussia in the Pomeranian War 1757 – 62 showed the need for further expansion and development of the inshore flotillas with more specialized vessels . 
 Traditional galleys were effective as troop transports for amphibious operations , but were severely under @-@ gunned , especially in relation to their large crews ; a galley with a 250 @-@ man crew , most of whom were rowers , would typically be armed with only one 24 @-@ pounder cannon and two 6 @-@ pounders , all in the bow . However , they were undecked and lacked adequate shelter for the rower @-@ soldiers , great numbers of which succumbed to illness in the 1741 – 43 war . 
 = = = The archipelago fleet = = = 
 After the defeat against Russia , a commission was assigned to identify weaknesses in the eastern defenses . In 1747 , it came to the conclusion that the fortifications in southeastern Finland needed to be improved and expanded and that a strong coastal navy should be built . The artillery officer Augustin Ehrensvärd was the driving force behind these changes and many of the conclusions and decisions of the committee were based on his ideas for improvements . In 1756 , a dedicated archipelago fleet was founded and put under the command of Krigskollegium , the army department , with Ehrensvärd as highest commander and the official name arméns flotta ( " the fleet of the army " ) . Over two decades the archipelago fleet went through several changes caused by the competition between the Hats and the Caps , the dominant political fractions at the time , and because of rivalries between army and navy . With the parliamentary victory of the Hats in the <unk> of 1769 – 70 and the coup d 'état by Gustav III in 1772 , the archipelago fleet 's status as an independent organization within the army was secured . From 1770 , it was given the Finnish squadron ( Finska eskadern ) based in Sveaborg and in 1777 the galley fleet based in Stockholm was included in the archipelago fleet as the Swedish squadron ( Svenska eskadern ) . The Swedish military invested considerable resources into the new army branch and made it a professional , independent organization . The archipelago fleet attracted the social and cultural elite that enjoyed the protection and patronage of King Gustav III who had strengthened his authority as an absolute monarch in the 1772 coup . 
 The base of the archipelago fleet was initially traditional galleys , but the war of 1741 – 43 and the war in Pomerania 1757 – 62 had revealed some inherent weaknesses : their firepower was inadequate , they were inefficient in terms of manpower , had poor protection for the crew and were not particularly seaworthy . During the Pomeranian War " gun barges " ( skottpråmar ) , heavily armed , oar @-@ driven , flat @-@ bottomed broadside vessels with a shallow draft , had been tried to compensate for the lack of firepower in the galleys , but had proven far too slow to be effective . 
 Ehrensvärd suggested that new archipelago vessels should be developed that combined sufficient firepower , maneuverability , seaworthiness and decent crew accommodations . He started a successful collaboration with shipbuilder and naval architect Fredrik Henrik Chapman ( ennobled " af Chapman " in 1772 ) and together they developed five new vessels : a type of gunboat with a 12 @-@ pounder gun , schooner rigging and 7 @-@ 8 pairs of oars , as well four types of " archipelago frigates " ( skärgårdsfregatter ) : turuma udema , pojama , and hemmema . These vessels were specifically designed for use in the archipelago off the south coast of Finland and were named after the Finnish provinces of Uusimaa , Pohjanmaa ( Österbotten ) , Turunmaa ( Åboland ) och Hämeenmaa ( <unk> ) . 
 All four types have been called " archipelago frigates " in Swedish and English historical literature , though the smaller udema and pojama have also been described as " archipelago corvettes " . 
 = = Design = = 
 The first turuma was completed in 1761 . Along with the hemmema , it was the type of " archipelago frigate " that closest fit the description , showing considerable similarities with small ocean @-@ going frigates . It had a low hull with no forecastle , only a low quarterdeck and no poop deck . It had three masts that were initially rigged with lateen sails , like a galley , which was later replaced with a conventional square frigate rig , but with combined top and topgallant masts . This improved its performance under sail and made it the best sailer in the archipelago fleet , though it was still slower than ordinary sailing vessels . 
 The first turuma , Norden , was c . 35 m ( 116 ft ) long and 8 m ( 26 @.@ 5 ft ) wide with a draft of 3 @.@ 3 m ( 11 ft ) . By the third ship , the Lodbrok ( 1771 ) , the hull had been expanded to 38 @.@ 5 m ( 126 ft ) by 9 @.@ 5 m ( 31 ft ) and remained roughly the same . The armament was considerably heavier than that of the galleys , or the smaller udemas and <unk> . It had one full gundeck of 22 ( 24 in the ships built before 1790 ) 12 @-@ pounders in a regular broadside arrangement , firing through gunports . On the forecastle deck facing straight forward were two 18 @-@ pounders . For close @-@ range action it carried another up to 24 3 @-@ pound swivel guns along the railings . In addition , there was also two 12 @-@ pound stern chasers . 
 For additional maneuverability , the turuma carried 19 pairs ( 16 in the first two ships ) of oars with four men per oar . <unk> rowed sitting on the weather deck , above the gun deck , with the <unk> attached to a rectangular outrigger that was designed to improve the leverage . Despite this , turumas performed poorly under oars and were very difficult to move in any kind of contrary wind . In calm weather the average speed with oars was reported as low as half a knot . 
 The turuma 's design was very similar to one of the other types of archipelago frigates , the hemmema . The primary difference was that hemmemas were rowed from the gundeck , providing the oarsmen with better leverage by placing them closer to the waterline . The later hemmemas were also considerably larger , more heavily armed and of a more robust construction . Naval historian Jan Glete has gone as describing them as variations on the same type , especially when considering the pre @-@ war designs . The crew varied between 220 and 266 , depending on the model . Between 128 and 152 of these were required to man all the oars . 
 The concept of hybrid frigates with oar propulsion capabilities was not new . Small " galleasses " had been built for the English Tudor navy as early as the mid @-@ 16th century . The Royal Navy , its successor , later equipped the equivalent of sixth rates with oar ports on or below the gundeck as early as the 1660s . " <unk> " , Baltic variations on the Mediterranean xebecs , had been introduced in the Russian navy for inshore duties during the 18th century . Both of these have been suggested as possible inspirations for af Chapman 's new designs . Though not identical to the Mediterranean @-@ inspired vessel , the Russian navy considered turumas similar enough in function to their own " shebecks " to use this terminology when referring to Swedish prizes ( captured ships ) . 
 = = = Special @-@ purpose ships = = = 
 In 1777 , Chapman designed a special turuma , the royal yacht Amphion . It was 33 @.@ 5 m ( 110 ft ) long and 6 @.@ 8 m ( 22 @.@ 25 ft ) wide and was schooner @-@ rigged with only two masts ( later changed to a brigantine rig ) . Chapman intended for the craft to carry a broadside armament similar to that of the regular turumas , but this was rejected by Gustav who ordered the craft to be built with an armament consisting of only light swivel guns . Amphion was decorated in the more stringent version of Rococo that in Sweden is defined as " Gustavian " , and was fitted with a great cabin with a skylight that was well @-@ suited for royal audiences and conferences . Amphion served as Gustav III 's staff ship in the war of 1788 – 90 , but was such a poor sailer that the king and his retinue abandoned it during the dramatic escape from Vyborg Bay in 1790 . 
 = = Service = = 
 Seven turumas were built for the Swedish navy before the Russian war of 1788 @-@ 90 , and another six were complete during the war , with one more built after 1790 . Altogether fourteen turumas were completed , making it the most common of the four archipelago frigate types . At the outbreak of war in 1788 , they formed the core of the archipelago flotilla in Finland . They were used to support amphibious operations and to conduct raids on the Russian archipelago fleet , while at the same time acting as a sea @-@ borne flank support for the Swedish army on the Finnish mainland . <unk> fought in both the first and second battles of Svensksund . In the first in August 1789 , six turumas made up the bulk of the firepower of the larger Swedish vessels , while at the second in July 1790 , it was reduced to just one ship . 
 Like the other specialized archipelago vessels , the turuma had only limited advantages . While it had superior firepower , its sailing qualities were only average and they were slow under oars . It had the potential to be an effective weapon against galleys , matching their forward firepower and severely outgunning them with its broadside armament . Inside an enemy galley formation , it could wreak considerable havoc , but such a maneuver was never achieved in an actual battle , leaving that tactical role untested . Like the hemmema , the turuma was effective in defensive formations , but lacked the mobility that was often needed in offensive archipelago warfare . In 1790 , after the war ended , two were converted into hospital ships . The second battle of Svensksund had clearly showed that the smaller and nimble gunboats and <unk> were far more efficient in coastal warfare and had all but displaced " archipelago frigates " in the inshore squadrons by the Finnish War of 1808 – 09 . 
 = = Ships = = 
 Fourteen or fifteen turumas were built for the Swedish archipelago fleet . All vessels except Amphion are listed below along with the basic information to the extent it has been recorded . Specifications that are identical to vessels listed directly <unk> are marked with a dash . Three " shebecks " were also built for the Russian Baltic fleet in 1788 – 89 that were based directly on the turumas rather than the Mediterranean xebecs . 
 = Julia Baird = 
 Julia Baird ( née Dykins ) ( born 5 March 1947 ) is the younger half @-@ sister of English musician John Lennon and is the eldest daughter of John ' Bobby ' Albert Dykins ( 1918 – December 1965 ) and Julia Lennon ( 12 March 1914 – 15 July 1958 ) . she also had an older half @-@ sister , Ingrid Pedersen . Her younger sister was Jacqueline ' Jackie ' Dykins ( born 26 October 1949 ) . 
 Lennon started visiting the Dykins ' house in 1951 . After the death of Julia Lennon in 1958 , Harriet and Norman Birch were appointed guardians of Julia and Jackie , ignoring Dykins ' parentage , as he had never legally married their mother . Lennon invited the Dykins sisters to visit after the success of the Beatles , when he was living in Kenwood , Weybridge , with his then @-@ wife , Cynthia Lennon . 
 Julia Dykins ( Baird ) married Allen Baird in 1968 and moved to Belfast . They had three children together but were divorced in 1981 . Baird worked as a special needs teacher , and after Lennon 's death she wrote John Lennon , My Brother ( with Geoffrey Giuliano ) and gave up working in 2004 to write Imagine This – Growing up with my brother John Lennon . She is now a director of Cavern City Tours in Liverpool . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Baird 's mother , Julia Lennon , was the fourth of five children in the Stanley family : Mary , known as ' Mimi ' ( 1906 – 1991 ) , Elizabeth ' Mater ' ( 1908 – 1976 ) , Anne ' Nanny ' ( 1911 – 1988 ) , Julia ' Judy ' ( 1914 – 1958 ) , and Harriet ' Harrie ' ( 1916 – 1972 ) . 
 John Lennon was Julia 's first child by Alfred Lennon , although she later had a daughter called Victoria ( renamed Ingrid ) after an affair with a Welsh soldier while Alfred was at sea . Julia was forced to give up the child for adoption after intense pressure from her father and her sisters . Although they had known each other previously , Julia started dating Dykins while working in a café near Mosspits , which was Lennon 's primary school . Dykins was said to be a good @-@ looking , well @-@ dressed man who was several years older than Julia and worked at the Adelphi Hotel in Liverpool as a wine steward . Julia later moved into a small flat in Gateacre with Dykins , who had access to rationed goods like alcohol , chocolate , silks and cigarettes . The Stanley sisters called Dykins a " spiv " , because of his pencil @-@ thin moustache , margarine @-@ coated hair , and pork @-@ pie hat , but the young Lennon called him " Twitchy " because of a physical tic and nervous cough Dykins had . Although Julia never divorced Alfred Lennon , she was the common @-@ law wife of Dykins , although Paul McCartney admitted to being sarcastic to Lennon about his mother living in sin while Julia was still married . Julia 's sister , Mimi , called Julia and Dykins ' home — at 1 Blomfield Road , Liverpool — " The House of Sin " and her own house ( where Lennon lived ) " The House of Correction " . When Jackie was born prematurely on 26 October 1949 , Julia went back to the hospital every day to see her , although she was often not allowed ( by Mimi ) to visit Lennon . 
 Dykins later managed several bars in Liverpool , which allowed Julia to stay at home at Blomfield Road , to look after Baird , Jackie , a cat named " Elvis " , and the 11 @-@ year @-@ old Lennon , who had started to visit and occasionally stayed overnight . Baird would give up her bed to Lennon , and share Jackie 's double bed . Dykins used to give Lennon weekly pocket money ( one shilling ) for doing odd jobs , such as collecting golf balls on the local course , on top of the five shillings that Lennon 's Aunt Mimi gave him . During Lennon 's visits , he would climb trees with Baird and Jackie , test Baird 's spelling , and once gave Baird half @-@ a @-@ crown to leave him alone when he wanted to kiss his first girlfriend . Baird remembered that after Lennon had visited them , her mother would often play a record called , My Son John , To Me You Are So Wonderful , " by some old crooner , and sit and listen to it " . " My Son John " — sung by David Whitfield — was released in 1956 . Although Mimi sent Lennon to his Aunt 's croft in Sango Bay , Durness , Scotland , for his holidays , he later persuaded Mimi to let him take short holidays in North Wales with the Dykins family . Julia took Baird and Jackie to <unk> Street , Liverpool , to watch Lennon play with The Quarrymen on the back of a flatbed coal truck on 22 June 1957 . Baird was allowed to sit on the back , but as the music was too loud she asked to be taken off . The Quarrymen played twice that day as part of a celebration to mark the 750th anniversary of the granting of Liverpool 's charter by King John . Lennon and McCartney would later rehearse in the bathroom of Blomfield Road because they said the acoustics " sounded like a recording studio " . 
 = = = Legal guardian = = = 
 Baird 's mother was struck and killed on 15 July 1958 , just outside Mimi 's home , by a Standard Vanguard car driven by an off @-@ duty constable , PC Eric Clague , who was a learner @-@ driver . Clague later said : " Mrs Lennon just ran straight out in front of me . I just couldn 't avoid her . I was not speeding , I swear it . It was just one of those terrible things that happen . " Baird and Jackie ( aged eleven and eight respectively ) were sent straightway to stay in Edinburgh at their Aunt Mater 's , and were not allowed to attend the funeral . They were told two months later by Norman Birch ( Lennon 's uncle ) that their mother had died . Lennon 's Aunt Harriet and Uncle Norman Birch were made legal guardians of the girls — ignoring Dykins ' parentage , as he had never legally married Julia . Julia was buried in the Allerton Cemetery , in Liverpool . Her grave is unmarked , and over the years its location was forgotten until it was recently identified by Jackie as " CE ( Church of England ) 38 @-@ 805 " . 
 Baird and Jackie were taken to live with the <unk> and their son at The Dairy Cottage , which was owned by Mimi 's husband , George Smith . At the age of 14 Baird was allowed to go into Liverpool city centre by herself , where she drank cappuccino coffee in the Kardomah Coffee House , although Baird and her friends called it " frothy coffee " . At 16 , Baird started to hitch @-@ hike to London , although her Aunt never knew , as she would never have allowed it . Baird talked about the trips to London , and how relatively safe they were : " <unk> was easy then . It was a way of life . Everything was becoming more free . We 'd start chatting to people in the Tube station and get invited to parties . People always gave us a place to stay – we were never harmed . " 
 Baird and Jackie were asked to visit Lennon at Kenwood which was his home in Weybridge in 1964 . Cynthia Lennon — Lennon 's wife at the time — took them both out shopping in Knightsbridge , buying them expensive clothes . During the same visit , The Beatles played at the Finsbury Park Astoria , and the sisters asked to be allowed to stand near the front , but had to be pulled out of the audience by security guards because of the crush . In December 1965 , Dykins was killed in a car crash at the bottom of Penny Lane . Lennon was not told about his death for months afterwards . Dykins had married again , but Baird acknowledges that she and Jackie had very little contact with his wife , and did not attend their father 's funeral . 
 In 1968 , Lennon was told The Dairy Cottage was too cramped for them all , so he told Birch to buy a house , and he found a 4 @-@ bedroom house in Gateacre Park Drive , Liverpool . Lennon told Birch to furnish and decorate it , and to send all the bills to him . The <unk> heard nothing from Lennon for years , until he phoned Baird in 1975 , and asked for mementos of his childhood life , such as his school tie and photographs . He sent £ 3 @,@ 000 to cover the cost of shipping and as a gift , but wrote , " Don 't tell Mimi " . Lennon continued to call Baird until 1976 , when the calls stopped . Jackie worked as a shop assistant during the 1970s , but battled against a heroin addiction . In the 1980s , and fully recovered , Jackie gave birth to her son , John , later working as a hairstylist . After Lennon and Harriet died , Yoko Ono wanted to sell the house — as it was still in Lennon 's name — but later gave it to the Salvation Army on 2 November 1993 , even though Lennon had once written : " I always thought of the house he 's in [ Birch ] as my contribution towards looking after Julia [ Baird ] and Jackie . I would prefer the girls to use it . " 
 = = Later years = = 
 Julia married Allen Baird in 1968 , they moved to Belfast and kept her family history a secret . The Bairds had three children : Nicholas ( b . 1971 ) , Sara ( b . 1972 ) and David ( b . 1980 ) , and were divorced in 1981 . Baird went to university and gained an MA in philosophy of education , and during her the course of her degree she spent a year off in France , hitch @-@ hiked around Europe , and protested against the war in Vietnam in Paris alongside Simone de Beauvoir . Baird later taught French and English before working as a special needs teacher with teenagers in deprived areas of Chester , until she retired to write books and become a director of Cavern City Tours . 
 Baird and Jackie met their half @-@ sister Ingrid Pedersen for the first time when they were present at the ceremony to place a Blue Heritage plaque on Mimi 's house , commemorating the fact that Lennon had lived there . Baird and Jackie had only recently found out who Pedersen was , after being told by journalist Bill Smithies of the Liverpool Echo . Baird was shocked that Pedersen did not look anything like the Stanley or the Lennon family , having pale blue eyes and fair hair . 
 After releasing the book , John Lennon , My Brother — written with Giuliano , and a foreword by McCartney — Baird travelled to New York during 1989 to appear at a <unk> convention , and was asked if she could prove she was really Lennon 's half @-@ sister . Baird declined , saying she was not going to produce her passport , and the audience would just have to take her word for it . In 2000 , Baird was present at the unveiling of six road signs , erected on major routes into Liverpool , saying , " Liverpool welcomes you – to the birthplace of THE <unk> " , and in October she planted a tree in Liverpool 's Peace Gardens to commemorate Lennon 's birthday . 
 Baird retired in 2004 , and published a book called Imagine This – Growing up with my brother John Lennon , in February 2007 . 
 From 28 to 30 September 2007 , Durness held the John Lennon Northern Lights Festival which was attended by Baird ( who read from Lennon 's writings and her own books ) and Stanley Parkes ( Lennon 's Scottish cousin ) . Parkes said , " Me and Julia [ Baird ] are going to be going to the old family croft to tell stories " . Musicians , painters and poets from across the UK performed at the festival . Baird now lives in Chester with her partner , Roger Keys . 
 Baird claims she was never told that her mother was buried in the Allerton Cemetery , in Liverpool , although the graveyard 's location is approximately 1 @.@ 19 miles east of 1 Blomfield Road . The grave was unmarked , but was recently identified as " CE ( Church of England ) 38 @-@ 805 " . The Stanley family finally put a headstone on her mother 's grave . The headstone reads : 
 Mummy 
 John 
 Victoria 
 Julie 
 Jackie . 
 = SS Gothenburg = 
 The SS Gothenburg was a steamship that operated along the British and then later the Australian and New Zealand coastlines . In February 1875 , she left Darwin , Australia en route to Adelaide when she encountered a cyclone @-@ strength storm off the north Queensland coast . The ship was wrecked on the Great Barrier Reef north @-@ west of Holbourne Island on 24 February 1875 . Survivors in one of the lifeboats were rescued two days later by the Leichhardt , while the occupants of two other lifeboats that managed to reach Holbourne Island were rescued several days later . Twenty @-@ two men survived , while between 98 and 112 others died , including a number of high @-@ profile civil servants and dignitaries . 
 = = Description and history = = 
 The Gothenburg was commissioned in 1855 following her construction at <unk> 's building yards in Millwall , London . She was a 501 @-@ ton , 197 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 60 m ) vessel , with a 120 @-@ horsepower ( 89 kW ) , coal @-@ burning engine . She was rigged as barquentine , with her funnel set well aft between the main and mizzen masts . She was fitted with four lifeboats , two port and two starboard . 
 Her first owner , the North of Europe Steam Navigation Company , operated her between <unk> Wharf , near the Tower of London , and Sweden . In 1857 , she was acquired by the Union Castle Line and renamed as RMS Celt . In June 1862 , <unk> , Blackwood and Co. of Melbourne purchased her for the Australian trade and in that year she made a protracted voyage from England to Australia by sail . She was one of the most modern vessels working around the Australian coastline in the 1860s , and became a popular ship as she was considered reliable . After many years on the Australia @-@ New Zealand run , her owners transferred her to the Australian coastal service . 
 In 1873 , she was lengthened and refitted in Adelaide to enable longer distances under steam and greater passenger and cargo capacity . Following her modifications , her name reverted once again to Gothenburg . 
 In November 1874 , several shipowners were contracted for two years from the South Australian government to provide ten round trips between the colonial capital of Adelaide and its furthest outpost , Port Darwin . Port Darwin was feeling the effects of a gold rush at Pine Creek and growing quickly as a trade post with the Dutch East Indies . However , all the local banks sent their money , together with government paperwork and the Royal Mail , around the east coast to Adelaide . On successful completion of each voyage , the South Australian government would pay the owners £ 1000 sterling . 
 When the Gothenburg left Port Darwin on Wednesday , 17 February 1875 , Captain James Pearce was under orders to make best possible speed . Pearce had been her captain on the Adelaide @-@ Darwin run for some time and had built up a solid reputation . He was a man of the sea , a man of sobriety and kindness and was well respected by his fellow sea captains . 
 Amongst the approximately 98 passengers and 37 crew ( surviving records vary ) were government officials , circuit court judges , Darwin residents taking their first furlough and miners . Also aboard was the French Vice Consul Eduard Durand and James Millner , the medical officer in George W. Goyder 's 1869 expedition to found the first colony at Port Darwin . There were also several prisoners aboard , bound for the Adelaide jail . Locked in the Captain 's cabin was approximately 93 kilograms ( 3 @,@ 000 ozt ) of gold valued at £ 40 @,@ 000 consigned to the ES & A Bank in Adelaide . ( approx US $ 2 @.@ 6 million in 2008 ) . Durand reportedly also carried a tin box with him containing gold sovereigns and coins worth in excess of £ 3 @,@ 000 . 
 In three days of fine weather , the Gothenburg travelled 1 @,@ 500 kilometres ( 900 mi ) from Palmerston ( Darwin ) to Somerset on Cape York . The weather began to worsen so the ship stopped to take on ballast at Somerset . While she was anchored , conditions deteriorated to a point where both anchor chains parted . After the loss of the anchors , the Gothenburg was forced to prematurely steam out 13 kilometres ( 7 @.@ 0 nmi ) because of strong currents ; at that point , she brought up for the night . 
 Two days later , Tuesday 23 February , the Gothenburg passed Cooktown at about 2 : 00 pm . The wind and rain severely increased and cloud cover became so thick it blocked out the sun . Despite this , she continued the journey south into worsening weather , in a deep water passage between the North Queensland coastline and the Great Barrier Reef , known as the inner route . Although taking this route provided some protection from the open sea , captains had to navigate and thread their way through a number of then uncharted reefs . All passengers and crew expected to be in Newcastle on Sunday evening for a scheduled stopover . 
 = = Shipwreck = = 
 On the evening of 24 February 1875 , the ship was still heading south in almost cyclonic conditions with fore , top and <unk> set and the steam engines running at full speed . Flooding rains lashed the entire Queensland coast and Captain Pearce reportedly could not see land or sun . At approximately 7 : 00 pm , and for reasons undetermined , he altered course and shortly afterwards , at full speed ( 11 to 12 knots ) , hit a section of the Great Barrier Reef at low tide 31 miles ( 50 km ) north west of Holbourne Island . The Gothenburg struck with such force that she was left high up on the reef . Immediately , an order came out to lower the sails . At first , there was no panic and many passengers returned to their cabin bunks expecting the Gothenburg would come off the reef at high tide . 
 In an attempt to refloat her , Captain Pearce ordered the Gothenburg to be lightened forward . Water casks used as ballast and passengers were positioned aft in an endeavour to refloat her as the tide rose , but without success . Finally , a fatal attempt was made to refloat her , by reversing the engine hard . The vessel came half off the reef , but holed herself badly and then slewed broadside to the waves , in a much worse position . However , with the tide rising and some cargo now being dumped overboard , all aboard still expected the Gothenburg to float free . With strong winds changing direction and seas increasing , the boiler fires were extinguished by water rising through the damaged stern . Around midnight , the chief engineer came on deck to report that the engine room was flooded and the engine was of no further use . With heavy seas now rushing down hatchways and into the cabins , the Gothenburg was doomed and Captain Pearce was forced to admit that the situation had become desperate . 
 The storm made launching the lifeboats almost impossible . At about 3 : 00 am , Captain Pearce ordered the two port lifeboats lowered , each with four crew on board . While being passed astern one of the boats broke the painter and became adrift . Its crew tried hard to pull up to the ship 's side , but it was impossible in the heavy squall . The other was accidentally let go and both boats , in heavy seas , were unable to be retrieved . 
 At about 3 : 30 am on Thursday , 25 February , the Gothenburg continued to heel over . The deck became so steep that passengers and crew had to climb over the rails to get on her side . At about 4 : 00 am , the two remaining starboard lifeboats were lowered and were rushed by the passengers . One starboard lifeboat , crammed with women and children , capsized when others tried to board it . Some half dozen men righted her in the water , but , damaged and without oars , food or water , it quickly drifted away and was never found . The second starboard lifeboat also capsized when the sea crashed over , washing all the occupants into the sea . One passenger recalled the sea on the downwind side of the ship being covered with human heads bobbing up and down like corks . Five or six men and one woman climbed onto the upturned hull . The boat was still connected to its painter , but it was unable to be recovered from the heavy sea and wind which swept the woman off and drowned her . A passenger , John Cleland , swam to the connected , but upturned lifeboat and further secured it with a rope tied to the Gothenburg . In less than fifteen minutes , nearly 100 people had drowned ; washed away or trapped in their water @-@ filled cabins . By this time , several sharks were circling the wreck . 
 Those still on board the Gothenburg tried to cling to the rigging , but throughout the early morning of 25 February , several more people were drowned after they were swept overboard by large broadside waves . Many passengers associated with the gold diggings were unwilling to let go of their gold and money belts , as it was probably their life savings , insisted on keeping them tied and once overboard reportedly drowned very quickly . 
 = = = Survivors = = = 
 By morning of the 25 February , only the masts were visible protruding from the water , with 14 people clinging to the rigging , where they remained for the next twenty four hours in cyclonic weather . At low tide , the Gothenburg ground and twisted and broke her back between the fore and main masts . However , the remaining starboard lifeboat , which had capsized , was still held by her painter and the rope attached by Cleland . At first light on 26 February the weather eased and the survivors managed to right the boat and bail it out ; they prepared a makeshift sail and paddled for the mainland . About seven hours later they realised they could not make mainland , so they altered course for an island that could be seen in the distance . When they arrived , they were met by four of the crew from one of the port lifeboats . Their lifeboat had been severely damaged on the rocks on the opposite side of the island in an attempt to land there the day before . 
 The other port lifeboat , with four crew on board , was picked up by the steamer Leichhardt at an island at the entrance to Whitsunday Passage two days after the disaster . The steamer immediately reversed course back towards the wreck , which she reached at approximately 3 @.@ 30 pm on Friday , 26 February . Gothenburg was a complete wreck ; the funnel was gone and she had sunk to the eyes of the lower rigging . The Leichhardt 's Chief Officer and four hands went alongside , but nothing other than her masts could be seen above the water except for the body of a naked man floating nearby . They assumed the other victims had been taken by sharks . The Leichhardt searched for survivors until last light and then made way for Bowen where the alarm was raised . 
 At Holbourne Island , the other 18 survivors were living off raw bird 's eggs and rain water that had pooled in the island rocks . Because rescue was uncertain , they engraved ship details and their names on the concave side of a large turtle shell , in the hope that it would be found in the future . On Sunday , 28 February 15 of them set off in the starboard lifeboat for an island about 20 miles away to the south , which appeared to be closer to the main shipping lane . A rescue ship , sent looking for survivors , picked up the group and took them safely to Bowen . Another rescue ship called the <unk> from Townsville subsequently returned to Holbourne Island and rescued the three remaining survivors . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Although reports vary , records show that between 98 and 112 people drowned . Most records state the death toll at 102 . Only 22 people survived ( 12 crew and 10 passengers ) . All 25 women and children aboard and all the officers died . 
 Edward W. Price , Magistrate and Commissioner Circuit Court of the Northern Territory , who remained behind in Darwin , lost his wife and six children . Devastated by the news , he was given six months leave on full pay by the government . The retired fifth Premier of South Australia , Thomas Reynolds and his wife , Anne , both drowned as did Eduard Durand , the French Vice Consul . 
 Other notable passengers who died were Dr James Millner and his family , Justice William A. Wearing QC , Circuit Court Judge ; Joseph Whitby , acting South Australian Crown Solicitor ; Richard Wells , NT Times & Gazette editor ; Lionel Pelham , a senior public servant ; Commander Andrew Ross of the Royal Navy ; C. J. Lyons , Justice Wearing 's senior assistant ; William <unk> , Secretary to several mining companies ; A. L. McKay , Government Surveyor ; and several Overland Telegraph employees . 
 Never before in Australian history had so many high @-@ profile public servants , dignitaries and diplomats died in a single tragedy . Many passengers who died were Darwin residents and news of the tragedy severely affected the small community , reportedly taking several years to recover . Most of Gothenburg 's crew were from Melbourne and as a result of the shipwreck , 11 widows and 34 children were left destitute in Victoria . 
 At Bowen , twelve survivors left with Captain Lake on the ship Victoria headed for Sydney . They all got free passage from <unk> , Blackwood and Co , the owners of Gothenburg . The four survivors from the second port lifeboat that were picked up by the steamer Leichhardt , remained with that ship and subsequently made way for Brisbane . 
 Two weeks later a hard @-@ hat diver , sent down to recover the gold and other valuables , found the bodies of two women at the foot of the saloon staircase , one with her arm around the other . The diver tried to reach them to take a lock of hair or some other personal item that could be identified by their loved ones , but the restriction of the air line made it impossible . The gold in the Captain 's cabin was recovered after much difficulty . While recovering the gold , several sharks that were caught near the wreck were found to contain human bones , remains and jewellery . 
 There were three heroes identified that tragic night , all attested to by all the other survivors , for their attempts to save other passengers . In recognition of their bravery , on 26 July 1875 , the Governor of South Australia , Sir Anthony Musgrave , presented passengers James Fitzgerald and John Cleland and crewman Robert Brazil with gold medals and a gold watch . The Gothenburg Relief Fund Committee also presented each of them with a gold chain . 
 = = = Report = = = 
 The report of the Marine Board of Queensland determined that : 
 = = = Lifeboats = = = 
 There was also much speculation at the time in the Adelaide and Melbourne press on why the lifeboats had not been launched earlier . Survivor James Fitzgerald pointed out in his recollection that , had the lifeboats been filled to capacity , no one would have survived the severe weather conditions experienced . He also commented that passenger vessels were not required to carry enough lifeboats , concluding that there were insufficient places for all Gothenburg 's passengers and crew . It was not until RMS Titanic sank some 37 years later in 1912 , that it was made compulsory for all British registered ships to carry sufficient lifeboats for everyone on board . 
 = = Present day = = 
 Today , only parts of the deteriorated iron hull and the coal fired square boilers of the SS Gothenburg remain . The wreck lies between 9 and approximately 16 metres ( 52 ft ) of water on the western side of Old Reef , 130 kilometres ( 81 mi ) southeast of Townsville . The Gothenburg shipwreck is registered on the Queensland National Estate ( place ID # <unk> ) as a Heritage site , and is protected under Section 7 of the ( Commonwealth ) Historic Shipwrecks Act 1976 , which requires that divers have a permit to enter the 200m protected zone that has been declared around the wreck . Its official location is : Old Reef , Great Barrier Reef , 75 kilometres ( 47 mi ) north @-@ east of Ayr , at 19 ° 22 ′ 06 ″ S 148 ° 03 ′ 21 ″ E. The reef around the wreck provides good diving with an extensive coral garden . A strict non @-@ disturbance policy applies to marine flora and fauna as well as to the fabric of the wreck . Pelagic fish and reef sharks are common . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 The northern Darwin suburb of Millner was named after Dr James Millner who , together with his family , lost their lives on the Gothenburg . Most streets in the northern Darwin suburb of Coconut Grove and some in the adjacent suburb of Millner , were named after local Darwin residents , interstate visitors and crew who lost their lives during the shipwreck . Gothenburg Crescent , in the inner Darwin suburb of Stuart Park , was named after the ship . 
 The large turtle shell , which was engraved by the 18 survivors at Holbourne Island , is displayed at the South Australian Museum , on North Terrace in Adelaide . 
 = = Survivors = = 
 In 1875 , a detailed list of all passengers and crew was published by J.H. Lewis , Printer & Publisher , albeit with several errors and spelling mistakes . That document was used as the main source of the following survivors ' table . 
 The survivors ' surnames have been reconciled against rescue ships ' log books , other records and a photo of the engraved turtle shell . Known discrepancies have been clarified , where possible , in the comments section . 
 = = = Full known passenger list = = = 
 = = = Full known crew list = = = 
 = 17th Airborne Division ( United States ) = 
 The 17th Airborne Division was an airborne infantry division of the United States Army during World War II , and was commanded by Major General William M. Miley . 
 It was officially activated as an airborne division in April 1943 but was not immediately sent to a combat theater , remaining in the United States to complete its training . During this training process , the division took part in several training exercises , including the Knollwood Maneuver , in which it played a vital part in ensuring that the airborne division remained as a military formation in the U.S. Army after the poor performance of American airborne forces in the invasion of Sicily . As such it did not take part in the first two large @-@ scale airborne operations conducted by the Allies , Operation Husky and Operation Neptune , only transferring to Britain after the end of Operation Overlord . 
 When the division arrived in Britain , it came under the command of XVIII Airborne Corps , part of the First Allied Airborne Army , but was not chosen to participate in Operation Market Garden , the airborne landings in the Netherlands , as Allied planners believed it had arrived too late and could not be " trained up " in time for the operation . However , after the end of Operation Market Garden the division was shipped to France and then Belgium to fight in the Ardennes during the Battle of the Bulge . The 17th gained its first Medal of Honor during its time fighting in the Ardennes , and was then withdrawn to Luxembourg to prepare for an assault over the River Rhine . In March 1945 , the division participated in its first , and only , airborne operation , dropping alongside the British 6th Airborne Division as a part of Operation Varsity , where it gained three more Medals of Honor . The division then advanced through Northern Germany until the end of World War II , when it briefly undertook occupation duties in Germany before shipping back to the United States . There , it was officially inactivated in September 1945 , although it was briefly reactivated as a training division between 1948 and 1949 . 
 = = Formation = = 
 The German Armed Forces pioneered the use of large @-@ scale airborne formations , first during the invasion of Norway and Denmark and later that year during the assaults on the Netherlands and Belgium in 1940 and later in the Battle of Crete in 1941 . The Allied governments were aware of the success of these operations ( but not of the heavy German casualties incurred , particularly during the assault on the Netherlands and the invasion of Crete ) and decided to form their own airborne formations . This decision would eventually lead to the creation of five American and two British airborne divisions , as well as many smaller units . The 17th Airborne Division was activated on 15 April 1943 at Camp Mackall in North Carolina , under the command of the newly promoted Major General William Miley . The division was originally composed of the 513th Parachute Infantry Regiment , activated on 11 January 1943 at Fort Benning , the 193rd Glider Infantry Regiment , and the 194th Glider Infantry Regiment . The official dedication ceremony for the unit took place on 1 May 1943 , with thousands of civilian and military spectators , including Major General Eldridge G. Chapman , overall commander of Airborne Command and of all American airborne forces during World War II . 
 Once activated , the division remained in the United States for training and exercises . As the division , like all airborne units , was intended to be an elite formation , the training regime was extremely arduous . There were 250 feet ( 76 m ) and 34 feet ( 10 m ) towers built from which prospective airborne troops would jump off of to simulate landing by parachute , lengthy forced marches and practice jumps from transport aircraft ; to pause in the doorway of an aircraft during a practice jump resulted in an automatic failure for the candidate . The resultant failure rate was accordingly high , but there was never a shortage of candidates , especially for the American divisions , as the rate of pay was much higher than that of an ordinary infantryman . As the division trained , a debate developed in the U.S. Army over whether the best use of airborne forces was en masse or as small compact units . On 9 July 1943 , the first large @-@ scale Allied airborne operation – the Allied invasion of Sicily ( Operation Husky ) – was carried out by elements of the U.S. 82nd Airborne Division and the British 1st Airborne Division . The commanding general of the U.S. 11th Airborne Division , Major General Joseph May Swing , had been temporarily assigned to act as airborne advisor to General Dwight D. Eisenhower , the Supreme Allied Commander Mediterranean , for the invasion of Sicily , and had observed the airborne assault , which went badly . The U.S. 82nd Airborne Division had been deployed by both parachute and glider and had suffered high casualties , leading to a perception that it had failed to achieve many of its objectives . 
 = = = Swing Board = = = 
 General Eisenhower had reviewed the airborne role in Operation Husky , and had concluded that large @-@ scale formations were too difficult to control in combat to be practical . Lieutenant General Lesley J. McNair , commander of Army Ground Forces , had similar misgivings : once an airborne supporter , he had been greatly disappointed by their performance in North Africa and , more recently , Sicily . However , other high @-@ ranking officers believed otherwise , notably the U.S. Army Chief of Staff , George Marshall . He persuaded Eisenhower to set up a review board and to withhold judgement on the effectiveness of divisional @-@ sized airborne forces until a large @-@ scale maneuver could be tried in December . When Swing returned to the United States to resume command of the 11th Airborne Division in mid @-@ September 1943 , he had an additional role . McNair ordered him to form a committee – the Swing Board – composed of U.S. Army Air Forces , parachute and glider infantry , and artillery officers to arrange a large @-@ scale maneuver that would effectively decide the fate of the divisional @-@ sized airborne force . As the 11th Airborne Division was in reserve in the United States , and had not yet been earmarked for overseas shipment , the Swing Board chose it as the test formation ; it would be opposed by a composite combat team from the 17th Airborne Division with a battalion from the 541st Parachute Infantry Regiment temporarily attached . The maneuver would also provide both divisions with further airborne training , as had occurred several months previously in a large @-@ scale maneuver undertaken by the 82nd and the 101st Airborne Divisions . 
 = = = Knollwood Maneuver = = = 
 The objective for the 11th as the attacking force was to capture Knollwood Army Auxiliary Airfield near Fort Bragg in North Carolina , after which the maneuver was named . The defending forces were to try to defend the airport and the surrounding area and repel the airborne assault . The entire operation would be observed by Lieutenant General McNair . His observations and reports to the U.S. War Department , and ultimately General Eisenhower , would do much to decide the success or failure of the exercise . The Knollwood Maneuver took place on the night of 7 December , with the troops of the 11th Airborne Division being delivered to thirteen separate objectives by 200 C @-@ 47 Dakota transport aircraft and 234 Waco CG @-@ 4A gliders , with eighty @-@ five percent of the airborne troops being delivered to their target without navigational error . The transport aircraft were divided into four groups , each taking off from a different airfield in the Carolinas , with two groups dropping paratroopers and two towing gliders , and between them deployed 4 @,@ 800 airborne troops in the first wave . These airborne troops then seized the Knollwood Army Auxiliary Airfield from the defending troops and secured the area in which the rest of the division landed , all before daylight . Having secured their initial objectives , the 11th Airborne Division then conducted a coordinated ground attack against a reinforced infantry regiment , as well as several aerial resupply and casualty evacuation missions in coordination with transport aircraft . The exercise was judged to be a great success by those who observed it . McNair reported that the success of the maneuver pleased him , and highlighted the great improvements in airborne training that had occurred in the months between the end of Operation Husky and the Knollwood Maneuver . Due to the success of the units of the 17th Airborne Division during the exercise , the divisional @-@ sized airborne force was deemed to be effective and was allowed by Eisenhower to remain . 
 = = World War II = = 
 The division also participated in the Second Army maneuvers in the Tennessee Maneuver Area from 6 February 1944 . It finished its training on 27 March 1944 , and transferred to Camp Forrest on 24 March 1944 . The division staged at Camp Myles Standish on 12 August 1944 before departing Boston Port of Embarkation on 20 August 1944 . It arrived in the United Kingdom on 26 August . 
 Once in Britain the division was attached to U.S. XVIII Airborne Corps , under Major General Matthew Ridgway , which commanded all American airborne formations , and which in turn became part of the First Allied Airborne Army when it was formed on 21 August , under the command of Lieutenant General Lewis H. Brereton . Although attached to XVIII Airborne Corps , the division was not chosen to participate in Operation Market Garden , a large @-@ scale airborne operation intended to seize several bridges through the Netherlands to allow the Allied armies to bypass the Rhine river and enter Germany . The 17th was passed over in favour of the 82nd and 101st Airborne Divisions because it had only recently arrived in the European Theater and was considered to be unprepared logistically as it was still collecting its combat equipment . The division , now with the 507th Parachute Infantry Regiment – which had fought in Normandy under command of the 82nd – remained in England as a theater reserve during Market Garden and its aftermath , as the Allied armies continued their advance towards Germany . 
 = = = Battle of the Bulge = = = 
 On 16 December 1944 the Wehrmacht launched an offensive in the Ardennes region of Belgium , breaking through Allied lines and rapidly advancing towards Antwerp . On the afternoon of 17 December , General Eisenhower , the Supreme Allied Commander , decided to commit his theater reserve to the Ardennes in an attempt to halt the German advance ; this consisted of the 17th , 82nd and 101st Airborne Divisions under the control of XVIII Airborne Corps . The three divisions were to be attached to Courtney Hodges 's U.S. First Army and were ordered to concentrate around the town of St Vith . However , while the other two airborne divisions were able to immediately make their way to the Ardennes as they were already stationed in France , bad weather prevented the 17th from flying in from where the division was stationed in Britain for several days . On 23 December the weather cleared and the division was finally flown to France by emergency night flights . It moved to an assembly area near Rheims . On Christmas Day , the division was attached to George Patton 's U.S. Third Army and ordered to assume a thirty @-@ mile long defensive position that ran along the Meuse River near Charleville . 
 By 1 January 1945 the threat to Charleville had eased sufficiently for the division to be transferred to another area of the Ardennes , being transported to an area south @-@ west of Bastogne near the village of <unk> on 3 January ; there it relieved the 11th Armored Division which had occupied the village prior to its arrival . On 4 January the division entered combat for the first time when it was ordered alongside the 87th Infantry Division to seize a number of key towns to the west of Bastogne , in order to prevent German forces from encircling the town a second time ; it had been relieved by the Third Army on 26 December . With the 87th Infantry Division on its left flank , the division advanced towards German positions with the 194th Glider Infantry Regiment and 513th Parachute Infantry Regiment forming the division 's assault element ; the 193rd Glider Infantry Regiment and the 507th Parachute Infantry Regiment moved behind these two regiments to deal with expected German armoured counter @-@ attacks against them . During its initial advance the division engaged German forces , including infantry and armour , in an attempt to secure a narrow , high @-@ rimmed road to the north @-@ west of Bastogne ; during a battle that lasted three days the division suffered nearly 1 @,@ 000 casualties attempting to hold what the division 's official historian labeled ' Dead Man 's Ridge ' . It was during the opening stages of this battle that the division earned its first Medal of Honor . Staff Sergeant Isadore S. <unk> of the 513th Parachute Infantry engaged and destroyed two German tanks with a bazooka that formed part of an armoured column attacking American positions , forcing the column to retreat but simultaneously being killed by machine gun fire . Between 19 and 26 January , the division broke through German lines and captured several towns before linking up with elements of the British 51st Infantry Division . After it had captured the town of <unk> on 26 January the entire division was withdrawn from the front and transported by truck to Luxembourg , effectively ending its participation in the Ardennes campaign . 
 = = = Operation Varsity = = = 
 = = = = Preparation = = = = 
 After participating in the Battle of the Bulge , the division was moved behind the front @-@ lines as a reserve formation and theater reserve , whilst the Allies continued their advance towards the German interior . However , even as the division received replacements and trained , it had already been selected to take part in a highly ambitious airborne operation code @-@ named Operation Eclipse . This operation , which got to such an advanced stage that plans had been created and divisional commanders briefed , called for the 17th and 82nd Airborne divisions , along with a brigade from the British 6th Airborne Division , to be dropped in daylight in and around Berlin to capture the city . The operation received the support of General Henry H. Arnold , the Chief of the United States Army Air Corps , but planning ended on 28 March , when General Eisenhower sent a message to Joseph Stalin indicating that the Allied armies would not attempt to capture Berlin , thereby making Eclipse obsolete . Eclipse and several other similarly ambitious airborne operations came to nothing , but in February the division finally received word that it would be involved in an Allied airborne operation to cross the River Rhine in support of the Anglo @-@ Canadian 21st Army Group that would take place during March . 
 By March 1945 , the Allies had advanced into Germany and had reached the River Rhine . The Rhine was a formidable natural obstacle to the Allied advance , but if breached would allow the Allies to access the North German Plain and ultimately advance on Berlin and other major cities in Northern Germany . Following the ' Broad Front Approach ' laid out by General Eisenhower , it was decided to attempt to breach the Rhine in several areas . British Field Marshal Sir Bernard Montgomery , commanding the 21st Army Group , devised a plan to allow the forces under his command to breach the Rhine , which he entitled Operation Plunder , and which was subsequently authorized by Eisenhower . Plunder envisioned the British Second Army , under Lieutenant @-@ General Miles Dempsey and the U.S. Ninth Army under Lieutenant General William Simpson crossing the Rhine at Rees , Wesel , and an area south of the Lippe Canal . To ensure that the operation was a success , Montgomery insisted that an airborne component was inserted into the plans for the operation to support the amphibious assaults that would take place , which was code @-@ named Operation Varsity . Three airborne divisions were initially chosen to take part in Varsity , these being the British 6th Airborne Division , the U.S. 13th Airborne Division and the 17th Airborne Division , all of which were assigned to the U.S. XVIII Airborne Corps . 
 However , as planning for Operation Varsity began , it soon became obvious that there was a lack of suitable transport aircraft to transport all three airborne divisions . As such the 13th Airborne Division was dropped from the operational plan , primarily because it had no combat experience , whereas the 6th Airborne Division had participated in Operation Tonga , the British airborne landings during Operation Neptune , and the 17th had seen combat in the Ardennes . The plan for the operation was therefore altered to accommodate the two remaining airborne divisions . This would be the first airborne operation the 17th would take part in , and indeed would be its only before it was disbanded . The two airborne divisions would be dropped behind German lines , with their objective to land around Wesel and disrupt enemy defences in order to aid the advance of the British Second Army . To achieve this , both divisions would be dropped near the town of Hamminkeln , and were tasked with a number of objectives ; they were to seize the Diersfordter Wald , a forest that overlooked the Rhine and had a road linking several towns together ; several bridges over a smaller waterway , the Issel , were to be seized to facilitate the advance ; and the town of Hamminkeln was to be captured . Once these objectives were taken , the airborne troops would consolidate their positions and await the arrival of Allied ground forces , defending the territory captured against the German forces known to be in the area . 
 The 17th Airborne was to land its units in the southern portion of the area chosen for the operation , engaging the German forces that were defending the area , securing the Diersfordterwald Forest which dominated the surrounding area and capturing three bridges that spanned the River Issel . It would then hold the territory it had captured until it linked up units from the British 6th Airborne Division , which would land in the northern section of the operational area , and finally advance alongside 21st Army Group once the Allied ground forces had made contact with the airborne forces . To avoid the heavy casualties incurred by the British 1st Airborne Division that had occurred during Operation Market Garden , both Allied airborne divisions would only be dropped after Allied ground units had crossed the Rhine and secured crossings ; the two divisions would also be dropped only a relatively short distance behind German lines , to ensure that reinforcements would be able to link up with them after only a few hours and they would not be isolated . 
 = = = = Battle = = = = 
 Operation Plunder began at 21 : 00 on 23 March after a week @-@ long aerial bombardment of Luftwaffe airfields and the German transport system , involving more than ten thousand Allied aircraft . By the early hours of 24 March units of 21st Army Group had crossed the Rhine against heavy German opposition and secured several crossings on the eastern bank of the river . In the first few hours of 24 March , the transport aircraft carrying the two airborne divisions that formed Operation Varsity took off from airbases in England and France and rendezvoused over Brussels , before turning north @-@ east for the Rhine dropping zones . The airlift consisted of 541 transport aircraft containing airborne troops , and a further 1 @,@ 050 troop @-@ carriers towing 1 @,@ 350 gliders . The 17th Airborne Division consisted of 9 @,@ 387 personnel , who were transported in 836 C @-@ 47 Dakota transports , 72 C @-@ 46 Commando transports , and more than 900 Waco CG @-@ 4A gliders . At 10 : 00 on the morning of the 24th , the first Allied airborne units began to land on German soil on the eastern bank of the Rhine , some thirteen hours after the Allied assault had begun . 
 The 507th Parachute Infantry Regiment , under the command of Colonel Edson Raff , was the lead assault formation for the 17th Airborne Division , and was consequently the first U.S. airborne unit to land as part of Operation Varsity . The entire regiment was meant to be dropped in drop zone W , a clearing two miles north of Wesel ; however , excessive ground haze confused the pilots of the transport aircraft carrying the 507th , and as such when the regiment dropped it split into two halves . Colonel Raff and approximately 690 of his paratroopers landed north @-@ west of the drop zone near the town of Diersfordt , with the rest of the regiment successfully landing in drop zone W. The colonel rallied his separated paratroopers and led them to the drop zone , engaging a battery of German artillery en route , killing or capturing the artillery crews before reuniting with the rest of the regiment . By 14 : 00 the 507th PIR had secured all of its objectives and cleared the area around Diersfordt , having engaged numerous German troops and destroying a German tank . The actions of the regiment during the initial landing also gained the division its second Medal of Honor , when Private George J. Peters posthumously received the award after charging a German machine gun nest and eliminating it with rifle fire and grenades , allowing his fellow paratroopers to gather their equipment and capture the regiments first objective . 
 The 513th Parachute Infantry Regiment was the second divisional unit to land , and was under the command of Colonel James W. Coutts . En route to the drop zone , the transport aircraft containing the regiment had the misfortune to pass through a belt of German anti @-@ aircraft weapons , losing twenty @-@ two of the C @-@ 46 transport aircraft and damaging a further thirty @-@ eight . Just as the 507th had , the 513th also suffered from pilot error due to the ground haze , and as such the regiment actually missed their designated drop zone , and were dropped on one of the landing zones designated for the British 6th Airlanding Brigade . However , despite this inaccuracy the paratroopers swiftly rallied and aided the British glider @-@ borne troops who were landing simultaneously , eliminating several German artillery batteries which were covering the area . Once the German troops in the area had been eliminated , a combined force of American and British airborne troops stormed Hamminkeln and secured that town . By 14 : 00 , Colonel Coutts reported to the Divisional Headquarters that the 513th had secured all of its objectives , having knocked out two tanks and destroyed two complete regiments of artillery during its assault . During its attempts to secure its objectives , the regiment also gained a third Medal of Honor for the division when Private First Class Stuart S. Stryker posthumously received the award after leading a charge against a German machine gun nest , creating a distraction to allow the rest of his platoon to capture the fortified position the machine gun was situated in . 
 The third component of the 17th Airborne Division to take part in the operation was the 194th Glider Infantry Regiment , under the command of Colonel James Pierce . The regiment landed accurately in landing zone S , but their gliders and the aircraft that towed them took heavy casualties ; twelve C @-@ 47 transports were lost due to anti @-@ aircraft fire , and a further one hundred and forty were damaged by the same fire . The regiment landed in the midst of a number of German artillery batteries that were engaging Allied ground forces crossing the Rhine , and as such many of the gliders were engaged by German artillery pieces which had their barrels lowered for direct @-@ fire . However , these artillery batteries and their crews were defeated by the glider @-@ borne troops , and the regiment was soon able to report that its objectives had been secured , having destroyed forty @-@ two artillery pieces , ten tanks , two mobile @-@ flak wagons and five self @-@ propelled guns . 
 = = = = Aftermath = = = = 
 Operation Varsity was a successful large @-@ scale airborne operation . All of the objectives that the airborne troops of the 17th had been tasked with had been captured and held , usually within only a few hours of the operation beginning . The bridges over the Issel had been successfully captured , although one later had to be destroyed to prevent its capture by counter @-@ attacking German forces . The Diersfordter Forest had been cleared of enemy troops , and the roads through which the Germans might have routed reinforcements against the advance had been cut by airborne troops . By nightfall of the 24th , the British 15th Infantry Division had joined up with elements of 6th Airborne , and by midnight the first light bridge was across the Rhine . By the 27th , twelve bridges suitable for heavy armour had been installed over the Rhine and the Allies had fourteen divisions on the east bank of the river which had penetrated up to ten miles . The division also gained its fourth Medal of Honor in the days following Operation Varsity , when Technical Sergeant Clinton M. Hedrick of the 194th Glider Infantry Regiment received the award posthumously after aiding in the capture of Lembeck Castle , which had been turned into a fortified position by the Germans . In terms of casualties , the 17th suffered a total of 1 @,@ 346 casualties between 24 and 29 March , when Operation Plunder came to an end . 
 = = = Inactivation = = = 
 After it had participated in Operation Varsity , the 17th Airborne Division continued to advance through Germany as a part of XVIII Airborne Corps , engaging German forces around Wesel , Essen and Münster . The division had only served in combat for five months and seen only one combat drop , but in that short period of time it had seen 1 @,@ 314 men killed in action and 4 @,@ 904 men wounded or otherwise injured in action . When Germany unconditionally surrendered on 7 May 1945 , the division was conducting occupation duties in northern Germany , which it continued to do until it was relieved by British troops on 14 June . From that date , the division was split up and its component units attached to other airborne divisions , either to the 82nd Airborne Division in Berlin or to the 13th Airborne Division which was preparing to participate in the invasion of Japan . When Japan surrendered , all of the division 's units returned to their parent formation and the division moved to Camp Myles Standish in Taunton , Massachusetts , being officially inactivated on 16 September 1945 . The formation was reactivated at Camp Pickett , VA , on 6 July 1948 as a training division , but on 19 June 1949 it was permanently inactivated . 
 = = Order of battle = = 
 Units of the 17th Airborne Division during World War II included : 
 Division Headquarters 
 193rd Glider Infantry Regiment ( disbanded 1 March 1945 ) 
 194th Glider Infantry Regiment 
 507th Parachute Infantry Regiment ( attached 27 August 1944 to 1 March 1945 , thereafter assigned ) 
 513th Parachute Infantry Regiment ( replaced 517th Parachute Infantry Regiment on 10 March 1944 ) 
 517th Parachute Infantry Regiment ( relieved 10 March 1944 , replaced by the 513th Parachute Infantry Regiment ) 
 Division Artillery 
 464th Parachute Field Artillery Battalion ( 75mm ) ( assigned 4 June 1945 ) 
 466th Parachute Field Artillery Battalion ( 75mm ) 
 <unk> Glider Field Artillery Battalion ( 75mm ) 
 <unk> Glider Field Artillery Battalion ( 75mm ) 
 139th Airborne Engineer Battalion 
 155th Airborne Antiaircraft Battalion 
 224th Airborne Medical Company 
 17th Parachute Maintenance Company 
 Headquarters Special Troops 
 Headquarters Company , 17th Airborne Division 
 Military Police Platoon 
 717th Airborne Ordnance Maintenance Company 
 517th Airborne Signal Company 
 411th Airborne Quartermaster Company 
 17th Counter Intelligence Corps Detachment 
 Band ( assigned 1 March 1945 ) 
 Reconnaissance Platoon ( assigned 1 March 1945 ) 
 550th Airborne Infantry Battalion ( not assigned ; under division operational control during the Ardennes Offensive ) 
 761st Tank Battalion ( attached 15 – 27 January 1945 ) 
 <unk> Tank Destroyer Battalion ( attached 17 – 27 January 1945 ) 
 = M @-@ 28 Business ( Ishpeming – Negaunee , Michigan ) = 
 Business M @-@ 28 ( Bus . M @-@ 28 ) is a state trunkline highway serving as a business route that runs for 4 @.@ 841 miles ( 7 @.@ 791 km ) through the downtown districts of Ishpeming and Negaunee in the US state of Michigan . The trunkline provides a marked route for traffic diverting from U.S. Highway 41 ( US 41 ) and M @-@ 28 through the two historic iron @-@ mining communities . It is one of three business loops for M @-@ numbered highways in the state of Michigan . There have previously been two other Bus . M @-@ 28 designations for highways in Newberry and Marquette . 
 The trunkline was originally a section of US 41 / M @-@ 28 and M @-@ 35 . Before the 1930s , the main highways ran through the two downtown areas when US 41 / M @-@ 28 was relocated to run near Teal Lake . The former routing had various names over the years . It was designated as an alternate route of the main highways , using both the US 41A / M @-@ 28A and Alt . US 41 / ALT M @-@ 28 designations before it was designated as Bus . M @-@ 28 in 1958 . M @-@ 35 continued to run through downtown Negaunee along a section of the highway until the 1960s . A rerouting in 1999 moved the trunkline designation along Lakeshore Drive in Ishpeming , and a streetscape project rebuilt the road in Negaunee in 2005 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 There are currently three business routes in the state of Michigan derived from M @-@ numbered highways . The other two are in Hillman and Niles for M @-@ 32 and M @-@ 60 respectively . In the past , two other business routes for M @-@ 28 existed in Newberry and Marquette , but they have since been retired . The extant Bus . M @-@ 28 designation remains for the loop through Ishpeming and Negaunee . 
 = = = Ishpeming = = = 
 Bus . M @-@ 28 begins at a signalized intersection on US 41 / M @-@ 28 with Lakeshore Drive in the city of Ishpeming . The trunkline runs south along Lakeshore Drive under the tracks of the Lake Superior and Ishpeming Railroad ( LS & I ) and southeasterly towards Lake Bancroft . South of the lake , Bus . M @-@ 28 turns east on Division Street . Traffic along the highway here can view the towers of the Cliffs Shaft Mine Museum ; the museum is dedicated to telling the story of underground iron ore mining in the region . 
 Division Street carries the Bus . M @-@ 28 designation into the central business district of Ishpeming , where it runs past local businesses , Ishpeming High School and the original Ishpeming City Hall . On the east side of downtown , both the central machine shops and the research labs for Cleveland @-@ Cliffs Iron Company are located on Division Street . Continuing east , the trunkline follows Ready Street over hills and through a residential area to the Ishpeming – Negaunee city line . 
 = = = Negaunee = = = 
 In Negaunee , the routing uses a street named County Road east from the city line . County Road passes Jackson Park , location of the first iron ore discovery in the area . The iron mined from the region supplied half of the nation 's supply between 1850 and 1900 . South of downtown Negaunee , Bus . M @-@ 28 turns north along the west fork of Silver Street . The street runs north under an overpass that carries Rail Street , so named because it was once a rail line into downtown Negaunee . The trunkline turns east on Jackson Street , running next to the Negaunee City Hall , which was built in 1914 – 15 at a time when the city 's population was increasing and iron production was peaking . The building still houses the city 's offices , police station and library . 
 The business loop follows Jackson Street east to Division Street , where the street curves slightly and becomes Main Street . Bus . M @-@ 28 follows Main Street one block to the intersection with Teal Lake Avenue . Turning north , the trunkline follows Teal Lake Avenue through residential areas of town past the Negaunee Middle School and up over a hill . On the opposite side of the hill next to Teal Lake Bluff , the business loop intersects Arch Street , which carries traffic to Negaunee High School to the west or the football field complex to the east . Negaunee High School was the site of the former Mather B Mine Complex . The administration building for the mine was converted to its present educational use in 1986 . Bus . M @-@ 28 continues along Teal Lake Avenue past the football field and under the LS & I tracks where it ends at another signalized intersection with US 41 / M @-@ 28 by Teal Lake . The total length of Bus . M @-@ 28 is 4 @.@ 873 miles ( 7 @.@ 842 km ) . 
 = = = Traffic counts = = = 
 The Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) publishes traffic data for the highways it maintains . On Lakeshore Drive in Ishpeming , MDOT stated that 5 @,@ 857 vehicles on average used the roadway daily in 2014 . Along Division Street , traffic drops to 4 @,@ 044 vehicles before dropping further to 1 @,@ 617 vehicles along the section on Silver Street in Negaunee . Traffic increases along Jackson and Main streets to 4 @,@ 340 vehicles on an average day . Traffic is heaviest along Teal Lake Avenue , at 7 @,@ 521 vehicles . 
 = = History = = 
 The state highway system was created on May 13 , 1913 , with the passage of the State Reward Trunk Line Highway Act . The state originally signposted these highways by July 1 , 1919 , and the roadways that make up Bus . M @-@ 28 were originally a portion of M @-@ 15 . Later when the United States Numbered Highway System was created on November 11 , 1926 , the highway was redesignated as a part of US 41 and part of M @-@ 28 . The main highway was moved with the construction of a northerly bypass of Ishpeming and Negaunee in 1937 . The business loop was not designated Bus . M @-@ 28 permanently and marked on state maps until 1958 . It was designated US 41A / M @-@ 28A before being redesignated ALT US 41 / ALT M @-@ 28 @.@ or Bus . US 41 / Bus . M @-@ 28 . This dual designation later was mirrored by the other Marquette County business route , Bus . US 41 . Occasionally , more recent maps use this older numbering to label the highway . 
 When M @-@ 35 was routed through downtown Negaunee , it joined Bus . M @-@ 28 northward from the east fork of Silver Street on to US 41 / M @-@ 28 . This routing was moved to bypass the city in 1964 when iron ore mining activity destabilized a portion of the M @-@ 35 routing southeast of town . From this point on , Bus . M @-@ 28 has not shared its routing with any other state trunklines . 
 In 1969 , the Michigan Department of State Highways petitioned the American Association of State Highway Officials ( AASHO ) to approve a Bus . US 41 designation for the trunkline . Action on the request was deferred by AASHTO 's U.S. Route Numbering Subcommittee , and then denied the following year . The western end of Bus . M @-@ 28 was rerouted on June 4 , 1999 , when the City of Ishpeming petitioned MDOT to reroute the highway along Lakeshore Drive to US 41 / M @-@ 28 . Previously , it ran along Greenwood Street and North Lake Road and met US 41 / M @-@ 28 in the West Ishpeming neighborhood of Ishpeming Township . 
 MDOT in a partnership with the City of Negaunee upgraded Teal Lake Avenue between Arch and Rock streets in a streetscaping project to provide a " pedestrian refuge area " . This work entailed reconstruction of the retaining wall , curbing and gutters in 2005 . Arch Street is the access to Negaunee High School , and this section of Bus . M @-@ 28 is near the athletic field complex in Negaunee . The project budgeted $ 120 @,@ 200 with $ 24 @,@ 200 from the City of Negaunee ( equivalent to $ 151 @,@ 500 and $ 30 @,@ 500 respectively in 2015 ) . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The following table lists Bus . M @-@ 28 's major intersections with the primary Marquette County Roads . The entire highway is in Marquette County . 
 = Bounce ( Iggy Azalea song ) = 
 " Bounce " is a song recorded by Australian rapper Iggy Azalea for her debut album , The New Classic ( 2014 ) . It was released as the album 's second single internationally on 27 May 2013 , with the exception of the United States where " Change Your Life " was released instead . " Bounce " was written by Azalea , its producers Reeva & Black , Speedy Jay , Talay Riley , Oladayo Olatunji and Natalie Sims . Developed as a festival anthem about celebration , Azalea wanted the track to showcase a fun side to her artistry and offset the seriousness of her previous single " Work " . Distinctly more pop @-@ indebted than her previous material , the EDM , hip hop and trap song contains a prominent build @-@ drop production formula and elements of Eastern music with tabla and sarangi instruments . 
 The track received generally positive reviews from music critics who complimented its catchy tune and tempo . Commercially , " Bounce " became Azalea 's second top 20 hit on the UK Singles Chart where it peaked at number 13 . It also reached the top 40 in Ireland . An accompanying music video was released on 6 May 2013 . It was filmed in Mumbai , India , and inspired by the Bollywood disco era . The video features Azalea donning saris and bindis , performing belly dancing and traditional Indian dance sequences in Hindu wedding and Holi celebration settings . Most critics praised the video 's concept and fashion , although public reaction saw it being accused of cultural appropriation by some . Azalea promoted " Bounce " with a series of live festival performances and on the premiere of Channel 4 's Smells Like Friday Night . It was also included in the setlist for her 2014 The New Classic Tour . " Bounce " is featured on the soundtracks for the 2014 film Vampire Academy and the 2015 film Spy . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Bounce " was written by Iggy Azalea , Speedy Jay , Talay Riley , Oladayo Olatunji , Natalie Sims , and its producers Reeva & Black for Azalea 's debut album , The New Classic . With the song , Azalea wanted to showcase a fun side to herself and her artistry , and to offset the seriousness of her previous single , " Work " . " Bounce " was written as " something light and fun for the summer " and a " festival anthem " about celebration . Azalea also wanted " to see how the pop @-@ rap thing would go " . She recorded the track in early 2013 , when she was on tour with Nas in London . Olatunji recorded background vocals for the track with Azalea at Grove Studios in London . The song was mixed by Anthony Kilhoffer at The Mix Spot in Los Angeles , with assistance from Kyle Ross . 
 Azalea found " Bounce " to be different from her previous releases and the most commercial song on The New Classic . She initially felt that it was a risky choice for a single , and consulted Nas regarding the decision ; " With ' Bounce , ' I was like , ' It 's a pop record . I don 't know . ' [ Nas ] was like , ' Just fucking do it . It 's something different . It 's one song , what 's the big deal ? ' I couldn 't believe Nas was telling me to do a hip @-@ pop record . " Azalea also did not intend to include the song on The New Classic , believing that it strayed too far from the album 's musical and lyrical themes , but her record label convinced her otherwise and it was included as one of the album 's three bonus tracks . The song was later included in the main track listing of the album 's reissue , Reclassified . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Bounce " is an EDM , hip hop and trap song . It incorporates elements of house and Eastern music . Charley Rogulewski of Vibe writes that the song adds a pop element to Azalea 's " trademark trap sound " . The track combines busy production with Azalea 's energetic rapping — a combination viewed as " relentless " and " overwhelming " by some critics . The production consists of an uptempo , " club @-@ friendly " beat and " squiggle " sound effects . Its instrumentation comprises winding synths , deep bass , and tabla and sarangi melodies . 
 In contrast with the song 's tempo , Azalea 's rapping is fast @-@ paced and in Southern American English pronunciation throughout . A timed build @-@ drop production formula is used to vary her delivery in which she puts emphasis on certain lyrics and lifts off on others . During the verses , Azalea 's delivery is <unk> riddled and contains trill consonants , particularly during the bridge , " All about money , the nice never ending / We party till morning , tomorrow we kick it " . According to Digital Spy 's Lewis Corner , the chorus causes the listener to " adhere to the song 's title " . In it , Azalea repeatedly raps , " Make it bounce / Make it bounce / Make it bounce / Shake it , break it , make it bounce " . Lyrically , " Bounce " is about being carefree , partying , dancing , and celebrating life . Sam Lansky of Idolator describes the lyrics as " party @-@ happy uncomplicated fun " . Several critics compared the song to 2 Unlimited 's " No Limit " ( 1993 ) . 
 = = Release = = 
 " Bounce " served as the second single from The New Classic internationally , with the exception of Canada and the United States where " Change Your Life " was released instead . The song 's title was first revealed in an announcement about its accompanying music video on 15 April 2013 . Azalea posted the single 's cover art on Twitter on 24 April 2013 . " Bounce " premiered on BBC Radio 1 on 26 April 2013 , with Azalea uploading the song to her SoundCloud and YouTube channels the same day . 
 " Bounce " was first released as a digital extended play ( EP ) — which included a remix by DJ Green Lantern — on 27 May 2013 in selected countries such as France , while the release in several other countries were postponed to a later date . The delays prompted Azalea 's fans to campaign an earlier release of the single ; in a press release , Azalea explained : " The problem with kids – and I was one of these people too – is that they think they work in the industry and know how it all works . They 're like , ' put ' Bounce ' out now or it 's gonna flop ! ' . I 'm like , ' I need to promote it first or it 's gonna flop ! ' . It 's coming out on July 8 and I need fans to trust their fave on this one because it 's for the best . I need to hashtag that – # <unk> . " The EP was later released on 5 July 2013 in Germany , 7 July 2013 in the United Kingdom , and 8 July 2013 in Italy and Spain . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 " Bounce " received generally positive reviews from music critics . Eric Diep of XXL praised Azalea 's " rapid @-@ fire rhymes " and said the track " will certainly burn up the dance floor " . Lucy O 'Brien of The Quietus called the song " irrepressible " . AllMusic 's David Jeffries opined that " Bounce " was " simple and infectious " , and " does just what it says on the tin " . Jeffries ' view was shared by Mark Beaumont of NME who also deemed the song " infectious " , and Matt Jost of RapReviews.com who called it " simply fun " . Rory Cashin of Entertainment.ie described its production as " overwhelmingly busy in a good way " . In a State publication , Cashin deemed it a " warped earworm " and a " belter " . Rap @-@ Up hailed it as Azalea 's " new anthem " , and felt it was timed for the summer to " [ shake ] up the dancefloor " . Similarly , Kyle Anderson of Entertainment Weekly opined that the song was " thumping " and " a thoroughbred entry in the song @-@ of @-@ summer race " , while Juliana June Rasul of The Straits Times said it was " a perfect summer pop song " . In a publication for The Atlantic , Nolan Feeney highlighted it as a " colorful butt @-@ shaker " . Idolator 's Sam Lansky called the track a " twerk anthem " and considered it to be Azalea 's most impressive and most commercial single . 
 Digital Spy 's Lewis Corner gave the song a four ( out of five ) <unk> rating , and wrote that its production was of a " summer anthem level " . Corner said the track felt " slightly lighter " than Azalea 's previous releases , adding : " ... but if it means she crosses over into superstardom territory , it 's a job well done " . While Robert Copsey of the same website believed that it " felt like a somewhat needless moment of pop frivolity " . Complex reviewers were also divided ; Brian Josephs considered the track a " [ clear ] club banger " , but David Drake criticized Azalea 's " nimble rapping and forced accent " . According to Drake , " [ ' Bounce ' ] is the kind of thing that might work in the UK , where a digitally @-@ animated frog once had a No. 1 hit with a cover of the theme to Beverly Hills Cop , but this will probably be a long shot at getting stateside club play " . John Robinson of The Guardian felt it was " second @-@ division " and " <unk> " . Karen Lawler of Blues & Soul opined that it recalled " a lost track " from Miley Cyrus ' 2013 album , Bangerz , and dismissed its " nod " to 2 Unlimited as " cringe worthy " . While Clash called " Bounce " an inferior version of " No Limit " and " criminal in every way " , and opined that it lacked tune ; " No Auto @-@ Tune , though , because you need a tune to Auto " . 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 " Bounce " first charted on the Irish Singles Chart issued for 11 July 2013 , where it debuted and peaked at number 34 . It marked Azalea 's first top 40 hit in Ireland . In the United Kingdom , Music Week reported that " Bounce " placed at number eight in the mid @-@ week UK Singles Chart . However , the single 's sales declined through the rest of the week and it entered the chart at number 13 with first @-@ week sales of 22 @,@ 401 copies . It became Azalea 's second top 20 hit in the country and spent a total of five weeks on the chart . Although not released as a single in the United States , " Bounce " reached number one on the Bubbling Under R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Singles chart issued for 21 June 2014 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background and development = = = 
 The accompanying music video for " Bounce " was directed by BRTHR . It was filmed in Mumbai , India over a 10- to 12 @-@ day period with 16- to 18 @-@ hour working days . BRTHR previously applied to direct Azalea 's music video for " Work " , but Jonas & François were hired instead ; BRTHR 's strong interest in working with Azalea encouraged them to try again with " Bounce " . Azalea 's label wanted BRTHR to work with executive producer Eli Born for the music video because they felt confident in him after his involvement in the " Work " music video . BRTHR were guided by their producer Brendan Lynch and executive producer Geoff McLean . Equipment by the Red Digital Cinema Camera Company and Carl Zeiss AG were used for filming . In an interview for MTV UK , Azalea detailed the inspiration behind the video : 
 " My mother growing up was really , really close friends with an Indian woman . She ended up having an arranged marriage oddly enough and I remember going to her wedding and it was one of the only weddings that I 've EVER been to , besides my own mother 's , and it was the biggest party , the most fun ever . So when I was doing ' Bounce ' , you know I don 't actually drink or smoke so I thought I don 't wanna do a video in a club like poppin ' bottles and all this stuff , although the song 's about partying . I [ wanted to ] do a celebration ... and it made me think of that experience with my mother 's friend going to an Indian wedding and having the most crazy and amazing time and I though I wanna do an Indian wedding ! And I wanna do it in India ! And I wanna do it properly ... and I put an elephant in there for good luck . " 
 Azalea also envisioned an Eastern theme for the music video because of the song 's Eastern music influences and her interest in Bollywood films . BRTHR wrote a Hindu wedding scenario for the video , with Azalea as the bride . At Azalea 's request , the video was filmed in Mumbai 's streets and slums , and on Bollywood sets . Because of the increased cost of filming on location , Azalea decided to personally contribute to the video 's budget . T.I. was scheduled to appear in the music video , but was unable due to visa delays . Azalea 's stylist , Alejandra Hernandez , coordinated the rapper 's wardrobe , inspired by Bollywood disco era and Indian actress Parveen Babi . Hernandez used bold @-@ coloured saris in the video ; she prepared Azalea 's wardrobe in Los Angeles , and her creations were made in London and Mumbai . Azalea 's jewelry was also purchased in Mumbai . 
 The team hired an Indian film crew , and spent the entire budget in India . <unk> Films in Mumbai helped find locations and cast extras . Choreographer <unk> Desai assembled Indian dancers , and worked with Azalea on a Bollywood dance routine unique to " Bounce " and Azalea 's style . With the exception of the video 's celebration scenes , BRTHR filmed in guerilla " run and gun " style , and occasionally paid local police to facilitate a setup . According to Azalea , the Indian elephant in the clip took a month to find , and " the Indian mafia " were needed to shut down a street in Mumbai for the filming of her scene with it . Avinash Shankar was later hired to consult to the filming 's cultural and visual issues . BRTHR stated that " Bounce " was the most difficult music video they had ever directed because of the persistent difficulties they encountered with its on @-@ location production and final version @-@ editing . A narrative with a speech introducing Azalea at the wedding was cut from the final version . In an interview for Rap @-@ Up , Azalea stated , " It 's just so crazy to dream something so big and actually see it happen " . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The video opens with a bird 's @-@ eye view of Mumbai , with Azalea 's name and " Bounce " in large yellow text . Scenes with local residents include a young Indian boy and children playing cricket . Azalea , in a gold bodysuit and Indian inspired clothing , slouches atop an Indian elephant . The song begins with Azalea and a troupe of female Indian dancers entering a darkened Bollywood set for a traditional Indian wedding . Azalea and the dancers , in traditional red saris with bindis , begin belly dancing and modernised Indian dance routines . The scene is intercut with snippets of Azalea walking and dancing in Mumbai 's slums . On the Bollywood set , a large Indian family are seen celebrating , drinking and dancing . Azalea ( in a green sari ) dances in a garden , rides an elephant along city streets and travels in an auto rickshaw , wearing a printed silk blouse , with the wind blowing through her hair . Now in a blue sari , she lies on the elephant , gesturing with her hands and dancing next to Indian children on a cluttered platform . 
 The video returns to the Bollywood set , where Azalea dances at the wedding and before a moving backdrop with occasional slow @-@ motion sequences . In a white sari with a golden crown , she performs ( surrounded by children ) at a Holi celebration . After a series of jump cuts , the video ends with Azalea driving off on a motorcycle under a shower of flower petals . 
 = = = Release and reception = = = 
 A teaser of the video was first unveiled by Azalea for Digital Spy on 1 May 2013 . Prior to the video 's release , Azalea also posted images of her wardrobe on Instagram . The video premiered on Vevo on 6 May 2013 . A behind @-@ the @-@ scenes segment was released on 10 June 2013 . The music video received positive reviews from critics and was nominated for Best Video at the 2014 MtvU Woodie Awards , but lost to Chance the Rapper 's " Everybody 's Something " . Some critics compared the video to Selena Gomez 's " Come & Get It " ( 2013 ) . 
 Digital Spy 's Lewis Corner wrote , " We knew [ Azalea ] had the tunes , but now we know she has the moves " . Jean Trinh of The Daily Beast said that Azalea never disappoints with her music videos , and described the " Bounce " video as " breathtaking " and " entertaining " . Liza Darwin of MTV News praised the video 's fashion , and quipped , " Now that the clip 's finally premiered , everyone can bask in its glimmering , glittering glory " . Jessie Peterson of the same website likened Azalea 's bodysuit to Babi in the 1982 film <unk> <unk> , and <unk> . Natalie Wall of Cosmopolitan complimented the Bollywood theme and called Azalea her " new style crush " . Stephen Kearse of Respect. wrote that the artistic texture of the visual was " so rich that the song and music video became inextricable , each always invoking each other " . Kearse said it brought the song to life , and added , " It is unclear whether or not the song was produced with such an affinity for Indian images , but the match up genuinely works " . Brian Josephs of Complex commended the avoidance of a clichéd club setting , and called the video " fun to watch " . Idolator 's Sam Lansky said the video " does the trick " and was " fun , in a super @-@ culturally appropriate way " . The video 's global theme was compared to that of Macklemore & Ryan Lewis ' " Can 't Hold Us " by a writer for MuchMusic who opined that Azalea provided a good representation of Indian style and culture , and complimented her appreciation of it . Conversely , Ingrid Kesa of Oyster felt it followed the trend of filming a high @-@ budget video in a developing country . While John Robinson of The Guardian was critical of the video 's " rather tired Bollywood concept " . 
 A report by The Northern Star highlighted that public reaction to the music video saw some accusing it of cultural appropriation . According to Nico Lang of the Los Angeles Times , Azalea 's sari and bindi attire " drew ire " . Similar blog reaction led to Bruce Sterling of Wired invoking Kareena Kapoor 's " Hai Re Hai Re " from the 2003 Hindi film , Khushi : " Bring in some class analysis , too , ' cause our Kareena 's a born <unk> who is worth millions while Iggy is a high @-@ school dropout who used to clean hotels . " The Sunshine Coast Daily hosted an online poll asking if the music video was offensive ; 63 % of its readers voted " no " and 36 % voted " yes " . BRTHR later addressed the accusations , and stated that they specifically hired an Indian producer for the filming to avoid the video from offending Indian culture . According to BRTHR , the producer 's requests were to remove profanity from the dialogue and to ensure Azalea 's wardrobe was " not too offensive " . The music video has received over 50 million views on YouTube as of September 2015 . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Azalea first performed " Bounce " during her sets at The Great Escape Festival on 21 May 2013 , and Radio 1 's Big Weekend later that month . She also performed the song during her setlists for Gucci 's Chime for Change Concert , The Parklife Weekender and the Glastonbury Festival in June 2013 . Azalea gave her first live , televised performance of the track on the premiere of Channel 4 's Smells Like Friday Night on 21 June 2013 . The song was then performed during her sets at the Wireless Festival , and London nightclubs G @-@ A @-@ Y and Fabric in July 2013 . " Bounce " was later included in Azalea 's setlist at the 2013 iTunes Festival , where she was a supporting act for Katy Perry . In October 2013 , Azalea performed the track as part of her sets during Beyoncé 's The Mrs. Carter Show World Tour . 
 In 2014 , " Bounce " featured in the setlist for Azalea 's first headlining tour , The New Classic Tour . She also performed the song during her sets for the 2014 MtvU Woodie Awards at South by Southwest in April , and the Jingle Ball Tour 2014 in December . Azalea performed " Bounce " in her setlist for the Redfest in February 2015 . She reprised the song for her set at South by Southwest in March 2015 ; the rendition incorporated elements of <unk> 's " Watch Me " . Azalea also performed " Bounce " during her gigs at the Ottawa Bluesfest and Quebec City Summer Festival in July 2015 . 
 = = Usage in media = = 
 In 2013 , " Bounce " was used in the commercials for the tenth series of Big Brother Australia , and ABC 's Super Fun Night . The track was featured in an episode of the television show EastEnders which aired on 13 August 2013 . It was also included in an episode of the television show Love & Hip Hop on 4 November 2013 . Contestants of the fifteenth series of Big Brother UK performed a dance to " Bounce " in a task which aired on 27 July 2014 . The song was used for the 2014 films Vampire Academy and Step Up : All In ; appearing on the soundtrack for the former and in the trailer for the latter . It also featured on the soundtrack for the 2015 film Spy and was used for its accompanying trailer . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital download ( EP ) 
 " Bounce " – 2 : 47 
 " Bounce " ( DJ Green Lantern Remix ) – 4 : 24 
 " Bounce " ( Instrumental ) – 2 : 46 
 " Bounce " ( Acappella ) – 2 : 46 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Iggy Azalea – writer , vocals 
 Reeva & Black – writers , producers , vocal engineering 
 Speedy Jay – writer 
 Talay Riley – writer 
 Oladayo Olatunji – writer , background vocals 
 Natalie Sims – writer 
 Anthony Kilhoffer – mixing 
 Kyle Ross – mixing assistant 
 Credits adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Themes in Maya Angelou 's autobiographies = 
 The themes encompassing African @-@ American writer Maya Angelou 's seven autobiographies include racism , identity , family , and travel . Angelou ( 1928 – 2014 ) is best known for her first autobiography , the critically acclaimed I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings ( 1969 ) . The rest of the books in her series are Gather Together in My Name ( 1974 ) , Singin ' and Swingin ' and Gettin ' Merry Like Christmas ( 1976 ) , The Heart of a Woman ( 1981 ) , All God 's Children Need Traveling Shoes ( 1986 ) , A Song Flung Up to Heaven ( 2002 ) , and Mom & Me & Mom ( 2013 ) . 
 Beginning with Caged Bird and ending with her final autobiography , Angelou used the metaphor of a bird , which represented Angelou 's confinement resulting from racism and depression , struggling to escape its cage , as described in the Paul Laurence Dunbar poem " Sympathy " . Angelou 's autobiographies can be placed in the African @-@ American literature tradition of political protest . Their unity underscored one of Angelou 's central themes : the injustice of racism and how to eat it . According to scholar Pierre A. Walker , all of Angelou 's books described " a sequence of lessons about resisting racist oppression " . In the course of her autobiographies , her views about Black @-@ white relationships changed and she learned to accept different points of view . Angelou 's theme of identity was established from the beginning of her autobiographies , with the opening lines in Caged Bird , and like other female writers in the late 1960s and early 1970s , she used the autobiography to reimagine ways of writing about women 's lives and identities in a male @-@ dominated society . Her original goal was to write about the lives of Black women in America , but it evolved in her later volumes to document the ups and downs of her life . 
 The theme of family and family relationships — from the character @-@ defining experience of Angelou 's parents ' abandonment in Caged Bird to her relationships with her son , husbands , friends , and lovers — are important in all of her books . As in American autobiography generally and in African @-@ American autobiography specifically , which has its roots in the slave narrative , travel is another important theme in Angelou 's autobiographies . Scholar Yolanda M. Manora called the travel motif in Angelou 's autobiographies , beginning in Caged Bird , " a central metaphor for a psychic mobility " . Angelou 's autobiographies take place all over the world , from Arkansas to Africa and back to the US , and span almost forty years , beginning from the start of World War II to the assassination of Martin Luther King , Jr . 
 = = Overview = = 
 The themes encompassing Angelou 's seven autobiographies include racism , identity , family , and travel . She is best known for her first autobiography , the critically acclaimed I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings ( 1969 ) , which was nominated for a National Book Award . Angelou did not write Caged Bird with the intention of writing a series of autobiographies ; critics have " judged the subsequent autobiographies in light of the first " . Her series also includes Gather Together in My Name ( 1974 ) , Singin ' and Swingin ' and Gettin ' Merry Like Christmas ( 1976 ) , The Heart of a Woman , ( 1981 ) , All God 's Children Need Traveling Shoes ( 1986 ) , A Song Flung Up to Heaven ( 2002 ) , and Mom & Me & Mom ( 2013 ) . Angelou 's autobiographies have a distinct style , and " stretch over time and place " , from Arkansas to Africa and back to the US . They take place from the beginnings of World War II to the assassination of Martin Luther King , Jr . 
 According to scholar Mary Jane Lupton , Angelou 's autobiographies have been characterized as autobiographical fiction , but Lupton disagrees , stating that they conform to the genre 's standard structure : they are written by a single author , they are chronological , and they contain elements of character , technique , and theme . Angelou 's use of themes , especially that of racism , connects all seven autobiographies . One of her goals , beginning with Caged Bird , was to incorporate " organic unity " into them , and the events she described were episodic , crafted like a series of short stories , and were placed to emphasize the themes of her books . 
 = = Racism = = 
 Angelou used the metaphor of a bird struggling to escape its cage described in the Paul Laurence Dunbar poem " Sympathy " throughout all of her autobiographies ; she used the metaphor in the titles of both I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings and her sixth autobiography A Song Flung Up to Heaven . Like elements within a prison narrative , the caged bird represented Angelou 's confinement resulting from racism and oppression . This metaphor also invoked the " supposed contradiction of the bird singing in the midst of its struggle " . Reviewer Hilton Als observed that Angelou 's witness of the evil in her society , as directed towards Black women , shaped Angelou 's young life and informed her views into adulthood . Despite this , scholar Lynn Z. Bloom asserted that Angelou 's autobiographies and lectures , which he called " ranging in tone from warmly humorous to bitterly satiric " , have gained a respectful and enthusiastic response from the general public and critics . 
 I know why the caged bird sings , ah me , 
 When his wing is bruised and his bosom sore , 
 When he beats his bars and would be free ; 
 It is not a carol of joy or glee , 
 But a prayer that he sends from his heart 's deep core , 
 But a plea , that upward to Heaven he flings – 
 I know why the caged bird sings . 
 1st stanza of Paul Lawrence Dunbar 's poem " Sympathy " . 
 Reviewer Daisy Aldan of World Literature Today criticized Angelou for harboring " a fanatic hostility expressed toward all white people " , but writer Lyman B. Hagen disagreed , stating that like Angelou 's friend and mentor Langston Hughes , Angelou explained and illuminated the condition of African Americans , but without alienating her readers . Angelou promoted the importance of hard work , a common theme in slave narratives , throughout all her autobiographies , in order to break the African @-@ American stereotype of laziness . Her description of the strong and cohesive Black community of Stamps demonstrated how African Americans have subverted repressive institutions to withstand racism . Angelou evolved from wishing that she could become white in Caged Bird to later shedding her self @-@ loathing and embracing a strong racial identity . 
 Critic Pierre A. Walker placed Angelou 's autobiographies in the African @-@ American literature tradition of political protest written in the years following the American Civil Rights Movement . He emphasized that the unity of Angelou 's autobiographies underscored one of her central themes : the injustice of racism and how to fight it . Angelou 's biographies , beginning with Caged Bird , consisted of " a sequence of lessons about resisting racist oppression " . This sequence led Angelou , as the protagonist , from " helpless rage and indignation to forms of subtle resistance , and finally to outright and active protest " throughout all seven of her autobiographies . Angelou changed her views in the course of her autobiographies about Black @-@ white relationships and learned to accept different points of view . It was changes in how she regarded race , and her views of white people , that provided Angelou with freedom . According to Hagen , one of Angelou 's themes was that humans tend to be more alike than different . 
 " Human beings are more alike than unalike " . 
 Maya Angelou , 1994 ( Scholar Mary Jane Lupton has called this one of Angelou 's most well @-@ known sayings . ) 
 In Angelou 's third autobiography Singin ' and Swingin ' and Gettin ' Merry Like Christmas , in which she married a white man , she came into intimate contact with whites for the first time — whites very different from the racist people she encountered in her childhood . She discovered that her stereotypes of whites were developed to protect herself from their cruelty and indifference . As critic Dolly A. McPherson indicated , " <unk> by earlier experiences , Angelou distrusts everyone , especially whites . Nevertheless , she is repeatedly surprised by the kindness and goodwill of many whites she meets , and , thus , her suspicions begin to soften into understanding . " Selwyn Cudjoe wrote that in Singin ' and Swingin ' , Angelou effectively demonstrated " the inviolability of the African American personhood " , as well as her own closely guarded defense of it . In order for her to have any positive relationships with whites and people of other races , however , McPherson insisted that Angelou " must examine and discard her stereotypical views about Whites " . Scholar Lyman B. Hagen agreed and pointed out that Angelou had to re @-@ examine her lingering prejudices when faced with the broader world full of whites , but it was a complex process because most of Angelou 's experiences with whites were positive during this time . Angelou moved between the white and Black worlds , both defining herself as a member of her community and encountering whites in " a much fuller , more sensuous manner " . Angelou 's experiences with the Porgy and Bess tour , as described in Singin ' and Swingin ' , expanded her understanding of other races and race relations as she met people of different nationalities during her travels . All these experiences were instrumental in Angelou 's maturity and growth , and served as a basis for her later acceptance and tolerance of other races . 
 Angelou 's fourth autobiography The Heart of a Woman opened with Angelou and her son Guy living in an experimental commune with whites , in an attempt to participate in the new openness between Blacks and whites . She was not completely comfortable with the arrangement , however ; as Lupton pointed out , Angelou never named her roommates . For the most part , Angelou was able to freely interact with whites in this book , but she occasionally encountered prejudice similar to earlier episodes , like when she required the assistance of white friends to rent a home in a segregated neighborhood . Lupton stated that compared to her other books , Angelou had come " a long way " from her interactions with whites and people of other races . Hagen called the descriptions of whites and the hopes for eventual equality in this book " optimistic " . Angelou continued , however , her indictment of white power structure and her protests against racial injustice that had been a theme throughout all her books . Instead of offering solutions , however , she simply reported on , reacted to , and dramatized events . 
 Angelou became more " politicized " in The Heart of Woman , and developed a new sense of Black identity . McPherson argued that even Angelou 's decision to leave show business was political , and regarded this book as " a social and cultural history of Black Americans " during the late 1950s and early 1960s . Angelou saw herself as a historian of both the Civil Rights movement and the Black literary movement of the time . She became more attracted to the causes of Black militants , both in the U.S. and in Africa , to the point of entering into a relationship with South African freedom fighter Vusumzi Make , and became more committed to activism . She became an active political protestor during this period , but she did not think of herself in that way . Instead , the focus was on herself , and she used the autobiographical form to demonstrate how the Civil Rights movement influenced one person involved in it . According to Hagen , her contributions to civil rights as a fundraiser and SCLC organizer were successful and effective . 
 According to Lupton , " Angelou 's exploration of her African and African @-@ American identities " was an important theme in her fifth autobiography All God 's Children Need Traveling Shoes . The alliances and relationships with those she met in Ghana contributed to Angelou 's identity and growth . Her experiences as an expatriate helped her come to terms with her personal and historical past , and by the end of the book she was ready to return to America with a deeper understanding of both the African and American parts of her character . McPherson called Angelou 's parallels and connections between Africa and America her " double @-@ consciousness " , which contribute to her understanding of herself . 
 In Traveling Shoes , Angelou was able to recognize similarities between African and African @-@ American culture ; as Lupton put it , the " blue songs , shouts , and gospels " she has grown up with in America " echo the rhythms of West Africa " . Marcia Ann Gillespie and her colleagues , writing in A Glorious Celebration , the book published in 2008 for Angelou 's 80th birthday , agreed , stating that Angelou recognized the connections between African and American Black cultures , including the children 's games , the folklore , the spoken and non @-@ verbal languages , the food , sensibilities , and behavior . She connected the behavior of many African mother figures , especially their generosity , with her grandmother 's actions . In one of the most significant sections of Traveling Shoes , Angelou recounted an encounter with a West African woman who recognized her , on the basis of her appearance , as a member of the Bambara group of West Africa . These and other experiences in Ghana demonstrated Angelou 's maturity , as a mother able to let go of her adult son , as a woman no longer dependent upon a man , and as an American able to " perceive the roots of her identity " and how they affected her personality . 
 Also in Traveling Shoes , Angelou came to terms with her difficult past , both as a descendent of Africans taken forcibly to America as slaves and as an African America who had experienced racism . As she told an interviewer , she brought her son to Ghana to protect him from the negative effects of racism because she did not think he had the tools to withstand them . For the first time in Angelou 's life , she did not " feel threatened by racial hate " in Ghana . The theme of racism was still an important theme in Traveling Shoes , but she has matured in the way she dealt with it . As Hagen stated , Angelou was " not yet ready to toss off the stings of prejudice , but tolerance and even a certain understanding can be glimpsed " . This was demonstrated in Angelou 's treatment of the " genocidal involvement of Africans in slave @-@ trading " , something that has often been overlooked or misrepresented by other Black writers . Angelou was taught an important lesson about combating racism by Malcolm X , who compared it to a mountain in which everyone 's efforts was needed to overcome it . 
 Angelou learned about herself and about racism throughout Traveling Shoes , even during her brief tour of Venice and Berlin for the revival of The Blacks , the play by Jean Genet that Angelou had originally performed in 1961 . She revived her passion for African @-@ American culture while associating with other African Americans for the first time since moving to Ghana . She compared her experiences of American racism with Germany 's history of racial prejudice and military aggression . The verbal violence of the folk tales shared during her luncheon with her German hosts and Israeli friend was as significant to Angelou as physical violence , to the point that she became ill . Angelou 's first @-@ hand experience with fascism , as well as the racist sensibilities of the German family she visited , " help [ ed ] shape and broaden her constantly changing vision " regarding racial prejudice . 
 = = Identity = = 
 The theme of identity was established from the beginning of Angelou 's series of autobiographies , with the opening lines in Caged Bird , which " foretell Angelou ’ s autobiographical project : to write the story of the developing black female subject by sharing the tale of one Southern Black girl ’ s becoming " . Angelou and other female writers in the late 1960s and early 1970s used the autobiography to reimagine ways of writing about women 's lives and identities in a male @-@ dominated society . Feminist scholar Maria Lauret has made a connection between Angelou 's autobiographies , which Lauret called " fictions of subjectivity " and " feminist first @-@ person narratives " , with fictional first @-@ person narratives ( such as The Women 's Room by Marilyn French and The Golden Notebook by Doris Lessing ) written during the same period . Both genres employed the narrator as protagonist and used " the illusion of presence in their mode of signification " . Scholar Yolanda M. Manora agreed , stating that Angelou broke stereotypes of African @-@ American women by describing these images and stereotypes , and then disproving them , which set the stage for Angelou 's identity development in her later autobiographies . 
 When I try to describe myself to God I say , " Lord , remember me ? Black ? Female ? Six @-@ foot tall ? The writer ? " And I almost always get God 's attention . 
 Maya Angelou , 2008 . 
 Angelou , as a woman , demonstrated the formation of her own cultural identity throughout her narratives . Angelou presented herself as a role model for African @-@ American women by reconstructing the Black woman 's image throughout her autobiographies , and has used her many roles , incarnations , and identities to connect the layers of oppression with her personal history . Angelou 's themes of the individual 's strength and ability to overcome appeared throughout Angelou 's autobiographies as well . The women Angelou presented in her autobiographies , especially Caged Bird , influenced the woman Angelou became . According to Manora , three characters in Caged Bird , Angelou 's mother Vivian , her grandmother Annie Henderson , and Mrs. Flowers ( who helps Angelou find her voice again after her rape ) , collaborated to " form a triad which serves as the critical matrix in which the child is nurtured and sustained during her journey through Southern Black girlhood " . 
 Angelou 's original goal was to write about the lives of Black women in America , but her goal evolved in her later volumes to document the ups and downs of her own life . Angelou 's autobiographies had the same structure : a historical overview of the places she was living in at the time and how she coped within the context of a larger white society , as well as the ways that her story played out within that context . Angelou , especially in her third autobiography , Singin ' and Swingin ' and Gettin ' Merry Like Christmas , successfully demonstrated the integrity of the African @-@ American character as she experienced more positive interactions with whites . In Angelou 's second volume , Gather Together in My Name , Angelou was concerned with what it meant to be a Black female in the U.S. , but she focused upon herself at a certain point in history . Writer Selwyn Cudjoe said regarding her second autobiography : " It is almost as though the incidents in the text were simply ' gathered together ' under the name of Maya Angelou . " 
 = = Family = = 
 The theme of family and family relationships ( which scholar Mary Jane Lupton called " kinship concerns " ) , from the character @-@ defining experience of Angelou 's parents ' abandonment to her relationships with her son , husbands , friends , and lovers are important in all of her books . Angelou 's description of close familial relationships , such as her relationships with her parents and son ( which Lupton called " the mother @-@ child pattern " ) was the only unifying theme that connected all of her autobiographies . Angelou 's concept of family was affected by Maya and Bailey 's displacement at the beginning of Caged Bird . Motherhood was a theme that connected all of Angelou 's autobiographies , specifically her experiences as a single mother , a daughter , and a granddaughter . Lupton believed that Angelou 's plot construction and character development were influenced by this mother / child motif found in the work of Harlem Renaissance poet Jessie Fauset . 
 Scholar Yolanda M. Manora insisted that three women in Caged Bird — the " hybridized mother " of Angelou 's grandmother , her mother , and her friend Mrs. Flowers — taught her how to be a mother to her son Guy . Although Angelou 's grandmother died early in the series , in her third autobiography Singin ' and Swingin ' and Gettin ' Merry Like Christmas , Angelou quoted her many times throughout the series . Angelou 's desire for security for Guy drove her to marry Tosh Angelos in Singin ' and Swingin ' , and drove many of her decisions , job choices , and romantic relationships . Scholar <unk> Koyana stated that due to Angelou 's race and economic background , her " experience of motherhood is inseparably intertwined with work " . According to Koyana , " ... Black motherhood always encompassed work " . Angelou 's long list of occupations attested to the challenges , especially in her second autobiography Gather Together in My Name , she faced as a working teenager mother , which often led Angelou to questionable decisions . Koyana stated that it was not until Angelou was able to take advantage of opportunities , such as her role in Porgy and Bess , when she was able to fully support her and Guy , and the quality of her life and her contribution to society improved . It was impossible , however , for Angelou to become successful without her extended family to provide childcare for her ; i.e. , when she left Guy in the care of his grandmother in spite of the conflict and guilt she experienced as a result ( something Koyana insisted was imposed on her by the larger society ) , a pattern established in Caged Bird by her own mother when she left Angelou and her brother in the care of Angelou 's grandmother . 
 The woman who survives intact and happy must be at once tender and tough . 
 Maya Angelou , Wouldn 't Take Nothing For My Journey Now ( 1993 ) 
 Black women autobiographers like Angelou have debunked the stereotypes of African @-@ American mothers of " breeder and matriarch " and have presented them as having more creative and satisfying roles . According to scholar Sondra O 'Neale , Angelou 's autobiographies presented Black women differently from their literary portrayals up to that time . O 'Neale maintained that " no Black woman in the world of Angelou 's books are losers " , and that Angelou was the third generation of intelligent and resourceful women who overcame the obstacles of racism and oppression . Koyana recognized that Angelou depicted women , which Koyana called her " womanist theories " , in an era of cultural transition , and that her books described one Black woman 's attempts to create and maintain a healthy self @-@ esteem . Angelou 's experiences as a working @-@ class single mother challenged traditional and Western viewpoints of women and family life , including the nuclear family structure . Angelou described societal forces that eventually expanded to the white family , and that Angelou 's strategies of economic survival and experiences of family structure enabled Black families to survive economically . 
 = = Travel = = 
 Travel is a common theme in American autobiography as a whole ; as McPherson stated , it is something of a national myth to Americans as a people . This was also the case for African @-@ American autobiography , which was rooted in and developed out of the slave narrative . Like those narratives that focused on the writers ' search for freedom from bondage , modern African @-@ American autobiographers like Angelou sought to develop " an authentic self " and the freedom to find it in their community . Scholar Yolanda M. Manora called the travel motif in Angelou 's autobiographies " fluidity " . This fluidity began in Caged Bird and was a metaphor for her psychological movements and growth caused by her displacement and trauma throughout the book , something Manora stated Angelou had to escape in order to transcend it . As Hagen stated , Angelou structured Caged Bird into three parts : arrival , sojourn , and departure , with both geographic and psychological aspects . 
 As McPherson stated , " The journey to a distant goal , the return home , and the quest which involves the voyage out , achievement , and return are typical patterns in Black autobiography . " For Angelou , this quest took her from her childhood and adolescence , as described in her first two books , into the adult world . The setting in Angelou 's first two autobiographies was limited to three places ( Arkansas , Missouri , and California ) , but the " setting breaks open " in Singin ' and Swingin ' and Gettin ' Merry Like Christmas to include Europe as she traveled with her Porgy and Bess company . McPherson saw Angelou 's third autobiography as " a sunny tour of Angelou 's twenties " , from early years marked by disappointments and humiliation , into the broader world — to the white world and to the international community . This period described " years of joy " , as well as the start of Angelou 's great success and fulfillment as an entertainer . Lupton stated that Angelou 's travel narrative in Singin ' and Swingin ' , which took up approximately 40 percent of the book , gave the book its organized structure . Angelou 's observations about race , gender , and class made the book more than a simple travel narrative . As a Black American , her travels around the world put her in contact with many nationalities and classes , expanded her experiences beyond her familiar circle of community and family , and complicated her understandings of race relations . 
 Angelou continued to expand the settings of her autobiographies in her subsequent volumes . The Heart of a Woman had three primary settings — the San Francisco Bay Area , New York , and Egypt — and two secondary ones — London and Accra . Lupton stated that like all of Angelou 's books , the structure of The Heart of a Woman was based upon a journey . Angelou emphasized the theme of movement by opening the book with a spiritual ( " The ole ark 's a <unk> ' " ) , stating , " That ancient spiritual could have been the theme song of the United States in 1957 " . This spiritual , which contained a reference to Noah 's ark , presented Angelou as a type of Noah and demonstrated her spirituality . Angelou also mentioned Alan Ginsberg and On the Road , the 1951 novel by Jack Kerouac , thus connecting her own journey and uncertainty about the future with the journeys of literary figures . Even though the reason Angelou traveled to Africa is an eventual failed relationship , she made a connection with the continent , both in this book and in the one that follows it , All God 's Children Need Traveling Shoes . As Lupton stated , " Africa is the site of her growth " . Angelou 's time in Africa made her more aware of her African roots . Lupton insisted , however , that although Angelou journeys to many places in the book , the most important journey she described is " a voyage into the self " . 
 The travel motif is a recurring theme in Traveling Shoes , as evidenced in the book 's title , but Angelou 's primary motivation in living in Africa , as she told interviewer George Plimpton , was " trying to get home " . Angelou not only related her own journey of an African @-@ American woman searching for a home , but the journeys of other Black expatriates at the time , whom McPherson compared to the descriptions of white expatriates in Europe in the 1920s by Ernest Hemingway and Henry James . Angelou 's issues were resolved at the end of Traveling Shoes when she decided to return to America . She called her departure a " second leave @-@ taking " , and compared it to the last time she left her son with his grandmother in Singin ' and Swingin ' when he was a child , and to the forced departure from Africa by her ancestors . As Lupton states , " Angelou 's journey from Africa back to America is in certain ways a restatement of the historical phase known as mid @-@ passage , when slaves were brutally transported in ships from West Africa to the so @-@ called New World " . Even though Angelou 's final autobiography A Song Flung Up to Heaven took place in her home country , the travel motif continued . Reviewer Patricia Elam described Song as a " journey through an authentic and artistic life " . 
 = Solange Knowles = 
 Solange Piaget Knowles ( born June 24 , 1986 ) is an American singer , songwriter , model , and actress . Knowles was born in Houston , Texas to Mathew and Tina Knowles , both of whom left their careers to support her older sister Beyoncé 's recording interests . Expressing an interest in music from an early age , Knowles had several temporary stints in Destiny 's Child , before signing with her father 's Music World Entertainment label . Aged sixteen , Knowles released her first studio album Solo Star ( 2002 ) to moderate commercial and critical success . In 2004 , Knowles married Daniel Smith , eventually giving birth to their son Daniel Julez J. Smith Jr . , which prompted a move to Idaho . Between 2005 and 2007 , Knowles had several minor acting roles , including the direct @-@ to @-@ video Bring It On : All or Nothing ( 2006 ) and continued writing music for Beyoncé and ex @-@ Destiny 's Child band members Kelly Rowland and Michelle Williams . In 2007 , Knowles divorced Smith and moved to Los Angeles , California , beginning to write and record music again . Her second studio album Sol @-@ Angel and the Hadley St. Dreams ( 2008 ) deviated from the pop @-@ oriented music of her debut to the Motown Sound of the 1960s and 1970s . It peaked at number 9 on US Billboard 200 and received positive reviews from critics . She followed this up with the 1980s pop / R & B – inspired extended play True ( 2012 ) and intends to release her third studio album in the future on her own label Saint Records . 
 Knowles is heavily influenced by Motown girl groups and says that her first passion is songwriting . She has been recognised as a fashion icon and has received frequent comparisons to sister Beyoncé from the media , although insists they have different aspirations and are musically different . Her other ventures include an endorsement deal with Rimmel London and a line of hip @-@ hop @-@ oriented merchandise for young children , which was inspired by her son . On November 16 , 2014 , Knowles married music video director Alan Ferguson in New Orleans , Louisiana . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Knowles was born in Houston , Texas , to Mathew Knowles and Tina Knowles . Solange 's older sister is singer Beyoncé . Her father , originally from Alabama , is African American , and her mother , originally from south Louisiana , is Creole ( with African , Native American , French , and 1 / 32nd Irish ancestry ) . Her maternal grandparents are <unk> Beyincé and <unk> Deréon , ( a seamstress ) . She is also a descendant of Acadian leader Joseph Broussard . As a child , Knowles studied dance and theater . At the age of five , she made her singing debut at an amusement park . She began writing songs at the age of nine . At 13 , she decided to pursue recording , but her parents initially advised her to wait . At the age of 15 Knowles replaced a departed dancer and performed with her sister 's group Destiny 's Child on tour . During the group 's opening stint for American pop singer Christina Aguilera 's tour , Knowles temporarily replaced Destiny 's Child member Kelly Rowland after Kelly broke her toes backstage during a costume change . When Knowles was 16 , her father , who was then also her manager , signed her to his recording company , Music World Entertainment along with Columbia . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = 2001 – 03 : Early career and Solo Star = = = 
 Managed by her father Mathew , Knowles ' first time into the music business was in 2001 as the lead singer , backed with Destiny 's Child , on the title theme song for the animated television series The Proud Family . She also was a featured performer on " Hey Goldmember " for the soundtrack to the 2002 film Austin Powers in Goldmember , as well as a backup singer on the track " Little Drummer Boy " on her sister 's group 's 2001 holiday album 8 Days of Christmas . In 2002 , she was featured on Lil Romeo 's second studio album Game Time , singing portions of Luther Vandross @-@ penned " So Amazing " on the single " True Love " , and on Rowland 's debut solo album Simply Deep , for which she also wrote the title track and " Alone " . In 2001 she also appeared as Lil ' Bow Wow 's date in the music video for his single " Puppy Love " . She also made an appearance on The Master of Disguise soundtrack and made cameos in Play 's video for " <unk> ( Part II ) " featuring Lil ' Fizz . 
 In 2002 , she lent her voice for the character Chanel , the cousin of the protagonist Penny Proud , in the episode " Behind Family Lines " to the animated television series The Proud Family . In June 2003 , Mathew Knowles excitedly announced that he was considering adding Solange to Destiny 's Child when the group reunited in 2004 , thus turning them into a quartet for the first time since short @-@ lived member Farrah Franklin left in 2000 . Mathew Knowles said he was testing the reactions , and , judging by what he had heard , " it seems like a good idea " . Later in August , however , Beyoncé said it was only a rumor and Destiny 's Child would remain a trio . Rowland added , " She 's a solo star , " name @-@ dropping Knowles ' debut album . 
 At the age of 14 , Solange Knowles started working on her debut album Solo Star , which involved American producers such as Jermaine Dupri , The Neptunes , Linda Perry and Timbaland among others . The album is primarily uptempo R & B , although Knowles said there are pop , rock , reggae and hip hop influences . Knowles co @-@ wrote and co @-@ produced some of the 15 tracks in the album , including its lead single , " Feelin ' You ( Part II ) " . The song failed to enter the Billboard Hot 100 , but reached number three on both the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Singles Sales and Hot Dance Singles Sales chart . Solo Star was released on January 21 , 2003 in the United States , where it debuted at number 49 on the Billboard 200 and reached number 23 on the Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums chart . Solo Star had a mixed critical reception : William Ruhlmann of AllMusic called it a " state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art contemporary R & B album " , but deemed Knowles " lost somewhere in the mix " . By mid @-@ 2008 , the album had sold 112 @,@ 000 copies domestically according to Nielsen SoundScan . 
 = = = 2004 – 08 : Films and Sol @-@ Angel and the Hadley St. Dreams = = = 
 In 2004 , she guest starred in the episode " The Catch " of the sitcom One on One . Knowles appeared as a nubile teenager in the 2004 comedy film Johnson Family Vacation , starring alongside American actors Cedric the Entertainer , Vanessa Williams and Bow Wow . She provided a song for its soundtrack — " Freedom " , a collaboration with the Houston @-@ based funk @-@ jazz band Drop Trio . Although the reviews were generally negative , Knowles earned praise from Variety magazine : " Solange Knowles is nearly as dazzling as big sister Beyoncé and does little more than smile winningly in her first <unk> outing . " In 2006 , she starred as a cheerleading captain in the film Bring It On : All or Nothing , the third installment of the Bring It On series , alongside American actress and singer Hayden Panettiere . What little critical reaction the low @-@ budget , direct @-@ to @-@ DVD movie got was negative , and Knowles was described as an " affordable young starlet " . Knowles uses her full name for her acting , rather than just the first name she uses when singing ; for Bring It On : All or Nothing , she was billed as Solange Knowles @-@ Smith , reflecting her married state at the time . 
 After the release of her debut album , Knowles started acting in films followed by a career break . While she was married , her family moved to Idaho , and , while staying there , resumed writing songs including the singles " Get Me Bodied " and " Upgrade U " from her sister 's second solo album , B 'Day . Knowles earned the R & B and Hip @-@ Hop Song accolade for " Get Me Bodied " at the 2008 ASCAP Awards . She had also written songs for Destiny 's Child , and members Rowland and Michelle Williams . In 2004 , while pregnant with son Daniel , she made a cameo appearance in Destiny 's Child 's music video for " Soldier " . 
 After the divorce , Knowles returned to Houston to begin working on her second album . Knowles renewed her management , signing a record deal with Geffen and a publishing deal with EMI . Knowles finished working on her second studio album in 2008 and titled the project Sol @-@ Angel and the Hadley St. Dreams . It includes production by CeeLo Green , Soulshock & Karlin and Mark Ronson as well as an appearance by Bilal . A collection of <unk> and 1970s @-@ influenced songs , it is seen as a departure from her pop @-@ oriented debut , with what Billboard magazine called " more of a modern twist on hip @-@ hop and R & B flecked with tinges of blues and jazz " . The album was released on August 26 , 2008 in the United States . By December 2008 , the album had sold over 114 @,@ 000 copies according to Nielsen SoundScan . The album was positively received by critics , some of whom considered it far better than her debut . The album 's lead single , " I Decided " , was released in April 2008 , and reached the top of the Billboard Hot Dance Club Play chart ; Rolling Stone magazine labelled it her breakthrough single . In support of the album , Knowles began the Solange Presents Sol @-@ Angel and the Hadley St. Dreams Tour in Britain in November 2008 . 
 Knowles announced , via her blog <unk> , that she would be releasing a series of mixtapes to coincide with the album . The first mixtape , I Can 't Get Clearance ... , includes the leaked track " Fuck the Industry ( Signed Sincerely ) " . On this record , Knowles expressed her views on the current state of the music industry . The lyrics to the song name check some major artists such as Mary J. Blige , Ashanti , Keyshia Cole , and Beyoncé , although she made a point of stating that it does not have " a negative light to any of [ them ] " . The mixtape was never released , but Solange released " Fuck the Industry ( Signed Sincerely ) " as a single in 2010 . 
 = = = 2009 – 14 : True EP and Saint Records = = = 
 In an interview with MTV in 2009 , Knowles revealed that she was determining the type of sound for the follow @-@ up to Sol @-@ Angel and the Hadley St. Dreams . Knowles also parted ways with the Interscope @-@ Geffen @-@ A & M record label group . She would now release her third studio album independently . Early in 2010 , Knowles traveled to Australia to work with Australian rock band , Midnight <unk> on her third studio album . Knowles had planned to release the album in summer as revealed on her official Twitter account in 2009 . She also revealed on her Twitter account that she rented a house in Santa Barbara , California to get into a certain state of mind while writing and making music . On May 7 , 2010 , Knowles made a guest appearance on the popular children show , Yo Gabba Gabba ! for a " Mothers Day Special " where she performed an original song called " Momma Loves Baby " . 
 In an interview with Vibe on July 7 , 2010 , Knowles said she suffered " a little bit of a breakdown " while recording her new album : " I literally gave up my sanity for a while to do this record . [ ... ] We literally were waking up in the morning and just making music all day and all night . [ ... ] It just started to wear on me in so many different ways . I started having these crazy panic attacks . " Knowles explained how she made sacrifices " mentally , emotionally and financially " , and continued , " It 's more than an album to me . It 's a transitional time in my life . " Regarding the musical direction of the album , she said the inspiration came from new wave and stated , " This is a dance record , but the lyrics can get pretty dark at times . " The singer has also worked on songs with <unk> and long @-@ time collaborator Pharrell Williams . 
 In September 2012 , Solange released a teaser video for " Losing You " , which was announced as the lead single from her third studio album . This release marked Solange 's first release as a signee of the independent label Terrible Records . The video was shot in Cape Town , South Africa in early September 2012 . Knowles revealed in an interview that her mother Tina Knowles had paid for Solange and her friends to fly out and record the video as her birthday gift . On October 24 , 2012 , Knowles held a listening party in New York City for her EP True , released for digital download on iTunes November 27 , 2012 . The CD and vinyl was made available January 8 , 2013 . Following the EP 's release , Solange appeared on the cover of The <unk> magazine 's 84th issue . 
 On May 14 , 2013 , Knowles announced that she had launched her own record label named Saint Records , which she will be using to release her third full @-@ length album and future music projects distributed through Sony . Solange also collaborated with The Lonely Island on the song " <unk> " which was featured as part of YouTube 's Comedy Week and is featured on The Lonely Island 's album , The Wack Album . On November 11 , 2013 , Knowles ' record label released its first compilation album , Saint Heron . 
