 On May 17 , 2006 , another suspect , Guido Wever , the son of a former Aruban politician , was detained in the Netherlands on suspicion of assisting in the abducting , battering , and killing of Holloway . Wever was questioned for six days in Utrecht . While initially Aruban prosecutors sought his transfer to the island , he was instead released by agreement between the prosecutor and Wever 's attorney . 
 At Aruba 's request the Netherlands took over the investigation . A team of the Dutch National Police started work on the case in September 2006 following receipt of extensive case documentation in Rotterdam . On April 16 , 2007 , a combined Aruban – Dutch team began pursuing the investigation in Aruba . 
 = = = Book , search , and inspection = = = 
 A book by Joran van der Sloot and reporter <unk> <unk> , De <unk> Natalee Holloway ( The Case of Natalee Holloway ) was published , in Dutch , in April 2007 . In the book , Van der Sloot gives his perspective of the night Holloway disappeared and the media frenzy which followed . He admits , and apologizes for , his initial untruths , but maintains his innocence . 
 On April 27 , 2007 , a new search involving some twenty investigators was launched at the Van der Sloot family residence in Aruba . Dutch authorities searched the yard and surrounding area , using shovels and thin metal rods to penetrate the dirt . Prosecution spokeswoman Van der Biezen stated , " The investigation has never stopped and the Dutch authorities are completely reviewing the case for new indications " . A statement from the prosecutor 's office related , " The team has indications that justify a more thorough search " . Investigators did not comment on what prompted the new search , except that it was not related to Van der Sloot 's book . According to Paulus van der Sloot , " nothing suspicious " was found , and all that was seized were diary entries of him and his wife , and his personal computer — which was subsequently returned . 
 According to <unk> Mansur , managing editor of Aruba 's Diario newspaper , investigators were following up on statements made during early suspect interrogations regarding calls made and emails sent between the Kalpoe brothers and Joran van der Sloot . He also said investigators could be seen examining a laptop at the house . 
 On May 12 , 2007 , the Kalpoe family home was subject to an " inspection " . The two brothers were detained for about an hour upon objecting to the entry by police and Dutch investigators , but were released when the authorities left . According to Kock , the brothers objected to the search because officials did not show them an order justifying the intrusion . A statement from Van der Biezen did not mention what , if anything , officials were searching for , but indicated nothing was removed from the home . A subsequent statement from Het <unk> <unk> van Aruba ( the Aruban prosecutor 's office ) indicated that the purpose of the visit was to " get a better image of the place or circumstances where an offense may have been committed and to understand the chain of events leading to the offense " . 
 = = = 2007 rearrests and re @-@ releases = = = 
 With Aruban investigators citing what was described as newly discovered evidence , Joran van der Sloot and Satish and Deepak Kalpoe were rearrested November 21 , 2007 , on suspicion of involvement in " manslaughter and causing serious bodily harm that resulted in the death of Holloway " . Van der Sloot was detained by Dutch authorities in the Netherlands , while the Kalpoe brothers were detained in Aruba . Van der Sloot returned to Aruba and was incarcerated . 
 In November 2007 , Dave Holloway announced a new search for his daughter , probing the sea beyond the original 330 @-@ foot ( 100 m ) depths in which earlier searches had taken place . That search , involving a vessel called the Persistence , was abandoned due to lack of funds at the end of February 2008 with nothing of significance found . 
 On November 30 , 2007 , a judge ordered the release of Satish and Deepak Kalpoe , despite attempts by the prosecution to extend their detention . The two brothers were released on the following day . The prosecution appealed the Kalpoes ' release . That appeal was denied on December 5 , 2007 , with the court writing , " Notwithstanding expensive and lengthy investigations on her disappearance and on people who could be involved , the file against the suspect does not contain direct indications that Natalee passed away due to a violent crime . " Van der Sloot was released without charge on December 7 , 2007 , due to lack of evidence implicating him as well as a lack of evidence that Holloway died as the result of a violent crime . The prosecution indicated it would not appeal . 
 On December 18 , 2007 , prosecutor Hans Mos officially declared the case closed , and that no charges would be filed due to lack of evidence . The prosecution indicated a continuing interest in the Kalpoes and Joran van der Sloot ( though they ceased to be legally suspects ) , and alleged that one of the three , in a chat room message , had stated that Holloway was dead . This was hotly contested by Deepak Kalpoe 's attorney , who stated that the prosecution , in translating from <unk> to Dutch , had misconstrued a reference to a teacher who had drowned as one to Holloway . Attorney Ronald Wix also stated , " Unless ( Mos ) finds a body in the bathroom of one of these kids , there 's no way in hell they can arrest them anymore . " 
 = = = Secret cameras , statements , and stories = = = 
 On January 31 , 2008 , Dutch crime reporter Peter R. de Vries claimed that he had solved the Holloway case . De Vries stated that he would tell all on a special television program on Dutch TV on February 3 . Beth Twitty 's attorney , John Q. Kelly , told ABC News that he had little faith that the supposed evidence would prove pivotal to the case of her daughter and suggested that it would be quickly debunked . 
 On February 1 , the Dutch media reported that Joran van der Sloot made a confession regarding the disappearance of Natalee Holloway . Later that day , Van der Sloot stated that he was telling the individual what he wanted to hear , and that he had no role in her disappearance . That same day , the Aruba prosecutor 's office announced the reopening of the case . 
 The broadcast aired February 3 , 2008 . The broadcast included excerpts from footage recorded from hidden cameras and microphones in the vehicle of Patrick van der Eem , a Dutch businessman and ex @-@ convict , who gained Van der Sloot 's confidence . Van der Sloot was seen smoking marijuana and stating that he was with Holloway when she began convulsively shaking , then became unresponsive . Van der Sloot stated that he attempted to revive her , without success . He said that he called a friend , who told Van der Sloot to go home and who disposed of the body . An individual reputed to be this friend , identified in the broadcast as Daury , has denied Van der Sloot 's account , indicating that he was then in Rotterdam at school . 
 The Aruban prosecutor 's office attempted to obtain an arrest warrant for Van der Sloot based on the tapes ; however , a judge denied the request . The prosecutor appealed the denial , but the appeal failed on February 14 , 2008 . The appeals court held that the statements on the tape were inconsistent with evidence in the case and were insufficient to hold Van der Sloot . 
 On February 8 , 2008 , Van der Sloot met with Aruban investigators in the Netherlands . Van der Sloot denied that what he said on the tape was true , stating that he was under the influence of marijuana at the time . Van der Sloot indicated that he still maintains that he left Holloway behind on the beach . 
 In March 2008 , news reports indicated that the tables had been turned on Van der Eem , who himself was secretly taped after giving an interview for Aruban TV . Van der Eem , under the impression that cameras had been turned off , kept talking . Van der Eem disclosed that he had been a friend of Van der Sloot for years ( contradicting his statement on the De Vries show that he had met Van der Sloot in 2007 ) , that he expects to become a millionaire through his involvement in the Holloway case , and that he knew the person who supposedly disposed of Holloway 's body — and that Van der Sloot had asked him for two thousand euros to buy the man 's silence . According to Dutch news service ANP , Van der Eem , who had already signed a book deal , " was furious " after learning of the taping , and " threatened " the interviewer , who sought legal advice . Van der Eem 's book <unk> ( Overboard ) , co @-@ written with E.E. <unk> , was released ( in Dutch ) on June 25 , 2008 . Van der Eem was arrested on December 13 , 2008 in the Netherlands for allegedly hitting his girlfriend with a crowbar and engaging in risky driving behavior while fleeing police . 
 The De Vries broadcast was discussed in a seminar by Dutch legal psychologist Willem Albert Wagenaar , who indicated that the statements did not constitute a confession . Wagenaar criticized De Vries for broadcasting the material , stating that the broadcast made it harder to obtain a conviction , and had De Vries turned over the material to the authorities without broadcasting it , they would have held " all the trumps " in questioning Van der Sloot . Wagenaar opined that not only was the case not solved , it was not even clear that a crime had been committed . Professor <unk> Brants , in the same seminar , also criticized De Vries 's methods . 
 On November 24 , 2008 , Fox News aired an interview with Van der Sloot in which he alleged that he sold Holloway into sexual slavery , receiving money both when Holloway was taken , and later on to keep quiet . Van der Sloot also alleged that his father paid off two police officers who had learned that Holloway was taken to Venezuela . Van der Sloot later retracted the statements made in the interview . The show also aired part of an audio recording provided by Van der Sloot , which he alleged is a phone conversation between him and his father , in which the father displays knowledge of his son 's purported involvement in human trafficking . According to Mos , this voice heard on the recording is not that of Paulus van der Sloot — the Dutch newspaper De Telegraaf reports that the ' father 's ' voice is almost certainly that of Joran van der Sloot himself , trying to speak in a lower tone . Paulus van der Sloot died of a heart attack on February 10 , 2010 . 
 On March 20 , 2009 , Dave Holloway flew a search dog to Aruba to search a small reservoir in northern Aruba , previously identified by a supposed witness as a possible location of Natalee 's remains . Aruban authorities indicated that they had no new information in the case , but that Holloway had been given permission to conduct the search . 
 On February 23 , 2010 , it was reported that Joran van der Sloot had stated in an interview ( first offered to RTL Group in 2009 ) that he had disposed of Holloway 's body in a marsh on Aruba . New chief prosecutor Peter Blanken indicated that authorities had investigated the latest story , and had dismissed it . Blanken stated that " The locations , names , and times he gave just did not make sense " . 
 Underwater searches were conducted by Aruban authorities in March 2010 after an American couple reported that while snorkeling they had photographed what they thought might be human skeletal remains , possibly those of Holloway . Aruban authorities sent divers to investigate , but no remains were recovered . 
 = = = Van der Sloot 's extortion of money from Holloway 's family = = = 
 On March 29 , 2010 , Van der Sloot contacted John Q. Kelly , legal representative of Beth Twitty , with an offer to reveal the location of Holloway 's body and the circumstances surrounding her death for an advance of US $ 25 @,@ 000 against a total of $ 250 @,@ 000 . After Kelly notified the Federal Bureau of Investigation , they arranged to proceed with the transaction . On May 10 , Van der Sloot had $ 15 @,@ 000 wire transferred to his account in the Netherlands , following the receipt of $ 10 @,@ 000 in cash that was videotaped by undercover investigators in Aruba . Authorities state that the information that he provided in return was false because the house in which he said Holloway 's body was located had not yet been built at the time of her disappearance . On June 3 , Van der Sloot was charged in the U.S. District Court of Northern Alabama with extortion and wire fraud . U.S. Attorney Joyce White Vance obtained an arrest warrant and transmitted it to Interpol . Van der Sloot was indicted on the charges on June 30 . 
 On June 4 , at the request of the U.S. Justice Department , authorities raided and confiscated items from two homes in the Netherlands , one of them belonging to reporter Jaap <unk> who had previously interviewed Van der Sloot and claimed knowledge of criminal activities by Van der Sloot . Aruban investigators used information gathered from the extortion case to launch a new search at a beach , but no new evidence was found . Dave Holloway returned to Aruba on June 14 to pursue possible new clues . 
 = = = Van der Sloot kills in Peru = = = 
 On May 30 , 2010 — five years to the day after Holloway 's disappearance — Stephany Tatiana Flores Ramírez , a 21 @-@ year @-@ old business student , was reported missing in Lima , Peru . She was found dead three days later in a hotel room registered in Van der Sloot 's name . Van der Sloot was arrested on June 3 in Chile and was extradited to Peru the next day . On June 7 , 2010 , Peruvian authorities said that Van der Sloot confessed to killing Flores Ramírez after he lost his temper because she accessed his laptop without permission and found information linking him to the disappearance of Holloway . Police chief Cesar Guardia related that Van der Sloot told Peruvian police that he knows where Holloway 's body is and offered to help Aruban authorities find it . However , Guardia stated that the interrogation was limited to their case in Peru , and that questions about Holloway 's disappearance were avoided . On June 11 , Van der Sloot was charged in Lima Superior Court with first @-@ degree murder and robbery . On June 15 , Aruban and Peruvian authorities announced an agreement to cooperate and allow investigators from Aruba to interview Van der Sloot at Miguel Castro Castro prison in Peru . In a September 2010 interview from the prison , Van der Sloot reportedly admitted to the extortion plot , stating : " I wanted to get back at Natalee 's family — her parents have been making my life tough for five years . " Van der Sloot pleaded guilty to murdering Ramirez on January 11 , 2012 , and was sentenced to 28 years in prison . 
 On November 12 , 2010 , tourists found a jawbone on an Aruban beach near the Phoenix Hotel and <unk> Swamp . Aruban prosecutor Peter Blanken stated that a preliminary examination by a forensic expert on the island determined that the bone was from a young woman . A part of the bone was sent to The Hague for testing by the Netherlands Forensic Institute . On November 23 , 2010 , Aruba Solicitor @-@ General Taco Stein announced that , based on dental records , the jawbone was not from Holloway , and it was not possible to determine whether it had come from a man or woman . 
 = = = Holloway declared dead = = = 
 In June 2011 , Dave Holloway filed a petition with the Alabama courts seeking to have his daughter declared legally dead . The papers were served on his former wife , who announced her intention to oppose the petition . A hearing was held on September 23 , 2011 , during which Probate Judge Alan King ruled Dave Holloway had met the requirements for a legal presumption of death . On January 12 , 2012 , a second hearing was held , after which Judge King signed the order declaring Natalee Holloway to be dead . 
 = = Beth Twitty 's involvement = = 
 Beth Twitty has alleged in televised interviews that Joran van der Sloot and the Kalpoe brothers know more than they have told , and that at least one of them sexually assaulted or raped her daughter . Twitty stated that she received copies of police statements stating that Joran van der Sloot admitted having sex with Holloway at his home and described intimate details of her . She has never released copies of the alleged statement , though she characterizes them as admissions of " sexual assault " and Vinda de Sousa , former Holloway – Twitty family Aruban attorney , has indicated that no such admission was made . In addition , Dompig denied that any such statement was made , stating that Van der Sloot and the Kalpoe brothers consistently denied having sex with Holloway . 
 On June 12 , 2005 , three days after the arrest of Joran van der Sloot and the Kalpoe brothers , and in response to a nationally televised address by Aruba Prime Minister Nelson <unk> reaffirming Aruba 's commitment to solving the case , Twitty stated , " I 'm not getting any answers " . She added , " I don 't feel any further along than the day I got here " . Twitty stated that her complaints were not addressed specifically at the Aruban government , but arose from frustration at not knowing what happened to her daughter . 
 On July 5 , 2005 , following the initial release of the Kalpoes , Twitty alleged , " Two suspects were released yesterday who were involved in a violent crime against my daughter " , and referred to the Kalpoes as " criminals " . A demonstration involving about two hundred Arubans took place that evening outside the courthouse in Oranjestad in anger over Twitty 's remarks , with signs reading " Innocent until proven guilty " and " Respect our Dutch laws or go home " . On July 8 , 2005 , and after Satish Kalpoe 's attorney threatened legal action over Twitty 's allegations , which he described as " prejudicial , inflammatory , libelous , and totally outrageous " , Twitty read a statement that said her remarks were fueled by " despair and frustration " and that she " apologize [ d ] to the Aruban people and to the Aruban authorities if I or my family offended you in any way " . 
 Twitty was criticized for her focus on Joran van der Sloot and the Kalpoe brothers , to the exclusion of any other theory as to what happened to Holloway . According to the lawsuit filed by the Kalpoe brothers , she has ( on various television programs ) repeatedly accused them , and Joran van der Sloot , of " sexual assault " and " gang rape " of her daughter . 
 Twitty was also criticized for making what have been deemed to be inconsistent and contradictory statements ( for example , as to whether there were operating security cameras at the Holiday Inn ) . According to Julia Renfro , U.S.-born editor of the Aruban tourist @-@ oriented newspaper , Aruba Today , who befriended Twitty in the early days of the investigation , Twitty pandered to tabloid television and her " behavior was odd from the get @-@ go " . Renfro noted that " Twitty immediately concluded that her daughter had been kidnapped and made no effort to check hospitals or police " , adding that within a couple of days , after fixing responsibility on Joran van der Sloot , Twitty " was telling TV interviewers that she knew her daughter had been gang @-@ raped and murdered " . 
 Her book Loving Natalee : A Mother 's Testament of Hope and Faith , was published on October 2 , 2007 under the name " Beth Holloway , " which she resumed using following her December 2006 divorce from Jug Twitty . 
 What we want is , we want justice . And you know — and we have to recognize the fact that , you know , this crime has been committed on the island of Aruba , and we know the perpetrators . We know it 's these suspects , Deepak and Satish Kalpoe and Joran Van Der Sloot . And you know , we just have to , though , keep going , Nancy , because the only way we will get justice for Natalee is if we do keep going . I mean , if we give up , absolutely nothing will happen . Nothing . 
 Following the airing of the De Vries program , Beth Holloway , adhering to the position that the tapes represent the way events transpired , told the New York Post that she believes her daughter might still be alive if Van der Sloot had called for help . She contends that Van der Sloot dumped Holloway 's body , possibly alive , into the Caribbean . Holloway also alleges that the individual Joran van der Sloot supposedly called that evening was his father , Paulus , who , according to Holloway , " orchestrated what to do next " . She , and Dave Holloway , alleged that Joran van der Sloot was receiving " special legal favors " . After the court decision not to rearrest Van der Sloot was affirmed , Beth Holloway stated , " I think that what I do take comfort in , his life is a living hell " , later adding , " I 'd be good with a Midnight Express prison anywhere for Joran . " 
 In response to her daughter 's disappearance , Beth Holloway founded the International Safe Travels Foundation , a non @-@ profit organization designed " to inform and educate the public to help them travel more safely as they travel internationally " . She has marketed herself as a for @-@ fee speaker through the Nashville Speakers Bureau . In April 2010 , Holloway announced plans for a service called " Mayday 360 " , to intervene immediately when young people get into trouble overseas . She stated that if necessary , former federal agents with specific knowledge of a country could be dispatched there . In May 2010 , she announced that the Natalee Holloway Resource Center would open at the National Museum of Crime & Punishment . Located in Washington , D.C. , the center opened on June 8 to aid families of missing persons . 
 Though Beth Holloway made television appearances as new developments arose in the case , she is under FBI direction not to discuss her daughter 's case or that of Stephany Flores Ramírez . 
 = = Criticism of the investigation = = 
 The Twittys and their supporters criticized a perceived lack of progress by Aruban police . The Twittys ' own actions in Aruba were also criticized , and the Twittys were accused of actively stifling any evidence that might impugn Holloway 's character by asking her fellow students to remain silent about the case and using their access to the media to push their own version of events . The Twittys denied this . 
 While initially the Twittys discouraged a travel boycott of Aruba , this changed by September 2005 . Beth Twitty urged that persons not travel to Aruba and other Dutch territories because of what she stated were tourist safety issues . Alabama Governor Bob Riley , joined by the Twittys , urged <unk> and others to boycott Aruba on November 8 , 2005 , in a news conference . Riley also wrote to other United States governors seeking their support — the governors of Georgia and Arkansas eventually joined in the call for boycott . The Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , city council voted to ask the governor of Pennsylvania to call for a boycott . The governor did not join in the call for a boycott , and no federal support was given . 
 The boycott was supported by some of Alabama 's Congressional delegation , including both senators and Congressman Spencer <unk> ( R @-@ AL ) , who represents Mountain Brook . Senator Richard Shelby ( R @-@ AL ) voiced his support for the boycott in a letter to the American Society of Travel Agents . Shelby stated , " For the safety , security and wellbeing of our citizens , I do not believe that we can trust that we will be protected while in Aruba " . Prime Minister <unk> stated that Aruban investigators have done their best to solve the mystery , and responded to the call for boycott , " This is a preposterous and irresponsible act . We are not guerillas . We are not terrorists . We don 't pose a threat to the United States , nor to Alabama " . 
 Members of the Aruba Hotel and Tourism Association , the Aruba Tourism Authority , the Aruba Hospitality and Security Foundation , the Aruban Chamber of Commerce and government figures , including Public Relations Representative Ruben <unk> , formed an " Aruba Strategic Communications Task Force " to respond collectively to what they perceived to be unfounded and / or negative portrayals of the island . The group issued press releases and sent representatives to appear in news media . They joined the Aruban government in opposing the calls for a boycott of the island . 
 = = = Skeeters tape and Dr. Phil ; lawsuits = = = 
 On September 15 , 2005 , the Dr. Phil television show showed parts of a hidden @-@ camera interview with Deepak Kalpoe in which Kalpoe seems to answer " She did . You 'd be surprised how easy it was " to a suggestion that Holloway had sex with all three men . The taping had been instigated by Jamie Skeeters , a private investigator . When the tape was broadcast , news reports indicated an expectation of a rearrest , which Dompig termed a " strong possibility " if the tapes were legitimate . 
 Aruban police subsequently provided a fuller version of the relevant part of the tape in which Kalpoe 's response differed from the Dr. Phil version , apparently due to editing that may have altered the meaning of what was said . An unofficial Aruban @-@ affiliated spokesperson and commentator on the case said videotape showed Kalpoe had shaken his head and said " No , she didn 't . " , thereby denying that Holloway had sex with him and the other two men . According to an MSNBC report , the crucial words are inaudible , and presenter Rita Cosby questioned if it could be substantiated that Kalpoe had ever made the statements attributed to him in the Dr. Phil version 's transcript of the secret recording . 
 In December 2006 , the Kalpoes filed a slander and libel suit against Dr. Phil and Skeeters ( who died in January 2007 ) in Los Angeles . Beth Twitty and Dave Holloway responded by filing a wrongful death lawsuit against the Kalpoes in the same venue . The wrongful death suit was dismissed for lack of personal jurisdiction on June 1 , 2007 ; the libel and slander case was initially set for trial on October 12 , 2011 but was later set for April 2015 . An earlier lawsuit had been filed in New York City by the parents against Paulus and Joran van der Sloot and served on them on a visit to New York . The case had been dismissed in August 2006 as filed in an inconvenient forum . 
 On November 10 , 2005 , Paulus van der Sloot won an unjust detention action against the Aruban government , clearing him as a suspect and allowing him to retain his government contract . The elder Van der Sloot then brought a second action , seeking monetary damages for himself and his family because of his false arrest . The action was initially successful , but the award of damages was reversed on appeal . 
 = = = <unk> article = = = 
 The <unk> reported on interviews with Renfro and Dompig in which they said that Aruban authorities had been systematically obstructed in their investigation by US officials . They also said that within a day of Holloway being declared missing , a <unk> , unauthorized by Aruban authorities , had arrived on Aruba and had remained for several days for the purpose of covertly taking Holloway off the island without notifying local authorities . Renfro also said she and Beth Twitty received a phone call from an unknown woman on June 2 , 2005 asking for money in return for her giving Holloway 's location , and asserting that Holloway was unwilling to return to her mother . According to <unk> , she and another American went to a drug house where Holloway supposedly was , bringing money , but found that Jug Twitty had already been to the area , spreading " a lot of uproar and panic in the direct vicinity " , and nothing could be accomplished . The Twittys disputed <unk> 's accounts , Beth describing Renfro as " a witch " . 
 = = = Film adaptation = = = 
 On April 19 , 2009 , Lifetime Movie Network aired Natalee Holloway , a television film based on Beth Holloway 's book Loving Natalee . Starring Tracy Pollan as Beth Holloway @-@ Twitty , Grant Show as George " Jug " Twitty , Amy <unk> as Natalee Holloway and Jacques <unk> as Joran van der Sloot , the film retells events leading up to the night of Holloway 's disappearance in 2005 , and the ensuing investigation in the aftermath . It was shot in South Africa . 
 The movie does not solve the case , but stages re @-@ creations of various scenarios , based on the testimony of key players and suspects , including Van der Sloot . The broadcast of the film attracted 3 @.@ 2 million viewers , garnering the highest television ratings in the network 's 11 @-@ year history . Although it set ratings records for Lifetime , the movie received mixed reviews from critics . Alec Harvey of The Birmingham News called the movie " sloppy and uneven , a forgettable look at the tragedy that consumed the nation 's attention for months " . However , Jake Meaney of PopMatters found the film to be surprisingly " calm and levelheaded " , and praised Tracy Pollan 's portrayal of Holloway 's mother . A follow up film , Justice for Natalee Holloway , aired in mid @-@ 2011 on the Lifetime Movie Network . This film picks up in 2010 , on the five year anniversary of Natalee 's disappearance . It continues to center on the investigation and what exactly happened to the Alabama teen . 
 = = Media coverage = = 
 U.S. television networks devoted much air time to the search for Holloway , the investigation of her disappearance , and rumors surrounding the case . Greta Van Susteren , host of Fox News Channel 's On the Record , and Nancy Grace on her eponymous Headline News program were among the most prominent television personalities to devote time to the incident . Van Susteren 's almost continuous coverage of the story caused On the Record to get its best ratings to date , while Grace 's show became the cornerstone of the new " Headline Prime " block on Headline News , which ran two episodes ( a live show and a repeat ) every night during prime @-@ time . As the case wore on , much of the attention was given to Beth Twitty and her statements . Aruban government spokesman Ruben <unk> stated , " The case is under a microscope , and the world is watching . " 
 The saturation of coverage triggered a backlash among some critics who argued that such extensive media attention validates the " missing white woman syndrome " theory , which argues that missing @-@ person cases involving white women and girls receive disproportionate attention in the media compared with cases involving white males or people of color . CNN ran a segment criticizing the amount of coverage their competitors gave to the story despite what they characterized as a lack of new items to report , with CNN news anchor Anderson Cooper calling the coverage " downright ridiculous " . 
 Early in the case , political commentator and columnist Arianna Huffington wrote , " If you were to get your news only from television , you 'd think the top issue facing our country right now is an 18 @-@ year @-@ old girl named Natalee who went missing in Aruba . Every time one of these stories comes up , like , say , Michael Jackson , when it 's finally over I think , what a relief , now we can get back to real news . But we never do . " 
 In March 2008 , El Diario commented , " But if doubts persist about cases involving missing Latinas , there are reasons why . These cases rarely receive the attention and resources we see given to other missing persons . The English @-@ language media , for example , appear to be focused on the stories of missing white women , such as with the disappearance of Natalee Holloway in Aruba . Cases of missing Latina and African American women often remain faceless , when they are even covered . " 
 CBS senior journalist Danna Walker stated , " There is criticism that it is only a story because she is a pretty blonde — and white — and it is criticism that journalists are taking to heart and looking elsewhere for other stories . But it is a big story because it is an American girl who went off on an adventure , and didn 't come back . It is a huge mystery , it is something people can identify with . " 
 Good Morning America anchor Chris Cuomo was unapologetic of his program 's extensive coverage of the Holloway case . " I don 't believe it 's my role to judge what people want to watch … If they say , ' I want to know what happened to this girl ' … I want to help them find out . " 
 Holloway 's family , however , instead criticized the lessening of coverage of the young woman 's disappearance . The saturation coverage of Holloway 's disappearance by the American media was largely eclipsed in late August 2005 by Hurricane Katrina . Beth Twitty and Dave Holloway alleged that Aruba took advantage of the extensive coverage of the hurricane to release the suspects . However , the deadline for judicial review of Joran van der Sloot 's detention was set long before the hurricane . 
 <unk> Dave Holloway in his book , 
 Hurricane Katrina had left the door open for the boys to be sent on their way with little publicity and few restrictions because it took the world 's focus off of Natalee , but only for a brief time . The huge amount of publicity had waned and , during that time of quiet for us , Joran and the Kalpoe brothers were sent home ... All of the news shows that had followed our every move only a day before had now become fixated on the next big ratings grabber : the victims of Hurricane Katrina . 
 = Finnish Civil War = 
 The Finnish Civil War ( 27 January – 15 May 1918 ) concerned leadership and control of Finland during the transition from a Grand Duchy of the Russian Empire to an independent state . The conflict formed a part of the national , political , and social turmoil caused by World War I ( Eastern Front ) in Europe . The war was fought between the Reds , led by the Social Democratic Party and the Whites , conducted by the non @-@ socialist , conservative @-@ led Senate . The paramilitary Red Guards , composed of industrial and agrarian workers , controlled the towns and industrial centres of southern Finland . The paramilitary White Guards , composed of peasants and middle- and upper @-@ class factions , controlled rural central and northern Finland . 
 Finnish society had experienced - by 1917 , under the Russian regime - rapid population growth , industrialisation , <unk> and the rise of a comprehensive labour movement . The country 's political and governmental systems were in an unstable phase of democratisation and modernization , while the people 's socioeconomic condition and national @-@ cultural status gradually improved . World War I led to the collapse of the Russian Empire and a power struggle , militarization , and escalating crisis between the left @-@ leaning Finnish labor movement and the Finnish conservatives . 
 The Reds carried out an unsuccessful general offensive in February 1918 , supplied with weapons by Soviet Russia . A counteroffensive by the Whites began in March , reinforced by an Imperial German Army squad in April . The decisive military actions of the war were the Battles of Tampere and Viipuri , won by the Whites , and the Battles of Helsinki and Lahti , won by German troops , leading to overall victory of the Whites and the German forces . Both the Reds and Whites engaged in political terror . A large number of Reds perished due to malnutrition and disease in prison camps . Altogether , around 39 @,@ 000 people died in the war , including 36 @,@ 000 Finns — out of a population of 3 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . 
 In the aftermath , the Finns passed from Russian rule to the German Empire 's sphere of power . The conservative Finnish Senate attempted to establish a Finnish monarchy , but the plan was aborted by the defeat of Germany in World War I. Finland emerged as an independent , democratic republic . The war divided the nation for many years and remains one of the most emotionally charged events in Finnish history . The society was reunited through social compromises based on a long @-@ term culture of moderate politics and religion , the outcome of World War I , and the postwar economic recovery . 
 = = Background = = 
 The main factor behind the Finnish Civil War was World War I ; the Russian Empire collapsed under the pressures of the war , leading to the February and October Revolutions in 1917 . The breakdown caused a large power vacuum and subsequent power struggle in Eastern Europe . The Grand Duchy of Finland , a part of the Russian Empire since 1809 , became embroiled in the struggle for power . <unk> less important Finland was a peaceful <unk> until early 1918 , but the war between the German Empire and Russia had indirect effects on the Finns . Since the end of 19th century , the Grand Duchy had become a vital source of raw materials , industrial products , food and labor for the growing Imperial Russian capital Petrograd ( Saint Petersburg ) , and World War I emphasized the role . Strategically , the Finnish territory was the northern section of the Estonian – Finnish gateway and buffer zone to and from Petrograd via the Gulf of Finland , the Narva area and the Karelian Isthmus . 
 The German Empire saw Eastern Europe — mainly Russia — as a major source of vital products and raw materials , both during World War I and in the future . Her resources overstretched by the two @-@ front war , Germany pursued a policy of breaking up Russia from within by providing financial support to revolutionary groups such as the Bolsheviks , Socialist Revolutionary Party ( <unk> ) and separatist factions such as the Finnish Activists leaning toward Germanism . Between 30 and 40 million marks were spent on this endeavor . Controlling the Finnish area would allow the Imperial German Army to penetrate Petrograd and the Kola Peninsula , an area rich in raw materials for the mining industry . Finland possessed large ore reserves and a well @-@ developed forest industry . 
 From 1809 to 1898 , a period called Pax <unk> , the peripheral power of the Finns gradually increased , and the Russian @-@ Finnish relations were exceptionally peaceful compared with other parts of the Russian Empire . Russia 's defeat in the Crimean War in the 1850s led to attempts to speed up the modernization of the country . This caused more than 50 years of economic , industrial , cultural and educational progress in the Grand Duchy of Finland , including improvement in the status of the Finnish language . All this encouraged Finnish nationalism and cultural unity through the birth of the Fennoman movement , which bound the Finns to the domestic governmental system and led to the idea that the Finnish Grand Duchy was an increasingly autonomous state of the Russian Empire . 
 In 1899 , the Russian Empire initiated a policy of integration through the Russification of Finland . The strengthened , pan @-@ <unk> central power tried to unite the " Russian Multinational Dynastic Union " , because the military and strategic situation of Russia became more difficult due of the rise of Germany and Japan . The Finns called the increased military and administrative control " the First Period of Oppression , 1899 – 1905 " , and plans for disengagement from Russia or sovereignty for Finland were drawn up for the first time . In the power struggle , the most radical political group opposing Russia , the Activist movement , included terrorist factions from the working class and the Swedish @-@ speaking intelligentsia . During World War I and the rise of Germanism , the <unk> began their covert collaboration with Imperial Germany , and from 1915 to 1917 , a Finnish " Jäger " ( <unk> ) battalion consisting of 1900 volunteers were trained in Germany . 
 = = = Politics = = = 
 The major reasons for rising political tensions among the Finns were the autocratic rule of the Russian Czar and the undemocratic class system of the estates of the realm . The system originated in the Swedish Empire regime , preceding the Russian power , and divided the Finnish people into two groups , separated economically , socially and politically . Finland 's population grew rapidly in the 19th century ( from 860 @,@ 000 in 1810 to 3 @,@ 130 @,@ 000 in 1917 ) , and a class of industrial and agrarian workers and property @-@ less peasants emerged . The Industrial Revolution was rapid in Finland , though it started later than in the rest of Western Europe . Industrialization was financed by the state , and some of the social problems associated with the industrial process were diminished via control of the administration . Among urban workers , socioeconomic problems steepened during periods of industrial depression . The position of rural workers had worsened since the end of the 19th century , as farming became more efficient and market @-@ oriented and the gradually developing industry did not fully utilize the rapid population growth of the countryside . 
 The difference between Scandinavian @-@ Finnish ( Finno @-@ Ugric peoples ) and Russian @-@ Slavic culture affected the nature of Finnish national integration ; the social upper faction took the lead , though it gained domestic might from the Russian Czar in 1809 . The estates planned to build up an increasingly autonomous Finnish state , led by the elite and intelligentsia . The <unk> aimed to include the common people in a nonpolitical role in order to reduce unrest due to social problems ; the labor movement , youth associations and temperance movement were initially led " from above . " 
 Social conditions , the standard of living and the self @-@ confidence of the workers gradually improved due to industrialization between 1870 – 1916 but , while the standard of living rose among the common people , the rift between rich and poor deepened markedly . The common people 's rising awareness of the socioeconomic and political questions interacted with the ideas of socialism , social liberalism and nationalism ( Fennomania ) . The commoners ' responses and the corresponding counteracts of the dominating upper factions steepened the social relations in Finland . 
 The Finnish labor movement , which emerged at the end of the 19th century from temperance , religious movements and Fennomania , had a Finnish nationalist , working @-@ class character . From 1899 – 1906 the labor movement became conclusively independent , shedding the patriarchal thinking of the Fennoman estates , and it was represented by the Finnish Social Democratic Party , established in 1899 . Workers ' activism directed both toward opposing Russification and in developing a domestic policy that tackled social problems and responded to the demand for democracy . This was a reaction to the domestic dispute , ongoing since the 1880s , between the Finnish nobility @-@ burghers and the labor movement concerning voting rights for the common people . 
 Besides their obligations as obedient , peaceful and nonpolitical inhabitants of the Grand Duchy , who had a few decades earlier accepted the class system as the natural order of their life , the commoners had begun to ask for and then demand their civil rights and citizenship in Finnish society . The power struggle between the Finnish estates and the Russian administration gave a concrete role model and free space for the labor movement . On the other side , due to at least a century @-@ long tradition and experience of administrative leadership , the Finnish elite saw itself as the inherent natural power in the Grand Duchy . 
 The political struggle for democracy was solved outside Finland , via international power politics ; the Russian Empire 's failed 1904 – 1905 war against Japan led to the 1905 Revolution in Russia and to a general strike in Finland . In an attempt to quell the general unrest , the system of estates was abolished in the Parliamentary Reform of 1906 , which introduced universal suffrage . The general strike increased support for the Social Democrats substantially , as a proportion of the population , the party was the most powerful socialist movement in the world . 
 The Reform of 1906 was a giant leap in the political and social liberalization of the common Finnish people ; the Russian royal family was the most autocratic and conservative rulers in Europe . The Finns adopted a unicameral parliamentary system with all political rights for female citizens , increasing the number of voters from 126 @,@ 000 to 1 @,@ 273 @,@ 000 . This produced around 50 % turnouts for the Social Democrats , but the Czar regained his authority after the crisis of 1905 , and during the second period of Russification between 1908 and 1917 neutralized the power of the Parliament . He dissolved it and ordered parliamentary elections almost annually between 1908 – 1916 , and determined the composition of the Finnish Senate , which did not correlate with the assembly of the Parliament , prohibiting true <unk> . 
 The capacity of the Parliament to solve major socioeconomic problems was stymied by confrontations between the representatives of the largely uneducated common man and the representatives of the former estates , accustomed to autocratic rule and attitudes . At the same time , conflict grew between industrial employers and their workers as the industrialists denied collective bargaining and the right of the labour unions to represent working people ; the employers essentially dictated contracts signed on the personal level . Although the parliamentary process disappointed the labour movement , dominance in the Finnish Parliament and in legislation was the workers ' pathway to reach a more balanced society - they identified themselves powerfully to the state . Altogether , these political developments led to conditions that encouraged a struggle for leadership of the Finnish state , during the ten years before the collapse of the Russian Empire . 
 = = = February Revolution = = = 
 The more severe programme of Russification , called " the Second Period of Oppression , 1908 – 1917 " by the Finns , was halted on 15 March 1917 by the removal of the Russian Czar Nicholas II . The immediate reason for the collapse of the Russian Empire was crisis caused by military defeats in the war against Imperial Germany and war @-@ weariness among the Russians . The deeper causes lay in the collision between the most conservative and autocratic regime in Europe and the Russian people urging for socioeconomic modernization . The Czar 's power was transferred to the Russian Parliament , Duma and the right @-@ wing Provisional Government , but it was challenged by the Petrograd Soviet , leading to dual power in the country . 
 Autonomous status was returned to the Finns in March 1917 , and the revolt in Russia handed to the Finnish Parliament true political power for the first time . The political left , consisting mainly of Social Democrats , covered a wide spectrum from moderate to revolutionary socialists . The political right was even more diverse , ranging from social liberals and moderate conservatives to rightist conservative elements . The four main parties were : 
 the conservative Finnish Party 
 the Young Finnish Party including both liberals and conservatives , the liberals divided to social liberals and economic liberals 
 the social reformist , centrist Agrarian League , which drew its support mainly from peasants with small or middle @-@ sized farms 
 the conservative Swedish People 's Party , which sought to retain the rights of the former nobility and the Swedish @-@ speaking minority of Finland . 
 The Finns faced a detrimental interaction of power struggle and breakdown of society during 1917 . The collapse of Russia induced a chain reaction of disintegration , starting from the government , military power and economy , and spreading downwards to all fields of the society such as local administration and workplaces , and finally to the level of individual citizens as changes and questions of freedom , responsibility and morality . The Social Democrats aimed at retaining the political rights of the labor movement already achieved , and gaining power over the people and society . The conservatives were fearful of losing their long @-@ held socioeconomic might . Both factions , with groups aiming at major supremacy , collaborated with the corresponding political forces in Russia , deepening the split in the nation . 
 As a consequence of the unbalanced social development and the labour movement 's continuous position in the political opposition , the Social Democratic Party had gained an absolute majority in the new Parliament of Finland , in the general parliamentary elections of 1916 . The new Senate was formed in March 1917 by Social Democrat and trade union leader Oskari Tokoi . His cabinet did not reflect the assembly of the Finnish parliament , with the socialists ' absolute majority . It comprised six representatives from the Social Democrats and six from non @-@ socialist parties . 
 In theory , the new Senate consisted of a broad national coalition , but in practice , with the main political groups unwilling to compromise and the most experienced politicians remaining outside it , the cabinet proved unable to solve any major local Finnish problems . After the First Russian Revolution of 1917 in February , real political power shifted to the street level in the form of mass meetings , strike organizations , and the street councils formed by workers and soldiers , and to active organizations of the employers , all of which served to undermine the authority of the state . 
 The rapid economic growth stimulated by World War I , which had raised the incomes of industrial workers and profits of the employers during 1915 and 1916 , collapsed with the February Revolution . The consequent decrease in production and economy led to unemployment and high inflation . For those who had a job , the February revolution gave freedom to reach for resolving long @-@ term problems of their laborious working life . The workers called for eight @-@ hour @-@ per @-@ day working limits , better working conditions and higher wages . The demands led to demonstrations and large @-@ scale strikes in both industry and agriculture throughout Finland . 
 The food supply of the country depended on cereals produced in southern Russia , while the Finns had specialized in milk and butter production . The cessation of the cereal imports from disintegrating Russia led to food shortages in Finland . The Senate responded by introducing rationing and price controls . The farmers opposed the state control ; a black market with sharply rising food prices formed and export to free market of the Petrograd area increased . Food supply , prices , and in the end the fear of starvation became emotional political issues between farmers and industrial workers , in particular the unemployed ones . The common people , their fears exploited by the politicians and the political media , took to the streets . Despite the food shortages , no large @-@ scale starvation hit southern Finland before the war . Economic factors remained a supporting factor in the crisis of 1917 , but only a secondary part of the power struggle of the state . 
 = = = = Battle for leadership = = = = 
 The passing of the Tokoi Senate bill , called the " Power Act " , in July 1917 became the first one of the three <unk> of the power struggle between the Social Democrats and the conservatives during the political crisis from March 1917 to the end of January 1918 . The fall of the Russian emperor opened the question of who would hold the highest political power in the former Grand Duchy . Although the Finns had accepted the liberating manifesto ( from the period of 1908 – 1916 ) of March 1917 issued by the Russian Provisional Government , they planned at least an expansion of the former autonomy . 
 The February Revolution offered the Finnish Social Democrats momentum : they had the absolute majority in the Parliament and a narrow dominance in the Senate . After the decades of political disappointments , the socialists gained an opportunity to take power . Conservatives were alarmed by the continuous increase of the socialists ' might since 1899 , with the climax in 1917 without the offsetting control of Russian administration ; the Social Democrats had to be halted before they were able to markedly alter the power structure of the country . 
 The " Power Act " incorporated a plan by the Social Democrats to substantially increase the power of Parliament , as a reaction to the non @-@ parliamentary and conservative leadership of the Finnish Senate between 1906 and 1916 . The bill furthered Finnish autonomy by restricting Russia 's influence on domestic affairs : the Provisional Government would determine the foreign and military policies of Finland . In Parliament , the bill was adopted with the support of the Social Democrats , the Agrarian League , some members of the Young Finnish Party and some Activists eager for Finnish sovereignty . The conservatives opposed the Act and some of the most right @-@ wing representatives resigned from Parliament . 
 In Petrograd , the Social Democrats ' plan had the backing of Vladimir Lenin and the Bolsheviks , who by July 1917 were plotting a revolt against the Provisional Government . In the end , the Government still had the support of the Russian military ; Lenin was thwarted during the " July Days " and forced to flee to Finland . As the Russians ' war against Germany came increasingly closer to total defeat , the significance of the Finnish area as a buffer zone protecting Petrograd was highlighted , the Provisional Government disapproved the " Power Act " and sent reliable troops to Finland . There , with the demands and co @-@ operation of Finnish conservatives , the Finnish Parliament was dissolved and new elections announced . 
 In the October 1917 elections , the Social Democrats lost their absolute majority , which radicalized the labor movement and decreased support for relying on parliamentary means of achieving its aims . The events of July 1917 did not bring about the Red Revolution in January 1918 on their own , but together with political development based on the labor movement 's interpretation of the ideas of Fennomania and socialism since the 1880s , these events were decisive for the goals of a Finnish revolution . In order to win power , the socialists had to overcome the Finnish Parliament . 
 The collapse of Russia in the February Revolution resulted in a loss of institutional authority in Finland and the dissolution of the police force , creating fear and uncertainty . In response , both the right and left began assembling their own security groups , which were initially local and largely unarmed . By Autumn 1917 , in the power struggle and vacuum following the dissolution of Parliament , and in the absence of a stable government or a Finnish army , such forces began assuming a paramilitary character . The Civil / White Guards were organized by local men of influence , conservative academics , industrialists , major landowners and activists , and were armed by the Germans . The Workers ' Security / Red Guards were recruited through their local party sections and the labor unions , and were armed by the Russians . 
 = = = October Revolution = = = 
 Vladimir Lenin 's Bolshevik October / November Revolution on 7 November transferred political power in Petrograd to the radical , left @-@ wing socialists . The German Empire 's intrigue , based on idea that Lenin was the most powerful weapon they could launch against Russia , to finance the Bolsheviks and arrange safe conduct of Lenin and his comrades from exile in Switzerland to Petrograd in April 1917 , was a success . An armistice between Germany and the Bolshevik regime came into force on 6 December and peace negotiations began on 22 December 1917 at Brest @-@ Litovsk . 
 November 1917 saw the second turning point in the 1917 – 1918 rivalry for the leadership of Finland . After the dissolution of the Finnish Parliament , polarization between the Social Democrats and Conservatives increased dramatically , including political violence . An agricultural worker was shot during a local strike on 9 August at Ypäjä and a Civil Guard member was killed in aftermath of local political crisis at <unk> on 24 September 1917 . 
 The informal truce between the Finnish non @-@ socialists and the Russian Provisional Government was disrupted by the October Revolution . After political wrangle how to react on the revolt , the majority of the politicians accepted a compromising proposal of Santeri <unk> , the leader of the Agrarian League . The Finnish Parliament <unk> the highest power in Finland , on 15 November , on the model of the " Power Act " of the socialists , and ratified the Social Democratic proposals from July 1917 of eight @-@ hour working day and universal suffrage in local elections . 
 A purely non @-@ socialist , conservative @-@ led cabinet of Pehr <unk> Svinhufvud was appointed on 27 November . The nomination was both a long @-@ term aim of the conservatives and a respond to the labour movements ' acts during November 1917 . Svinhufvud 's main goals were to separate Finland from Russia , strengthen the military power of the Civil @-@ White Guards and to return at least a part of the Parliament 's new power to the Senate . 
 There were 149 Civil @-@ White Guards in Finland ( local units in towns and rural communes ) on 31 August 1917 , 251 on 30 September , 315 on 31 October , 380 on 30 November 1917 and 408 on 26 January 1918 . The first attempt at serious military training among the Civil Guards was the establishment of a 200 @-@ strong " cavalry school " at the <unk> estate , in the vicinity of the town of Porvoo , in September 1917 . The vanguard of the Finnish Jägers and German weapons arrived in Finland in October – November 1917 , on a ship Equity and a German U @-@ boat ( SM UC @-@ 57 ) ; around 50 Jägers had returned by the end of 1917 . 
 After the political defeats in July and October 1917 , the Social Democrats put forward , on 1 November , an uncompromising program called " We Demand " in order to push for political concessions ; they demanded a return to the power political status before dissolution of the Parliament in July 1917 , disbanding of the Civil Guards and elections to establish a Finnish Constituent Assembly . Following the October Revolution , based on the " Power Act " , socialists planned to ask the Bolsheviks for acceptance of Finland 's sovereignty in a manifesto on 10 November , but the uncertain situation in Petrograd stalled the plan . After the " We Demand " program had failed , the socialists initiated a General strike on 14 – 19 November 1917 to increase the political pressure , in particular on the conservatives , who had opposed the " Power Act " and the 15 November <unk> Power proclamation . 
 Revolution had been the goal of the radical left since the loss of the political power in July and October 1917 , and November 1917 offered momentum for an uprising . At this phase , Lenin and Joseph Stalin , under threat in Petrograd , urged the Social Democrats to seize power in Finland . The majority of Finnish socialists were moderate and preferred parliamentary methods , prompting Lenin to label them " reluctant revolutionaries . " The reluctance diminished as the General strike appeared to offer a major power for the workers in southern Finland . The strike leadership voted by a narrow majority to seize power on 16 November , but the proposed revolution had to be called off the same day , due to lack of true revolutionaries for executing the decision . 
 The moderate socialists won a repeated vote over revolutionary versus parliamentary means at a special party meeting in the end of November 1917 , but when they tried to pass a resolution to completely abandon the idea of a socialist revolution , the party representatives and several <unk> leaders voted it down . The Finnish labor movement wanted to sustain a military force of its own and keep the revolutionary road open too . The Finnish socialists ' weak interest in revolutionary activity was a disappointment to Lenin . He lost his faith in them finally in December 1917 and shifted his energies toward encouraging the Finnish Bolsheviks in Petrograd . 
 Among the labor movement , a more marked consequence of Autumn 1917 was the rise of the Workers ' Guards . There were approximately 20 – 60 Guards of the Working class in Finland between 31 August and 30 September 1917 , but on 20 October , after the defeat in the October Parliamentary elections , the Finnish Labor Union proclaimed the need to establish more Guards in the country . The announcement led to a rush of recruits to the Guards ; on 31 October their number was 100 – 150 , 342 on 30 November 1917 and 375 on 26 January 1918 . There were two parts to the Workers ' Guards since May 1917 , most of them being Security Guards . The minority were Red Guards ; partly secret groups formed in industrialized towns and industrial centres including Helsinki , Kotka , Tampere , Turku , Viipuri and the <unk> area , on the model of the domestic Red Guards built up during 1905 – 1906 in Finland . 
 The presence of the two opposing armed forces , the Red and White Guards , imposed a state of dual power and multiple sovereignty on Finnish society , typically the prelude to a civil war . The decisive cleavage between the guards broke out during the General strike ; the Reds executed several political opponents in southern Finland , and the first armed clashes between the Whites and Reds broke out . In total , 34 casualties were reported . Eventually , the political rivalries of 1917 led to a race for weapons and an escalation towards civil war . 
 = = = Independence of Finland = = = 
 The disintegration of Russia offered the Finns a historic opportunity to gain national independence , but after the October Revolution , the positions of the conservatives and the Social Democrats on the sovereignty issue became reversed . The conservatives were eager for secession from Russia , in order to control the left and minimize the influence of the Bolsheviks . The socialists feared a loss of support among nationalistic workers , after constant promises of increasing liberty , in particular through the " Power Act " , and they hoped to renew political majority later . Both political factions agreed on the need for Finnish sovereignty , despite strong disagreement on the selection of its leadership . 
 Nationalism had become a " civic religion " among the Finns by the end of 19th century , but their main goal , in particular during the First Period of Russification and the General strike of 1905 , was a return to the autonomy of 1809 – 1898 , not independence . Since 1809 , under the less uniform Russian rule , the domestic power of the Finns increased substantially , compared to the unitary Swedish regime . In economy the Grand Duchy benefited from an independent domestic state budget , own currency ( the <unk> , since 1860 ) and customs organization , and the industrial progress during 1860 – 1916 . The economy of the Grand Duchy was dependent on the huge Russian market , and separation from Russia would create a risk of losing Finland 's preferred position . The economic collapse of Russia and the political power struggle of the Finnish state during 1917 were among the key factors that brought sovereignty to the fore in Finland . 
 P.E. Svinhufvud 's Senate proposed Finland 's declaration of independence , which the Parliament adopted on 6 December 1917 . The Social Democrats voted against the Senate 's proposal while presenting an alternative declaration of independence . The establishment of an independent state was not a foregone conclusion for the small Finnish nation ; recognition by Russia and the major European powers was essential . Svinhufvud accepted , by the end of December 1917 , that he had to negotiate with Lenin for Russian recognition . The socialists , reluctant to talks with the Russian leadership in July 1917 , sent two delegations to Petrograd to ask Lenin to approve Finnish sovereignty . 
 In December 1917 the Bolsheviks were under intense pressure from the Germans to conclude peace negotiations at Brest @-@ Litovsk , and Russia Bolshevism was in crisis , with a demoralized army and the fate of the October Revolution in doubt . Lenin calculated that the Bolsheviks could hold central parts of Russia but had to give up some peripheral territories , including Finland in the geopolitically less important north @-@ western corner . As a result , Svinhufvud and his senate delegation won Lenin 's concession of sovereignty on 31 December 1917 . 
 By the beginning of the Civil War , Austria @-@ Hungary , Denmark , France , Germany , Greece , Norway , Sweden and Switzerland had recognized Finnish independence . The United Kingdom and United States did not approve it ; they were standing by and followed the relations between Finland and Germany , the main enemy of the Allies , which hoped to override Lenin 's regime and get Russia back into the war against Germany . As to Finland 's separation from Russia , Germany hastened it , in order to get Finland within the German sphere of power . France broke off diplomatic relations to the White government later , during the war of 1918 , as a consequence of White Finland 's co @-@ operation with Germany . 
 = = Warfare = = 
 = = = Escalation = = = 
 The final escalation towards war began in early January 1918 , as each military or political act of the Reds or the Whites resulted in a corresponding counteraction by their opponents . Both sides justified these acts as defensive measures , particularly to their own supporters . On the left , the vanguard of the war was the most active , urban Red Guards from Helsinki , Kotka and Turku ; they led the rural Reds , and convinced the socialist leaders who wavered between peace and war to support revolution . On the right , the vanguard of the conflict was the Finnish " Jägers " who had been moved to Finland by the end of 1917 , and the most active volunteer White Guards of Viipuri province in the southeastern corner of Finland , southwestern Finland and southern Ostrobothnia . The first local battles were fought during 9 – 21 January in southern and southeastern Finland , mainly to win the race for weapons and for controlling the Viipuri town . 
 The Svinhufvud Senate and the Parliament decided , on 12 January 1918 to create a " State power of internal order and discipline " , leaning on the White forces . On 15 January , Carl Gustaf Emil Mannerheim , a competent former general of the Imperial Russian Army , was appointed supreme commander of the White Guards . He established a major power base in Vaasa @-@ Seinäjoki area . The Senate renamed the White Guards the Finnish White Army and the White Order to engage was issued , on 25 January . The Whites gained weaponry by disarmament of Russian garrisons during 21 – 28 January , in particular in southern Ostrobothnia . 
 The Red Guards , led by Ali Aaltonen , refused to recognise the Whites Guard 's power status , and decided to establish a military authority of their own . Aaltonen placed the Red power base in Helsinki . The Red Order of Revolution was issued on 26 January 1918 , and a red lantern , a symbolic indicator of the Uprising , was lit in the tower of the Helsinki Workers ' Hall . The large scale mobilization of the Reds began in the late evening of 27 January , with the Helsinki Guard and some of the Guards located along the Viipuri @-@ Tampere railway having become active between 23 – 26 January , in order to safeguard vital positions and escort a heavy railroad shipment of Bolsheviks ' weapons from Petrograd to Finland . White troops tried to capture the shipment ; 20 – 30 Finns , Red and White , died in the " Battle of the <unk> Trains " in the Karelian Isthmus on 27 January 1918 . 
 The third and final culmination of the Finnish power struggle and the disintegration of the society had begun . 
 = = = Finland divided into White and Red = = = 
 At the beginning of the war , a discontinuous front line ran through southern Finland from west to east , dividing the country into White Finland and Red Finland . The Red Guards controlled the area to the south , including nearly all the major towns and industrial centres , and the largest estates and farms with high numbers of crofters and tenant farmers . The White Army controlled the area to the north , which was predominantly agrarian with small or medium @-@ sized farms and tenant farmers , and where crofters were few , or held a better social position than in the south . Enclaves of the opposing forces existed on both sides of the front line : within the White area lay the industrial towns of <unk> , Kuopio , Oulu , <unk> , Kemi and Tornio ; within the Red area lay Porvoo , Kirkkonummi and <unk> . The elimination of these strongholds was a priority for both armies in February 1918 . 
 Red Finland , called also the Finnish Socialist Workers ' Republic , was led by the People 's Delegation , established on 28 January , in Helsinki . The delegation sought democratic socialism based on the Finnish Social Democratic ethos ; their visions differed from Lenin 's dictatorship of the proletariat . Otto Ville Kuusinen formulated a proposal for a new constitution , influenced by those of Switzerland and the United States . Political power was to be concentrated to Parliament , with a lesser role for Senate . The proposal included a multi @-@ party system , freedom of assembly , freedom of speech and press , and the use of referenda in political decision making . In order to ensure the power of the labour movement , the common people would have a right to " continuous revolution " . 
 The Reds ' plans concerning private property rights were in conflict with their plans for an " <unk> " and free society ; the state and local administration of municipalities would have had true property rights . In agriculture the crofters were liberated from the control of the landowners at the beginning of the war , but they were allowed a right of containment of the farms under the plans of a later general socialization in the country . All these plans , including the new constitution , remained unfulfilled , as the Reds lost the 1918 war . 
 In foreign policy Red Finland leaned on Bolshevist Russia . A Finnish @-@ Russian Red treaty and peace agreement was signed on 1 March 1918 . The negotiations for the treaty revealed , that , as in World War I in general , nationalism was more important for both sides than the principles of international socialism . The Red Finns did not accept alliance with the Bolsheviks and major disputes appeared e.g. over demarcation of the border between Red Finland and Soviet Russia . The bargaining sides exchanged land areas ; an artillery base , Ino , located in the Karelian Isthmus , was transferred to Russia , while Finland received Petsamo in north @-@ eastern Lapland . The significance of the Russian @-@ Finnish Treaty evaporated soon , due to the signing of the Treaty of Brest @-@ Litovsk between the Bolsheviks and the German Empire on 3 March 1918 . 
 V. I. Lenin 's policy of the right of nations to self @-@ determination aimed at preventing the disintegration of Russia during the period of military weakness . He tried to utilize the power vacuums and political rivalries commonly formed inside fledgling nations as they separated from major , splintering countries . Lenin expected that in the political circumstances of Europe at the time , the proletariat of free nations would carry out socialist revolutions , and unite with Soviet Russia later . The majority of the Finnish labor movement supported Finland 's independence . The Finnish Bolsheviks , influential though few in number , favoured annexation of Finland by Russia . The question of annexation , in the aftermath of WWI , was resolved by the defeat of Red Finland and weakness of Russia . 
 The government of White Finland , Pehr <unk> Svinhufvud 's first senate , was called the Vaasa Senate after relocation to the west @-@ coast city of Vaasa , acting as the capital of the Whites from 29 January to 3 May . In domestic policy the White Senate 's main goal was to return the political right to power in Finland . The conservatives planned a monarchist political system , with a lesser role for Parliament . A section of the conservatives had always been against democracy ; others approved parliamentarianism since the revolutionary reform of 1906 , but after the crisis of 1917 and the outbreak of the 1918 war concluded , that empowering the common people would not work . Social liberals and reformist , moderate non @-@ socialists opposed any restriction of parliamentarianism . They initially resisted German military help , but the prolonged warfare changed their stance . 
 In foreign policy , the Vaasa Senate leaned on the German Empire for military and political aid , in order to defeat the Finnish Red Guards , end the influence of Bolshevist Russia in Finland , and expand Finnish territory to Russian Karelia , which held geopolitical significance , and was home to people speaking Finno @-@ Ugric languages ( <unk> campaigns / <unk> ) . The weakness of Russia induced an idea of Greater Finland among the expansive factions of both the right and left ; the Reds had claims concerning the same areas . General Mannerheim agreed on the need to take over eastern Karelia and for German weapons , but opposed German intervention in Finland . Mannerheim recognized the lack of combat skills of the Finnish Red Guards , and he leaned on the high military skills of the Finnish Jägers . As a former Russian army officer , Mannerheim was well aware of the demoralization of the Russian army . He co @-@ operated with White Russian officers in Finland and Russia . 
 The competing parties ' war propaganda aimed to prove their support of democracy and liberty and their ability to represent the whole Finnish nation . Both failed by allowing the political crisis to end up in the bloody Civil War and a comprehensive terror , instead of reaching a compromise to accomplish a peaceful political settlement . 
 = = = = Soldiers on rails = = = = 
 The number of Finnish troops on each side varied from 70 @,@ 000 to 90 @,@ 000 ; both sides had around 100 @,@ 000 rifles , 300 @-@ 400 machine guns and a few hundred cannons . While the Red Guards consisted mostly of volunteers ( wages paid at the beginning of the war ) , the White Army contained only 11 @,@ 000 – 15 @,@ 000 volunteers , the remainder being conscripts . The main motives for volunteering were economic factors ( salary , food ) , idealism , and peer pressure . The Red Guards included 2 @,@ 000 female troops , mostly girls recruited from the industrial centres of southern Finland . Urban and agricultural workers constituted the majority of the Red Guards , whereas land @-@ owning farmers and well @-@ educated people formed the backbone of the White Army . 
 Both armies used child soldiers , mainly between 14 and 17 years of age . The usage of juvenile soldiers was not rare in World War I ; children of that time were under the absolute authority of adults and generally were not shielded against exploitation . In the Finnish case , chaotic conditions , particularly at the start of the war , provided an additional reason to recruit child soldiers ; military leaders took whoever they could get their hands on . In the Red Guards there was also the chance for salary and food supplies . 
 The Finnish Civil War was fought primarily along the railways , the vital means of transporting troops and supplies . One of the most important objectives for both Guards was the seizure of <unk> , a railway junction northeast of Tampere which connected both western @-@ eastern and southern @-@ northern Finland . The Whites captured the junction at the end of January 1918 , leading to fierce battles at <unk> . The Whites ' bridgehead south of the River <unk> at <unk> on the Karelian Isthmus threatened the railway connection Viipuri @-@ Petrograd also . The other vital railway junctions during the war were Kouvola , Riihimäki , Tampere and <unk> . The significance of the railways is well symbolized by the most frightening weapon used in the turmoil : armoured train , carrying light cannons and heavy machine guns . 
 = = = Red Guards and the Russian troops = = = 
 The Finnish Red Guards seized the early initiative in the war , taking control of Helsinki on 28 January , and with a general attack phase lasting from February till early March 1918 . The Reds were relatively well armed , but a chronic shortage of skilled leaders , both at command level and in the field , left them unable to capitalize on their initial momentum , and most of the offensives came to nothing . The military order chain functioned relatively well at Red company and platoon level , but leadership and authority were weak , as most of the field commanders were chosen by the vote of the troopers . The common troopers were more or less armed civilians , whose military training , discipline and combat morale were both inadequate and low . 
 Ali Aaltonen found himself rapidly replaced in command of the Red troops by Eero <unk> , who in turn was replaced by the triumvirate of Eino <unk> , Adolf <unk> and Evert <unk> . The last commander of the Red Guards was Kullervo Manner , who led the final retreat into Russia . Some talented men with a high sense of responsibility such as Hugo <unk> rose up to take the lead , but they could not change the course of the war . The Red Guards achieved victories , only at local level , as they retreated from southern Finland towards Russia ; they won German troops in the fierce battles on 28 – 29 April 1918 at <unk> and <unk> , <unk> , where female Red Guard platoons played a combat role . 
 Although some 60 @,@ 000 Russian soldiers of the former Czar 's army remained stationed in Finland at the start of the Civil War , the Russian contribution to the Reds ' cause was negligible . V.I. Lenin tried to commit the troops on behalf of Red Finland , but the soldiers were demoralized , war @-@ weary and home @-@ sick after years of World War I. The majority of the troops returned to Russia by the end of March 1918 . In total 7 @,@ 000 to 10 @,@ 000 soldiers participated in the 1918 war , of which around 4 @,@ 000 , in separate smaller units of 100 – 1 @,@ 000 men , could be persuaded to fight in the front line . 
 The Russian revolutions split the Russian army officers politically and their attitude toward the Finnish civil war varied ; Mikhail <unk> led Finnish Red troops in western Finland in February and Konstantin <unk> the Russian forces in the Karelian Isthmus , while other officers were mistrustful of their revolutionary underlings and co @-@ operated with their former colleague General Mannerheim , assisting the Whites in the disarmament of the Russian garrisons in Finland . On 30 January 1918 Mannerheim proclaimed to Russian soldiers in Finland that the White army did not fight against Russia : the goal of the White campaign was to beat the Finnish Red rebels and the Russian troops supporting them . 
 The number of Russian soldiers active in the Civil War declined markedly once Germany attacked Russia on 18 February 1918 . The German @-@ Russian Treaty of Brest @-@ Litovsk of 3 March , restricted the Bolsheviks ' support to the Finnish Reds to weapons and supplies . The Russians remained active on the south @-@ eastern front , defending the approaches to Petrograd . 
 = = = White Guards and Sweden 's role = = = 
 While the conflict has been called by some " The War of the Amateurs " , the White Army had two major advantages over the Red Guards in the war : the professional military leadership of General Mannerheim and his staff — which included 84 Swedish volunteer officers and former Finnish officers of the Czar 's army — and 1 @,@ 450 soldiers of the 1 @,@ 900 @-@ strong , elite Jäger ( <unk> ) battalion . This battalion was trained in Germany during 1915 – 1917 , and battle @-@ hardened on the Eastern Front . The main part of the battalion arrived in Vaasa on 25 February 1918 . 
 On the battlefield the Jägers provided strong leadership that made disciplined action by the common White soldiers possible . The White troopers were similar to those of the Red Guards : most of them had brief and inadequate training . At the beginning of the war , the leadership of the White Guards had little authority over volunteer White Guard platoons and companies , which obeyed only their dominant , local leaders . In the end of February , the Jägers started rapid training of six Jäger Regiments , with conscripts . 
 Even the Jäger battalion was divided in the same way that the rest of the country was : 450 mostly socialist Jägers remained stationed in Germany as they could have chosen the Red side in the conflict . The leaders of the White Guards faced a similar problem with drafting young men to the army in February 1918 : 30 @,@ 000 obvious supporters of the Finnish labor movement never showed up . It was also uncertain whether common troopers drafted from the small @-@ sized and poor farms of central and northern Finland had strong enough motivation to fight the Finnish Reds ; the White 's propaganda promoted a nationalist war against the Red , Bolshevist Russians , and belittled the significance of the Red Finns . 
 Social divisions did appear both between southern and northern Finland and within rural Finland . The economy and society of the north had modernized more slowly than those of the south , there was a more pronounced conflict between Christianity and socialism in the north , and farmland had a major social status ; ownership of even a small parcel of land created a motivation to fight against the Reds . 
 Sweden declared neutrality during WWI and the Finnish Civil War . The general opinion , in particular among the Swedish elite was divided between supporters of the Allies and the Central powers , Germanism being somewhat more popular . Three war @-@ time priorities determined pragmatic policy of the Swedish liberal @-@ social democratic government ; sound economics , via export of iron @-@ ore and foodstuff to Germany , sustaining tranquility of the Swedish society and geopolitics . The government accepted participation of Swedish volunteer officers and soldiers in the Finnish Civil War , on the White side , in order to block expansion of revolutionary unrest to Scandinavia . 
 A 800 – 1 @,@ 000 @-@ strong " Swedish Brigade " , led by Hjalmar Frisell , took part in the battles of Tampere and those fought in the area south of the town . In February 1918 , the Swedish Navy escorted the German naval squadron , transporting Finnish Jägers and German weapons , and allowed it to pass through Swedish territorial waters . The Swedish socialists did not aid the Finnish Reds but tried to open peace negotiations between the Whites and Reds . The weakness of Finland gave Sweden a chance to take @-@ over geopolitically vital Finnish Åland islands , east of Stockholm , but the German army 's Finland @-@ operation stalled the plan . 
 = = = = Battle of Tampere = = = = 
 In February 1918 General Mannerheim weighed the question of where to focus the general offensive of the Whites , between two strategically vital enemy strongholds : Tampere , Finland 's major industrial town in the south @-@ west , and Viipuri , Karelia 's main city . Although seizing Viipuri offered major advantages , the lack of combat skills of his army and potential for a major counterattack by the enemy in the area or in the south @-@ west made it too risky . 
 Mannerheim decided to strike first at Tampere . He launched the attack on 16 March at <unk> , 65 km north @-@ east of the town . At the same time , the White Army began advancing along a northern and north @-@ western frontline , through <unk> – Kuru – <unk> – <unk> . Many Red Guard units collapsed and retreated in panic under the weight of the assault , while some detachments defended their posts relentlessly , and were able to slow the advance of the White Guards , who were unaccustomed to offensive warfare . Eventually , the Whites lay siege to Tampere . They cut off the Reds southward connection in <unk> on 24 March and westward in <unk> ( Nokia , Finland ) and <unk> on 25 March . 
 The battle for Tampere was fought between 16 @,@ 000 White and 14 @,@ 000 Red soldiers . It was Finland 's first large scale urban battle , and , along with the battles of Helsinki and Viipuri , one of the three decisive military engagements of the 1918 war . The fight for the Tampere town area began on 28 March , on the eve of Easter 1918 , later called the " Bloody Maundy Thursday " , in the <unk> graveyard . After this fierce combat , won by the Whites , with more than 50 % losses in some of the attacking units , the White army re @-@ organized the troops and plans , and attacked the town centre , in the early hours of 3 April . 
 After a heavy , concentrated artillery barrage , the White Guards began advancing from house to house and street to street , as the Red Guards retreated . In the late evening of 3 April the Whites reached the eastern river banks of <unk> . The Reds ' major attempts to break the siege of Tampere from outside , along the Helsinki @-@ Tampere railway , failed . The Red Guards lost the western parts of the town between 4 and 5 April . The Tampere City Hall was among the last strongholds of the Red troops . The battle ended 6 April 1918 with the surrender of Red forces in the <unk> and <unk> sections of Tampere . 
 In the battle , the Reds , now on the defensive , had shown markedly increased motivation to fight . General Mannerheim had been compelled to deploy parts of his best trained detachments , the fresh Jäger regiments , which he had initially hoped to conserve for later use in the Viipuri area . The fighting in Tampere was purely a civil war — Finn against Finn , " brother rising against brother " — as most of the Russian army had retreated to Russia in March and the German troops had yet to arrive in Finland . The Battle of Tampere was the bloodiest action of the Civil War . The White Army lost 700 – 900 men , including 50 Jägers , the highest number of deaths the former Jäger battalion suffered in a single battle of the 1918 war . The Red Guards lost 1 @,@ 000 – 1 @,@ 500 soldiers , with a further 11 @,@ 000 – 12 @,@ 000 captured . 71 civilians died , mainly due to artillery fire . The eastern parts of the city , consisting mostly of wooden buildings , were destroyed completely . 
 After their defeat in Tampere , the Red Guards began a slow retreat eastwards . As the German army seized Helsinki , the White Army shifted the military focus to Viipuri , taking it on 29 April 1918 with a major attack of 18 @,@ 500 men , against 15 @,@ 000 Red troopers . 500 – 800 Reds died , and 12 @,@ 000 – 15 @,@ 000 were imprisoned . 
 = = = German intervention = = = 
 The German Empire intervened in the Finnish Civil War on the side of the White Army in March 1918 . The Finnish Activists leaning on Germanism had been seeking German aid in freeing Finland from Russian hegemony since Autumn 1917 , but the Germans did not want to prejudice their armistice and peace negotiations with Russia because of the pressure they were facing at the Western front . The German stance changed after 10 February when Leon Trotsky , despite the weakness of the Bolsheviks ' position , broke off negotiations , hoping revolutions would break out in the German Empire and change everything . The German government promptly decided to teach Russia a lesson and , as a pretext for aggression , invited " requests for help " from the smaller countries west of Russia . Representatives of White Finland in Berlin duly requested help on 14 February ; on 13 February the German Imperial Military Council had made the decision to send troops to Finland . 
 The Germans attacked Russia on 18 February ; the offensive led to a rapid collapse and retreat of the Russian troops and to signature of the first Treaty of Brest @-@ Litovsk by the Bolsheviks on 3 March 1918 . Finland , the Baltic countries , Poland and Ukraine were transferred to the German power sphere . The economic and political investments that Germany had made in Vladimir Lenin had paid off . The German army did not alter the military plans concerning Finland after the peace treaty with the Bolsheviks because the Civil War of the Finns opened an easy access with low costs to Fennoscandia , where the geopolitical status altered as troops of a British Naval squadron invaded the harbour of Murmansk on the northwestern coast of Russia by the Arctic Ocean on 9 March 1918 . 
 On 5 March a German naval squadron landed in the southwestern archipelago of Finland , on the Åland Islands , which the Swedish military expedition took over in mid @-@ February ( departed in May ) . On 3 April 1918 , the 10 @,@ 000 @-@ strong Baltic Sea Division , led by Rüdiger von der Goltz , launched the main attack , west of Helsinki at Hanko , followed on 7 April by the 3 @,@ 000 @-@ strong Detachment Brandenstein taking the town of Loviisa on the south @-@ eastern coast . The main German formations advanced rapidly eastwards from Hanko and took Helsinki on 12 – 13 April . The Brigade Brandenstein overran the town of Lahti on 19 April , cutting the connection between the western and eastern Red Guards . The main German detachment advanced northwards from Helsinki and took <unk> and Riihimäki on 21 – 22 April , followed by Hämeenlinna on 26 April . The efficient performance of the German top detachments contrasted strikingly with that of the demoralized Russian troops . The final blow to the cause of the Finnish Reds was dealt when the Bolsheviks broke off the peace negotiations at Brest @-@ Litovsk , leading to the German eastern offensive in February 1918 . 
 = = = = Battle of Helsinki = = = = 
 After peace talks between the Germans and the Finnish Reds were broken off on 11 April , the true battle for the capital of Finland began . On 12 April , at 5 a.m. 2 @,@ 000 – 3 @,@ 000 German soldiers from the Brigade von <unk> attacked the city from the north @-@ west , supported via the Helsinki @-@ Turku railway . The Germans broke through the area between <unk> and <unk> , and advanced on the central @-@ western parts of the town . The German naval squadron Meurer blocked the city harbour , bombarded the southern town area , and landed naval troops at <unk> . 
 Around 7 @,@ 000 Finnish Reds defended Helsinki , but their best troops fought on the main fronts of the war . The main strongholds of the Red defence were the Workers Hall , the Railway station , the Red Headquarters of " <unk> " ( the former palace of the Russian governor @-@ general , in southern Esplanade ) , the Senate @-@ University area , and the former Russian garrisons in Helsinki . By the late evening of 12 April most of the major southern parts and all the western area of the city had been occupied by the Germans , who cleared the city house by house , street by street . Local Helsinki White Guards , hidden in the city during the war , joined the battle as the Germans advanced through the town . 
 On 13 April German troops took over the Market Square , " <unk> " , the Presidential Palace , and the Senate @-@ <unk> area . Toward the end , the Brigade Wolff with 2 @,@ 000 – 3 @,@ 000 soldiers joined the battle . The units rushed from north to the eastern parts of Helsinki , pushing into the working @-@ class neighborhoods of <unk> , Kallio and <unk> . German artillery bombarded and destroyed the Helsinki Workers ' Hall , and put out the Red lantern of the Finnish revolution . The eastern parts of the town surrendered around 2 p.m. , 13 April ; a white flag was raised in the tower of the Kallio Church , but sporadic fighting lasted until the evening . In total , 60 Germans , 300 – 400 Reds and 23 White Guard troopers were killed in the battle . Around 7 @,@ 000 Reds were captured . The German army celebrated the victory and demonstrated its might with a major military parade in the centre of Helsinki on 14 April 1918 . 
 = = = Red and White terror = = = 
 During the civil war , the White Army and the Red Guards both perpetrated acts of terror , called the Red terror and White terror . The threshold of political violence had been crossed in the primarily peaceful Grand Duchy of Finland during the first period of Russification 1899 – 1905 ; the Finnish Activists murdered a Russian governor @-@ general , police officers and a Finnish civil servant . World War I enhanced the potential of terror as it was widespread between the Allies and the Central Powers . The February Revolution in 1917 initiated a comprehensive terror in Finland ; the Russian army common soldiers murdered several Russian army officers in March 1917 . The first Finnish socialist victim was killed at the beginning of August and the first non @-@ socialist victim was killed at the end of September 1917 . The general strike in November 1917 led to a marked political terror ; the Workers ' Guards murdered 27 Finns . 
 During the war of 1918 there were two kinds of Red and White political violence : ( i ) a calculated part of the general warfare , ( ii ) local , personal murders and corresponding acts of revenge . In the former , the highest staffs of both sides planned and organized these actions and gave orders to the lower level . At least a third of the Red terror and most of the White terror was centrally led . At first the governments of White Finland and Red Finland officially opposed acts of terror , but such operational decisions were made at the military level . 
 The main purpose of the Red and White terror was to destroy the power structure of the opponent , clear and secure the areas governed by the armies since the beginning of the war and the areas seized and occupied by the common units during the conflict . Another goal of the terror was to create shock and fear among the civil population and the opposing soldiers . The common troopers ' paramilitary nature and lack of combat skills , in the both armies , led and created the opportunity to use terror as a military weapon . Terror achieved some of the intended military objectives , but also gave additional motivation to each side to fight against an enemy perceived to be inhuman and cruel . The propaganda of the Reds and Whites utilized the terror acts of the opponent effectively , which increased the local political violence and the spiral of revenge . 
 The number of casualties and the timing of the terror differed markedly between the Reds and Whites . 
 The level of killings by the Red Guards varied over the months because the Reds could never seize and occupy new areas outside Red Finland , and they had to focus their efforts on the industrialized southern Finland , where they faced the establishment of Finland , and because in the end the Reds retreated from southern Finland . The Red Guards were less organized than the White army in respect to the political terror . The level of killings by the Whites varied over the months of the war because they occupied southern Finland , and initially did not encounter marked resistance from the area of White Finland . The comprehensive White terror started with the general offensive of the Whites in March 1918 , increased constantly , culminated in the end of the war , and ceased soon after the enemy had been sent to the prison camps . 
 The Red Guards executed the representatives of economic and / or social power in Finland , including politicians , major landowners , industrialists , police officers , civil servants , teachers , and leaders and members of the White Guards . Ten priests of the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland and 90 ( moderate ) socialists were executed also . The two major sites of the Red terror were <unk> and Kouvola . There 300 – 350 Whites were executed between February and April 1918 . 
 The White Guards executed Red Guard and party leaders , Social Democratic representatives of the Finnish parliament and local Red administrations , members of the Red tribunals and police , and common troopers of the Red Guards , and those who had participated in a way or another to the Red Terror . During the peak of the White terror , between the end of April and the beginning of May , 200 Reds were shot per day . The White terror hit particularly strong against the Russian soldiers who fought with the Finnish Red Guards , and several Russian non @-@ socialist civilians were executed in the aftermath of the Battle for Viipuri . 
 Most of the terror was undertaken by " flying detachments " deployed by the both armies . These were cavalry units , usually consisting of 10 to 80 soldiers aged 15 to 20 , under the absolute authority of an experienced adult leader . The detachments , specialising in search @-@ and @-@ destroy operations behind the front lines and during and after battles , have been described as death squads . They resembled German <unk> and Russian Assault units organized during WWI . 
 In total , 1 @,@ 650 Whites died in the Red terror , while 10 @,@ 000 Reds perished in the White terror , which eventually became political cleansing , typical for victors of many civil wars . The White victims have been recorded quite exactly , but there are questions and permanent uncertainty about the Red victims of the terror . It is unclear which of the victims died in the battles and which of them were executed immediately after the battles . Together with the prison camp experiences of the Reds later in 1918 , the terror caused the deepest mental wounds and scars of the Civil War among the majority of the Finns regardless of their political allegiance . Some of those , who carried out the terror were seriously traumatized , a phenomenon that was later to become well @-@ documented . 
 = = = End = = = 
 After the defeat in Tampere and under the threat of invasion by the German division on the south coast , the People 's Delegation retreated from Helsinki to Viipuri on 8 April . After the loss of Helsinki , most of them , only Edvard <unk> standing by his warriors , moved to Petrograd on 25 April 1918 . The escape of the Red leadership made the ranks of the Red soldiers bitter and resentful . At the end of April , thousands of them , without true leadership , tried to flee to Petrograd from Red Finland , but the majority of the refugees were besieged by the White and the German troops . The Reds surrendered on 1 – 2 May in the Lahti area . 
 The long caravans of the Reds included women and children , who experienced a desperate , chaotic escape with several human losses due to the attacks of the enemy . It was a " road of tears " for the Reds , for the Whites the long enemy caravans heading east was a victorious scene . The Red Guards ' last stronghold in south @-@ east Finland , the area between Kouvola and Kotka , fell by 5 May . The war of 1918 ended on 15 May , when the Whites took over Ino , a Russian coastal artillery base on the Karelian Isthmus , from the Russian troops . White Finland and General Mannerheim celebrated the victory with a large military parade in Helsinki on 16 May 1918 . 
 The Red Guards had been defeated . The initially pacifist Finnish labour movement had lost the Civil War , several military leaders committed suicide and a majority of the Reds were sent to prison camps . The Vaasa Senate returned to Helsinki on 4 May 1918 , but the capital was under the control of the German army . White Finland had become a protectorate of the German Empire . General Rüdiger von der Goltz was called " the true Regent of Finland . " No armistice or peace negotiations were carried out between the Whites and Reds , and an official peace treaty in order to end the Finnish Civil War was never signed . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Bitter legacy = = = 
 The Civil War was a catastrophe for Finland ; around 36 @,@ 000 people , 1 @.@ 2 percent of the nation 's total population , perished . The war left about 15 @,@ 000 children orphaned . As is often the case during ( civil ) war , most of the deaths occurred outside the battlefields , in the terror campaigns and from the appalling conditions in the prison camps . Many Reds fled to Russia at the end of the war and during the period that followed . The traumatic war deepened the divisions within Finnish society , many moderate @-@ neutral Finns identifying themselves as " citizens of two nations . " 
 The war of 1918 led to disintegration within both socialist and the non @-@ socialist factions . The power political shift toward the right caused a dispute between conservatives and liberals on the best system of government for Finland to adopt : the former demanded monarchy and restricted parliamentarianism , the latter demanded a Finnish republic with full @-@ scale democracy and social reforms . Both sides justified their views via political and legal grounds . 
 The monarchists leaned on the Swedish regime 's year 1772 monarchist constitution , belittled the Declaration of Independence 1917 and proposed a modernized monarchist constitution for Finland . The republicans argued that the 1772 law , accepted by Russia in 1809 , lost its status in the February Revolution , the might of the Russian Czar was assumed by the Finnish Parliament on 15 November 1917 and Finnish republic was accepted on 6 December . The republicans were able to postpone processing of the monarchists ' proposal in the parliament , and in the end a new monarchist constitution was not accepted in Finland . The monarchists responded by applying directly the 1772 law to select a new monarch for the country . 
 A major consequence of the 1918 conflict was the breakup of the Finnish labour movement into three parts : moderate Social Democrats and left @-@ wing socialists in Finland , and communists acting in Soviet Russia with the support of the Bolsheviks . The Social Democratic Party had the first official party meeting after the civil war on 25 December 1918 . The party proclaimed commitment to parliamentary means and disclaimed Bolshevism and communism . The leaders of Red Finland , who had fled to Russia established the Communist Party of Finland in Moscow on 29 August 1918 . After the power struggle of 1917 and the bloody civil war , the former <unk> and Social Democrats , who had supported " <unk> " means in Red Finland , declared to have committed to revolutionary Bolshevism @-@ communism and to dictatorship of proletariat , under the control of V.I. Lenin . 
 A conservative @-@ monarchist Senate was formed by JK Paasikivi in May 1918 . All members of the Parliament , who had taken part in the red uprising were removed from office . Eventually three Social Democrats continued there ; the Parliament was called a " Rump Parliament " . In May 1918 , the Senate asked the German troops to remain in Finland , but overall the 3 March Treaty of Brest @-@ Litovsk and the 7 March 1918 German @-@ Finnish agreements bound White Finland to the power sphere of the German Empire . General Mannerheim resigned his post on 25 May after disagreements with the Senate about German hegemony over Finland , and about his planned attacks on Petrograd to repulse the Bolsheviks , and to Russian Karelia . The Germans opposed these attacks under the peace treaties they had signed with Russia . 
 On 9 October 1918 , under pressure by Germany , the Senate and Parliament elected a German prince , Friedrich Karl , brother @-@ in @-@ law of German Emperor William II , to become the King of Finland . Eventually , General Rüdiger von der Goltz was able to utilize the weakness of Finland for the power political benefit of the German Empire . All of these measures diminished Finnish sovereignty . The Finns , both right and left , had achieved independence on 6 December 1917 without a gunshot , but then compromised that independence by allowing the Germans to enter the country without difficulty during the Civil War . 
 The economic condition of the country had deteriorated so drastically that recovery to pre @-@ conflict levels was not achieved until 1925 . The most acute crisis was in the food supply , already deficient in 1917 , though starvation had at that time been avoided in southern Finland . The Civil War , according to the leaders of Red Finland and White Finland , would solve all past problems ; instead it led to starvation in southern Finland too . Late in 1918 , Finnish politician Rudolf Holsti appealed for relief to Herbert Hoover , the American chairman of the Committee for Relief in Belgium : Hoover arranged for food shipments and persuaded the Allies to relax their blockade of the Baltic Sea , which had obstructed food supplies to Finland , to allow the food in . 
 = = = = Prison camps = = = = 
 The White Army and the German troops captured around 80 @,@ 000 Red war prisoners , including 5 @,@ 000 women , 1 @,@ 500 children and 8 @,@ 000 Russians . The largest prison camps were <unk> , an island facing Helsinki , Hämeenlinna , Lahti , Riihimäki , <unk> ( <unk> ) , Tampere and Viipuri . The Senate decided to keep the prisoners detained until each person 's guilt could be investigated ; a law for a Tribunal of Treason was enacted on 29 May 1918 . The Tribunal did not meet all the standards of neutral justice , due to the mental atmosphere of White Finland after the war . In total 76 @,@ 000 cases were examined and 68 @,@ 000 Reds were convicted , primarily for complicity to treason ; 39 @,@ 000 got out on parole and mean punishment of the rest was 2 – 4 years in penitentiary . 555 people were sentenced to death , of which 113 were executed . The trials revealed that also some innocent adults had been imprisoned . 
 Combined with the severe food shortage , the mass imprisonment led to high mortality rates in the camps , and the catastrophe was compounded by a mentality of punishment , anger and indifference on the part of the victors . Many prisoners felt that they were abandoned by their own leaders , who had fled to Russia . The physical and mental condition of the prisoners declined rapidly in May as food supplies had disrupted during the Red Guards ' chaotic retreat in April , and a high number of Red prisoners had been sent to the less organized prison camps already during the first half of April in Tampere and Helsinki . As a consequence , in June 2 @,@ 900 starved to death or died as a result of diseases caused by malnutrition and Spanish flu , 5 @,@ 000 in July , 2 @,@ 200 in August , and 1 @,@ 000 in September . The mortality rate was highest in the <unk> camp at 34 percent , while in the others the rate varied between 5 percent and 20 percent . In total around 13 @,@ 000 Finns perished ( 3 @,@ 000 – 4 @,@ 000 due to Spanish influenza ) . The dead were buried in mass graves near the camps . 
 The majority of the prisoners were paroled or pardoned by the end of 1918 , after the change in the political situation . There were 6 @,@ 100 Red prisoners left at the end of the year , 4 @,@ 000 at the end of 1919 ( 3 @,@ 000 pardoned in January 1920 , at the same time civil rights were given back to 40 @,@ 000 prisoners ) , 500 in 1923 , and in 1927 the last 50 prisoners were pardoned by the Social Democratic government led by Väinö Tanner . In 1973 , the Finnish government paid reparations to 11 @,@ 600 persons imprisoned in the camps after the civil war . Several reasons for the long @-@ term and relatively high support of communism in Finland can be found ; for the civil war generation of the left , the traumatic hardships of the prison camps were decisive . 
 = = = Compromise = = = 
 Just as the fate of the Finns was decided outside Finland in Saint Petersburg on 15 March 1917 , so it was decided outside Finland again on 11 November 1918 , this time in Berlin , as Germany accepted defeat in World War I. The grand plans of the German Empire had come to nothing , and revolution had spread among the German people due to lack of food , war @-@ weariness , and defeat in the battles on the Western Front . General Rüdiger von der Goltz and the German troops left Helsinki on 16 December , and Prince Friedrich Karl , who had not yet been crowned , left his post on 20 December . Finland 's status altered from a monarchist protectorate of the German Empire to an independent democratic republic , with a modernizing civil society . The system of government , the primary Constitution of Finland , was confirmed on 17 July 1919 . 
 The first local elections based on universal suffrage in the history of Finland were held during 17 – 28 December 1918 , and the first parliamentary election after the Civil War on 3 March 1919 . The United States and the United Kingdom recognised Finnish sovereignty on 6 – 7 May 1919 . The Western powers demanded establishment of democratic republics in post @-@ war Europe in order to calm down the widespread revolutionary movements in Europe . The Finnish @-@ Russian Treaty of Tartu ( Russian @-@ Finnish ) signed on 14 October 1920 aimed to stabilize the political relations and settle the border line between the former Grand Duchy and its mainland . 
 In April 1918 , the leading Finnish social liberal , the eventual first president of Finland , <unk> Juho <unk> wrote : " It is urgent to get the life and development in this country back on the path that we had already reached in 1906 and which the turmoil of war turned us away from . " A moderate Social Democrat , Väinö <unk> agonised in 1919 : " Those who still trust in the future of this nation must have an exceptionally strong faith . This young independent country has lost almost everything due to the war .... " He was a vital companion for the leader of the reformed Social Democratic Party , Väinö Tanner . 
 Santeri <unk> supported moderate politics . His party colleague <unk> Kallio urged in his <unk> address on 5 May 1918 : " We must rebuild a Finnish nation , which is not divided into the Reds and Whites .... We have to establish a democratic Finnish republic , where all the Finns can feel that we are true citizens and members of this society . " In the end , many of the moderate Finnish conservatives followed the thinking of Lauri Ingman , who wrote in spring 1918 : " A political turn more to the right will not help us now , instead it would strengthen the support of socialism in this country . " 
 Together with the other broader @-@ minded Finns , the new partnership constructed a Finnish compromise which eventually delivered stable and broad parliamentary democracy . This compromise was based both on the defeat of the Reds in the 1918 war and the fact that most of the Whites ' political goals had not been achieved . After the foreign forces left Finland , the militant factions of the Red and White lost their backup , while the pre @-@ 1918 cultural and national integrity , and the legacy of Fennomania , stood out among the Finns . 
 The weakness of both Germany and Russia after World War I empowered Finland and made a peaceful , domestic Finnish social and political settlement possible . The reconciliation led to a slow and painful , but steady , national unification . In the end , the power vacuum and interregnum of 1917 – 1919 gave way to the Finnish compromise . From 1919 to 1991 , the democracy and sovereignty of the Finns withstood challenges from right @-@ wing and left @-@ wing political radicalism , the crisis of World War II , and pressure from the Soviet Union during the Cold War . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Between 1918 and 1950s the mainstream of literature and poetry presented the 1918 war from the point of view of the White victors ; e.g. " Psalm of the Cannons " ( Finnish : <unk> <unk> ) by Arvi <unk> in 1918 . In poetry , Bertel <unk> , who had volunteered for the White army , celebrated its cause in " The Great Age " ( Swedish : Den stora <unk> ) in 1928 and V.A. <unk> in " Young Anthony " ( Finnish : <unk> <unk> ) in 1918 . The war tales of the Red side were kept in silence or hidden at home or inside spheres of the workers . 
 The first neutral @-@ critical books were written soon after the war : " Devout Misery " ( Finnish : <unk> <unk> ) written by the Nobel Laureate in Literature Frans Emil <unk> in 1919 , " Dead Apple trees " ( Finnish : <unk> <unk> ) by Joel Lehtonen in 1918 and " Home coming " ( Swedish : <unk> ) by <unk> <unk> in 1919 . They were followed by Jarl Hemmer in 1931 with the book " A man and his conscience " ( Swedish : En man och hans <unk> ) and <unk> Paloheimo in 1942 with " Restless childhood " ( Finnish : <unk> <unk> ) . Lauri <unk> 's book " <unk> ground " ( Finnish : <unk> ) from 1950 , presented life and experiences of a worker family in Tampere in 1918 , including a point of view of outsiders in the Civil War . 
 Between 1959 and 1962 , Väinö Linna , in his trilogy " Under the North Star " ( Finnish : <unk> <unk> alla ) , described the Civil War and World war II from the point of view of the common people . Part II of Linna 's work markedly opened the larger view and the tales of the Reds in the 1918 war , and it had a significant mental effect in Finland . At the same time , a new point of view for the war was opened by the books of Paavo <unk> " Private matters " ( Finnish : <unk> <unk> ) , by <unk> Meri " The events of 1918 " ( Finnish : <unk> 1918 <unk> ) and Paavo <unk> " My grandmother and Mannerheim " ( Finnish : <unk> ja Mannerheim ) , all published in 1960 . 
 In poetry <unk> <unk> , who had experienced the horrors of the Battle of Tampere at the age of nine , presented a pacifist view of the civil war in his " Poems of Tampere 1918 " ( Finnish : Tampereen <unk> ) in 1966 . The similar point of view , in the same battle , is emphasized in the novel " Corpse bearer " ( Finnish : <unk> <unk> ) by Antti <unk> from 2007 . Väinö Linna 's trilogy turned the general tide , and several books were written mainly from the point of view of the Red side in 1918 : e.g. Tampere @-@ trilogy by Erkki <unk> in 1977 , " John " ( Finnish : Juho ) by Juhani <unk> in 1998 and " The Command " ( Finnish : <unk> ) by <unk> Lander in 2003 . Kjell Westö 's epic novel " Where We Once Went " ( Swedish : <unk> vi en <unk> <unk> ) published in 2006 deals with period of 1915 @-@ 1930 , from both the Red and the White point of views . Kjell Westö 's book " Mirage 38 " ( Swedish : <unk> 38 ) from 2013 describes Finnish pre @-@ World War II mental atmosphere and post @-@ war traumas of the 1918 war . F.E. <unk> 's , Väinö Linna 's , Lauri <unk> 's , Jarl Hemmer 's , Paavo <unk> 's , <unk> Lander 's and Kjell Westö 's stories have been utilized in motion picture and in theatre . 
 = Seattle SuperSonics relocation to Oklahoma City = 
 The Seattle SuperSonics relocation to Oklahoma City was a successful effort by the ownership group of the Seattle SuperSonics to move the team from Seattle to Oklahoma City . The team began play as the Oklahoma City Thunder in the 2008 – 2009 basketball season after becoming the third National Basketball Association ( NBA ) franchise to relocate in the 2000s . 
 After efforts to persuade Washington state government officials to provide funding to update KeyArena failed , the SuperSonics ' ownership group , led by Howard Schultz , sold the team to the Professional Basketball Club LLC ( PBC ) , an investment group headed by Oklahoma City businessman Clay Bennett . After failing to persuade local governments to fund a US $ 500 million arena complex , Bennett 's group notified the NBA that it intended to move the team to Oklahoma City and requested arbitration with the city of Seattle to be released from its lease with KeyArena . When the request was rejected by a judge , Seattle sued Bennett 's group to enforce the lease that required the team to play in KeyArena through 2010 . On July 2 , 2008 , a settlement was reached that allowed the team to move under certain conditions . 
 In months prior to the settlement , Seattle publicly released email conversations that took place within Bennett 's ownership group and alleged that they indicated at least some members of the group had a desire to move the team to Oklahoma City prior to the purchase in 2006 . The city used the conversations to argue that the ownership failed to negotiate in good faith , and as a result , Schultz filed a lawsuit seeking to rescind the sale of the team and transfer the ownership to a court @-@ appointed receiver . The NBA claimed the lawsuit was void because Schultz signed a release forbidding himself to sue Bennett 's group , but also argued that the proposal would have violated league ownership rules . Schultz dropped the case before the start of the 2008 – 09 NBA season . 
 = = Sale of team = = 
 On July 18 , 2006 , the Basketball Club of Seattle , led by Howard Schultz , sold the Seattle SuperSonics and Seattle Storm after failing to reach an agreement with the city of Seattle over a publicly funded $ 220 million expansion of KeyArena , which was remodeled in 1995 and was the NBA 's smallest venue , with a seating capacity of 17 @,@ 072 . After failing to find a local ownership group to sell the team to , Schultz talked to ownership groups from Kansas City , St. Louis , Las Vegas , San Jose and Anaheim before agreeing to sell the team to an ownership group from Oklahoma City , which pursued an NBA franchise after hosting the New Orleans Hornets franchise successfully for two seasons as New Orleans rebuilt from Hurricane Katrina . The sale to Clay Bennett 's group for US $ 350 million was approved by NBA owners on October 24 , 2006 . Terms of the sale required the new ownership group to " use good faith best efforts " for the term of 12 months in securing a new arena lease or venue in the Seattle metropolitan area . 
 On February 12 , 2007 , Bennett proposed using tax money to pay for a new $ 500 million arena in Renton , Washington , a suburb of Seattle . After failing to reach a deal by the end of the legislative session , Bennett gave up his attempt in April 2007 . On November 2 , 2007 the team announced it would move to Oklahoma City as soon as it could get free of its KeyArena lease . Seattle 's mayor , Greg Nickels , maintained the stance that the Sonics were expected to stay in Seattle until their lease expired in 2010 and said that the city did not intend to make it easy for Bennett to move the team early . Over concerns that the city would accept a buyout of the lease , a grassroots group filed a citywide initiative that sought to prevent the city from accepting such an offer from Bennett 's group . The Seattle City Council later unanimously passed an ordinance modeled after the initiative . 
 On August 13 , 2007 , Aubrey McClendon , a minor partner of Bennett 's ownership group , said in an interview with The Journal Record ( an Oklahoma City newspaper ) that the team was not purchased to keep it in Seattle but to relocate it to Oklahoma City . Bennett later denied such intentions , saying McClendon " was not speaking on behalf of the ownership group " . Due to his comments , McClendon was fined $ 250 @,@ 000 by the NBA . 
 = = Relocation effort = = 
 On September 21 , 2007 , Bennett applied for arbitration on the issue of whether the team could break its lease in 2008 . Arguing that the lease does not allow for arbitration on the issue of occupancy , the city of Seattle filed for declaratory relief on September 24 . The motion asked the King County Superior court to reject the arbitration request and enforce the Specific Performance Clause of the Sonics ' lease , which required the team to play at KeyArena through 2010 . United States District Court Judge Ricardo Martinez denied the request for arbitration on October 29 , saying that the " arguments ignore the clear language of Article II , which states that PBC ’ s use and occupancy rights with respect to the Premises and the Term of this Agreement shall end on September 30 , 2010 . ” 
 Two days after Bennett 's October 31 , 2007 deadline passed for public financing of a new arena , he informed NBA commissioner David Stern that the ownership group intended to move the Sonics to Oklahoma City as soon as it was legally possible . The timing of the announcement , one day after the Sonics ' home opener , drew critical comments from Tom Carr , Seattle 's attorney , who said " Mr. Bennett 's announcement today is a transparent attempt to alienate the Seattle fan base and follow through on his plan to move the team to Oklahoma City ... Making this move now continues the current ownership 's insulting behavior toward the Sonics ' dedicated fans and the citizens of the city . " Bennett also reiterated that the team was not for sale and dismissed attempts by local groups to repurchase the team . 
 On February 15 , 2008 , the Sonics ' ownership group gave the city of Seattle a one @-@ day deadline to accept a $ 26 @.@ 5 million offer that would buy out the Sonics ' lease in KeyArena and pay off what the ownership group claimed was the value of debts on the arena . The city rejected the offer . 
 The prospect of expanding KeyArena resurfaced on March 6 , 2008 , when Microsoft CEO Steve Ballmer promised that his investor group would pay half of the $ 300 million needed for an extensive renovation ; the rest was to be provided by the city and county . However , when the state legislature did not give approval for the county to provide funds by an April 10 deadline , Seattle Mayor Greg Nickels said that the effort had failed and the city 's hopes rested in its lawsuit . 
 = = = Oklahoma City 's preparations = = = 
 In anticipation of an NBA team , and led by Mayor Mick Cornett , who had successfully lobbied for the previous temporary relocation of the New Orleans Hornets to Oklahoma City , the voters of that city approved a $ 120 million renovation of the Ford Center on March 3 , 2008 , including construction of a new NBA practice facility . After a tour of downtown Oklahoma City , a subcommittee of three NBA owners recommended that the league approve the move . On March 14 , Bennett reached a preliminary agreement with Oklahoma City on a 15 @-@ year lease of the Ford Center that was finalized by the Oklahoma City Council and the Sonics ’ ownership group two weeks later . The Oklahoma State Legislature later approved a bill to provide tax breaks and other incentives if the team relocated . 
 NBA owners gave approval of a potential SuperSonics ' relocation to Oklahoma City on April 18 in a 28 – 2 vote by the league 's Board of Governors ; only Mark Cuban of the Dallas Mavericks and Paul Allen of the Portland Trail Blazers voted against the move . The approval meant the Sonics would be allowed to move to Oklahoma City 's Ford Center for the 2008 – 2009 season after reaching a settlement with the city of Seattle . 
 = = = Popular opposition in Seattle = = = 
 In 2006 , a group of Seattle residents created Save Our Sonics and Storm ( " SOS " ) to rally support for a permanent professional basketball presence in Seattle . The " and Storm " portion of the name was dropped when the WNBA Storm was sold to local ownership . On June 16 , 2008 , the group organized a well @-@ publicized rally , which reportedly drew over 3 @,@ 000 participants , at the U.S. District Courthouse in Seattle to protest the proposed relocation of the team . The rally was held on the first day of the city of Seattle 's lawsuit against the PBC to enforce the remaining two years on the KeyArena lease . 
 = = Lawsuits = = 
 = = = City of Seattle v. Professional Basketball Club LLC = = = 
 Seattle filed a lawsuit on September 23 , 2007 in an attempt to keep the Sonics from leaving before the end of their lease in 2010 . The trial was set for June 16 , 2008 . On April 10 , 2008 , Seattle asked the Federal District Court to order the NBA to release documents related to the financial situation of each team , the claim that the SuperSonics ' lease with KeyArena was financially unworkable , and the league 's involvement in requiring PBC to make a good @-@ faith effort to stay in Seattle . On April 28 , the trial 's presiding judge , Loretta <unk> , ruled that the NBA must supply the internal documents about the possible relocation of the Sonics that the city of Seattle had requested . In addition , the judge said that Stern could be deposed at a later day should the need arise . The city hoped the documents would aid in building its legal case , and cited an email conversation among members of the ownership group that suggested they were privately discussing intent to move the team while publicly insisting that they would not attempt to do so . 
 The ownership group filed a motion saying that the lawsuit and the release of the emails by the city were meant to drive up the cost of leaving Seattle and force the ownership group to sell the team . The motion requested that all emails and other records be released to the team . Slade Gorton , lead attorney for the city , responded by pointing out that it was PBC that started the fight that led to the lawsuit when they filed for arbitration to break the lease . The motion was denied by the presiding judge , who said the team failed to make a " good @-@ faith effort " to resolve the dispute and that it failed to show that trial preparations were hindered by the records not being made public . However , the ruling also said the team could bring up the issue again if it could prove the relevance or the confidentiality of the records . 
 On April 21 , 2008 , Gorton said he would be open to a settlement if the league promised a replacement team for Seattle . He said it was " highly unlikely " that the Sonics would stay and indicated the city should instead focus on gaining a replacement team , but noted that local governments would need to be willing to fund an expansion of KeyArena first . 
 When Bennett 's group requested that the trial also decide the team 's financial obligations to KeyArena should its lease be broken , Seattle 's lawyers requested a six @-@ month delay in the trial date in order to prepare for the additional issues , arguing that the ownership group 's request would " dramatically change the scope " of the case and would require considerable preparation time to determine damages . The trial 's presiding judge denied the motion by Bennett 's group on March 6 , noting that the team would have needed to make the request at the scheduling conference . A second trial would therefore need to have been held to determine the team 's financial obligations . 
 Attorneys made their closing arguments in the city 's case on June 26 and Judge Marsha J. <unk> announced that she would issue her ruling on the following Wednesday . On July 2 , hours before Judge <unk> was to release her ruling , it was announced that the team and the city had reached a settlement where PBC would pay the city $ 45 million immediately in exchange for breaking the lease , and an additional $ 30 million if Seattle was not given a replacement team in five years . According to the conditions of the settlement , the Sonics ' name and colors could not be used by the team in Oklahoma City , but could be taken by a future team in Seattle , although no promises for a replacement team were given . The OKC team would retain the franchise history of the SuperSonics , which could be " shared " with any future NBA team in Seattle . The team moved to Oklahoma City immediately and announced it would begin play in the 2008 – 09 season . 
 = = = Basketball Club of Seattle LLC v. Professional Basketball Club LLC = = = 
 The release of email conversations between members of Bennett 's group prompted former Sonics ' owner Howard Schultz to file a lawsuit that sought to rescind the sale of the team and alleged that Bennett 's group used fraud and misrepresentation to purchase the Sonics without making a " good faith best effort " to keep them in Seattle as mandated by the original sales contract . Bennett said the emails were misinterpreted and that he had spent millions of dollars in attempting to keep the team in Seattle . 
 The lawsuit was filed on April 22 , 2008 at the U.S. District Court for the Western District of Washington . It sought , among other things , an injunction to prevent the Sonics from being relocated from Seattle to Oklahoma City . The suit further requested that the franchise be placed in a constructive trust and no longer in the ownership of PBC . On May 20 , 2008 , Schultz 's attorney added alleged a breach of contract as a third cause of action against Bennett . Chicago @-@ based attorney and ESPN senior writer Lester Munson said that while the remedies Schultz sought were " without precedent in the sports industry " , he did believe that both the Schultz case and Seattle 's lease case presented " serious problems " for Bennett . 
 On May 9 , 2008 , Oklahoma City officials declared intent to sue for damages and a forced relocation of the SuperSonics if Schultz 's lawsuit succeeded and the subsequent ownership did not relocate . In a legal letter to Schultz , Oklahoma City 's attorney said that the Sonics were legally bound to relocate to Oklahoma City at the end of the KeyArena lease regardless of who owned the team . The letter stated that the city had " valid and enforceable agreements with the Team requiring it relocate to Oklahoma City at the end of the current lease with the city of Seattle . " Schultz 's attorney replied to the letter saying the lease agreement was with PBC , not <unk> , and that the city began improvements on Ford Center at their own risk prior to conclusion of the pending litigation . 
 The NBA filed a motion to intervene with Seattle 's federal court on July 9 , 2008 , claiming that Schultz 's lawsuit would interfere with the stable operation of the franchise and the transfer of ownership would violate NBA regulations unless the team was put under control of NBA Commissioner David Stern . The league also claimed that Schultz signed a release forbidding him to sue Bennett 's ownership group as a condition of the NBA 's approval of the original sale . Weeks later , Schultz requested that two separate trials be used to determine whether Bennett 's group committed fraud and subsequently determine a remedy . On August 29 , 2008 , shortly after the court denied his request and ruled that the NBA could intervene in the case , Schultz said his legal team no longer believed the case could be won . He announced he would drop the lawsuit , saying in a prepared statement , " The prevailing wisdom of many in the Seattle community and the advice of key members of the <unk> is that Seattle 's best chance for a professional basketball franchise is to end this litigation and allow the City , State Legislature and other parties to begin the necessary fence mending with the NBA . " 
 = = Distribution of assets = = 
 According to the terms detailed in the settlement agreement , items associated with the SuperSonics ' history in Seattle , including trophies , banners , and retired jerseys , stayed in the city and were placed in the Museum of History & Industry ( <unk> ) . Other items such as televisions , radios , headphones , CDs , chairs , and equipment were shipped to Oklahoma City after the Seattle Storm finished the 2008 WNBA season . 
 = = Chronicles = = 
 In 2009 , Seattle @-@ based filmmakers released " <unk> " , a documentary about the relocation of the Sonics . 
 In 2012 , the book " Big League City : Oklahoma City 's Rise to the NBA " by David Holt chronicled the story from Oklahoma City 's perspective . 
 = Wood turtle = 
 The wood turtle ( Glyptemys insculpta ) is a turtle endemic to North America . It is in the genus Glyptemys , a designation given to only one other turtle : the bog turtle . The wood turtle reaches a carapace length of 14 to 20 centimeters ( 5 @.@ 5 to 7 @.@ 9 in ) , its defining characteristic being the pyramidal pattern on its upper shell . Morphologically , it is similar to the bog turtle , spotted turtle , and Blanding 's turtle . The wood turtle exists in a broad range extending from Nova Scotia in the north ( and east ) to Minnesota in the west and Virginia in the south . In the past , it was forced south by encroaching glaciers : skeletal remains have been found as far south as Georgia . 
 It spends a great deal of time in or near the water of wide rivers , preferring shallow , clear streams with compacted and sandy bottoms . The wood turtle can also be found in forests and grasslands , but will rarely be seen more than several hundred meters from flowing water . It is diurnal and is not overtly territorial . It spends the winter in hibernation and the hottest parts of the summer in estivation . 
 The wood turtle is omnivorous and is capable of eating on land or in water . On an average day , a wood turtle will move 108 meters ( 354 ft ) , a decidedly long distance . Many other animals that live in its habitat pose a threat to it . Raccoons are over @-@ abundant in many places and are a direct threat to all life stages of this species . Inadvertently , humans cause a large number of deaths through habitat destruction , road traffic , farming accidents , and illegal collection . When unharmed , it can live for up to 40 years in the wild and 58 years in captivity . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Formerly in the genus Clemmys , the wood turtle is now a member of Glyptemys , a classification that wood turtles share with only the bog turtle . It and the bog turtle have a similar genetic makeup , which is marginally different from that of the spotted turtle , the only current member of the Clemmys genus . It has undergone extensive name changes by various scientists over the course of its history . Today , there are several prominent common names for the wood turtle , including sculptured tortoise , red @-@ legged tortoise , and <unk> . 
 Although no subspecies are recognized , there are morphological differences in wood turtles between areas . Individuals found in the west of its range ( areas like the Great Lakes and the Midwest United States ) have a paler complexion on the inside of their legs and underside of their necks than ones found in the east ( places including the Appalachian Mountains , New York , and Pennsylvania ) . Genetic analysis has also revealed that southern populations have less genetic diversity than the northern ; however , both exhibit a fair amount of diversity considering the decline in numbers that have occurred during previous ice ages . 
 = = Description = = 
 Wood turtles grow to between 14 and 20 centimeters ( 5 @.@ 5 and 7 @.@ 9 in ) in length , and reach a maximum of 23 @.@ 4 centimeters ( 9 @.@ 2 in ) . They have a rough carapace that is a tan , grayish brown or brown color , with a central ridge ( called a keel ) made up of a pyramidal pattern of ridges and grooves . Older turtles typically display an abraded or worn carapace . Fully grown , they weigh 1 kilogram ( 35 oz ) . The wood turtle 's karyotype consists of 50 chromosomes . 
 The larger scutes display a pattern of black or yellow lines . The wood turtle 's plastron ( ventral shell ) is yellowish in color and has dark patches . The posterior margin of the plastron terminates in a V @-@ shaped notch . Although sometimes speckled with yellowish spots , the upper surface of the head is often a dark gray to solid black . The ventral surfaces of the neck , chin , and legs are orange to red with faint yellow stripes along the lower jaw of some individuals . Seasonal variation in color vibrancy have been known to occur . 
 At maturity , males , who reach a maximum length of 23 @.@ 4 centimeters ( 9 @.@ 2 in ) , are larger than females , who have been recorded to reach 20 @.@ 4 centimeters ( 8 @.@ 0 in ) . Males also have larger claws , a larger head , a concave plastron , a more dome @-@ like carapace , and longer tails than females . The plastron of females and juveniles is flat while in males it gains concavity with age . The posterior marginal scutes of females and juveniles ( of either gender ) radiate outward more than in mature males . The coloration on the neck , chin , and inner legs is more vibrant in males than in females who display a pale yellowish color in those areas . Hatchlings range in size from 2 @.@ 8 to 3 @.@ 8 centimeters ( 1 @.@ 1 to 1 @.@ 5 in ) in length ( straight carapace measurement ) . The plastrons of hatchlings are dull gray to brown . Their tail usually equals the length of the carapace and their neck and legs lack the bright coloration found in adults . Hatchling 's carapaces also are as wide as they are long and lack the pyramidal pattern found in older turtles . 
 The eastern box turtle and Blanding 's turtle are similar in appearance to the wood turtle and all three live in overlapping habitats . However , unlike the wood turtle , both the Blanding 's turtle and members of the box turtle family have hinged plastrons that allow them to completely close their shells . The diamondback terrapin has a shell closely resembling the wood turtle 's ; however its skin is gray in color , and it inhabits coastal brackish and saltwater marshes . The bog turtle and spotted turtle are also similar , but neither of these have the specific sculptured pattern found on the carapaces of the wood turtle . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The wood turtle is found in most New England states , Nova Scotia , west to Michigan , northern Indiana and Minnesota , and south to Virginia . Overall , the distribution is disjunct with populations often being small and isolated . Roughly 30 % of its total population is in Canada . It prefers slow @-@ moving streams containing a sandy bottom and heavily vegetated banks . The soft bottoms and muddy shores of these streams are ideal for overwintering . Also , the areas bordering the streams ( usually with open canopies ) are used for nesting . Spring to summer is spent in open areas including forests , fields , bogs , wet meadows , and beaver ponds . The rest of the year is spent in the aforementioned waterways . 
 The densities of wood turtle populations have also been studied . In the northern portion of its range ( Quebec and other areas of Canada ) , populations are fairly dilute , containing an average of 0 @.@ 44 individuals per 1 hectare ( 2 @.@ 5 acres ) , while in the south , over the same area , the densities varied largely from 6 to 90 turtles . In addition to this , it has been found that colonies often have more females than males . 
 In the western portion of its range , wood turtles are more aquatic . In the east , wood turtles are decidedly more terrestrial , especially during the summer . During this time , they can be found in wooded areas with wide open canopies . However , even here , they are never far from water and will enter it every few days . 
 = = = Evolutionary history = = = 
 In the past , wood turtle populations were forced south by extending glaciers . Remains from the Rancholabrean period ( 300 @,@ 000 to 11 @,@ 000 years ago ) have been found in states such as Georgia and Tennessee , both of which are well south of their current range . After the receding of the ice , wood turtle colonies were able to re @-@ inhabit their customary northern range ( areas like New Brunswick and Nova Scotia ) . 
 = = Ecology and behavior = = 
 During the spring , the wood turtle is active during the daytime ( usually from about 7 : 00 a.m. and 7 : 00 p.m. ) and will almost always be found within several hundred metres of a stream . The early morning and late afternoon are preferred foraging periods . Throughout this season , the wood turtle use logs , sandy shores , or banks to bask in sunlight . In order to maintain its body temperatures through thermoregulation , it spends a considerable amount of time basking , most of which takes place in the late morning and late afternoon . The wood turtle reaches a peak body temperature of 37 ° C ( 99 ° F ) after basking . During times of extreme heat , it has been known to estivate . Several reports mention individuals resting under vegetation , fallen debris and in shallow puddles . During the summer , the wood turtle is considered a largely terrestrial animal . At night , its average body temperature drops to between 15 and 20 ° C ( 59 and 68 ° F ) and it will rest in small creeks or nearby land ( usually in areas containing some sort of underbrush or grass ) . 
 During warmer weather , the wood turtle stays in the water for a larger percentage of the time . For this reason , during the winter months ( and the late fall and early spring ) it is considered an aquatic turtle . November through February or March is spent in hibernation at the bottom of a small , flowing river . The wood turtle may hibernate alone or in large groups . During this period , individuals bury themselves in the thick mud at the bottom of the river and rarely move . During hibernation , it is vulnerable to flash floods . Emergence does not occur until March or sometimes April , months that mark the beginning of its activation period ( males are typically more active than females at this time ) . 
 Males are known to be aggressive , with larger and older turtles being more dominant . Larger males rank higher on the social hierarchy often created by wood turtle colonies . In the wild , the submissive turtle is either forced to flee , or is bombarded with physical abuses , which include biting , shoving , and ramming . Larger and more dominant males will sometimes try to remove a subordinate male while he is mating with a female . The defender will , if he does not successfully fight for his position , lose the female to the larger male . Therefore , among males , there is a direct relationship between copulation opportunities and social rank . However , the outcome of encounters between two turtles is more aggression @-@ dependent than size @-@ dependent . The wood turtle that is more protective of his or her area is the victor . Physical bouts between wood turtles ( regardless of gender ) increases marginally during the fall and spring ( times of mating ) . 
 The wood turtle is omnivorous , feeding mainly on plant matter and animals both on land and in water . It eats prey such as beetles , millipedes , and slugs . Also , wood turtles consume specific fungi ( Amanita muscaria and Leccinum <unk> ) , mosses , grasses , various insects , and also carrion . On occasion , it can be seen stomping the ground with alternating hits of the left and right front feet . This behavior is thought to imitate the sound of falling rain , sometimes causing earthworms to rise to the surface where they quickly become easy prey . When hunting , the wood turtle pokes its head into such areas as dead and decaying logs , the bottoms of bushes , and in other vegetation . In the water , it exhibits similar behavior , searching algae beds and cavities along the sides of the stream or river . 
 Many different animals are predators of or otherwise pose a threat to the wood turtle . They include snapping turtles , porcupines , raccoons , otters , foxes , and cats . All of these species destroy unhatched eggs and prey upon hatchlings and juveniles . Several animals that often target wood turtle eggs are the common raven and coyote , which may completely destroy the nests they encounter . Evidence of predatory attacks ( wounds to the skin and such ) are common on individuals , but the northern populations tend to display more scarring than the southern ones . In addition to these threats , wood turtles also suffer from leech infestations . 
 = = = Movement = = = 
 The wood turtle can travel at a relatively fast speed ( upwards of 0 @.@ 32 kilometers per hour ( 0 @.@ 20 mph ) ) ; it also travels long distances during the months that it is active . In one instance , of nine turtles studied , the average distance covered in a 24 @-@ hour period was 108 meters ( 354 ft ) , with a net displacement of 60 meters ( 197 ft ) . 
 The wood turtle , an intelligent animal , has homing capabilities . Its mental capacity for directional movement was discovered after the completion of an experiment that involved an individual finding food in a maze . The results proved that these turtles have locating abilities similar to that of a rat . This was also proved by another , separate experiment . One male wood turtle was displaced 2 @.@ 4 kilometers ( 1 @.@ 5 mi ) after being captured , and within five weeks , it returned to the original location . The homing ability of the wood turtle does not vary among genders , age groups , or directions of travel . 
 = = = Life cycle = = = 
 The wood turtle takes a long time to reach sexual maturity , has a low fecundity ( ability to reproduce ) , but has a high adult survival rate . However , the high survival rates are not true of juveniles or hatchlings . Although males establish hierarchies , they are not territorial . The wood turtle becomes sexually mature between 14 and 18 years of age . Mating activity among wood turtles peaks in the spring and again in the fall , although it is known to mate throughout the portion of the year they are active . However , it has been observed mating in December . In one rare instance , a female wood turtle hybridized with a male Blanding 's turtle . 
 The courtship ritual consists of several hours of ' dancing , ' which usually occurs on the edge of a small stream . Males often initiate this behavior : starting by nudging the females shell , head , tail , and legs . Because of this behavior , the female may flee from the area , in which case the male will follow . After the chase ( if it occurs ) , the male and female approach and back away from each other as they continually raise and extend their heads . After some time , they lower their heads and swing them from left to right . Once it is certain that the two individuals will mate , the male will gently bite the female 's head and mount her . Intercourse lasts between 22 and 33 minutes . Actual copulation takes place in the water , between depths between 0 @.@ 1 and 1 @.@ 2 meters ( 0 and 4 ft ) . Although unusual , copulation does occur on land . During the two prominent times of mating ( spring and fall ) , females are mounted anywhere from one to eight times , with several of these causing impregnation . For this reason , a number of wood turtle clutches have been found to have hatchlings from more than one male . 
 Nesting occurs from May until July . Nesting areas receive ample sunlight , contain soft soil , are free from flooding , and are devoid of rocks and disruptively large vegetation . These sites however , can be limited among wood turtle colonies , forcing females to travel long distances in search of a suitable site , sometimes a 250 meters ( 820 ft ) trip . Before laying her eggs , the female may prepare several false nests . After a proper area is found , she will dig out a small cavity , lay about seven eggs ( but anywhere from three to 20 is common ) , and fill in the area with earth . Oval and white , the eggs average 3 @.@ 7 centimeters ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) in length and 2 @.@ 36 centimeters ( 0 @.@ 93 in ) in width , and weigh about 12 @.@ 7 grams ( 0 @.@ 45 oz ) . The nests themselves are 5 to 10 centimeters ( 2 @.@ 0 to 3 @.@ 9 in ) deep , and digging and filling it may take a total of four hours . Hatchlings emerge from the nest between August and October with overwintering being rare although entirely possible . An average length of 3 @.@ 65 centimeters ( 1 @.@ 44 in ) , the hatchlings lack the vibrant coloration of the adults . Female wood turtles in general lay one clutch per year and tend to congregate around optimum nesting areas . 
 The wood turtle , throughout the first years of its life , is a rapid grower . Five years after hatching , it already measures 11 @.@ 5 centimeters ( 4 @.@ 5 in ) , at age 16 , it is a full 16 @.@ 5 to 17 centimeters ( 6 @.@ 5 to 6 @.@ 7 in ) , depending on gender . The wood turtle can be expected to live for 40 years in the wild , with captives living up to 58 years . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 Despite many sightings and a seemingly large and diverse distribution , wood turtle numbers are in decline . A large number of deaths caused by humans result from : habitat destruction , farming accidents , and road traffic . Also , it is commonly collected illegally for the international pet trade . These combined threats have caused many areas where they live to enact laws protecting it . Despite legislation , enforcement of the laws and education of the public regarding the species are minimal . 
 For proper protection of the wood turtle , in @-@ depth land surveys of its habitat to establish population numbers are needed . One emerging solution to the highway mortality problem , which primarily affects nesting females , is the construction of under @-@ road channels . These tunnels allow the wood turtle to pass under the road , a solution that helps prevent accidental deaths . <unk> and other media that warn people to avoid keeping the wood turtle as a pet are currently being distributed . Next , leaving nests undisturbed , especially common nesting sites and populations , is the best solution to enable the wood turtle 's survival . 
 = Iowa Highway 25 = 
 Iowa Highway 25 ( Iowa 25 ) is a north – south highway in the southwest and west @-@ central portion of the state . It begins at Iowa 2 seven miles ( 11 km ) south of Clearfield . It heads north along a two @-@ lane road through Creston , Greenfield , and Guthrie Center on its way to its northern end at U.S. Route 30 ( US 30 ) near Scranton . 
 Iowa 25 was created in 1926 as a replacement for Primary Road No. 16 , which was redesignated further east . It originally connected US 30 to US 34 in Creston . In the early 1930s , it was extended south to Blockton by absorbing all of Iowa 184 . By the end of the 1930s , the highway reached the Missouri state line , where it ended for over 40 years . In the late 1970s and early 1980s , the highway south of Iowa 2 was turned over to local jurisdictions . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Iowa 25 begins at a T intersection with Iowa 2 along the Taylor – Ringgold county line south of Clearfield . Eastbound Iowa 2 comes from the south along the county line and turns east into Ringgold County while Iowa 25 heads north from the intersection along the county line . It passes through Clearfield , which lies in Taylor County , and continues north towards the quadripoint of Taylor , Adams , Union , and Ringgold counties ( counter @-@ clockwise from the southwest ) . 
 North of the quadripoint , Iowa 25 runs along the Adams – Union county line . It crosses the Platte River south of the unincorporated community of Kent . North of Kent , the highway meets U.S. Route 34 ( US 34 ) and the two routes head east together towards Creston . Shortly after crossing into Union County , the two routes turn to the northeast . In southern Creston , the two routes split with US 34 continuing to the east and Iowa 25 heading north along Sumner Street through the western part of town . Near Southwestern Community College , the route turns to the west along Townline Road . It crosses Summit Lake , a reservoir created by damming the Platte River . West of Summit Lake , the highway turns 90 degrees to the north and passes close to Green Valley State Park . 
 Iowa 25 crosses into Adair County near the source of the East <unk> River . At Orient , the highway turns to the west , but west of the town , it turns back to the north . It heads through rural Adair County , occasionally passing a roadside farmhouse . The highway enters Greenfield on the town 's eastern side and intersects Iowa 92 . The section of the route from Creston to Greenfield is part of the Mormon Pioneer Trail , which roughly marks the trail used by Mormons on their exodus to Utah . North of Greenfield , Iowa 25 passes through land equally as rural as that south of the town . In the northern part of the county , the highway passes Freedom Rock , a large boulder painted every year to honor U.S. veterans and their families . Just north of Freedom Rock , it meets Interstate 80 ( I @-@ 80 ) and US 6 at a diamond interchange adjacent to a golf course . 
 North of the interchange , Iowa 25 enters Guthrie County and briefly overlaps part of the White Pole Road by heading west towards Casey . The concurrency ends as the White Pole Road curves to the southwest while Iowa 25 turns to the north . Continuing north through the rolling hills of Guthrie County , Iowa 25 eases to the west through a series of S curves which aligns the road with 5th Street , the main north – south road in Guthrie Center . Just before it enters the city , the highway crosses the South Raccoon River . In downtown Guthrie Center , it meets Iowa 44 at a four @-@ way stop . North of Guthrie Center , the highway crosses Brushy Creek , a tributary of the South Raccoon River . Near Springbrook State Park , it crosses the Middle Raccoon River . Further north , between the communities of Bayard and Bagley , Iowa 25 intersects Iowa 141 . The two routes head west towards Bayard and split on the eastern side of town . 
 North of Bayard , Iowa 25 crosses into Greene County , the final county through which it passes . The highway heads due north through farmland , passing a few houses along the way to Scranton . Just south of Scranton , it picks up the Lincoln Highway Heritage Byway , a designation it carries to its end . The route goes through the west side of Scranton and continues north to its endpoint at US 30 . North of US 30 , the roadway becomes County Road N65 ( CR N65 ) , which carries the Lincoln Highway Heritage Byway . 
 = = History = = 
 The original Primary Road No. 25 was designated with the rest of the Iowa Primary Highway System in 1920 . It spanned 20 miles ( 32 km ) from Adel to Winterset . This designation only lasted a few years ; it was absorbed by Primary Road No. 16 in 1926 . When the Adel – to – Winterset route changed numbers in 1926 , it was not paved at all , but the segment in Madison County was graded , the first step in becoming a paved road . 
 The second iteration of Iowa 25 was created in 1925 during the time when the Iowa State Highway Commission was designating the new U.S. Highway System on the state 's primary road network . In order to avoid driver confusion , the commission reorganized various route numbers to simplify the system and to remove any duplicated numbers , i.e. US 30 and Primary Road No. 30 . Interestingly , Iowa 25 was allocated along a section of former Primary Road No. 16 from Scranton to Creston . Iowa 16 was rerouted to the east , absorbing all of the previous incarnation of Primary Road No. 25 . 
 A few years later , the highway commission created Iowa 184 , which ran from US 34 south to Blockton . In early 1933 , Iowa 25 was extended southward along US 34 and absorbed all of Iowa 184 . In 1938 , it was extended an additional four miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) to the Missouri state line . Iowa 357 was created as a short spur route into Blockton . 
 Iowa 25 stayed largely the same for over 40 years . By 1980 , it was truncated at County Road <unk> ( formerly Iowa 357 ) near Blockton . Two years later , it trimmed back to its northern junction with Iowa 2 , where it remains today . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = = Related routes = = 
 Iowa 184 was the 27 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 43 km ) route that connected Blockton to US 34 . It was designated in 1931 and absorbed into Iowa 25 two years later . 
 Iowa 357 was a short spur that entered Blockton after Iowa 25 was extended to the Missouri state line in 1938 . It was turned over to Taylor County in 1964 . 
 = Office of Strategic Influence ( album ) = 
 Office of Strategic Influence is the first album by American progressive rock band OSI , released by InsideOut Music on February 18 , 2003 . The album was recorded in June 2002 and mixed in August 2002 at the Carriage House Studios in Stamford , Connecticut . 
 Fates Warning guitarist Jim Matheos originally recruited Dream Theater drummer Mike Portnoy to work on a progressive metal album . When keyboardist and vocalist Kevin Moore ( founder of Chroma Key and former Dream Theater member ) joined the project , the musical direction of the album changed to become more focused on soundscapes and composition than musicianship . Sean Malone ( of Cynic and Gordian Knot ) and Steven Wilson ( of Porcupine Tree ) also performed on the album . 
 The album is named after the Office of Strategic Influence , an organization set up after the September 11 attacks to spread misinformation and plant false news items in the media , among other functions . The Office was shut after The New York Times published a story on it ; many of its operations were transferred to the Information Operations Task Force . The album 's lyrics were written by Moore in reaction to the September 11 attacks . 
 Critical reception of the album was generally positive , praising the band 's musicianship . Critics compared the band 's sound to Porcupine Tree . Portnoy was ultimately dissatisfied with the experience of making the album . He performed on the second OSI album , Free , but was replaced by Gavin Harrison for Blood , the band 's third album . 
 = = Background = = 
 Fates Warning guitarist Jim Matheos originally started work on Office of Strategic Influence as a side project while his bandmates took a break before starting work on their next album . Matheos decided to work with Dream Theater drummer Mike Portnoy because the two had wanted to work on a project together for some time . They originally planned to form a supergroup , envisaging the album as " straight prog metal " . 
 Matheos spent seven months writing material for the album . He then sent Kevin Moore ( who was living in Costa Rica ) some MP3 files of the music he had written and asked him to write some keyboard parts . Moore ( known as a founding member of Dream Theater and for his solo career as Chroma Key ) had previously performed on three Fates Warning albums , and Matheos was expecting him to write keyboard parts as he had for the Fates Warning album . Instead , Moore " messed with [ Matheos ' ] tracks and switched things around and put vocals to it and stuff like that . " He said that he no longer considered the keyboard , bass and guitar parts separate from each other : " I don 't write like that any more as much as I 'm composing a whole song . " The resulting track would become " Hello , Helicopter ! " 
 Moore emailed his work back to Matheos , who was " pleasantly surprised " to be sent something completely different from what he expected . Matheos wanted to create a heavy album ; before deciding to takes Moore 's ideas further , Matheos and Moore wrote what would become " OSI " . Moore said that after that , " [ Matheos ] was pretty much comfortable with whatever I wanted to do . " This new song format was very different from what Portnoy and Matheos originally planned : the already @-@ written long tracks were split into multiple short songs , closer to Moore 's project Chroma Key than traditional progressive metal . " The Thing That Never Was " , a track on the bonus disc , shows the direction Matheos and Portnoy originally planned to take the album in . 
 Matheos and Portnoy initially considered having a different vocalist perform on each track ; this idea was scrapped as they decided the constant change in vocalist would disrupt the flow of the album . Vocalists considered included Steve Walsh , Steve Hogarth , Steven Wilson and John Arch . Portnoy particularly pushed for Daniel Gildenlöw to sing on the album . Early on in the album 's production , Gildenlöw wrote some vocal melodies and lyrics for two songs and completely wrote another song . Matheos liked Gildenlöw 's ideas , but did not want to take the music in the same direction Gildenlöw did . Moore ended up performing most of the vocals on the album . In order to keep the album from becoming too similar to Chroma Key , Matheos and Portnoy decided to feature a guest vocalist on one track . Steven Wilson ( of Porcupine Tree ) wrote lyrics and performed vocals on the track " ShutDOWN " . He was chosen because his music in Porcupine Tree was similar in style to the music on the album . Portnoy also credited Wilson as " a pioneer of his genre " . 
 Bassist Sean Malone ( of Cynic and Gordian Knot ) was only credited as a guest musician . Portnoy explained that this was because Malone 's schedule did not allow him to join Matheos , Moore and Portnoy in the basic tracking sessions . 
 = = Recording = = 
 Office of Strategic Influence was recorded at Carriage House Studios in Stamford , Connecticut from June 2 to June 9 , 2002 . Matheos and Moore mixed the album with Phil Magnotti ( who had previously mixed for Fates Warning ) in August . Portnoy pushed to get as much of the band together as possible for the main tracking sessions because of his dislike of " side projects done through mail . " 
 Matheos and Moore created the basic song ideas in Pro Tools . Songs in the progressive metal vein were almost entirely written by Matheos , while Moore had more influence on the more vocal @-@ driven tracks . Portnoy noted that they were ultimately " Jim 's songs " , but that Moore was very involved with arrangements , post @-@ production , melodies and lyrics . Portnoy considered himself as " just a drummer " : he made minor arrangement suggestions but did not have a part in the actual writing . Malone and Wilson contributed their parts after the songs had been arranged . Matheos saved any unused ideas for the next Fates Warning album . 
 Sean Malone said that he enjoyed playing on the album , but that " it would have been nice to work out parts with Mike as they were being recorded rather than after the fact " . He took a " session approach " to the album , " trying as much as possible to create parts that fit what Jim et al had created , versus trying to impose anything upon it " . He was sent MIDI bass parts for each song which served as a guideline . For the particularly sparse and texture @-@ heavy tracks , Malone did lots of <unk> to create " a natural kind of <unk> " he prefers to any digital effects . 
 Before the recording of Office of Strategic Influence , the last time Moore and Portnoy worked together was on Dream Theater 's Awake in 1994 . Matheos was initially concerned about how Moore and Portnoy would feel about working together for the first time in eight years . Moore noted that he and Portnoy were not on bad terms , but " just weren 't in touch . " The two both described the experience as initially " awkward " . When recording the album Portnoy had to take directions from others ; he found this difficult as he was used to taking the creative lead . Moore noted that there was tension when recording the same drum part for a song more than once ( in order to give Moore choice later on ) : " He 's used to just playing the stroke once , the way he wants to , " he said . 
 In a 2009 interview , Portnoy blamed his frustration with the project on Moore : 
 Portnoy performed as a session musician on the second OSI album , Free , but was replaced by Porcupine Tree drummer Gavin Harrison for the third album , Blood . 
 = = Music = = 
 Moore described the music on Office of Strategic Influence as " a new approach to progressive rock " , stating that he could use his musical roots in progressive music but " was far enough away from it to play with it . " He said that " progressive rock has been around for so long and we have to stop taking it so seriously and really have fun with it . " Portnoy described the album as " more <unk> " than his work in Dream Theater , focusing more on composition and sounds than musicianship . He noted the style " would never work in Dream Theater . " 
 Moore wrote lyrics for the album by " mumbling along to the song and then deciphering what I 'm saying . " The lyrics feature political themes ( " Hello , Helicopter ! " is about the US supplying military arsenals to other countries to protect its own national interests ) , although Matheos stated that the album was not political in nature . Moore said that he writes lyrics based on personal experiences , and that much of the album 's lyrical content stems from how the September 11 attacks affected him . Moore 's brother was a firefighter who worked at the World Trade Center after the attacks , " and I was totally apolitical before this , politically naïve and I still am , " Moore stated . " I was like , ' Whoa , what the fuck is going on in the world ? ' " 
 Office of Strategic Influence features Moore 's signature use of spoke word samples . He collected samples first and then tried to match them with the song 's tempo . Moore said that the samples relate directly to the song 's lyrics . 
 Matheos listed his influences as progressive rock bands such as Genesis , Jethro Tull and Emerson , Lake & Palmer and heavy metal bands such as Black Sabbath , UFO and Uriah Heep . Moore described his influences as minimal techno , experimental electronic musicians and " bands that play live and then chop it up " . He specifically named Pole , The Gordons and Acid Undertones as influences . Malone cited Mick Karn as an influence . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 Moore chose the album 's name from a list of band , album and song names he kept . The Office of Strategic Influence was a highly secret organization set up three weeks after the September 11 attacks . Part of its mission was to spread misinformation and plant false news items in the media in order to " influence the hearts and minds of the opposition . " After The New York Times ran a story on the Office in February 2002 , it was forced to shut , although many of its operations were later transferred to the Information Operations Task Force . " The funny thing about it was the government and administration was saying it 's so embarrassing that they had to name it the ' Office of Strategic Influence , ' we couldn 't just put it in a room in the Pentagon and name it whatever the room number is , " Moore said . " Someone decided to be really creative about it and name it what it really is . " 
 The limited edition bonus CD features three bonus tracks on it . There are two cover songs : a cover of the Pink Floyd song " Set the Controls for the Heart of the Sun " performed by Moore and Portnoy , chosen because they both " love Pink Floyd " , according to Portnoy , and a cover of the Neil Young song " New Mama " performed by Moore . The third track , entitled " The Thing That Never Was " , is a seventeen @-@ minute instrumental performed by Matheos and Portnoy , showing the original direction they intended to take the album in . The CD contains a 19 @-@ minute multimedia section , including two documentary @-@ style videos shot during the album 's recording , and a music video for the track " Horseshoes and B @-@ 52s " directed by Moore . 
 Matheos suggested using an altered version of the United States passport for the album 's cover art . The differences are that the arrows are double @-@ headed , the olive branch is wilted , and the eagle 's wings have been clipped . Matheos , Moore and Portnoy decided against sending out promotional copies of the album before its release date in order to prevent an early Internet leak of it . The album was released in Europe on February 17 , 2003 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Office of Strategic Influence was critically well received . Keith Gordon of Allmusic praised the album as " offering both power and pomp . " Tommy Hash of <unk> described the music as " catchy , complete with great melodies and musicianship that does not overdo it . " He described the album as " almost in complete contrast to the parent bands ' other related side projects , " such as Liquid Tension Experiment and Transatlantic . John Bollenberg of <unk> praised Matheos , Moore and Portnoy for " [ starting ] from scratch without copying their past in order to deliver something fresh , new and exciting . " 
 Hash described the album as having " the atmosphere of some of the mid @-@ 90s to the latter era Fates Warning fused with industrial sounding elements and sound effects that create an ambient effect . " Gordon described the music as similar to Pink Floyd , King Crimson and Max Vague . Bollenberg noted " the material on Office Of Strategic Influence gets closer to Moore 's very own Chroma Key mixed with dashes of latterday Porcupine Tree ... there are bits and bobs all over the album that could easily have fit on In Absentia . " Ed Sander of <unk> compared the album 's sound to that of Porcupine Tree : " the album features both the dreaminess of some early Porcupine Tree material , as well as the aggressive riff based approach of tracks like ' Up The <unk> ' , ' <unk> ' and ' Wedding Nails ' and other trademark Tree elements like distorted vocals and catchy bass parts . " He noted the music was " more based around catchy dark riffs in the Porcupine Tree vein then on self @-@ indulging fast @-@ finger guitar or keyboard solos . " Sander stated that the use of spoken word samples reminded him of Dark Star . 
 Gordon described the performances on the album as " crackling with electricity and passion " . He lauded Matheos ' performance on the album : " In any other subgenre of rock , Matheos would be a guitar hero on the order of Steve Vai or Eddie Van Halen , the Fates Warning frontman capable of both classically styled acoustic craftsmanship and chaotic metallic riffing , often in the context of the same song . " He praised Malone and Portnoy for " [ holding ] down the bottom line with rock @-@ solid rhythms . " Sander compared some of Malone 's bass parts to those in <unk> Tentacles . While noting that Portnoy " rather sticks to ' plain ' drumming , " he commended the drummer 's performance , praising his use of ethnic percussion to give the album " an original twist " . 
 Gordon praised Moore for " providing an instrumental counterpoint to Matheos ' raging guitar . Moore 's imaginative style and natural skill coax a myriad of sounds from his instrument to challenge Matheos in the mix . " Sander noted Moore 's contribution , saying that " at times there 's more technology and electronics than in the average house release . " Bollenberg noted that Moore 's keyboards added " textures flirting with semi @-@ industrial patches and often being closer to Nine Inch Nails than ' vintage ' melodic prog . " Hash praised Moore 's vocals , noting they " fit in well with all of the instrumental textures " . In contrast , Sander criticized Moore 's voice as " dull " : " the many added distortion and echo effects cannot always make it more interesting . His voice is okay for one or two tracks ... but it 's too flat to keep you tied to the speakers for much longer . " He cited Moore 's vocals as the main weakness of some tracks . 
 Sander considered " ShutDOWN " as " the absolute highlight of the album " , comparing it to the Porcupine Tree track " Russia on Ice " . Bollenberg listed his favorite track as " Hello , Helicopter ! " : " it once again gets so very close to authentic Porcupine Tree with Portnoy introducing some tribal rhythms that go ever so well with the rest of the material . I simply melt once that superb sound of the Fender Rhodes enters , taking turns with synthesizer tweaks . " Gordon described the instrumental parts of the album as " powerful and purposeful : an integral part of each composition rather than an excuse to merely ' jam . ' " Sander praised the tracks " The New Math " and " Dirt from a Holy Place " , but criticized the more experimental " Horseshoes and B @-@ 52s " : " to me it sometimes sounds like some random cutting and pasting was done on this track , leaving out a couple of seconds here and there . " He criticized the track 's video as " nearly unbearable to watch . If some video games are bad for people with epilepsy , this video is going to instantly kill them . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Jim Matheos and Kevin Moore , except where noted . 
 = = = Limited edition bonus CD = = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Jim Matheos – guitars , keyboards , programming , producer , engineering 
 Kevin Moore – vocals , keyboards , programming , producer 
 Sean Malone – bass guitar , Chapman stick 
 Mike Portnoy – drums 
 Steven Wilson – vocals on " ShutDOWN " 
 Produced by Jim Matheos and Kevin Moore 
 Mixed by Phil Magnotti 
 Engineered by Phil Magnotti , Steven Wilson , Sean Malone and Jim Matheos 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = Banksia attenuata = 
 Banksia attenuata , commonly known as the candlestick banksia , slender banksia or <unk> as known by the Nyoongar Aboriginal people , is a species of plant in the proteaceae family . Commonly a tree , it reaches 10 m ( 33 ft ) high , but is often a shrub in dryer areas 0 @.@ 4 to 2 m ( 1 @.@ 3 to 6 @.@ 6 ft ) high . It has long narrow serrated leaves and bright yellow inflorescences , or flower spikes , held above the foliage , which appear in spring and summer . The flower spikes age to grey and swell with the development of the woody follicles . It is found across much of the southwest of Western Australia , from north of Kalbarri National Park down to Cape Leeuwin and across to Fitzgerald River National Park . 
 John Lindley had named material collected by James Drummond Banksia <unk> in 1840 , but this proved to be the same as the species named Banksia attenuata by Robert Brown 30 years earlier in 1810 , and thus Brown 's name took precedence . Within the genus Banksia , the close relationships and exact position of B. attenuata is unclear . 
 The candlestick banksia is pollinated by and provides food for a wide array of vertebrate and invertebrate animals in summer months . Several species of honeyeater visit the flower spikes , as does the honey possum , which has an important role as a pollinator . It regenerates from bushfire by regrowing from its woody base known as a lignotuber , or from epicormic buds within its trunk . Plants may have a lifespan of 300 years . It has been widely used as a street tree and for amenities planting in urban Western Australia , though its large size generally precludes use in small gardens . A dwarf form is commercially available in nurseries . 
 = = Description = = 
 Banksia attenuata is generally encountered as a tree up to 10 m ( 30 ft ) tall . In the north of its range as the climate becomes warmer and dryer , it is often a stunted multistemmed shrub 0 @.@ 4 to 2 m ( 1 @.@ 3 to 6 @.@ 6 ft ) tall . Both forms occur in the vicinity of Hill River but there is otherwise a marked demarcation . In the Wheatbelt and east of the Stirling Range , it is a stunted tree . Tree forms have a solid trunk , generally wavy or bent , with 1 – 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 39 – 0 @.@ 79 in ) thick crumbly orange @-@ grey bark which is a red @-@ brown underneath . It regenerates from fire via lignotuber or epicormic buds from its fire @-@ tolerant trunk . It has long narrow shiny green linear leaves 4 to 27 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 to 10 @.@ 6 in ) long and 0 @.@ 5 to 1 @.@ 6 cm ( 0 @.@ 20 to 0 @.@ 63 in ) wide . The leaf margins have <unk> or u @-@ shaped serrations along their length . The new growth is a pale grey @-@ green , and occurs mainly in the late spring and summer , often after flowering . The brilliant yellow inflorescences ( flower spikes ) occur from spring into summer and are up 5 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) wide and up to 25 – 30 cm ( 9 @.@ 8 – 11 @.@ 8 in ) tall . They are made up of many small individual flowers ; a study at Mount Adams 330 km ( 210 mi ) north of Perth revealed a count of 1933 ( ± a standard error of 88 ) flowers per inflorescence , and another in the Fitzgerald River National Park yielded a count of 1720 ( ± 76 ) flowers . Anthesis proceeds up the flower spike over about 10 to 20 days , and is asynchronous . That is , a plant produces flower spikes over a several week period and will thus have spikes at different stages of development over the flowering season . Often bright green in bud stage , they are terminal , occurring at the ends of one- to three @-@ year @-@ old branches , and displayed prominently above the foliage . The smell of the open flowers has been likened to a peppery Shiraz wine . Over time , the spikes fade to brown and then grey , and the individual flowers shrivel and lie against the spikes . This coincides with the development of dark furry oval follicles , which measure 2 – 3 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 79 – 1 @.@ 38 in ) long , 1 – 1 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 39 – 0 @.@ 59 in ) high , and 1 @.@ 4 – 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 55 – 0 @.@ 79 in ) wide . However , only a very small percentage ( 0 @.@ 1 % ) of flowers develop into follicles ; the field study at Mount Adams yielded a count of 3 @.@ 6 ± 1 @.@ 2 per cone . The follicles develop and mature over seven to eight months , from February to December , while seed development occurs over four months from September to December . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Banksia attenuata was first collected by Robert Brown from King George Sound in December 1801 , and published by him in 1810 . The specific epithet is the Latin adjective attenuatus " narrowed " , and refers to the leaves narrowing towards the base . The species has had a fairly uneventful taxonomic history . It has only two synonyms , and no subspecies or varieties have been published ; George reviewed the variation in form in the species , and felt that the tree and shrub forms differed only in size and hence were not distinct enough to represent separate taxa . In 1840 , John Lindley published a putative new species , Banksia <unk> , in his A Sketch of the Vegetation of the Swan River Colony ; this has now be shown to be a taxonomic synonym of B. attenuata . In 1891 , Otto Kuntze made a failed attempt to transfer Banksia to the new generic name Sirmuellera . In the process he published the name Sirmuellera attenuata , which is now considered a nomenclatural synonym of B. attenuata . Common names include slender banksia , candle banksia and candlestick banksia . <unk> ( alternately spelled <unk> ) is an aboriginal name from the Melville region of Perth . 
 The relationships of Banksia attenuata within the genus are unclear . When Carl Meissner published his infrageneric arrangement of Banksia in 1856 , he placed B. attenuata in section Eubanksia because its inflorescence is a spike rather than a domed head , and in series Salicinae , a large series that is now considered quite heterogeneous . This series was discarded in the 1870 arrangement of George Bentham ; instead , B. attenuata was placed in section Cyrtostylis , a group of species which did not fit easily into one of the other sections . 
 In 1981 , Alex George published a revised arrangement that placed B. attenuata in the subgenus Banksia because of its flower spike , section Banksia because its styles are straight rather than hooked , and the series Cyrtostylis , a large and rather heterogenous series of twelve species . He conceded its large emarginate cotyledons ( having a notch in their apex ) were quite different from other members , and that it had similarities in flower architecture to another anomalous member B. elegans . He felt B. attenuata to have affinities to B. lindleyana and B. media . 
 George 's arrangement remained current until 1996 , when Kevin Thiele and Pauline Ladiges published an arrangement informed by a cladistic analysis of morphological characteristics . They calculated B. attenuata to lie at the base of a large B. attenuata – <unk> clade , but conceded further work was needed before its relationships could be determined , and left it as incertae sedis ( i.e. Its exact placement is unclear . ) . Questioning the emphasis on cladistics in Thiele and Ladiges ' arrangement , George published a slightly modified version of his 1981 arrangement in his 1999 treatment of Banksia for the Flora of Australia series of monographs . To date , this remains the most recent comprehensive arrangement . The placement of B. attenuata in George 's 1999 arrangement may be summarised as follows : 
 Banksia 
 B. subg . Banksia 
 B. sect . Banksia 
 B. ser . Cyrtostylis 
 B. media 
 B. praemorsa 
 B. epica 
 B. pilostylis 
 B. attenuata 
 B. ashbyi 
 B. <unk> 
 B. audax 
 B. lullfitzii 
 B. elderiana 
 B. laevigata 
 B. laevigata subsp. laevigata 
 B. laevigata subsp. <unk> 
 B. elegans 
 B. lindleyana 
 Since 1998 , American botanist Austin Mast and co @-@ authors have been publishing results of ongoing cladistic analyses of DNA sequence data for the subtribe Banksiinae , which then comprised genera Banksia and Dryandra . Their analyses suggest a phylogeny that differs greatly from George 's taxonomic arrangement . Banksia attenuata resolves as a basal member of and next closest relative , or ' sister ' , to a clade containing B. elegans and , within that , a monophyletic B. subg . Isostylis . An Eocene fossil cone named Banksia <unk> , around 50 million years old , resembles that of B. attenuata . 
 Early in 2007 , Mast and Thiele rearranged the genus Banksia by merging Dryandra into it , and published B. subg . Spathulatae for the taxa having spoon @-@ shaped cotyledons ; thus B. subg . Banksia was redefined as encompassing taxa lacking spoon @-@ shaped cotyledons . They foreshadowed publishing a full arrangement once DNA sampling of Dryandra was complete ; in the meantime , if Mast and Thiele 's nomenclatural changes are taken as an interim arrangement , then B. attenuata is placed in B. subg . Banksia . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The most widely distributed of all western banksias , Banksia attenuata occurs across a broad swathe of southwest of Western Australia , from Kalbarri National Park and the Murchison River ( with an outlying population in <unk> National Park ) southwards right to the southwestern corner of the state at Augusta and Cape Leeuwin , and then eastwards across the south to the western edge of Fitzgerald River National Park . Along the eastern border northwards it is found at Lake Grace , Lake Magenta north of Jerramungup , and the Wongan Hills . It is restricted to various sandy soils , including white , yellow or brown sands , and sand over either laterite or limestone . It forms an important component of open Eucalyptus woodland as a dominant or understory tree or tall shrub . To the north , it is a shrubby component of shrubland . It does not grow on heavy ( clay @-@ based ) soils , and is hence only found in sandy pockets . Within open woodland , it is found alongside B. menziesii , B. ilicifolia , B. prionotes , Allocasuarina fraseriana , Eucalyptus marginata , or E. gomphocephala . The annual rainfall within its distribution varies from 300 to 900 mm ( 12 to 35 in ) . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Like many plants in south @-@ west Western Australia , B. attenuata is adapted to an environment in which bushfire events are relatively frequent . Most Banksia species can be placed in one of two broad groups according to their response to fire : reseeders are killed by fire , but fire also triggers the release of their canopy seed bank , thus promoting recruitment of the next generation ; resprouters survive fire , resprouting from a lignotuber or , more rarely , epicormic buds protected by thick bark . Bearing epicormic buds and a lignotuber , B. attenuata is one of the latter group , with follicles that may open spontaneously or by fire . It is moderately serotinous , storing only one tenth the number of seeds in its seed bank as the reseeding B. hookeriana which it coexists with on sand dunes in scrub at Eneabba north of Perth . Even then , many of its follicles do not release seed after a fire , but instead after successive autumn rains . An experiment simulating wet weather following a fire saw a series of Banksia attenuata cones with follicles subjected to twice weekly <unk> in water after being heated in a ring Bunsen flame to around 500 – 600 ° C ( 932 – 1 @,@ 112 ° F ) for two minutes . Cones that had been exposed to water for more weeks had more seed released from follicles over time ; around 40 % released at three weeks , increasing steadily to almost 90 % at ten weeks , compared with a series of controls ( which were kept dry ) of which fewer than 10 % of seed released . Thus , the seed remains in the follicles until successive rains result in seed dispersal in the wetter winter ( instead of dryer summer ) , increasing the chance of survival . After the follicle is split , the seed and separator are exposed to the elements . The wings of the woody separator are hygroscopic , and move together when wet , and spread and curl apart when dry . The seed is gradually drawn out by the movement with each wetting . Once released , seed germinates at temperatures between 15 and 20 ° C ( 59 and 68 ° F ) to optimise timing with autumn and winter rains and hence maximise chance of survival . Still , many seedlings die off in the hot and dry summer months . Seedling survival for the species is lower than for banksias which regenerate by seeding over time . Despite this , the longevity of mature plants allows for maintenance of population until favourable years enable better survival of young plants . As they mature , plants are less likely to perish , and estimated to live for 300 years or more . Analyzing the seed bank and longitudinal results over fifteen years on the Eneabba sandplain showed that B. attenuata would become more abundant over time with fire intervals averaging between 6 and 20 years , peaking with intervals around 10 to 12 years , compared with longer intervals for the reseeders B. hookeriana and B. prionotes . Placed against its rivals , B. attenuata would be dominant between 8 and 10 or 11 years , but at longer intervals is outcompeted by B. hookeriana . Variability in the timing between fires allows all three species to coexist . Exaggerated good and bad weather conditions favours B. attenuata over the reseeding species , which suffer more . 
 Despite having relatively heavy seed , seed from Banksia attenuata has a high rate of long distance dispersal . A genetic study of populations in Eneabba showed that over 5 % of plants had originated up to 2 @.@ 6 km ( 1 @.@ 6 mi ) away ( similar rates to Banksia hookeriana , the seed of which only weighs half as much ) . The mechanism for this is unclear , although Byron Lamont has proposed the short @-@ billed black cockatoo ( Calyptorhynchus latirostris ) as a vector ; the species seeks out Banksia attenuata cones after bushfire , possibly because the large seeds and greater chance of grubs in the cone make them more nutritious . Flowering has been recorded one to two years after a bushfire . 
 Many bird species were recorded by the national Banksia Atlas survey , including the New Holland honeyeater ( Phylidonyris novaehollandiae ) , brown honeyeater ( Lichmera indistincta ) , singing honeyeater ( Lichenostomus virescens ) , western spinebill ( Acanthorhynchus superciliosus ) , twenty @-@ eight parrot ( Barnardius zonarius semitorquatus ) and red @-@ tailed black cockatoo ( Calyptorhynchus banksii ) . Black cockatoos have been observed feeding upon the seed of B. attenuata , although it is not clear which species of black cockatoo was observed , the short @-@ billed or long @-@ billed black cockatoo ( Calyptorhynchus baudinii ) . At a site near Jandakot , short @-@ billed black cockatoos were observed selecting immature infructescences which bore signs of infestation by the weevil <unk> <unk> , the larvae of which tunnel in banksia spikes and eat the seed . They extract the larvae and drop the cones . 
 A 1978 field study conducted around Albany found the honey possum ( Tarsipes rostratus ) was a major pollinator of Banksia attenuata , both feeding directly on the pollen and drinking the nectar . The flower structure is suited to passing pollen onto the possum as it feeds , unlike honeyeaters whose bills are too long for this to occur readily . Coupled with the flower spike 's musky odour , these findings suggest Banksia attenuata is highly adapted to be pollinated primarily by this mammal species . Furthermore , Petroc Sumner and colleagues have investigated the cone photoreceptor cells of honey possums and compared them with the colour changes of B. attenuata . They found that the possum is trichromatic ( like humans and possibly many marsupials ) and propose that its L ( long wavelength ) cones help it discern B. attenuata flower spikes , and the M ( or medium wavelength ) cones could help it distinguish ripe inflorescences with nectar from recently finished spikes ( a difficult task for human vision ) . There is some evidence for other mammals as pollinators ; B. attenuata @-@ like pollen was recovered from museum skins of <unk> ( <unk> spp . ) and pygmy possums ( Cercartetus spp . ) , and the sugar glider ( Petaurus breviceps ) visited flower spikes in captivity . 
 Seventeen species from several orders of slime molds ( myxomycetes ) have been isolated from the bark of Banksia attenuata . Over half ( nine ) were from the order Stemonitales , and Echinosteliales and <unk> were also common . The abundance of the first two orders may be due to the acidity of the bark . Another order , the <unk> , was unusually rare — other studies have demonstrated that the order is typically abundant on the bark of various species of tree around the world . 
 All banksias have developed proteoid or cluster roots in response to the nutrient @-@ poor conditions of Australian soils ( particularly lacking in phosphorus ) . These have been measured in Eneabba extending to a depth of 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) below the soil surface . The plant develops masses of fine lateral roots which form a mat @-@ like structure underneath the soil surface , and enable it to extract nutrients as efficiently possible out of the soil . A study of three co @-@ occurring species in Banksia woodland in southwestern Australia — Banksia menziesii , B. attenuata and B. ilicifolia — found that all three develop fresh roots in September after winter rainfall , and that the bacteria populations associated with the root systems of B. menziesii differ from the other two , and that they also change depending on the age of the roots . Another study on root architecture of Banksia hookeriana , B. menziesii and B. attenuata found the overall structure of all three to be similar , with proteoid mats more active and growing in wetter months ( winter @-@ spring ) . Plants send out several sinker roots which descend to reach the water table , and the original tap root may or may not have died off . Along with B. menziesii , B. attenuata is a facultative phreatophyte . The two species are less strictly tied to the water table and hence able to grow in a wider variety of places within Banksia woodland habitat around Perth than the co @-@ occurring B. ilicifolia and B. littoralis . A study at a rehabilitation site on a sand mine north of Perth found that the broadleaved species B. attenuata and B. hookeriana were harder to establish than the fine @-@ leaved B. leptophylla there , due to increased impedance of the disturbed soil . Analysis of native plant species at a remnant of banksia woodland in suburban Perth which had been invaded by two herbaceous weed species ( <unk> <unk> and Pelargonium <unk> ) found increased phosphorus levels in native foliage . Although B. attenuata leaves did not have increased phosphorus , they did have reduced levels of manganese — an element which is absorbed into the plant by its proteoid roots , the formation of which can be inhibited by raised levels of phosphorus . 
 In a 1985 study inoculating cultivated plants , Banksia attenuata showed moderate to high susceptibility to Phytophthora cinnamomi dieback ; and at least some field and cultivation evidence points to it being highly susceptible . P. cinnamomi spreads from plant to plant via lateral roots , advancing at a rate of around a metre a year . The symptoms of infection in Banksia attenuata include yellowing of the leaves in the tree crown , and lesions at the base of the trunk . The red healthy roots become discoloured brown . A study of Banksia attenuata woodland 400 km ( 250 mi ) southeast of Perth across 16 years and following a wave of P. cinnamomi infestation showed that B. attenuata populations still existed but were significantly reduced in diseased areas . Injecting a solution of phosphite into the trunks of affected B. attenuata trees at a disease front in Banksia woodland can delay morbidity from dieback for five years . Injecting and spraying phosphite also reduces the rate of spread of a dieback front for around five years . A bushfire did not influence this slowing . A 2003 study found that drenching the soil with 0 @.@ 50 mM benzoic acid significantly reduced the size of P. cinnamomi lesions . Research into dieback in Western Australia has identified a new species , P. <unk> , isolated from ailing eucalypts and B. attenuata in 2009 . 
 = = Cultivation and cultural use = = 
 The well @-@ displayed bright yellow spikes are an attractive feature , with shrubby dwarf forms more versatile <unk> . All forms of Banksia attenuata require good drainage , sandy soil and a sunny position to do well , with a pH between 5 @.@ 5 and 7 @.@ 0 . They are sensitive to dieback , and do not fare well in humid climates . Seeds do not require any treatment , and take 16 to 49 days to germinate . Seedlings are highly vulnerable to damping off . Plants take from four to six years to flower from seed . There has been little success with other methods of improving adaptability to humid climates such as grafting . -- > Flower spikes in late bud are used in the cut flower industry , primarily in Western Australia . 
 Aboriginal people , particularly the Nyoongar and <unk> , placed the flower spike in a paperbark @-@ lined hole filled with water to make a sweet drink . Both this species and B. aemula have been credited with the inspiration behind May Gibbs ' Big Bad Banksia Men ; this species was familiar to Gibbs in her childhood and likely gave her the initial inspiration , although the depictions resemble the latter species . Artist Marianne North produced a highly regarded painting of B. attenuata during her stay in Australia in 1880 – 81 . 
 = Murphy Pakiam = 
 Tan Sri Datuk Murphy Nicholas Xavier Pakiam ( born 6 December 1938 ) is the third metropolitan archbishop of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Kuala Lumpur , Malaysia . 
 Pakiam was born in Tapah , Perak and was ordained into the priesthood on 10 May 1964 . He was appointed metropolitan archbishop of Kuala Lumpur on 24 May 2003 , and was installed five days later . Pakiam is the former president of the Catholic Bishops ' Conference of Malaysia , Singapore and Brunei ; and the publisher of the Catholic weekly newspaper , The Herald . 
 In 2007 , Pakiam filed for a judicial review after The Herald was ordered to stop using the Arabic word " Allah " in its publication by the Malaysian government . In 2009 , the High Court overturned the government 's ban of the word . In 2010 , he accepted the public apology of Al @-@ Islam magazine , which had sent two reporters to a Catholic church the year before , where they desecrated the Eucharist . 
 = = Background = = 
 Pakiam was born in Tapah , Perak , on the feast day of the popular saint of children , St. Nicholas . Educated at the Sultan Yusuf School in Batu Gajah , he entered the minor seminary in 1955 and started his priestly formation at the College General in Penang three years later . Pakiam was ordained a priest on 10 May 1964 , and served as assistant priest at the Church of St. Louis , Taiping . The following year , he was posted to the Church of St. Francis Xavier in Penang and became the Parish Priest of the Church of Our Lady of Lourdes , <unk> , Ipoh from 1970 – 72 . 
 Pakiam completed his studies for a Masters in Moral Theology ( Ethics ) at the Lateran University in Rome in 1974 , and upon his return to Malaysia , became a lecturer at Penang 's College General . In 1978 , he was appointed Rector of the College General and served two terms . In 1989 , he received his Masters in Guidance and Counselling from the De La Salle University , Manila , Philippines . He then served as Parish Priest of the Church of the Nativity in Butterworth from 1989 – 95 . 
 He was appointed as the auxiliary bishop of Kuala Lumpur and titular bishop of <unk> on 1 April 1995 , and ordained titular bishop of <unk> , Epirus Nova , known as an Episcopal Ordination , on 4 October 1995 at the College General in Penang . 
 On 24 May 2003 , Pakiam succeeded Anthony Soter Fernandez , who resigned due to poor health , as metropolitan archbishop of Kuala Lumpur . His installation took place five days later , on 29 May 2003 . His principal consecrator was Archbishop Anthony Fernandez and principal co @-@ consecrators were Bishop James Chan Soon Cheong and Bishop Anthony <unk> . He was the president of the Catholic Bishops ' Conference of Malaysia , Singapore and Brunei . 
 On 13 December 2013 , the Pope accepted the resignation of Archbishop Pakiam upon his 75th birthday . In practice , the Bishop of Rome may decide to immediately accept the resignation letter , or keep the bishop in service until a successor is chosen . The Pope decided to accept Archbishop Pakiam 's resignation as soon as he received it even though his successor , Archbishop Julian Leow Beng Kim , was only appointed on 3 July 2014 . 
 = = Coat of arms = = 
 Hat & Tassels : Symbols of an Archbishop of the Roman Catholic <unk> on yellow background : Symbol of Jesus , the Light of the <unk> wavy lines : Symbol of the Holy Spirit , the river of Living <unk> & Host : The Sacraments of the <unk> : The Word of <unk> letter ' M ' : Mary , Mother of the Church , representing all the <unk> : Symbol of the Apostolic authority in the <unk> background : <unk> the new life obtained through the Mercy and Peace of God . 
 = = Allah judicial review = = 
 By virtue of his position as archbishop of Kuala Lumpur , Pakiam is the publisher of The Herald , a weekly Catholic newspaper . In 2007 , The Herald and Pakiam , as its publisher , filed for a judicial review after it was ordered to stop using the Arabic word " Allah " in its publication by the Malaysian Ministry of Home Affairs . Malaysia 's home minister has the power to impose prohibition as a condition under the Printing Presses and Publication Act of 1984 . In the case of The Herald , Home Minister Datuk Seri Syed Hamid Albar prohibited the usage of the word " Allah " on the grounds of national security and to avoid misunderstanding and confusion among Muslims . 
 On 31 December 2009 , the High Court overturned the government ban on the use of the word " Allah " by The Herald . Justice Lau Bee Lan quashed the Home Minister 's prohibition against The Herald to use the word " Allah " , declaring the order as " illegal , null and void " . She declared that under Article 3 ( 1 ) of the Federal Constitution , applicant Archbishop Tan Sri Pakiam had the constitutional right to use " Allah " in The Herald in the exercise of his right that religions other than Islam might be practised in peace and harmony in the country . 
 = = Al @-@ Islam magazine = = 
 In 2009 , two Muslim reporters from Al @-@ Islam , a small Malaysian magazine , participated in a Catholic Mass and received Holy Communion , which they then spat out and photographed . The resulting photo was then published in their May 2009 edition . The magazine , which is owned by Utusan Karya , part of the Utusan Malaysia Group , sent its reporters including one <unk> Ridwan Abdul Jalil , to two churches in the Klang Valley , as part of a special investigative report . The act of desecration occurred at St Anthony 's Church in Jalan Robertson , Kuala Lumpur . 
 Pakiam , the Catholic Lawyers Society , as well as numerous editorials in the media , criticised the Attorney @-@ General for its failure to take any action on the desecration . 
 Nine months later , in March 2010 , Al @-@ Islam published an apology to the Roman Catholic Church and Christians for the article . The public apology was posted on the website of its publisher . Pakiam accepted the apology and said that no further legal action would be taken against the magazine or its publishers . 
 = = Honours = = 
 In 2005 , the King of Malaysia , the Yang di @-@ Pertuan Agong Tuanku Syed Sirajuddin , made Pakiam a Member of the Order for Important Services or " Panglima Jasa Negara " ( <unk> ) , which carries the title " Datuk " . In 2008 , the Yang di @-@ Pertuan Agong Tuanku Mizan Zainal Abidin made him Commander of the Order of Loyalty to the Crown of Malaysia , or Panglima Setia Mahkota ( PSM ) , which allows the recipients to use the title " Tan Sri " . This title is the second most senior federal title in Malaysia , and there may only be up to a maximum of 250 living PSM holders at any time . 
 = Eleanor Norcross = 
 Eleanor Norcross , born Ella Augusta Norcross ( 1854 – 1923 ) , was an American painter who studied under William Merritt Chase and Alfred Stevens . She lived the majority of her adult life in Paris , France as an artist and collector and spent the summers in her hometown of Fitchburg , Massachusetts . Norcross painted Impressionist portraits and still lifes , and is better known for her paintings of genteel interiors . 
 Her father provided her a comfortable living , under the proviso that she would not sell her paintings . With a life mission to provide people from her hometown the ability to view great works of art , Norcross collected art , made copies of paintings of Old Masters , and systematically documented decorative arts from the 12th through the 19th century . Her funding and art collection were used to establish the Fitchburg Art Museum . 
 In 1924 , her works were shown posthumously in Paris at the Louvre and Salon d 'Automne , where Norcross was the first American to have had a retrospective . Her works were also shown the following year at the Museum of Fine Arts , Boston . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Ella Augusta Norcross was born in Fitchburg , Massachusetts , about 50 miles ( 80 km ) west of Boston , to Amasa Norcross and Susan Augusta Norcross . Her father was an attorney , Fitchburg 's first mayor , state senator , and United States representative . Her mother , Susan , had been a school teacher in the Fitchburg area and during the Civil War was a leader of the Ladies ' Soldiers Aid Society , which provided clothing , blankets , and other supplies to soldiers from Fitchburg and other locations in the state of Massachusetts . In 1863 , her three @-@ year @-@ old brother Nelson died of scarlet fever , and when she was 14 , her mother died of consumption . Norcross and her father , the remaining household members , had a close relationship . 
 Norcross was afforded a privileged education that was not available to many young ladies of her generation . At 16 years of age , she graduated from Fitchburg High School , and , beginning in 1870 , she attended Wheaton Female Seminary , now Wheaton College . When she was 16 and 17 years old she wrote essays for <unk> , the school 's literary journal . The nature of her essays provide insight into the woman she would become : one who would successfully operate in a male @-@ oriented society , had an interest in bettering the plight of others , and appreciated historical things . She graduated in 1872 . Frances Vose Emerson was a classmate at Wheaton , good friend from childhood , and ultimately a trustee for the Fitchburg Art Museum . 
 = = Education and early career = = 
 Norcross studied at Boston 's Massachusetts Normal Art School , now the Massachusetts College of Art and Design , to prepare to teach art . Living in Fitchburg , she commuted by train to the school in Boston . Norcross earned her teaching certificate by 1876 and taught drawing in the Fitchburg schools for a year . Norcross moved with her father to Washington when he was elected to the House of Representatives . A " witty and lively conversationalist " , she acted as his hostess in the capital and beginning in 1878 , Norcross studied art in New York City under William Merritt Chase at the Art Students League of New York for up to five years . In June 1883 , she sailed for Paris to study with Alfred Stevens at Chase 's suggestion . She and a few other women studied with the Belgian artist during the winters of 1883 and 1884 . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Father 's influence = = = 
 Her father provided financial support that allowed Norcross to live comfortably . She exhibited her works in salons , according to the agreement with her father that she would not sell any of them ; he believed that women should give their works away and not enter into the male @-@ oriented business world . Any paintings that she wanted to give away , Mr. Norcross offered to have " handsomely framed " . 
 She lived in Paris for 40 years , and traveled throughout Europe . Her father lived with her during the winters after his retirement and until 1898 , when he died . Joined by his daughter , Amasa Norcross spent his summers in Fitchburg . 
 = = = Style and paintings = = = 
 Norcross painted portraits and still lifes , and she made copies of Old Masters . Her portraits and later interiors were executed with " delicate brush strokes " . She had an adept sense of color and the ability to portray reflections and textures , like metal 's gleam , satin 's sheen , and velvet 's texture . The compositions of her interiors are positioned in a way that leads the viewer to consider what might be through a door or around a corner , as in Carpeaux Sevres . 
 Her painting , Woman in a Garden , reflects influences of Chase , Monet and French Impressionism combined with the skill to draw with a paintbrush learned from Alfred Stevens . Reminiscent of Chase 's en plein air paintings , the dark background contrasts with the enigmatic , illuminated woman . My Studio ( 1891 ) — which depicts her father in an room with " elaborately patterned textiles " , antique and oriental furnishings , and flowers — is " the most impressive " of her works at the Fitchburg Art Museum . It was also her image of an " ideal home " . Of it , Ann H. Murray writes : 
 ... the painting itself is reminiscent of Chase in the informality and candidness that pervade the composition . The vacant chair , the mirror reflecting spaces not directly perceivable , and the abundance of rectangular units that impose a geographic organization on the wall — all these features occur also in Chase 's paintings , as well as in those of Degas and Cassatt who were , along with Monet , Renoir and Rodin , among her personal acquaintances . 
 She exhibited from 1887 until her death in Champ de Mars ' Société Nationale des Beaux @-@ Arts , which was made possible through her close friendship with Puvis de Chavannes . Her works were also shown in Boston , Chicago , and New York City . Norcross shared a studio with Alix d <unk> , whose paintings , influenced by Puvis , were of pastoral and contemporary life . 
 Norcross began to collect historical European artwork , particularly to be shown in public places in or near her hometown . After 1905 , she made copies of paintings by great artists , like Hals , Velázquez , and Botticelli . At roughly the same time , she began making paintings of French decorative art from 12th century Gothic art through the 19th century that she saw in galleries , including interior scenes of the Louvre . Norcross 's interiors provided insight into European decorative arts : 
 Her gift was for mellow , loving , quiet observation of cozy spaces that close out the rest of the world . She wasn 't merely recording decor , though . Her surfaces are loose and brushy , clearly influenced by Impressionism . 
 The 1914 Musée des Arts Décoratifs ( in the Louvre ) was to have exhibited her works , but the show was cancelled due to the commencement of World War I. She was known for being welcoming to art students from the United States and lived in the Rue de <unk> the final 12 years of her life . 
 = = = Collection = = = 
 She began purchasing art objects with the intention of sending them to America , so that people that were not afforded the luxury of traveling to Europe could view good works of art . Norcross collected furniture , textiles , porcelains , and other objects during visits to quiet French villages . 
 Works from her collection were given to Wheaton College in 1922 during her 50th @-@ year reunion , including an oil sketch by Alix d <unk> and a seascape by Alfred Stevens . She loaned her paintings to the Worcester Art Museum , and the Fitchburg Public Library was a beneficiary of photographs , prints , engravings , textiles , dishes , and furniture . She was involved in the placement of art at the library so that visitors to every department would have the opportunity to view the works of art , including European prints and rare engravings that span several centuries . 
 = = Museum = = 
 To implement her plan to establish a cultural center in Fitchburg , Norcross shipped works of art from her collection to her hometown and left $ 10 @,@ 000 or $ 100 @,@ 000 in her will , with the provision that the town raise an equal amount to provide a healthy endowment , otherwise the monies would go to Wheaton Seminary . 
 [ Norcross ] was an artist , collector , and philanthropist who sought to inspire , educate , and improve society through cultural enrichment in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries . 
 Friends Frances Vose Emerson and Providence art teacher Sophia Lord Pitman were identified in the will as trustees for the museum . An old brick stable was purchased in 1924 and was remodeled by Howe , Manning & <unk> , Inc . , a Boston firm of women architects , into a French Provincial building . In 1929 , the Fitchburg Art Center opened , it was later renamed Fitchburg Art Museum . Most of the collection and the building were destroyed in a fire in 1934 . The museum now has 20 @,@ 000 square feet of exhibition space over four buildings and works of art from the pre @-@ Columbian era to the 20th century . The works of art — which include paintings , prints , illustrated books , drawings and photographs — originated in Europe , the Americas , Asia , and Africa . The Fitchburg Art Museum has a collection of Norcross 's work , along with works of John Singer Sargent , William Merritt Chase , and other American and European artists . <unk> M. Marshall , author of Art Museums Plus , said , " [ S ] he stands up well against the more famous competition . " 
 = = Death = = 
 Norcross died of kidney failure on October 19 , 1923 . 
 = = Posthumous exhibitions = = 
 Shows of her paintings were held after her death . The memorial exhibition at the Louvre , opened by American ambassador Myron T. Herrick , included 53 of her paintings in 1924 . The Louvre retained two paintings Norcross made of the Musée des Arts Décoratifs 's interior . Sixteen of her works were exhibited at the Salon d 'Automne the same year ; Norcross was the first American to have had a retrospective of her work there . A show was also held at the Museum of Fine Arts , Boston in 1925 . 
 = Fanny Imlay = 
 Frances " Fanny " Imlay ( 14 May 1794 – 9 October 1816 ) , also known as Fanny Godwin and Frances Wollstonecraft , was the daughter , born out of wedlock , of the British feminist Mary Wollstonecraft and the American commercial speculator Gilbert Imlay . Fanny 's mother wrote about her frequently in her later works , and Percy Bysshe Shelley composed a poem on her death . Fanny grew up in the household of anarchist political philosopher William Godwin , and her half @-@ sister Mary later wrote Frankenstein and married Percy Bysshe Shelley , a leading Romantic poet . 
 Although Gilbert Imlay and Mary Wollstonecraft lived together happily for brief periods before and after the birth of Fanny , he left Wollstonecraft in France in the midst of the French Revolution . In an attempt to revive their relationship , Wollstonecraft travelled to Scandinavia on business for him , taking the one @-@ year @-@ old Fanny with her , but the affair never rekindled . After falling in love with and marrying the philosopher William Godwin , Wollstonecraft died soon after giving birth in 1797 , leaving the three @-@ year @-@ old Fanny in the hands of Godwin , along with the newborn Mary Wollstonecraft Godwin ( the future author of Frankenstein ) . 
 Four years later , Godwin remarried and his new wife , Mary Jane Clairmont , brought two children of her own into the marriage , most significantly — from Fanny Imlay and Mary Godwin 's perspective — Claire Clairmont . Wollstonecraft 's daughters resented the new Mrs Godwin and the attention she paid to her own daughter . The Godwin household became an increasingly uncomfortable place to live as tensions rose and debts mounted . The teenage Mary and Claire escaped by running off to the Continent with the Romantic poet Percy Bysshe Shelley in 1814 . Fanny , left behind , bore the brunt of her stepfather 's anger . She became increasingly isolated from her family and committed suicide in 1816 . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Birth = = = 
 Fanny Imlay was the daughter of the British feminist writer Mary Wollstonecraft and the American entrepreneur Gilbert Imlay . Both had moved to France during the French Revolution , Wollstonecraft to practise the principles laid out in her seminal work A Vindication of the Rights of Woman ( 1792 ) and Imlay to engage in speculative business ventures . The two met and fell in love . At one point during Wollstonecraft and Imlay 's relationship , the couple could meet only at a tollbooth between Paris and Neuilly , and it was there that their daughter was conceived ; Fanny was therefore , in Godwin 's words , a " barrier child " . Frances " Fanny " Imlay , Wollstonecraft 's first child , was born in Le Havre on 14 May 1794 , or , as the birth certificate stated , on the 25th day of <unk> in the Second Year of the Republic , and named after Fanny Blood , her mother 's closest friend . Although Imlay never married Wollstonecraft , he registered her as his wife at the American consulate to protect her once Britain and France went to war in February 1793 . Most people , including Wollstonecraft 's sisters , assumed they were married — and thus , by extension , that Fanny was legitimate — and she was registered as such in France . 
 = = = Infancy and early childhood = = = 
 Initially , the couple 's life together was idyllic . Wollstonecraft playfully wrote to one friend : " My little Girl begins to suck so manfully that her father reckons saucily on her writing the second part of the R [ <unk> ] ts of Woman " [ emphasis in original ] . Imlay soon tired of Wollstonecraft and domestic life and left her for long periods of time . Her letters to him are full of needy expostulations , explained by most critics as the expressions of a deeply depressed woman but by some as a result of her circumstances — alone with an infant in the middle of the French Revolution . 
 Wollstonecraft returned to London in April 1795 , seeking Imlay , but he rejected her ; the next month she attempted to commit suicide , but he saved her life ( it is unclear how ) . In a last attempt to win him back , she embarked upon a hazardous trip to Scandinavia from June to September 1795 , with only her one @-@ year @-@ old daughter and a maid , in order to conduct some business for him . Wollstonecraft 's journey was daunting not only because she was travelling to what some considered a nearly uncivilized region during a time of war , but also because she was travelling without a male escort . When she returned to England and realized that her relationship with Imlay was over , she attempted suicide a second time . She went out on a rainy night , walked around to soak her clothes , and then jumped into the River Thames , where a stranger rescued her . 
 Using her diaries and letters from her journey to Scandinavia , Wollstonecraft wrote a rumination on her travels and her relationship — Letters Written in Sweden , Norway , and Denmark ( 1796 ) — in which , among other things , she celebrated motherhood . Her maternal connection to her daughter prompted her to reflect on a woman 's place in the world : 
 You know that as a female I am particularly attached to her — I feel more than a mother 's fondness and anxiety , when I reflect on the dependent and oppressed state of her sex . I dread lest she should be forced to sacrifice her heart to her principles , or principles to her heart . With trembling hand I shall cultivate sensibility , and cherish delicacy of sentiment , lest , whilst I lend fresh blushes to the rose , I sharpen the thorns that will wound the breast I would fain guard — I dread to unfold her mind , lest it should render her unfit for the world she is to inhabit — Hapless woman ! what a fate is thine ! 
 Wollstonecraft lavished love and attention on her daughter . She began two books , drawn from her own experience , related to Fanny 's care : a parenting manual entitled " Letters on the Management of Infants " and a reading primer entitled " Lessons " . In one section of " Lessons " , she describes weaning : 
 When you were hungry , you began to cry , because you could not speak . You were seven months without teeth , always sucking . But after you got one , you began to gnaw a crust of bread . It was not long before another came pop . At ten months you had four pretty white teeth , and you used to bite me . Poor mamma ! Still I did not cry , because I am not a child , but you hurt me very much . So I said to papa , it is time the little girl should eat . She is not naughty , yet she hurts me . I have given her a crust of bread , and I must look for some other milk . 
 In 1797 , Wollstonecraft fell in love with and married the philosopher William Godwin ( she had become pregnant with his child ) . Godwin grew to love Fanny during his affair with Wollstonecraft ; he brought her back a mug from Josiah Wedgwood 's pottery factory with an " F " on it that delighted both mother and daughter . Wollstonecraft died in September of the same year , from complications giving birth to Mary Wollstonecraft Godwin , who survived . Three @-@ year @-@ old Fanny , who had been scarred from smallpox , was unofficially adopted by her stepfather and given the name of Godwin . Her copy of Wollstonecraft 's only completed children 's book , Original Stories from Real Life ( 1788 ) , has the initials " F. G. " written in large print in it . According to the dominant interpretation of Godwin 's diary , it was not until Fanny turned twelve that she was informed in an important conversation with Godwin that he was not her natural father . In the only biography of Fanny , Janet Todd disputes this reading , arguing instead that the conversation was about Fanny 's future . She finds it unlikely that Fanny would have been unaware of her origins in the open and liberal Godwin household . 
 After Wollstonecraft 's death , Godwin and Joseph Johnson , Wollstonecraft 's publisher and close friend , contacted Fanny 's father , but he was uninterested in raising his child . ( Neither Wollstonecraft nor her daughter ever saw Gilbert Imlay after 1796 . ) Wollstonecraft 's two sisters , Eliza Bishop and Everina Wollstonecraft , Fanny 's only two living female relatives , were anxious to care for her ; Godwin , disliking them , turned down their offer . Several times throughout Fanny 's childhood Wollstonecraft 's sisters asked Godwin to allow them to raise their niece and each time he refused . Godwin himself did not seem particularly ready for parenthood and he now had two small children to raise and no steady source of income . However , he was determined to care for them . During these early years of Fanny 's life , Joseph Johnson served as an " unofficial trustee " for her as he had occasionally for her mother . He even willed her £ 200 , but Godwin owed Johnson so much money upon his death in 1809 that Johnson 's heirs demanded Godwin pay the money back as part of his arrears . 
 = = = Childhood = = = 
 Although Godwin was fond of his children , he was , in many ways , ill @-@ equipped to care for them . As Todd explains , he was constantly annoyed by their noise , demanding silence while he worked . However , when he took a trip to Dublin to visit Wollstonecraft 's sisters , he missed the girls immensely and wrote to them frequently . 
 On 21 December 1801 , when Fanny was seven , Godwin married Mary Jane Clairmont , a neighbour with two children of her own : three @-@ year @-@ old Claire and six @-@ year @-@ old Charles . She had never been married and was looking , like Godwin , for financial stability . Although Clairmont was well @-@ educated and well @-@ travelled , most of Godwin 's friends despised her , finding her vulgar and dishonest . They were astonished that Godwin could replace Mary Wollstonecraft with her . Fanny and her half @-@ sister Mary disliked their stepmother and complained that she preferred her own children to them . On 28 March 1803 , baby William was born to the couple . 
 Although Godwin admired Wollstonecraft 's writings , he did not agree with her that women should receive the same education as men . Therefore , he occasionally read to Fanny and Mary from Sarah Trimmer 's Fabulous Histories ( 1786 ) and Anna Laetitia Barbauld 's Lessons for Children ( 1778 – 79 ) , but , according to Todd , he did not take great pains with their educations and disregarded the books Wollstonecraft had written for Fanny . William St Clair , in his biography of the Godwins and the Shelleys , argues that Godwin and Wollstonecraft spoke extensively about the education they wanted for their children and that Godwin 's writings in The Enquirer reflect these discussions . He contends that after Wollstonecraft 's death Godwin wrote to a former pupil to whom she had been close , now Lady Mountcashell , asking her advice on how to raise and educate his daughters . In her biography of Mary Shelley , Miranda Seymour agrees with St Clair , arguing that " everything we know about his daughter 's [ Mary 's and presumably Fanny 's ] early years suggests that she was being taught in a way of which her mother would have approved " , pointing out that she had a governess , a tutor , a French @-@ speaking stepmother , and a father who wrote children 's books whose drafts he read to his own first . It was the new Mrs Godwin who was primarily responsible for the education given to the girls , but she taught her own daughter more , including French . Fanny received no formal education after her stepfather 's marriage . Yet , the adult Imlay is described by C. Kegan Paul , one of Godwin 's earliest biographers , as " well educated , sprightly , clever , a good letter @-@ writer , and an excellent domestic manager " . Fanny excelled in drawing and was taught music . Despite Godwin 's atheism , all of the children were taken to an Anglican church . 
 The Godwins were constantly in debt , so Godwin returned to writing to support the family . He and his wife started a Juvenile Library for which he wrote children 's books . In 1807 , when Fanny was 13 , they moved from the Polygon , where Godwin had lived with Wollstonecraft , to 41 Skinner Street , near Clerkenwell , in the city 's bookselling district . This took the family away from the fresh country air and into the dirty , smelly , inner streets of London . Although initially successful , the business gradually failed . The Godwins also continued to borrow more money than they could afford from generous friends such as publisher Joseph Johnson and Godwin devotee Francis Place . 
 As Fanny Imlay grew up , her father increasingly relied on her to placate tradespeople who demanded bills be paid and to solicit money from men such as Place . According to Todd and Seymour , Imlay believed in Godwin 's theory that great thinkers and artists should be supported by patrons and she believed Godwin to be both a great novelist and a great philosopher . Throughout her life , she wrote letters asking Place and others for money to support Godwin 's " genius " and she helped run the household so that he could work . 
 = = = Teenage years = = = 
 Godwin , never one to mince words , wrote about the differences he perceived between his two daughters : 
 My own daughter [ Mary ] is considerably superior in capacity to the one her mother had before . Fanny , the eldest , is of a quiet , modest , unshowy disposition , somewhat given to indolence , which is her greatest fault , but sober , observing , peculiarly clear and distinct in the faculty of memory , and disposed to exercise her own thoughts and follow her own judgment . Mary , my daughter , is the reverse of her in many particulars . She is singularly bold , somewhat imperious , and active of mind . Her desire for knowledge is great , and her perseverance in everything she undertakes is almost invincible . My own daughter is , I believe , very pretty ; Fanny is by no means handsome , but in general prepossessing . 
 The intellectual world of the girls was widened by their exposure to the literary and political circles in which Godwin moved . For example , during former American vice @-@ president Aaron Burr 's self @-@ imposed exile from the United States after his acquittal on treason charges , he often spent time with the Godwins . He greatly admired the works of Wollstonecraft and had educated his daughter according to the precepts of A Vindication of the Rights of Woman . He was anxious to meet the daughters of the woman he revered and referred to Fanny , Mary , and Claire as " goddesses " . He spent most of his time talking with Imlay about political and educational topics . Burr was impressed by the Lancastrian teaching method and took Fanny to see a model school in 1811 . 
 = = = = Percy , Mary , and Claire = = = = 
 It was not Burr , but the Romantic poet and writer Percy Bysshe Shelley who had the greatest impact on Imlay and her sisters ' lives . Impressed by Godwin 's Political Justice , Shelley wrote to him and the two started corresponding . In 1812 , Shelley asked if Imlay , then 18 and the daughter of one of his heroes , Mary Wollstonecraft , could come live with him , his new wife , and her sister . Having never actually met Shelley and being sceptical of his motivations ( Shelley had eloped to marry his wife , Harriet ) , Godwin refused . When Shelley finally came to visit the Godwins , all three girls were enamoured of him , particularly Imlay . Both Shelley and Imlay were interested in discussing radical politics ; for example , Shelley liked to act as if class were irrelevant , but she argued that it was significant in daily affairs . 
 In 1814 , Shelley spent a considerable amount of time at the Godwins ' and he and Imlay may have fallen in love . Later , Claire Clairmont claimed that they had been . Imlay was sent to Wales in May of that year ; Todd speculates that Godwin was trying to separate her from Shelley while Seymour hints that Mrs Godwin was trying to improve her despondent mood . Meanwhile , the Godwin household became even more uncomfortable as Godwin sank further into debt and as relations between Mary and her stepmother became increasingly hostile . Mary Godwin consoled herself with Shelley and the two started a passionate love affair . When Shelley declared to Godwin that the two were in love , Godwin exploded in anger . However , he needed the money that Shelley , as an aristocrat , could and was willing to provide . Frustrated with the entire situation , Mary Godwin , Shelley , and Claire Clairmont ran off to Europe together on 28 June 1814 . Godwin hurriedly summoned Imlay home from Wales to help him handle the situation . Her stepmother wrote that Imlay 's " emotion was deep when she heard of the sad fate of the two girls ; she cannot get over it " . In the middle of this disaster , one of Godwin 's protégés killed himself , and young William Godwin ran away from home and was missing for two days . When news of the girls ' escapade became public , Godwin was pilloried in the press . Life in the Godwin household became increasingly strained . 
 When Mary Godwin , Claire Clairmont , and Shelley returned from the Continent in September 1814 , they took a house together in London , enraging Godwin still further . Imlay felt pulled between the two households : she felt loyal both to her sisters and to her father . Both despised her decision not to choose a side in the family drama . As Seymour explains , Imlay was in a difficult position : the Godwin household felt Shelley was a dangerous influence and the Shelley household ridiculed her fear of violating social conventions . Also , her aunts were considering her for a teaching position at this time , but were reluctant because of Godwin 's shocking Memoirs of the Author of A Vindication of the Rights of Woman ( 1798 ) . Seymour writes , the " few timid visits Fanny made to see Mary and [ Claire ] in London were acts of great courage ; she got little thanks for them " . Although instructed by Godwin not to speak to Shelley and her sisters , Imlay warned them of creditors who knew of Shelley 's return ( he also was in debt ) . Her attempts to persuade Clairmont to return to the Godwins ' convinced Shelley that she was of Godwin 's party and he began to distrust her . Imlay was also still responsible for soliciting money from Shelley in order to repay her father 's debts ; despite Shelley 's essential elopement with two of his daughters , Godwin agreed to accept £ 1 @,@ 200 from Shelley . When Mary Godwin gave birth to a daughter in February 1815 , she immediately sent for Imlay , particularly as both she and the infant were ill . Godwin chastised Imlay for disobeying his orders not to see her half @-@ sister and her misery increased . After the death of the child , Imlay paid more frequent visits to the couple . 
 Soon after , Clairmont became a lover of the Romantic poet Lord Byron , and Mary Godwin and Shelley had a second child on 24 January 1816 , who was named William after Godwin . In February , Imlay went to visit the Shelleys , who had settled in Bishopsgate . Godwin 's debts continued to mount , and while he demanded money from Shelley , Godwin still refused to see either him or his daughter . At this time , Charles Clairmont ( Imlay 's step @-@ brother ) , frustrated with the tension in the Godwin household , left for France and refused to help the family any further . At around the same time , Claire Clairmont , Mary Godwin , and Shelley left for the Continent , seeking Byron . Godwin was aghast . He relied on Shelley 's money , and the stain on his family 's reputation only increased when the public learned that the group had left to join the rakish Byron . 
 Amidst all of this family turmoil , Imlay still found time to ponder larger social issues . The utopian socialist Robert Owen came to visit Godwin in the summer of 1816 and he and Imlay discussed the plight of the working poor in Britain . She agreed with many of Owen 's proposals , but not all of them . She decided , in the end , that his utopian scheme was too " romantic " , because it depended heavily on the goodwill of the rich to sacrifice their wealth . That same summer , George Blood — the brother of Fanny Imlay 's namesake — came to meet her for the first time and told her stories of her mother . After this meeting she wrote to Mary Godwin and Shelley : " I have determined never to live to be a disgrace to such a mother ... I have found that if I will endeavour to overcome my faults I shall find being 's [ sic ] to love and esteem me " [ emphasis in original ] . 
 Before Mary Godwin , Clairmont , and Shelley had left for the Continent , Imlay and Mary had had a major argument and no chance to come to a reconciliation . Imlay attempted in her letters to Mary to smooth over the relationship , but her sense of loneliness and isolation in London was palpable . She wrote to Mary of " the dreadful state of mind I generally labour under & which I in vain endeavour to get rid of " . Many scholars attribute Imlay 's increasing unhappiness to Mrs Godwin 's hostility towards her . Kegan , and others , contend that Imlay was subject to the same " extreme depression to which her mother had been subject , and which marked other members of the Wollstonecraft family " . Wandering amongst the mountains of Switzerland , frustrated with her relationship with Shelley , and engrossed by the writing of Frankenstein , her sister was unsympathetic . 
 The group returned from the Continent , with a pregnant Clairmont , and settled in Bath ( to protect her reputation , they attempted to hide the pregnancy ) . Imlay saw Shelley twice in September 1816 ; according to Todd 's interpretation of Fanny 's letters , Fanny had earlier tried to solicit an invitation to join the group in Europe and she repeated these appeals when she saw Shelley in London . Todd believes that Imlay begged to be allowed to stay with them because life in Godwin 's house was unbearable , with the constant financial worries and Mrs Godwin 's insistent haranguing , and that Shelley refused , concerned with anyone learning about Clairmont 's condition , most of all someone he believed might inform Godwin ( Shelley was being sued by his wife and was worried about his own reputation ) . After Shelley left , Todd explains that Imlay wrote to Mary " to make clear again her longing to be rescued " . 
 = = Death = = 
 = = = Theories = = = 
 In early October 1816 , Imlay left Godwin 's house in London and committed suicide on 9 October by taking an overdose of laudanum at an inn in Swansea , Wales ; she was 22 . The details surrounding her death and her motivations are disputed . Most of the letters regarding the incident were destroyed or are missing . In his 1965 article " Fanny Godwin 's Suicide Re @-@ examined " , B. R. Pollin lays out the major theories that had been put forward regarding her suicide and which continue to be used today : 
 Imlay had just learned of her illegitimate birth . 
 Mrs Godwin became more cruel to Imlay after Mary Godwin and Claire Clairmont ran off with Percy Shelley . 
 Imlay had been refused a position at her aunts ' school in Ireland . 
 Imlay was depressive , and her condition was aggravated by the state of the Godwin household . 
 Imlay was in love with Percy Shelley and distraught that Mary and he had fallen in love . 
 Pollin dismisses the first of these , as have most later biographers , arguing that Imlay had access to her mother 's writings and Godwin 's Memoirs of the Author of A Vindication of the Rights of Woman which openly discuss the circumstances of her birth . Imlay herself even makes this distinction in letters to her half @-@ sister Mary Godwin . 
 Pollin is also sceptical of the second explanation , pointing to Imlay 's letter to Mary of 3 October 1816 in which she defended her step @-@ mother : " Mrs. Godwin would never do either of you a deliberate injury . Mamma and I are not great friends , but always alive to her virtues , I am anxious to defend her from a charge so foreign to her character . " 
 Pollin finds no evidence that Imlay had been refused a position at her aunts ' school , only that such a scheme may have been " in contemplation " , as Godwin later wrote , although Seymour grants this explanation some plausibility . St Clair claims that Imlay was on her way to join her maternal aunts in Ireland when she decided to commit suicide . He believes that it was to be a probationary visit , to see if she could be a teacher in their school . Godwin 's modern biographer , Richard Holmes , dismisses this story . 
 In his survey of the letters of the Godwins and the Shelleys , Pollin comes to the conclusion that Imlay was not depressive . She is frequently described as happy and looking toward the future and describes herself this way . The mentions of melancholia and sadness are specific and related to particular events and illness . Richard Holmes , in his biography of Percy Shelley , argues that " her agonizing and loveless suspension between the Godwin and Shelley households was clearly the root circumstance " of her suicide . Locke argues that " most probably because she could absorb no more of the miseries of Skinner Street , her father 's inability to pay his debts or write his books , her mother 's unending irritability and spitefulness " , all of which she blamed on herself , she committed suicide . 
 Pollin largely agrees with Todd , speculating that Imlay saw Percy Shelley in Bath and he " somehow failed her " , causing her to commit suicide . Seymour and others speculate that Shelley 's only failure was to live up to his financial promises to Godwin and it was this that helped push Imlay over the edge ; she was convinced , like her father , " that the worthy have an absolute right to be supported by those who have the worth to give " . Todd , on the other hand , agrees with Pollin and speculates that Imlay went to see Mary Godwin and Shelley . Todd argues that Imlay had affection for Shelley and felt that his home was her only haven . Relying on scraps of poetry that Shelley may have written after Imlay 's death , Todd concludes that Shelley saw her in Bath and rejected her pleas because he needed to protect Claire 's reputation as well as his own at this time . Todd also notes that Imlay had worn her mother 's stays , which were embroidered with the initials " M.W. " , and the nicest clothes she owned . She had adorned herself with a Swiss gold watch sent to her from Geneva by the Shelleys and a necklace , in order to make a good impression . After Shelley rejected her , Todd concludes , Imlay decided to commit suicide . 
 = = = Suicide and aftermath = = = 
 On the night of 9 October , Imlay checked into the Mackworth Arms Inn in Swansea and instructed the chambermaid not to disturb her . The same night Mary Godwin , staying in Bath with Shelley , received a letter Imlay had mailed earlier from Bristol . Her father in London also received a letter . The alarming nature of the letters prompted both Godwin and Shelley to set out for Bristol at once ( although they travelled separately ) . By the time they tracked her to Swansea on 11 October , they were too late . Imlay was found dead in her room on 10 October , having taken a fatal dose of laudanum , and it was only Shelley who stayed to deal with the situation . Imlay left behind an unaddressed note , describing herself as " unfortunate " , perhaps referring to Mary Wollstonecraft 's description of her as " my unfortunate girl " in the note she wrote on " Lessons " before she herself attempted suicide : 
 I have long determined that the best thing I could do was to put an end to the existence of a being whose birth was unfortunate , and whose life has only been a series of pain to those persons who have hurt their health in endeavouring to promote her welfare . Perhaps to hear of my death will give you pain , but you will soon have the blessing of forgetting that such a creature ever existed as 
 The note appears to have originally been signed , but the name was torn off or burned off so that her body could not be identified . When the announcement was printed in the local newspaper , The Cambrian , therefore , it did not refer to Imlay specifically . 
 At the inquest , Imlay was declared " dead " , rather than a suicide or an insanity victim , which saved her body from various indignities . Todd speculates that Shelley arranged for Imlay to be declared " dead " ( an appellation more common for the well @-@ to @-@ do ) and removed any identifying items , such as her name on the note . She also concludes that to protect the rest of the family , he refused to claim her body . No one else claimed Imlay 's body and it was probably buried in a pauper 's grave . In fact , Godwin wrote to Percy Shelley : 
 Do nothing to destroy the obscurity she so much desired , that now rests upon the event . It was , as I said , her last wish ... Think what is the situation of my wife & myself , now deprived of all our children but the youngest [ William ] ; & do not expose us to those idle questions , which to a mind in anguish is one of the severest trials . 
 We are at this moment in doubt whether during the first shock we shall not say she is gone to Ireland to her aunts , a thing that had been in contemplation ... What I have most of all in horror is the public papers ; & I thank you for your caution as it might act on this . 
 Because suicide was considered scandalous , disreputable , and sinful at the time , which might have damaged Godwin 's business , the family told various stories regarding Imlay 's death in order to cover up the truth , including that she had gone on vacation , that she had died of a cold in Wales , that she had died of an " inflammatory fever " , that she was living with her mother 's sisters , or , if forced to admit suicide , that Imlay killed herself because Shelley loved Mary Godwin and not her . Neither Percy nor Mary mention Imlay 's death in their surviving letters from this time . Claire Clairmont claimed in a letter to Byron that Percy became ill because of her death , but as Holmes notes , there is no other evidence for this assertion . Yet Locke writes that Shelley told Byron he felt " a far severer anguish " over Imlay 's suicide than over Harriet 's ( his wife 's ) suicide just two months later . 
 While there is no known image of Imlay , a few months after her death , Shelley penned the poem quoted at the beginning of this article . As Seymour writes , " [ p ] <unk> by Mary without comment , it has always been supposed to allude to his last meeting with her half @-@ sister . " 
 = = Family tree = = 
 = Chinese Indonesians = 
 Chinese Indonesians ( Indonesian : Orang Tionghoa @-@ Indonesia ; Chinese : trad <unk> , <unk> <unk> , pin <unk> <unk> ) , are Indonesians descended from various Chinese ethnic groups , particularly Han . 
 Chinese came to Indonesia as workers both directly and through Maritime Southeast Asia . Their population grew rapidly during the colonial period when workers were contracted from their home provinces in southern China . Under the Dutch ethnic classification policy , Chinese Indonesians were considered " foreign <unk> " ; as such , they struggled to enter the colonial and national sociopolitical scene , despite successes in their economic endeavors . 
 Evidence of discrimination against Chinese Indonesians can be found throughout the history of Indonesia , although government policies implemented since 1998 have attempted to redress this . Resentment of ethnic Chinese economic aptitude grew in the 1950s as native Indonesian merchants felt they could not remain competitive . In some cases , government action only propagated the stereotype that ethnic Chinese @-@ owned conglomerates were corrupt . Although the 1997 Asian financial crisis severely disrupted their business activities , reform of government policy and legislation removed a number of political and social restrictions on Chinese Indonesians . 
 Indonesia 's 2010 census reported more than 2 @.@ 8 million self @-@ identified ethnic Chinese : 1 @.@ 20 percent of the country 's population . However other source stated that there are about 10 to 12 million Chinese living in the country , mostly are half Chinese like Peranakan , Straits Chinese , etc. and other Indonesians who have Chinese descendant , making up 5 @-@ 6 % of Indonesia population . 
 The development of local Chinese society and culture is based upon three pillars : clan associations , ethnic media , and Chinese @-@ language schools . These flourished during the period of Chinese nationalism in the final years of China 's Qing Dynasty and through the Second Sino @-@ Japanese War ; however , differences in the object of nationalist sentiments brought about a split in the population . One group supported political reforms in mainland China , while others worked towards improved status in local politics . The New Order government ( 1967 – 1998 ) dismantled the pillars of ethnic Chinese identity in favor of assimilation policies as a solution to the " Chinese Problem " . Patterns of assimilation and ethnic interaction can be found in Indonesia 's literature , architecture , and cuisine . 
 The Chinese Indonesian population of Java accounts for nearly half of the group 's national population . Although they are generally more urbanized than Indonesia 's indigenous population , significant rural and agricultural communities exist throughout the country . Declining fertility rates have resulted in an upward shift in the population pyramid , as the median age increases . Emigration has contributed to a shrinking population , and communities have emerged in more industrialized nations in the second half of the 20th century . Some have participated in repatriation programs to the People 's Republic of China , while others emigrated to Western countries to escape anti @-@ Chinese sentiment . Among the overseas residents , their identities are noticeably more Indonesian than Chinese . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early interactions = = = 
 The first recorded movement of people from China into Maritime Southeast Asia was the arrival of Mongol forces under Kublai Khan that culminated in the invasion of Java in 1293 . The Mongols introduced Chinese technologies to the island , including shipbuilding and coinage . Their intervention hastened the decline of the classical kingdoms such as <unk> and precipitated the rise of the Majapahit empire . Some Chinese and Portuguese sources indicate that Chinese traders were the first to arrive on Ternate and Tidore in the Maluku Islands to buy cloves , but they were later driven out by Javanese traders as Majapahit expanded . 
 Chinese Muslim traders from the eastern coast of China arrived at the coastal towns of Indonesia and Malaysia in the early 15th century . They were led by the mariner Zheng He , who commanded several expeditions to southeastern Asia between 1405 and 1430 . In the book <unk> <unk> , his translator Ma Huan documented the activities of the Chinese Muslims in the archipelago and the legacy left by Zheng He and his men . These traders settled along the northern coast of Java , but there is no documentation of their settlements beyond the 16th century . The Chinese Muslims were likely to have been absorbed into the majority Muslim population . Between 1450 and 1520 , the Ming Dynasty 's interest in southeastern Asia reached a low point and trade , both legal and illegal , rarely reached the archipelago . The Portuguese made no mention of any resident Chinese minority population when they arrived in Indonesia in the early 16th century . Trade from the north was re @-@ established when China legalized private trade in 1567 through licensing 50 junks a year . Several years later silver began flowing into the region , from Japan , Mexico , and Europe , and trade flourished once again . Distinct Chinese colonies emerged in hundreds of ports throughout southeastern Asia , including the pepper port of Banten . 
 Chinese traders boycotted Portuguese Malacca after it fell to the Portuguese in the 1511 Capture of Malacca . The Chinese engaged in business with Malays and Javanese instead of the Portuguese . Some Chinese in Java assisted in Muslim attempts to reconquer the city using ships . The Javanese – Chinese participation in retaking Malacca was recorded in " The Malay Annals of Semarang and <unk> " . 
 = = = Colonial attitudes ( 1600 – 1900 ) = = = 
 By the time the Dutch arrived in the early 17th century , major Chinese settlements existed along the north coast of Java . Most were traders and merchants , but they also practiced agriculture in inland areas . The Dutch contracted many of these immigrants as skilled artisans in the construction of Batavia ( Jakarta ) on the northwestern coast of Java . A recently created harbor was selected as the new headquarters of the Dutch East India Company ( Vereenigde Oost @-@ Indische Compagnie , VOC ) in 1609 by Jan <unk> Coen . It grew into a major hub for trade with China and India . Batavia became home to the largest Chinese community in the archipelago and remains so in the 21st century . Coen and other early Governors @-@ General promoted the entry of Chinese immigrants to new settlements " for the benefit of those places and for the purpose of gathering spices like cloves , nutmeg , and mace " . The port 's Chinese population of 300 – 400 in 1619 had grown to at least 10 @,@ 000 by 1740 . The Dutch , however , introduced a racial classification system that separated residents of Chinese ancestry from those of other ancestry . 
 Most of those who settled in the archipelago had already severed their ties with the mainland and welcomed favorable treatment and protection under the Dutch . Some became " revenue farmers " , middlemen within the corporate structure of the VOC , tasked with collecting export – import duties and managing the harvest of natural resources ; although this was highly profitable , it earned the enmity of the pribumi population . Others worked as opium farmers . Following the 1740 Batavia massacre and ensuing war , in which the Chinese rebelled against the Dutch , the Dutch attempted to place a quota on the number of Chinese who could enter the Indies . Amoy was designated as the only immigration port to the archipelago , and ships were limited to a specified number of crew and passengers depending on size . This quota was adjusted at times to meet demand for overseas workers , such as in July 1802 when sugar mills near Batavia were in need of workers . 
 When the VOC was nationalized on 31 December 1799 , many freedoms the Chinese experienced under the corporation were eliminated by the Dutch government . Among them was the Chinese monopoly on the salt trade which had been granted by the VOC administration . An 1816 regulation introduced a requirement for the indigenous population and Chinese traveling within the territory to obtain a travel permit . Those who did not carry a permit faced arrest by security officers . The Governor @-@ General also introduced a resolution in 1825 which forbade " foreign Asians in Java such as Malays , Buginese and Chinese " from living within the same neighborhood as the native population . Following the costly Java War ( 1825 – 1830 ) the Dutch introduced a new agrarian and cultivation system that required farmers to " yield up a portion of their fields and cultivate crops suitable for the European market " . Compulsory cultivation restored the economy of the colony , but ended the system of revenue farms established under the VOC . 
 The Chinese were perceived as temporary residents and encountered difficulties in obtaining land rights . Europeans were prioritized in the choice of plantation areas , while colonial officials believed the remaining plots must be protected and preserved for the indigenous population . Short @-@ term and renewable leases of varying lengths were later introduced as a temporary measure , but many Chinese remained on these lands upon expiration of their contracts and became squatters . In the second half of the 19th century the colonial government began experimenting with the idea of an " Ethical Policy " to protect the indigenous population , casting the Chinese as the " foremost enemy of the state " . Under the new policy the administration increased restrictions on Chinese economic activities , which they believed exploited the native population . 
 In western Borneo the Chinese established their first major mining settlement in 1760 . <unk> Dutch settlers and the local Malay princes , they joined into a new republic known as Lanfang . By 1819 they came into conflict with the new Dutch government and were seen as " incompatible " with its objectives , yet indispensable for the development of the region . The Bangka – Belitung Islands also became examples of major settlements in rural areas . In 1851 28 Chinese were recorded on the islands and by 1915 the population had risen to nearly 40 @,@ 000 and fishing and tobacco industries had developed . <unk> brought into the region after the end of the 19th century were mostly hired from the Straits Settlements owing to recruiting obstacles that existed in China . 
 = = = Divided nationalism ( 1900 – 1949 ) = = = 
 The Chinese revolutionary figure Sun Yat @-@ sen visited southeast Asia in 1900 , and later that year the socio @-@ religious organization Tiong Hoa Hwe Koan ( <unk> <unk> ) , also known as the Chinese Association , was founded . Their goal was to urge ethnic Chinese in the Indies to support the revolutionary movement in China . In its effort to build Chinese @-@ speaking schools the association argued that the teaching of the English and Chinese languages should be prioritized over Dutch , to provide themselves with the means of taking , in the words of Phoa Keng Hek , " a two or three @-@ day voyage ( Java – Singapore ) into a wider world where they can move freely " and overcome restrictions of their activities . Several years later the Dutch authorities abandoned its segregation policies , abolished travel permits for the ethnic Chinese , and allowed them to freely move throughout the colony . The 1911 Xinhai Revolution and the 1912 founding of the Republic of China coincided with a growing Chinese @-@ nationalist movement within the Indies . 
 Although there was no recognizable nationalist movement among the indigenous population until 1908 , Dutch authorities feared that nationalist sentiments would spread with the growth of ethnically mixed associations , known as <unk> . In 1911 some Javanese members of the Kong Sing association in Surakarta broke away and clashed with the ethnic Chinese . This incident led to the creation of Sarekat Islam , the first organized popular nationalist movement in the Indies . Indigenous groups saw the Chinese nationalist sentiment as " haughty " , leading to mutual antagonism . The anti @-@ Chinese sentiment spread throughout Java in 1918 and led to mass violence orchestrated by members of Sarekat Islam on the ethnic Chinese in Kudus . Following this incident the left @-@ wing Chinese nationalist daily Sin Po called on both sides to work together to improve living conditions because it considered most ethnic Chinese , like most of the indigenous population , to be poor . 
 Sin Po first went into print in 1910 and began gaining momentum as the leading advocate of Chinese political nationalism in 1917 . The ethnic Chinese who followed its stream of thought refused any involvement with local institutions and would only participate in politics relating to mainland China . A second stream was later formed by wealthy ethnic Chinese who received an education at Dutch @-@ run schools . This Dutch @-@ oriented group wished for increased participation in local politics , Dutch education for the ethnic Chinese , and the furthering of ethnic Chinese economic standing within the colonial economy . <unk> by the Volksraad 's Chinese representatives , such as Hok <unk> Kan , Phoa Liong Gie and Loa Sek <unk> , this movement gained momentum and reached its peak with the Chung Hwa Congress of 1927 and the 1928 formation of the Chung Hwa Hui party , which elected Kan as its president . The editor @-@ in @-@ chief of the <unk> Panorama news magazine criticized Sin Po for <unk> the ethnic Chinese by pressuring them into a Chinese @-@ nationalist stance . 
 In 1932 pro @-@ Indonesian counterparts founded the Partai Tionghoa Indonesia to support absorption of the ethnic Chinese into the Javanese population and support the call for self @-@ government of Indonesia . Members of this group were primarily peranakan . This division resurfaced at the end of the period of Japanese occupation ( 1942 – 1945 ) . Under the occupation ethnic Chinese communities were attacked by Japanese forces , in part owing to suspicions that they contained sympathizers of the Kuomintang as a consequence of the Second Sino @-@ Japanese War . When the Dutch returned , following the end of World War II , the chaos caused by advancing forces and retreating revolutionaries also saw radical Muslim groups attack ethnic Chinese communities . 
 Although revolutionary leaders were sympathetic toward the ethnic Chinese , they were unable to stop the sporadic violence . Those who were affected fled from the rural areas to Dutch @-@ controlled cities , a move many Indonesians saw as proof of pro @-@ Dutch sentiments . There was evidence , however , that Chinese Indonesians were represented and participated in independence efforts . Four members of the Committee for the Investigation of the Preparation for Indonesian Independence ( Badan <unk> <unk> <unk> Kemerdekaan Indonesia , <unk> ) and one member on the Preparatory Committee for Indonesian Independence ( <unk> <unk> Kemerdekaan Indonesia , <unk> ) had Chinese names . 
 = = = Loyalty in question ( 1950 – 1966 ) = = = 
 The Netherlands relinquished its territorial claims in the archipelago ( with the exception of West Papua ) following the 1949 Round Table Conference , which is the same year that the Kuomintang retreated to Taiwan , allowing the Communist Party of China to take control of mainland China . Most Chinese Indonesians considered a communist China less attractive than a newly independent Indonesia , but in the archipelago their loyalties were questioned . Ethnic Chinese born in the Dutch East Indies whose parents were domiciled under Dutch administration were regarded as citizens of the new state according to the principle of jus soli , or " right of the soil " . However , Chinese law considered a person as a Chinese citizen according to the principle of jus sanguinis , or right of blood . This meant that all Indonesian citizens of Chinese descent were also claimed as citizens by the People 's Republic of China . After several attempts by both governments to resolve this issue , Indonesia and China signed a Dual Nationality Treaty on the sidelines of the 1955 Asian – African Conference in Bandung . One of its provisions was the ability to renounce Chinese citizenship for those who wished to solely remain Indonesian citizens . 
 As many as 390 @,@ 000 ethnic Chinese , two @-@ thirds of those with rightful claims to Indonesian citizenship renounced their Chinese status when the treaty came into effect in 1962 . On the other hand , an estimated 60 @,@ 000 ethnic Chinese students left for the People 's Republic of China in the 1950s and early 1960s . The first wave of students were almost entirely educated in Chinese @-@ language schools , but were not able to find opportunities for tertiary education in Indonesia . Seeking quality scientific professions , they entered China with high hopes for their future and that of the mainland . Subsequent migrations occurred in 1960 as part of a repatriation program and in 1965 – 1966 following a series of anti @-@ communist violence that also drew anger toward the ethnic Chinese . As many as 80 percent of the original students who entered the mainland eventually became refugees in Hong Kong . Under the programs of China 's Cultural Revolution ( 1966 – 1976 ) , the returned overseas Chinese were questioned for their loyalty because of their foreign connections . As most had grown up in an urban environment they were sent to the countryside , told to " rebel against their own class background " , and eventually lost contact with their families . They were attacked as " imperialists " , " capitalists " , " spies " , " half @-@ breeds " , and " foreign devils " . 
 In 1959 , following the introduction of soft @-@ authoritarian rule through Guided Democracy , the Indonesian government and military began placing restrictions on alien residence and trade . These regulations culminated in the enactment of Presidential Regulation 10 in November 1959 , banning retail services by non @-@ indigenous persons in rural areas . Ethnic Chinese , Arab , and Dutch businessmen were specifically targeted during its enforcement to provide a more favorable market for indigenous businesses . This move was met with protests from the Chinese government and some circles of Indonesian society . Javanese writer Pramoedya Ananta Toer later criticized the policies in his 1961 book <unk> di Indonesia . An integrationist movement , led by the Chinese @-@ Indonesian political party Baperki ( Badan <unk> <unk> Indonesia ) , began to gather interest in 1963 , including that of President Sukarno . However , a series of attacks on ethnic Chinese communities in West Java in May proved it to be short @-@ lived , despite the government 's condemnation of the violence . When Baperki was branded a communist organization in 1965 the ethnic Chinese were implicated by association ; this was exacerbated in the public mind by the People 's Republic of China 's communism . As many as 500 @,@ 000 people , the majority of them Javanese <unk> Muslims and Balinese Indonesians but including a minority of several thousand ethnic Chinese , were killed in the anti @-@ communist purge which followed the failed coup d 'état , suspected as being communist @-@ led , on 30 September 1965 . 
 = = = Managing the " Chinese Problem " ( 1967 – 1998 ) = = = 
 When the New Order government of General Suharto came into power in 1966 – 1967 , it introduced a political system based only on the Pancasila ( five principles ) ideology . To prevent the ideological battles that occurred during Sukarno 's presidency from resurfacing , Suharto 's " Pancasila democracy " sought a <unk> system in which discussions of forming a cohesive ethnic Chinese identity were no longer allowed . A government committee was formed in 1967 to examine various aspects of the " Chinese Problem " ( <unk> Cina ) and agreed that forced emigration of whole communities was not a solution : " The challenge was to take advantage of their economic aptitude whilst eliminating their perceived economic dominance . " The semi @-@ governmental Institute for the Promotion of National Unity ( Lembaga Pembina <unk> Bangsa , <unk> ) was formed to advise the government on facilitating assimilation of Chinese Indonesians . This process was done through highlighting the differences between the ethnic Chinese and the indigenous pribumi , rather than seeking similarities . Expressions of Chinese culture through language , religion , and traditional festivals were banned and the ethnic Chinese were pressured to adopt Indonesian @-@ sounding names . 
 During the 1970s and 1980s Suharto and his government brought in Chinese Indonesian businesses to participate in the economic development programs of the New Order , while keeping them highly vulnerable to strengthen the central authority and restrict political freedoms . Patron @-@ client relationships , mainly through the exchange of money for security , became an accepted norm among the ethnic Chinese as they maintained a social contract through which they could claim a sense of belonging in the country . A minority of the economic elite of Indonesian society , both those who were and were not ethnic Chinese , secured relationships with Suharto 's family members and members of the military for protection , while small business owners relied on local law enforcement officials . Stereotypes of the wealthy minority became accepted as generalized facts , but failed to acknowledge that said businessmen were few in number compared to the small traders and shop owners . In a 1989 interview conducted by scholar Adam Schwarz for his book A Nation in Waiting : Indonesia 's Search for Stability , an interviewee stated that , " to most Indonesians , the word ' Chinese ' is synonymous with corruption " . The economic role of the ethnic Chinese was contradictory because it did not translate to acceptance of their status in the greater society . They were politically weak and often faced social harassment . 
 Anti @-@ Chinese sentiment gathered intensity through the 1990s . President Suharto gathered the most powerful businessmen — mostly Chinese Indonesians — in a nationally televised 1990 meeting at his private ranch , calling on them to contribute 25 percent of their shares to cooperatives . Commentators described the spectacle as " good theatre " , as it only served to reinforce resentment and suspicion of the ethnic Chinese among the indigenous population . Major riots broke out in <unk> ( October 1996 ) , Tasikmalaya ( December 1996 ) , and <unk> ( January 1997 ) . 
 When Suharto entered his seventh term as president , following an uncontested election on 10 March 1998 , Indonesian students began a series of major demonstrations in protest of the New Order regime which continued for weeks and culminated in the shootings of four students by security forces at Trisakti University in May . The incident sparked major violence in several cities during 12 – 15 May . Property and businesses owned by Chinese Indonesians were targeted by mobs , and over 100 women were sexually assaulted ; this aspect of the riots , though generally accepted as true , has been denied by several Indonesian groups . In the absence of security forces , large groups of men , women , and children looted and burned the numerous shopping malls in major cities . In Jakarta and Surakarta over 1 @,@ 000 people — both Chinese and non @-@ Chinese — died inside shopping malls . Tens of thousands of ethnic Chinese fled the country following these events , and bankers estimated that US $ 20 billion of capital had left the country in 1997 – 1999 to overseas destinations such as Singapore , Hong Kong , and the United States . 
 = = = Social policy reforms ( 1999 – present ) = = = 
 Suharto unexpectedly resigned on 21 May 1998 , one week after he returned from a Group of 15 meeting in Cairo , which took place during the riots . The reform government formed by his successor <unk> Jusuf Habibie began a campaign to rebuild the confidence of Chinese Indonesians who had fled the country , particularly businessmen . Along with one of his envoys James Riady , son of financial magnate Mochtar Riady , Habibie appealed to Chinese Indonesians seeking refuge throughout East Asia , Australia , and North America to return and promised security from various government ministries as well as other political figures , such as Abdurrahman Wahid and <unk> Rais . Despite Habibie 's efforts he was met with skepticism because of remarks he made , as Vice President and as President , which suggested that the message was insincere . One special envoy described Chinese Indonesians as the key to restoring " badly needed " capital and economic activity , prioritizing businessmen as the target of their pleas . Others , including economist Kwik Kian Gie , saw the government 's efforts as perpetuating the myth of Chinese economic domination rather than affirming the ethnic Chinese identity . 
 Symbolic reforms to Chinese Indonesian rights under Habibie 's administration were made through two Presidential Instructions . The first abolished the use of the terms " pribumi " and " non @-@ pribumi " in official government documents and business . The second abolished the ban on the study of Mandarin Chinese and reaffirmed a 1996 instruction that abolished the use of the SBKRI to identify citizens of Chinese descent . Habibie established a task force to investigate the May 1998 violence , although his government later dismissed its findings . As an additional legal gesture Indonesia ratified the 1965 Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination on 25 May 1999 . In 2000 the newly elected President Wahid abolished the ban on public displays of Chinese culture and allowed Chinese traditions to be practised freely , without the need of a permit . Two years later President Megawati Sukarnoputri declared that the Chinese New Year ( <unk> ) would be marked as a national holiday from 2003 . In addition to Habibie 's directive on the term " pribumi " , the legislature passed a new citizenship law in 2006 defining the word <unk> ( " indigenous " ) in the Constitution as a natural born person , allowing Chinese Indonesians to be eligible to run for president . The law further stipulates that children of foreigners born in Indonesia are eligible to apply for Indonesian citizenship . 
 The post @-@ Suharto era saw the end of discriminatory policy against Chinese Indonesians . Since then , numbers of Chinese Indonesians began to took parts in the nation 's politics , government and administrative sector . Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono presidency ( 2004 @-@ 2014 ) saw the first female Chinese Indonesian minister Mari Elka Pangestu as Minister of Trade ( 2004 @-@ 2011 ) and Minister of Tourism and Creative Economy ( 2011 @-@ 2014 ) . Another notable Chinese Indonesian in Indonesian politics is Basuki <unk> <unk> or popularly known as <unk> . Former Regent of East Belitung ( 2005 @-@ 2006 ) and the first Chinese Indonesian Governor of Jakarta ( 2014 – present ) . 
 = = Origins = = 
 Chinese immigrants to the Indonesian archipelago almost entirely originated from ethnic Han groups of what are now the Fujian and Guangdong provinces in southern China , areas known for their regional diversity . Large numbers of Han Chinese , the largest ethnic group in the world , live in Southeast Asia . Nearly all Chinese Indonesians are either patrilineal descendants of these early immigrants , or new immigrants born in mainland China . 
 As the first group of Chinese people to settle in large numbers , the Hokkien of southern Fujian became the dominant immigrant group until the middle of the 19th century . Their maritime @-@ mercantile culture comes from their trade occupations whilst in Indonesia . Descendants of Hokkiens are the dominant group in eastern Indonesia , Central and East Java , and the western coast of Sumatra . Teochews , southern neighbors of the Hokkien , are found throughout the eastern coast of Sumatra , in the Riau Archipelago , and in western Borneo . They were preferred as plantation laborers in Sumatra , but have become traders in regions where the Hokkien are not well represented . 
 The Hakka , unlike the Hokkien and the Teochew , originate from the mountainous inland regions of Guangdong and do not have a maritime culture . Owing to the unproductive terrain of their home region , the Hakka emigrated out of economic necessity in several waves from 1850 to 1930 and were the poorest of the Chinese immigrant groups . Although they initially populated the mining centers of western Borneo and Bangka Island , Hakkas became attracted to the rapid growth of Batavia and West Java in the late 19th century . 
 Cantonese people , like the Hakka , were well known throughout Southeast Asia as mineworkers . Their migration in the 19th century was largely directed toward the tin mines of Bangka , off the east coast of Sumatra . Notable traditionally as skilled artisans , the Cantonese benefited from close contact with Europeans in Guangdong and Hong Kong by learning about machinery and industrial success . They migrated to Java about the same time as the Hakka , but for different reasons . In Indonesia 's cities they became artisans , machine workers , and owners of small businesses such as restaurants and hotel @-@ keeping services . The Cantonese are evenly dispersed throughout the archipelago , and number far less than the Hokkien or the Hakka . Consequently , their roles are of secondary importance in the Chinese communities . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 Indonesia 's 2000 census reported 2 @,@ 411 @,@ 503 citizens ( 1 @.@ 20 percent of the total population ) as ethnic Chinese . An additional 93 @,@ 717 ( 0 @.@ 05 percent ) ethnic Chinese living in Indonesia were reported as foreign citizens , mostly those of the People 's Republic of China and Republic of China , who may not be able to pay the cost of becoming an Indonesian citizen . Because the census employed the method of self @-@ identification , those who refused to identify themselves as ethnic Chinese , or had assumed the identity of other ethnic groups , were recorded as non @-@ Chinese . It is also likely that some did not identify themselves for fear of repercussions in the wake of anti @-@ Chinese violence in 1998 . According to 2010 population census , the self @-@ identified Chinese Indonesian population is 2 @,@ 832 @,@ 510 . There is a growth of 17 @.@ 5 % from 2000 census . 
 Past estimates on the exact number of Chinese Indonesians relied on the 1930 Dutch East Indies census , which collected direct information on ethnicity . This census reported 1 @.@ 23 million self @-@ identified ethnic Chinese living in the colony , representing 2 @.@ 03 percent of the total population , and was perceived to be an accurate account of the group 's population . Ethnic information would not be collected again until the 2000 census and so was deduced from other census data , such as language spoken and religious affiliation , during the intermediate years . In an early survey of the Chinese Indonesian minority , anthropologist G. William Skinner estimated that between 2 @.@ 3 million ( 2 @.@ 4 percent ) and 2 @.@ 6 million ( 2 @.@ 7 percent ) lived in Indonesia in 1961 . Former foreign minister Adam Malik provided a figure of 5 million in a report published in the Harian Indonesia daily in 1973 . Many media and academic sources subsequently estimated between 4 and 5 percent of the total population as ethnic Chinese regardless of the year . Estimates during the 2000s have placed the figure between 6 and 7 million , and the Overseas Compatriot Affairs Commission of the Republic of China estimated a population as high as 7 @.@ 67 million in 2006 . 
 According to 2010 population census , 22 @.@ 3 percent of Chinese Indonesians lived in the capital city of Jakarta , located on the island of Java . When the island 's other provinces — Banten , West Java , Central Java , Yogyakarta , and East Java — are included , this population accounted for around half ( 51 @.@ 8 percent ) of all Chinese Indonesians . This data doesn 't count the number of ethnic Chinese that has foreign citizenship . West Kalimantan have about 8 @.@ 15 percent of population is ethnic Chinese , followed by Bangka – Belitung Islands ( 8 @.@ 14 percent ) , Riau Islands ( 7 @.@ 66 percent ) , Jakarta ( 6 @.@ 58 percent ) , North Sumatra ( 2 @.@ 62 percent ) , Riau ( 1 @.@ 84 percent ) . In each of the remaining provinces , Chinese Indonesians account for 1 percent or less of the provincial population . Most Chinese Indonesians in North Sumatra lived in the provincial capital of Medan , but they constituted only a small percentage because of the relatively large population of the province . Bangka – Belitung , West Kalimantan , and Riau are grouped around the hub of ethnic Chinese economic activity in Singapore and , with the exception of Bangka – Belitung , these settlements existed long before Singapore 's founding in 1819 . 
 The ethnic Chinese population in Indonesia grew by an average of 4 @.@ 3 percent annually between 1920 and 1930 . It then slowed owing to the effects of the Great Depression and many areas experienced a net emigration . Falling growth rates were also attributed to a significant decrease in the number of Chinese immigrants admitted into Indonesia since the 1950s . The population is relatively old according to the 2000 census , having the lowest percentage of population under 14 years old nationwide and the second @-@ highest percentage of population over 65 . Their population pyramid had a narrow base with a rapid increase until the 15 – 19 age group , indicating a rapid decline in total fertility rates . This was evidenced by a decline in the absolute number of births since 1980 . In Jakarta and West Java the population peak occurred in the 20 – 24 age group , indicating that the decline in fertility rates began as early as 1975 . The upper portion of the pyramid exhibited a smooth decline with increasing population age . It is estimated that 60 @.@ 7 percent of the Chinese Indonesian population in 2000 constitute the generation which experienced political and social pressures under the New Order government . With an average life expectancy of 75 years , those who spent their formative years prior to this regime will completely disappear by 2032 . 
 = = = Emigrant communities = = = 
 New migrants began moving from Indonesia and other Southeast Asian countries to more industrialized regions around the world in the second half of the 20th century . Although these migrants possess a Chinese heritage , they often were not identified as such ; this trend has continued into the modern day . There have been several independent estimates made on the Chinese Indonesian population living in other countries . James Jupp 's The Australian People encyclopedia estimated that half of over 30 @,@ 000 Indonesians living in Australia in the late 1990s are ethnic Chinese , and they have since merged with other Chinese communities . In New Zealand , many migrants reside in the suburbs of Auckland after some 1 @,@ 500 sought asylum from the 1998 upheaval , of which two @-@ thirds were granted residency . 
 Australian scholar Charles Coppel believes Chinese Indonesian migrants also constitute a large majority of returned overseas Chinese living in Hong Kong . Though it is impossible to accurately count this number , news sources have provided estimates ranging from 100 @,@ 000 to 150 @,@ 000 . 
 Of the 57 @,@ 000 Indonesians living in the United States in 2000 , one @-@ third were estimated to be ethnic Chinese . Locally knowledgeable migrants in Southern California estimate that 60 percent of Indonesian Americans living in the area are of Chinese descent . Their families usually resided in Indonesia for several generations and may have intermarried with " pribumi " . In Canada , only a minority of the emigrant Chinese Indonesian community speak Chinese . Although families are interested in rediscovering their ethnic traditions , their Canadian @-@ born children are often reluctant to learn either Indonesian or Chinese . 
 = = Society = = 
 It may be stated as a general rule that if a given area of Indonesia was settled by Chinese in appreciable numbers prior to this [ 20th ] century , Chinese society there is in some degree dichotomous today . In one sector of the society , adults as well as children are Indonesia @-@ born , the orientation toward China is attenuated , and the influence of the individual culture is apparent . In the other sector of the society , the population consists of twentieth @-@ century immigrants and their immediate descendants , who are less acculturated and more strongly oriented toward China . The significance and pervasiveness of the social line between the two sectors varies from one part of Indonesia to another . 
 Scholars who study Chinese Indonesians often distinguish members of the group according to their racial and sociocultural background : the " totok " and the " peranakan " . The two terms were initially used to racially distinguish the pure @-@ blooded Chinese from those with mixed ancestry . A secondary meaning to the terms later arose that meant the " totok " were born in China , and anyone born in Indonesia was considered " peranakan " . Segmentation within " totok " communities occurs through division in speech groups , a pattern that has become less apparent since the turn of the 20th century . Among the indigenized " peranakan " segmentation occurs through social class , which is graded according to education and family standing rather than wealth . 
 = = = Gender and kinship = = = 
 Kinship structure in the " totok " community follows the patrilineal , <unk> , and patriarchal traditions of Chinese society , a practice which has lost emphasis in " peranakan " familial relationships . Instead , kinship patterns in indigenized families have incorporated elements of matrilocal , matrilineal , and matrifocal traditions found in Javanese society . Within this community , both sons and daughters can inherit the family fortune , including ancestral tablets and ashes . Political , social , and economic authority in " peranakan " families is more evenly distributed between the two genders than in " totok " families . Kin terms do not distinguish between maternal and paternal relatives , and polygyny is strongly frowned upon . Western influence in " peranakan " society is evidenced by the high proportion of childless couples . Those who did have children also had fewer of them than " totok " couples . 
 Despite their break from traditional kinship patterns , " peranakan " families are closer to some traditional Chinese values than the " totok " . Because the indigenized population have lost much of the connection to their ancestral homes in the coastal provinces of China , they are less affected by the 20th @-@ century modernization patterns that transformed the region . The " peranakan " have a stricter attitude toward divorce , though the separation rates among families in both segments are generally lower than other ethnic groups . Arranged marriages are more common in " peranakan " families , whose relationships tend to be more nepotistic . Secularization among the " totok " meant that their counterparts carry out ancestral rituals to a higher degree , and " peranakan " youth tend to be more religious . Through education provided by high @-@ quality Catholic and Protestant schools , these youth are much more likely to convert to Christianity . 
 In the 21st century the conceptual differences of " totok " and " peranakan " Chinese are slowly becoming outdated as some families show a mixture of characteristics from both cultures . Interracial marriage and cultural assimilation often prevent the formation a precise definition of Chinese Indonesians in line with any simple racial criterion . Use of a Chinese surname , in some form or circumstance , is generally a sign of cultural self @-@ identification as ethnic Chinese or alignment with a Chinese social system . 
 = = = Identity = = = 
 Ethnic Chinese in the 1930 Dutch East Indies census were categorized as foreign <unk> , which led to separate registration . Citizenship was conferred upon the ethnic Chinese through a 1946 citizenship act after Indonesia became independent , and it was further reaffirmed in 1949 and 1958 . However , they often encountered obstacles regarding the legality of their citizenship . Chinese Indonesians were required to produce an Indonesian Citizenship Certificate ( Surat <unk> <unk> Republik Indonesia , SBKRI ) when conducting business with government officials . Without the SBKRI they were not able to make passports and identity cards ( <unk> Tanda <unk> , <unk> ) ; register birth , death , and marriage certificates ; or register a business license . The requirement for its use was abolished in 1996 through a presidential instruction which was reaffirmed in 1999 , but media sources reported that local authorities were still demanding the SBKRI from Chinese Indonesians after the instructions went into effect . 
 Other terms used for identifying sectors of the community include peranakan and totok . The former , traditionally used to describe those born locally , is derived from the root Indonesian word anak ( " child " ) and thus means " child of the land " . The latter is derived from Javanese , meaning " new " or " pure " , and is used to describe the foreign born and new immigrants . A significant number of Chinese Indonesians also live in the People 's Republic of China and Hong Kong ; they are considered part of the population of " returned overseas Chinese " ( <unk> <unk> <unk> ) . To identify the varying sectors of Chinese Indonesian society , Tan contends they must be differentiated according to nationality into those who are citizens of the host country and those who are resident aliens , then further broken down according to their cultural orientation and social identification . In her doctoral dissertation , Aimee <unk> notes that such definitions , based on cultural affinity and not nation of origin , have gained currency since the early 1990s , although the old definition is occasionally used . 
 Sociologist <unk> G. Tan asserts that scholars studying ethnic Chinese emigrants often refer to the group as a " monolithic entity " : the overseas Chinese . Such treatment also persists in Indonesia ; a majority of the population referred to them as orang Cina or orang Tionghoa ( both meaning " Chinese people " , <unk> 人 ) , or <unk> ( <unk> ) . They were previously described in ethnographic literature as the Indonesian Chinese , but there has been a shift in terminology as the old description emphasizes the group 's Chinese origins , while the more recent one , its Indonesian integration . Aimee <unk> , citing prominent scholar Leo Suryadinata , believes the shift is " necessary to debunk the stereotype that they are an exclusive group " and also " promotes a sense of nationalism " among them . 
 = = = Economic aptitude = = = 
 Members of the " totok " community are more inclined to be entrepreneurs and adhere to the practice of guanxi , which is based on the idea that one 's existence is influenced by the connection to others , implying the importance of business connections . In the first decade following Indonesian independence their business standing strengthened after being limited to small businesses in the colonial period . By the 1950s virtually all retail stores in Indonesia were owned by ethnic Chinese entrepreneurs , whose businesses ranged from selling groceries to construction material . <unk> soon grew among indigenous merchants who felt unable to compete with ethnic Chinese businesses . Under pressure from indigenous merchants , the government enacted the <unk> program and Presidential Regulation 10 of 1959 , which imposed restrictions on ethnic Chinese importers and rural retailers . Ethnic Chinese businesses persisted , owing to their integration into larger networks throughout Southeast Asia , and their dominance continued despite continuous state and private efforts to encourage the growth of indigenous capital . Indonesian Chinese businesses are part of the larger bamboo network , a network of overseas Chinese businesses operating in the markets of Southeast Asia that share common family and cultural ties . 
 Government policies shifted dramatically after 1965 , becoming more favorable to economic expansion . In an effort to rehabilitate the economy , the government turned to those who possessed the capability to invest and expand corporate activity . Ethnic Chinese capitalists , called the <unk> , were supported by the military , which emerged as the dominant political force after 1965 . Indigenous businessmen once again demanded greater investment support from the government in the 1970s , but legislative efforts failed to reduce ethnic Chinese dominance . In a 1995 study published by the East Asia Analytical Unit of Australia 's Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade , approximately 73 percent of the market capitalization value of publicly listed companies ( excluding foreign and state @-@ owned companies ) were owned by Chinese Indonesians . Additionally , they owned 68 percent of the top 300 conglomerates and nine of the top ten private sector groups at the end of 1993 . This figure propagated the general belief that ethnic Chinese — then estimated at 3 percent of the population — controlled 70 percent of the economy . Although the accuracy of this figure was disputed , it was evident that a wealth disparity existed along ethnic boundaries . The image of an economically powerful ethnic Chinese community was further fostered by the government through its inability to dissociate itself from the patronage networks . The <unk> group dominated the ethnic Chinese business scene during the Suharto government , although other groups emerged after 1998 . 
 The top five conglomerates in Indonesia prior to the 1997 Asian financial crisis — the Salim Group , Astra International , the Sinar Mas Group , Gudang Garam , Sampoerna and the <unk> Group — were all owned by ethnic Chinese , with annual sales totaling <unk> trillion ( US $ 47 billion ) . When the crisis finally hit the country , the rupiah 's plunge severely disrupted corporate operations . Numerous conglomerates lost a majority of their assets and collapsed . Over the next several years , other conglomerates struggled to repay international and domestic debts . Reforms introduced following 1998 were meant to steer the economy away from oligarchic arrangements established under the New Order ; however , plans for reform proved too optimistic . When President B. J. Habibie announced in a 19 July 1998 interview with The Washington Post that Indonesia was not dependent on ethnic Chinese businessmen , the rupiah 's value plunged 5 percent . This unexpected reaction prompted immediate changes in policies , and Habibie soon began enticing conglomerates for their support in the reform plans . Most were initially fearful of democratization , but the process of social <unk> meant that the ethnic Chinese were regarded as equal members of society for the first time in the nation 's history . Increased regional autonomy allowed surviving conglomerates to explore new opportunities in the outer provinces , and economic reforms created a freer market . 
 = = = Political activity = = = 
 Between the 18th and early 20th centuries , ethnic Chinese communities were dominated by the " peranakan " presence . This period was followed by the growth of " totok " society . As part of a <unk> effort by the indigenized ethnic Chinese community , a new pan @-@ Chinese movement emerged with the goal of a unified Chinese political identity . The movement later split in the 1920s when " peranakan " elites resisted the leadership of the " totok " in the nationalist movement , and the two groups developed their own objectives . When it became apparent that unification was being achieved on " totok " terms , " peranakan " leaders chose to align their community with the Dutch , who had abandoned the segregation policies in 1908 . The two communities once again found common ground in opposition to the invading Japanese when the occupying forces treated all Chinese groups with contempt . 
 The issue of nationality , following independence , politicized the ethnic Chinese and led to the formation of Baperki in 1954 , as the first and largest Chinese Indonesian political party or mass organization . Baperki and its majority " peranakan " membership led the opposition against a draft law that would have restricted the number of ethnic Chinese who could gain Indonesian citizenship . This movement was met by the Islamic Masyumi Party in 1956 when it called for the implementation of affirmative action for indigenous businesses . During the 1955 legislative election , Baperki received 178 @,@ 887 votes and gained a seat on the People 's Representative Council ( DPR ) . Later that year , two Baperki candidates were also elected to the Constitutional Assembly . 
 Ethnic @-@ based political parties were banned under the government of President Suharto , leaving only the three indigenous @-@ dominated parties of Golkar , the United Development Party ( PPP ) , and the Indonesian Democratic Party ( PDI ) . The depoliticizing of Indonesian society confined ethnic Chinese activities to the economic sector . Chinese Indonesian critics of the regime were mostly " peranakan " and projected themselves as Indonesians , leaving the ethnic Chinese with no visible leaders . On the eve of the 1999 legislative election , after Suharto 's resignation , the news magazine Tempo conducted a survey of likely Chinese Indonesian voters on their political party of choice for the election . Although respondents were able to choose more than one party , 70 percent favored the Indonesian Democratic Party – Struggle ( PDI – P ) , whose image of a nationalist party was considered favorable toward the ethnic Chinese . The party also benefited from the presence of economist Kwik Kian Gie , who was well respected by both ethnic Chinese and non @-@ ethnic @-@ Chinese voters . 
 New ethnic political parties such as the Chinese Indonesian Reform Party ( Partai Reformasi Tionghoa Indonesia , <unk> ) and the Indonesian Bhinneka Tunggal Ika Party ( Partai Bhinneka Tunggal Ika Indonesia , PBI ) failed to garner much support in the 1999 election . Despite this result , the number of Chinese Indonesian candidates standing in national election increased from fewer than 50 in 1999 to almost 150 in 2004 . Of the 58 candidates of Chinese descent who ran for office as representatives from Jakarta in the 2009 legislative election , two won seats . 
 = = Culture = = 
 = = = Language = = = 
 Four major Chinese @-@ speech groups are represented in Indonesia : Hokkien , Mandarin , Hakka , and Cantonese . In addition to these , the Teochew speak a dialect that is mutually intelligible with the Hokkien . Distinctions between the two , however , are accentuated outside of their regions of origin . There were an estimated 2 million native speakers of various Chinese varieties in Indonesia in 1982 : 1 @,@ 100 @,@ 000 speakers of Southern Min varieties ( including Hokkien and Teochew dialect ) ; 640 @,@ 000 Hakka speakers ; 460 @,@ 000 Mandarin speakers ; 180 @,@ 000 Cantonese speakers ; and 20 @,@ 000 speakers of the Eastern Min Chinese ( including Fuzhou dialect ) . Additionally , an estimated 20 @,@ 000 spoke varieties of the Indonesian language . 
 The Chinese along the North @-@ Eastern coast of Sumatra , especially in North Sumatra , Riau , Jambi are predominantly Hokkien speakers , there are also two different variant of Hokkien speaking such as Medan Hokkien who based on the Zhangzhou dialect and Riau Hokkien who based Quanzhou dialect . There are also Hokkien speaker in Java , Sulawesi , Kalimantan . Meanwhile , the Hakka speaker is majority in Aceh , Bangka @-@ Belitung , and West Kalimantan north of Pontianak . Some Hakka speakers live in Java . The Cantonese speakers mainly living in big cities like Medan , Jakarta , Batam , Surabaya , and Pontianak . The Teochew speakers become majority in West Kalimantan especially in Central to Southern area such as Ketapang , <unk> , and Pontianak , as well as in Riau Islands surround Batam . There are some <unk> speakers in East Java , especially in Surabaya . 
 Many Indonesians , including the ethnic Chinese , believe in the existence of a dialect of Malay language , Chinese Malay , known locally as Melayu Tionghoa or Melayu Cina . The growth of " peranakan " literature in the second half of the 19th century gave rise to such a variant , popularized through silat ( martial arts ) stories translated from Chinese or written in Malay and Indonesian . However , scholars argue it is different from the mixture of spoken Javanese and Malay that is perceived to be " spoken exclusively by ethnic Chinese " . 
 [ E ] <unk> for a few loan words from Chinese , nothing about ' Chinese Malay ' is uniquely Chinese . The language was simply low , bazaar Malay , the common tongue of Java 's streets and markets , especially of its cities , spoken by all ethnic groups in the urban and multi @-@ ethnic environment . Because Chinese were a dominant element in the cities and markets , the language was associated with them , but government officials , Eurasians , migrant traders , or people from different language areas , all resorted to this form of Malay to communicate . 
 Academic literature discussing Chinese Malay commonly note that ethnic Chinese do not speak the same dialect of Malay throughout the archipelago . Furthermore , although the Dutch colonial government first introduced the Malay orthography in 1901 , Chinese newspapers did not follow this standard until after independence . Because of these factors , the ethnic Chinese play a " significant role " in the development of the modern Indonesian language as the largest group during the colonial period to communicate in a variety of Malay dialects . 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 Chinese cultural influences can be seen in local Chinese Malay literature , which dates back to the late 19th century . One of the earliest and most comprehensive works on this subject , Claudine Salmon 's 1981 book Literature in Malay by the Chinese of Indonesia : A Provisional Annotated Bibliography , lists over 3 @,@ 000 works . Samples of this literature were also published in a six @-@ volume collection titled Kesastraan Melayu Tionghoa dan Kebangsaan Indonesia ( " Chinese Malay Literature and the Indonesian Nation " ) . 
 Kho Ping Hoo or <unk> <unk> Kho Ping Hoo is a beloved Indonesian author of Chinese ethnicity . He is well known in Indonesia for his martial art fiction set in the background of China or Java . During his 30 years career , at least 120 stories has been published ( according to Leo Suryadinata ) . However , Forum magazine claimed at least Kho Ping Hoo had 400 stories with the background of China and 50 stories with the background of Java . 
 = = = Media = = = 
 All Chinese @-@ language publications were prohibited under the assimilation policy of the Suharto period , with the exception of the government @-@ controlled daily newspaper Harian Indonesia . The lifting of the Chinese @-@ language ban after 1998 prompted the older generation of Chinese Indonesians to promote its use to the younger generation ; according to Malaysian @-@ Chinese researcher of the Chinese diaspora , Chang @-@ Yau Hoon , they believed they would " be influenced by the virtues of Chinese culture and Confucian values " . One debate took place in the media in 2003 , discussing the Chinese " mu yu " ( <unk> , " mother tongue " ) and the Indonesian " guo yu " ( 國語 , " national language " ) . Nostalgia was a common theme in the Chinese @-@ language press in the period immediately following Suharto 's government . The rise of China 's political and economic standing at the turn of the 21st century became an impetus for their attempt to attract younger readers who seek to rediscover their cultural roots . 
 During the first three decades of the 20th century , ethnic Chinese owned most , if not all , movie theaters in cities throughout the Dutch East Indies . Films from China were being imported by the 1920s , and a film industry began to emerge in 1928 with the arrival of the three Wong brothers from Shanghai — their films would dominate the market through the 1930s . These earliest films almost exclusively focused on the ethnic Chinese community , although a few examined inter @-@ ethnic relations as a main theme . The later ban on the public use of Chinese language meant that imported films and television programs were required to be dubbed in English with subtitles in Indonesian . When martial arts serials began appearing on national television in 1988 , they were dubbed in Indonesian . One exception was the showing of films from Hong Kong in Chinese — limited to ethnic Chinese districts and their surroundings — because of an agreement between importers and the film censor board . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 There is little scholarly work devoted to the religious life of Chinese Indonesians . The 1977 French book Les <unk> de Jakarta : Temples et Vie Collective ( " The Chinese of Jakarta : Temples and Collective Life " ) is the only major study to assess ethnic Chinese religious life in Indonesia . The Ministry of Religious Affairs grants official status to six religions : Islam , Catholicism , Protestantism , Hinduism , Buddhism , and Confucianism . A 2006 civil registration law does not allow Indonesians to identify themselves as a member of any other religion on their identity cards . 
 According to the 2000 census data , almost 90 percent of Chinese Indonesians were Buddhist or Christian ( Catholic and Protestant ) . Conversion from the " Chinese religion " to Christianity often occurs in the younger generations , and it is not uncommon to find Christian children whose parents adhere to their traditional religion . The first wave of conversions occurred in the 1950s and 1960s , in response to intolerance against Chinese culture , and the number of ethnic Chinese Catholics during this period quadrupled . The second wave followed after the government withdrew Confucianism 's status as a recognized religion in the 1970s . Roderick Brazier , assistant country representative in Indonesia for the Asia Foundation , reported in 2006 that 70 percent of the ethnic Chinese population was Christian , and that there was active proselytism from international churches . <unk> Aris Ananta reported in 2008 that " anecdotal evidence suggests that more Buddhist Chinese have become Christians as they increased their standards of education " . 
 In a country where nearly 90 percent of the population are Muslims , the ethnic Chinese Muslims form a small minority of the ethnic Chinese population . The 2000 census counted 5 @.@ 41 percent of Chinese Indonesians were followers of Islam . Associations such as the Organization of Chinese Muslims of Indonesia ( Persatuan Islam Tionghoa Indonesia , <unk> ) had been in existence in the late 19th century . <unk> was re @-@ established in 1963 as a modern organization , but occasionally experienced periods of inactivity . Confucians were included in the category of other religions in 2000 and accounted for 3 @.@ 91 percent of the Chinese Indonesian population . The Supreme Council for Confucian Religion in Indonesia ( Majelis Tinggi Agama <unk> Indonesia , <unk> ) estimated that 95 percent of Confucians are ethnic Chinese ; most of the remaining 5 percent are ethnic Javanese converts . Although the government has restored Confucianism 's status as a recognized religion , many local authorities do not abide by it and have refused to allow ethnic Chinese from listing it as a religion on their identity cards . Local officials remained largely unaware that the civil registration law legally allowed citizens to leave the religion section on their identity cards blank . 
 = = = Architecture = = = 
 Various forms of Chinese architecture exist throughout Indonesia with marked differences between urban and rural areas and among the different islands . Architectural developments by the Chinese in Southeast Asia differ from those in mainland China . By blending local and European ( Dutch ) design patterns , numerous variations of fusion styles emerged . Chinese architecture in Indonesia has manifested in three forms : religious temples , study halls , and houses . Cities during the colonial period were divided into three racial districts : European , oriental ( Arabs , Chinese , and other Asians ) , and indigenous . There usually were no physical boundaries among the zones , except for rivers , walls , or roads in some cases . Such legal boundaries promoted high growths in urban density within each zone , especially in the Chinese quarters , often leading to poor environmental conditions . 
 Early settlers did not adhere to traditional architectural practices when constructing houses , but instead adapted to living conditions in Indonesia . Although the earliest houses are no longer standing , they were likely built from wood or bamboo with thatched roofs , resembling indigenous houses found throughout Sumatra , Borneo , and Java . More permanent constructions replaced these settlements in the 19th century . Segregation policies under the Dutch forbade the use of European architectural styles by non @-@ European ethnic groups . The ethnic Chinese and other foreign and indigenous groups lived according to their own cultures . Chinese houses along the north coast of Java were renovated to include Chinese ornamentation . As racial segregation eased at the turn of the 20th century , the ethnic Chinese who had lost their identity embraced European culture and began removing ethnic ornaments from their buildings . The policies implemented by the New Order government which prohibited the public display of Chinese culture have also accelerated the transition toward local and Western architecture . 
 = = = Cuisine = = = 
 Chinese culinary culture is particularly evident in Indonesian cuisine through the Hokkien , Hakka , and Cantonese loanwords used for various dishes . Words beginning with bak ( <unk> ) signify the presence of meat , e.g. <unk> ( " meat bun " ) ; words ending with cai ( <unk> ) signify vegetables , e.g. <unk> ( " Chinese white cabbage " ) and cap cai . The words mi or mie ( <unk> ) signify noodle as in mi goreng . 
 Most of these loanwords for food dishes and their ingredients are Hokkien in origin , and are used throughout the Indonesian language and vernacular speech of large cities . Because they have become an integral part of the local language , many Indonesians and ethnic Chinese do not recognize their Hokkien origins . Some popular Indonesian dishes such as nasi goreng , <unk> , and <unk> can trace their origin to Chinese influence . Some food and ingredients are part of the daily diet of both the indigenous and ethnic Chinese populations as side dishes to accompany rice , the staple food of most of the country . Among ethnic Chinese families , both peranakan and totok , pork is generally preferred as meat ; this is in contrast with traditional Indonesian cuisine , which in majority @-@ Muslim areas avoids the meat . The consumption of pork has , however , decreased in recent years owing to a recognition of its contribution to health hazards such as high cholesterol levels and heart disease . 
 In a 1997 restaurant listing published by the English @-@ language daily The Jakarta Post , which largely caters to expatriates and middle class Indonesians , at least 80 locations within the city can be considered Chinese out of the 10 @-@ page list . Additionally , major hotels generally operate one or two Chinese restaurants , and many more can be found in large shopping centers . <unk> Chinese restaurants in Jakarta , where the urban character of the ethnic Chinese is well established , can be found serving delicacies such as shark fin soup and bird 's nest soup . Food considered to have healing properties , including ingredients in traditional Chinese medicine , are in high demand . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 Citizens of the Republic of China ( Taiwan ) residing in Indonesia are served by two international schools : Jakarta Taipei School , which was the first Chinese @-@ language school in Indonesia since the Indonesian government ended its ban on the Chinese language , and the Surabaya Taipei International School ( <unk> ) . 
 = Skinner 's Sense of Snow = 
 " Skinner 's Sense of Snow " is the eighth episode of The Simpsons ' twelfth season . It first aired on the Fox network in the United States on December 17 , 2000 . In the episode , a snowstorm traps the students with principal Seymour Skinner and Groundskeeper Willie in Springfield Elementary . When Skinner uses his army skills to control the students , they overthrow him and take over the school . Meanwhile , Homer and Ned set out to rescue the children using Ned 's car . 
 " Skinner 's Sense of Snow " was written by Tim Long and directed by Lance Kramer . While the episode 's premise is based on an occurrence in Long 's childhood , the setpiece came from staff writer Matt Selman . Because the episode takes place in winter , Kramer found it difficult to animate . It features references to <unk> 's Sense of Snow , The Deer Hunter and Kristi Yamaguchi , among other things . In its original broadcast , the episode was seen by approximately 8 @.@ 8 million viewers , finishing in 33rd place in the ratings the week it aired . Following the home video release , the episode received mostly positive reviews from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 While the Simpsons attend a French Canadian circus called " Cirque de Purée " , a wild blizzard hits Springfield , turning it into a snowsquall overnight . However , Springfield Elementary School stays open regardless of the storm , even though every other local school closes . Only some students , including the classmates of Bart and Lisa , show up while Skinner and Willie are the only faculty members at the school that day . To pass the time , Skinner plays his professed favourite film , a very low @-@ budget , long @-@ running , 1938 holiday movie called " The Christmas That Almost Wasn 't , But Then Was " . When the kids try to leave school , however , snow has piled up , trapping the kids inside with Skinner and Groundskeeper Willie , much to their horror . 
 Skinner tries to keep the children under control , forcing them to stay together in the cafeteria and eat apples , relish and ( only if they behave well enough ) mayonnaise and will not let them go home until the snow melts . After Nelson tries to escape , Skinner unearths his U.S. Army memorabilia and is reminded of the days when he commanded respect from his troops . Skinner tries to command respect from the students , and briefly succeeds after threatening to hang them in their clothes on hooks on the wall if they rebel . Bart tries to tunnel his way out , but Skinner stops him , and after Willie refuses to destroy the tunnel , Skinner tries to , but is stuck in the resulting cave @-@ in . The students rebel and eventually tie Skinner up in a dodge ball bag . They then set about ' going nuts ' such as racing trolleys in the school hallway , even burning numerous books in the school 's library . 
 Meanwhile , Homer , with the help of Ned Flanders , sets out to rescue the children but crashes Flanders ' car into a fire hydrant , which sprays water that freezes the car in place . Homer 's repeated gunning of the accelerator causes carbon monoxide to flood the front of the car . Flanders and Homer get high from the fumes and wildly hallucinate . While the trapped children go wild with power , Skinner uses the school hamster , named Nibbles , to get a message to the outside world . Nibbles makes it to Ned and Homer , breaking the window and reviving them : they crash into a salt silo , melting the snow around the school and badly rusting the car but freeing the kids in the process . 
 Superintendent Chalmers appears and is ready to blame Skinner for the school 's current poor state when Bart takes the place , amending things with Skinner . As he and Lisa leave with Homer and Ned , Homer starts hallucinating again making him see Lisa as a camel and Bart as a dancing girl . Homer tries to kiss Bart , who tries his best to escape , causing the car to lose control and crash , and camel Lisa , then says " Merry Christmas from the Simpsons " ! 
 = = Production = = 
 " Skinner 's Sense of Snow " was written by Tim Long and directed by Lance Kramer . It was first broadcast on the Fox network in the United States on December 17 , 2000 . The idea for the episode came from Long . One winter during his childhood , Exeter , Ontario , where Long lived , was hit by a blizzard . Much to his dismay , Long found out that all schools except Exeter Public School , which he went to , got closed ( in the U.S. , schools are closed entirely at the County or District level , so the real @-@ life situation did not apply here , as it was shown Principal Skinner had the authority to open the school and even to have Otto work his usual bus route ) . Eventually , Long and his classmates were snowed in with the school 's staff . " It was hellish , but then became a sweet thing " , he said . " A couple of the dads braved the cold and brought us food on snowmobiles . So it was sweet . " Two years after Long pitched the premise , staff writer Matt Selman pitched the episodes setpiece , which revolves around the Simpsons ' visit to Cirque du Purée . " I pitched [ the setpiece ] to Tim [ Long ] when we were pitching around ideas " , Selman said in the episode 's DVD commentary . " And I said , ' What about a Cirque du Soleil parody ? ' " The staff then decided to combine the two stories , and production on " Skinner 's Sense of Snow " ensued . 
 In order to make a faithful rendition of the circus , director Kramer asked the animators to watch a showing of Cirque du Soleil in Santa Monica , but they declined the offer . Regardless , executive producer and former showrunner Mike Scully found that the animators did an " amazing " job animating the setpiece . Because the episode takes place in winter , the animators faced some challenges that they would not have with any other episode . " It just adds another element " , Kramer said about episodes taking place in winter , " People 's clothes have to get tugged in the wind if it 's windy . And you have to make sure the snow is consistent because [ ... ] It 's like a character . If it 's a big snowflake in one scene and then tiny ones where it 's snowing too hard in the next scene ... It 's not gonna work . " The scratches and bad quality of " The Christmas That Almost Wasn 't , But Then Was " were added in by the Post @-@ Production Department , led by Alex Duke . " Our Post @-@ Production Department never gets enough credit , " Scully said , " But they 'll take a film like [ ' The Christmas That Almost Wasn 't , But Then Was ' ] and make it all scratchy and make it look really old . They always do a great job . " The woman in " The Christmas That Almost Wasn 't , But Then Was " was portrayed by Tress MacNeille , while the clown in the Cirque du Purée was voiced by Hank Azaria . The song that plays when Homer and Ned are driving to the school is " Feel Like Makin ' Love " by English rock band Bad Company . Originally , the series ' staff wanted to use " Rock and Roll All Nite " by American rock band Kiss , but they failed to obtain the rights to use it . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Although the episode 's title is a reference to the Danish mystery novel <unk> 's Sense of Snow , there are no other allusions to the book in the episode . In the episode 's setpiece , the Simpsons visit a circus called Cirque du <unk> . The circus is a reference to the Canadian entertainment company Cirque du Soleil . In the film " The Christmas That Almost Wasn 't , But Then Was " , one of the hobgoblins has a similar singing voice as American singer Nelson Eddy . Having just found out that they are trapped in the school , Skinner says " I don 't care if you 're Kristi Yamaguchi - no one leaves the building " . According to Long , the line was written by either Dana Gould or George Meyer , both of whom are former staff writers . While wreaking havoc in the school , Milhouse can be seen doodling a mustache on a picture of Warren G. Harding , the 29th President of the United States . While ordering Skinner to humiliate himself , Bart says " Di , di , mau " . This is a reference to the 1978 drama film The Deer Hunter , in which the Vietcong says the line to their captives . One of the books that the children burn in the school 's library is the 1944 children 's novel Johnny Tremain by Esther Forbes . 
 = = Release = = 
 In its original American broadcast on December 17 , 2000 , " Skinner 's Sense of Snow " received an 8 @.@ 7 rating , according to Nielsen Media Research , translating to approximately 8 @.@ 8 million viewers . The episode finished in 33rd place in the ratings for the week of December 11 @-@ 17 , 2000 , tying with an episode of the ABC sitcom The Drew Carey Show . Since its broadcast , the episode has been released twice on home video . On November 2 , 2004 , it was released along with " Homer vs. Dignity " , " Dude , Where 's My Ranch ? " and " ' Tis the 15th Season " as part of a DVD set entitled The Simpsons - Christmas 2 . On August 18 , 2009 , the episode was again released as part of a DVD set called The Simpsons : The Complete Twelfth Season . Matt Groening , Mike Scully , Ian Maxtone @-@ Graham , Tim Long , Matt Selman , David Mirkin , Max Pross and Lance Kramer participated in the audio commentary for the episode . 
 Following its home video release , " Skinner 's Sense of Snow " received mostly positive reviews from critics . In his review of The Simpsons : The Complete Twelfth Season , DVD Verdict 's Mac McEntire wrote that , while he prefers " down @-@ to @-@ Earth " episodes , the more " outrageous " episodes like " Skinner 's Sense of Snow " are the ones that are " standouts " . He added that the episode " provides a lot of solid ' cool kids versus dorky adults ' comedy " , and that the setpiece was the best part of the episode . Matt Haigh of Den of Geek described the episode as " gold " , and considers it to be one of the season 's best episodes . The staff of The Journal , while reviewing The Simpsons - Christmas 2 DVD set , described the episode as " memorable " , and John McMurtrie of the San Francisco Chronicle cited it as " great " . Elizabeth Skipper , another reviewer for DVD Verdict , wrote that most episodes that center around Skinner are " a sure thing " , and that " Skinner 's Sense of Snow " is no exception . Both Aaron Beierle and Jason Bailey of DVD Talk argued that " Skinner 's Sense of Snow " is one of the best episodes of the season . On the other hand , giving the episode a mixed review , Colin Jacobsson of DVD Movie Guide described the episode as " mediocre " . Although he found the children 's revolt against Skinner amusing , he argued that the premise was not used to its full potential . He concluded his review by calling it " a fairly average program " . 
 = New York State Route 252 = 
 New York State Route 252 ( NY 252 ) is an east – west state highway south of Rochester in Monroe County , New York , in the United States . The western terminus of the route is at an intersection with NY 33A in Chili and the eastern terminus is at a junction with NY 64 and NY 96 in the village of Pittsford . NY 252 passes through the center of the town of Henrietta 's commercial district , where it intersects NY 15 . The route passes through three distinct areas : a lightly populated , rural area of Chili west of the Genesee River , the heavily developed commercial district centered on NY 252 's intersections with NY 15 and NY 15A , and a mostly residential area of the town of Pittsford . 
 When NY 252 was assigned in the early 1930s , it extended from Scottsville Road ( NY 383 ) in Chili to the village of Pittsford . NY 252 was extended northwest to Chili Center in 1949 by way of modern NY 252A , and east to Bushnell 's Basin in the mid @-@ 1950s after NY 96 was realigned onto part of the Eastern Expressway . The route was shifted southward onto its present alignment through Chili in the late 1950s and cut back to Pittsford c . 1961 . The segment of NY 252 west of NY 383 was initially county @-@ maintained ; however , ownership and maintenance of it was transferred to the state of New York in 2007 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 252 begins at an intersection with NY 33A in the Monroe County town of Chili . The route heads eastward , following Beaver Road through a sparsely populated area of Chili . About 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) from NY 33A , NY 252 intersects NY 386 . The highway continues onward , partially paralleling Black Creek eastward to an intersection with Archer Road . Here , Beaver Road comes to an end while NY 252 adopts the Archer Road name and heads southeastward , crossing over Black Creek as it approaches Ballantyne Road . At Ballantyne Road , Archer Road terminates and NY 252 changes names once more to Ballantyne Road . 
 As Ballantyne Road , the route progresses northeastward , paralleling Black Creek as it crosses the Rochester and Southern Railroad . Roughly 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) past the railroad crossing , the road curves to the southeast , entering a residential area as it approaches the Genesee River and NY 383 ( Scottsville Road ) , which runs along the river 's western bank . At NY 383 , NY 252 becomes Jefferson Road , a name that follows NY 252 eastward to its terminus in the village of Pittsford . NY 252 traverses the river and enters the town of Henrietta by way of the Ballantyne Bridge . On the opposite bank of the river , NY 252 intersects East River Road , Scottsville Road 's counterpart on the eastern river bank . 
 Just east of the river , the route passes north of the campus of the Rochester Institute of Technology , one of largest colleges in the Rochester area . NY 252 connects to the college by way of Lomb Memorial Drive and Lowenthal Road before proceeding eastward into an area of Henrietta dominated by commercial establishments . From Brighton – Henrietta Town Line Road east to South Winton Road , NY 252 is at least four lanes wide and is lined with plazas , stores and shopping centers . The approximate center of Henrietta 's commercial district is situated near the modified diamond interchange that links NY 252 to NY 15 . The Marketplace Mall and South Town Plaza , the two largest shopping centers in the area , are both located in the vicinity of this intersection . NY 252 intersects NY 15A and meets Interstate 390 ( I @-@ 390 ) at an interchange prior to intersecting Winton Road . 
 East of Winton Road , NY 252 narrows to two lanes and enters a highly residential neighborhood . At the Henrietta – Pittsford town line , the route passes the Locust Hill Country Club . Past Locust Hill , NY 252 continues past a series of residential neighborhoods to an intersection with NY 65 . East of NY 65 , NY 252 becomes West Jefferson Road and briefly enters an area of open , cultivated fields before entering the village of Pittsford . The route heads east for four blocks as a residential street , passing Pittsford Sutherland High School before ending at an intersection with South Main Street ( NY 64 and NY 96 ) . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Designation and maintenance = = = 
 NY 252 was assigned in the early 1930s to the portion of its modern alignment east of Scottsville Road ( current NY 383 ) in Chili . It was extended northwest to NY 33A and then @-@ NY 251 ( now NY 386 ) in the hamlet of Chili Center via Scottsville and Paul roads on January 1 , 1949 , replacing NY 198 . In the mid @-@ 1950s , NY 96 was realigned onto the new Eastern Expressway from Bushnell 's Basin to East Rochester . Its former surface routing between the village of Pittsford and Bushnell 's Basin became part of an extended NY 252 . The west end of NY 252 was altered in the late 1950s to follow Ballantyne , Archer , and Beaver Roads between NY 33A and NY 383 , while the east end was truncated back to Pittsford c . 1961 when the Eastern Expressway was redesignated as I @-@ 490 . The former routing of NY 252 along Paul Road was redesignated as NY 252A . 
 The portion of NY 252 west of NY 383 was originally maintained by Monroe County . This section was concurrent with three different county route designations , one for each of the three different road names along this stretch . The portion of NY 252 on Ballantyne Road was designated by Monroe County as County Route 125 ( CR 125 ) while the Beaver Road segment was CR 127 and the Archer Road piece was CR 129 . In 2007 , ownership and maintenance of NY 252 west of NY 383 was transferred from Monroe County to the state of New York as part of a highway maintenance swap between the two levels of government . A bill ( S4856 , 2007 ) to enact the swap was introduced in the New York State Senate on April 23 and passed by both the Senate and the New York State Assembly on June 20 . The act was signed into law by Governor Eliot Spitzer on August 28 . Under the terms of the act , it took effect 90 days after it was signed into law ; thus , the maintenance swap officially took place on November 26 , 2007 . The entirety of NY 252 is now maintained by the New York State Department of Transportation ( NYSDOT ) . 
 = = = Widening projects = = = 
 In August 2008 , construction began on a $ 5 @.@ 5 million project to improve the intersection between Clover Street ( NY 65 ) and Jefferson Road ( NY 252 ) in the town of Pittsford . The project , which had been in development for a decade , involved the widening of Jefferson Road from two to four lanes in the vicinity of the intersection , the addition of green arrow signal lights for all left @-@ hand turns , and the installation of sidewalks alongside both Clover Street and Jefferson Road . Work on the project was temporarily halted during the winter months ; however , it resumed on April 1 , 2009 . The project was completed in late 2009 . 
 The portion of NY 252 in Henrietta between Marketplace Drive and Ridgeland Road was widened from four to six lanes as part of a multi @-@ year , $ 15 @.@ 6 million project that began in mid @-@ 2009 . Phase one of the five @-@ phase project , completed during the second half of 2009 , involved the relocation of utility poles and water mains . The next four phases involved the actual widening of the highway . During phase two , all traffic on Jefferson Road was routed along the eastbound lanes while the westbound half of the road was reconstructed and widened ; this was reversed during phase three . A raised median between the two directions , which prohibited left @-@ hand turns at all points except signalized intersections , was constructed during phase four , and phase five covered the finishing touches of the project . As part of the project , the intersection between Jefferson Road and East Henrietta Road ( NY 15A ) was widened to have two dedicated left turn lanes in all four directions . Work on the last four phases began on March 29 , 2010 , and was expected to be fully completed in November 2011 . Construction did get completed in November 2011 , but at the cost of $ 16 @.@ 5 million ( 2012 USD ) instead of the original $ 15 @.@ 6 million . 
 = = NY 252A = = 
 NY 252A ( 4 @.@ 40 miles or 7 @.@ 08 kilometres ) was an alternate route of NY 252 along Paul Road in the town of Chili . It extended from the eastern terminus of the overlap between NY 33A and NY 386 in the hamlet of Chili Center to NY 383 in the vicinity of the Greater Rochester International Airport . Despite its designation , NY 252A never connected to NY 252 . The route existed from the late 1950s to 2009 . Its former alignment is now maintained by Monroe County as part of CR 168 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Monroe County . 
 = Margaritaville ( South Park ) = 
 " Margaritaville " is the third episode of the thirteenth season of the American animated television series South Park . The 184th overall episode of the series , it originally aired on Comedy Central in the United States on March 25 , 2009 as an Easter special . The episode is a satire and commentary on the global recession affecting much of the industrialized world at the time of the episode 's broadcast . Kyle is portrayed as a Jesus @-@ like savior working to save the economy , and Stan spends much of the episode trying to return a personal Jimmy Buffett Margaritaville machine . 
 The episode was written and directed by series co @-@ founder Trey Parker , and was rated TV @-@ MA L in the United States . Parker and Stone long planned to create an episode about the economy and considered making it the season premiere , but decided they needed more time to craft the script , and instead opened the season with " The Ring " , a spoof of the Jonas Brothers boy band . In their original idea for an economy episode , Parker and Stone considered having Cartman dress as a superhero who fights the economy . That idea was ultimately scrapped , and elements were transferred to the season 's second episode , " The Coon " . 
 " Margaritaville " reflected Parker and Stone 's belief that most Americans view the economy in the same way as religion , in that it is seldom understood but seen as an important , elusive entity . The Margaritaville blender featured in the episode serves as a metaphor for American consumerism , as well as the housing bubble . The script proved challenging for Parker and Stone , and they did not finish writing it until the night before the episode first aired . Parker and Stone themselves were not entirely pleased with the final product of " Margaritaville " , but it received generally positive reviews by television critics . 
 According to Nielsen Media Research , the episode was seen by 2 @.@ 77 million households in its original airing , making it the most @-@ watched Comedy Central production of the week . " Margaritaville " won the 2009 Emmy Award for Outstanding Animated Program for Programming Less Than One Hour . " Margaritaville " was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray along with the rest of the thirteenth season on March 16 , 2010 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Stan tries to save money by depositing it into the bank but it " disappears " moments after when the bank manager invests the money in a " money @-@ market mutual fund . " When Randy complains to the manager , he invests money in a portfolio , but the money also disappears ; a recession then hits the nation and South Park . At dinner , Randy explains to Stan that the economy is failing due to people spending their money on luxuries , and ironically , he continues his tirade while making himself a margarita in a Margaritaville @-@ brand mixer , the noise of which drowns out his voice for part of the tirade . 
 People in South Park are struggling with the recent economic downturn , and many people on the street are castigating those whom they would blame ; Cartman predictably blames the Jews , claiming they hid the money in a " Jew Cave " , but Randy convinces everyone to reduce their spending to only the " bare essentials " in order to propitiate the economy , defending his own frivolous purchase by adding that the essentials include margaritas . His recommended changes make the town resemble first @-@ century Galilee . 
 Kyle becomes annoyed , responding that the economy is not actually angry with them , and that they should be out spending money , and continues to preach that the economy only exists as a mental construct , and that people have lost their faith in it because of the recession . He then convinces his friends that if they want the economy to be strong , they must have faith in it . Upon hearing of this heresy , Randy and his makeshift economic council decide that they must kill Kyle . Cartman , in his desire to obtain a copy of Grand Theft Auto : Chinatown Wars , says that he will deliver Kyle to Randy and his friends in exchange for the game . 
 In a scene resembling that of the Last Supper , Kyle and his friends go out for pizza where he laments that he feels they will not be able to get together like this anymore because he thinks one of his friends will betray him . The next day , Kyle sets up a table with a credit card machine in the town and begins " paying everybody 's debts " with his American Express Platinum Card . Kyle 's mother begs him to stop because he will be in debt for life , but Kyle feels he must to help everybody in the town . After paying for the debts , he passes out and the people carry him to his bed . 
 Soon enough , the economy takes a turn for the better . Malls and shops start opening again for business and the now debt free people start purchasing again . Randy is shown buying the new Margaritaville . The news acknowledges President Barack Obama for the sacrifices he made and credits him for bringing these improvements in the economy leaving Kyle infuriated shouting " Come on ! " . 
 As a subplot , Stan spends most of the episode trying to return the aforementioned Margaritaville mixer ; the trendy retailer Sur La Table will not accept the return because it was bought on a payment plan . He tries to find out to whom he can return it , each person saying the debt has been packaged and sold to someone else ( much like real @-@ life mortgage @-@ backed securities ) . Eventually he goes all the way to the United States Treasury , where a group of associates " consult the charts " and tell him the mixer is worth $ 90 trillion . One of the three treasury workers then says that another insurance company is failing and asks what they should do . They say they have to " consult the charts " again . Stan follows the men inside , and he sees a round lit @-@ up game show style board , where the men cut off a chicken 's head and let the decapitated chicken run on the board while one of them plays a tune similar to Yakety Sax on a kazoo . The chicken falls on the " bailout ! " spot , so that is what the men do . In anger at the ridiculousness of the system , Stan breaks the mixer on the platform by the chicken and walks off . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Margaritaville " was written and directed by series co @-@ founder Trey Parker . It first aired on March 25 , 2009 in the United States on Comedy Central . Parker and fellow co @-@ creator Matt Stone said they had long planned to do an episode about the global recession , and they argued over whether to start the season with an episode about the economy , or " The Ring , " an episode mocking the Jonas Brothers , a boy band which had recently grown in popularity . Stone argued the season premiere should focus on the economy because it was the biggest news item at the time , but Parker felt they needed more time to craft the script , and that the Jonas Brothers would be a funny season opener . Stone ultimately agreed , and later admitted it was the right decision . During an interview a few weeks before the episode aired , Stone said , " That 's one of those big things we want to get right . We 'll be talking about what kind of social commentary we want to make and do it right . " 
 Parker and Stone originally planned for their economy @-@ related episode to involve Cartman dressing as a superhero named " The Coon " and fighting the recession . Eventually , Cartman would discover the recession stemmed from the sale of Jimmy Buffett 's Margaritaville blenders , and he would have to battle singer @-@ songwriter Jimmy Buffett and investor Warren Buffett , who would be portrayed as Jimmy 's brother . Eventually , the idea was scrapped , and the superhero elements were incorporated into the episode " The Coon " , which aired just before " Margaritaville " . The opening scene of " The Coon " , in which Cartman discussed the poor economic state of the nation and the election of U.S. President Barack Obama , were left remnants of the original economy @-@ related idea . Certain elements of the original idea , such as the Margaritaville blenders , were eventually incorporated into " Margaritaville " . 
 As with most South Park episodes , Parker , Stone , and their team created the episode within a week of its broadcast date . The script was not finished until late March 24 , the night before the episode aired . " Margaritaville " featured a 70 @-@ second shot which panned over several characters speaking about the recession on pedestals before finally settling on Randy wearing robes and preaching about the economy . It was the longest shot in South Park history to that point , although it would be surpassed later in the season by " Dances with Smurfs " , which featured an 86 @-@ second single shot in which a South Park elementary student is murdered while reading the morning announcements . 
 Within a week of " Margaritaville 's " original broadcast date , the online retailer Zazzle and South Park Studios , the official South Park website , released T @-@ shirts and hooded sweatshirts based on " Margaritaville " , including shirts with Randy dressed in rags saying " Finger pointing gets us nowhere ! " and " We must mock The Economy no longer ! " Other shirts included the finance company executive saying " Ooh , yeah , no , you know what , yeah , no ... " and an image of The Last Supper @-@ inspired pizza dinner between Kyle and his friends . 
 = = Theme = = 
 " Margaritaville " is a satire and commentary on the global recession affecting much of the industrialized world at the time of the episode 's broadcast on March 25 , 2009 . Parker and Stone believed many viewed the economy as an important , elusive entity without truly understanding how it works , and felt it mirrored faith in religion . The duo had difficulty writing the script due to their limited familiarity with religion and Christian history , and they relied heavily on executive producer Anne Garefino for help . In describing the economic elements of the episode , they sought assistance from Stone 's father , who works as an economist . The scenes in which Stan explains how his Margaritaville blender was purchased on a payment plan that was eventually combined into securities sold to the banks required particular assistance from Stone 's father . Parker said the dialogue proved so difficult , they were working on the script right up until the night before the episode was first broadcast . 
 The Margaritaville blender itself served as a metaphor for consumerism and the tendency of Americans to buy luxuries that they do not need . Stone said , " We didn 't want to make an episode where it was like , ' Oh , those Wall Street guys took our money . ' It was one of those things where we all screwed up and nobody really knows what 's going on , but it has something to do with buying shit like <unk> . " The Margaritaville also serves as a metaphor for the housing bubble . Parker himself actually owns a Margaritaville , of which he said , " It 's pretty stupid because it really is just a blender " . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The episode 's title comes from the Jimmy Buffett 's Margaritaville blender featured in the episode , which serves as a metaphor for the housing bubble . " Margaritaville " is also the name of a popular 1977 song by Jimmy Buffett , who has been the butt of South Park humor in the past . In " Margaritaville " , Kyle is portrayed as a Jesus @-@ like savior who makes a tremendous sacrifice to save the economy . A dinner he has with his friends is portrayed as the Last Supper , the final meal Jesus had with his Twelve Apostles before his death . Almost inevitably Cartman takes on the role of Judas Iscariot , the disciple who betrayed Jesus ( in the Last Supper scene he even sits in the same position as Judas in da Vinci 's painting ) , while some of the South Park residents form a council . Kyle uses a platinum American Express card to pay off the debts of all South Park residents . 
 Cartman says he wants the soon @-@ to @-@ be @-@ released Grand Theft Auto : Chinatown Wars game for the handheld game console Nintendo DS . The game was released within a week of the original " Margaritaville " broadcast date . Representatives from game developer Rockstar Games told video game blog Kotaku they liked the reference , and did not know in advance it would be in the episode . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Parker and Stone themselves were not entirely pleased with the final result of " Margaritaville " . Although they liked the idea , they felt the main storyline involving the economy and the subplot involving Stan and the Margaritaville blender did not come together in the end as the duo originally hoped they would when they started writing the script . Parker said of the episode , " I give the concept on this an A , and the execution like a C- . " In its original American broadcast , " Margaritaville " was watched by 2 @.@ 77 million overall households , according to the Nielsen Media Research , making it the most @-@ watched Comedy Central production of the week . The episode received generally positive reviews from television critics . Ken Tucker of Entertainment Weekly said of the episode , " The episode was the most back @-@ handed endorsement imaginable of President Obama 's economic bailout plan . Or the most withering dismantling of it . As usual , South Park had it both ways . " Tucker also said of Cartman 's blaming the Jews for the recession , " Among its many achievements , South Park has exposed anti @-@ Semitism to such relentless ridicule over the years , it deserves some sort of humanitarian award . " 
 Financial writer Roger Nusbaum said the episode was not only " humorous " but provided a decent analysis of the recession . He particularly praised Randy 's inclusion of margaritas with the barest of necessities ; Nusbaum said most people tend to take on absurd expenses that they fail to realize are unnecessary , even as they discuss the plight of the economy . Brad Trechak of TV Squad called " Margaritaville " a highlight of the season . Mike Fahey of Kotaku said the episode had " a clever little plot " . Zac Bissonnette of <unk> said of the episode , " It isn 't quite as trenchant as some of the other Wall Street satire that 's been making the rounds , but it 's definitely worth watching . " Carlos Delgado of If magazine said the episode included many excellent moments , including the headless chicken method of making economic decisions , but otherwise felt " Margaritaville " was not as strong as previous episodes like " The Ring " . Delgado said , " Maybe I 'm too depressed about the current economic situation , who knows , but although ' Margaritaville ' was well written and poignant , I wasn 't bursting out in laughter every two minutes . " 
 = = Emmy Award = = 
 Parker and Stone decided to submit " Margaritaville " for an Emmy Award because they had received a large amount of positive feedback about the episode from adults and older viewers . Since most Emmy voters are older , they decided " Margaritaville " stood the best chance of winning . Stone joked , " If an Emmy voter were to watch this , they might think the show was smarter than it was , so they might be fooled into voting for us . " " Margaritaville " ultimately won the 2009 Emmy Award for Outstanding Animated Program for Programming Less Than One Hour . It competed against Robot Chicken , The Simpsons and American Dad ! at the 61st Primetime Emmy Awards , which was held September 12 , 2009 . 
 = = Home release = = 
 " Margaritaville " , along with the thirteen other episodes from South Park 's thirteenth season , were released on a three @-@ disc DVD set and two @-@ disc Blu @-@ ray set in the United States on March 16 , 2010 . The sets included brief audio commentaries by Parker and Stone for each episode , a collection of deleted scenes , and a special mini @-@ feature Inside Xbox : A Behind @-@ the @-@ Scenes Tour of South Park Studios , which discussed the process behind animating the show with Inside Xbox host Major Nelson . 
 = Henry Bell Gilkeson = 
 Henry Bell Gilkeson ( June 6 , 1850 – September 29 , 1921 ) was an American lawyer , politician , school administrator , and banker in West Virginia . 
 Gilkeson was born in Moorefield , Virginia ( now West Virginia ) , the eldest child of a dry goods merchant , and was raised in Romney . Following his graduation from Hampden – Sydney College , Gilkeson became a schoolteacher and served as superintendent of the Hampshire County Schools district from 1877 to 1879 . Gilkeson later studied law and started a law practice in Romney . Following the death of John Collins Covell in 1887 , Gilkeson served as the principal of the West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and Blind until 1888 . 
 Gilkeson served in the West Virginia Legislature as a state senator representing the 12th District in the West Virginia Senate ( 1890 – 93 ) and as a member of the West Virginia House of Delegates ( 1883 – 85 and 1909 – 11 ) . Gilkeson served as the mayor of Romney beginning in 1885 , and the first president of the Bank of Romney ( 1888 – 1913 ) . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Henry Bell Gilkeson was born in Moorefield , Virginia ( now West Virginia ) on June 6 , 1850 . He was the eldest child of Robert B. Gilkeson and his wife , Sarah E. Gilkeson , both of Scottish ancestry . His father was a prominent dry goods merchant in Romney , where Henry and his brother , Edward , were raised . 
 Gilkeson graduated from Hampden – Sydney College in Hampden Sydney , Virginia , in 1872 . While a student , he was inducted as a member of the Beta Theta Pi fraternity . Gilkeson completed a special course in engineering at Yale University . He also received further education in Germany . 
 = = Academic career = = 
 Following his graduation from Hampden – Sydney College , Gilkeson became a schoolteacher and later served as superintendent of the Hampshire County Schools district from 1877 to 1879 . Before 1886 , Gilkeson was elected a member of the Romney Literary Society together with his brother . 
 = = = West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and Blind = = = 
 From 1876 to 1888 , Gilkeson served as a member and secretary of the fourth , fifth , and sixth Board of Regents of the West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and Blind , a position that enabled him to become familiar with the school 's efforts to educate its deaf and blind students . 
 In 1887 , upon the death of the schools ' principal , John Collins Covell , Gilkeson was selected by the Board of Regents to serve as principal of the institution . The Board of Regents had reservations about selecting an immediate successor to Covell and requested that Gilkeson fill the position temporarily until the board could find a permanent replacement . Gilkeson left his lucrative law practice and accepted the position under the condition that he serve as interim principal while the Board of Regents sought a more suitable candidate to build upon Covell 's initiatives and reforms . Gilkeson believed that only administrators and educators fluent in sign language should be appointed to serve in the School for the Deaf , and during his tenure as principal he found that personnel who relied on interpreters did not receive " satisfactory results " . After he had spent a few weeks as acting principal , the Board of Regents reconvened and appointed him to stay on permanently . 
 During his tenure , the position of principal included the roles of clerk , bookkeeper , steward , and final arbiter of matters in the classroom . While Gilkeson lacked special training for the position , his business experience allowed him to run the schools in an economically efficient manner , which pleased the schools ' Board of Regents . 
 In the summer of 1888 , Gilkeson was delegated by the Board to Regents to attend the Conference of Superintendents and Principals of American Schools for the Deaf in New York City and select the most fitting candidate present at the conference or recommended someone to replace him as principal of the West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and Blind . Gilkeson tendered an offer to C. H. Hill , then an instructor at the Maryland School for the Deaf , and upon Gilkeson 's return to Romney he recommended Hill and resigned from his post as principal . Hill was subsequently appointed by the Board to fill the position . While the Board of Regents was pleased with Gilkeson 's performance as principal and wished for him to stay on in the position , but he preferred to return to his professional law and political career in the end . 
 Gilkeson resumed the practice of law and pursued a political career , but he continued his involvement with , and advocacy for , the West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and Blind , especially through his influence as a prominent lawyer and state legislator . Gilkeson used his position as a state legislator to condemn and hold accountable the officials responsible for the mismanagement of the West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and Blind , and often interceded on the schools ' behalf following Hill 's retirement due to political reasons . Gilkeson was displeased with the state 's political interference in the schools , and the " multiplication " of positions within the institution that were filled with personnel who had political or business ties but lacked prior knowledge or experience with deaf and blind education . 
 = = Law and political careers = = 
 Following his tenure as superintendent of Hampshire County Schools , Gilkeson undertook the study of law and started a law practice in Romney ; he subsequently became a prominent lawyer in the community . His law office was located on Main Street in Romney , two blocks from the West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and Blind . Due to his preeminence in the legal field and high standing in the community , Gilkeson served as dean of the Hampshire County Bar Association . 
 Gilkeson was twice elected to represent Hampshire County as a member of the West Virginia House of Delegates for the 1883 – 85 and 1909 – 11 legislative sessions . As the leadership of the House of Delegates was being determined at the 1884 Democratic Party State Convention in Wheeling , Gilkeson was a leading contender for a speaker candidacy , but fellow Romney native Robert White was selected as the party 's candidate instead . 
 On August 13 , 1890 , the Twelfth Senatorial District Democratic Convention nominated Gilkeson to fill the vacant West Virginia State Senate seat of Samuel Lightfoot Flournoy . Gilkeson was elected to fill the seat during the general election of 1890 and served the remainder of Flournoy 's senate term until 1893 . At the time of his appointment , the Twelfth Senatorial District consisted of Grant , Hampshire , Hardy , Mineral , and Pendleton counties . In 1892 , Gilkeson was appointed to the Committees on the Judiciary , Public Buildings and Humane Institutions , Federal Relations , Forfeited , Delinquent , and <unk> Lands , and Clerks Office . In addition to serving in the state senate , Gilkeson also held the position of mayor of Romney , West Virginia , beginning in 1885 . 
 = = Banking and business career = = 
 Gilkeson served on the board of directors as the first president of the Bank of Romney after it was granted its charter by the West Virginia Legislature on September 3 , 1888 , and was opened later on December 20 , 1888 . During Gilkeson 's tenure as president , the Bank of Romney occupied two rooms on the ground floor of the Wirgman Building , where the city 's previous bank , the Bank of the Valley of Virginia , was located prior to the American Civil War . Gilkeson served as the president of the Bank of Romney until his retirement in 1913 , when he was succeeded by John J. Cornwell , 15th Governor of West Virginia . In November 1906 , Gilkeson , R. W. Dailey , Jr . , P. J. <unk> , and Joshua Soule Zimmerman were incorporators of the Mill Mountain Orchard Company , which operated orchards along the top of Mill Creek Mountain west of Romney . 
