 = = Later life and death = = 
 Gilkeson resided in Romney for the majority of his life and was involved in most of the community 's organizations as either a leader , officer , or stockholder . Gilkeson 's son Henry Bell Gilkeson , Jr . , died on November 16 , 1901 , from injuries sustained by falling against a piece of sharp iron , which penetrated his stomach . Gilkeson 's wife , Mary Katherine , predeceased him in February 1910 following the effects of a surgical procedure she had undergone in Cumberland , Maryland . 
 In his later years , Gilkeson suffered from allergic rhinitis and experienced a " physical breakdown " following the death of his son , Robert William Gilkeson , on October 2 , 1918 , during the Meuse @-@ Argonne Offensive of World War I and shortly before the Armistice with Germany . Robert William Gilkeson was a second lieutenant in Company C of the 316 Engineers , and was interred in the Meuse @-@ Argonne American Cemetery and Memorial near <unk> @-@ sous @-@ Montfaucon . Robert William Gilkeson was a 1907 graduate of his father 's alma mater , Hampden – Sydney College . 
 On account of his increasingly failing health , Gilkeson spent the summer of 1921 in Mountain Lake Park , Maryland , to recuperate . About a week before his death , Gilkeson fell down a flight of porch steps at his vacation residence , fracturing a number of bones . He died on September 29 , 1921 , in Mountain Lake Park , and his funeral was held on the anniversary of his son 's death on October 2 , 1921 . Gilkeson is interred with his wife Mary Katherine and son Henry , Jr . , at Indian Mound Cemetery in Romney , West Virginia . 
 In recounting Gilkeson 's achievements to the Conference of Superintendents and Principals of American Schools for the Deaf following his death , West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and Blind instructor Charles D. Seaton said of Gilkeson : 
 In 1980 , Gilkeson 's son @-@ in @-@ law George Sloan Arnold bequeathed the $ 1 @.@ 5 @-@ million George S. Arnold Trust to Hampden – Sydney College , his shared alma mater with his father @-@ in @-@ law and brother @-@ in @-@ law Robert William Gilkeson . At the time , it was the largest amount given by a living person and the institution 's second @-@ largest gift in its 204 @-@ year history . Arnold gave the trust in honor of the Gilkeson family . 
 = = Religious activities = = 
 Gilkeson was active in the Presbyterian Church in Hampshire County and served as a trustee for the Presbytery of Winchester along with Samuel Lightfoot Flournoy . In 1881 , Gilkeson and his fellow trustees were instrumental in securing from Amos L. and Allie G. Pugh a house and a large , partially wooded land lot in Capon Bridge for use by the Presbytery as a centrally located manse in Hampshire County . Gilkeson remained a trustee of the Presbytery from 1876 until his death in 1921 . He was also a commissioner of the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in the United States representing the Presbytery of Winchester , and attended the assembly 's meeting in Jackson , Mississippi , May 15 – 25 , 1902 . 
 = = Marriage and family = = 
 Gilkeson was married on November 19 , 1884 , to Mary Katherine Paxton ( 1853 – 1910 ) , daughter of Jordan J. and E. J. Paxton of Iron Gate , Virginia . Their wedding ceremony was officiated by Reverend George W. Finley of Romney at the residence of Mary Ann Lipscomb at 1537 I Street , N.W. in Washington , D.C. Mary Katherine had been employed as a teacher under Lipscomb at Waverly Seminary . Following the ceremony , Gilkeson and his wife embarked upon a tour of the Northern United States . Gilkeson and his wife Mary Katherine had three children together : 
 Laura Paxton Gilkeson Arnold ( August 18 , 1885 – 1973 ) , married Romney lawyer George Sloan Arnold ( 1885 – 1986 ) 
 Robert William Gilkeson ( July 25 , 1887 – October 2 , 1918 ) 
 Henry Bell Gilkeson , Jr . ( February 8 , 1890 – November 16 , 1901 ) 
 = Elvy Kalep = 
 <unk> @-@ Johanna Kalep ( 26 June 1899 – 15 August 1989 ) , known as Elvy Kalep , was an Estonian aviator and the country 's first female pilot , as well as an artist , toy designer and a one @-@ time children 's author . 
 Kalep grew up in Estonia and Russia , and subsequently moved to China to escape the Russian Civil War . She worked briefly as an interpreter for military officials in China before settling in Paris to study art with Alexandre <unk> . In 1931 , she qualified as a pilot in Germany , becoming the first Estonian female pilot . Befriending American aviatrix Amelia Earhart , she joined the Ninety @-@ Nines and took up the cause of encouraging other women to take up aviation . She wrote and illustrated a children 's book about flying , Air Babies , which was first published in 1936 . 
 After settling in the United States , Kalep founded a toy manufacturing business in New York . Although she was forced to close the business in 1946 due to her poor health , she made a living through the 1950s by selling patents to toy designs to larger businesses . In later decades , she created artworks out of leather , which she exhibited across the United States . She died in Florida in 1989 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Kalep was born on 26 June 1899 in the village of <unk> in Tori Parish , Pärnu County . She was the only child of Joanna ( née <unk> ) and locksmith Aksel Emil , who both died when she was a young girl . She attended <unk> <unk> <unk> , a girls ' secondary school in Tallinn . As a teenager , Kalep moved to Russia to live with an aunt in Saint Petersburg . She witnessed the events that sparked the February Revolution in 1917 , and spent a night in police detention as an eyewitness . She made a failed attempt to flee at the outset of the revolution , during which time she witnessed six men being shot while waiting in line to buy train tickets out of the country . She and her aunt moved to Vladivostok , where she married a Russian general , Count <unk> , and had a son . She lived in Vladivostok for eight years , during which time she made numerous escape efforts , before her new family was able to successfully flee to China , a refuge they chose because of <unk> 's ties to Zhang Zuolin . 
 Within a year of arriving in Harbin , China , Kalep 's son died and her husband disappeared . Kalep was able to support herself by working as an interpreter — she spoke Russian , German , English and Chinese — for a British general in Shenyang . She was also employed by Zhang Zuolin and later his son , Zhang Xueliang , but decided to return to Estonia in 1925 . She traveled through Indonesia , Italy and France before eventually arriving in Tallinn in 1926 . Soon afterwards she settled in Paris , where she studied the art of oil painting with Russian painter Alexandre <unk> . She married Rolf Baron von <unk> @-@ <unk> , who was of German or Austrian descent . 
 = = Aviation career = = 
 Kalep took up flying in the late 1920s , when she met Dutch aviator Anthony Fokker while holidaying in St. Moritz and asked him to teach her to fly a plane . She completed five hours of flying with Fokker and , after breaking her arm during a sledding accident in the winter of 1931 , took her pilot 's test in Germany on 1 August 1931 . She passed , becoming the first qualified female pilot from Estonia , and the seventh woman to pass the exam in Germany . Soon after receiving her license , Kalep and Valter Mayer , a German mechanic , co @-@ piloted a small Klemm plane from Berlin through Eastern Europe , stopping in Szczecin , Gdańsk , Kaunas , Jelgava and Riga , finally landing in Tallinn on 18 August . Upon her arrival in Tallinn , Kalep was greeted by a crowd of journalists and officers of the Estonian Air Force ; she briefly visited relatives in Nõmme before beginning her return journey to Amsterdam . 
 In May 1932 , Kalep traveled from France to New York on the steamship SS Paris with the intention of flying back to Europe across the Atlantic Ocean ; at the time , no woman had made a solo transatlantic flight . She befriended American aviation pioneer Amelia Earhart , who , unbeknownst to Kalep , was planning a similar feat . After Earhart 's successful flight from Canada to Ireland on 20 May , Kalep decided that it would not be worthwhile to make her own attempt at flying across the Atlantic , since she would no longer be the first woman to do so . She continued to encourage other women to enter the field of aviation , however , and became a member of the Ninety @-@ Nines , an international organisation for women pilots which was founded by Earhart and 98 other female aviators . In August 1932 , Kalep planned to fly with Roger Q. Williams from Los Angeles to Athens to celebrate the former city 's hosting of the 1932 Summer Olympics , but their flight was canceled . Soon after , it was reported that Kalep had remarried to W. E. Hutton @-@ Miller , an American stockbroker . 
 In 1936 , Kalep published the first edition of Air Babies , a children 's book that she wrote and illustrated to teach children about flying . The story followed two young planes , Happy Wings and Speedy , and a 1938 reprint included a foreword from Earhart , who embarked on her last flight three days after writing the piece ; she disappeared while flying in 1937 . Kalep later said of Earhart 's disappearance : " I miss her very much . When I heard that Amelia had disappeared , well , I fell apart . " She visited the 1939 New York World 's Fair to promote Air Babies on television and to speak at the National Woman 's Party luncheon . 
 = = Art and design career = = 
 After the outbreak of World War II in 1939 , and with the dissolution of her third marriage , Kalep began a new business venture in the American toy market . She designed a doll named <unk> Parachute which , when thrown into the air , would fall down slowly as a parachutist would . The dolls were produced in a New York factory where Kalep herself was forced to work to sustain the business . Her health deteriorated , however , and her profits from the business were spent almost entirely on medical costs ; she was forced to close the factory in 1946 . She had recovered by 1950 and made a living by selling patents for toy designs to larger businesses . One of her successful designs was <unk> Dolls — toy dolls with blank faces that could be individually decorated by children — which was inspired by the 50 @,@ 000 doll heads she had left over from the closure of the <unk> Parachute factory . 
 In the 1960s , while living in Palm Beach , Florida , Kalep began creating leather artworks which she sold to her neighbours to make a living . She created three @-@ dimensional paintings made out of small pieces of coloured leather imported from France . Throughout the 1970s she showcased her art in exhibitions across the United States and sold works to high @-@ profile customers including Eugene Ormandy . 
 = = Death = = 
 Kalep died on 15 August 1989 , aged 90 , in the Regency Health Care Center of Lake Worth , Florida . She had lived in the facility since 1986 . She had been married three times but had no surviving family at the time of her death . Obituaries for Kalep were published in the Florida newspaper the Sun @-@ Sentinel and <unk> Eesti <unk> , an Estonian @-@ language newspaper published in New York . 
 = Ryan Crowther = 
 Ryan John Crowther ( born 17 September 1988 ) is an English semi @-@ professional footballer who plays for Ashton United as a winger . He started his career with his local side Stockport County , where he stayed for 10 years before moving to Liverpool in 2007 . After spending two years at Liverpool , he left by mutual consent having made no first team appearances . 
 Crowther went on several trials before joining Stalybridge Celtic in August 2010 . He left the club in September , having been sentenced to four months in prison , for a drunken attack on a taxi driver in Watford . After his release from prison he joined Ashton United , where he stayed until the end of the 2010 – 11 season , before Hyde , and later Fleetwood Town . Following his release from Fleetwood , Crowther joined non @-@ League side FC Halifax Town . At the end of the 2013 – 14 season he left Halifax Town after just 4 months at the club . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Stockport County and Liverpool = = = 
 Born in Stockport , Greater Manchester , Crowther spent nine years at his local club Stockport County moving through the youth system , before making his first team debut for the club on 2 January 2006 in a 2 – 2 draw against Cheltenham Town , where aged just 17 , he came on as a substitute and was made captain , making him the youngest captain in the club 's history . He went on to make one other senior appearance for Stockport before the club were approached by Liverpool requesting an opportunity to take both Crowther and Greg <unk> on trial with a view to take them to a tournament in Milan , and agreed deals with Stockport for both players subject to satisfactory performances from the players at the tournament . The players both went to the tournament and Crowther joined Liverpool on 9 July 2007 , with <unk> deciding to stay at Stockport . Crowther featured for the successful Liverpool reserve team during the 2007 – 08 season . On 18 August 2009 , it was confirmed that he had left Liverpool by mutual consent . 
 Just one week after leaving Liverpool he went on trial at Bournemouth . He also returned to Stockport where he played in a pre @-@ season friendly but was not offered a contract . In October 2009 he went on trial with Grimsby Town but again was not offered a contract . 
 = = = Drop into non @-@ League = = = 
 After several trials , he joined Stalybridge Celtic in August 2010 , making his debut for the club on 28 of that month in a Conference North match against Nuneaton Town . After just one more appearance , as a substitute , in a 1 – 0 defeat to Harrogate Town , he left the club to serve four months in prison after being convicted of assault . On his release from prison , he joined Northern Premier League outfit Ashton United . He scored his first goal for the club , in a Manchester Premier Cup game against Irlam Town , which Crowther 's side won 7 – 0 . He scored his first league goal for the club on the following weekend , as his side were beaten 6 – 3 by Frickley Athletic . He played 25 games in the 2010 – 11 season in total , scoring four goals . However , Crowther joined Ashton 's neighbours Hyde in June 2011 . He made his debut on the opening day of the 2011 – 12 season as his side beat Worcester City 2 – 1 , Crowther scored the opening goal . He scored one more goal in August as Hyde came out as 4 – 0 winners over Hinckley United . Crowther played a total of 17 games , in which he scored nine goals , during his short spell with Hyde . 
 = = = Fleetwood Town = = = 
 On 18 November 2011 , he left Hyde in order to join Conference National club Fleetwood Town on a free transfer . He made his Fleetwood debut a day later as a second @-@ half substitute as his side beat Crowther 's former team Stockport 2 – 1 . 
 In January 2012 he returned to former club Hyde on a three @-@ month loan , with a recall possible after 28 days . He returned to Fleetwood after playing 14 games scoring two goals , and he played in Fleetwood 's game against Cambridge United , in which they lost . He re @-@ joined Hyde on loan for the second time , in August 2012 . Making his third debut for the club away at Forest Green Rovers , scoring in a 3 – 1 defeat . He scored the winner for Hyde in October as his side won 1 – 0 away at Cambridge United . He scored twice in two games in November scoring in a 3 – 2 win over Grimsby Town , and a 3 – 2 defeat at Ebbsfleet United respectively . He returned to Fleetwood in January 2013 playing 18 times scoring four times in his third spell with the club . 
 He made a goal scoring return for Fleetwood , scoring on his first game after returning from Hyde , in a 3 – 0 win over Oxford United . He scored his second goal for the club again against Oxford United three games later . He finished the 2012 – 13 season having played 18 times scoring four goals for Hyde , and 15 games scoring two goals for Fleetwood . 
 On 30 January 2014 , Crowther was released from Fleetwood Town . 
 = = = FC Halifax Town = = = 
 Following his release from Fleetwood , Crowther joined Conference Premier side FC Halifax Town . Crowther scored on his Halifax debut in the 3 – 1 away defeat to Lincoln City on 1 February 2014 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In an interview with Liverpool Football Club , he stated that if he wasn 't a footballer he would have been a physio . On 12 September 2010 , he was jailed for four months over a drunken attack on a taxi driver which had taken place on 9 August 2009 in Watford , Hertfordshire . He was tried for racially aggravated assault occasioning actual bodily harm but a jury acquitted him of that charge , but found him guilty of an alternative charge of assaulting the taxi driver . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 As of 11 February 2014 
 = John Slessor = 
 Marshal of the Royal Air Force Sir John Cotesworth Slessor , GCB , DSO , MC ( 3 June 1897 – 12 July 1979 ) , sometimes known as Jack Slessor , was a senior commander in the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) , serving as Chief of the Air Staff from 1950 to 1952 . As a pilot in the Royal Flying Corps during the First World War , he saw action with No. 17 Squadron in the Middle East , earning the Military Cross , and with No. 5 Squadron on the Western Front , where he was awarded the Belgian Croix de Guerre . Between the wars he commanded No. 4 Squadron in England , and No. 3 ( Indian ) Wing , earning the Distinguished Service Order for operations with the latter in Waziristan . In 1936 , he published Air Power and Armies , which examined the use of air power against targets on and behind the battlefield . 
 Slessor held several operational commands in the Second World War . As Air Officer Commanding Coastal Command in 1943 and 1944 , he was credited with doing much to turn the tide of the Battle of the Atlantic through his use of long @-@ range bombers against German U @-@ boats . He was knighted in June 1943 . In the closing stages of the war he became Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief RAF Mediterranean and Middle East and deputy to Lieutenant General Ira Eaker as Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief Mediterranean Allied Air Forces , conducting operations in the Italian Campaign and Yugoslavia . Slessor went on to serve in the RAF 's most senior post , Chief of the Air Staff , in the early 1950s , and was considered a strong proponent of strategic bombing and the nuclear deterrent . In retirement he published two more books , including an autobiography , and held ceremonial appointments in Somerset . 
 = = Early life and First World War = = 
 The son of Major Arthur Kerr Slessor and Adelaide Slessor ( née Cotesworth ) , Slessor was born in Ranikhet , India , on 3 June 1897 , and educated at Haileybury . Lame in both legs as a result of polio , he was rejected for army service in 1914 and only received a commission as a second lieutenant in the Royal Flying Corps on 6 July 1915 with the help of family connections . He was appointed to the Special Reserve as a flying officer on 9 September 1915 , and confirmed in his rank of second lieutenant on 28 September . Slessor saw action with No. 17 Squadron in Egypt and the Sudan , where he was credited with arresting the escape of Sultan Ali Dinar and 2 @,@ 000 men on 23 May 1916 , following the Sultan 's defeat at Beringia . He was mentioned in despatches on 25 October before being wounded in the thigh and invalided back to England . 
 Slessor was promoted to the temporary rank of captain on 1 December 1916 . Awarded the Military Cross on 1 January 1917 , he returned to combat in April as a flight commander with No. 5 Squadron on the Western Front . The squadron converted from Royal Aircraft Factory <unk> to R.E.8s soon afterwards . Promoted to the substantive rank of lieutenant on 1 July 1917 , Slessor was appointed a Chevalier of the Belgian Order of Leopold on 24 September , and awarded the Belgian Croix de Guerre on 11 March 1918 . He transferred to the newly formed Royal Air Force in April 1918 and , having been promoted to the temporary rank of major on 3 July 1918 , was posted to the Central Flying School at Upavon as an instructor on 14 July 1918 . 
 = = Inter @-@ war years = = 
 Having left the RAF as a flight lieutenant on 21 August 1919 , Slessor applied to rejoin and was offered a short @-@ service commission at the same rank on 24 February 1920 . In May 1921 , he became a flight commander with No. 20 Squadron , which operated Bristol Fighters on the North @-@ West Frontier of India . He joined the staff at the Directorate of Training and Staff Duties in the Air Ministry in February 1923 . The same year , he married Hermione Grace Guinness ; they had a son and a daughter . He attended the RAF Staff College , Andover , in 1924 , and was promoted squadron leader on 1 January 1925 . 
 Slessor commanded No. 4 ( Army Cooperation ) Squadron , which flew Bristol Fighters out of RAF Farnborough , from April 1925 to October 1928 , when he joined the air planning staff at the Directorate of Operations and Intelligence at the Air Ministry . He attended the Staff College , Camberley , in 1931 , and was appointed RAF Directing Staff Officer there in January 1932 . Slessor was promoted acting wing commander on 1 January 1932 ( substantive on 1 July ) . He became Officer Commanding No. 3 ( Indian ) Wing at Quetta in March 1935 , and was awarded the Distinguished Service Order for operations in Waziristan between 25 November 1936 and 16 January 1937 . 
 In 1936 , Slessor published Air Power and Armies , an examination of the use of air power against targets on and behind the battlefield . In this work he advocated army co @-@ operation , interdiction to cut off enemy reinforcements and supply , and the use of aerial bombardment as a weapon against enemy morale . He did , however , acknowledge the limitations of his theory , stating : 
 ... the conditions envisaged throughout [ this book ] are those of a campaign on the land in which the primary problem at the time is the defeat of an enemy army in the field . ... in a war against a great Naval power at sea , or when the principle threat to the Empire at the time is the action of hostile air forces against this country or its possessions , the aim and objectives of the air forces of the Empire will not be the same as described in this book . 
 On 17 May 1937 , following his posting to India , Slessor was promoted acting group captain , and appointed Deputy Director of Plans at the Air Ministry . He was promoted to substantive group captain on 1 July 1937 . Mentioned in despatches on 18 February 1938 , he took over as Director of Plans on 22 December 1938 . He was appointed Air Aide @-@ de @-@ Camp to the King on 1 January 1939 . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 Slessor was promoted air commodore on the first day of the Second World War , 1 September 1939 , and was succeeded as Air Aide @-@ de @-@ Camp by Group Captain Ralph Cochrane . On 10 January 1941 , he was raised to temporary air vice marshal ( made permanent in April 1942 ) and became Air Officer Commanding ( AOC ) No.5 ( Bomber ) Group in May 1941 . Appointed a Companion of the Order of the Bath and mentioned in despatches in January 1942 , he was appointed Assistant Chief of the Air Staff in April 1942 . Slessor was closely involved in planning the combined Allied air offensive in Europe . At the Casablanca Conference in January 1943 , he was able to influence Britain 's Secretary for Air , Sir Archibald Sinclair , and Chief of the Air Staff , Air Chief Marshal Sir Charles Portal , to agree to USAAF proposals that led to a " round @-@ the clock " bombing policy against Germany , with the US mounting daylight precision attacks and the RAF conducting area bombing at night . 
 Appointed AOC Coastal Command with the acting rank of air marshal on 5 February 1943 , Slessor had at his disposal sixty squadrons , two of which were equipped with B @-@ 24 Liberator heavy bombers . He was credited with doing much to turn the tide of the Battle of the Atlantic in the Allies ' favour by employing his thinly stretched long @-@ range bomber force against the U @-@ boat threat , in close cooperation with naval forces . Promoted temporary air marshal on 1 June 1943 , he was advanced to Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath in the 1943 Birthday Honours . Slessor became Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief RAF Mediterranean and Middle East in January 1944 , and deputy to Lieutenant General Ira Eaker as Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief Mediterranean Allied Air Forces . In this role he conducted operations in the Italian Campaign and Yugoslavia , establishing the Balkan Air Force in the latter theatre . Slessor joined the Air Council as Air Member for Personnel on 5 April 1945 . His rank of air marshal became substantive on 6 June . He was awarded the Grand Cross of the Greek Order of the Phoenix on 6 September 1946 . His war service also earned him appointment as a Commander of the Belgian Order of Leopold on 27 August 1948 , and a Knight Grand Cross of the Norwegian Order of St. Olav on 6 March 1953 . 
 = = Post @-@ war career = = 
 Slessor was promoted air chief marshal on 1 January 1946 . He continued to serve as Air Member for Personnel , responsible for overseeing the demobilisation of the wartime RAF , until 1 October 1947 . At the urging of the @-@ then Chief of the Air Staff , Marshal of the Royal Air Force Sir Arthur Tedder , Slessor succeeded General Sir William Slim as Commandant of the Imperial Defence College . Slessor had been dubious about accepting the position , and sought assurances from Tedder that he would be next in line for the post of Chief of the Air Staff , particularly in light of Tedder 's preference for Air Chief Marshal Sir Ralph Cochrane to succeed him . Meanwhile , Slessor was appointed a Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath on 10 June 1948 , and became Principal Air Aide @-@ de @-@ Camp to the King on 1 July . In the event , he took over from Tedder as Chief of the Air Staff on 1 January 1950 , and chose Cochrane as his Vice Chief of the Air Staff . Slessor was promoted Marshal of the Royal Air Force on 8 June 1950 . In late 1951 , he reluctantly became involved in the Australian Government 's quest for a suitable RAF officer to serve as Chief of the Air Staff of the Royal Australian Air Force . He eventually selected Air Marshal Donald Hardman as the " outstanding candidate " for the Australian post , trying to avoid what he called " the follies of some years ago " , referring to Air Chief Marshal Sir Charles Burnett 's controversial tenure as Chief of the Air Staff in Australia on secondment from Britain in the early years of the Second World War . 
 As leader of the RAF , Slessor coined the term " V @-@ Force " to denote its planned trio of strategic jet bombers — the Vickers Valiant , Handley Page Victor , and Avro Vulcan — and contributed to the decision to build all three designs . He played a key role in promoting nuclear weapons as an effective instrument of deterrence in early Cold War British strategy . In 1952 , the RAF argued that , because bombers were such an important deterrent , conventional forces could be drastically reduced at a time when the Government was seeking significant public expenditure savings . Slessor believed it unlikely that the United Kingdom would be able to meet a communist offensive without resorting to the use of tactical nuclear weapons . He became one of the key propagandists of the " Great Deterrent " ( which he employed as the title of a book he wrote after he retired ) on both sides of the Atlantic . Slessor 's term as Chief of the Air Staff was dominated by the Korean War . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Completing his term as Chief of the Air Staff on 31 December 1952 , Slessor was succeeded by Air Chief Marshal Sir William Dickson and retired from the RAF on 29 January 1953 . He attended the coronation of Queen Elizabeth II in June 1953 . In retirement he published two books : his autobiography , The Central Blue ( 1956 ) , and The Great Deterrent ( 1957 ) . He served as Honorary Air Commodore of No. 3 ( County of Devon ) Maritime Headquarters Unit , Royal Auxiliary Air Force , from 23 May 1963 to 5 May 1969 . His wife , Lady Hermione , was appointed a Serving Sister of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St. John of Jerusalem on 2 July 1963 . 
 On 24 March 1965 , Slessor was appointed Sheriff of Somerset for the following year . He was commissioned a Deputy Lieutenant of Somerset in April 1969 . Slessor was also a director of Blackburn Aircraft and governor of several schools . After Hermione 's death , he married Marcella Florence Priest ( née Spurgeon ) in 1971 . Slessor died at the Princess Alexandra Hospital , Wroughton , in Wiltshire on 12 July 1979 . His son John also joined the RAF , rising to the rank of group captain . 
 = John Key = 
 John Phillip Key ( born 9 August 1961 ) is the 38th Prime Minister of New Zealand , in office since 2008 . He has led the New Zealand National Party since 2006 . 
 Born in Auckland before moving to Christchurch when he was a child , Key attended the University of Canterbury and graduated in 1981 with a bachelor of commerce . He began a career in the foreign exchange market in New Zealand before moving overseas to work for Merrill Lynch , in which he became head of global foreign exchange in 1995 , a position he would hold for six years . In 1999 he was appointed a member of the Foreign Exchange Committee of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York until leaving in 2001 . 
 Key entered the New Zealand Parliament representing the Auckland electorate of Helensville as one of the few new National members of parliament in the election of 2002 following National 's significant defeat of that year . He has held the seat since then . In 2004 , he was appointed Finance Spokesman for National and eventually succeeded Don Brash as the National Party leader in 2006 . After two years as Leader of the Opposition , Key led his party to victory at the November 2008 general election , and repeated this feat at both the November 2011 general election and September 2014 general election . 
 As Prime Minister , Key leads the Fifth National Government of New Zealand which entered government at the beginning of the late @-@ 2000s recession in 2008 . In his first term , Key 's government implemented a GST rise and personal tax cuts . In February 2011 , a major earthquake in Christchurch , the nation 's second largest city , significantly affected the national economy and the government formed the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority in response . In its second term , Key 's government announced a policy of partial privatisation of five state @-@ owned enterprises ; while the policy was enacted , voters in a citizens @-@ initiated referendum on the issue were 2 to 1 opposed to the policy . In foreign policy , Key announced the withdrawal of New Zealand Defence Force personnel from their deployment in the war in Afghanistan , signed the Wellington Declaration with the United States and pushed for more nations to join the Trans @-@ Pacific Strategic Economic Partnership . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Key was born in Auckland , New Zealand , to George Key ( 1914 – 1969 ) and Ruth Key ( née Lazar ; 1922 – 2000 ) , on 9 August 1961 . His father was an English immigrant and a veteran of the Spanish Civil War and World War II . Key and his two sisters were raised in a state house in the Christchurch suburb of <unk> , by his mother , an Austrian Jewish immigrant . 
 He attended Aorangi School , and then Burnside High School from 1975 to 1979 . Then he attended the University of Canterbury and earned a Bachelor of Commerce degree in accounting in 1981 . He has attended management studies courses at Harvard University . 
 Key met his wife Bronagh when they were both students at Burnside High School . They married in 1984 . She also has a <unk> degree , and worked as a personnel consultant before becoming a full @-@ time mother . They have two children , Stephie and Max . Max is the new night @-@ time radio host for George FM , and is also a singer . 
 On 25 July 2008 , Key was added to the New Zealand National Business Review ( NBR ) Rich List for the first time . The list details the wealthiest New Zealand individuals and family groups . Key had an estimated wealth of NZ $ 50 million . Key is the wealthiest New Zealand Member of Parliament . 
 = = Before politics = = 
 Key 's first job was in 1982 , as an auditor at McCulloch Menzies , and he then moved to be a project manager at Christchurch @-@ based clothing manufacturer Lane Walker Rudkin for two years . Key began working as a foreign exchange dealer at Elders Finance in Wellington , and rose to the position of head foreign exchange trader two years later , then moved to Auckland @-@ based Bankers Trust in 1988 . 
 In 1995 , he joined Merrill Lynch as head of Asian foreign exchange in Singapore . That same year he was promoted to Merrill 's global head of foreign exchange , based in London , where he may have earned around US $ 2 @.@ 25 million a year including bonuses , which is about NZ $ 5 million at 2001 exchange rates . Some co @-@ workers called him " the smiling assassin " for maintaining his usual cheerfulness while sacking dozens ( some say hundreds ) of staff after heavy losses from the 1998 Russian financial crisis . He was a member of the Foreign Exchange Committee of the New York Federal Reserve Bank from 1999 to 2001 . 
 In 1998 , on learning of his interest in pursuing a political career , the National Party president John Slater began working actively to recruit him . Former party leader Jenny Shipley describes him as one of the people she " deliberately sought out and put my head on the line – either privately or publicly – to get them in there " . 
 = = Member of Parliament = = 
 Auckland 's population growth , as evidenced in the 2001 census , led to the formation for the 2002 General Election of a new electorate called Helensville , which covered the north @-@ western corner of the Auckland urban area . Key beat long @-@ serving National MP Brian Neeson ( whose own <unk> seat had moved on paper to being a Labour seat through the boundary changes ) for the National Party Helensville selection . At the 2002 elections Key won the seat with a majority of 1 @,@ 705 , ahead of Labour 's Gary Russell , with Neeson , now standing as an independent , coming third . Key won re @-@ election with ease at the 2005 election garnering 63 % of votes cast in Helensville , and increased his majority again in 2008 , gaining 73 % of the electorate vote . 
 = = = Finance spokesman = = = 
 In 2004 the National Party Parliamentary leader Don Brash promoted Key to the Opposition front benches and appointed him the party spokesman for finance . In late 2006 Brash resigned as leader , citing damaging speculation over his future as the reason . His resignation followed controversies over an extramarital affair , and over leaked internal National Party documents later published in the book The Hollow Men . 
 = = = Leader of the Opposition = = = 
 In his maiden speech as National Party leader on 28 November 2006 , Key talked of an " underclass " that had been " allowed to develop " in New Zealand , a theme which received a large amount of media coverage . Key followed up on this speech in February 2007 by committing his party to a programme which would provide food in the poorest schools in New Zealand . 
 He relented on his stance in opposition to Sue Bradford 's Child Discipline Bill , which sought to remove " reasonable force " as a defence for parents charged with prima facie assault of their children . Many parents saw this bill as an attempt to ban smacking outright . Key and Prime Minister Helen Clark agreed a compromise – giving police the discretion to overlook smacking they regarded as " inconsequential " . 
 In August 2007 Key came in for criticism when he changed his position regarding the Therapeutic Products and Medicine Bill : 
 " John Key had finally slipped up . National 's leader had told the Herald on Tuesday he would have signed up to a New Zealand First @-@ initiated compromise on the stalled Therapeutic Products and Medicines Bill had he seen it – and was still willing to sign up – only to change his mind yesterday after his remarks appeared in print . " 
 Also in August 2007 , Labour 's Trevor Mallard hinted in Parliament that Labour would try to link Key to the 1987 " H @-@ Fee " scandal , which involved Key 's former employer Elders Merchant Finance and a payment to <unk> Chief Executive Allan Hawkins . Hawkins and Elders executive Ken Jarrett were later jailed for fraud . Key forestalled the accusation by declaring that he had left Elders months before the event , that he had no knowledge of the deal , and that his interview with the Serious Fraud Office ( SFO ) during the investigation into the affair could only have helped to convict the people involved . Then @-@ SFO director Charles Sturt publicly supported Key 's statement . 
 Labour MPs criticised Key for not releasing specific policy information at their annual conference . Key responded that National would set its own policy agenda and that there was adequate time before the next election for voters to digest National Party policy proposals . 
 = = = Prime Minister = = = 
 Key became Prime Minister following the general election on 8 November 2008 which signalled an end to the Labour @-@ led government of nine years under Helen Clark . The National Party , promoting a policy of " change " , won 45 % of the party vote and 59 of the 122 seats in Parliament ( including a two @-@ seat overhang ) , a substantial margin over the Labour Party , which won 43 seats . 
 Key was sworn in as Prime Minister and Minister of Tourism and also appointed as a member of the Executive Council on 19 November 2008 with his new cabinet . His first international outing as Prime Minister was the 20th APEC meeting in Peru the following day . 
 Arriving at the Ngapuhi Te <unk> Waitangi Marae the day before Waitangi Day 2009 , Key was briefly shoved and grabbed by two protesters before diplomatic protection officers pulled them off . He told reporters he was " quite shocked " but continued onto the marae and spoke , while police took the two men away and charged them with assault . 
 Key has also been tied with the National <unk> Project since its conception at the national Job Summit in early 2009 . He proposed it , and as Minister for Tourism , was instrumental in getting NZ $ 50 million approved for initial construction work . 
 In January 2009 , after addressing Chinese New Year celebrations at the <unk> ASB Showgrounds , Key tripped after coming down a small set of stairs in front of cameras leaving him with a broken right arm and " embarrassed " . 
 = = = Controversies = = = 
 During his first term in office , National remained high in the polls and one commentator described support for John Key as " stratospheric " . In 2011 he was nicknamed " Teflon John " , as nothing damaging to his reputation seemed to " stick " to him . Coming up to the election in 2011 , the gloss began to come off . In October that year , Key was caught up in a controversy over the replacement of 34 three @-@ year @-@ old Government BMW limousines with new ones at a time of economic restraint . Initially , Key denied any knowledge of the plan , although reports later surfaced showing that his office was aware of the deal . Key was accused of hypocrisy ; he eventually apologised , calling it a ' sloppy ' deal , effectively placing most of the blame on his chief of staff . 
 That same month , Key made a statement in which he claimed that Standard and Poor 's had said that " if there was a change of Government , that downgrade would be much more likely " . S & P contradicted the claim , bringing Key 's credibility into question . National won the election , but New Zealand 's credit rating was subsequently downgraded anyway – by two different agencies – Standard and Poor 's and Fitch Group . 
 The real turning @-@ point in the public 's perception of Mr Key began with the teapot tapes . Just before the election in November 2011 , a recording was made of a conversation between John Key and ACT Party candidate John Banks that they considered private – despite the fact that the meeting took place in a cafe and the media were invited to attend . Mr Key made a complaint to the police and compared the incident to illegal hacking in the News of the World scandal in Britain . He refused to answer media questions about what was said and the incident dominated media discussion in the days before the election . The unreleased recording allegedly concerns the leadership of ACT and disparaging remarks about elderly New Zealand First supporters . 
 The event causing perhaps the most embarrassment to John Key was the arrest of Kim Dotcom and the subsequent revelations that the New Zealand Government Communications Security Bureau ( GCSB ) had illegally spied on Dotcom . As Prime Minister , John Key is directly responsible for the GCSB , which is not allowed to spy on New Zealand citizens – and Dotcom had been granted permanent residency . Three days later , the Prime Minister John Key apologised for the illegal spying . " I apologize to Mr Dotcom . I apologize to New Zealanders because every New Zealander … is entitled to be protected from the law when it comes to the GCSB , and we failed to provide that appropriate protection for him . " It subsequently came to light that deputy Prime Minister Bill English had been asked to sign a " ministerial certificate " suppressing details of the GCSB 's involvement in the case while Mr Key was overseas – the only time this had been done in the last ten years . 
 In November 2012 , Key told students at St Hilda 's Collegiate in Dunedin that football star David Beckham was " thick as batshit " . The comments were picked up by UK papers The Daily Mirror and The Sun . On the same day , there was controversy over Key 's comments to a radio host that his shirt was " gay " . " You 're <unk> mate , you 're never gonna make it , you ’ ve got that gay red top on there " , he told host Jamie Mackay on <unk> 's Farming Show . The following day , Lord of the Rings actor Sir Ian McKellen said in a blog entry that Key should " watch his language " . 
 The potential fallout from Dotcom 's arrest continued in December 2012 when the High Court ordered the GCSB to " confirm all entities " to which it gave information opening the door for Dotcom to sue for damages – against the spy agency and the police . Later that month , John Key 's rating as preferred PM dropped to 39 % – the first time in his four years as prime minister that his rating had slipped below 40 % . 
 In March 2013 it emerged that Key has known Ian Fletcher , head of the GCSB , since they were at school , but he denied that the pair were friends . But in early April it was revealed that Key had personally picked Fletcher for the role at the GCSB , encouraging Fletcher to apply for the role . Despite Key 's office claiming Fletcher was " the best candidate for the job " , Fletcher was in fact the only candidate interviewed . Key said he hadn 't originally mentioned the phone call because he " forgot " . Political commentator Bryce Edwards called it the " most appalling political management since he became Prime Minister back in 2008 " . Key was critical of reporting on the <unk> saga , calling journalists " knuckleheads " in a radio interview . 
 In April 2013 whilst visiting Chinese president Xi Jinping in Beijing , Key made headlines by suggesting New Zealand would back any United States or Australian military action against North Korea . The following day he backtracked , saying the chance of New Zealand troops entering North Korea was " so far off the planet " . 
 In May 2014 Key justified the use of New Zealand intelligence that resulted in innocent civilians falling to American targeted killings . 
 In April 2015 a waitress claimed and Key acknowledged that he had pulled her ponytail multiple times over several months ; when Key learnt she had taken offence , he apologised . International media have reported the incident as " ponytail @-@ gate " . 
 = = = UN Security Council bid = = = 
 Key launched New Zealand 's campaign for a Security Council seat at the UN General Assembly meeting in September 2009 . He met briefly with US President Barack Obama and former US President Bill Clinton . While in New York , Key appeared on the Late Show with David Letterman . He read out the Top Ten list , ' Top Ten Reasons You Should Visit New Zealand ' . 
 Key continued New Zealand 's push for a spot on the Security Council while in New York in 2013 . There he accused rival candidates Spain and Turkey of using aid money to buy votes from small African countries , and said New Zealand would not be spending its way onto the Council . While in New York , Key suddenly fell ill , but recovered in time for meetings with representatives from other countries ahead of the General Assembly . 
 = = = Intelligence reform = = = 
 On 6 October 2014 , John Key created a new ministerial portfolio called the Minister of National Security and Intelligence . The Minister of National Security and Intelligence will be responsible for setting national security and intelligence police and legislation , and will also head a newly established Cabinet National Security Committee . The Prime Minister will assume the new portfolio while the Attorney General Christopher Finlayson will assume the portfolios of Minister Responsible for the Government Communications Security Bureau ( GCSB ) and Minister in Charge of the New Zealand Security Intelligence Service ( <unk> ) , which have traditionally been held by the Prime Minister . 
 = = Political views = = 
 Key 's views are largely aligned with his own party 's view . However he also notes that his differences from his predecessor are more of style and focus rather than view . Key has in the past noted others ' concern at the pace of asset sales , but argued that the arguments against selling assets in the 1980s were largely irrational . In a 2002 interview he said " some form of orientation towards privatisation " in health , education and <unk> , such as giving firms tax breaks for employer super schemes , made sense . After leading the National party to victory in the 2011 election , Key rejected that the National Party lacks a mandate to partially sell off state @-@ owned assets , he acknowledged that some New Zealanders were anxious about the mixed ownership model . " But I think we got a mandate . " 
 Key has a mixed voting record on social issues : he voted against the bill creating civil unions , claiming that this represented his constituents ' views but he supports them personally . He was part of a large block of MPs voting to defeat a bill that defined marriage as being between a man and a woman . Key has also stated that he does not oppose gay adoption . He voted for the Marriage ( Definition of Marriage ) Amendment Act 2013 . 
 In 2008 Key voted for an ill @-@ fated attempt to raise the legal drinking age from 18 back to 20 but subsequently ignored a Law Commission recommendation to increase levies on alcohol . He claimed there was ' no appetite ' for such a move . A ' suppressed ' report on public attitudes to alcohol law reform eventually came to light indicating that in 2010 , when he made this claim , 56 % of New Zealanders supported a price increase . 
 Key says that he believes that global warming is a real phenomenon , and that the Government needs to implement measures to reduce human contribution to global warming . Key has committed the National Party to working towards reducing greenhouse emissions in New Zealand by 50 % within the next fifty years . Commentators note that as recently as 2005 , Key made statements indicating that he was sceptical of the effects and impact of climate change . 
 Critics note that Key has changed his views on the Iraq war since becoming leader of the opposition . In 2003 , as an opposition MP , Key emphasised National 's position of supporting New Zealand 's traditional allies , the United States and Australia . Key came under fire in the New Zealand Parliament in August 2007 , when the Government claimed that had Key been Prime Minister at the time , he would have sent troops to Iraq . 
 Like his predecessor Helen Clark , Key views a New Zealand republic as " inevitable " , although probably not for another decade . " If Australia becomes a republic there is no question it will set off quite an intense debate on this side of the Tasman , " he said , " We would have to have a referendum if we wanted to move towards it . " Key later stated that he is a monarchist , and that a New Zealand republic would " Not [ happen ] under my watch " . Key is a supporter of changing the Flag of New Zealand , and during the 2014 general election campaign promised a referendum on the issue . Following the election he stated he hoped the referendum would be completed in 2015 . 
 = = Religious views = = 
 Key attends church frequently with his children , but is an agnostic . He has stated that he does not believe in an afterlife , and sees religion as " doing the right thing " . Key 's wife , Bronagh ( née Dougan ) Key , is the daughter of Northern Irish emigrants of mixed religious descent . Key is the third prime minister or premier of New Zealand ( after Julius Vogel and Francis Bell ) with Jewish ancestry . 
 = On a Clear Night = 
 On a Clear Night is the second studio album by Australian singer @-@ songwriter Missy Higgins , released by Eleven on 28 April 2007 . Higgins started work on the album straight after finishing her 2004 debut , The Sound of White . She spent six months of 2006 in Broome , Western Australia , writing new material . She composed songs inspired by the landscape , and by past relationships . She wrote more material while touring the US and at the end of the year travelled to Los Angeles to record with Mitchell Froom . 
 The album was released on 28 April 2007 in Australia , with three singles ; " Steer " , " Where I Stood " and " Peachy " . The album went to No. 1 on the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) albums chart and was certified triple platinum . " Steer " topped the ARIA singles chart and " Where I Stood " went to No. 10 . To help her break into the US market , Higgins ' manager and Eleven 's president John Watson endeavored to get her songs featured in US television shows . " Where I Stood " was used in shows including Grey 's Anatomy , One Tree Hill and So You Think You Can Dance . 
 On a Clear Night drew mixed reviews from critics both in Australia and abroad . More positive reviews compared Higgins to Sarah McLachlan and Alanis Morissette , and praised the album 's maturity and assertiveness compared to The Sound of White . Less complimentary reviews said that On a Clear Night fails to lift Higgins above the level of her peers . Higgins was nominated for four awards at the 2007 ARIA Music Awards and won ' Best Female Artist ' . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 Higgins started writing tracks for her second album as soon as she had finished recording The Sound of White , which was released in 2004 . She said , " I started quite early because I knew there would a lot of pressure for the second album and I didn 't want to write songs under anyone 's stopwatch . " " 100 Round the Bends " was written while she was still recording the first album . During 2006 , Higgins spent six months living in Broome , Western Australia , away from the distractions of the entertainment industry . Here she was able to relax and focus on creating new material for her next album . The landscape around Broome inspired the lyrics for " Going North " . She said , " It was the first place I 'd ever felt honestly connected with my country , with the physical land of my country " . The lyrics for " Steer " were inspired when Higgins looked up at the night sky on a Broome beach : " It dawned on me how small we are , how short life is ... I felt so liberated to have finally figured that out . " 
 Several of the songs on the album drew their lyrics from real life relationships . " Peachy " documents the permanent breakup of a relationship that had inspired her 2004 single " Ten Days " . " Where I Stood " , which Higgins calls " a pretty sad love song " , describes the end of another relationship . She said it portrays " one of those situations where you just feel that leaving this person is something you have to do to get to know yourself again . " " Secret " was about an ex @-@ girlfriend who was uncomfortable about going public with their relationship ; " I was so head over heels in love with her I kind of wanted to shout it out to the world , so it was just a song about keeping something under the covers ... keeping it away locked in a little room . " 
 She left Broome to tour the United States , and continued to write material on the road . While much of the her first album revolved around the piano , most of the songs from On a Clear Night were guitar @-@ based . This was because Higgins had easier access to a guitar than keyboards while touring . She said , " I hadn 't been playing guitar very long for the first album so I think I 'm definitely a better guitar player , and probably a worse piano player because I haven 't been able to play it much over the last few years " . 
 In the second half of 2006 , Higgins moved to Los Angeles to record On a Clear Night with American musician and producer Mitchell Froom , an experience Higgins described as " really easy and really fun . " They spent three months recording in Froom 's home studio with session musicians including Matt Chamberlain ( drums ) , Davey Faragher ( bass ) and Greg Leisz ( mandolin ) . Neil Finn of Crowded House played guitar on " Peachy " and sang backing vocals on " Going North " . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 On a Clear Night was released 28 April 2007 on Eleven . It debuted at No. 1 on the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) albums chart and stayed on the chart for 39 weeks . By 12 June it had sold 35 @,@ 627 units and was eventually certified triple platinum . It peaked at No. 14 on the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) albums chart . The first single from the album was " Steer " , released as an extended play ( EP ) on 14 April 2007 . It debuted on the ARIA singles chart at No. 1 and stayed on the chart for 11 weeks . " Where I Stood " was released 4 August and entered the chart ( and peaked ) at No. 10 . " Peachy " was released for digital download only on 10 November 2007 . Higgins spent November and December promoting the album in Australia on her For One Night Only Tour , taking in Cairns , Sydney and Perth . She was joined on some dates by You Am I lead singer , Tim Rogers . 
 Eleven 's president and Higgins ' manager John Watson noted that her first album , The Sound of White had achieved limited success in North America . He said , " There 's high name recognition there ... but not a high song recognition . " To promote On a Clear Night , he sought placement of its songs in US films and television shows . " Where I Stood " featured in Grey 's Anatomy , One Tree Hill , Brothers & Sisters , Lipstick Jungle , Smallville , The Hills , Men in Trees and So You Think You Can Dance . Higgins toured the US from July – October 2007 with her new material . The album was released in the US on 26 February 2008 on the Warner Bros. label . It reached No. 193 on the Billboard 200 . Higgins then spent 10 months of 2008 in the US promoting the album and toured as a support act with the Indigo Girls and then Ben Folds . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical = = = 
 The album received mixed reviews in Australia . Writing for the Sydney Morning Herald , Bernard Zuel said that Higgins ' second album was the chance to prove herself as a " special one " , but that she had failed to do so . He called the album " attractive , in a comfortable way " and said that it would appeal to her fans , but said that Higgins is " no better or worse " than many other similar artists . Andrew Murfett for The Age was more positive and called the album " a convincing return " . He cited " Secret " as a highlight and called the song " remarkably forthright " . He also praised Froom 's production . 
 In the US , reviews were also mixed but generally positive . Andrew Leahey of Allmusic said that On a Clear Night marks a development from The Sound of White and that the second album combines " sass with sweet sentiment " although at times is " a bit too calculated " . He compared Higgins to Sarah McLachlan and Amy Winehouse , calling her " family friendly " but said that her popularity in Australia has not successfully spread to the US . A reviewer for Billboard noted that with this album , Higgins was trying to broaden her market and said that On a Clear Night would appeal to fans of KT Tunstall and the " Grey 's Anatomy @-@ soundtrack crowd " . They said that " Steer " was a highlight and that Higgins sounded assured . Writing for Mix , Sarah <unk> commented on Higgins ' increased assertiveness with her second album and compared her to Sarah McLachlan and Alanis Morissette . She called the album lyrically rich and " beautifully stirring " . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 At the 2007 ARIA Music Awards Higgins was nominated for ' Best Pop Release ' , ' Highest Selling Album ' and ' Best Female Artist ' for On a Clear Night and ' Highest Selling Single ' for " Steer " . She won the award for ' Best Female Artist ' . It was her seventh ARIA . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs were written by Missy Higgins . 
 " Where I Stood " – 4 : 17 
 " 100 Round the Bends " – 2 : 58 
 " Steer " – 3 : 50 
 " Sugarcane " – 3 : 17 
 " Secret " – 4 : 07 
 " Warm Whispers " – 3 : 12 
 " The Wrong Girl " – 3 : 31 
 " Angela " – 3 : 03 
 " Peachy " – 2 : 39 
 " Going North " – 2 : 48 
 " Forgive Me " – 4 : 05 
 Limited Edition Tour DVD Edition 
 The Making Of " On A Clear Night " Documentary 
 " Steer " ( Video ) 
 " Where I Stood " ( Video ) 
 " Peachy " ( Video ) 
 " Steer " [ Director 's Cut ] ( Video ) 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = Madame Tussauds Hong Kong = 
 Madame Tussauds Hong Kong , part of the renowned chain of wax museums founded by Marie Tussaud of France , is located at the Peak Tower on Hong Kong Island in Hong Kong . It is the first Madame Tussauds museums in Asia , the other being the Shanghai branch , which opened in 2006 and the third branch at Singapore which opened in 2014 . The Hong Kong branch houses nearly 100 wax figures of internationally known personalities , with Asian figures taking up more than a third of the total , of which sixteen were Hong Kongers . The wax figures are featured in a range of themed settings such as Hong Kong Glamour , Music Icons , Historical and National Heroes , The Champions and World Premiere . 
 = = History = = 
 In the late 1990s , Madame Tussauds had outlets spanning worldwide in major cities such as London , Amsterdam and Las Vegas , but none was in the Asia @-@ Pacific region . When the " Madame Tussaud 's Touring Attraction " ran in Asian cities of Singapore and Australia , proving to be highly popular , the Tussauds Group decided to open a permanent outlet in Asia to cater to such demand , and Hong Kong was chosen for its proximity to the Asian markets . 
 Madame Tussauds Hong Kong opens at The Peak in 2000 , and features nearly 100 wax figures of internationally known personalities and local celebrities to date – with Asian figures taking up more than a third of the total , of which sixteen were Hong Kongers . Asian celebrities and superstars have often graced the unveiling of their wax likenesses with sizeable groups of their fans tagging along . In September 2005 , it began its renovation in its effort to bring an interactive and immersive entertainment experience to visitors . It re @-@ opened at a cost of HK $ 20 million ( US $ 2 @.@ 6 million ) on 18 May 2006 , adding a further 700 square metres ( 7 @,@ 500 sq ft ) of exhibition space on three floors and five themed areas . Visitors can journey through the attraction , stopping to mingle with the ' stars ' in a range of themed settings including Hong Kong Glamour , Music Icons , Historical and National Heroes , The Champions and World Premiere . 
 As of 2008 , the museum is headed by Bret Pidgeon , who is currently the general manager of Madame Tussauds Hong Kong and Shanghai . He has worked for eight years for Madame Tussauds in New York previously . The museum is accessible from Central via minibus , taxi or Peak Tram and opens all year round from 10 am to 10 pm daily . Admission fee is HK $ 140 ( US $ 18 ) for adults and HK $ 70 for children aged between 3 and 11 years old . 
 = = Wax figure making process = = 
 In over one or more sittings , a highly skilled sculptor from Madame Tussauds Studios who is given direct access to the celebrity will record the colours of the hair and eyes , and over 500 precise body measurements are referenced . Most important is to capture the look of the celebrity to reflect the personality of each unique individual . The next task is to make a clay model of the head and body which is used to create a mould . Wax cast of the head and hands are made from the mould , and the eyes are inserted . Each eye is hand @-@ painted to achieve a perfect match of the original . Real human hair is then inserted painstakingly strand by strand . 
 The head and hands are coloured using a blend of oil , water and acrylic colour . From the mould , the body is cast in fibreglass , and the head and hands are fitted to the fiberglass body and dressed in clothes that are often donated by the celebrity . The pose , clothes and expression on the face all contribute to making the figure as realistic as possible . The whole process usually takes up to six months by a team of 20 people to create and cost about HK $ 1 million each . 
 = = Unique figures = = 
 The figure of Miriam Yeung , unveiled on November 2006 , is the first in the world designed to giggle via in @-@ built sensors . Miriam is well known for her fun @-@ loving and bubbly personality , and Madame Tussauds want to capture that essence in her figure . 
 The figure of Connie Chan , unveiled on August 2006 , was the first figure to appear in full Chinese regalia . The model 's costume was inspired by the musical Only You , set in the Yuan Dynasty , in which Chan formerly starred . 
 The figure of Bae Yong @-@ joon , unveiled on May 2006 , is the first Korean star to be included in a Madame Tussauds exhibition . 
 The figure of Andy Lau , unveiled on April 2005 , was the outlet first animatronic model that was crafted out of silicone rather than wax . Lau 's animatronic heartbeat was modelled on a similar system installed in a replica of Brad Pitt at Madame Tussauds Amsterdam . 
 = = Featured personalities = = 
 The list of featured celebrities sorted according to on @-@ site themes are : 
 = = Madame Tussauds Shanghai = = 
 The second Asian outlet is located in the Chinese city of Shanghai . Attracted by Shanghai 's growing reputation and tourism volume in East Asia , the Tussauds Group approached Shanghai authorities to discuss the possibility of opening its second Asian location in early 2004 . The Shanghai authorities agreed with the proposal and Madame Tussauds Shanghai ( <unk> ) was opened on 1 May 2006 on the 10th floor of the New World Department Store at West Nanjing Road . 
 The Shanghai outlet houses nearly 75 wax figures of local and internationally known celebrities to date , and will add more in its second and third phases . The museum opens all year round from 10 am to 10 pm daily and it is divided up into seven themed sections : Glamour , Behind the Scenes , History and Heroes , Music , Film , Speed and Sport . Admission fee is RMB 135 ( US $ 20 ) for adults and RMB 100 for students . Madame Tussauds Shanghai is the Tussauds Group 's sixth waxwork museum after London , Amsterdam , Las Vegas , New York City and Hong Kong . 
 = Haakon IV of Norway = 
 Haakon Haakonsson ( c . March / April 1204 – 16 December 1263 ) ( Old Norse : Hákon Hákonarson ; Norwegian : Håkon <unk> ) , sometimes called Haakon the Old in contrast to his son with the same name , and known in modern regnal lists as Haakon IV , was the King of Norway from 1217 to 1263 . His reign lasted for 46 years , longer than any Norwegian king since Harald I. Haakon was born into the troubled civil war era in Norway , but his reign eventually managed to put an end to the internal conflicts . At the start of his reign , during his minority , his later rival Earl Skule Bårdsson served as regent . As a king of the birkebeiner faction , Haakon defeated the uprising of the final bagler royal pretender , Sigurd Ribbung , in 1227 . He put a definitive end to the civil war era when he had Skule Bårdsson killed in 1240 , a year after he had himself proclaimed king in opposition to Haakon . Haakon thereafter formally appointed his own son as his co @-@ regent . 
 Under Haakon 's rule , medieval Norway is considered to have reached its zenith or golden age . His reputation and formidable naval fleet allowed him to maintain friendships with both the Pope and the Holy Roman Emperor , despite their conflict . He was at different points offered the Imperial Crown by the Pope , the Irish High Kingship by a delegation of Irish kings , and the command of the French crusader fleet by the French king . He amplified the influence of European culture in Norway by importing and translating contemporary European literature into Old Norse , and by constructing monumental European @-@ style stone buildings . In conjunction with this he employed an active and aggressive foreign policy , and at the end of his rule added Iceland and the Norse Greenland community to his kingdom , leaving Norway at its territorial height . Although he for the moment managed to secure Norwegian control of the islands off the northern and western shores of Great Britain , he fell ill and died when wintering in Orkney following some military engagements with the expanding Scottish kingdom . 
 = = Historical sources = = 
 The main source of information concerning Haakon is the Saga of Haakon Haakonsson which was written in the immediate years following his death . Commissioned by his son Magnus , it was written by the Icelandic writer and politician Sturla Þórðarson ( nephew of the famous historian Snorri Sturluson ) . Having come into conflict with the royal representative in Iceland , Sturla came to Norway in 1263 in an attempt to reconcile with Haakon . When he arrived , he learned that Haakon was in Scotland , and that Magnus ruled Norway in his place . While Magnus initially took an unfriendly attitude towards Sturla , his talents as a story @-@ teller and skald eventually won him the favour of Magnus and his men . The saga is considered the most detailed and reliable of all sagas concerning Norwegian kings , building on both written archive material and oral information from individuals who had been close to Haakon . It is nonetheless written openly in support of the political program of the House of Sverre , and the legitimacy of Haakon 's kingship . 
 = = Background and childhood = = 
 Haakon was born in <unk> ( now in Eidsberg ) to Inga of <unk> in the summer of 1204 , probably in March or April . The father was widely regarded to have been King Haakon Sverresson , the leader of the birkebeiner faction in the ongoing civil war against the bagler , as Inga had been with Haakon in his hostel in Borg ( now Sarpsborg ) in late 1203 . Haakon Sverresson was dead by the time his son Haakon was born , but Inga 's claim was supported by several of Haakon Sverresson 's followers . Haakon was born in bagler @-@ controlled territory , and his mother 's claim placed them in a dangerous position . While the bagler started hunting Haakon , a group of birkebeiner warriors fled with the child in the winter of 1205 / 06 , heading for King Inge <unk> , the new birkebeiner king in Nidaros ( now Trondheim ) . As the party was struck by a blizzard , two of the best birkebeiner skiers , Torstein <unk> and <unk> <unk> , carried on with the child over the mountain from Lillehammer to Østerdalen . They eventually managed to bring Haakon to safety with King Inge ; this particular event is commemorated in modern @-@ day Norway by the popular annual skiing event Birkebeinerrennet . Haakon 's dramatic childhood was often <unk> with that of former king Olaf Tryggvasson ( who introduced Christianity to Norway ) , as well as with the gospels and Child Jesus , which served as an important ideological function for his kingship . 
 In the saga , Haakon is described as bright and witty , and as being small for his age . When he was three years old , Haakon was captured by the bagler but refused to call the bagler king Philip Simonsson his lord ( he nonetheless came from the capture unharmed ) . When he learned at the age of eight that King Inge and his brother Earl Haakon the Crazy had made an agreement of the succession to the throne that excluded himself , he pointed out that the agreement was invalid due to his attorney not having been present . He subsequently identified his attorney as " God and Saint Olaf . " Haakon was notably the first Norwegian king to receive formal education at a school . From the late civil war era , the government administration relied increasingly on written communication , which in turn demanded literate leaders . When Haakon was in Bergen under the care of Haakon the Crazy , he started receiving education from the age of seven , likely at the Bergen Cathedral School . He continued his education under King Inge at the Trondheim Cathedral School after the Earl 's death in 1214 . Haakon was brought up alongside Inge 's son Guttorm , and they were treated as the same . When he was eleven , some of Haakon 's friends provoked the king by asking him to give Haakon a region to govern . When Haakon was approached by the men and was urged to take up arms against Inge , he rejected it in part because of his young age and its bad prospects , as well as because he believed it would be morally wrong to fight Inge and thus split the birkebeiner . He instead said that he prayed that God would give him his share of his father 's inheritance when the time was right . 
 = = Reign = = 
 = = = Succession struggle = = = 
 After King Inge 's death in 1217 , a dispute erupted over who was to become his successor . In addition to Haakon who gained the support of the majority of the birkebeiners including the veterans who had served under his father and grandfather , candidates included Inge 's illegitimate son Guttorm ( who dropped out very soon ) , Inge 's half @-@ brother Earl Skule Bårdsson who had been appointed leader of the king 's hird at Inge 's deathbed and was supported by the Archbishop of Nidaros as well as part of the birkebeiners , and Haakon the Crazy 's son Knut Haakonsson . With his widespread popular support in Trøndelag and in Western Norway , Haakon was proclaimed king at Øyrating in June 1217 . He was later the same year hailed as king at Gulating in Bergen , and at <unk> , Borgarting and local things east of Elven ( Göta <unk> ) . While Skule 's supporters initially had attempted to cast doubt about Haakon 's royal ancestry , they eventually suspended open resistance to his candidacy . As the dispute could have threatened to split the birkebeiners in two , Skule settled on becoming regent for Haakon during his minority . 
 In connection with the dispute over the royal election , Haakon 's mother Inga had to prove his parentage through a trial by ordeal in Bergen in 1218 . The result of the trial strengthened the legal basis for his kingship , and improved his relationship with the church . The saga 's claim that Haakon already had been generally accepted as king in 1217 / 18 has however been contested by modern historians such as Sverre Bagge . Skule and Haakon increasingly drifted apart in their administration , and Skule focused mainly on governing Eastern Norway after 1220 , which he had gained the right to rule in 1218 as his third of the Norwegian kingdom . From 1221 to 1223 , Haakon and Skule separately issued letters as rulers of Norway , and maintained official contacts abroad . In 1223 a great meeting of bishops , clergy , secular nobles and other high @-@ ranking figures from all across the country was held in Bergen to finally decide on Haakon 's right to the throne . Other candidates to the throne were present either personally or through attorneys , but Haakon was in the end unanimously confirmed as King of Norway by the court . 
 The last bagler king Philip Simonsson died in 1217 . Speedy political and military manoeuvering by Skule led to a reconciliation between the birkebeiner and bagler , and thus the reunification of the kingdom . However , some discontented elements among the bagler found a new royal pretender , Sigurd Ribbung , and launched a new rising from 1219 . The rising only gained support in parts of Eastern Norway , and were unable to gain control of Viken and <unk> as the bagler formerly had done . In the summer of 1223 Skule eventually managed to force the <unk> to surrender . The great meeting in Bergen soon after however renewed the division of the Norwegian kingdom with Skule , who thereafter gained control of the northern third of the country instead of the east , in what marked a setback despite his military victory . In 1224 , Ribbung who had been in Skule 's custody escaped , and Haakon was left to fight him alone as the new ruler of Eastern Norway . Skule remained passive throughout the rest of the war , and his support for Haakon was lukewarm at best . Assuming the military lead in the fight , Haakon nevertheless defeated Ribbung through comprehensive and organisationally demanding warfare over the next years . As part of the campaign , Haakon additionally led a large army into Värmland , Sweden in 1225 in order to punish the inhabitants for their support of Ribbung . While Ribbung died in 1226 , the revolt was finally quashed in 1227 after the surrender of the last leader of the uprising , Haakon the Crazy 's son Knut Haakonsson . This left Haakon more or less uncontested monarch . 
 Haakon 's councillors had sought to reconcile Haakon and Skule by proposing marriage between Haakon and Skule 's daughter Margrete in 1219 . Haakon accepted the proposal ( although he did not think it would change much politically ) , but the marriage between Haakon and Margrete did not take place before 1225 , partly due to the conflict with Ribbung . The relationship between Haakon and Skule nevertheless deteriorated further during the 1230s , and attempts of settlements at meetings in 1233 and 1236 only distanced them more from each other . Periodically , the two nonetheless reconciled and spent a great amount of time together , only to have their friendship destroyed , according to the saga by intrigues derived from rumours and slander by men who played the two against each other . Skule was the first person ever in Norway to be titled Duke ( <unk> ) in 1237 , but instead of control over a region gained the rights to the incomes from a third of the <unk> scattered across the whole of Norway . This was part of an attempt by Haakon to limit Skule 's power . In 1239 the conflict between the two erupted into open warfare when Skule had himself proclaimed king . Although he had some support in Trøndelag , <unk> and in eastern Viken , he could not stand up to Haakon 's forces . The rebellion ended when Skule was killed in 1240 , leaving Haakon the undisputed king of Norway . This revolt is generally taken to mark the final end of Norway 's civil war era . 
 = = = Recognition by the Pope = = = 
 While the church in Norway initially had refused to recognise Haakon as King of Norway , it had largely turned to support his claim to the throne by the 1223 meeting , although later disagreements occurred . Despite additionally having become the undisputed ruler of Norway after 1240 , Haakon had still not been approved as king by the Pope due to his illegitimate birth . He nonetheless had a strong personal desire to be approved fully as a European king . Several papal commissions were appointed to investigate the matter , and Haakon declared his legitimate son Haakon the Young his successor instead of an older living illegitimate son . Although Haakon had children with his mistress Kanga the Young prior to his marriage with Margrete , it was his children with Margrete that was designated as his successors in accordance with a papal recognition . The Catholic principle of legitimacy was thus established in the Norwegian order of succession , although Haakon 's new law still maintained that illegitimate children could be designated as successor in the absence of any legitimate children or grandchildren — contrary to Catholic principles . While his strong position allowed him to set boundaries to the church 's political influence , he was on the other hand prepared to give the church much autonomy in internal affairs and relations with the rural society . 
 Haakon also attempted to strengthen his ties with the papacy by issuing a vow of crusade . In 1241 he however converted this into a vow of engaging in warfare against pagan peoples in the north in light of the Mongol invasion of Europe . When a group of Karelians ( " <unk> " ) had been forced westwards by the Mongols , Haakon allowed them to stay in <unk> and had them Christianized — something that would please the papacy . Later , in 1248 , Louis IX of France proposed ( by Matthew Paris as messenger ) to Haakon to join him for a crusade , with Haakon as commander of the fleet , but Haakon turned the offer down . While Haakon had been unsuccessful in gaining the recognition of Pope Gregory IX , he quickly gained the support from Pope Innocent IV who sought alliances in his struggle with Holy Roman Emperor Frederick II . Haakon finally achieved royal recognition by Pope Innocent in 1246 , and Cardinal William of Sabina was sent to Bergen and crowned Haakon in 1247 . 
 = = = Cultural influence and legal reforms = = = 
 After consolidating his position in 1240 , Haakon focused on displaying the supremacy of the kingship , influenced by the increasingly closer contact with European culture . He started constructing several monumental royal buildings , primarily in the royal estate in Bergen where he built a European @-@ style stone palace . He used a grand fleet with stately royal ships when meeting with other Scandinavian rulers , and actively sent letters and gifts to other European rulers ; his most far @-@ reaching contact was achieved when he sent gyrfalcons with an embassy to the Sultan of Tunis . 
 The royal court in Bergen also started importing and translating the first true European literature that became available to a wider Norwegian audience . The literature which was popular then was heroic @-@ romantic literature derived from the French and in turn English courts , notably chansons de geste around Charlemagne ( the Matter of France ) and tales of King Arthur ( the Matter of Britain ) . The first work that was translated into Old Norse was reportedly the Arthurian romantic story Tristan and Iseult , which was finished in 1226 after orders from the young and newly @-@ wed Haakon . Hákon 's programme seems to have been the spark for the emergence of a new Norse genre of chivalric sagas . 
 Haakon also had the popular religious text <unk> <unk> translated into Old Norse as <unk> <unk> . The literature also appealed to women , and both Haakon 's wife Margrete and his daughter Kristina owned richly illustrated psalters . 
 Haakon also initiated legal reforms which were crucial for the development of justice in Norway . Haakon 's " New Law " written around 1260 was a breakthrough for both the idea and practice of public justice , as opposed to the traditional Norwegian customs for feuds and revenge . The influence of the reforms is also apparent in Haakon 's King 's Mirror ( <unk> <unk> ) , an educational text intended for his son Magnus , which was probably written in cooperation with the royal court in the mid @-@ 1250s . 
 = = = <unk> abroad = = = 
 Relations were hostile with both Sweden and Denmark from the start . During his rivalry with Earl Skule , Skule attempted to gain the support of Valdemar II of Denmark , but any aid was made impossible after Valdemar 's capture by one of his vassals . Since the Danes wanted overlordship of Norway and supported the Guelphs ( those supporting the Pope over the Holy Roman Emperor ) , Haakon in turn sought closer ties with the Ghibelline Emperor Frederick II , who sent ambassadors to Norway . As Haakon had gained a powerful reputation due to the strength of his fleet , other European rulers wanted to benefit from his friendship . Despite the struggle between the Pope and the Emperor , Haakon was able to maintain friendships with both . According to an English chronicler , the Pope wanted Haakon to become Holy Roman Emperor . It has been suggested that Haakon hesitated to leave Norway due to the Mongol threat . 
 Haakon pursued a foreign policy that was active in all directions ( although foremost to the west and south @-@ east ) . In the north @-@ east , the relationship with Novgorod had been tense due to a dispute over the right to tax the Sami people , as well as raiding from both Norwegian and Karelian sides . Eventually , the Mongol threat drove Prince Alexander Nevsky to negotiations with Haakon that likely strengthened Norwegian control of Troms and Finnmark . An embassy from Novgorod one time asked for Haakon 's daughter Christina for a marriage , but Haakon refused due to the Mongol threat . Due to the Elven @-@ based Norwegian presence in the seas around the south of Sweden and into the Baltic Sea , Norway increasingly relied on Baltic grain from Lübeck . The import was however halted in the late 1240s due to the plundering of Norwegian ships in Danish seas by ships from Lübeck . In 1250 , Haakon made a peace and trade agreement with Lübeck , which eventually also opened the city of Bergen to the Hanseatic League . During the conflict , Haakon had reportedly been offered control over the city by Holy Roman Emperor Frederick II . In any case , Haakon 's policy regarding Northern German ports largely derived from his strategy of attempting to exploit the internal turmoil that had erupted in Denmark following the death of King Valdemar II in 1241 . 
 In Scandinavia , Haakon regularly met with neighbouring rulers in the border @-@ area around Elven from the late 1240s through the 1250s . Using grand fleets as envoys , Haakon 's fleet at most reportedly counted over 300 ships . Haakon sought to expand his kingdom southwards of Elven into the Danish province of Halland . He thus looked for alliance with the Swedes , as well as ties with opponents of the ruling line of monarchs of Denmark . Haakon made a deal with Swedish leader Earl Birger in 1249 about a joint Swedish @-@ Norwegian invasion into Halland and Scania , but the agreement was eventually abandoned by the Swedes ( see Treaty of <unk> ) . Haakon claimed Halland in 1253 , and finally invaded the province on his own in 1256 , demanding it as compensation for the looting of Norwegian ships in Danish seas . He was however forced to renounce his claims in 1257 after a peace agreement was made with Christopher I of Denmark . Haakon thereafter negotiated a marriage between his only remaining son Magnus and Ingeborg , daughter of former Danish king Eric <unk> . Haakon had also reconciled with the Swedes when he had his son Haakon the Young marry a daughter of Earl Birger . Haakon 's Nordic policies initiated the build @-@ up to the later personal unions ( called the Kalmar Union ) , that in the end had dire consequences for Norway as it did not have the economic and military resources to persevere and maintain Haakon 's aggressive policies . 
 More distantly , Haakon sought an alliance with Alfonso X of Castile , a potential next Holy Roman Emperor — chiefly as it would guarantee new supplies of grain in light of rising prices in England , and possibly giving access to Baltic grain through Norwegian control of Lübeck . Alfonso in turn sought to expand his influence in Northern Europe , as well as to gain Norwegian naval assistance for the campaign or crusade he had proposed in Morocco ( seeing that the Iberian Moors received backing overseas from North Africa ) . Haakon could thus potentially also fulfill his papal vow of crusade , although he likely did not intend to . He sent an embassy to Castile in 1255 , and the accompanying Castilian ambassador on the return to Norway proposed to establish the " strongest ties of friendship " with Haakon . At the request of Alfonso , Haakon gave his consent that his daughter Christina could go to Castile and marry one of Alfonso 's brothers . Christina 's death four years after the childless marriage , however , marked an effective end of the short @-@ lived " alliance " , and the proposed crusade fell into the blue . 
 = = = The Scottish expedition and death = = = 
 Haakon employed an active and aggressive foreign policy towards strengthening Norwegian ties in the west . His policy relied on friendship and trade with the English king ; the first known Norwegian trade agreements were made with England in the years 1217 – 23 ( England 's first commercial treaties were also made with Norway ) , and the friendship with Henry III of England was a cornerstone in Haakon 's foreign policy . As they had become kings around the same time , Haakon wrote to Henry in 1224 that he wished they could maintain the friendship that had existed between their fathers . Haakon sought to defend the Norwegian sovereignty over the islands in the west , namely the Hebrides and Man ( under the Kingdom of Mann and the Isles ) , Shetland and Orkney ( under the Earldom of Orkney ) , and the Faroe Islands . Further , the Norse community in Greenland agreed to submit to the Norwegian king in 1261 , and in 1262 Haakon achieved one of his long @-@ standing ambitions when he managed to incorporate Iceland into his kingdom by utilising the island 's internal conflicts in his favour . The dependency on Norwegian maritime trade and their subordination to the Nidaros ecclesiastical province were some of the key reasons which allowed Haakon to assert sovereignty over the islands . The Norwegian kingdom was at the largest it has ever been by the end of Haakon 's reign . 
 Norwegian control over the Faroe Islands and Shetland was strong due to the importance of Bergen as a trading centre , while Orkney , the Hebrides and Man had more natural ties with the Scottish mainland . Although traditionally having had ties with the community of Norse settlers in northern Scotland , Scottish rulers had increasingly asserted their sovereignty over the entire mainland . Haakon had at the same time gained stronger control of the Hebrides and Man than any Norwegian ruler since Magnus Barefoot . As part of a new development the Scottish king Alexander II claimed the Hebrides and requested to buy the islands from Norway , but Haakon staunchly rejected the proposals . Following Alexander II 's death , his son Alexander III continued and stepped up his father 's policy by sending an embassy to Norway in 1261 , and thereafter attacking the Hebrides . 
 In 1263 the dispute with the Scottish king over the Hebrides induced Haakon to undertake an expedition to the islands . Having learned in 1262 that Scottish nobles had raided the Hebrides and that Alexander III planned to conquer the islands , Haakon went on an expedition with his formidable leidang fleet of at least 120 ships in 1263 , having become accustomed to negotiating backed by an intimidating fleet . The fleet left Bergen in July , and reached Shetland and Orkney in August where they were joined by chieftains from the Hebrides and Man . Negotiations were started by Alexander following Norwegian landings on the Scottish mainland , but were purposely prolonged by the Scots . Having waited until September / October for weather that caused trouble for Haakon 's fleet , a clash occurred between a smaller Norwegian force and a Scottish division at the Battle of Largs . Although inconclusive and of a limited impact , Haakon withdrew to Orkney for the winter . A delegation of Irish kings invited Haakon to help them rid Ireland of English settlers as High King of Ireland , but this was apparently rejected against Haakon 's wish . 
 Haakon over @-@ wintered at the Bishop 's Palace in Kirkwall , Orkney , with plans to resume his campaign the next year . During his stay in Kirkwall he however fell ill , and died in the early hours of 16 December 1263 . Haakon was buried in the St Magnus Cathedral in Kirkwall for the winter , and when spring came he was exhumed and his body taken back to Norway , where he was buried in the Old Cathedral in his capital Bergen . Centuries later , in 1531 , the cathedral was demolished by the Danish feudal overlord <unk> Bille for military purposes in connection with the Protestant Reformation , and the graves of Haakon and other Norwegian kings buried there were apparently destroyed in the process . 
 = = Views on Haakon 's reign = = 
 Norwegian historians have held strongly differing views on Haakon 's reign . In the 19th century , historian P. A. Munch portrayed Haakon as a mighty , almost flawless ruler , which in turn influenced Henrik Ibsen in his 1863 play The Pretenders . In the early 20th century , poet Hans E. <unk> countered and viewed Haakon as an insignificant king subordinated to forces outside of his control , a view which influenced historians such as Halvdan Koht and Edvard Bull , Sr .. Haakon has often been compared with Skule Bårdsson , and historians have taken sides in the old conflict . While Munch saw Skule as a traitor to the rightful Norwegian king , Koht viewed Skule as a heroic figure . On more sketchy grounds , <unk> praised Skule as representing the original and dying Norse culture , and Haakon as a superficial emulator of foreign culture . Since the 1960s , historians including <unk> <unk> , Per <unk> Andersen , Knut Helle , Svein Haga and Kåre Lunden have in turn professed a reaction against Koht 's view . According to Sverre Bagge , modern historians tend to follow Koht when it comes to see Skule 's rebellion as a last desperate attempt to stop Haakon from <unk> his power , but lean closer to Munch 's overall evaluation of the two men . 
 Knut Helle interprets the saga to leave an impression of Skule as a skilled warrior and politician , while noting that the author of the saga purposely created a diffuse image of his role in the conflict with Haakon . On the other hand , Helle notes that Skule was outmaneuvered with relative ease by Haakon 's supporters in the immediate years after 1217 , and that this may suggest some limited abilities . While neither giving a clear picture of Haakon , Helle maintains that Haakon " obviously " learned to master the political game in his early years . He interprets Haakon as an independent and <unk> ruler whom he assigns a " significant personal responsibility " for the policies pursued during his reign — notably regarding the internal consolidation of the kingship , the orientation towards European culture and the aggressive foreign policy . In his article in Norsk biografisk leksikon , Knut Helle acknowledges that Haakon was empowered by the strong institutional position of the kingship at the end of his reign ( which it should be noted that he had developed himself ) , and that his policies were not always successful . It nonetheless recognises the substantial political abilities and powerful determination Haakon must have had in order to progress from the difficult position in which he started his reign . 
 = = Children and marriage = = 
 Haakon had two illegitimate children with his mistress Kanga the Young ( who is only known by name ) before 1225 . They were : 
 Sigurd ( died 1252 ) . 
 Cecilia ( died 1248 ) . Married <unk> Gregorius <unk> , a nephew of the last bagler king Philip Simonsson in 1241 . Widowed in 1246 , she married Harald Olafsson , King of Mann and the Isles in 1248 . They both drowned the same year on the return voyage to Great Britain . 
 Haakon married Margrete <unk> on 25 May 1225 , daughter of his rival Earl Skule Bårdsson . Their children were : 
 Olav ( born 1226 ) . Died in infancy . 
 Haakon the Young ( 1232 – 1257 ) . Married <unk> <unk> , daughter of the Swedish statesman Earl Birger in 1251 . He was appointed king and co @-@ ruler by his father in 1240 , but predeceased his father . 
 Christina ( 1234 – 1262 ) . Married Infante Philip of Castile , brother of Alfonso X of Castile in 1258 . She died childless . 
 Magnus VI of Norway ( 1238 – 1280 ) . Married Ingeborg , daughter of Eric IV of Denmark in 1261 . Was appointed king and co @-@ ruler following the death of Haakon the Young . Succeeded his father as King of Norway following his father 's death . 
 = = Olympic Mascot = = 
 Håkon and Kristin are the mascots of the 1994 Winter Olympics . Håkon is named after Haakon IV of Norway and Kristin after Christina of Norway . 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = Saudi Arabia women 's national football team = 
 The Saudi Arabia women 's national football team would be the national team representing the kingdom in international football . However , the team does not yet exist because of influence of religious leaders in Saudi Arabia and systematic discrimination against women 's sport , active opposition of political leaders and sport administrators . International pressure has come to bear on the country to field a women 's team , and FIFA now allows the hijab to be worn in competition . A meeting at the College of Business Administration in Jeddah was seen as a possible first step in a team eventually being created . 
 Despite a lack of official support for a national team and women 's football in general , women have self @-@ organised their own teams and play games out of the sight of men . Created in 2006 , King 's United women football club was the first women 's football club in the country . No official data is kept regarding participation rates for women football players . 
 = = Team = = 
 In 1985 , almost no country in the world had a women 's national football team including Saudi Arabia , who have not played in a FIFA @-@ recognised match as of June 2012 . In 2008 , based on the influence of conservative religious leaders in the country , the creation of a FIFA recognised women 's national team was banned by law . In June 2012 the team was not ranked in the world by FIFA and no team from the country has ever been FIFA ranked . 
 Growing the game and having an opportunity to have a women 's national team has been hindered by the systematic discrimination that all women 's sport is subject to in the country . Saudi Arabia 's Olympic Committee head Nawaf bin Faisal is quoted as saying that the committee should " not be endorsing any female participation at the moment " . In November 2011 , Ahmad Eid Al @-@ Harbi , vice president of the Player Status Committee for the Saudi Arabian Football Federation , said of the creation of a women 's national team : " Saudi society is a very conservative one , even when it comes to men ’ s clubs . No one can imagine his daughter playing in front of thousands of people wearing shorts , such as in soccer . " Leaders in Saudi Arabian sport held a meeting in mid @-@ 2011 at the College of Business Administration in Jeddah where they discussed women 's sport and possible participation of women as part of the Saudi Arabian national team at the Olympic Games . They were inspired by the example of seven other Arab nations having successfully created women 's national football teams . During 2012 opposition to women 's participation in sport softened with the national Olympic Committee and the Saudi Embassy in London announcing that women 's participation at the 2012 Summer Olympics would be permitted if they were invited . 
 No Saudi women 's national football team will be competing at the 2012 London Olympics , despite extensive pressure from the International Olympic Committee . Still , in 2012 , the national federation was quietly arguing with the International Football Association Board not to allow women 's participation if they were wearing the hijab while playing . The logic they followed was that if FIFA allowed women to wear the hijab in recognised matches , it would be much more difficult for the federation to prevent a national team from being created . There is a lot of pressure being put on the sporting community to allow for national representation of women on the international team as the kingdom will likely be the last nation in the world to prohibit women from competing at the Olympics . If the Saudis can successfully argue the hijab cannot be worn in competition , it would make them less isolated internationally as other teams in the Arab world would be less likely to compete in the upcoming FIFA Women 's Under @-@ 17 World Cup . PRI 's The World said in late 2011 : " Who knows . In 10 years Saudi Arabia might just have a formidable national women 's soccer team . " A current female football player in the country said of the situation as it pertains to the national team : " Our generation started the game , the leagues , the structure . The next generation will have it on a silver platter . We may not get to play for a national team but we 're laying the groundwork . " 
 = = Background and development = = 
 The national federation was created in 1956 and became a FIFA affiliate in 1956 . However women 's football is not included in the country 's FIFA coordinated Goals ! project . By 2011 , inside the Saudi Arabia Football Federation , there has been an effort to create women 's football programs at universities . Input had been sought on how to do this from other national federations including ones from the United States , Germany , Brazil and the United Kingdom . On the men 's side of the game , the national federation has funded efforts to improve the quality of the Saudi Arabia men 's national football team . 
 Founded in 2006 , King 's United women football club was the first women 's football club in the country . In 2009 , they trained in Jeddah . The team was initially sponsored by Prince Alwaleed bin Talal but facing scrutiny in the face of intense media coverage , he withdrew his support in 2009 . In 2012 , the team trained three times a week outside the sight of men , with players wearing traditional football kit of short sleeved shirts and shorts . The team is coached by Reema Abdullah who also is the team 's striker . It has 35 players who range in age from 13 to 35 . Other women 's teams have been created in the country in cities like Riyadh and Dammam and a tournament was held in 2008 , with seven teams competing and the event being won by King 's United . The first match between two female teams in the country occurred in January 2008 when the Prince Mohammad bin Fahd University team beat Al @-@ Yamamah College in a match played at Dammam 's 35 @,@ 000 @-@ spectator capacity Prince Mohamed bin Fahd Stadium in a shootout victory before an all @-@ women audience . The player of the match was Al @-@ Yamamah College 's goalkeeper . In March 2009 , a women 's charity football match was held between a team called " University " and a team called " Barcelona " that was attended by 400 female fans and no men . The game was won 2 – 1 by University and earned <unk> ( $ 21 @,@ 598 ) to go towards people with disabilities in the eastern part of the kingdom . 
 As of 2006 , no data was available for the number of women 's football players in the country . In 2006 , there was international uproar when Saudi authorities sought to prevent women from attending a game between the Saudi Arabia national football team and the Sweden national football team . In 2008 , the situation for women 's football in the Middle East was said by author Gary Brecher to be up there in popularity of freedom and democracy in the region . An all @-@ women 's school sporting competition was held at <unk> University in 2010 . The tournament was investigated by Saudi authorities because , according to Ahmed al @-@ <unk> , director of the Girls Education Department in Jeddah , the country does not have " any regulations that say that it 's okay for girl schools to hold sports classes or training " . In 2011 , women 's football was seen as a way to combat a growing problem of obesity in the country . 
 = Ajtony = 
 Ajtony , Ahtum or Achtum ( Hungarian : Ajtony , Bulgarian : <unk> , Romanian : Ahtum , Serbian : <unk> ) was an early @-@ 11th @-@ century ruler in the territory now known as Banat in present Romania and Serbia . His primary source is the Long Life of Saint Gerard , a 14th @-@ century hagiography . Ajtony was a powerful ruler who owned many horses , cattle and sheep and was baptised according to the Orthodox rite in Vidin . He taxed salt which was transferred to King Stephen I of Hungary on the Mureș River . The king sent Csanád , Ajtony 's former commander @-@ in @-@ chief , against him at the head of a large army . Csanád defeated and killed Ajtony , occupying his realm . In the territory , at least one county and a Roman Catholic diocese were established . 
 Historians disagree on the year of Ajtony 's defeat ; it may have occurred in 1002 , 1008 or between 1027 and 1030 . His ethnicity is also a subject of historical debate ; he may have been Hungarian , Kabar , Pecheneg or Romanian . In Romanian historiography Ajtony is viewed as the last member of a Romanian ruling family founded by Glad , lord of Banat around 900 according to the Gesta Hungarorum . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Magyars ( or Hungarians ) , who had lived on the Pontic steppe for decades , invaded the Carpathian Basin after their defeat by a coalition of Bulgarians and Pechenegs about 895 AD . Byzantine Emperor Constantine Porphyrogenitus wrote that the seven Magyar tribes formed a confederation with the Kabars . Although the Kabars had originally lived in the Khazar Khaganate , they rebelled against the Khazars and joined the Magyars on the Pontic steppe . 
 According to churchman Regino of Prüm , Constantine Porphyrogenitus and other contemporary sources , the Magyars fought the Bavarians , Bulgarians , <unk> , Franks and Moravians in the Carpathian Basin . Among the Magyars ' opponents the same sources noted many local rulers , including Svatopluk I of Moravia , Luitpold of Bavaria and Braslav , Duke of Lower Pannonia . The Gesta Hungarorum — the earliest extant Hungarian chronicle , written after 1150 — instead mentioned Glad , lord of the lands between the Danube and the Mureș ( now known as the Banat in Romania and Serbia ) and other local rulers absent from the earlier sources . Therefore , the credibility of the Gesta reports is a subject of scholarly debate . Although Vlad Georgescu , Ioan Aurel Pop and other historians describe Glad as one of the local Romanian rulers who attempted to resist the invading Hungarians , other scholars — including Pál Engel and György Györffy — call him one of the dozen " imaginary figures " invented by Anonymus ( author of the Gesta ) as foes in the Hungarian conquest of the Carpathian Basin . 
 Constantine Porphyrogenitus identified " the whole settlement of Turkey " ( Hungary ) with the basins of five rivers — the <unk> , Mureș , Timiș , Tisza and the unidentified " Toutis " — around 950 , indicating that the land east of the Tisza was ruled by the Hungarians at that time . The emperor apparently received information about the Carpathian Basin situation from <unk> , Bulcsú and Gylas , three Hungarian chieftains who visited Constantinople during the mid @-@ 10th century . According to Byzantine historian John Skylitzes , Bulcsú and Gylas were baptised during their visit . Bulcsú , Skylitzes wrote , still " violated his contract with God and often invaded " the Byzantine Empire ; Gylas , however , " remained faithful to Christianity " and made no further inroads against the empire . Skylitzes also mentioned a Greek monk , Hierotheos , who was ordained bishop for the Hungarians . Hierotheos accompanied Gylas back to Hungary and " converted many from the barbaric fallacy to Christianity " . Most 10th @-@ century Byzantine coins and artifacts have been unearthed around the confluence of the Tisza and the Mureș , particularly in the Banat . Tudor Sălăgean , Florin Curta and other historians posit that Gylas 's lands must have been in these territories , but their theory is not universally accepted . 
 Unlike Gylas , who chose the Eastern Orthodox Church , Géza , Grand Prince of the Hungarians , opted for Western Christianity and a cleric from the Holy Roman Empire ( according to most scholars , Bruno from the Abbey of Saint Gall ) baptised him during the 970s . Thietmar of Merseburg and other 11th @-@ century authors emphasized that Géza was a cruel ruler , suggesting that the unification of the Hungarian chieftains ' lands began under him . Géza was succeeded by his son , Stephen , who was crowned the first king of Hungary in 1000 or 1001 . 
 = = In primary sources = = 
 The principal source of Ajtony 's life is the Long Life of Saint Gerard , compiled from a number of earlier sources in the early 14th century . According to modern historians ( including Carlile Aylmer Macartney and Florin Curta ) , all information on Ajtony incorporated into the Long Life was based on a ballad about the heroic deeds of Csanád — Ajtony 's former commander @-@ in @-@ chief — because a shorter version of Bishop Gerard of Csanád 's life does not mention Ajtony . Most historians agree that the ballad was composed shortly after Ajtony 's death . In addition to the Long Life , Ajtony is mentioned in the Gesta Hungarorum ; the Hungarian chronicle was written after around 1150 . According to the Gesta , Ajtony was descended from Glad ( in the same source , lord of the Banat ) ; however , its credibility is questioned . In a 1499 sermon the Franciscan <unk> <unk> wrote that Ajtony was from the Nyírség region , but no evidence exists to indicate that <unk> knew his place of birth . 
 Ajtony 's name , recorded in the earliest sources as " <unk> " or " Achtum " , is of Turkic origin . According to linguist <unk> <unk> , his name is rooted in the Turkic word for golden ( <unk> ) and changed in Hungarian . Place names also echo his name ; an abbey named <unk> ( Ajtony 's monastery ) existed in Csanád County and a village ( <unk> ) in <unk> County , and a settlement named Aiton exists in Romania . 
 According to the Long Life , Ajtony 's seat was a stronghold on the Mureș ( <unk> <unk> ) . His realm extended from the <unk> in the north to the Danube in the south , and from the Tisza in the west to Transylvania in the east . Ajtony was a wealthy ruler who owned horses , cattle and sheep , and was powerful enough to establish customs offices and guards along the Mureș and tax salt carried to Stephen I of Hungary on the river . 
 Originally a pagan , Ajtony was baptised according to the Greek rite in Vidin . Shortly after his baptism , he established a monastery for Greek monks at his seat which was dedicated to John the Baptist . Ajtony remained polygamous , with seven wives after his baptism . In the Long Life Ajtony " had taken his power from the Greeks " , suggesting that he accepted the Byzantine emperor 's suzerainty . 
 Ajtony 's commander @-@ in @-@ chief was Csanád , described in the Gesta Hungarorum as the " son of Doboka and nephew " of King Stephen . Accused of conspiring against Ajtony , Csanád fled to Stephen ; the king prepared to conquer Ajtony 's realm , placing Csanád at the head of a large army . After crossing the Tisza , the royal army engaged Ajtony 's troops but was forced to withdraw . In a second battle , Stephen 's army routed Ajtony 's troops near modern <unk> <unk> or at <unk> . Csanád killed Ajtony , either on the battlefield ( according to the Long Life ) or in his stronghold on the Mureș ( according to the Gesta Hungarorum ) . In the Long Life Csanád cut out Ajtony 's tongue after his death , enabling him to prove that he had killed Ajtony ( and exposing Gyula , who had taken credit for the deed in Stephen 's presence ) . Archaeologist István Erdélyi said that the Treasure of Sânnicolau Mare , excavated near Ajtony 's seat , was connected to the ruler ; however , his view has not been universally accepted by scholars . 
 King Stephen granted large estates to Csanád in the lands Ajtony had ruled . Ajtony 's stronghold , now known as Cenad ( Hungarian : Csanád ) , was named for Stephen 's commander . The king also appointed Csanád the head ( or ispán ) of the county made up of Ajtony 's former realm . Stephen established a Roman Catholic diocese in Cenad , with the Venetian monk Gerard its first bishop . The Greek monks from Cenad were transferred to a new monastery built by Csanád at <unk> <unk> . Ajtony 's descendants owned land in the region , indicating that King Stephen had not confiscated all of his predecessor 's domain . 
 = = In modern historiography = = 
 Ajtony 's ethnicity is debated . Historian Paul Stephenson described him as a Magyar chieftain ; according to historian László Makkai , he was of Kabar origin and his Turkic name may imply that he was a Pecheneg . In Romanian historiography , Ajtony has been considered the last member of a Romanian dynasty descended from Glad ; historian Alexandru Madgearu wrote that the Latin name of Ajtony 's seat ( <unk> <unk> ) preserved a Romanian form . 
 The date of Ajtony 's conquest is also uncertain . His close contacts with the Byzantine Empire , including his " Greek rite " baptism in Vidin , show that he ruled after the Byzantine Emperor Basil II seized Vidin from the Bulgarians in 1002 . The conflict between Ajtony and King Stephen must have occurred before the king appointed Gerard the first bishop of Csanád in 1030 . Alexandru Madgearu , who called Ajtony an ally of Samuel of Bulgaria rather than Emperor Basil II , wrote that Stephen I 's army occupied Ajtony 's realm in parallel with Basil II 's 1002 conquest of Vidin . Makkai placed the conquest of Ajtony 's realm in 1008 . According to Pop , Stephen I decided to invade the Banat after a 1027 Pecheneg raid on the Byzantine Empire and Emperor Constantine VIII 's death the following year . Pop also writes that Ajtony 's former duchy was not fully incorporated into the Kingdom of Hungary until the 13th century because frequent internal conflicts had enabled the Romanians to preserve their idea of a " Romanian country " . Curta rejected the Long Life account of Ajtony altogether , calling it a " family legend " from a 14th @-@ century hagiography . 
 = = = Primary = = = 
 = = = Secondary = = = 
 = Ferugliotherium = 
 Ferugliotherium is a genus of fossil mammals from the Campanian and / or Maastrichtian ( Late Cretaceous , around 70 million years ago ) of Argentina in the family Ferugliotheriidae . It contains a single species , Ferugliotherium windhauseni , which was first described in 1986 . Originally interpreted as a member of Multituberculata , an extinct group of small , rodent @-@ like mammals , on the basis of a single brachydont ( low @-@ crowned ) molar , it was recognized as related to the hypsodont ( high @-@ crowned ) Sudamericidae after the discovery of additional material in the early 1990s . After a jaw of the sudamericid Sudamerica was described in 1999 , these animals ( collectively known as Gondwanatheria ) were no longer considered to be multituberculates and a few fossils that were previously considered to be Ferugliotherium were assigned to unspecified multituberculates instead . Since 2005 , a relationship between gondwanatheres and multituberculates has again received support . A closely related animal , Trapalcotherium , was described in 2009 on the basis of a single tooth . 
 About twenty teeth and a jaw fragment have been referred to Ferugliotherium , but the assignment of many of these is controversial or has been superseded . The upper and lower incisors are long and rodent @-@ like and have enamel on only one side of the crown . A fragment of the lower jaw shows that the tooth socket of the lower incisor was very long , extending below the fourth premolar ( p4 ) . The p4 is preserved in this fragment . It is blade @-@ shaped and resembles multituberculate p4s . However , the determination of this fossil as Ferugliotherium is in question . The identity of a few additional isolated premolars assigned to Ferugliotherium , some resembling multituberculates , is also uncertain . The first lower molariform ( molar @-@ like tooth ; mf1 ) is known from four examples , of which two were originally identified as upper molars of a different species ( Vucetichia gracilis ) , which is now considered a synonym of Ferugliotherium . They bear two longitudinal rows of three or four cusps and transverse crests and furrows . A single example each of the second lower ( mf2 ) and first upper molariform ( MF1 ) show that these teeth also had longitudinal cusp rows and transverse furrows and crests , but the mf2 had only two or perhaps three cusps per row and the MF1 had three longitudinal rows . 
 Although Ferugliotherium teeth are much lower @-@ crowned than those of the Sudamericidae , they share an essentially similar pattern on the occlusal ( chewing ) surface of mf1 and mf2 , similar incisors , backward jaw movement during chewing , and enamel with small prisms . Ferugliotherium is thought to have been a small animal , with a body mass of about 70 g ( 2 @.@ 5 oz ) , and may have eaten insects and plant material . Its remains have been found in two geological formations of southern Argentina , where it is part of a mammal fauna that also includes the sudamericid Gondwanatherium and a variety of dryolestoids . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Ferugliotherium windhauseni was named in 1986 by Argentinean paleontologist José Bonaparte on the basis of a single second lower molar ( m2 ) from the Late Cretaceous Los Alamitos Formation of Argentina . Both the generic name , Ferugliotherium , and the specific name , windhauseni , honor geologists who studied the geology of Patagonia : Egidio <unk> and Anselmo <unk> , respectively . Bonaparte created a new family , Ferugliotheriidae , for the new species and tentatively assigned it to Multituberculata , an extinct group of mammals that was diverse during the late Cretaceous , mostly in the northern continents ( Laurasia ) . In subsequent years , other finds permitted a more confident assignment to Multituberculata . In 1990 , Bonaparte described Vucetichia gracilis on the basis of what he interpreted as two upper molars of a relative of Gondwanatherium within the order Gondwanatheria , a small mammalian group that was at the time known only from Argentinean fossils and thought to be related to xenarthrans as part of a group called Paratheria . The generic name , Vucetichia , commemorates Argentinean paleontologist Guiomar <unk> , and the specific name , gracilis ( Latin for " slender " ) , refers to the animal 's small size . 
 However , in 1990 David W. Krause and Bonaparte argued that Gondwanatheria , including Ferugliotherium ( family Ferugliotheriidae ) , Gondwanatherium , and Sudamerica ( family Sudamericidae ) , should be placed within Multituberculata . Two years later , Krause , Bonaparte , and Zofia Kielan @-@ Jaworowska described additional material of Ferugliotherium ( which they tentatively placed in the multituberculate suborder Plagiaulacoidea ) and suggested that the supposed upper molars of Vucetichia were in fact heavily worn first lower molariforms ( mf1 ) of Ferugliotherium . In 1993 , Krause described an unworn mf1 of Ferugliotherium and confirmed that Vucetichia was based on worn specimens of Ferugliotherium and therefore a synonym of the latter . In the same year , he and Bonaparte argued once again that Ferugliotherium , Gondwanatherium , and Sudamerica formed a closely related group of multituberculates , which they called the superfamily <unk> . Kielan @-@ Jaworowska and Bonaparte described a lower jaw fragment with a multituberculate @-@ like lower fourth premolar ( p4 ) from Los Alamitos in 1996 and tentatively identified it as Ferugliotherium . On the basis of the morphological features of the jaw fragment , they argued that gondwanatherians were not closely related to any other multituberculate group , and consequently placed them in a suborder of their own , Gondwanatheria . 
 In 1999 , Rosendo Pascual and colleagues described a jaw of Sudamerica . Because some of this jaw 's features were thought to be incompatible with a multituberculate identity , they regarded gondwanatheres ( including Ferugliotherium ) as Mammalia incertae sedis . However , in 2009 Yamila Gurovich and Robin Beck argued in favor of a close relationship between gondwanatheres ( including Ferugliotherium ) and multituberculates . The controversy is partially due to disagreement over the assignment of two upper premolars and the jaw fragment described by Kielan @-@ Jaworowska and Bonaparte in 1996 ; Gurovich and Beck identify these as Ferugliotherium , while Kielan @-@ Jaworowska and others regard them as indeterminate multituberculates . 
 In the 2000s , some possible close relatives of Ferugliotherium were discovered . An enigmatic tooth from the Paleogene of Peru , LACM 149371 , was described in 2004 as possibly related to the family Ferugliotheriidae . Kielan @-@ Jaworowska and colleagues described a p4 from the La Colonia Formation ( Late Cretaceous of Argentina ) as a new multituberculate genus , Argentodites , in 2007 , but Gurovich and Beck noted close similarities between this p4 and the p4 in the possible jaw fragment of Ferugliotherium and suggested that it represented Ferugliotherium or a closely related species . A single mf1 from the Allen Formation ( Late Cretaceous of Argentina ) was described as another ferugliotheriid genus , Trapalcotherium , in 2009 . 
 = = Description = = 
 Ferugliotherium is known from isolated teeth , the assignment of some of which is controversial . The material from the Los Alamitos Formation , which is mostly in the Museo Argentino de Ciencias Naturales Bernardino Rivadavia ( MACN ) in Buenos Aires , with one tooth in the Museo de La Plata ( MLP ) in La Plata , Argentina , has been thoroughly described ; while there are additional Ferugliotherium fossils from the La Colonia Formation , they have not been described in detail . Although the fragmentary nature of the known fossils of Ferugliotherium makes it impossible to determine its dental formula with certainty , Gurovich suggested that it had one incisor ( possibly two in the upper jaw ) , no canines , one or two premolars , and two molars on each side of the lower and upper jaws . However , on the basis of comparisons with Sudamerica , which is known to have had four lower molariforms ( molar @-@ like teeth , either premolars or molars ) in its lower jaw , Pascual and Ortiz @-@ <unk> suggested in 2007 that Ferugliotherium may also have had four lower molars . 
 Ferugliotherium was much smaller than the sudamericids Gondwanatherium and Sudamerica , and its body mass is estimated to have been about 70 g ( 2 @.@ 5 oz ) . Unlike the hypsodont ( high @-@ crowned ) sudamericids , Ferugliotherium has brachydont ( low @-@ crowned ) molariform teeth that are supported by at least two roots , not a single massive root . The direction of wear on the teeth indicates that Ferugliotherium , Gondwanatherium , and Sudamerica all had <unk> jaw movement ( i.e. , the lower jaw moved backwards during the power stroke of chewing ) — a feature otherwise only seen in multituberculates among mammals . 
 = = = Incisors = = = 
 Three fragmentary Ferugliotherium lower incisors ( MACN Pv @-@ RN 701A , <unk> , and 701C ) are known from the Los Alamitos Formation . Another incisor , MACN Pv @-@ RN 970 , was assigned to Ferugliotherium by Bonaparte in 1990 , but it is much larger than the other three incisors , which are otherwise similar , and probably represents Gondwanatherium instead . Only the tips of the three incisors are preserved . They are laterally compressed , with an estimated width of 1 @.@ 3 mm and height of 2 @.@ 4 mm in 701A . The medial side ( towards the middle of the mouth ) is flat , but the lateral side ( towards the sides ) is convex . There is enamel only on the lower ( ventral ) side . A large wear facet is present at the tip , forming an angle of about 35 ° with the ventral margin in 701A . The three incisor fragments are identified as Ferugliotherium because of their size and provenance and the presence of a restricted enamel band . They show features , such as lateral compression , an acute angle at the tip , small curvature , and an irregular cross section , that are usually seen in lower , not upper incisors in mammals with procumbent incisors , such as rodents and <unk> multituberculates . 
 Four specimens ( MACN Pv @-@ RN 702A through <unk> ) are thought to represent second upper incisors ( I2 ) of Ferugliotherium . 702A ( height 1 @.@ 5 mm ; width 1 @.@ 1 mm ) and <unk> are slightly larger than 702C ( height 1 @.@ 2 mm ; width 0 @.@ 9 mm ) and <unk> . The smaller incisors cannot be lateral incisors ( I3 ) , because 702C 's wear facet is stronger than would be expected in an I3 ; therefore , all four upper incisors are identified as central incisors ( I2 ) . To explain the size difference , Krause and colleagues suggested that Ferugliotherium was variable in size or that the smaller incisors were deciduous precursors of the larger permanent tooth . They considered it less likely that multiple species with similar incisors were present . The upper incisors have enamel only on the dorsal side . The wear facet at the tip is preserved only in 702C , forming an angle of 52 ° with the dorsal side , and is more concave than the facet in the lower incisors . 702A – D are recognizable as upper incisors because they have a less acute angle at the tip and are less laterally compressed , more curved , and elliptical in cross section . 
 Incisors of Ferugliotherium and Gondwanatherium are similar in overall shape and share a restricted band of enamel — a feature otherwise seen only in multituberculates among Mesozoic mammals . The incisors of Sudamerica are also similar . 
 = = = Mandible with lower premolar = = = 
 MACN Pv @-@ RN 975 , a fragment of the mandible ( lower jaw ) preserving one premolar , was discovered in 1991 and tentatively identified as Ferugliotherium by Kielan @-@ Jaworowska and Bonaparte in 1996 , but this assignment remains controversial . The poorly preserved and worn premolar is a bladelike tooth , resembling multituberculate fourth lower premolars ( p4 ) . The premolar is 4 @.@ 8 mm long and bears eight faint ridges on both the labial ( towards the lips ) and lingual ( towards the tongue ) sides . On the labial side , the four ridges at the back are more widely separated than the four in front of them . The back and front margins of the tooth are parallel and there is no small cusp on the labial side . There are two roots ; the one at the front is larger than the one at the back and bears a furrow . The lower border of the enamel cover is marked by two semicircular extensions of the enamel on the front side , but there is only one such extension at the back . By its size , the number of ridges , and apparently greater length than height , it differs from all known multituberculate first , second , and third lower premolars , indicating that it is a p4 . 
 The dentary ( lower jaw bone ) itself is robust and short . The length axis of the p4 makes an angle of about 58 ° with the length axis of the jawbone . The bone is concave on the lingual , but convex on the labial side . There is a diastema ( gap ) between the p4 and the incisor that would have been in front of it , as in the jaw of Sudamerica . Gurovich estimated the length of the diastema as 2 @.@ 5 mm . There is a rounded mental foramen ( an opening in the labial side of the jawbone ) , with a diameter of 0 @.@ 7 mm , located about 0 @.@ 8 mm below the dorsal margin of the bone and 1 @.@ 5 mm in front of the p4 . Although the incisor itself is not preserved , its alveolus ( the housing of the root ) is in part . As in Sudamerica , it extends far into the dentary , passing below p4 . The alveolus is 1 @.@ 5 mm wide below the front root of p4 and 1 @.@ 4 mm at the back of the jaw fragment . Although the height of the alveolus cannot be determined because the lower side is broken away , the incisor must have been quite deep . 
 When it was discovered that Sudamerica had four molariform teeth and no bladelike premolar in its lower jaw , Pascual , Kielan @-@ Jaworowska , and colleagues removed MACN Pv @-@ RN 975 from Ferugliotherium , which they expected to have the same dental formula as its fellow gondwanathere Sudamerica , and identified it as an indeterminate multituberculate instead . Pascual and colleagues argued that molariform teeth as seen in Sudamerica could not have evolved from the bladelike p4 of Ferugliotherium , and that it was unlikely that additional molars had been added in Sudamerica . In 2004 and 2007 , Kielan @-@ Jaworowska and colleagues aligned the dentary with the multituberculate suborder " <unk> " because the p4 is rectangular in labial view , not curved as in the suborder Cimolodonta . This feature was also used to distinguish MACN Pv @-@ RN 975 from the single p4 assigned to Argentodites , which was tentatively placed in Cimolodonta . 
 Gurovich , Guillermo Rougier , and colleagues , on the other hand , maintain that the dentary is referable to Ferugliotherium and that the p4s of Argentodites and MACN Pv @-@ RN 975 are very similar . The alveolus of MACN Pv @-@ RN 975 fits the lower incisors attributed to Ferugliotherium in size and the blade @-@ like premolar is of the size expected for an animal with molariforms the size of Ferugliotherium teeth . If the dentary and premolars ( whose identification has been similarly controversial ; see below ) do not belong to Ferugliotherium , then , Gurovich and Beck argue , the Los Alamitos Formation would contain two mammals ( Ferugliotherium and a multituberculate ) similar in size and morphology , and therefore presumably occupying similar ecological niches — and one of those would be represented only by molariforms and incisors and the other only by premolars and a jaw fragment among the available fossils . Furthermore , they noted that the transition from blade @-@ like to molariform premolars had actually been observed in the fossil record of the extinct <unk> kangaroos , and that the first molariform in Sudamerica and Gondwanatherium is laterally compressed , suggesting that it may have derived from a blade @-@ like tooth . Gurovich and Beck attributed the difference in shape between the MACN Pv @-@ RN 975 and Argentodites p4s to the extensive wear of the former , and suggested that the two are similar enough that they probably represent at least closely related species . 
 = = = Other premolars = = = 
 Krause and colleagues identified a single tooth , MACN Pv @-@ RN 251 , as a possible deciduous anterior ( i.e. , not p4 or <unk> , the deciduous version of p4 ) lower premolar of Ferugliotherium . It is minuscule , with a length of 0 @.@ 85 mm and width of 0 @.@ 5 mm ( assuming the tooth is oriented correctly ) . It bears two serrations ( small projections ) at the tip of the crown — one around the middle of the crown and the other at what may be the back of the crown , where it is highest . Two prominent ridges descend from each serration towards the front down the sides of the tooth . No roots are preserved , but the rounded surface of the lower side of the tooth suggests they may have been resorbed , which would indicate that the tooth is deciduous . Krause and colleagues suggested that the tooth may have been the frontmost premolar , whether deciduous or permanent . However , Kielan @-@ Jaworowska and Bonaparte wrote that this tooth does not match the partial jaw MACN Pv @-@ RN 975 , which has no alveoli in front of p4 , and Pascual and colleagues agreed in 1999 that the tooth probably does not belong to Ferugliotherium . 
 Bonaparte had identified another tooth , MACN Pv @-@ RN 252 , as a possible Ferugliotherium lower premolar in 1990 , but this fossil is very fragmentary and according to Krause and colleagues , it cannot even be proven to be a mammalian tooth . 
 Krause and colleagues identified two teeth , MACN Pv @-@ RN 249 and 250 , as anterior upper premolars . 249 bears two longitudinal rows of cusps . One row ( row A ; possibly the lingual one ) includes four cusps , the other ( row B ) includes at least two , but is damaged . In row A , there are three ridges ( at the front , middle , and back ) extending from the tip of the base of each cusp . The second and third cusps are largest and most widely separated from each other . In row B , one cusp bears three ridges , of which one extends towards the other cusp in the row and the two others towards row A ) and the other cusp is damaged . 250 is more fragmentary , but bears at least five cusps and may represent the same tooth position as 249 , though it would come from the opposite side of the mouth . The microstructure of the enamel of this tooth has been studied . With a width of about 55 μm near the tip of a cusp , the enamel is thin . The enamel prisms are straight , small , and rounded and there is little material between the prisms . Small , rounded prisms are also seen in Gondwanatherium , Sudamerica , and other gondwanatheres , but in few multituberculates . Even in those multituberculates that do have small prisms , the prism sheath is closed , but the sheath is incomplete in Gondwanatherium and possibly Ferugliotherium . 
 Krause and colleagues wrote that these two teeth resemble multituberculate deciduous anterior upper premolars , particularly second and third premolars ( P2 and P3 ) , and used this as one of their arguments for identifying Ferugliotherium as a multituberculate . However , as with the dentary MACN Pv @-@ RN 975 , the two upper premolars were excluded from Ferugliotherium and identified as multituberculates by Kielan @-@ Jaworowska and colleagues after the discovery of the jaw of Sudamerica . Gurovich continues to identify them as Ferugliotherium on the basis of their size and provenance and other similarities between Ferugliotherium and multituberculates . 
 = = = Lower molariforms = = = 
 Five putative lower molariforms of Ferugliotherium are known from the Los Alamitos Formation ( MACN Pv @-@ RN 20 , 174 , 175 , and 253 and MLP 88 @-@ III @-@ 28 @-@ 1 ) . These teeth include the holotypes of Ferugliotherium windhauseni ( MACN Pv @-@ RN 20 , the only second lower molariform , or m2 ) and Vucetichia gracilis ( MACN Pv @-@ RN 174 ) . 
 The best @-@ preserved mf1 is MLP 88 @-@ III @-@ 28 @-@ 1 . The crown is unworn and complete and there are no roots , suggesting that the tooth had not yet erupted when its owner died . Krause , who first described the tooth in 1993 , identified it as a right molar , but the subsequent discovery of the jaw of Sudamerica made it clear that Ferugliotherium molariforms had been reversed , and MLP 88 @-@ III @-@ 28 @-@ 1 is actually from the left side of the jaw . The tooth is 2 @.@ 2 mm long and 1 @.@ 5 mm wide . The crown is roughly rectangular , with rounded corners , and bears two longitudinal rows of cusps . The lingual row consists of four cusps , which are smaller and lower than the three labial ones . The cusps in this row become smaller and lower from the front to the back . Two ridges descend from the tip of each cusp to the lingual and labial sides . The labial ridges on the first and fourth cusp only reach the base of the cusp , but those on the second and third cusps join ridges descending from the first and second labial cusp . In the first three cusps , the lingual ridge extends to near the lingual margin of the tooth and then turns backward ; the end of the ridge is lingual to the next cusp . In the fourth cusp , the ridge hardly extends posteriorly , but rather <unk> , forming the posterior margin of the tooth and joining a ridge descending from the last labial cusp . The labial cusp row includes three , larger cusps , each of which bears two ridges that descend lingually into the valley between the two cusp rows . The front ridge of each pair ends in the central valley , and the back ridge joins a ridge from a lingual cusp . The ridge pattern results in the presence of three transverse furrows between the main cusps . 
 Another mf1 , MACN Pv @-@ RN 253 , is almost unworn , but damaged : only the front two lingual cusps and the first two cusps and part of the third in the labial row are preserved . This tooth is similar to MLP 88 @-@ III @-@ 28 @-@ 1 in all respects . However , Gurovich suggests that it may also be an m2 . MACN Pv @-@ RN 174 , which is heavily worn , and MACN Pv @-@ RN 175 , which is not only heavily worn but has also undergone severe abrasion , were originally identified as upper molars of Vucetichia gracilis by Bonaparte in 1990 . The roots of MACN Pv @-@ RN 174 are preserved ; at the front and back of the tooth , there is a pair of roots , which are fused near their bases . It has small enamel prisms . Krause and colleagues suggested in 1992 that 174 and 175 were mf1s of Ferugliotherium on the basis of similarities with 253 , and Krause confirmed this in 1993 by describing the complete mf1 MLP 88 @-@ III @-@ 28 @-@ 1 . The related ferugliotheriid genus Trapalcotherium is known from a single mf1 , which is similar to Ferugliotherium mf1s but different in some morphological details ( see Trapalcotherium : Relationships ) . 
 The holotype , MACN Pv @-@ RN 20 , is a right mf2 according to both Krause and colleagues ( 1992 ) and Gurovich ( 2005 ) , but Gurovich considered the side that Krause and colleagues thought was lingual to be labial , and vice versa . The latter interpretation is used in the following description . It is almost square , but at the front it is slightly narrower than at the back . The labial side of the tooth is taller and less worn than the lingual side . There are two rows of cusps , and each lingual cusp is connected to each labial cusp by a broad crest , with one or more fossas in the middle . One of the two labial cusps may have been divided into two smaller cusps . The two crests are separated by a deep furrow . The enamel prisms of this tooth are small , like those of the premolar MACN Pv @-@ RN 250 . 
 Transverse ridges between the cusps , as seen in Ferugliotherium , are known in only one multituberculate , Essonodon , but the ridge pattern in Essonodon is more complicated and the animal lacks the prominent furrows of Ferugliotherium and differs in numerous other features . On the other hand , overall patterns of cusps and ridges are essentially similar among Ferugliotherium , Gondwanatherium , and Sudamerica , indicating that the three are closely related . 
 = = = Upper molariforms = = = 
 A single tooth , MACN Pv @-@ RN 248 , is currently identified as a Ferugliotherium upper molariform . In 1992 , Krause and colleagues labeled it as a right MF1 , but Gurovich identifies it as a left MF1 or possibly even a right mf1 . LACM 149371 , an enigmatic tooth from the Paleogene of Santa Rosa , Peru , may represent an upper molar of an animal related to Ferugliotherium . Like the latter , it has cusps that are compressed from front to back and that are connected to the center of the crown by low crests . 
 MACN Pv @-@ RN 248 is somewhat damaged and almost rectangular , but slightly narrower at the back than at the front . The tooth bears three longitudinal rows of cusps . The middle row consists of five cusps , the labial row ( assuming it is a left M1 ; if it is from the right , " lingual " and " labial " should be reversed ) includes two or perhaps three cusps , and the lingual row includes probably four cusps . The lingual and middle rows extend across the entire length of the tooth , but the labial row is shorter , extending across about 70 % of the length . The middle row is oriented obliquely with respect to the length axis of the tooth , so that it converges with the lingual row towards the back of the tooth . The front lingual corner of the tooth is missing , but it appears that the first cusps in the lingual and middle rows are connected by two ridges , one at the front margin of the tooth and one at the back of the cusps . A deep fossa ( basin ) lies between the two cusps and their connecting ridges . Behind these two cusps , a transverse furrow extends across the width of the tooth . The second lingual and middle cusps are also connected by a crest , which is somewhat weaker than those connecting the first cusps . Another transverse furrow extends behind the second cusps and also separates the second middle cusp from the labial row . A third furrow , behind the third lingual and middle cusps , also separates the first from the second labial cusp . Three ridges descend from the fourth lingual cusp : one connects to the fourth middle cusp , one ends blindly between the fourth lingual and middle cusps , and one connects to the fifth middle cusp . The second labial cusp , which is larger than the first one , is superficially divided into two smaller cusps by an indentation on its lingual side . There are vertical grooves at the bases of the cusps . 
 = = Range and ecology = = 
 Remains of Ferugliotherium come from two formations in the Late Cretaceous of southern Argentina , the Los Alamitos and La Colonia Formations . These and the Allen Formation ( which has yielded Trapalcotherium ) are all dated to the Campanian ( 84 – 71 million years ago ) and / or Maastrichtian ( 71 – 66 million years ago ) , the penultimate and ultimate stages of the Cretaceous . The La Colonia Formation may be somewhat younger than the other two , while the Los Alamitos Formation has been considered Campanian , and can be dated to the Campanian or Maastrichtian on the basis of palynology . The Allen Formation is likely Maastrichtian , but not latest Maastrichtian . 
 The Los Alamitos Formation is located in southeastern Río Negro Province , in the vicinity of the town of <unk> <unk> and was probably deposited in a marshy environment . In 1983 , it yielded the first Mesozoic mammal to be found in Argentina , <unk> <unk> , and since then , the mammalian fauna has expanded to 14 species . Most of those belong to the archaic mammalian group <unk> , but the fauna also includes the gondwanatheres Ferugliotherium and Gondwanatherium . The dryolestoids <unk> <unk> and <unk> <unk> and the two gondwanatheres are the most common mammals . Other fossils found in the Los Alamitos Formation include fish , frogs , turtles , <unk> snakes , dinosaurs such as Secernosaurus , gastropods , and other invertebrates . 
 The La Colonia Formation outcrops in north @-@ central Chubut Province , and the mammalian fossils come from the <unk> Chico valley . The formation includes fluvial ( river ) , deep @-@ sea , and near @-@ shore deposits , and the mammalian fauna probably comes from an estuary , tidal flat , or coastal plain . The La Colonia Formation also contains dryolestoids , such as <unk> and <unk> , as well as a ferugliotheriid and the putative multituberculate Argentodites . In addition , the La Colonia Formation has yielded fossils of a wide array of other animals , including crocodiles , plesiosaurs , lungfish ( <unk> ) , and dinosaurs ( including Carnotaurus ) . 
 The high @-@ crowned sudamericids were probably herbivores , but the lower @-@ crowned Ferugliotherium was more probably an insectivore or omnivore , like similar multituberculates such as Mesodma , which is thought to have eaten insects , other arthropods , seeds , and / or nuts . It may have used its incisors for gnawing or slicing , and the blade @-@ like p4 may also have been used for slicing hard plant parts , such as seeds . The wear patterns on Ferugliotherium teeth independently suggest that the animal may have eaten some plant material . 
 = Bethlehem = 
 Bethlehem ( Arabic : بيت <unk> Bayt Lahm Arabic pronunciation : [ <unk> ] ; " House of Meat " , <unk> <unk> ; Hebrew : בֵּית <unk> Bet Lehem , Modern : Bet Lehem [ bet <unk> ] , lit . " House of Bread " ; Ancient Greek : <unk> [ <unk> ] ; Latin : <unk> ) is a Palestinian city located in the central West Bank , Palestine , about 10 km ( 6 @.@ 2 miles ) south of Jerusalem . Its population is approximately 25 @,@ 000 people . It is the capital of the Bethlehem Governorate . The economy is primarily tourist @-@ driven . 
 The earliest known mention of the city was in the Amarna correspondence of 1350 – 1330 BCE during its habitation by the Canaanites . The Hebrew Bible , which says that the city of Bethlehem was built up as a fortified city by <unk> , identifies it as the city David was from and where he was crowned as the king of Israel . The New Testament identifies Bethlehem as the birthplace of Jesus . Bethlehem was destroyed by the Emperor Hadrian during the second @-@ century Bar Kokhba revolt ; its rebuilding was promoted by Empress Helena , mother of Constantine the Great , who commissioned the building of its great Church of the Nativity in 327 CE . The church was badly damaged by the Samaritans , who sacked it during a revolt in 529 , but was rebuilt a century later by Emperor Justinian I. 
 Bethlehem became part of Jund Filastin following the Muslim conquest in 637 . Muslim rule continued in Bethlehem until its conquest in 1099 by a crusading army , who replaced the town 's Greek Orthodox clergy with a Latin one . In the mid @-@ 13th century , the Mamluks demolished the city 's walls , which were subsequently rebuilt under the Ottomans in the early 16th century . Control of Bethlehem passed from the Ottomans to the British at the end of World War I. Bethlehem came under Jordanian rule during the 1948 Arab @-@ Israeli War and was later captured by Israel in the 1967 Six @-@ Day War . Since the 1995 Oslo Accords , Bethlehem has been administered by the Palestinian Authority . 
 Bethlehem now has a Muslim majority , but is still home to a significant Palestinian Christian community . Bethlehem 's chief economic sector is tourism , which peaks during the Christmas season when Christians make pilgrimage to the Church of the Nativity , as they have done for almost 2 @,@ 000 years . Bethlehem has over 30 hotels and 300 handicraft workshops . Rachel 's Tomb , an important Jewish holy site , is located at the northern entrance of Bethlehem . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Canaanite period = = = 
 The earliest reference to Bethlehem appears in the Amarna correspondence ( c . 1400 BCE ) . In one of his six letters to Pharaoh , Abdi @-@ <unk> , Egypt 's governor for Jerusalem , appeals for aid in retaking " Bit @-@ <unk> " in the wake of disturbances by <unk> <unk> employed by his rivals : " now even a town near Jerusalem , Bit @-@ <unk> by name , a village which once belonged to the king , has fallen to the enemy . . . Let the king hear the words of your servant Abdi @-@ <unk> , and send archers to restore the imperial lands of the king ! " 
 It is thought that the similarity of this name to its modern forms indicates that this was a settlement of Canaanites who shared a Semitic cultural and linguistic heritage with the later arrivals . <unk> was the Chaldean god of fertility , worshipped by the Canaanites as Lachama . Some time in the 3rd millennium BCE , they erected a temple to worship the god on the hill now known as the Hill of the Nativity . The town was known as Beit Lachama , meaning " House of Lachama . " The Philistines later established a garrison there . William F. Albright notes that the pronunciation of the name remained essentially the same for 3 @,@ 500 years , but has meant different things : " ' Temple of the God <unk> ' in Canaanite , ' House of Bread ' in Hebrew and Aramaic , ' House of Meat ' in Arabic . " 
 A burial ground discovered in spring 2013 , and surveyed in 2015 by a joint Italian @-@ Palestinian team found that the necropolis covered 3 hectares ( more than 7 acres ) and originally contained more than 100 tombs in use between roughly 2200 B.C. and 650 B.C. The archaeologists were able to identify at least 30 tombs . 
 = = = Israelite and Judean period = = = 
 Archaeological confirmation of Bethlehem as a city in the Kingdom of Judah was uncovered in 2012 at the archaeological dig at the City of David in the form of a bulla ( seal impression in dried clay ) in ancient Hebrew script that reads " From the town of Bethlehem to the King , " indicating that it was used to seal the string closing a shipment of grain , wine , or other goods sent as a tax payment in the 8th or 7th century BCE . 
 Biblical scholars believe Bethlehem , located in the " hill country " of Judah , may be the same as the Biblical <unk> , which means " fertile " , as there is a reference to it in the Book of Micah as Bethlehem Ephratah . The Bible also calls it Beth @-@ Lehem Judah , and the New Testament describes it as the " City of David " . It is first mentioned in the Tanakh and the Bible as the place where the matriarch Rachel died and was buried " by the wayside " ( Gen. 48 : 7 ) . Rachel 's Tomb , the traditional grave site , stands at the entrance to Bethlehem . According to the Book of Ruth , the valley to the east is where Ruth of Moab gleaned the fields and returned to town with Naomi . It was the home of Jesse , father of King David of Israel , and the site of David 's anointment by the prophet Samuel . It was from the well of Bethlehem that three of his warriors brought him water when he was hiding in the cave of Adullam . 
 Writing in the 4th century , the Pilgrim of Bordeaux reported that the <unk> of David , Ezekiel , Asaph , Job , Jesse , and Solomon were located near Bethlehem . There has been no corroboration of this . 
 = = = Classical period = = = 
 After the Bar Kokhba revolt was crushed , Hadrian converted the Christian site above the Grotto into a shrine dedicated to the Greek god Adonis , to honour his favourite , the Greek youth Antinous . Some scholars hold the view that this site was one that had originally been dedicated to Adonis @-@ Tammuz and Christians had taken it over . 
 In 326 – 328 , the empress Helena , consort of the emperor Constantius Chlorus , and mother of the emperor Constantine the Great , made a pilgrimage to <unk> @-@ Palaestina , in the course of which she visited the ruins of Bethlehem . The empress promoted the rebuilding of the city , and Eusebius of Caesarea writes that she was responsible for the construction of the Church of the Nativity . 
 During the Samaritan revolt of 529 , Bethlehem was sacked and its walls and the Church of the Nativity destroyed ; they were rebuilt on the orders of the Emperor Justinian I. In 614 , the Persian Sassanid Empire , supported by Jewish rebels , invaded Palestina Prima and captured Bethlehem . A story recounted in later sources holds that they refrained from destroying the church on seeing the magi depicted in Persian clothing in a mosaic . 
 = = = Middle Ages = = = 
 In 637 , shortly after Jerusalem was captured by the Muslim armies , ' Umar ibn al @-@ <unk> , the second Caliph , promised that the Church of the Nativity would be preserved for Christian use . A mosque dedicated to Umar was built upon the place in the city where he prayed , next to the church . Bethlehem then passed through the control of the Islamic caliphates of the Umayyads in the 8th century , then the Abbasids in the 9th century . A Persian geographer recorded in the mid @-@ 9th century that a well preserved and much venerated church existed in the town . In 985 , the Arab geographer al @-@ Muqaddasi visited Bethlehem , and referred to its church as the " Basilica of Constantine , the equal of which does not exist anywhere in the country @-@ round . " In 1009 , during the reign of the sixth Fatimid Caliph , al @-@ Hakim bi @-@ Amr Allah , the Church of the Nativity was ordered to be demolished , but was spared by local Muslims , because they had been permitted to worship in the structure 's southern transept . 
 In 1099 , Bethlehem was captured by the Crusaders , who fortified it and built a new monastery and cloister on the north side of the Church of the Nativity . The Greek Orthodox clergy were removed from their sees and replaced with Latin clerics . Up until that point the official Christian presence in the region was Greek Orthodox . On Christmas Day 1100 , Baldwin I , first king of the Frankish Kingdom of Jerusalem , was crowned in Bethlehem , and that year a Latin episcopate was also established in the town . 
 In 1187 , Saladin , the Sultan of Egypt and Syria who led the Muslim Ayyubids , captured Bethlehem from the Crusaders . The Latin clerics were forced to leave , allowing the Greek Orthodox clergy to return . Saladin agreed to the return of two Latin priests and two deacons in 1192 . However , Bethlehem suffered from the loss of the pilgrim trade , as there was a sharp decrease of European pilgrims . William IV , Count of Nevers had promised the Christian bishops of Bethlehem that if Bethlehem should fall under Muslim control , he would welcome them in the small town of Clamecy in present @-@ day Burgundy , France . As a result , the Bishop of Bethlehem duly took up residence in the hospital of <unk> , Clamecy , in 1223 . Clamecy remained the continuous ' in partibus <unk> ' seat of the Bishopric of Bethlehem for almost 600 years , until the French Revolution in 1789 . 
 Bethlehem , along with Jerusalem , Nazareth , and Sidon , was briefly ceded to the Crusader Kingdom of Jerusalem by a treaty between Holy Roman Emperor Frederick II and Ayyubid Sultan al @-@ Kamil in 1229 , in return for a ten @-@ year truce between the Ayyubids and the Crusaders . The treaty expired in 1239 , and Bethlehem was recaptured by the Muslims in 1244 . In 1250 , with the coming to power of the Mamluks under Rukn al @-@ Din Baibars , tolerance of Christianity declined . Members of the clergy left the city , and in 1263 the town walls were demolished . The Latin clergy returned to Bethlehem the following century , establishing themselves in the monastery adjoining the Basilica of the Nativity . The Greek Orthodox were given control of the basilica and shared control of the Milk Grotto with the Latins and the Armenians . 
 = = = Ottoman era = = = 
 From 1517 , during the years of Ottoman control , custody of the Basilica was bitterly disputed between the Catholic and Greek Orthodox churches . By the end of the 16th century , Bethlehem had become one of the largest villages in the District of Jerusalem , and was subdivided into seven quarters . The <unk> family served as the heads of Bethlehem among other leaders during this period . The Ottoman tax record and census from 1596 indicates that Bethlehem had a population of 1 @,@ 435 , making it the 13th largest village in Palestine at the time . Its total revenue amounted to 30 @,@ 000 <unk> . 
 Bethlehem paid taxes on wheat , barley and grapes . The Muslims and Christians were organized into separate communities , each having its own leader . Five leaders represented the village in the mid @-@ 16th century , three of whom were Muslims . Ottoman tax records suggest that the Christian population was slightly more prosperous or grew more grain than grapes ( the former being a more valuable commodity ) . 
 From 1831 to 1841 , Palestine was under the rule of the Muhammad Ali Dynasty of Egypt . During this period , the town suffered an earthquake as well as the destruction of the Muslim quarter in 1834 by Egyptian troops , apparently as a reprisal for the murder of a favored loyalist of Ibrahim Pasha . In 1841 , Bethlehem came under Ottoman rule once again and remained so until the end of World War I. Under the Ottomans , Bethlehem 's inhabitants faced unemployment , compulsory military service , and heavy taxes , resulting in mass emigration , particularly to South America . An American missionary in the 1850s reported a population of under 4 @,@ 000 , nearly all of whom belonged to the Greek Church . He also noted that a lack of water crippled the town 's growth . 
 = = = Modern era = = = 
 Bethlehem was administered by the British Mandate from 1920 to 1948 . In the United Nations General Assembly 's 1947 resolution to partition Palestine , Bethlehem was included in the special international enclave of Jerusalem to be administered by the United Nations . Jordan captured the city during the 1948 Arab @-@ Israeli War . Many refugees from areas captured by Israeli forces in 1947 – 48 fled to the Bethlehem area , primarily settling in what became the official refugee camps of ' Azza ( Beit Jibrin ) and ' Aida in the north and <unk> in the south . The influx of refugees significantly transformed Bethlehem 's Christian majority into a Muslim one . 
 Jordan retained control of the city until the Six @-@ Day War in 1967 , when Bethlehem was captured by Israel , along with the rest of the West Bank . Following the Six @-@ Day War , Israel took control of the city . In 1995 , Israel turned it over to the Palestinian National Authority in accordance with the Oslo peace accord . 
 Today , the city is surrounded by two bypass roads for settlers , leaving the inhabitants squeezed between 37 Jewish enclaves , where a quarter of all West Bank settlers , roughly 170 @,@ 000 , live , and the gap between the two roads closed by the 8 @-@ metre high Israeli West Bank barrier , which cuts Bethlehem off from its sister city Jerusalem . 
 = = = = Palestinian control = = = = 
 On December 21 , 1995 , Israeli troops withdrew from Bethlehem , and three days later the city came under the complete administration and military control of the Palestinian National Authority in conformance with the Interim Agreement on the West Bank and the Gaza Strip in 1995 . During the Second Palestinian Intifada in 2000 – 2005 , Bethlehem 's infrastructure and tourism industry were damaged . In 2002 , it was a primary combat zone in Operation Defensive Shield , a major military counteroffensive by the Israeli Defense Forces ( IDF ) . During the counteroffensive , the IDF besieged the Church of the Nativity , where dozens of Palestinian militants had sought refuge . The siege lasted for 39 days . Several militants were killed . It ended with an agreement to exile 13 of the wanted militants to various foreign countries . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Bethlehem is located at an elevation of about 775 meters ( 2 @,@ 543 ft ) above sea level , 30 meters ( 98 ft ) higher than nearby Jerusalem . Bethlehem is situated on the southern portion in the Judean Mountains . 
 The city is located 73 kilometers ( 45 mi ) northeast of Gaza City and the Mediterranean Sea , 75 kilometers ( 47 mi ) west of Amman , Jordan , 59 kilometers ( 37 mi ) southeast of Tel Aviv , Israel and 10 kilometers ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) south of Jerusalem . Nearby cities and towns include Beit <unk> and Jerusalem to the north , Beit Jala to the northwest , <unk> to the west , al @-@ Khadr and <unk> to the southwest , and Beit Sahour to the east . Beit Jala and the latter form an agglomeration with Bethlehem . The Aida and Azza refugee camps are located within the city limits . 
 In the center of Bethlehem is its old city . The old city consists of eight quarters , laid out in a mosaic style , forming the area around the Manger Square . The quarters include the Christian an @-@ Najajreh , al @-@ <unk> , al @-@ <unk> , al @-@ <unk> , al @-@ <unk> and <unk> quarters and al @-@ <unk> — the only Muslim quarter . Most of the Christian quarters are named after the Arab Ghassanid clans that settled there . Al @-@ <unk> Quarter was formed by Arab Christian emigrants from the nearby town of <unk> ' in the 18th century . There is also a Syriac quarter outside of the old city , whose inhabitants originate from <unk> and Ma <unk> in Turkey . The total population of the old city is about 5 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Climate = = 
 Bethlehem has a Mediterranean climate , with hot and dry summers and mild , wetter winters . Winter temperatures ( mid @-@ December to mid @-@ March ) can be cool and rainy . January is the coldest month , with temperatures ranging from 1 to 13 degree Celsius ( 33 – 55 ° F ) . From May through September , the weather is warm and sunny . August is the hottest month , with a high of 30 degrees Celsius ( 86 ° F ) . Bethlehem receives an average of 700 millimeters ( 28 in ) of rainfall annually , 70 % between November and January . 
 Bethlehem 's average annual relative humidity is 60 % and reaches its highest rates between January and February . Humidity levels are at their lowest in May . Night dew may occur in up to 180 days per year . The city is influenced by the Mediterranean Sea breeze that occurs around mid @-@ day . However , Bethlehem is affected also by annual waves of hot , dry , sandy and dust <unk> winds from the Arabian Desert , during April , May and mid @-@ June . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 = = = Population = = = 
 According to Ottoman tax records , Christians made up roughly 60 % of the population in the early 16th century , while the Christian and Muslim population became equal by the mid @-@ 16th century . However , there were no Muslim inhabitants counted by the end of the century , with a recorded population of 287 adult male tax @-@ payers . Christians , like all non @-@ Muslims throughout the Ottoman Empire , were required to pay the jizya tax . In 1867 an American visitor describes the town as having a population of 3 @,@ 000 to 4 @,@ 000 ; of whom about 100 were Protestants , 300 were Muslims and " the remainder belonging to the Latin and Greek Churches with a few Armenians . " Another report from the same year puts the Christian population at 3 @,@ 000 , with an additional 50 Muslims . An 1885 source put the population at approximately 6 @,@ 000 of " principally Christians , Latins and Greeks " with no Jewish inhabitants . 
 In 1948 , the religious makeup of the city was 85 % Christian , mostly of the Greek Orthodox and Roman Catholic denominations , and 13 % Muslim . In the 1967 census taken by Israel authorities , the town of Bethlehem proper numbered 14 @,@ 439 inhabitants , its 7 @,@ 790 Muslim inhabitants represented 53 @.@ 9 % of the population , while the Christians of various denominations numbered 6 @,@ 231 or 46 @.@ 1 % . 
 In the PCBS 's 1997 census , the city had a population of 21 @,@ 670 , including a total of 6 @,@ 570 refugees , accounting for 30 @.@ 3 % of the city 's population . In 1997 , the age distribution of Bethlehem 's inhabitants was 27 @.@ 4 % under the age of 10 , 20 % from 10 to 19 , 17 @.@ 3 % from 20 – 29 , 17 @.@ 7 % from 30 to 44 , 12 @.@ 1 % from 45 – 64 and 5 @.@ 3 % above the age of 65 . There were 11 @,@ 079 males and 10 @,@ 594 females . In the 2007 PCBS census , Bethlehem had a population of 25 @,@ 266 , of which 12 @,@ 753 were males and 12 @,@ 513 were females . There were 6 @,@ 709 housing units , of which 5 @,@ 211 were households . The average household consisted of 4 @.@ 8 family members . 
 = = = Christian population = = = 
 After the Muslim conquest of the Levant in the 630s , the local Christians were Arabized as well even though large numbers were ethnically Arabs of the Ghassanid clans . Bethlehem 's two largest Arab Christian clans trace their ancestry to the Ghassanids , including al @-@ <unk> and an @-@ Najajreh . The former have descended from the Ghassanids who migrated from Yemen and from the Wadi Musa area in present @-@ day Jordan and an @-@ Najajreh descend from Najran . Another Bethlehem clan , al @-@ <unk> , also trace their ancestry to the Ghassanids . 
 The percentage of Christians in the town has been steadily declining over the years , primarily due to emigration . The lower birth rate of Christians also accounts for some of the decline . In 1947 , Christians made up 85 % of the population , but by 1998 the figure had declined to 40 % . In 2005 , the mayor of Bethlehem , Victor <unk> explained that " due to the stress , either physical or psychological , and the bad economic situation , many people are emigrating , either Christians or Muslims , but it is more apparent among Christians , because they already are a minority . " The Palestinian Authority is officially committed to equality for Christians , although there have been incidents of violence against them by the Preventive Security Service and militant factions . The only mosque in the Old City is the Mosque of Omar , located in the Manger Square . 
 The outbreak of the Second Intifada and the resulting decrease in tourism also affected the Christian minority , since they are the owners of many Bethlehem hotels and services that cater to foreign tourists . A statistical analysis of the Christian exodus cited lack of economic and educational opportunity , especially due to the Christians ' middle @-@ class status and higher education . Since the Second Intifada , 10 % of the Christian population have left the city . 
 In 2006 , the Palestinian Centre for Research and Cultural Dialogue conducted a poll among the city 's Christians according to which 90 % said they had had Muslim friends , 73 @.@ 3 % agreed that the PNA treated Christian heritage in the city with respect and 78 % attributed the exodus of Christians to the Israeli blockade . However , it is likely that there are many factors , most of which are shared with the Palestinian population as a whole . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Shopping is a major attraction , especially during the Christmas season . The city 's main streets and old markets are lined with shops selling Palestinian handicrafts , Middle Eastern spices , jewelry and oriental sweets such as baklawa . Olive wood carvings are the item most purchased by tourists visiting Bethlehem . Religious handicrafts include ornaments handmade from mother @-@ of @-@ pearl , as well as olive wood statues , boxes , and crosses . Other industries include stone and marble @-@ cutting , textiles , furniture and furnishings . Bethlehem factories also produce paints , plastics , synthetic rubber , pharmaceuticals , construction materials and food products , mainly pasta and confectionery . 
 <unk> Wine , founded in 1885 , is a winery run by monks in the Monastery of <unk> . The grapes are grown mainly in the al @-@ Khader district . In 2007 , the monastery 's wine production was around 700 @,@ 000 liters per year . 
 In 2008 , Bethlehem hosted the largest economic conference to date in the Palestinian territories . It was initiated by Palestinian Prime Minister and former Finance Minister Salam Fayyad to convince more than a thousand businessmen , bankers and government officials from throughout the Middle East to invest in the West Bank and Gaza Strip . A total of 1 @.@ 4 billion US dollars was secured for business investments in the Palestinian territories . 
 = = = Tourism = = = 
 Tourism is Bethlehem 's main industry . Unlike other Palestinian localities prior to 2000 , the majority of the employed residents did not have jobs in Israel . More than 20 % of the working population is employed in the industry . Tourism accounts for approximately 65 % of the city 's economy and 11 % of the Palestinian National Authority . The city has more than two million visitors every year . 
 The Church of the Nativity is one of Bethlehem 's major tourist attractions and a magnet for Christian pilgrims . It stands in the center of the city — a part of the Manger Square — over a grotto or cave called the Holy Crypt , where Jesus is believed to have been born . Nearby is the Milk Grotto where the Holy Family took refuge on their Flight to Egypt and next door is the cave where St. Jerome spent thirty years creating the Vulgate , the dominant Latin version of the Bible until the Reformation . 
 There are over thirty hotels in Bethlehem . <unk> Palace , built in 1910 near the church , is one of Bethlehem 's most successful hotels and its oldest . It was closed down in 2000 due to the Israeli @-@ Palestinian conflict , but reopened in 2005 as the <unk> Palace InterContinental at Bethlehem . 
 = = Religious significance and commemoration = = 
 = = = Birthplace of Jesus = = = 
 Early Christian traditions describe Jesus as being born in Bethlehem : in one , a verse in the Book of Micah is interpreted as a prophecy that the Messiah would be born there . The New Testament has two different accounts of the birth . In the Gospel of Luke , Jesus ' parents live in Nazareth and travel for the Census of Quirinius to Bethlehem , where Jesus is born , after which they return home . The Gospel of Matthew mentions Bethlehem but not the census . Told that a ' King of the Jews ' has been born in the town , Herod orders the killing of all the boys aged two and under in the town and surrounding area . Joseph , warned of by an angel of the Lord , flees to Egypt with his family ; the Holy Family later settles in Nazareth . 
 Many modern scholars question the idea that Jesus was born in Bethlehem , seeing the biblical stories not as historical accounts but as symbolic narratives invented to present the birth as fulfillment of prophecy and imply a connection to the lineage of King David . The Gospel of Mark and the Gospel of John do not include a nativity narrative , but refer to him only as being from Nazareth . In a 2005 article in Archaeology magazine , archaeologist Aviram <unk> points to an absence of evidence for the settlement of Bethlehem near Jerusalem at the time when Jesus was born , and postulates that Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Galilee . In a 2011 article in Biblical Archaeology Review magazine , Jerome Murphy @-@ O 'Connor argues for the traditional position that Jesus was born in Bethlehem near Jerusalem . 
 The existence of early traditions of Jesus ' birth in Bethlehem is attested by the Christian apologist Justin Martyr , who stated in his Dialogue with <unk> ( c . 155 – 161 ) that the Holy Family had taken refuge in a cave outside of the town . Origen of Alexandria , writing around the year 247 , referred to a cave in the town of Bethlehem which local people believed was the birthplace of Jesus . This cave was possibly one which had previously been a site of the cult of Tammuz . 
 = = = Christmas celebrations = = = 
 Christmas rites are held in Bethlehem on three different dates : December 25 is the traditional date by the Roman Catholic and Protestant denominations , but Greek , Coptic and Syrian Orthodox Christians celebrate Christmas on January 6 and Armenian Orthodox Christians on January 19 . Most Christmas processions pass through Manger Square , the plaza outside the Basilica of the Nativity . Roman Catholic services take place in St. Catherine 's Church and Protestants often hold services at Shepherds ' Fields . 
 = = = Other religious festivals = = = 
 Bethlehem celebrates festivals related to saints and prophets associated with Palestinian folklore . One such festival is the annual Feast of Saint George ( al @-@ Khadr ) on 5 – 6 May . During the celebrations , Greek Orthodox Christians from the city march in procession to the nearby town of al @-@ Khader to baptize newborns in the waters around the Monastery of St. George and sacrifice a sheep in ritual . The Feast of St. Elijah is commemorated by a procession to Mar Elias , a Greek Orthodox monastery north of Bethlehem . 
 = = Culture = = 
 = = = Embroidery = = = 
 The women embroiderers of Bethlehem were known for their <unk> . Bethlehem embroidery was renowned for its " strong overall effect of colors and metallic brilliance . " Less formal dresses were made of indigo fabric with a sleeveless coat ( <unk> ) from locally woven wool worn over top . Dresses for special occasions were made of striped silk with winged sleeves with a short <unk> jacket known as the Bethlehem jacket . The <unk> was made of velvet or broadcloth , usually with heavy embroidery . 
 Bethlehem work was unique in its use of couched gold or silver cord , or silk cord onto the silk , wool , felt or velvet used for the garment , to create stylized floral patterns with free or rounded lines . This technique was used for " royal " wedding dresses ( thob <unk> ) , <unk> and the <unk> worn by married women . It has been traced by some to Byzantium , and by others to the formal costumes of the Ottoman Empire 's elite . As a Christian village , local women were also exposed to the detailing on church vestments with their heavy embroidery and silver brocade . 
 = = = Mother @-@ of @-@ pearl carving = = = 
 The art of mother @-@ of @-@ pearl carving is said to have been a Bethlehem tradition since the 15th century when it was introduced by Franciscan friars from Italy . A constant stream of pilgrims generated a demand for these items , which also provided jobs for women . The industry was noted by Richard Pococke , who visited Bethlehem in 1727 . 
 = = = Cultural centers and museums = = = 
 Bethlehem is home to the Palestinian Heritage Center , established in 1991 . The center aims to preserve and promote Palestinian embroidery , art and folklore . The International Center of Bethlehem is another cultural center that concentrates primarily on the culture of Bethlehem . It provides language and guide training , woman 's studies and arts and crafts displays , and training . 
 The Bethlehem branch of the Edward Said National Conservatory of Music has about 500 students . Its primary goals are to teach children music , train teachers for other schools , sponsor music research , and the study of Palestinian folklore music . 
 Bethlehem has four museums : The Crib of the Nativity Theatre and Museum offers visitors 31 3D models depicting the significant stages of the life of Jesus . Its theater presents a 20 @-@ minute animated show . The Badd <unk> Museum , located in the Old City of Bethlehem , dates back to the 18th century and is primarily dedicated to the history and process of olive oil production . <unk> al @-@ <unk> Museum , established in 1972 , contains displays of Bethlehem culture . The International Museum of Nativity was built by United Nations Educational , Scientific and Cultural Organization ( UNESCO ) to exhibit " high artistic quality in an evocative atmosphere " . 
 = = Local government = = 
 Bethlehem is the muhfaza ( seat ) or district capital of the Bethlehem Governorate . 
 Bethlehem held its first municipal elections in 1876 , after the <unk> ( " heads " ) of the quarters of Bethlehem 's Old City ( excluding the Syriac Quarter ) made the decision to elect a local council of seven members to represent each clan in the town . A Basic Law was established so that if the victor for mayor was a Catholic , his deputy should be of the Greek Orthodox community . 
 Throughout , Bethlehem 's rule by the British and Jordan , the Syriac Quarter was allowed to participate in the election , as were the Ta <unk> Bedouins and Palestinian refugees , hence ratifying the number of municipal members in the council to 11 . In 1976 , an amendment was passed to allow women to vote and become council members and later the voting age was increased from 21 to 25 . 
 Today , the Bethlehem Municipal Council consists of 15 elected members , including the mayor and deputy mayor . A special statute requires that the mayor and a majority of the municipal council be Christian , while the remainder are open seats , not restricted to any religion . 
 There are several branches of political parties on the council , including Communist , Islamist , and secular . The leftist factions of the Palestine Liberation Organization ( PLO ) such as the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine ( PFLP ) and the Palestinian People 's Party ( PPP ) usually dominate the reserved seats . Hamas gained the majority of the open seats in the 2005 Palestinian municipal elections . 
 = = = Mayors = = = 
 The mayor and the deputy mayor of Bethlehem are required by municipal law to be Christian . In the October 2012 municipal elections , Fatah member Vera <unk> won , becoming the first female mayor of Bethlehem . 
 = = Education = = 
 According to the Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics ( PCBS ) , in 1997 , approximately 84 % of Bethlehem 's population over the age of 10 was literate . Of the city 's population , 10 @,@ 414 were enrolled in schools ( 4 @,@ 015 in primary school , 3 @,@ 578 in secondary and 2 @,@ 821 in high school ) . About 14 @.@ 1 % of high school students received diplomas . There were 135 schools in the Bethlehem Governorate in 2006 ; 100 run the Education Ministry of the Palestinian National Authority , seven by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency ( UNRWA ) and 28 were private . 
 Bethlehem is home to Bethlehem University , a Catholic Christian co @-@ educational institution of higher learning founded in 1973 in the <unk> tradition , open to students of all faiths . Bethlehem University is the first university established in the West Bank , and can trace its roots to 1893 when the De La Salle Christian Brothers opened schools throughout Palestine and Egypt . 
 = = Transportation = = 
 Bethlehem has three bus stations owned by private companies which offer service to Jerusalem , Beit Jala , Beit Sahour , Hebron , <unk> , <unk> , al @-@ Khader , al @-@ <unk> and Beit <unk> . There are two taxi stations that make trips to Beit Sahour , Beit Jala , Jerusalem , <unk> ' and <unk> . There are also two car rental departments : Murad and ' Orabi . Buses and taxis with West Bank licenses are not allowed to enter Israel , including Jerusalem , without a permit . 
 The Israeli construction of the West Bank barrier has had an impact on Bethlehem politically , socially , and economically . The barrier is located along the northern side of the town 's built @-@ up area , within meters of houses in ' Aida refugee camp on one side , and the Jerusalem municipality on the other . Most entrances and exits from the Bethlehem agglomeration to the rest of the West Bank are currently subjected to Israeli checkpoints and roadblocks . The level of access varies based on Israeli security directives . Travel for Bethlehem 's Palestinian residents from the West Bank into Jerusalem is regulated by a permit @-@ system . Palestinians require a permit to enter the Jewish holy site of Rachel 's Tomb . Israeli citizens are barred from entering Bethlehem and the nearby biblical Solomon 's Pools . 
 = = Twin towns and sister cities = = 
 Bethlehem is twinned with : 
 = Green Light ( Beyoncé song ) = 
 " Green Light " is a song recorded by American singer Beyoncé . The song was written by Beyoncé , Sean Garrett , and Pharrell for Beyoncé 's second solo studio album , B 'Day ( 2006 ) . Produced by The Neptunes , it was released as the fifth UK and seventh overall single on July 30 , 2007 through Columbia Records . " Green Light " is an R & B @-@ funk song with lyrics detailing a break @-@ up song in which the female protagonist gives her love interest the permission to move out . The song also finds Beyoncé using fairly aggressive tone . Written in the key of A minor , " Green Light " samples the " uh @-@ oh @-@ oh @-@ oh @-@ oh " vocals which music critics noted to have a flagrant resemblance to Beyoncé 's own 2003 hit single , " Crazy in Love " . A remix of the song features American rapper Young Buck . 
 " Green Light " was generally well received by music critics who universally praised the beat , bass , groove , and angry tone used by Beyoncé in the song . The single performed moderately on charts , peaking at number 12 on the UK Singles Chart and at number 46 in Ireland . The Freemasons remix of the track peaked at number eighteen on the Dutch Top 40 chart . The single 's accompanying music video was directed by Melina Matsoukas and co @-@ directed by Beyoncé . It is inspired by Robert Palmer 's 1985 music video " Addicted to Love " . Beyoncé considered the video , which is her second to feature her all @-@ female tour band called the Suga Mama , her toughest shoot . The song was a part of the set list on her world tour The Beyoncé Experience ( 2007 ) . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 After filming Dreamgirls in which Beyoncé landed a major role , she went on a month @-@ long vacation . On the break she went to the studio to start working on her second solo album , B 'Day . She was inspired by her role and she " had so many things bottled up , so many emotions , so many ideas " . Beyoncé contacted American singer @-@ songwriter Sean Garrett , who had worked with her in Destiny 's Child and on her 2006 single " Check on It " . Together with Pharrell , who had also previously collaborated with Beyoncé , Garrett was booked to Sony Music Studios in New York City , each had studio to work in . The track was co @-@ produced by Beyoncé and The Neptunes , along with " Kitty Kat " , and was recorded by Jim Caruana and mixed by Jason Goldstein at the same studio . 
 In June 2006 , Beyoncé invited Tamara Coniff of Billboard magazine to a New York recording studio . There she premiered several songs from the album including " Ring the Alarm " ( 2006 ) and " Freakum Dress " ( 2006 ) , which both were cited as possible second singles , to be released in the United States only . At the same time , she revealed that " Green Light " and " Get Me Bodied " ( 2007 ) , were planned to be released as the next two international / third US singles from B 'Day , following the release of the lead single " Déjà Vu " ( 2006 ) . However , she ultimately opted for " Ring the Alarm " ( 2006 ) as the second single to be released in the United States only while " Irreplaceable " ( 2006 ) was officially serviced as the album 's second international / third US single . " Green Light " was released later in the United Kingdom on July 30 , 2007 as the seventh overall single , following the international release " Beautiful Liar " ( 2007 ) . Along with the release of the single , a Digital EP featuring remixes from the English production team Freemasons , was made available on July 27 , 2007 as an online digital download . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Green Light " is an R & B @-@ funk song performed with " vivace " tempo . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by EMI Music Publishing , the song is written in the key of A minor with a moderate groove of 132 beats per minute . The chord follows the Fm @-@ G ♭ key series with an occasional shift to additional B ♭ m7 . Beyoncé 's vocals range from the note of C ♯ 4 to F5 . The song is built on a ripping bassline and features " a more organic " beat . Green Light " features " uh @-@ huh huh huh " vocals and uses brassy stabs which a reviewer from Guardian Unlimited found to be a " direct echo to ' Crazy in Love ' . " According to The London Paper , the " uh @-@ oh @-@ oh @-@ oh @-@ oh " vocals in " Green Light " is an " imitation of Amerie 's performance " in her 2005 single " 1 Thing " . " Green Light " also displays Latin percussion as well as sampled soul horns , and uses a fairly aggressive tone . Conforming to Jon Pareles of The New York Times , " Green Light " is a break @-@ up song in which the female protagonist gives her love interest the permission to move out . This is shown in the lines of the hook : " Go ! Go ! " The lyrics are constructed in the traditional verse @-@ chorus form . The song starts with an intro in which Beyoncé sings , " Give it to mama " . Jaime Gill of Yahoo ! Music commented that " Green Light " seems to be all " slink and minimalism before a surging come @-@ on of a chorus . " It follows the verse @-@ chorus @-@ verse @-@ verse @-@ chorus pattern giving way to the bridge . Beyoncé repeats the chorus , ending the song . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 " Green Light " received positive reception from critics . Eb Haynes of AllHipHop referred to " Green Light " as a " classic Pharrell @-@ Neptunes groove " . Andy Kellman of Allmusic described the track as an " ambitious , fleet @-@ footed number that continually switches tempos and sounds " . Spence D. of IGN music stated , " ' Green Light ' brings things back down to pseudo earthiness ; both with the slightly more organic sounding Neptunes beat . " He felt that the " rippling bassline sounds really familiar , like it 's been used in other Neptunes ' produced tracks before " .... Jaime Gill of Yahoo ! Music said that " Green Light " is " the best thing Pharrell and co have done in a long , long while . " Roger Friedman of Fox News Channel considered " Green Light " as his second choice as the song having the greatest potential to become a massive hit after " Irreplaceable " ( 2006 ) . Thomas Inskeep of Stylus Magazine gave a mixed review for the song commenting that it 's one of the " tired random @-@ percussion tracks [ ... ] that goes nowhere . " 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 With the album version of the song being available digitally as soon as the album was released , " Green Light " debuted on the UK Singles Chart at number 152 after the video aired in early July 2007 , and then rose to number seventy @-@ eight on July 28 , 2007 . Because of heavy radio airplay of the Freemasons remix , as soon as it was available , the song climbed sixty places from number seventy @-@ seven to number seventeen on August 11 , 2007 , and then to number twelve , giving Beyoncé her eleventh top twenty hit in the United Kingdom . " Green Light " became Beyoncé 's highest charting single on downloads alone on the UK Singles Chart without a prominent featured artist . The UK commercial CD single was cancelled at the last minute , which means it did not receive a physical release . This explains why the single failed to reach a higher position . " Green Light " stayed on the chart for nine weeks . In Ireland , the single debuted at number forty @-@ six on August 23 , 2007 , and dropped off the chart a week later . The Freemasons remix of the track debuted at number thirty on the Dutch Top 40 chart on September 8 , 2007 . It propelled to number nineteen , and peaked at number eighteen on September 29 , 2007 . It remained on the chart for six weeks . On the other hand , the album version of " Green Light " peaked at number twenty on the Dutch Mega Single Top 100 on September 22 , 2007 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Green Light " was directed by Melina Matsoukas and co @-@ directed by Beyoncé . Filmed in early 2007 , it was one of the videos shot in two weeks for the B 'Day Anthology Video Album ( 2007 ) and was one out of eight previously unseen clips . " Green Light " was the third video shot during the sessions . The clip was inspired mainly by Robert Palmer 's 1985 music video " Addicted to Love " with its " stone @-@ faced models pretending to play guitars " . " Green Light " was considered by Beyoncé as a modern version of the video because they used the instruments as props , where she pretended as a rock star . 
 She also revealed that the scenes reminded her of Vanity 6 . A short " Kitty Kat " clip opens the " Green Light " video . Beyoncé considered " Green Light " the " toughest video " to shoot . Besides from dressing in latex rubber clothing , she and her back @-@ up dancers had to wear ballet @-@ pointe heels . The shoes blistered her feet and gave muscle spasms due to the 18 @-@ hour session . Beyoncé invited her all @-@ female tour band , Suga Mama , to make their second appearance in a video after their debut performance on the music video for " Irreplaceable " ( 2006 ) . The video was posted on the MTV Overdrive on March 28 , 2007 . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 On September 6 , 2006 , Beyoncé promoted the album B 'Day with a performance of " Green Light " on Good Morning America . On April 2 , 2007 she also appeared on the Today Show , to promote the deluxe edition of B 'Day , which was released the following day . Beyoncé sang the Spanglish version of " Irreplaceable " and " Green Light " . The song was included as a part of her set list on The Beyoncé Experience . On August 5 , 2007 , Beyoncé performed the song at the Madison Square Garden in Manhattan , wearing a sparkly silver dress with a long train . For the performance , Beyoncé also brought out her squad of six female dancers . According to Shaheem Reid of MTV News , all the women moved with the precision " of a Navy Seal strike force " , slaying the crowd with their synchronized dances . Jon Pareles of The New York Times praised the performance , stating : " Beyoncé needs no distractions from her singing , which can be airy or brassy , tearful or vicious , rapid @-@ fire with staccato syllables or sustained in curlicued melismas . But she was in constant motion , strutting in costumes [ ... ] " . According to Tonya Turner of The Courier @-@ Mail , the performance of " Green Light " , " moved fans to screams of endearment . " In Los Angeles , Beyoncé gave a full @-@ length performance of the song , dressed in a sparkly silver dress with a long train . It was executed with several female backup dancers , and live instrumentation . " Green Light " was included as on her live album The Beyoncé Experience Live ( 2007 ) . 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 Digital download 
 " Green Light " – 3 : 29 
 " Green Light " ( Freemasons Remix ) – 3 : 19 
 " Green Light " ( Remix featuring Young Buck ) - 4 : 19 
 UK Freemasons Digital EP 
 " Green Light " ( Freemasons Remix ) – 3 : 19 
 " Beautiful Liar " ( Freemasons Club Remix ) ( featuring Shakira ) – 7 : 31 
 " Déjà Vu " ( Freemasons Radio Mix ) ( featuring Jay @-@ Z ) – 3 : 15 
 " Ring the Alarm " ( Freemasons Club Mix Radio Edit ) – 3 : 26 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits are taken from B 'Day 's liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Cincinnati , Lebanon and Northern Railway = 
 The Cincinnati , Lebanon and Northern Railway ( CL & N ) was a local passenger and freight @-@ carrying railroad in the southwestern part of the U.S. state of Ohio , connecting Cincinnati to Dayton via Lebanon . It was built in the late 19th century to give the town of Lebanon and Warren County better transportation facilities . The railroad was locally known as the " Highland Route " , since it followed the ridge between the Little and Great Miami rivers , and was the only line not affected by floods such as the Great Dayton Flood of 1913 . 
 The company went through multiple bankruptcies , both before and after its 1881 completion , until the Pennsylvania Railroad gained control in 1896 and leased it in 1921 . Except for several years in the mid @-@ 1880s , when the line was under control of the 3 ft ( 914 mm ) narrow gauge Toledo , Cincinnati and St. Louis Railroad , it was not a major line , in part due to its steep approach to downtown Cincinnati . For this reason , portions of the line have been abandoned , beginning in 1952 with a segment north of Lebanon . 
 Passenger service was eliminated entirely in 1934 . Conrail , the Pennsylvania Railroad 's successor , sold the remaining trackage in the 1980s to the Indiana and Ohio Railway , a short line now owned by <unk> . That company continues to provide local freight service on the ex @-@ CL & N , and the Lebanon Mason Monroe Railroad operates tourist trains on a portion of the line near Lebanon . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Planning and grading , 1850 – 1876 = = = 
 The town of Lebanon , Ohio , laid out in 1802 , was bypassed by the Miami and Erie Canal in 1830 ; the branch Warren County Canal to Lebanon was wrecked by flooding in 1848 . The Little Miami Railroad ( 1846 , later a Pennsylvania line ) and Cincinnati , Hamilton and Dayton Railroad ( 1851 , later a B & O line ) followed the valleys of the Little and Great Miami rivers ( the M & E Canal had used the latter ) , also bypassing the highlands on which Lebanon lay . Residents of the town obtained a legislative charter in March 1850 for the Cincinnati , Lebanon and Xenia Railroad ( CL & X ) , which would extend from Cincinnati northeast through Lebanon to Xenia . At the latter town , the incorporators decided the most likely connection would be the New York and Erie Railroad , which was planning on extending into Ohio . Thus the line was planned to use the Erie 's 6 ft ( 1 @,@ 829 mm ) broad gauge . 
 To enter the city of Cincinnati , the CL & X would join the Dayton and Cincinnati Railroad ( D & C ) , which was planning the 10 @,@ 011 @-@ foot ( 3 @,@ 051 m ) double @-@ track Deer Creek Tunnel through the Walnut Hills , at <unk> ( then known as Sharon ) . Tunnel construction began in late 1852 , and the CL & X was finally organized under the charter in November . The CL & X located right @-@ of @-@ way , and began construction in about April 1853 , but was forced to stop work by the end of 1855 due to lack of funds . Only grading between Sharon and Lebanon , mostly north of Mason , had been completed . ( The tunnel project also failed , and was eventually acquired by the CL & N. ) In July 1861 , the courts appointed a receiver for the CL & X , who in March 1869 sold the unfinished railroad , which had cost $ 83 @,@ 885 , to 40 area residents for $ 4 @,@ 000 . Five trustees would ensure that the property was not sold without a majority of its owners consenting . Twenty years after its canal connection was destroyed , Lebanon was still without a modern connection to the outside world , and its economy continued to stagnate . 
 The 1870s fad of the narrow gauge railway , which was cheaper than broader gauges to build and operate ( for low volumes of traffic ) , presented a new possibility . The Dayton and South Eastern Railroad ( D & SE , later a B & O line ) was planning a 3 ft narrow gauge line from the Jackson County mines through Xenia to Dayton , and a branch from Xenia through Lebanon would connect to the markets at Cincinnati . The editors of the local newspaper , The Western Star , encouraged citizens to support the project , but by taking a more active role and organizing a locally owned railroad company to ensure its completion . Editorials likened the situation to Aesop 's fable of Hercules and the Carter , where Hercules tells a stuck carter that he will not assist unless the carter himself is willing to help . In November 1874 , residents of Lebanon and the surrounding area organized the 3 ft narrow gauge Miami Valley Narrow Gauge Railway ( renamed Miami Valley Railway in October 1876 ) , which would complete the unfinished CL & X as a branch of the D & SE . 
 Slow stock subscriptions delayed surveying until June 1875 , when a line was located between Xenia and the Marietta and Cincinnati Railroad ( M & C , later a B & O line ) west of Norwood . Property owners in the villages of Norwood and Pleasant Ridge , wishing to develop their land as suburbs , put forward a proposition to relocate the line to the east through their land in exchange for free right @-@ of @-@ way , and to build a steam dummy line between Norwood and the horse car lines in Walnut Hills , which would provide Miami Valley passengers with a more direct entrance to downtown Cincinnati than the circuitous M & C. However , in August , an even more direct route south of Norwood , through the rugged Deer Creek Valley , was suggested , by which the Miami Valley could obtain its own access to Cincinnati . After imposing heavy restrictions , which would require the construction of several trestles and a tunnel , the Cincinnati City Council granted the right @-@ of @-@ way through the valley , including Eden Park , to the railroad company . The owners of the old CL & X grade sold it in April 1876 for $ 8 @,@ 000 in stock of the new company , and most of the land outside Cincinnati had been bought by that summer . The Miami Valley resolved in May 1876 to build only north to Waynesville , a village southwest of Xenia , where the projected Waynesville , Port William and Jeffersonville Railroad and Jeffersonville , Mt . Sterling and Columbus Railroad would extend to Columbus , crossing the D & SE at Octa . ( The former completed most of its line , but abandoned it in 1887 ; the latter was only able to grade a portion . ) 
 = = = Construction and early operations , 1876 – 1885 = = = 
 President Seth S. Haines of Waynesville broke ground in Eden Park on September 1 , 1876 , although most early work was done outside Cincinnati . The company continued to be plagued by lack of funds , and , despite completion of the grade between Norwood and Waynesville within a year , work soon slowed and eventually stopped in late 1878 . Contractor John B. Benedict brought a suit in December for breach of contract , alleging that he was not properly paid . During the trial , two embarrassing facts came to light : Haines and Benedict had signed a " secret contract " giving Haines a portion of the bonds paid to Benedict , and the price of the line south of Norwood had been artificially inflated so that the connecting Cincinnati and Eastern Railway ( C & E , later a N & W line ) would have to pay more for trackage rights into Cincinnati . However , it was nonpayment of interest on bonds that forced the Miami Valley into receivership in January and foreclosure in March 1880 . Another decade had passed and Lebanon still lacked a railroad . 
 The Toledo , Delphos and Burlington Railroad ( TD & B ) , a growing 3 ft narrow gauge system with roots in the town of Delphos , would finally give Lebanon its rail line . Together with a group of suburban Cincinnati investors , the TD & B bought the unfinished grade at the foreclosure sale for $ 61 @,@ 000 and incorporated the 3 ft narrow gauge Cincinnati Northern Railway as its successor on June 8 , 1880 . ( The TD & B would also acquire the Dayton and South Eastern in February 1881 . ) At first the TD & B and Cincinnati @-@ area residents shared stock and management equally , but soon this was changed so that the former party would control all the stock for ease in future consolidation , and the latter would locally manage the road . As the TD & B was in the process of building into Dayton from the north , it was decided that the new company would not use the grade all the way to Waynesville . Instead , the TD & B would construct a connection from the D & SE at a point they called Lebanon Junction , now inside Dayton near the intersection of Woodman and Rainier Drives , to the small village of Dodds . There the Cincinnati Northern would begin , following the Miami Valley 's route through Lebanon to Cincinnati . Construction resumed in late 1880 , and proceeded rapidly thanks to funding from Ohio and Northeastern capitalists . Mixed train operations between Lebanon and Norwood , where connections could be made with the M & C , began on May 30 , 1881 , and on September 5 the line was opened south to a streetcar connection at Oak Street , just north of the tunnel . Service was extended through the tunnel to the Eden Park entrance on January 12 , 1882 , and on February 13 a temporary Cincinnati depot opened just north of Court Street . With the completion of the TD & B 's branch from Lebanon Junction to Dodds in December 1881 , the Cincinnati @-@ Dayton line was finally complete ; Jackson County coal was first shipped over it in February 1882 . Two short branches to the suburbs of Montgomery and Avondale — the latter built separately as the Spring Grove , Avondale and Cincinnati Railway ( SGA & C ) — opened on November 14 , 1881 and July 1 , 1882 , respectively . C & E operations to Court Street began by April 1882 , using the Cincinnati Northern south of a junction at Idlewild , and in October the Cincinnati Northern laid tracks across that street into its permanent depot at the southeast corner of the Broadway Street intersection . 
 The TD & B absorbed its subsidiary , the Toledo , Cincinnati and St. Louis Railroad ( TC & StL ) , in March 1882 , and took its name as more descriptive of the growing system , which hoped to become part of a nationwide narrow gauge network stretching southwest to Mexico City . One year later , in May 1883 , the Cincinnati Northern and the SGA & C were consolidated into the TC & StL . However , the TC & StL was constructed cheaply , with poor drainage and little ballast . While the Cincinnati Northern had been built to better standards , the connecting line between Lebanon Junction and Dodds was just as bad . The inadequate facilities and equipment , as well as difficulties in interchanging equipment with 4 ft 8 1 ⁄ 2 in ( 1 @,@ 435 mm ) standard gauge lines , contributed to its entering receivership in August 1883 . The TC & StL had six divisions at this time . Four of the five TC & StL divisions south of Delphos were sold to their bondholders at auction in June 1884 , and separate companies were soon organized for three of those : the Dayton and Toledo Railroad , Dayton and Ironton Railroad , and Iron Railway ( named Iron Railroad prior to TC & StL receivership ) . The Toledo @-@ St. Louis line was sold in December 1885 and reorganized as the Toledo , St. Louis and Kansas City Railroad , commonly known as the Clover Leaf Route . In July , George Hafer of Avondale replaced William J. Craig of Toledo as receiver of the Cincinnati Northern Division , allowing it to recover from Craig 's deferred maintenance . Hafer obtained a short @-@ term lease from the trustees of the Dodds @-@ Lebanon Junction line ( officially the Cincinnati Division ) , allowing continued access to Dayton . Finally , on June 27 , 1885 , the Cincinnati Northern Division was sold for $ 200 @,@ 000 to its bondholders , who incorporated the Cincinnati , Lebanon and Northern Railway , with Hafer as president , on July 14 and transferred operations on August 1 , 1885 . The narrow gauge movement of the 1870s had failed , and all of the ex @-@ TC & StL lines were converted to standard gauge within the next ten years . 
 = = = CL & N , 1885 – 1926 = = = 
 The newly organized CL & N initially operated a main line from Court Street in Cincinnati to Dayton , leasing the track from Dodds to Lebanon Junction from the Cincinnati Division trustees , and trackage rights over the Dayton and Ironton Railroad ( the old 3 ft narrow gauge D & SE line ) into Dayton . But the latter was converted to 4 ft 8 1 ⁄ 2 in ( 1 @,@ 435 mm ) standard gauge in April 1887 , and CL & N service was cut back to Dodds , since the operations north of there were unprofitable even when it was able to reach Dayton . ( The line from Lebanon to Dodds was leased in 1892 to the company organized to operate north of Dodds . ) Avondale Branch operations were discontinued in August 1889 , due to competition from the cheaper Mt . Auburn Cable Railway . Under Hafer 's leadership , new passenger and freight depots opened on the north side of Court Street in December 1885 . In preparation for conversion to standard gauge , the CL & N relaid rail and replaced bridges , including a straight trestle in the Deer Creek Valley , completed in January 1889 , in place of a curving old narrow gauge structure . The first standard gauge rails were laid by August 1889 as part of a dual gauge setup south of Idlewild , when the Ohio and North Western Railroad ( O & NW , successor to the C & E ) , which had converted its line to standard gauge , moved its trains from the Little Miami Railroad ( Pennsylvania Railroad system ) back to the CL & N. Several months later , a third rail was laid north to East Norwood , allowing the O & NW to connect with the Baltimore and Ohio Southwestern Railroad ( successor to the M & C ) . After undertaking more improvements to the alignment , the company completed the conversion of the main line to Lebanon to standard gauge on September 16 , 1894 , although , until it acquired a full set of standard gauge equipment , much of the commuter service to Blue Ash continued to use the narrow gauge tracks . 
 Throughout the CL & N 's independence , various larger companies were looking to acquire it , mainly for the valuable Court Street terminal property . The most persistent rumor was that the Cincinnati , Jackson and Mackinaw Railroad ( CJ & M , later a NYC line ) would buy the CL & N as an entrance to Cincinnati . The CJ & M had built south from Michigan to Carlisle , Ohio in 1887 , and initially acquired trackage rights over the CH & D to reach Cincinnati . Negotiations between the CL & N and CJ & M convinced the CH & D that the latter was capable of becoming a strong competitor , despite its poor financial state , and the CH & D attempted to acquire the CJ & M in 1892 . But the CL & N stopped the consolidation based on Ohio 's laws prohibiting such anti @-@ competitive practices , and the CJ & M continued to look at the CL & N as a possible part of its line . After the CL & N 's conversion to standard gauge was completed in 1894 , the CJ & M secured trackage rights over the CL & N into Court Street , beginning service on January 27 , 1896 via an extension from Carlisle to Franklin , the Cleveland , Cincinnati , Chicago and St. Louis Railway ( Big Four , later a NYC line ) to Middletown , and the recently opened Middletown and Cincinnati Railroad to the CL & N at Hageman . The CJ & M also acquired the long @-@ dormant Deer Creek Tunnel project in an attempt to construct its own route into the city , tired of dealing with Hafer and the CL & N. The Pennsylvania Railroad , owner of the Little Miami Railroad that had been constructed east of Lebanon in the 1840s , entered the negotiations in 1896 to protect its Cincinnati @-@ area interests , and in March it ( through the Pennsylvania Company ) acquired a majority of the CL & N 's stock . Pennsylvania officials took over management in May , and in 1902 the CL & N acquired the tunnel property and some terminal property near Court Street from the Cincinnati Northern Railroad , successor to the CJ & M , which had become part of the Big Four and terminated its use of the CL & N in 1901 . 
 As a part of the Pennsylvania system , the CL & N continued to operate its own property ( which included the line north of Dodds after 1914 ) until January 1 , 1921 , when it was leased to the Pennsylvania . Starting at the end of 1918 , the Interstate Commerce Commission classified the CL & N as a Class I railroad , meaning that it made at least $ 1 million per year in operating revenue . ( This designation was dropped in 1921 when the CL & N was leased . ) However , net operating income , revenue minus costs , which had steadily climbed from the 1890s , began falling in 1916 , becoming a deficit in 1920 . Subsequently , effective January 1 , 1926 , the Pennsylvania merged the CL & N with several other small companies — the Cleveland , Akron and Cincinnati Railway , Manufacturers Railway , Pennsylvania @-@ Detroit Railroad , and Toledo , Columbus and Ohio River Railroad — to create the Pennsylvania , Ohio and Detroit Railroad , a non @-@ operating subsidiary . That company was merged into the Connecting Railway , previously a short link in Philadelphia , in 1956 , and its lessee merged with the New York Central Railroad in 1968 to form Penn Central Transportation . 
 = = = Other lines , 1889 – 1915 = = = 
 The 16 @.@ 96 @-@ mile ( 27 @.@ 29 km ) line north of Dodds , built by the TD & B to connect the Cincinnati Northern to the D & SE at Lebanon Junction , was sold separately at the June 1884 foreclosure sale , to its first @-@ mortgage bondholders for $ 20 @,@ 000 . Initially operated under lease by the CL & N , service was discontinued in April 1887 when the ex @-@ D & SE was converted from 3 ft ( 914 mm ) narrow gauge to 4 ft 8 1 ⁄ 2 in ( 1 @,@ 435 mm ) standard gauge . With its northern connection gone , and no on @-@ line sources of revenue , there was no profit in operating the line . However , one such source would soon be created , when local businessman Henry Lewis decided to purchase nearby " Dayton limestone " quarries at Centerville . He bought the abandoned rail line from the bondholders ' trustees for $ 40 @,@ 000 in December 1888 , and in January 1889 organized the Dayton , Lebanon and Cincinnati Railroad ( DL & C ) . Extensions on both ends were planned , north into downtown Dayton and south to a standard gauge connection . Lewis finished converting the 3 ft ( 914 mm ) narrow gauge line to standard gauge in January 1891 , and initially leased it to the Dayton , Fort Wayne and Chicago Railway , successor to the D & SE . He leased in 1890 and later bought land in Dayton for the proposed terminal , and in early 1892 he acquired the quarries at Centerville , giving the line its source of traffic . The DL & C bought the line from Lewis in March 1892 for $ 189 @,@ 000 in stock , and in June it acquired a lease on the CL & N 's 5 @.@ 52 @-@ mile ( 8 @.@ 88 km ) line between Dodds and Lebanon . After converting the track to standard gauge , the DL & C began operations into Lebanon in late December 1892 . However , it was unable to negotiate trackage rights with the Cincinnati , Dayton and Ironton Railroad ( the latest name for the ex @-@ D & SE ) , and only operated north to Lebanon Junction , where passengers could transfer to that company 's trains into Dayton . Throughout its life , the DL & C competed with the CL & N wherever possible ; for example , the CL & N advertised ( along with the Middletown and Cincinnati Railroad and Big Four ) a faster route between Lebanon and Dayton via Hageman and Middletown . 
 Lewis died in 1893 , and in the next decade the DL & C built no new lines . However , a group of investors bought the company , including the Dayton terminal property , in 1901 for $ 250 @,@ 000 from Lewis 's heirs . The first segment of the line into downtown Dayton was completed in late 1902 , branching off the main line at Hempstead and ending at Lambeth , site of the Dayton State Hospital . Unable to obtain a franchise from Dayton , and still unprofitable , the DL & C entered receivership in January 1905 , and was sold at foreclosure in April 1907 and reorganized in May as the Dayton , Lebanon and Cincinnati Railroad and Terminal Company . The bondholders who had organized the new company succeeded in obtaining the franchise , and sold the stock to a new group of investors in January 1909 . Construction was restarted in April , and in November the branch reached the intersection of Brown and Caldwell Streets and the National Cash Register plant . Finally , after completing the cuts and fills required along the east bank of the Great Miami River , the DL & C opened its new main line in 1912 , to a passenger depot on the north side of Washington Street , several blocks south and west of the city 's main Union Station . A freight depot was located just to the north , at Eaker Street , and just beyond was an interchange track ( not part of the original line ) connecting to the Cincinnati , Hamilton and Dayton Railway ( B & O system ) and , via that line , the Pittsburgh , Cincinnati , Chicago and St. Louis Railway ( Panhandle Route , part of the Pennsylvania system ) . 
 The other line eventually acquired by the CL & N was the Middletown and Cincinnati Railway ( M & C , not to be confused with the Marietta and Cincinnati Railroad discussed earlier ) . Paul J. Sorg , owner of a tobacco plant east of Middletown , was unhappy with the service provided by the Cincinnati , Hamilton and Dayton Railroad ( then independent ) and Cincinnati and Springfield Railway ( Big Four system ) , both of which bypassed the center of town . Sorg and associates incorporated the M & C in early 1890 , and surveyed a 14 @.@ 23 miles ( 22 @.@ 90 km ) line from Middletown , which lay in the Great Miami River valley , southeast to a point that would be known as Middletown Junction on the Little Miami Railroad ( Pennsylvania system ) . Construction on the majority of the route , which crossed the CL & N at Hageman , was complete by September 1891 , and a 365 @-@ foot ( 111 m ) truss bridge over the Little Miami River opened in early 1892 , linking the line to the Pennsylvania . Access into central Middletown was delayed until December , when it was finally able to cross the CH & D to its depot . As opposed to the CL & N and DL & C , the M & C was straight and flat , giving a smooth ride , and turned a reasonable profit . The revenue was not enough , however , to pay off the bonds , and the M & C entered receivership in July 1894 . The holders of liens against the property bought the line at foreclosure in October for $ 335 @,@ 000 , incorporated the Middletown and Cincinnati Railroad in December , and elected Sorg president . 
 Sorg died on May 28 , 1902 , and six days later the CL & N , owned by the Pennsylvania since 1896 , bought its property for $ 400 @,@ 000 and began operating it as a branch . The DL & C would be acquired twelve years later , after the Great Dayton Flood of 1913 . The CL & N and DL & C , built on the highlands between the river valleys , combined to provide the only access into Dayton during the disaster . The Pennsylvania realized that the DL & C would make a good acquisition in the event of future flooding , and had the CL & N buy and begin operating the DL & C for about $ 700 @,@ 000 in December 1914 . ( Through service between Cincinnati and Dayton had begun that summer . ) The DL & C built a short connection from Lebanon Junction to the Panhandle Route at Clement in early 1915 , and on July 1 its property became that of the CL & N. 
 = = = <unk> and sales , 1917 – present = = = 
 Competition from interurbans , specifically the Cincinnati @-@ Lebanon Interurban Railway and Terminal Company , took away passengers from the CL & N beginning in 1903 . But the interurban began to decline , going out of business in 1922 , and it was motor vehicles that would kill the CL & N 's passenger service . The first line to go was the Middletown Branch , discontinued in 1917 ; the short branch to Montgomery became freight @-@ only in 1926 . All service north of Lebanon ended in 1928 , and in 1931 only one mixed train between Court Street and Lebanon was left on the schedule . The less @-@ convenient Cincinnati Union Terminal replaced Court Street in 1933 , as agreed upon by all railroads participating in its construction . CL & N trains reached the station via trackage rights on the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad ( ex @-@ M & C ) south of East Norwood . This was never popular among CL & N riders , and the last scheduled passenger train on the former CL & N ran on January 31 , 1934 . With passenger service gone , and several cross @-@ connections to other Pennsylvania lines , the CL & N was no longer needed as a through route . Several years after the Montgomery Branch was fully abandoned in 1933 , the Pennsylvania discontinued freight service between Blue Ash and Mason and between Lebanon and Lytle ; trains continued to reach Lebanon via the Little Miami Railroad and Middletown Branch . Service was resumed on the entire line during World War II , but the Lebanon @-@ Lytle segment was torn up in 1952 . After the Pennsylvania merged into Penn Central in 1968 , a 3 @-@ mile ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) piece north from Brecon was again abandoned , as was the short piece of the Middletown Branch east of the main line at Hageman , with Lebanon service now coming from the ex @-@ New York Central at Middletown . The line through the Deer Creek Valley into Court Street was also abandoned , and the old freight depot was torn down in 1975 . 
 When the Consolidated Rail Corporation ( Conrail ) acquired the assets of the bankrupt Penn Central in 1976 , it was allowed to choose which lines to keep and which to abandon . The line between Avondale and Brecon still saw heavy freight traffic , and there would still be a reasonable amount of traffic to Mason and Hempstead . Thus Conrail bought about half of the ex @-@ CL & N , including the main line from Cincinnati to Brecon ( Blue Ash Secondary Track ) , Mason to Hageman ( Mason Secondary Track ) , Hempstead to Pasadena ( Kettering Running Track ) , and Patterson Road to Dayton ( DP & L Industrial Track ) , as well as Middletown to Hageman ( Middletown Secondary ) and Hempstead to Clement ( Clement Running Track ) . Ownership of the remaining lines — Brecon to Mason , Hageman to Lebanon , Lytle to Hempstead , Pasadena to Patterson Road , and Hageman to Middletown Junction — remained with the Penn Central trustees , although , with local funding , Conrail operated the two segments from Hageman to Lebanon and Centerville to Hempstead as " light density lines " . Tracks between Lytle and Centerville were torn up in 1979 . Since then , several more segments have been abandoned , including Avondale to McCullough and Centerville to Kettering . Short line Indiana and Ohio Railway ( IORY ) acquired most of the remainder in the 1980s , beginning operations from Monroe ( near Middletown ) to Mason and Lebanon in March 1985 , and McCullough to Brecon in December 1986 . The city of Lebanon has bought the Hageman @-@ Lebanon segment , initially owned by the Penn Central trustees , and the Southwest Ohio Regional Transit Authority acquired the property between McCullough and Brecon in 1997 for a proposed public transit line . ( IORY continues to operate freight on both of these segments . ) The IORY began running tourist trains on the Lebanon segment in 1985 . The passenger operations were split in 1996 , going through several renamings to Turtle Creek Valley Railway , Turtle Creek and Lebanon Railway , and finally Lebanon Mason Monroe Railroad . Three short segments of line at Middletown and Dayton remained with Conrail until its 1999 breakup , when the Norfolk Southern Railway acquired Conrail 's assets in southwestern Ohio . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Lying on the highlands between the Little and Great Miami Rivers , the CL & N was commonly known as the " Highland Route " . While it normally received only local traffic , its location was a distinct advantage during floods . This was first demonstrated during the Flood of 1884 , when the rising Ohio River cut off all other railroads from downtown Cincinnati . But the load was too much for the 3 ft ( 914 mm ) narrow gauge TC & StL , and several companies switched to Miami and Erie Canal boats to make the connections until the waters subsided . Similar Cincinnati floods happened in 1883 , 1897 , 1898 , 1907 , and 1937 , but in 1913 the Great Dayton Flood inundated that city , then lying at the north end of the independent DL & C. That company had just completed its line into downtown Dayton , when , less than a year later , the Loramie Reservoir broke through its levees and sent a swell of water through down the Great Miami River and into the city . As with the Cincinnati floods , only the CL & N and DL & C were unaffected , and relief supplies were sent north from Cincinnati via Lebanon to the National Cash Register plant . 
 The line began on the east side of downtown Cincinnati , at the corner of Eggleston Avenue and Court Street . The site of the brick freight depot , closed in 1969 and demolished in 1975 , is now owned by Greyhound Lines , which uses it as an intercity bus terminal . A track built in 1887 crossed Court Street , connecting with the Little Miami Railroad 's Eggleston Avenue Connection for freight transfer . The line began by climbing the Deer Creek Valley , the only feasible rail entrance to downtown Cincinnati that did not follow a river valley . When the railroad was built in the late 1870s , the valley was used by the city as a dump . An 1852 city ordinance provided for raising the ground level , beginning with the raising of Court Street by as much as 50 feet ( 15 m ) . To follow the eventual surface level and avoid the steep hillsides , the railroad was built on trestles for much of its ascent , with a maximum grade of 3 @.@ 5 % . After leaving the depot , the line traversed an S @-@ shaped trestle to the east side of the valley , before crossing Elsinore Place and Eden Park Drive at grade , with a second trestle between these streets . ( The former was replaced in January 1889 with a straighter single @-@ track trestle . ) A bridge took the line over Florence Avenue , and it then passed through the neighborhood of Mount Auburn before passing under the summit through the cut @-@ and @-@ cover Oak Street Tunnel north of McMillan Street . The line started its gradual descent as it left the tunnel , generally following the existing ground level and crossing streets at grade . 
 Double tracks initially stretched from Court Street to near Fredonia Avenue , where the 1 @.@ 25 @-@ mile ( 2 @.@ 01 km ) Avondale Branch split for the Cincinnati Zoo . When the line was converted to 4 ft 8 1 ⁄ 2 in ( 1 @,@ 435 mm ) standard gauge in 1894 , the tunnel and McMillan Street underpass were not wide enough for a double @-@ track line , yet two standard gauge tracks were laid side @-@ by @-@ side . After an accident in 1916 , the tracks were relaid as a gauntlet track . The trestles were rebuilt as single @-@ track in 1888 and 1889 , after which double track only extended from Eden Park Drive to Avondale . Due to increased passenger traffic , the line was re @-@ widened not only south to Court Street but also north to Norwood from 1902 to 1904 , once the valley had been filled in . Beyond Avondale , the CL & N descended through Idlewild , where two Norfolk and Western Railway lines diverged — the Cincinnati and Eastern Railway east to Portsmouth and the Cincinnati Connecting Belt Railroad northwest to a junction near Elmwood Place . The railway began to climb again at East Norwood , where it crossed the Marietta and Cincinnati Railroad ( Baltimore and Ohio Railroad ) , reaching the flat highlands at Deer Park . In the late 1880s , the CL & N , with its frequent commuter service , contributed to the development of suburbs along its line including Idlewild , East Norwood , Silverton , Deer Park , and Hazelwood . At Hopkins Avenue in Norwood , commuters unsatisfied with the bare platform built by the railroad company raised $ 1500 to build a station building , which opened on August 1 , 1888 , and was owned by the Hopkins Avenue Depot Company until service ended in the 1930s . It was later used as a gas station , and now houses a chiropractor . As part of its bicentennial celebration , the city of Silverton built a replica of its former CL & N station with a museum inside . 
 Just beyond East Norwood , the Pennsylvania built McCullough Yard in 1927 , improving switching operations for the growing industrial base in Norwood . A connection was included to the Pennsylvania 's Chicago @-@ bound Richmond Branch , which the CL & N crossed over north of the yard . In Butler County , north of Brecon , the CL & N curved abruptly northeast onto the original line , partially graded in the 1850s between <unk> and Lebanon . Just beyond , it began to descend slowly through Mason to Hageman , where it crossed the Middletown Branch , and then rose slightly , alongside Turtle Creek , to Lebanon . The Pennsylvania tore down the original Lebanon passenger station in 1960 , replacing it ( for freight purposes ) with a smaller building from Kings Mills on the Little Miami Railroad . The Lebanon Council of Garden Clubs acquired the land in 1972 , tore down the freight depot , and erected a replica of the old passenger depot in its place , with a gift shop inside . 
 Leaving Lebanon , the line ascended a small gully and then headed north @-@ northeasterly across the highlands to Dodds . The never @-@ used grade from Dodds to Waynesville descended into the Little Miami River valley via Newman Run before turning north and ending at the latter village . Portions of the right @-@ of @-@ way and stone abutments for several never @-@ built bridges remain on what is now farmland . The line as completed turned north at Dodds , and required several cuts and fills to traverse the rolling terrain . At Hempstead , just north of Hempstead Road , the line split . The original route continued north , parallel to Woodman Drive , to the old Dayton and South Eastern Railroad ( now the Iron Horse Trail ) at Lebanon Junction . A 1915 extension was built parallel to the ex @-@ D & SE , and ended at the Panhandle Route ( now the Creekside Trail to the east ) at Clement . Part of this line is still operated by the Norfolk Southern Railway , and to the south the right @-@ of @-@ way is being used for an extension of the Iron Horse Trail . The other branch headed northwesterly into downtown Dayton , steadily descending as it passed south of the University of Dayton and alongside the Great Miami River . The main passenger and freight depots were at Washington Street , which the CL & N passed over on the first such grade separation in Dayton . The first freight depot opened with the line in 1912 , and was replaced in 1930 by a larger structure , itself torn down in 1966 . 
 = = Presidents = = 
 J. P. Gilchrist ( 1852 – 1861 ) 
 Seth Silver Haines ( 1874 – 1879 ) 
 Nathan <unk> ( receiver , 1879 – 1880 ) 
 John M. Corse of the TD & B ( 1880 – 1882 ) 
 Elijah B. Phillips of the TC & StL ( 1883 ) 
 William J. Craig ( receiver , 1883 – 1884 ) 
 George Hafer ( receiver , 1884 – 1885 ; president , 1885 – 1896 ) 
 Joseph Wood was the first of at least two Pennsylvania Railroad men elected president after that company gained control in 1896 . 
 = = Equipment = = 
 When the CL & N converted to 4 ft 8 1 ⁄ 2 in ( 1 @,@ 435 mm ) standard gauge in 1894 , it initially mounted its 3 ft ( 914 mm ) narrow gauge passenger cars on standard gauge trucks . These were replaced with standard gauge cars after the Pennsylvania acquisition in 1896 . 
 The first locomotive on the line , a Baldwin 4 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 named " Warren County No. 1 " , was bought in 1877 by the Miami Valley Railway . In all , the CL & N and predecessors had nine narrow gauge locomotives , bought from four different manufacturers . Two were disposed of in the 1880s , and , of the seven remaining into the 1890s , six provided main line service and one was used as a switching and helper locomotive . 
 Standard gauge operations began in 1894 with five locomotives , and the narrow gauge equipment was kept temporarily for commuter runs to Blue Ash . Later acquisitions , as well as consolidations with other companies , raised the number to 23 in 1920 , its final year of independent operation . 
 = = Station list = = 
 = Wyoming @-@ class battleship = 
 The Wyoming class was a pair of dreadnought battleships built for the United States Navy . The two ships , Wyoming and Arkansas , were authorized in early 1909 , and they were built between 1910 and 1912 . They were the fourth dreadnought design of the US Navy , and they marked an incremental improvement over the preceding Florida class . The primary changes being the addition of a sixth twin @-@ gun turret , bringing the number of 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) guns to twelve , and improved armor protection , including the first use of a torpedo bulkhead in an American battleship design . The Navy had seriously considered a significantly more powerful 14 @-@ inch ( 356 mm ) gun , but it would have entailed major delays and required extensive harbor improvements to accommodate what would have been much larger ships . 
 The two ships frequently served together , first in the Atlantic Fleet in the 1910s . Both vessels were deployed to British waters after the United States entered World War I in April 1917 to reinforce the Royal Navy 's Grand Fleet . They served in the Pacific Fleet in 1919 – 21 , before both returned to the Atlantic Fleet . Much of their time in the Atlantic Fleet was spent conducting peacetime training exercises , along with taking midshipmen from the US Naval Academy on training cruises . Wyoming and Arkansas were heavily modernized in the mid @-@ 1920s , receiving more efficient oil @-@ fired boilers to replace their old coal @-@ fired models , thicker deck armor to protect against plunging fire , anti @-@ torpedo bulges to increase their resistance to underwater damage , and anti @-@ aircraft guns to defend against aerial attacks . 
 The London Naval Treaty of 1930 mandated that Wyoming be demilitarized ; she accordingly was converted into a training ship , with half of her main battery turrets , belt armor , and anti @-@ torpedo bulges removed . Arkansas was permitted to continue in service with the fleet , however . After the United States entered World War II , Arkansas was used to escort convoys to North Africa . By 1944 , she served as a coastal bombardment vessel ; in this role , she supported Allied landings at Normandy ( Operation Overlord ) and southern France ( Operation Dragoon ) before being transferred to the Pacific , where she provided fire support to Marines fighting on Iwo Jima and at Okinawa in 1945 . Wyoming meanwhile continued as a training ship , being modified further in 1944 to include the various types of anti @-@ aircraft guns that trainees would operate in the fleet . Both ships were decommissioned shortly after the war , with Arkansas being expended as a target ship during the 1946 nuclear tests at Operation Crossroads , and Wyoming being sold for scrap in 1947 . 
 = = Design = = 
 On 22 July 1908 , the Newport Conference was held ; this included the General Board , the staff of the Naval War College , President Theodore Roosevelt — who had a keen interest in naval matters — and other officers . This conference examined a series of issues relating to existing battleships and new designs ; the first of these new ships would become the Wyoming class . The Board on Construction received general instructions from the Newport Conference ; those at the conference favored adopting the 14 @-@ inch gun , as the British Royal Navy had already traded their 12 @-@ inch guns for 13 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 343 mm ) pieces . The Bureau of Ordnance ( BuOrd ) estimated that design work on the new gun , production , and testing would take two years . On 26 August , the Secretary of the Navy , Victor Metcalf , issued a request for eight- and ten @-@ gun battleships armed with the 14 @-@ inch weapons to the Bureau of Construction and Repair ( C & R ) . Speed was to be at least 20 kn ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) , with as much armor as could be accommodated . 
 BuOrd argued that at likely battle ranges , 8 @,@ 000 to 8 @,@ 500 yd ( 7 @,@ 300 to 7 @,@ 800 m ) , the 12 @-@ inch gun was powerful enough to penetrate existing armor , and so the 14 @-@ inch gun was unnecessary . C & R produced three designs to meet Metcalf 's request , all based on the preceding Florida design ; the first , referred to as design 404 , was a battleship armed with eight 14 @-@ inch guns . The second , design 502 , had an additional twin turret for a total of ten 14 @-@ inch guns . The third , design 601 , would be fitted with twelve 12 @-@ inch guns . The General Board chose 601 , since the design work for the 14 @-@ inch gun had not begun , and adopting it would have caused the class to be delayed . In addition , the ships ' displacement would have increased more dramatically with the larger gun , requiring extensive improvements to harbor facilities ; design 502 would have only been able to dock in Pearl Harbor and Puget Sound with the existing facilities . The placement of the secondary battery also proved to be problematic . The cruise of the Great White Fleet in 1907 – 09 had demonstrated the problems with casemates on the main deck . They were too easily washed out in even moderate seas , making them unusable . Some officers at the Newport Conference had advocated placing them in the superstructure , but the heavy 5 @-@ inch ( 127 mm ) guns used by the Navy would have added excessive top weight . Another alternative was to place them in the forecastle , but the additional weight forward would have strained the ship where the forecastle stepped down to the main deck . The designers ultimately settled on a full @-@ length forecastle , which allowed the casemates to be moved about 4 ft ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) higher in the hull . 
 The ships ' armor protection was improved over earlier designs . The belt and barbette armor was increased by an inch compared to an earlier version of the twelve @-@ gun battleship . A new protection scheme for the funnels was devised , after the Russian experience at the Battle of Tsushima three years before had highlighted the risk of a destroyed exhaust system . The designers also emphasized the need for improved underwater protection . As a result , the <unk> design incorporated a torpedo bulkhead , the first time the feature was included on an American battleship design . Congress approved two new battleships , BB @-@ 32 and BB @-@ 33 , on 3 March 1909 . Design 502 later proved to be the basis for the subsequent class of battleships , the New Yorks . 
 = = = General characteristics and machinery = = = 
 The ships of the Wyoming class were 554 ft ( 169 m ) long at the waterline and 562 ft ( 171 m ) long overall . They had a beam of 93 ft 3 in ( 28 @.@ 42 m ) and a draft of 28 ft 7 in ( 9 m ) . The ships displaced 26 @,@ 000 long tons ( 26 @,@ 417 t ) as designed and up to 27 @,@ 243 long tons ( 27 @,@ 680 t ) at full combat load . They had a full length flush deck , which improved sea @-@ keeping and the ability to work the secondary guns in heavier seas . Both ships were fitted with lattice masts . Their transverse metacentric height was 5 @.@ 4 ft ( 2 m ) They had a crew of 58 officers and 1 @,@ 005 enlisted men . 
 The ships were powered by four @-@ shaft Parsons steam turbines rated at 28 @,@ 000 shp ( 21 @,@ 000 kW ) . Steam was provided by twelve mixed oil and coal @-@ fired Babcock & Wilcox boilers , which were trunked into two closely spaced funnels amidships . The engines generated a top speed of 20 @.@ 5 kn ( 38 @.@ 0 km / h ; 23 @.@ 6 mph ) , though on speed trials Arkansas made 21 @.@ 22 knots ( 39 @.@ 30 km / h ; 24 @.@ 42 mph ) from 25 @,@ 546 shp ( 19 @,@ 050 kW ) . Fuel capacity was 1 @,@ 667 long tons ( 1 @,@ 694 t ) of coal and 266 long tons ( 270 t ) of oil . This allowed the ships to cruise for 6 @,@ 700 nmi ( 12 @,@ 400 km ; 7 @,@ 700 mi ) at a speed of 10 kn ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . At 20 kn ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) , the range fell considerably , to 2 @,@ 655 nmi ( 4 @,@ 917 km ; 3 @,@ 055 mi ) . Steering was controlled by a single rudder . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The ships were armed with a main battery of twelve 12 @-@ inch / 50 caliber Mark 7 Mod 0 guns in six Mark 9 twin @-@ gun turrets all on the centerline , two of which were placed in a superfiring pair forward . The other four turrets were placed aft of the superstructure in two superfiring pairs . These guns fired a 870 lb ( 395 kg ) shell with a 353 lb ( 160 kg ) propellant charge , which produced a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 900 ft / s ( 880 m / s ) . Wyoming and Arkansas were the only ships of the US Navy to receive the gun ; earlier dreadnoughts were equipped with the lower @-@ velocity 12 @-@ inch / 45 @-@ caliber Mark 5 gun . The Mark 7 had significantly better armor penetrating capabilities , owing to its higher muzzle velocity ( and thus higher striking velocity ) . At a range of 12 @,@ 000 yd ( 11 @,@ 000 m ) , the gun could penetrate 12 @.@ 3 in ( 310 mm ) of contemporary face @-@ hardened armor , compared to 10 @.@ 8 in ( 270 mm ) for the Mark 5 . The guns were mounted in the Mark IX gun turret , which allowed for elevation to 15 degrees and depression to -5 degrees . Unlike the turrets used on earlier dreadnoughts , the Mark IX turret required the guns to return to 0 degrees to reload . 
 The secondary battery consisted of twenty @-@ one 5 @-@ inch / 51 caliber guns mounted in casemates along the side of the hull . These guns fired a 50 lb ( 23 kg ) shell with a charge of 24 @.@ 5 lb ( 11 @.@ 1 kg ) , at a muzzle velocity of 3 @,@ 150 ft / s ( 960 m / s ) . As was standard for capital ships of the period , they carried a pair of submerged 21 @-@ inch ( 530 mm ) torpedo tubes in the hull on the broadside . They were equipped with the Mark III Bliss @-@ Leavitt design , which carried a 218 lb ( 99 kg ) warhead and had a range of 4 @,@ 000 yd ( 3 @,@ 700 m ) at a speed of 26 @.@ 5 kn ( 49 @.@ 1 km / h ; 30 @.@ 5 mph ) . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 The main armored belt , which was 8 ft ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) high , was 11 in ( 280 mm ) thick over the central portion of the ship , where it protected the ammunition magazines and machinery spaces . The belt reduced to 5 in ( 130 mm ) toward the stern . On the bottom edge it was reduced to 9 in ( 230 mm ) . The forward end of the belt was connected with an 11 in thick transverse bulkhead with the forward @-@ most main battery barbette , while the aft end of the belt was connected with a 9 in bulkhead . The main armored deck was 2 @.@ 5 in ( 64 mm ) of special treatment steel , reduced to 1 @.@ 5 in ( 38 mm ) in less critical areas . The conning tower had 11 @.@ 5 in ( 292 mm ) thick sides and a 3 in ( 76 mm ) thick roof . 
 The gun turrets had 12 in ( 305 mm ) thick faces and 3 in thick roofs . Their supporting barbettes had 11 in thick sides where they were exposed ; the portions that were masked by the armored belt were reduced to 4 @.@ 5 in ( 110 mm ) . The lower half of the casemate armor was 11 in thick , and the upper half was reduced to 6 @.@ 5 in ( 170 mm ) . Inboard of the casemate battery were longitudinal armored bulkheads ; these were designed to protect the uptakes to the funnels . These were deemed important because during the Russo @-@ Japanese War , three years before , Russian battleships had had their uptakes damaged , which ducted the boiler smoke into the ship rather than out through the funnels . 
 = = = Modifications = = = 
 Both ships were significantly modified throughout their careers . During and shortly after World War I , the horizontal armor of the ships was improved , including the roofs of the conning tower and the gun turrets . Their deck armor was increased to 3 @.@ 5 in ( 89 mm ) , and eight 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) / 50 caliber anti @-@ aircraft guns were installed . Following the signing of the Washington Naval Treaty in February 1922 , modernization work was strictly controlled . The treaty governed what modifications could be made to existing ships , and included restrictions on what could be changed or added . Displacement could rise by no more than 3 @,@ 000 long tons ( 3 @,@ 000 t ) and no alterations of any kind could be made to the main battery guns or mounts . The primary areas that could be improved were those that concerned defense against aerial and underwater attack , along with propulsion systems . 
 The two <unk> , along with the Floridas and New Yorks were heavily modernized in the 1920s . All six ships were converted to completely oil @-@ fired boilers with equipment taken from the cancelled South Dakota @-@ class battleships . The boilers were trunked into a single funnel . These boilers were much more efficient than the coal @-@ fired models the ships had been completed with , and they allowed a significantly greater cruising radius of 11 @,@ 000 nmi ( 20 @,@ 000 km ; 13 @,@ 000 mi ) . The ships were also fitted with anti @-@ torpedo bulges , which improved their underwater defense and also provided additional oil storage capacity . Wyoming and Arkansas lost their cage main mast , which was replaced by a short tripod mast that carried searchlights and radio antennas . Some of their secondary battery guns were relocated higher in the ship to improve their workability in heavy seas . A sponson for six guns was built into the hull abreast of the conning tower and the eight 3 @-@ inch anti @-@ aircraft guns were moved to the top of the sponson . Both ships had their torpedo tubes removed . 
 Under the terms of the 1930 London Naval Treaty , Wyoming was to be demilitarized and converted into a training ship . During the demilitarization process , her anti @-@ torpedo bulges , side armor , and half of her main battery guns were removed . Wyoming was modernized at Norfolk Navy Yard from 12 January to 3 April 1944 ; the reconstruction removed the last of her three 12 @-@ inch gun turrets , and replaced them with four twin and two single enclosed mounts for 5 @-@ inch / 38 caliber guns . New fire control radars were also installed ; these modifications allowed Wyoming to train anti @-@ aircraft gunners with the most modern equipment they would use while in combat with the fleet . Modifications to Arkansas during World War II were kept to a minimum . In 1942 , Arkansas received a new tripod foremast and bridgework , along with more anti @-@ aircraft guns throughout the war . By 1945 , she carried nine quadruple 40 mm Bofors mounts and twenty @-@ eight 20 mm Oerlikons , and the number of 3 @-@ inch guns had been increased to ten . 
 = = Construction = = 
 = = Service history = = 
 After entering service , both ships were assigned to the Atlantic Fleet . The ships took part in the normal routine of training and fleet maneuvers off the east coast of the United States and in the Caribbean , interspersed with periodic maintenance . Both ships toured the Mediterranean in late 1913 , making stops in Italy and France , among others . In April 1914 , Arkansas was involved in the occupation of Veracruz during the Mexican Revolution , and Wyoming arrived later to support the operation . Two men from Arkansas won the Medal of Honor for their actions during the initial occupation of the city . After the United States declared war on Germany on 6 April 1917 , Wyoming , along with the rest of Battleship Division 9 ( BatDiv 9 ) , steamed to Britain to reinforce the Royal Navy 's Grand Fleet , stationed in Scapa Flow . Arkansas initially remained in the United States , training gun crews for the expanding wartime fleet . In July 1918 , she too was sent to Britain . Neither ship saw action during the war , though they were present when the German High Seas Fleet surrendered in November 1918 . 
 From mid @-@ 1919 to mid @-@ 1921 , Arkansas and Wyoming served in the Pacific Fleet , with the latter serving as the flagship of BatDiv 6 . During this time , the ships made a tour of Central and South American countries , culminating in a visit to Valparaiso , where they took part in a naval review for the Chilean president . Both battleships returned in service with the Atlantic Fleet in mid @-@ 1921 . They returned to their peacetime routine of training and maneuvers and periodic maintenance . In the summers , the ships would generally take midshipmen from the US Naval Academy on training cruises . In June 1925 , Arkansas assisted relief efforts after the 1925 Santa Barbara earthquake . From late 1925 to late 1926 , Arkansas received her reconstruction , followed by Wyoming in 1927 . In 1929 and 1930 , Arkansas visited European waters on midshipmen cruises ; she made stops in several countries . Wyoming was reduced to a training ship in 1931 in accordance with the London Naval Treaty , and she spent the next decade conducting training cruises for midshipmen and NROTC cadets . 
 From early 1932 to early 1934 , Arkansas returned for another stint in the Pacific Fleet , followed by another tour of Europe later in the year . After the outbreak of World War II in September 1939 , she was assigned to the reserve force for the Neutrality Patrols . She supported the occupation of Iceland in July 1941 as an escort for the troopship convoys . In November , as it became increasingly apparent that the United States would become involved in World War II , Wyoming was reassigned as a gunnery training ship , a role she served in for the duration of the war . Arkansas , meanwhile , continued in front @-@ line service during the war , first as an escort to convoys to North Africa , and then as a shore bombardment vessel . She supported the landings at Normandy in June 1944 , shelling German positions at Omaha Beach , before bombarding Cherbourg later in the month . Her next bombardment mission came with Operation Dragoon , the invasion of southern France , in August that year . She was then transferred to the Pacific Theater of Operations for action against the Japanese . She bombarded Japanese positions on Iwo Jima in February 1945 and on Okinawa in April . 
 With the end of the war in September 1945 , Arkansas was employed with Operation Magic Carpet , repatriating American soldiers in the Pacific . Wyoming remained in service briefly after the war , though she was decommissioned in August 1947 . She was sold for scrap in October and subsequently broken up . Arkansas was instead retained for use as a target ship during the Operation Crossroads nuclear tests in mid @-@ 1946 . She survived the first test , an air @-@ burst code @-@ named ABLE , though the second experiment , an underwater detonation code @-@ named BAKER , sank the ship . 
 = Michael P. Murphy = 
 Michael Patrick " Murph " Murphy ( May 7 , 1976 – June 28 , 2005 ) was a United States Navy SEAL officer who was awarded the U.S. military 's highest decoration , the Medal of Honor , for his actions during the War in Afghanistan . He was also the first member of the U.S. Navy to receive the award since the Vietnam War . His other posthumous awards include the Silver Star Medal ( which was later upgraded to the Medal of Honor ) and the Purple Heart . 
 Michael Murphy was born and raised in Suffolk County , New York . He graduated from Pennsylvania State University with honors and dual degrees in political science and psychology . After college he accepted a commission in the United States Navy and became a United States Navy SEAL in July 2002 . After participating in several War on Terrorism missions , he was killed on June 28 , 2005 , after his team was compromised and surrounded by Taliban forces near Asadabad , Afghanistan . 
 A United States Navy destroyer and several civilian and military buildings have been named in his honor . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Murphy was born on May 7 , 1976 in Smithtown , New York to Irish American parents Maureen and Daniel Murphy , a former assistant Suffolk County district attorney . He was raised in Patchogue . He attended Saxton Middle School , where he played youth soccer and pee @-@ wee football , with his father as coach . In high school , he continued playing sports , and took a summer job as a lifeguard at the Brookhaven town beach in Lake Ronkonkoma . He returned to the job every summer throughout his college years . 
 Murphy was known to his friends as " Murph " , and he was known as " The Protector " in his high school years . In 8th grade , he protected a special needs child who was being shoved into a locker by a group of boys , this was the only time the principal of the school had called his parents , they couldn 't have been prouder . He also protected a homeless man , who was being attacked while collecting cans . He chased away the attackers and helped the man pick up his cans . 
 In 1994 , Murphy graduated from Patchogue @-@ Medford High School and left home to attend The Pennsylvania State University ( Penn State ) . He graduated from Penn State in 1998 , with degrees in both political science and psychology . Murphy was engaged to be married with the ceremony scheduled for November 2005 . 
 = = Career = = 
 After graduating from Penn State , Murphy was accepted to several law schools , but decided to attend SEAL mentoring sessions at the United States Merchant Marine Academy . In September 2000 , he accepted an appointment to the U.S. Navy 's Officer Candidate School in Pensacola , Florida . On December 13 of that year , he was commissioned as an Ensign in the Navy and began Basic Underwater Demolition / SEAL ( BUD / S ) training in Coronado , California in January 2001 , eventually graduating with Class 236 . 
 Upon graduation from BUD / S , he attended the United States Army Airborne School , SEAL Qualification Training and SEAL Delivery Vehicle ( SDV ) school . Murphy earned his SEAL Trident and checked on board SDV Team ONE ( <unk> @-@ 1 ) in Pearl Harbor , Hawaii in July 2002 . In October 2002 , he deployed with Foxtrot Platoon to Jordan as the liaison officer for Exercise Early Victor . Following his tour with <unk> @-@ 1 , Murphy was assigned to Special Operations Command Central ( SOCCENT ) in Florida and deployed to Qatar in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom . After returning from Qatar , he was deployed to Djibouti to assist in the operational planning of future SDV missions . 
 = = = Combat in Afghanistan = = = 
 Operation Enduring Freedom is the official name used by the United States Government for its War in Afghanistan , together with three smaller military actions under the umbrella of its Global War on Terrorism . The war began on October 7 , 2001 with the response of the United States and United Kingdom to the September 11 attacks in New York City and Arlington , Virginia . In early 2005 , Murphy was assigned to SEAL Delivery Vehicle Team ONE as officer in charge of Alpha Platoon and deployed to Afghanistan in support of Operation Enduring Freedom . 
 = = = = Operation Red Wings = = = = 
 Operation Red Wings was a counter @-@ insurgent mission in Kunar province , Afghanistan , involving four members of the United States Navy SEALs . Murphy and two other SEALs , Danny Dietz and Matthew Axelson , were killed in the fighting , in addition to 16 American Special Operations Forces soldiers , who were killed when their helicopter was shot down while attempting to extract the SEAL Team . Prior to a helicopter being shot down in 2011 , it was both the largest loss of life for American forces since the invasion began and the largest loss for the SEALs since the Vietnam War . Marcus Luttrell was the only surviving American sailor from the squad ; he was protected by local villagers , who sent an emissary to the closest military base , allowing a rescue team to locate him . 
 Murphy led the four @-@ man reconnaissance team on a mission to kill or capture a top Taliban leader , Ahmad Shah ( code name Ben <unk> ) , who commanded a group of insurgents known as the " Mountain Tigers , " west of Asadabad . The team was dropped off by helicopter in a remote , mountainous area east of Asadabad in Kunar Province , near the Pakistan border . After an initially successful infiltration , local goat herders stumbled upon the SEALs ' hiding place . Unable to verify any hostile intent from the herders , the team cut them loose . Hostile locals , possibly the goat herders they let pass , alerted nearby Taliban forces , who surrounded and attacked the small group . After Murphy called for help , an MH @-@ 47 Chinook helicopter loaded with reinforcements was dispatched to rescue the team , but was shot down with an RPG , killing all 16 personnel aboard ; eight SEALs and eight service members from the 160th SOAR . 
 Murphy , Dietz , and Axelson were killed in the action . Luttrell was the only American survivor and was eventually rescued , after several days of wandering the mountain and being protected by the people of an Afghan village . All three of Murphy 's men were awarded the Navy 's second @-@ highest honor , the Navy Cross , for their part in the battle making theirs the most decorated Navy SEAL team in history . 
 = = Death = = 
 Murphy was killed June 28 , 2005 after exposing himself to enemy fire and knowingly leaving his position of cover to get a clear signal in order to communicate with his headquarters . He provided his unit ’ s location and requested immediate support for his element and then returned to his position to continue fighting until he died from his wounds . 
 On July 4 , 2005 , Murphy 's remains were found by a group of American soldiers during a combat search and rescue operation and returned to the United States . Nine days later , on July 13 , Murphy was buried with full military honors at Calverton National Cemetery , Calverton , New York , Section 67 , Grave No. <unk> , less than 20 miles from his childhood home . 
 = = Awards and decorations = = 
 Murphy 's military awards include : 
 = = = Medal of Honor = = = 
 On October 11 , 2007 The White House announced Murphy would be presented the Medal of Honor , awarded posthumously , during a ceremony at the White House on October 22 , 2007 . 
 The Medal of Honor is the highest military decoration awarded by the United States government and is bestowed on a member of the armed forces who distinguishes himself " ... conspicuously by gallantry and intrepidity at the risk of his life above and beyond the call of duty while engaged in an action against an enemy of the United States ... " Due to the nature of the award , it is commonly presented posthumously . 
 On October 22 , 2007 the Medal of Honor presentation ceremony was held at the White House . President George W. Bush presented Murphy 's Medal of Honor to his parents . 
 = = = = Citation = = = = 
 For conspicuous gallantry and intrepidity at the risk of his life and above and beyond the call of duty as the leader of a special reconnaissance element with Naval Special Warfare task unit Afghanistan on 27 and 28 June 2005 . 
 While leading a mission to locate a high @-@ level anti @-@ coalition militia leader , Lieutenant Murphy demonstrated extraordinary heroism in the face of grave danger in the vicinity of Asadabad , Kunar Province , Afghanistan . On 28 June 2005 , operating in an extremely rugged enemy @-@ controlled area , Lieutenant Murphy 's team was discovered by anti @-@ coalition militia sympathizers , who revealed their position to Taliban fighters . As a result , between 30 and 40 enemy fighters besieged his four member team . Demonstrating exceptional resolve , Lieutenant Murphy valiantly led his men in engaging the large enemy force . The ensuing fierce firefight resulted in numerous enemy casualties , as well as the wounding of all four members of the team . Ignoring his own wounds and demonstrating exceptional composure , Lieutenant Murphy continued to lead and encourage his men . When the primary communicator fell mortally wounded , Lieutenant Murphy repeatedly attempted to call for assistance for his beleaguered teammates . Realizing the impossibility of communicating in the extreme terrain , and in the face of almost certain death , he fought his way into open terrain to gain a better position to transmit a call . This deliberate , heroic act deprived him of cover , exposing him to direct enemy fire . Finally achieving contact with his headquarters , Lieutenant Murphy maintained his exposed position while he provided his location and requested immediate support for his team . In his final act of bravery , he continued to engage the enemy until he was mortally wounded , gallantly giving his life for his country and for the cause of freedom . By his selfless leadership , Lieutenant Murphy reflected great credit upon himself and upheld the highest traditions of the United States Naval Service . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 During his military career , Murphy received 11 different military decorations , including : the Medal of Honor , Purple Heart , Joint Service Commendation Medal , and Navy Commendation Medal . Since his death , a post office in his home town , a park and a guided missile destroyer , the USS Michael Murphy ( DDG @-@ 112 ) , have been named in his honor . 
 In addition to the Medal of Honor , his military awards and his inscription on the Hall of Heroes in the Pentagon , Murphy has received several other honors . 
 = = = Michael P. Murphy Memorial = = = 
 The Penn State class of 2011 's senior gift was a memorial named after LT Michael P. Murphy to commemorate all veterans who served the United States . The wall behind the memorial is inscribed with a Greek phrase meaning " With it [ your shield ] , or on it " referencing the ancient Spartan tradition that a warrior came home from a battle " with his shield " after a victory , or dead being carried home " on his shield " after a defeat . 
 = = = Michael P. Murphy Memorial Park = = = 
 On May 7 , 2006 , on what would have been his 30th birthday , Murphy ’ s hometown dedicated the Michael P. Murphy Memorial Park ; formerly Lake Ronkonkoma Park . The park contains a black granite wall dedicated to the men lost in Operation Red Wings , with each member ’ s name inscribed . A black granite stone embedded in the plaza bears the picture of Murphy and his Medal of Honor . 
 = = = Lieutenant Michael P. Murphy United States Post Office = = = 
 On May 7 , 2007 , the Lieutenant Michael P. Murphy United States Post Office was dedicated in Patchogue , New York . The request to rename the historic United States Postal Office located at 170 East Main Street in Patchogue , New York , was submitted as bill H.R. <unk> to the 109th Congress . On January 3 , 2006 , the 109th Congress approved the request and on August 1 , 2006 , it was signed by President George W. Bush and became Public Law No : 109 @-@ 256 . 
 " The facility of the United States Postal Service located at 170 East Main Street in Patchogue , New York , shall be known and designated as the ' Lieutenant Michael P. Murphy Post Office Building ' . " 
 = = = USS Michael Murphy ( DDG @-@ 112 ) = = = 
 On May 7 , 2008 , Secretary of the Navy Donald C. Winter announced that DDG @-@ 112 , the last planned U.S. Navy Arleigh Burke @-@ class destroyer at the time , would be named USS Michael Murphy ( DDG @-@ 112 ) in honor of Murphy . On May 7 , 2011 , on what would have been Murphy 's 35th birthday , the USS Michael Murphy was christened by his mother Maureen Murphy , the ship 's sponsor . 
 = = = Lt. Michael P. Murphy Combat Training Pool = = = 
 On July 9 , 2009 , the newly constructed Combat Training Pool at the Naval Station Newport , Rhode Island was dedicated in honor of Murphy . The pool is an L @-@ shaped , 8 @-@ lane pool which holds approximately 347 @,@ 000 gallons of chlorinated water . The training pool also has a training platform three meters above the water which is used for military training , abandon ship drills , etc . 
 = = = Lt. Michael P. Murphy Award in Geospatial Intelligence = = = 
 The Lt. Michael P. Murphy Award in Geospatial Intelligence recognizes achievement by a Penn State graduate student who is serving or has served in the U.S. Armed Forces or with the U.S. Intelligence Community and demonstrated exceptional contributions to the discipline . The award was made possible by the gracious gifts of GeoEye and the US Geospatial Intelligence Foundation . This award is endowed to be given in Murphy ’ s name in perpetuity . 
 = = = Lt. Michael P. Murphy / Penn State Veterans Plaza = = = 
 On November 2 , 2010 , it was announced the senior gift for the Pennsylvania State University ( Murphy 's alma mater ) Class of 2011 will be the Lt. Michael P. Murphy / Penn State Veterans Plaza . The plaza will honor all Penn State veterans and Penn State 's only Medal of Honor recipient , Murphy . 
 = = = Long Island Medal of Honor Recipients Memorial Plaque = = = 
 The United States Veterans Hospital at Northport Long Island New York maintains a memorial plaque that names all of the Medal of Honor recipients who have lived in Long Island . Lt. Murphy 's name was placed in honor on this memorial shortly after he was awarded the Medal of Honor . Others honored include President Theodore Roosevelt , General Theodore Roosevelt , Jr . , and Murphy ’ s fellow Eastern Long Island hero Garfield Langhorn . The Memorial , which is at the back end of the hospital lobby , is in close proximity to where his mother works in the hospital . 
 = = = High school campus = = = 
 In April 2014 , Patchogue @-@ Medford High School in Medford , New York , named its campus the " Navy ( SEAL ) LT Michael P. Murphy Campus " after its fallen former pupil . 
 = = = Sea Cadet unit = = = 
 The Sea Cadet unit from West <unk> , New York is named the " LT Michael P. Murphy Division " and has hosted and sponsored events in honor of Murphy . 
 = = = Fort Hamilton <unk> Memorial Wall = = = 
 The Fort Hamilton <unk> main lobby has a memorial wall dedicated to Murphy . 
 = = = LT Michael P Murphy Distinguished Citizen Award = = = 
 The Central Pennsylvania council of the Navy League of the United States awards the " LT Michael P Murphy Distinguished Citizen Award " in his name . The award honors living , non @-@ active duty citizens who exemplify his character and commitment to his country and his community . 
 = = = CrossFit Workout = = = 
 A workout named in Michael 's honor is performed at CrossFit boxes across the country on Memorial Day . The workout is named " Murph " . 
 For time : 1 mile Run 100 Pull @-@ ups 200 Push @-@ ups 300 <unk> 1 mile Run 
 Participants may choose to wear a body vest weighing 8 lbs . - 20 lbs . This workout was one of Mike 's favorites and he 'd named it " Body Armor " . 
 = = In media = = 
 In the 2013 film Lone Survivor , Murphy is portrayed by actor Taylor Kitsch . 
 = Theology of Huldrych Zwingli = 
 The theology of Huldrych Zwingli was based on the Bible , taking scripture as the inspired word of God and placing its authority higher than what he saw as human sources such as the Ecumenical councils and the church fathers . He also recognised the human element within the inspiration noting the differences in the canonical gospels . Zwinglianism is the Reformed confession based on the Second Helvetic Confession promulgated by Zwingli 's successor Heinrich Bullinger in the 1560s . 
 Zwingli 's views on baptism were largely a response to <unk> , a movement which attacked the practice of infant baptism . He defended the baptism of children by describing it as a sign of a Christian 's covenant with God just as God made a covenant with Abraham . 
 He developed the symbolic view of the Eucharist . He denied the Catholic doctrine of transubstantiation and following Cornelius Henrici Hoen , he agreed that the bread and wine of the institution signify and do not literally become the body and blood of Jesus Christ . Zwingli 's differences of opinion on this with Martin Luther resulted in the failure of the Marburg Colloquy to bring unity between the two Protestant leaders . 
 Zwingli believed that the state governed with divine sanction . He believed that both the church and the state are placed under the sovereign rule of God . Christians were obliged to obey the government , but civil disobedience was allowed if the authorities acted against the will of God . He described a preference for an aristocracy over monarchic or democratic rule . 
 = = Scripture = = 
 The Bible is central in Zwingli 's work as a reformer and is crucial in the development of his theology . Zwingli appealed to scripture constantly in his writings . This is strongly evident in his early writings such as <unk> ( 1522 ) and The Clarity and Certainty of the Word of God ( 1522 ) . He believed that man is a liar and only God is the truth . For him scripture , as God 's word , brings light when there is only darkness of error . 
 Zwingli initially appealed to scripture against Catholic opponents in order to counter their appeal to the church — which included the councils , the church fathers , the <unk> , and the popes . To him , these authorities were based on man and liable to error . He noted that " the fathers must yield to the word of God and not the word of God to the fathers " . His insistence of using the word of God did not preclude him from using the councils or the church fathers in his arguments . He gave them no independent authority , but he used them to show that the views he held were not simply his own . 
 The inspiration of scripture , the concept that God or the Holy Spirit is the author , was taken for granted by Zwingli . His view of inspiration was not mechanical and he recognized the human element in his commentaries as he noted the differences in the canonical gospels . He did not recognize the apocryphal books as canonical . Like Martin Luther , Zwingli did not regard the Revelation of St John highly , and also did not accept a " canon within the canon " , but he did accept scripture as a whole . 
 = = Baptism = = 
 Zwingli 's views on baptism are largely rooted in his conflict with the Anabaptists , a group whose beliefs included the rejection of infant baptism and centered on the leadership of Conrad Grebel and Felix Manz . In October 1523 , the controversy over the issue broke out during the second Zürich disputation and Zwingli vigorously defended the need for infant baptism and his belief that rebaptism was unnecessary . His major works on the subject include Baptism , <unk> , and Infant Baptism ( 1525 ) , A Reply to Hubmaier ( 1525 ) , A Refutation ( 1527 ) , and Questions Concerning the Sacrament of Baptism ( 1530 ) . 
 In Baptism , <unk> , and Infant Baptism , Zwingli outlined his disagreements with both the Catholic and the Anabaptist positions . He accused the Anabaptists of adding to the word of God and noted that there is no law forbidding infant baptism . He challenged Catholics by denying that the water of baptism can have the power to wash away sin . Zwingli understood baptism to be a pledge or a promise , but he disputed the Anabaptist position that it is a pledge to live without sin , noting that such a pledge brings back the hypocrisy of legalism . He argued against their view that those that received the Spirit and were able to live without sin were the only persons qualified to partake in baptism . At the same time he asserted that rebaptism had no support in scripture . The Anabaptists raised the objection that Christ did not baptise children , and so Christians , likewise , should not baptise their children . Zwingli responded by noting that kind of argument would imply women should not participate in communion because there were no women at the last supper . Although there was no commandment to baptise children specifically , the need for baptism was clearly stated in scripture . In a separate discussion on original sin , Zwingli denies original guilt . He refers to I Corinthians 7 : 12 – 14 which states that the children of one Christian parent are holy and thus they are counted among the sons of God . Infants should be baptised because there is only one church and one baptism , not a partial church and partial baptism . 
 The first part of the document , A Reply to Hubmaier , is an attack on Balthasar Hubmaier 's position on baptism . The second part where Zwingli defends his own views demonstrates further development in his doctrine of baptism . Rather than baptism being simply a pledge , he describes baptism as a sign of our covenant with God . Furthermore , he associates this covenant with the covenant that God made with Abraham . As circumcision was the sign of God 's covenant with Abraham , baptism was the sign of his covenant with Christians . In A Refutation , he states , 
 The children of Christians are no less sons of God than the parents , just as in the Old Testament . Hence , since they are sons of God , who will forbid this baptism ? Circumcision among the ancients ... was the same as baptism with us . 
 His later writings show no change in his fundamental positions . Other elements in Zwingli 's theology would lead him to deny that baptism is a means of grace or that it is necessary for salvation . His defence of infant baptism was not only a matter of church politics , but was clearly related to the whole of his theology and his profound sense of unity of the church . 
 = = Eucharist = = 
 The Eucharist was a key center of controversy in the Reformation as it not only focused differences between the reformers and the church but also between themselves . For Zwingli it was a matter of attacking a doctrine that imperiled the understanding and reception of God 's gift of salvation , while for Luther it was a matter of defending a doctrine that embodied that gift . It is not known what Zwingli 's eucharistic theology was before he became a reformer and there is disagreement among scholars about his views during his first few years as a priest . In the eighteenth article of The Sixty @-@ seven Articles ( 1523 ) which concerns the sacrifice of the mass , he states that it is a memorial of the sacrifice . He expounds on this in An Exposition of the Articles ( 1523 ) . 
 Zwingli credited the Dutch humanist , Cornelius Henrici Hoen ( <unk> ) , for first suggesting the " is " in the institution words " This is my body " meant " signifies " . Hoen sent a letter to Zwingli in 1524 with this interpretation along with biblical examples to support it . It is impossible to say how the letter impacted Zwingli 's theology although Zwingli claimed that he already held the symbolic view when he read the letter . He first mentioned the " signifies " interpretation in a letter to Matthäus Alber , an associate of Luther . Zwingli denies transubstantiation using John 6 : 63 , " It is the Spirit who gives life , the flesh is of no avail " , as support . He commended Andreas Karlstadt 's understanding of the significance of faith , but rejected Karlstadt 's view that the word " this " refers to Christ 's body rather than the bread . Using other biblical passages and patristic sources , he defended the " signifies " interpretation . In The Eucharist ( 1525 ) , following the introduction of his communion liturgy , he laid out the details of his theology where he argues against the view that the bread and wine become the body and blood of Christ and that they are eaten bodily . 
 The conflict between Zwingli and Luther began in 1525 , but it was not until 1527 that Zwingli engaged directly with Luther . The culmination of the controversy was the Marburg Colloquy in 1529 . He wrote four responses leading up to the meeting : A Friendly Exegesis ( 1527 ) , A Friendly Answer ( 1527 ) , Zwingli 's Christian Reply ( 1527 ) , and Two Replies to Luther 's Book ( 1528 ) . They examined Luther 's point @-@ of @-@ view rather than systematically presenting Zwingli 's own . Some of his comments were sharp and critical , although they were never as harsh and dismissive as some of Luther 's on him . However , Zwingli also called Luther " one of the first champions of the Gospel " , a David against Goliath , a Hercules who slew the Roman boar . Martin Bucer and Johannes Oecolampadius most likely influenced Zwingli as they were concerned with reconciliation of the eucharistic views . 
 The main issue for Zwingli is that Luther puts " the chief point of salvation in the bodily eating of the body of Christ " . Luther saw the action as strengthening faith and remitting sins . This , however , conflicted with Zwingli 's view of faith . The bodily presence of Christ could not produce faith as faith is from God , for those whom God has chosen . Zwingli also appealed to several passages of scripture with John 6 : 63 in particular . He saw Luther 's view as denying Christ 's humanity and asserted that Christ 's body is only at one place and that is at the right hand of God . The Marburg Colloquy did not produce anything new in the debate between the two reformers . Neither changed his position , but it did produce some further developments in Zwingli 's views . For example , he noted that the bread was not mere bread and affirmed terms such as " presence " , " true " , and " sacramental " . However , it was Zwingli 's and Luther 's differences in their understanding of faith , their Christology , their approach and use of scripture that ultimately made any agreement impossible . 
 Near the end of his life Zwingli summarized his understanding of the Eucharist in a confession sent to King Francis I , saying : 
 " We believe that Christ is truly present in the Lord ’ s Supper ; yea , we believe that there is no communion without the presence of Christ . This is the proof : ' Where two or three are gathered together in my name , there am I in the midst of them ' ( Matt . 18 : 20 ) . How much more is he present where the whole congregation is assembled to his honor ! But that his body is literally eaten is far from the truth and the nature of faith . It is contrary to the truth , because he himself says : ' I am no more in the world ' ( John 17 : 11 ) , and ' The flesh <unk> nothing ' ( John 6 : 63 ) , that is to eat , as the Jews then believed and the Papists still believe . It is contrary to the nature of faith ( I mean the holy and true faith ) , because faith embraces love , fear of God , and reverence , which abhor such carnal and gross eating , as much as any one would shrink from eating his beloved son . … We believe that the true body of Christ is eaten in the communion in a sacramental and spiritual manner by the religious , believing , and pious heart ( as also St. Chrysostom taught ) . And this is in brief the substance of what we maintain in this controversy , and what not we , but the truth itself teaches . " 
 = = State = = 
 The relation of church and state in Zwingli 's mind is best represented in a statue by the <unk> , where he stands with a Bible in one hand and a sword in the other . For him , the church and state are one under the sovereign rule of God . The development of the complex relationship between church and state in Zwingli 's view can only be understood by examining the context of his life , the city of Zürich , and the wider Swiss Confederation . His earliest writings before he became a reformer , such as The Ox ( 1510 ) and The Labyrinth ( 1516 ) , reveal a patriotic love of his land , a longing for liberty , and opposition to the mercenary service where young Swiss citizens were sent to fight in foreign wars for the financial benefit of the state government . His life as a parish priest and an army chaplain helped to develop his concern for morality and justice . He saw his ministry not limited to a private sphere , but to the people as a whole . 
 The Zürich council played an essential role at each stage of the Reformation . Even before the Reformation , the council operated relatively independently on church matters although the areas of doctrine and worship were left to the authority of the ecclesiastical hierarchy . As Zwingli was convinced that doctrinal matters had to conform to the word of God rather than the hierarchy , he recognised the role of the council as the only body with power to act if the religious authorities refused to undertake reform . His theocratic views are best expressed in Divine and Human Righteousness ( 1523 ) and An Exposition of the Articles ( 1523 ) in that both preacher and prince were servants under the rule of God . The context surrounding these two publications was a period of considerable tension . Zwingli was banned by the Swiss Diet from travelling into any other canton . The work of the Reformation was endangered by the potential outbreak of religious and social disorder . Zwingli saw the need to present the government in a positive light to safeguard the continued preaching of the Gospel . He stated , 
 ... the gospel of Christ is not opposed to government ... but is a support to government ... as far as it acts in a Christian way in accordance with the standard prescribed by God . 
 The relationship between preacher and magistrate was demonstrated by two forms of righteousness , human and divine . Human righteousness ( or the " outward man " ) was the domain of the magistrate or government . Government could secure human righteousness , but it could not make man righteous before God . That was the domain of the preacher where the " inward man " is called to account for divine righteousness . 
 As government was ordained by God , Christians were obliged to obey in Zwingli 's view . This requirement applied equally to a good or an evil government because both came from God . However , it is because rulers are to be servants of God and that Christians obey the rulers as they are to obey God , that the situation could arise when Christians may disobey . When the authorities act against the will of God then Zwingli noted , " We must obey God rather than men . " God 's commands took precedence over man 's . 
 In his Commentary on Isaiah ( 1529 ) , Zwingli noted that there were three kinds of governments : monarchy , aristocracy , and democracy . He expressed his preference for aristocracy which is not surprising given his experience with the Zürich council . In the publication , rather than comparing the three forms of government , he gave a defence of aristocracy against a monarchy . He argued that a monarchy would invariably descend to tyranny . A monarchy had inherent weaknesses in that a good ruler could be easily replaced by a bad one or a single ruler could be easily corrupted . An aristocracy with more people involved did not have these disadvantages . 
 = Manchester Liners = 
 Manchester Liners was a cargo and passenger shipping company founded in 1898 , based in Manchester , England . The line pioneered the regular passage of ocean @-@ going vessels along the Manchester Ship Canal . Its main sphere of operation was the transatlantic shipping trade , but the company also operated services to the Mediterranean . All of the line 's vessels were registered in the Port of Manchester , and many were lost to enemy action during the First and Second World Wars . 
 A successful switch from traditional to container shipping in 1968 was relatively short @-@ lived , as the subsequent introduction elsewhere of much larger container ships meant that the company 's vessels , which were restricted to a maximum length of 530 feet ( 160 m ) imposed by the ship canal 's lock chambers , could no longer compete economically . The line ceased operations in 1985 . 
 = = Early history = = 
 The opening of the Manchester Ship Canal in 1894 made it possible for large ocean @-@ going ships to sail directly into the heart of Manchester . However , because of opposition from cartels of ship @-@ owners based at Liverpool and other ports in the United Kingdom , shipping lines were slow to introduce direct services to the new Port of Manchester , which found it difficult to compete against the established ports . New trading routes from Manchester to West Africa and Mediterranean ports were countered by the established shipping conferences sharply reducing their own charges and by inducing their customers to sign binding contracts . In some cases , after achieving their aims , the cartels re @-@ imposed their old charges . To help counter these ' sharp practices ' , Sir Christopher Furness , of Furness Withy & Company , proposed in 1897 that a Manchester @-@ based shipping line should be formed , to encourage the use of the Manchester Ship Canal and docks . The public prospectus for Manchester Liners Ltd ( ML ) was issued on 10 May 1898 , with an authorised share capital of £ 1 million . Furness ' company became the largest shareholder , and he was appointed chairman . Other directors included representatives from the Ship Canal company and Salford Borough Council . Robert Burdon Stoker , a director of Furness Withy , was appointed as ML 's first managing director . 
 = = Initial operations 1898 – 1914 = = 
 Manchester Liners decided from the outset to make Manchester – Canada their prime route , with a secondary route to the southern United States cotton ports of New Orleans and Galveston . Other lesser , sometimes seasonal routes , were added later . Two 1890 @-@ built 3 @,@ 000 gross registered ton ( grt ) ships were bought for £ 60 @,@ 000 in May 1898 , and renamed Manchester Enterprise and Manchester Trader . The Trader made the shipping line 's first voyage , setting out from Avonmouth for Montreal on 26 May , before docking in Manchester with a cargo of grain . 
 The two secondhand vessels were joined in January 1899 by the newly built Manchester City of 7 @,@ 696 grt , constructed by <unk> Dixon & Co of Middlesbrough . This steamship carried 1 @,@ 170 long tons ( 1 @,@ 190 t ) of coal , burned at 70 long tons ( 71 t ) per day , giving a speed of 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) , fast for her day . She was a refrigerated vessel , designed to carry frozen meat and live cattle , and was claimed to be one of the largest meat @-@ carrying ships then afloat . She made a successful maiden voyage from Canada and up the new canal to Manchester , taking two days and stopping overnight at Irlam to give the crew a rest . The Manchester Guardian reported on 16 January 1899 that " there were many <unk> of the head , not only in Liverpool , at the audacity of the attempt " and that " the canal pilots , on reaching Irlam , looked as if they had not been in bed for a week , as their eyes were <unk> with exhaustion " . The City discharged 450 cattle and 150 sheep at Manchester Corporation 's Foreign Animals Wharf near the Mode Wheel locks in Salford . With an overall length of 467 feet ( 142 m ) , she was by far the largest vessel to have ventured up the waterway , and her successful navigation disproved the claim of Liverpool owners that only ships of 350 feet ( 110 m ) or less could safely reach Manchester . The vessel continued to Manchester docks for further unloading , where she was met by the Lord Mayor , accompanied by a band and a festive crowd . This successful voyage did much to encourage other shipowners to use the new port . On her first voyage to Halifax , Nova Scotia in March 1899 , the City took nine days and sixteen hours ; and arrived before the mail boat , which had left the Mersey twelve hours ahead of her . 
 The ML fleet was joined by two new smaller 5 @,@ 600 grt vessels , the Manchester Port and Manchester Merchant during 1899 and 1900 , and further new vessels followed quickly thereafter . The basic sailing pattern to Canada was St John , New Brunswick , year @-@ round and to Montreal when the St Lawrence River was ice @-@ free . 
 Between 1899 and 1902 , four Manchester ships and their crews were requisitioned by the United Kingdom government to transport troops , horses , and supplies to South Africa during the Boer War and its aftermath . Collecting points for horses and mules included Galveston and New Orleans ( USA ) and Buenos Aires and Montevideo in South America . Manchester Port made its second voyage to the Cape in 1900 , then continued to Australia to bring troops to the conflict . On the first voyage after her return to ML , in January 1903 , the first Manchester Merchant was lost while on passage from New Orleans to Manchester . A serious fire developed in her cotton cargo , and she was scuttled in Dingle Bay on the west coast of Ireland to douse the flames , but subsequently broke up in bad weather . 
 By 1904 the line was operating fourteen steamships of between four and seven thousand tons , several built by the associated Furness Withy shipyards . Services to ports in eastern Canada were supplemented by regular sailings to Boston , Philadelphia , and the southern US cotton ports of New Orleans and Galveston . Between 1904 and 1908 ML deployed three vessels including the Manchester City to the River Plate route , serving other UK ports as well Manchester . The main return cargo was frozen and chilled meat , and the City set a record for the largest meat consignment up to that time . Lord Furness , as he had become , died in 1912 and was succeeded as ML 's chairman by R. B. Stoker until his death in 1919 . ML 's fleet was maintained at 14 vessels during the last few years before the First World War . Eleven of their ships were deployed on the Canadian routes , carrying mainly manufactured goods outwards and meat and grain inbound . 
 = = Operations during the First World War = = 
 At the start of the war in July 1914 , ML had a fleet of fifteen ships . Most of the fleet continued to operate services to ports in eastern Canada and to USA including Baltimore , returning with war and other supplies . In August 1914 , the Manchester Miller ( 1903 ) and Manchester Civilian ( 1913 ) were requisitioned as supply ships and sent with coal to the Falkland Islands to refuel the battlecruisers HMS Inflexible and HMS Invincible . As the Civilian was coaling the cruisers , the German vessels approached and the British warships cast off immediately to engage them . In the ensuing battle Admiral Von Spee 's battleships <unk> and Gneisenau , plus escorting cruisers , were sunk . The Civilian was later equipped with minesweeping gear . She returned in 1916 carrying supplies and equipment from Canada to the troops in France . 
 All vessels were fitted with defensive guns at the bow and stern . In June 1917 Manchester Port ( 1904 ) beat off a submarine attack with gunfire near Cape Wrath . Manchester Commerce ( 1899 ) , outward @-@ bound for Quebec City was sunk off northwest Ireland on 26 October 1914 , with the loss of 14 crew , becoming the first merchant ship to be sunk by a mine . On 4 June 1917 the second Manchester Trader , en route from Souda Bay in Crete to Algiers , was engaged in a running battle with U @-@ boat U 65 before she was captured and sunk near Pantellaria island , with the loss of one crewmember . The master , Captain F. D. Struss , was awarded the Distinguished Service Cross , and went on to complete 40 years service with the line after surviving another sinking in the Second World War . A further nine ships were sunk by U @-@ boats , seven of the losses occurring in 1917 . 
 ML acquired seven ships between 1916 and 1918 , four of which were sunk in 1917 . Manchester Engineer , acquired secondhand in 1917 , had a short but eventful career with ML . On 18 June , when bound for Archangel , she was chased by a U @-@ boat but escaped when her naval escort arrived . On 16 August when sailing from the Tyne to St Nazaire with coal , she was torpedoed five miles off Flamborough Head and sunk . Manchester Division achieved fame on her maiden voyage from West Hartlepool to join a westbound Atlantic convoy at Plymouth when she rammed and sank a German submarine off Flamborough Head in October 1918 . At the end of the war in November 1918 , ML had twelve surviving vessels on strength . 
 = = Peacetime operations 1919 – 39 = = 
 In 1921 – 22 , ML 's fleet was augmented by two second @-@ hand vessels . <unk> were resumed to New Orleans , and the Baltimore service was extended to Norfolk , Virginia . Some ships including the Manchester Civilian and Manchester Spinner became regular carriers in the coal trade from Sydney , Nova Scotia . The Civilian made several round trips from the USA to Japan in 1923 , carrying relief supplies after the Japanese earthquake . ML took delivery of the 7 @,@ 930 tons steam turbine Manchester Regiment in 1922 , constructed on the Tees by the Furness Shipbuilding Company . This 12 @.@ 5 @-@ knot ( 23 @.@ 2 km / h ; 14 @.@ 4 mph ) ship with a crew of 65 was the largest operated to date , carrying 512 cattle , plus hold cargo and was equipped with large derricks to assist in heavy goods handling . The Regiment 's record from the Mersey Bar to Quebec was seven days nine hours . In 1925 her captain won the gold @-@ headed cane traditionally awarded each Spring to the master of the first ship to break through the St Lawrence ice to reach Montreal , a feat repeated later by several other ML captains . ML 's old head office in Deansgate , Manchester became inadequate and was replaced in August 1922 by a purpose @-@ built five @-@ storey modern building located in St Ann 's Square next to the Royal Exchange . 
 The line acquired two new vessels in 1925 , but later that year its fortunes were adversely affected by competition from subsidised American firms on the North Atlantic routes ; ML disposed of seven ships between late 1925 and 1930 , reducing its fleet to ten vessels . The Regiment steamed 160 miles through a gale in 1929 to reach the sinking Glasgow steamer <unk> . A lifeboat was launched to rescue the crew of forty @-@ five . On return home , King George V awarded the Regiment 's lifeboat crew the Silver Medal for Gallantry in Saving Life at Sea and Manchester 's Lord Mayor presented a silver salver from the Board of Trade to Captain Linton . In 1933 , amid the Great Depression , several ships were laid up ; the Manchester Merchant of 1904 was disposed of for breaking up and the Manchester Civilian was sold to Greek owners . The public sailing programme for the 1933 summer season listed six ships as allocated to the weekly " Fast Freight Service " to Quebec and Montreal . The six steamers were advertised as being " fitted with fan or forced ventilation and all have cold storage accommodation " . Most vessels were also able to carry up to twelve passengers . After a ten @-@ year gap , three new vessels were commissioned between 1935 and 1938 as trade started to recover , maintaining the fleet at ten ships . The trio were equipped with automatic stokers for their coal @-@ fired boilers and had greatly improved accommodation for the passengers and the crew . 
 = = Operations during the Second World War = = 
 ML had ten vessels at the start of World War II , but early in the conflict lost Manchester Regiment in December 1939 , when outbound with general cargo for St John , New Brunswick . She was proceeding without lights when she was run down by the Pacific Steam Navigation 's Oropesa , which had been detached from an eastbound convoy . While the ML fleet continued to be deployed on the North Atlantic routes during the war , the company 's vessels also undertook a wide variety of roles elsewhere during the conflict . Manchester City became a minelayer , then a naval auxiliary ship , working in the Far East . Manchester Progress was one of the last ships to leave Rangoon in 1941 before the Japanese conquest of Burma . Manchester Commerce ( 1925 ) was deployed on Mediterranean convoys in 1942 / 43 and next year transported mules from South Africa to India for the Burma Campaign . Manchester Trader ( 1941 ) was fitted with extra crew quarters for use as a commodore ship on Atlantic convoys . Except for two supply runs to Bone , Algeria , she remained in the Atlantic theatre and served ML until 1963 . Manchester Brigade , having survived the first World War , was sunk on 26 September 1940 after being torpedoed by U @-@ 137 when bound for Montreal in convoy off Malin Head , to the north of Ireland ; 58 crew were lost . 
 Manchester Merchant , completed in May 1940 , quickly became involved in " Operation Fish " , transporting Britain 's gold reserves to Canada , making two voyages with bullion valued in total at £ 4 @.@ 5 million . In late 1942 she was deployed on Operation Torch as a supply ship to North Africa . On 25 February 1943 , she was torpedoed by " U 628 " while part of an outbound Atlantic convoy ; 36 of the crew of 65 including gunners were lost , but Captain Struss again survived , and received the OBE . Manchester Division ( 1918 ) bound for Table Bay was directed to assist the Blue Star Line 's Dunedin Star which had beached on Namibia 's rugged coast . The Division stood by in heavy swell for three days , rescuing 40 passengers and crew , before taking them to Cape Town . Manchester Citizen ( 1925 ) was also sunk by a U @-@ boat , whilst on passage to Lagos on 9 July 1943 after surviving several supply runs for the Eighth Army . The last vessel to be " lost " , albeit deliberately , was Manchester Spinner ( 1918 ) , which had taken military supplies to India in 1942 . On 7 June 1944 , shortly after D @-@ Day , manned by a volunteer crew , she led a line of Mulberry Harbour blockships and was sunk off Juno Beach Normandy to act as a breakwater , whilst troop reinforcements and stores were landed on the beaches . Her superstructure was then armed with anti @-@ aircraft guns . 
 = = Peacetime operations 1945 – 68 = = 
 At the war 's end , ML had a fleet of eight vessels built between 1918 and 1943 , and these continued to operate the traditional service to eastern Canada for a further two years before new vessels could be acquired . In 1946 the Manchester Shipper became the first merchant ship to be fitted with radar , and to navigate the St Lawrence with its aid . In the same year the company carried Manchester 's Lord Mayor and party to Canada on a goodwill and trade mission . Manchester Exporter was sold in 1947 and replaced by the newly built larger Manchester Regiment . Two further 7 @,@ 000 ton 14 @-@ knot ( 26 km / h ; 16 mph ) ships were commissioned in 1952 , which meant that the Manchester Division , veteran of both wars , could be sold for scrapping after a record 35 years service with the line . In 1952 , Robert B. Stoker , grandson of the second chairman , became the third generation of his family to be appointed an executive director of ML . He had joined the line in 1932 and in turn became chairman in 1968 . 
 Manchester Shipper was used to transport WWII German aircraft to Canada . It left Ellesmere Port on the 23rd of August 1946 arriving in Montreal September 1 . Its cargo included two Me 262s ( <unk> , <unk> ) . Manchester Commerce also carried Second World War German aircraft to Canada , leaving Seaforth Docks on 26 August and arriving on 9 September with two He 162s ( <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) and two Me <unk> ( <unk> , <unk> ) . 
 ML contracted Cammell Laird of Birkenhead to build two smaller vessels of 1 @,@ 800 tons . Commissioned in 1952 , they were named the Manchester Pioneer and Explorer . They were joined by the secondhand 1 @,@ 400 @-@ ton Manchester Prospector . The trio were the first of a size able to pass through the restricted @-@ size canals and locks leading directly to Toronto and the other Great Lakes ports as far as Detroit , Michigan . This initiative , the first by a British line , and taken well ahead of the 1959 completion of the Saint Lawrence Seaway , gave the line a head start in the direct trade to the Midwest ports . During the winter months , when thick ice prevented navigation on the lakes , the trio were employed elsewhere , sometimes on charter to other lines . 
 Manchester Progress , 5 @,@ 620 grt , opened a regular mid @-@ summer service to Churchill , Manitoba on Hudson Bay in 1954 , during the short ice @-@ free season , bringing back grain shipped to the port by rail from the Canadian Prairies . Captain F. Struss , survivor of sinkings in both wars , retired in March 1954 after forty years service , the last ML Commodore who had gained his master 's ticket in sail . That same year the Great Lakes service was extended to Chicago , and ML 's pre @-@ 1914 service to the southern US ports of Charleston , Savannah , and Jacksonville was resumed . 
 A USAF RB @-@ 36 " Peacemaker " ten @-@ engined strategic bomber suffered engine fires on 5 August 1954 , while en route from Travis AFB California to RAF Lakenheath Suffolk . The crew of twenty @-@ three were ordered to bail out 450 miles ( 720 km ) west of Ireland at 03 : 40 . The Manchester Shipper , inbound from Montreal , and the outbound Manchester Pioneer , diverted to the scene and despite bad weather were able to rescue the four surviving crew . The USAF 's HQ Third Air Force sent messages commending the ship masters and crews efforts under adverse circumstances . 
 ML 's first two motor vessels , with engines and accommodation located aft , were commissioned in April 1956 . The Manchester Vanguard and Venture , 1 @,@ 662 grt , were designed for the Great Lakes service . Two larger motor vessels , the Manchester Faith and Fame , 4 @,@ 460 grt , were commissioned in April 1959 , and the Faith quickly became the first commercial vessel to transit the newly opened St Lawrence Seaway with its larger locks . 
 Two ML vessels were involved in a successful mid @-@ Atlantic rescue of airliner passengers on 23 September 1962 . A Flying Tiger Line Lockheed Super Constellation was en route from McGuire AFB New Jersey to Frankfurt Airport with 76 persons aboard . Two out of four engines failed and the airliner changed course for Shannon Airport Ireland . After a further hour , a third engine failed and Captain John Murray made a successful ditching in darkness 560 nautical miles ( 1 @,@ 040 km ; 640 mi ) west of Shannon . All occupants evacuated the aircraft before it sank . The larger Manchester Progress acted as a radio relay ship , while Manchester Faith picked up 48 survivors . The other 28 persons on board the aircraft were lost when their rafts sank in heavy seas . 
 = = Switch to containers 1968 – 78 = = 
 Manchester Liners House , the company 's new headquarters in Salford Docks was officially opened on 12 December 1969 by the High Commissioner for Canada . The design was advanced for its day and it remains basically unchanged today except for re @-@ glazing . The unusual curved facade of the ten @-@ storey building was designed to echo the bridge shape of the Manchester Miller . Later renamed Furness House , it was built on the former Manchester Ship Canal railway sidings between Nos. 8 and 9 Docks . 
 By the late 1960s rising shore costs , dock workers strikes , restrictive practices on both sides of the Atlantic , and subsidised competition from American shipping lines , persuaded Manchester Liners to switch its future fleet to container ships only . An example of the delaying effect of the strikes in the Canadian ports , with consequent impact on operating costs , was an extended ninety @-@ day return voyage to Quebec City in early 1967 by the new Manchester Progress . 
 Initially , three new ships were ordered from Smiths Dock Company in Middlesbrough , the first of which , Manchester Challenge , was delivered in 1968 , becoming the first British @-@ built and operated cellular container ship . The Challenge and her two sisters Manchester Courage and Concorde were followed from the Tees in 1971 by the Crusade . UK manufacturers supplied 10 @,@ 000 containers . The four ships each had the capacity to carry five hundred 20 @-@ foot ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) containers , all of them below deck . A new regular container route started in November 1968 , with a twice @-@ weekly service to Montreal , where the containers were transferred to smaller vessels which could navigate to the ports of the Great Lakes . The four new powerful ( 16 @,@ 000 hp ) 19 @.@ 5 @-@ knot ( 36 @.@ 1 km / h ; 22 @.@ 4 mph ) vessels were constructed to a standard exceeding Lloyds class 1 ice @-@ stiffening , with additional aft protection over the rudder to permit reversing through ice . 
 On her second voyage in early 1969 , Manchester Challenge lived up to her name by entering the heavily iced Montreal harbour , discharging , reloading and departing only two days late . Another thirty @-@ seven conventional vessels were stuck at the port for a month . The quartet 's ice @-@ breaking capability often resulted them in leading a convoy of other vessels into Montreal during the winter months . The four ships of 12 @,@ 039 gross tons were of the maximum size able to navigate the Manchester Ship Canal . 
 To obtain the greatest operational efficiency , ML constructed two dedicated container terminals with their own gantry cranes , spreaders etc . The Manchester terminal was built on an open site next to the western end of No. 9 Dock . A second container berth was added in 1972 . The other terminal was created at Montreal , with similar equipment , where the containers were trans @-@ shipped to a dedicated liner train operated by Canadian National Railways , which carried them onwards to Toronto and further destinations . 
 ML inaugurated a container service to the Mediterranean in 1971 using smaller ships . Initial destinations included Malta , Cyprus and Israel . Later in the decade , the countries served were extended to include Italy , Greece , Lebanon and Syria . To further improve service to shippers , two large road <unk> were acquired in 1971 and 1972 , enabling a " door @-@ to @-@ door " container operation to be introduced . Facilities for container storage and repair were also acquired . Following its successful pioneering of the UK container trade , ML was given the Queen 's Award for Export in 1971 , the first to be given to a shipping company ; every ship in the fleet flew the award flag . 
 In 1974 ML carried 783 @,@ 000 long tons ( 796 @,@ 000 t ) out of the total 2 @,@ 900 @,@ 000 long tons ( 2 @,@ 900 @,@ 000 t ) of dry cargo handled on the ship canal ( 27 % ) . During the same year , ML acquired Manchester Dry Docks Ltd , which operated three large and one small dry docks on the canal adjacent to MLs berths in Salford Docks . These facilities assisted greatly in keeping the fleet fully operational . Manchester Challenge completed her 100th round voyage to Montreal in 1975 having carried 95 @,@ 000 containers weighing 1 @,@ 440 @,@ 000 long tons ( 1 @,@ 460 @,@ 000 t ) a distance of 554 @,@ 000 miles ( 892 @,@ 000 km ) – the equivalent of a round trip to the moon . During 1976 MLs Manchester to Canada route had three sailings per week . 
 = = Decline and closure = = 
 Manchester Liners had been partly owned by Furness Withy from the beginning , and they became a subsidiary in 1970 . Furness Withy was itself taken over in 1980 by the C. Y. Tung Group of Hong Kong . Robert B. Stoker retired in 1979 as Chairman of Manchester Liners after 47 years service with the company . 
 Severe competition following the building of excess container shipping capacity by many companies badly affected ML 's trade and profitability . The company 's vessels were by then smaller than average in the industry , leading to higher operating costs per unit of cargo carried . Their operations were further severely affected during the mid @-@ 1970s by both official and unofficial strikes by dock workers . The service to Canada ended in 1979 , and by the early 1980s only five " Manchester " ships remained – the 30 @,@ 000 ton container vessel Manchester Challenge and four 1 @,@ 600 – 4 @,@ 000 ton vessels : Manchester Crown , Manchester Trader , Manchester Faith and Manchester City . The line had by then ceased using the Port of Manchester , and the four smaller vessels were operating to the Mediterranean out of Ellesmere Port , 33 miles ( 53 km ) closer to the sea on the lower reaches of the ship canal . 
 In 1981 , ML jointly with the Canadian Pacific Steamship Company and the Dart Container Line , instituted a weekly <unk> service from Felixstowe , Suffolk , to Montreal . MLs contribution to the service was the large Manchester Challenge . The last of Manchester Liners ' ships was sold in 1985 , and in 1988 the services formerly operated by the company were taken over by the Orient Overseas Container Line , successor to the Tung Group . 
