 = = Ship naming policy , house and flag colours = = 
 The company 's ship @-@ naming policy throughout its 87 @-@ year period of operations was to use its home port 's name plus a suffix word , often a trade or occupation . The most frequently used name was Manchester Trader , applied to six different vessels between 1898 and cessation of operations in 1985 . Some names used appropriately during the First World War , such as Manchester Hero , Manchester Brigade and Manchester Division were not reused after the disposal or loss of those vessels . Some ships operated short @-@ term or on charter retained their original names and did not receive the Manchester prefix . 
 From the earliest days , the line 's colours were : funnels – dark red with black top and thin black band ; hulls – black with white boot topping . During the Second World War , ships were painted in battleship grey and the names were deleted for security , except when in friendly ports . From the 1960s onwards , some ships ' hulls were painted light grey and others red . 
 The line 's flag colours were a red oval , placed horizontally , with white " ML " lettering in the centre , imposed on an overall white background . 
 = Mickie James = 
 Mickie Laree James @-@ Aldis ( born August 31 , 1979 ) better known as Mickie James , is an American professional wrestler , actress , model and country singer signed with Global Force Wrestling ( GFW ) . 
 James began her wrestling career in 1999 as a valet on the independent circuit , where she was known under the name Alexis Laree . She trained in several camps to improve her wrestling abilities before working for Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( NWA : TNA ) in June 2002 , where she gained national attention . After only a few appearances , she joined a stable called The Gathering and was written into storylines with the group . She is also the only woman to be involved in Clockwork Orange House of Fun matches . 
 James appeared in World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) in October 2005 and was placed in a storyline with Trish Stratus , in which James ' gimmick was that of Stratus ' biggest fan turned obsessed stalker , an angle which ran over eight months . She received a push , and she won her first WWE Women 's Championship at WrestleMania 22 , a title she has held a total of five times . James also won her first Divas Championship at Night of Champions in 2009 to become the second of five Divas to hold both the Women 's and Divas titles . She was released from the company on April 22 , 2010 , after which she returned to Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( TNA ) . 
 In Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( TNA ) , James won the TNA Knockouts Championship three times and the 2013 TNA World Cup with Team USA . She left TNA in September 2013 . Between WWE and TNA , James is a nine @-@ time champion , which is a national record and is also the only female to hold the WWE Women 's , WWE Divas and TNA Knockouts Championships in wrestling history . Pro Wrestling Illustrated ranked James as the number one female wrestler in 2009 , and she was also voted Woman of the Year twice , first in 2009 and again in 2011 by readers of PWI magazine . 
 = = Early life = = 
 James was born at Richmond Memorial Hospital in 1979 to Stuart James , a retired wastewater @-@ treatment worker and landscaper , and Sandra Knuckles , a Hanover County teacher and real @-@ estate agent . Her parents divorced while she was young . She has a sister , a half @-@ sister , a half @-@ brother , and three stepbrothers . She grew up in Montpelier , Virginia and graduated from Patrick Henry High School in 1997 . While growing up , she spent a lot of time on her grandmother 's horse farm , and developed a keen interest in equestrian sports . She played violin for five years . 
 = = Professional wrestling career = = 
 = = = Independent circuit ( 1999 – 2002 ) = = = 
 A fan of professional wrestling from an early age , James attended a professional wrestling school in the Washington , D.C. area at the suggestion of a friend . She made her professional debut on the independent circuit in 1999 , as a valet for <unk> Pro Wrestling under the ring name Alexis Laree , a name created as the result of a combination of her stage name from when she was a dancer and her middle name . Laree went on to manage several male wrestlers , including managing Tommy Dreamer to win the <unk> Pro Heavyweight Championship . In March , she wrestled in her first match , an intergender tag team match with Jake Damian against American Mike Brown and Candie . She trained to improve her wrestling abilities by attending training camps such as the Funking Conservatory , a workshop run by Dory Funk Jr . , and an Extreme Championship Wrestling ( ECW ) dojo . She also started competing for Maryland Championship Wrestling ( MCW ) , where she trained at camps run by Ricky Morton and Bobby Eaton . Beginning in 2002 , she also made appearances for Ring of Honor . 
 Due to the low salary of the independent shows , James supplemented her income by working as a waitress at a Olive Garden restaurant , and posing nude for the magazines Leg Show and Naughty Neighbors in the mid 2000s before gaining fame for the in WWE . 
 = = = Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( 2002 – 2003 ) = = = 
 While working in Ring of Honor for a year , James also debuted as Alexis Laree in Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( TNA ) on the company 's second ever weekly pay @-@ per @-@ view , as a participant in a lingerie battle royal . She was not prominently featured until March 26 , 2003 , when she teamed with Amazing Red as part of his feud against the X Division Champion Kid Kash and Trinity . Laree competed in her first singles match with the promotion on April 2 , 2003 in a losing effort against Trinity . Weeks later , she became the first member of The Gathering , a stable led by Raven in his feud against NWA World Heavyweight Champion Jeff Jarrett . On April 16 , Laree became the first ( and thus far , only ) woman to compete in a Clockwork Orange House of Fun match , after the Gathering challenged and defeated Jarrett . She continued to wrestle with the stable while they feuded with The Disciples of the New Church , taking part in an angle with Father James Mitchell burning her with a fireball and wrestling in another Clockwork Orange House of Fun match before leaving the company . 
 = = = World Wrestling Entertainment / WWE = = = 
 = = = = Ohio Valley Wrestling ( 2003 – 2005 ) = = = = 
 After two years of sending tapes and making phone calls , as well as wrestling a tryout dark match with Dawn Marie , James was signed to a developmental contract with World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) , who sent her to train at Ohio Valley Wrestling ( OVW ) , their then @-@ developmental territory , in August . Still using the ring name Alexis Laree , she began making television appearances for OVW on January 29 , 2004 and competed in several tag team matches throughout the year . She also won a Halloween costume contest on October 30 , and defeated Jillian Hall in a $ 1 @,@ 000 match on November 12 . 
 On May 17 , 2005 , Laree was placed into a tournament for the OVW Television Championship . She defeated Mike Mondo in the first round , only to lose to Blaster Lashley in the next round . She began a feud with Beth Phoenix on July 20 after Phoenix interrupted Laree during an interview , setting up a match on July 29 , which Laree lost . Their angle continued into September , with Shelly Martinez being added to the storyline to side with Phoenix against Laree . On October 12 , she appeared in OVW under her real name , and finished the year on the losing end of matches against Martinez and Jillian Hall . 
 = = = = Storyline with Trish Stratus ( 2005 – 2006 ) = = = = 
 James , under her real name , debuted in WWE on the October 10 , 2005 episode of Raw as a face , under the gimmick of WWE Women 's Champion Trish Stratus 's biggest fan . The angle had the two Divas competing together in tag team matches , with James ' character becoming increasingly obsessed with Stratus . The storyline included a Halloween costume contest , in which James was dressed like Stratus and helped Stratus retain the Women 's Championship in a Fulfill Your Fantasy battle royal at Taboo Tuesday by eliminating herself and Victoria at the same time . James even began utilizing Stratus ' signature finishing moves as her own during matches . James later became the number one contender for the WWE Women 's Championship on December 12 , by defeating Victoria in a match to determine who would face Stratus at New Year 's Revolution . Subsequently , the storyline between James and Stratus developed into a lesbian angle , after James kissed Stratus under a sprig of mistletoe . In the championship match at the pay @-@ per @-@ view , James lost to Stratus , but continued to be enamored of her the next night on Raw . 
 Despite the defeat , James continued to be enamored of Stratus , which made Stratus feel uncomfortable . On March 6 , 2006 , the storyline had Stratus confronting James , telling her that they needed time apart from each other . Through the early part of 2006 , James would attack Ashley Massaro several times due to Massaro calling her " crazy " . At the Royal Rumble pay @-@ per @-@ view , James defeated Massaro with then @-@ Women 's Champion , Trish Stratus , as the special guest referee . James would also confess her love for Stratus at the event . Massaro got her revenge on her one @-@ week later by pinning James in a rematch on Raw . 
 James and Stratus teamed together at the March 18 , 2006 episode of Saturday Night 's Main Event to defeat Candice Michelle and Victoria . After the match , James agreed to honor Stratus 's wishes and attempted to kiss her . After Stratus pushed her away , James attacked Stratus and vowed to destroy her , becoming a villain in the process . The feud between James and Stratus culminated in a Women 's Championship match at WrestleMania 22 , which James won , to earn her first Women 's Championship . Her angle with Stratus continued into Backlash during a rematch , after Stratus legitimately dislocated her shoulder when James threw her out of the ring . The feud would come to an end on the June 26 episode of Raw , when James defeated Stratus in a Women 's Championship match . The storyline is widely regarded as one of the best women 's feuds in WWE history . 
 = = = = Women 's Champion ( 2006 – 2008 ) = = = = 
 James dropped the WWE Women 's Championship on August 14 to Lita , after Lita hit James with the title belt . After the Women 's Championship was vacated due to the retirement of Trish Stratus , James entered a tournament to determine the new champion . She defeated Victoria and Melina en route to the finals at Cyber Sunday , where she lost to Lita . James transitioned into a face after her and Lita wrestled in a series of matches in which Lita chose stipulations to hinder James ' wrestling ability . The feud between James and Lita ended at Survivor Series , where James defeated Lita , in the latter 's retirement match , to win her second Women 's Championship . 
 James then began an angle with Melina on January 29 , 2007 , when Melina became the number one contender for the Women 's Championship . Following a successful title defense on February 5 , James teamed with Super Crazy in a mixed tag team match against Melina and Johnny Nitro . After Melina pinned James for the victory , she challenged her to a rematch for the title . James would subsequently lose the Women 's Championship to Melina on February 19 and , in continuation of their storyline feud , failed to regain the title during the first women 's Falls Count Anywhere match in WWE history . During the finish of the match , James fell from the top turnbuckle and landed on her neck , which resulted in a rushed finish . James , however , was not seriously injured in the incident . 
 The scripted feud between James and Melina was rekindled on April 2 , when James interrupted and attacked Melina during her photo op on Raw . At a house show in Paris , France on April 24 , James won her third Women 's Championship during a triple threat match that also involved Victoria . Since James pinned Victoria , however , and not Melina , Jonathan Coachman announced that a rematch would take place immediately . James dropped the title to Melina , giving her the shortest Women ’ s Championship reign in WWE history . James later received a rematch for the title at Backlash , but was unsuccessful . After Backlash , James would only make sporadic appearances on television , wrestling occasionally in tag @-@ matches and rarely in singles competition . On the November 26 episode of Raw , James defeated Melina in a number one contender 's match for Beth Phoenix 's Women 's Championship , setting up a title match between the two at Armageddon , in which Phoenix retained the title . 
 On the April 14 , 2008 episode of Raw , held in London , England , James defeated Beth Phoenix to win her fourth Women 's Championship . At Judgment Day , James successfully defended her title against Melina and Beth Phoenix in a triple @-@ threat match . James re @-@ entered the feud against Phoenix in mid @-@ 2008 , where she and Kofi Kingston teamed up against Phoenix and Santino Marella at SummerSlam in a Winner Takes All tag team match for both the Women 's and Intercontinental Championships , in which James and Kingston lost their titles to Phoenix and Marella . After James lost the championship , she had two rematches for the title , but was unsuccessful in regaining it . 
 = = = = Divas Champion and feud with LayCool ( 2009 – 2010 ) = = = = 
 Following an appearance in the 25 @-@ Diva battle royal at WrestleMania XXV , James began feuding with the WWE Divas Champion Maryse heading into Night of Champions on July 26 . At the event , James defeated Maryse to win her first Divas Championship , becoming only the second Diva in history to have held both the Women 's and Divas titles . Throughout the Summer , James successfully defended the title against Gail Kim and Beth Phoenix on episodes of Raw , and against Alicia Fox at the Hell in a Cell pay @-@ per @-@ view on October 4 . Two weeks later on Raw , James lost the title to Jillian Hall after an approximate three month title reign . After the show , James was traded to the SmackDown brand for the first time in her career , due to a Diva trade made by Raw guest host Nancy O 'Dell . 
 James made her debut with the brand on the October 23 episode of SmackDown , defeating Layla . On the October 30 episode of SmackDown , a controversial angle began that saw WWE Women 's Champion Michelle McCool and Layla , collectively known as LayCool , bully James . On the November 20 episode of SmackDown , after James defeated Layla , McCool gave James the nickname " Piggy James " , that sent James to tears , resulting in a five @-@ on @-@ five elimination tag team match at the November pay @-@ per @-@ view Survivor Series , where James ' team prevailed over McCool 's team , with James and Melina as the sole survivors . On the December 4 episode of SmackDown , James became the number one contender for McCool 's Women 's Championship by defeating Beth Phoenix and Natalya in a triple threat match . The following week , James challenged McCool for the championship at TLC : Tables , Ladders & Chairs , but was unsuccessful after interference from Layla . The storyline feud continued into the Royal Rumble on January 31 , 2010 where James finally defeated McCool , in 20 seconds , to become a five @-@ time Women 's Champion . Over the following couple of weeks , SmackDown consultant Vickie Guerrero was introduced into the rivalry , choosing to side with LayCool over James . On the February 26 episode of SmackDown , McCool used her rematch clause to face James for the Women 's Championship , with Guerrero acting as special guest referee . After Guerrero slapped James , McCool pinned her to regain the title . 
 On March 9 , WWE.com announced that James had been diagnosed with a staph infection on her right knee , and that she would be out of action for three weeks . She returned on the March 22 episode of Raw , where alongside Kelly Kelly , she accompanied Eve Torres , Beth Phoenix and Gail Kim in their losing effort against McCool , Maryse and Layla , who had Vickie Guerrero and Alicia Fox in their corner . This set up a 10 @-@ Diva tag team match at WrestleMania XXVI , in which James made an unsuccessful in @-@ ring return after Vickie pinned Kelly . James made her last appearance on Raw during a rematch , where her team was victorious . James ' final match in WWE aired on the April 23 episode of SmackDown where she teamed with former long @-@ time rival Beth Phoenix against LayCool in a losing effort when she was pinned by Layla . James was released from WWE one day earlier on April 22 , having pre @-@ taped her SmackDown match . According to James , WWE explained the decision as due to desiring to " move in a new direction with their women 's division " . 
 In November 2013 , James served as guest trainer at the WWE Performance Center in Orlando , Florida for a week , training WWE NXT 's female wrestlers . James also attended that week 's NXT live event in Tampa , Florida . 
 = = = Asistencia Asesoría y Administración ( 2010 – 2011 ) = = = 
 On June 18 , 2011 , James made her debut for the Mexican promotion Asistencia Asesoría y Administración ( AAA ) at Triplemanía XIX , where she teamed with Angelina Love , Sexy Star and Velvet Sky to defeat Cynthia Moreno , <unk> Apache , Lolita and Mari Apache in an eight @-@ woman tag team match . James returned to AAA on July 9 , teaming with Sexy Star to defeat the Apaches in a tag team match , after which she challenged Mari to a match for her AAA Reina de <unk> Championship . On July 31 at Verano de Escándalo , James competed in an eight – way match for the Reina de <unk> Championship , becoming the last person eliminated by the new champion , Pimpinela <unk> . 
 = = = Return to TNA = = = 
 = = = = Feud with Madison Rayne ( 2010 – 2011 ) = = = = 
 On September 22 , 2010 , it was reported that James had signed a contract with Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( TNA ) . James returned to the promotion on October 7 's Before The Glory special episode of Impact ! , announcing that she would be the special guest referee for the TNA Knockouts Championship match between Angelina Love , Velvet Sky , Madison Rayne and Tara at Bound for Glory . At the pay @-@ per @-@ view , James counted the pinfall which made Tara the new Knockouts Champion , prompting Rayne to shove James amidst an argument with Tara , and James replying with a punch . On the following episode of Impact ! , Tara lost the title to Rayne , while James made her intentions for the Knockouts title clear , after a confrontation with the new champion . James wrestled her return match the following week , defeating Sarita , before being attacked by Rayne 's ally , Tara . James wrestled her first TNA pay @-@ per @-@ view match at Turning Point , where she battled Tara to a double disqualification . 
 On the November 18 episode of Impact ! James defeated Angelina Love to become the number one contender to the championship . At Final Resolution , James was defeated by Tara in a Falls Count Anywhere match , following interference from Madison Rayne after she sprayed a fire extinguisher and hit James with the Knockouts title belt . On the following episode of Impact ! , James defeated Tara in a steel cage match . On January 9 , 2011 at Genesis , James lost her match against Rayne for the Knockouts Championship due to interference from Tara . The following month at Against All Odds , James once again failed to win the Knockouts Championship , this time losing to Rayne in a Last Knockout Standing match , after another interference by Tara . On the March 17 episode of Impact ! , Rayne agreed to give James another title match at Lockdown , with the added stipulation that should James fail to win the title , she would have to shave her hair off . On March 18 , James legitimately separated her shoulder at a TNA house show in Jacksonville , Florida . James 's injury was put into a storyline , where it was caused by Rayne and Tara running over her with Tara 's motorcycle . 
 = = = = Knockouts Championship reigns ( 2011 – 2013 ) = = = = 
 On April 17 , James defeated Madison Rayne in a steel cage match , which lasted less than a minute , to win the TNA Knockouts Championship for the first time . With the win , James became the first woman in history to have held the WWE Women 's Championship , the WWE Divas Championship , and the TNA Knockouts Championship . On the May 5 episode of Impact ! , James made her first successful title defense against Ms. Tessmacher . On May 15 at Sacrifice , James successfully defended her title against Madison Rayne and in the process helped Tara get a release from her alliance with Rayne . The following month at Slammiversary IX , James successfully defended her title against Angelina Love , however after the match both Love and Winter attacked her . On the June 23 episode of Impact Wrestling , James was defeated by Winter in a non @-@ title Street Fight , following outside interference from Love . This led to a match on August 7 at Hardcore Justice , where James lost the Knockouts Championship to Winter , following multiple interferences from Love and a red mist from Winter . On the following episode of Impact Wrestling , James defeated Madison Rayne to earn a rematch for the title . On the September 1 episode of Impact Wrestling , James defeated Winter to win her second TNA Knockouts Championship . On September 11 at No Surrender , James dropped the title back to Winter . On the September 22 episode of Impact Wrestling , James defeated Ms. Tessmacher to earn another shot at the championship at Bound for Glory , in a four @-@ way match with defending champion Winter , Madison Rayne and Velvet Sky , which Sky would win . 
 On the November 17 episode of Impact Wrestling , James defeated nine other Knockouts in a gauntlet match to earn a championship match with the new champion , Gail Kim . On December 11 at Final Resolution , Gail defeated James to retain the championship , following a distraction from Madison Rayne . In the main event of the December 29 episode of Impact Wrestling , James challenged Kim for the championship , but was defeated following interference from Rayne . On the January 5 , 2012 , episode of Impact Wrestling , James and Traci Brooks failed to capture the TNA Knockouts Tag Team Championship from Kim and Rayne . Three days later at Genesis , James lost another championship match against Kim , after being disqualified for using the brass knuckles that were thrown into the ring by Rayne , who was locked in a cage suspended in the air during the match . On the January 19 episode of Impact Wrestling , James defeated Rayne in a steel cage match . On the January 26 episode of Impact Wrestling , James and Velvet Sky were defeated by Tara in a triple @-@ threat number one contender 's match for the Knockouts Championship . On the April 5 episode of Impact Wrestling , James was defeated by Sky in a six @-@ way number one contenders match , also involving Angelina Love , Madison Rayne , Tara , and Winter . On the June 7 episode of Impact Wrestling , James again failed to earn a shot at the Knockouts Championship when she was defeated by Ms. Tessmacher in a four @-@ way match that also included Tara and Velvet Sky , while also showing signs of a heel turn due to jealousy of Sky . On the June 21 episode of Impact Wrestling , James was chosen over Sky as the next challenger for the Knockouts Championship , but failed to recapture the title from Ms. Tessmacher . James ' storyline with Sky ended abruptly the following month , when Sky was granted her release from TNA . On the August 2 episode of Impact Wrestling , James unsuccessfully competed in a four @-@ way number one contenders match involving Gail Kim , Tara and the eventual winner Madison Rayne . After a three @-@ month absence , James returned on the November 15 episode of Impact Wrestling , winning a Knockouts battle royal to become the number one contender to the Knockouts Championship . On December 9 at Final Resolution , James was unsuccessful in winning the championship from Tara after a distraction from her boyfriend Jesse . James received another shot at the championship on the December 20 episode of Impact Wrestling , but was again defeated by Tara . On January 13 , 2013 , at the Genesis pay @-@ per @-@ view , James competed in a five @-@ woman gauntlet match to determine the number one contender to the Knockout Championship , but was eliminated by Gail Kim . 
 On the April 18 of Impact Wrestling , James defeated Ms. Tessmacher to become the number one contender to the Knockouts Championship . James received her title match the following week , but was defeated by defending champion Velvet Sky . On the May 23 episode of Impact Wrestling , James defeated Sky after attacking her injured knee to become a three @-@ time Knockouts Champion . The following week , James began portraying a villainous persona by calling out Velvet Sky , acting sarcastic and pompous towards her , and also did not help Sky when she was attacked by Gail Kim . James turned into a villainess on the June 13 episode of Impact Wrestling , when she attacked Sky after Sky announced that she was ready for a rematch . James and Sky had their rematch on the June 27 episode of Impact Wrestling , where James retained her championship . On the July 4 episode of Impact Wrestling , James justified her actions by claiming that getting to the top of the Knockouts division requires " clawing and scratching your way to the top " ; James also claimed that " no woman would ever be as great as her " and she 'll " stand atop the division as the greatest Knockouts Champion of all time " . On the July 25 episode of Impact Wrestling , James successfully defended the championship against Gail Kim . At the September 6 airing of Knockout Knockdown , James defeated Serena Deeb to qualify for the gauntlet battle royal finals , in which James was lastly eliminated by Gail Kim . James lost the Knockouts Championship on the September 19 episode of Impact Wrestling to ODB . Four days later , it was announced that James had failed to come to terms on a contract renewal with TNA . James later stated in an interview that she technically wasn 't under contract with TNA , but she did not confirm that she was gone . On November 15 , 2013 , James appeared in an interview on WWE.com , discussing her history with WWE and the possibility of making a return to the company . At the December 6 airing of World Cup of Wrestling , James was announced as a member of Team USA , along with James Storm , Christopher Daniels , Kazarian and Kenny King . James was defeated by Team Aces & Eights ' Ivelisse Vélez following interference from the other members of Aces & Eights . Team USA would go on to defeat Team Aces & Eights in a 5 @-@ on @-@ 5 elimination tag team match , in which James gained a measure of retribution by eliminating Vélez during the match . James and Storm were presented with the trophy afterwards . 
 = = = Return to the independent circuit ( 2010 – 2016 ) = = = 
 James made her return to the independent circuit in April 2010 , as part of World Wrestling Council ( WWC ) , teaming with Carlito to defeat the team of ODB and Christopher Daniels . James won the bout after pinning Daniels . On July 11 , as part of their Anniversary weekend , she defeated ODB in a singles match . On the last day of that month , James returned to one of her early promotions , Maryland Championship Wrestling ( MCW ) , to wrestle Mia Yim in a winning effort . The following month , she contested for the Women Superstars Uncensored ( WSU ) Championship against Mercedes Martinez , but she was unsuccessful . She also returned to Dory Funk 's promotion , recording a tag team match for ! Bang ! TV . James also accompanied Dory Funk Jr. during his match , and sung " The Star @-@ Spangled Banner " during ! Bang ! TV 's tribute to the troops . On September 18 , James served as a special guest referee for a three @-@ way match between ODB , Persephone and Kristin Flake for the <unk> Ladie 's Title during Southern California Wrestling Association 's ( <unk> ) ' <unk> event in Wentworth , North Carolina , where all matches took place in a cage . 
 In early 2011 , James began appearing for Covey Promotions . At All or Nothing 5 on April 30 , James defeated Hannah Blossom to become the first Covey Pro Women 's Champion . During her time with TNA , James made several appearances for independent wrestling promotions such as Pro Championship Wrestling , Legends of the Ring , Northeast Wrestling and National Wrestling Superstars . On November 11 , 2011 , James lost the Covey Pro Women 's Championship to the debuting Jessie Belle Smothers . 
 James made her debut for Pro Wrestling Elite ( PWE ) in Ayr , South Ayrshire , Scotland on September 15 , 2012 at History Is Born , where she fought Kay Lee Ray to a no contest . After the match , James teamed up with Ray in a winning effort against Carmel and Nikki Storm . The following night , James competed against Carmel in a winning effort . James returned to Pro Wrestling Elite at their two @-@ year anniversary event Elite Bro on July 20 , 2013 , in a winning effort against Nikki Storm . On September 21 , James made an appearance at the Wrestling Spectacular 2 all @-@ female event in Edison , New Jersey , alongside many former WWE and TNA female wrestlers , such as Angelina Love , Katarina Waters , Rosita and Brooke Adams . James and Love fought in the main event , with Candice Michelle as the special guest referee , where Love pinned James after an interference from Velvet Sky . James made an appearance for Big Time Wrestling in August 2013 , wrestling Reby Sky several times in different dates and locations , winning in all bouts against Sky . On October 12 , Mickie again appeared for the promotion , beating Quebec 's <unk> in Bristol , Connecticut . On February 8 , 2014 , James returned to Maryland Championship Wrestling for the Anniversary 2014 event in Joppa , Maryland to face Angelina Love , promoted as " Battle of the Bombshells " . Although originally promoted as a singles match , interference by MCW 's Renee <unk> ' and Jessie Kayes ' rivalry occurred during the match , resulting in the match being turned into a tag team match with Mickie and Michelle facing Angelina and Kayes , which James and Michelle won . 
 On April 25 , 2014 at the Berkeley Springs High School theater in West Virginia , James headlined the Covey Promotion 3rd Annual Hall Of Fame Induction Ceremony , as she was inducted into the Covey Pro Hall Of Hame Class of 2014 . The next day , during the All or Nothing 8 ! event which was aired on May 17 as the 154th episode of Covey Pro TV , James was interrupted during an interview by Amber Rodriguez , who mocked James on her legitimate pregnancy and gave her a pie as a tease , and in return , James shoved the pie in Amber 's face . Jessie Belle Smothers came to the rescue and battled Rodriguez as James was escorted out by security . Two months after giving birth to her child , James returned to in @-@ ring competition at Queens Of Combat 3 on November 30 , where she defeated Tessa Blanchard . On May 16 , James debuted for ( <unk> ) First State Championship Wrestling unsuccessfully challenging <unk> Carlisle for the <unk> Women 's Championship after getting herself disqualified . On June 19 , 2015 , at Maryland Championship Wrestling 's Ladies Night event , James defeated Amber Rodriguez with Lisa Marie Varon as the special guest referee to win the MCW Women 's Championship , despite James being attacked by villainous enforcer Melina during the match . On November 13 , Kimber Lee defeated James to win the MCW Women 's Championship after interference from Amber Rodriguez . The following night , James gained a measure of revenge by defeating Rodriguez in a Loser Leaves MCW match , causing Rodriguez to leave the company . On February 2 , 2016 , James made an appearance for Chikara in a losing effort against Grand Champion Princess Kimber Lee . On April 1 , 2016 , James returned to Queens of Combat and defeated LuFisto at Queens of Combat 10 . 
 = = = Second return to TNA ( 2015 ) = = = 
 James made a surprise return to TNA as a fan favorite , after a year and a half absence from the company , on January 30 , 2015 , during the tapings of Impact Wrestling in Glasgow , Scotland . James would then have several confrontations with Bram over his actions towards her real life fiancé , Magnus . On the April 24 episode of Impact Wrestling , James announced her retirement from wrestling to focus on becoming a full @-@ time mother , only to have James Storm talk her into having one more match . On the June 3 episode of Impact Wrestling , James declined an offer by Storm to join The Revolution , which resulted in him intentionally shoving her onto a train track in the storyline , which sparked controversy . This was done to write off James from television , as she had no more dates set with the company at the time . James made her return on the July 1 episode of Impact Wrestling , confronting Storm and challenging him to a mixed tag team match . On the July 29 episode of Impact Wrestling , James and Magnus defeated Storm and his partner Serena , when James pinned Serena . 
 = = = Global Force Wrestling ( 2015 – present ) = = = 
 On July 7 , 2015 , it was announced that James had signed with Global Force Wrestling ( GFW ) . On July 24 , at GFW 's inaugural tapings in Las Vegas , Nevada , James lost a three @-@ way GFW Women 's Championship tournament qualifying match that also included Lei 'D Tapa , and was ultimately won by Christina Von Eerie . At the September 3 event in Cedar Rapids , Iowa , James defeated ODB . On October 28 , during the GFW UK Invasion Tour , James defeated Nikki Storm in Grimsby , Lincolnshire , and defeated Toni Storm on October 30 in King 's Lynn , Norfolk . On January 22 , Christina Von Eerie defeated James and Kimber Lee to retain the GFW Women 's Championship . 
 = = Music career = = 
 James ' first country music album , Strangers & Angels , was released on May 18 , 2010 on iTunes . The album was self @-@ released with an independent team . On December 2 , 2010 , James released another single called , " Hardcore Country " , which is also used as her entrance music with TNA and on the independent circuit . A music video for the single was first shown during James 's first appearance on TNA Spin Cycle . For her second album , James joined a Kickstarter campaign in order to partially fund the album . Fans who contributed donations received special items from the campaign . The online campaign was a success , with a total pledge of $ 16 @,@ 500 out of a $ 5 @,@ 000 goal . The funds helped to produce the first six songs from the album . The album , called " Somebody 's Gonna Pay " was released on May 7 , 2013 under the label Entertainment One ( eOne ) Music , and debuted on the music charts at # 15 on the Billboards Heatseekers charts . James has also filmed a music video for the song " Somebody 's Gonna Pay " , from her second album of the same name . The video features former WWE Women 's Champion , Trish Stratus and her fiancé Magnus . TNA founder , Jeff Jarrett , was also on set of the video in Nashville , Tennessee . Jarrett did not appear in the video , but taught James how to swing a guitar . While she worked for TNA , James also toured around the United States , holding small concerts at various venues . 
 James has opened shows for Montgomery Gentry , Randy Houser , Gretchen Wilson and Rascal Flatts . James also performed at the 2011 CMA Music Festival . James again performed at CMA Fest in 2013 , where Eric Young and James Storm also made appearances at the event . Other musical appearances James has made are the 2013 <unk> Cancer Awareness Association ( <unk> ) benefit concert on August 24 , 2013 and World Chicken Festival in London , Kentucky on September 28 , 2013 . In 2014 , James collaborated with country artist Cowboy Troy and TNA wrestler James Storm on a song titled " Is Everybody Doing OK " , which is featured on Cowboy Troy 's album , King of Clubs . 
 = = = Studio albums = = = 
 = = = = Strangers & Angels = = = = 
 = = = = Somebody 's Gonna Pay = = = = 
 = = = Guest work = = = 
 = = Other media = = 
 James , along with Ken Anderson , represented WWE at the 2008 Republican National Convention , in an effort to persuade fans to register to vote in the 2008 Presidential election . On April 13 , 2008 , James , along with Layla , Melina and Kelly Kelly , appeared as guest trainers in an episode of Celebrity Fit Club Boot Camp . On September 5 of that same year , James appeared on the USA Network show Psych , portraying a villainous roller derby girl called Rita " Lethal Weapon " Westwood , in the episode " Talk Derby to Me " . James made a special appearance on Redemption Song which is hosted by Chris Jericho along with Candice Michelle , Maryse , and Eve Torres . It was originally aired on November 12 , 2008 . In 2012 , James was featured in Bucky Covington 's music video for his song " Drinking Side of Country " . In June 2013 , James starred in a Dr Pepper advert , which featured " One of a Kind " individuals talking about the role of Dr. Pepper in their lives . As part of the WWE roster , James made appearances in five WWE video games as a playable character . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 When she is finished with her wrestling career , James plans to own a farm and be an equine trainer . James owns three Morgan horses named Rhapsody , Bunny and Casanova . James also owns two dogs , one named Butch and a Miniature Pinscher named Elvis . Outside of wrestling , James received her Associate of Arts degree in business administration , and studied for her Bachelor of Arts degree in operations management . 
 James is part Native American of the Powhatan tribe . James has two tattoos : a symbol meaning ' love ' on her ankle , and a dragon that wraps around it . James is a fan of Equine sports and American Football , and is a fan of the Dallas Cowboys . 
 In 2007 , James was engaged to wrestler Kenny Dykstra . On September 25 , 2014 , James and Nick Aldis , better known by his ring name Magnus , welcomed their first child , a boy named Donovan Patrick Aldis . In December 2014 , James announced her engagement to Aldis , and the two were married on December 31 , 2015 ( New Year 's Eve ) . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing moves 
 As Mickie James 
 Mick Kick ( Roundhouse kick ) – 2006 ; parodied from Trish Stratus 
 Cross @-@ legged STF – 2013 – present 
 Long Kiss Goodnight ( Reverse roundhouse kick , sometimes preceded by a kiss to the opponent 's lips ) – 2005 – present 
 Mickie @-@ DT ( Standing tornado DDT or a jumping DDT , with theatrics ) – 2005 – present 
 Stratusfaction ( Springboard bulldog , with theatrics ) – 2005 – 2006 ; parodied from Trish Stratus 
 As Alexis Laree 
 Laree DDT ( Standing tornado DDT or a jumping DDT ) 
 Signature moves 
 Flapjack , sometimes followed by a kip @-@ up 
 Implant DDT 
 Mick @-@ a @-@ rana ( Rope aided hurricanrana from out of the corner ) 
 Multiple pin variations 
 Crucifix 
 Jackknife 
 Roll @-@ up 
 Victory roll 
 Snapmare , followed by a running low – angle front dropkick to the opponent 's front or back 
 Thesz press , followed by multiple punches , sometimes from the top rope 
 Wrestlers managed 
 A.J. Styles 
 Christian York 
 Amazing Red 
 Chris Cage 
 CM Punk 
 Joey Matthews 
 Julio Dinero 
 Raven 
 Tommy Dreamer 
 Trish Stratus 
 Super Crazy 
 Kofi Kingston 
 Entrance themes 
 " Girlfriend " by Dale Oliver ( TNA ) 
 " Day Dreamin ' <unk> " by Kottonmouth Kings ( ROH ) 
 " Just a Girl " by No Doubt ( OVW ) 
 " Ice Breaker " by Jim Johnston ( WWE ) 
 " Obsession " by Jim Johnston ( WWE ) 
 " Hardcore Country " by Mickie James and Serg Salinas ( TNA / AAA / Independent circuits ) 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 Covey Promotions 
 Covey Pro Women 's Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Covey Pro Hall of Fame ( 2014 ) 
 <unk> Wrestling Federation 
 <unk> Women 's Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Dynamite Championship Wrestling 
 DCW Women 's Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Impact Championship Wrestling 
 ICW Super Juniors Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Maryland Championship Wrestling 
 MCW Women 's Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Premier Wrestling Federation 
 PWF Universal Women 's Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Pro Wrestling Illustrated 
 Woman of the Year ( 2009 , 2011 ) 
 PWI ranked her No. 1 of the best 50 female wrestlers in the PWI Female 50 in 2009 
 Southern Championship Wrestling 
 SCW Diva Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Total Nonstop Action Wrestling 
 TNA Knockouts Championship ( 3 times ) 
 TNA World Cup of Wrestling ( 2013 ) – with Christopher Daniels , James Storm , Kazarian and Kenny King 
 Ultimate Championship Wrestling 
 <unk> Women 's Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Ultimate Wrestling Federation 
 UWF Women 's Championship ( 2 times ) 
 World Wrestling Entertainment 
 WWE Women 's Championship ( 5 times ) 
 WWE Divas Championship ( 1 time ) 
 = = = Luchas de Apuestas record = = = 
 = <unk> = 
 A metalloid is any chemical element which has properties in between those of metals and nonmetals , or that has a mixture of them . There is neither a standard definition of a metalloid nor complete agreement on the elements appropriately classified as such . Despite the lack of specificity , the term remains in use in the literature of chemistry . 
 The six commonly recognised metalloids are boron , silicon , germanium , arsenic , antimony , and tellurium . Five elements are less frequently so classified : carbon , aluminium , selenium , polonium , and astatine . On a standard periodic table , all eleven are in a diagonal area in the p @-@ block extending from boron at the upper left to astatine at lower right , along the dividing line between metals and nonmetals shown on some periodic tables . 
 Typical metalloids have a metallic appearance , but they are brittle and only fair conductors of electricity . Chemically , they behave mostly as nonmetals . They can form alloys with metals . Most of their other physical and chemical properties are intermediate in nature . Metalloids are usually too brittle to have any structural uses . They and their compounds are used in alloys , biological agents , catalysts , flame retardants , glasses , optical storage and optoelectronics , pyrotechnics , semiconductors , and electronics . 
 The electrical properties of silicon and germanium enabled the establishment of the semiconductor industry in the 1950s and the development of solid @-@ state electronics from the early 1960s . 
 The term metalloid originally referred to nonmetals . Its more recent meaning , as a category of elements with intermediate or hybrid properties , became widespread in 1940 – 1960 . Metalloids sometimes are called semimetals , a practice that has been discouraged , as the term semimetal has a different meaning in physics than in chemistry . In physics it more specifically refers to the electronic band structure of a substance . 
 = = Definitions = = 
 = = = Judgement @-@ based = = = 
 A metalloid is an element with properties in between , or that are a mixture of , those of metals and nonmetals , and which is therefore hard to classify as either a metal or a nonmetal . This is a generic definition that draws on metalloid attributes consistently cited in the literature . Difficulty of categorisation is a key attribute . Most elements have a mixture of metallic and nonmetallic properties , and can be classified according to which set of properties is more pronounced . Only the elements at or near the margins , lacking a sufficiently clear preponderance of either metallic or nonmetallic properties , are classified as metalloids . 
 Boron , silicon , germanium , arsenic , antimony , and tellurium are recognised commonly as metalloids . Depending on the author , one or more from selenium , polonium , or astatine sometimes are added to the list . Boron sometimes is excluded , by itself , or with silicon . Sometimes tellurium is not regarded as a metalloid . The inclusion of antimony , polonium , and astatine as metalloids also has been questioned . 
 Other elements occasionally are classified as metalloids . These elements include hydrogen , beryllium , nitrogen , phosphorus , sulfur , zinc , gallium , tin , iodine , lead , bismuth , and radon . The term metalloid also has been used for elements that exhibit metallic lustre and electrical conductivity , and that are amphoteric , such as arsenic , antimony , vanadium , chromium , molybdenum , tungsten , tin , lead , and aluminium . The p @-@ block metals , and nonmetals ( such as carbon or nitrogen ) that can form alloys with metals or modify their properties also have occasionally been considered as metalloids . 
 = = = Criteria @-@ based = = = 
 No widely accepted definition of a metalloid exists , nor any division of the periodic table into metals , metalloids and nonmetals ; Hawkes questioned the feasibility of establishing a specific definition , noting that anomalies can be found in several attempted constructs . Classifying an element as a metalloid has been described by Sharp as " arbitrary " . 
 The number and identities of metalloids depend on what classification criteria are used . Emsley recognised four metalloids ( germanium , arsenic , antimony and tellurium ) ; James et al. listed twelve ( Emsley 's plus boron , carbon , silicon , selenium , bismuth , polonium , ununpentium and livermorium ) . On average , seven elements are included in such lists ; individual classification arrangements tend to share common ground and vary in the ill @-@ defined margins . 
 A single quantitative criterion such as electronegativity is commonly used , metalloids having electronegativity values from 1 @.@ 8 or 1 @.@ 9 to 2 @.@ 2 . Further examples include packing efficiency ( the fraction of volume in a crystal structure occupied by atoms ) and the <unk> @-@ Herzfeld criterion ratio . The commonly recognised metalloids have packing efficiencies of between 34 % and 41 % . The <unk> @-@ Herzfeld ratio , roughly equal to the cube of the atomic radius divided by the molar volume , is a simple measure of how metallic an element is , the recognised metalloids having ratios from around 0 @.@ 85 to 1 @.@ 1 and averaging 1 @.@ 0 . Other authors have relied on , for example , atomic conductance or bulk coordination number . 
 Jones , writing on the role of classification in science , observed that " [ classes ] are usually defined by more than two attributes " . Masterton and Slowinski used three criteria to describe the six elements commonly recognised as metalloids : metalloids have ionization energies around 200 kcal / mol ( 837 kJ / mol ) and electronegativity values close to 2 @.@ 0 . They also said that metalloids are typically semiconductors , though antimony and arsenic ( semimetals from a physics perspective ) have electrical conductivities approaching those of metals . Selenium and polonium are suspected as not in this scheme , while astatine 's status is uncertain . 
 = = Periodic table territory = = 
 = = = Location = = = 
 Metalloids lie on either side of the dividing line between metals and nonmetals . This can be found , in varying configurations , on some periodic tables . Elements to the lower left of the line generally display increasing metallic behaviour ; elements to the upper right display increasing nonmetallic behaviour . When presented as a regular <unk> , elements with the highest critical temperature for their groups ( Li , Be , Al , Ge , Sb , Po ) lie just below the line . 
 The diagonal positioning of the metalloids represents an exception to the observation that elements with similar properties tend to occur in vertical groups . A related effect can be seen in other diagonal similarities between some elements and their lower right neighbours , specifically lithium @-@ magnesium , beryllium @-@ aluminium , and boron @-@ silicon . Rayner @-@ Canham has argued that these similarities extend to carbon @-@ phosphorus , nitrogen @-@ sulfur , and into three d @-@ block series . 
 This exception arises due to competing horizontal and vertical trends in the nuclear charge . Going along a period , the nuclear charge increases with atomic number as do the number of electrons . The additional pull on outer electrons as nuclear charge increases generally outweighs the screening effect of having more electrons . With some irregularities , atoms therefore become smaller , ionization energy increases , and there is a gradual change in character , across a period , from strongly metallic , to weakly metallic , to weakly nonmetallic , to strongly nonmetallic elements . Going down a main group , the effect of increasing nuclear charge is generally outweighed by the effect of additional electrons being further away from the nucleus . Atoms generally become larger , ionization energy falls , and metallic character increases . The net effect is that the location of the metal – nonmetal transition zone shifts to the right in going down a group , and analogous diagonal similarities are seen elsewhere in the periodic table , as noted . 
 = = = Alternative treatments = = = 
 Depictions of metalloids vary according to the author . Some do not classify elements bordering the metal – nonmetal dividing line as metalloids , noting that a binary classification can facilitate the establishment of rules for determining bond types between metals and nonmetals . Metalloids are variously grouped with metals , regarded as nonmetals or treated as a sub @-@ category of nonmetals . Other authors have suggested that classifying some elements as metalloids " emphasizes that properties change gradually rather than abruptly as one moves across or down the periodic table " . Some periodic tables distinguish elements that are metalloids and display no formal dividing line between metals and nonmetals . Metalloids are shown as occurring in a diagonal band or diffuse region . 
 = = Properties = = 
 Metalloids usually look like metals but behave largely like nonmetals . Physically , they are shiny , brittle solids with intermediate to relatively good electrical conductivity and the electronic band structure of a semimetal or semiconductor . Chemically , they mostly behave as ( weak ) nonmetals , have intermediate ionization energies and electronegativity values , and amphoteric or weakly acidic oxides . They can form alloys with metals . Most of their other physical and chemical properties are intermediate in nature . 
 = = = Compared to metals and nonmetals = = = 
 Characteristic properties of metals , metalloids and nonmetals are summarized in the table . Physical properties are listed in order of ease of determination ; chemical properties run from general to specific , and then to descriptive . 
 The above table reflects the hybrid nature of metalloids . The properties of form , appearance , and behaviour when mixed with metals are more like metals . Elasticity and general chemical behaviour are more like nonmetals . Electrical conductivity , band structure , ionization energy , electronegativity , and oxides are intermediate between the two . 
 = = Common applications = = 
 The focus of this section is on the recognised metalloids . Elements less often recognised as metalloids are ordinarily classified as either metals or nonmetals ; some of these are included here for comparative purposes . 
 Metalloids are too brittle to have any structural uses in their pure forms . They and their compounds are used as ( or in ) alloying components , biological agents ( toxicological , nutritional and medicinal ) , catalysts , flame retardants , glasses ( oxide and metallic ) , optical storage media and optoelectronics , pyrotechnics , semiconductors and electronics . 
 = = = Alloys = = = 
 Writing early in the history of intermetallic compounds , the British metallurgist Cecil Desch observed that " certain non @-@ metallic elements are capable of forming compounds of distinctly metallic character with metals , and these elements may therefore enter into the composition of alloys " . He associated silicon , arsenic and tellurium , in particular , with the alloy @-@ forming elements . Phillips and Williams suggested that compounds of silicon , germanium , arsenic and antimony with B metals , " are probably best classed as alloys " . 
 Among the lighter metalloids , alloys with transition metals are well @-@ represented . Boron can form intermetallic compounds and alloys with such metals of the composition <unk> , if n > 2 . <unk> ( 15 % boron ) is used to introduce boron into steel ; nickel @-@ boron alloys are ingredients in welding alloys and case hardening compositions for the engineering industry . Alloys of silicon with iron and with aluminium are widely used by the steel and automotive industries , respectively . Germanium forms many alloys , most importantly with the coinage metals . 
 The heavier metalloids continue the theme . Arsenic can form alloys with metals , including platinum and copper ; it is also added to copper and its alloys to improve corrosion resistance and appears to confer the same benefit when added to magnesium . Antimony is well known as an alloy @-@ former , including with the coinage metals . Its alloys include pewter ( a tin alloy with up to 20 % antimony ) and type metal ( a lead alloy with up to 25 % antimony ) . Tellurium readily alloys with iron , as <unk> ( 50 – 58 % tellurium ) , and with copper , in the form of copper tellurium ( 40 – 50 % tellurium ) . <unk> is used as a stabilizer for carbon in steel casting . Of the non @-@ metallic elements less often recognised as metalloids , selenium — in the form of <unk> ( 50 – 58 % selenium ) — is used to improve the machinability of stainless steels . 
 = = = Biological agents = = = 
 All six of the elements commonly recognised as metalloids have toxic , dietary or medicinal properties . Arsenic and antimony compounds are especially toxic ; boron , silicon , and possibly arsenic , are essential trace elements . Boron , silicon , arsenic and antimony have medical applications , and germanium and tellurium are thought to have potential . 
 Boron is used in insecticides and herbicides . It is an essential trace element . As boric acid , it has antiseptic , antifungal , and antiviral properties . 
 Silicon is present in <unk> , a highly toxic rodenticide . Long @-@ term inhalation of silica dust causes silicosis , a fatal disease of the lungs . Silicon is an essential trace element . Silicone gel can be applied to badly burned patients to reduce scarring . 
 Salts of germanium are potentially harmful to humans and animals if ingested on a prolonged basis . There is interest in the pharmacological actions of germanium compounds but no licensed medicine as yet . 
 Arsenic is notoriously poisonous and may also be an essential element in ultratrace amounts . During World War I , both sides used " arsenic @-@ based sneezing and vomiting agents … to force enemy soldiers to remove their gas masks before firing mustard or phosgene at them in a second salvo . It has been used as a pharmaceutical agent since antiquity , including for the treatment of syphilis before the development of antibiotics . Arsenic is also a component of <unk> , a medicinal drug used in the treatment of human African trypanosomiasis or sleeping sickness . In 2003 , arsenic trioxide ( under the trade name <unk> ) was re @-@ introduced for the treatment of acute promyelocytic leukaemia , a cancer of the blood and bone marrow . Arsenic in drinking water , which causes lung and bladder cancer , has been associated with a reduction in breast cancer mortality rates . 
 Metallic antimony is relatively non @-@ toxic , but most antimony compounds are poisonous . Two antimony compounds , sodium <unk> and <unk> , are used as <unk> drugs . 
 Elemental tellurium is not considered particularly toxic ; two grams of sodium tellurate , if administered , can be lethal . People exposed to small amounts of airborne tellurium exude a foul and persistent garlic @-@ like odour . Tellurium dioxide has been used to treat <unk> dermatitis ; other tellurium compounds were used as antimicrobial agents before the development of antibiotics . In the future , such compounds may need to be substituted for antibiotics that have become ineffective due to bacterial resistance . 
 Of the elements less often recognised as metalloids , beryllium and lead are noted for their toxicity ; lead arsenate has been extensively used as an insecticide . Sulfur is one of the oldest of the fungicides and pesticides . Phosphorus , sulfur , zinc , selenium and iodine are essential nutrients , and aluminium , tin and lead may be . Sulfur , gallium , selenium , iodine and bismuth have medicinal applications . Sulfur is a constituent of sulfonamide drugs , still widely used for conditions such as acne and urinary tract infections . Gallium nitrate is used to treat the side effects of cancer ; gallium citrate , a radiopharmaceutical , facilitates imaging of inflamed body areas . Selenium sulfide is used in medicinal shampoos and to treat skin infections such as <unk> versicolor . Iodine is used as a disinfectant in various forms . Bismuth is an ingredient in some antibacterials . 
 = = = Catalysts = = = 
 Boron trifluoride and trichloride are used as catalysts in organic synthesis and electronics ; the tribromide is used in the manufacture of diborane . Non @-@ toxic boron ligands can replace toxic phosphorus ligands in transition metal catalysts . Silica sulfuric acid ( <unk> ) is used in organic reactions . Germanium dioxide is sometimes used as a catalyst in the production of PET plastic for containers ; cheaper antimony compounds , such as the trioxide or triacetate , are more commonly employed for the same purpose despite concerns about antimony contamination of food and drinks . Arsenic trioxide has been used in the production of natural gas , to boost the removal of carbon dioxide , as have selenous acid and tellurous acid . Selenium acts as a catalyst in some microorganisms . Tellurium , and its dioxide and tetrachloride , are strong catalysts for air oxidation of carbon above 500 ° C. Graphite oxide can be used as a catalyst in the synthesis of <unk> and their derivatives . Activated carbon and alumina have been used as catalysts for the removal of sulfur contaminants from natural gas . Titanium doped aluminium has been identified as a substitute for expensive noble metal catalysts used in the production of industrial chemicals . 
 = = = Flame retardants = = = 
 Compounds of boron , silicon , arsenic and antimony have been used as flame retardants . Boron , in the form of borax , has been used as a textile flame retardant since at least the 18th century . Silicon compounds such as <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , silica and silicates , some of which were developed as alternatives to more toxic halogenated products , can considerably improve the flame <unk> of plastic materials . Arsenic compounds such as sodium arsenite or sodium arsenate are effective flame retardants for wood but have been less frequently used due to their toxicity . Antimony trioxide is a flame retardant . Aluminium hydroxide has been used as a wood @-@ fibre , rubber , plastic and textile flame retardant since the 1890s . Apart from aluminium hydroxide , use of phosphorus based flame @-@ retardants — in the form of , for example , organophosphates — now exceeds that of any of the other main retardant types . These employ boron , antimony or halogenated hydrocarbon compounds . 
 = = = Glass formation = = = 
 The oxides B2O3 , SiO2 , GeO2 , As2O3 and Sb2O3 readily form glasses . TeO2 forms a glass but this requires a " heroic quench rate " or the addition of an impurity , otherwise the crystalline form results . These compounds are used in chemical , domestic and industrial glassware and optics . Boron trioxide is used as a glass fibre additive , and is also a component of borosilicate glass , widely used for laboratory glassware and domestic <unk> for its low thermal expansion . Most ordinary glassware is made from silicon dioxide . Germanium dioxide is used as a glass fibre additive , as well as in infrared optical systems . Arsenic trioxide is used in the glass industry as a <unk> and fining agent ( for the removal of bubbles ) , as is antimony trioxide . Tellurium dioxide finds application in laser and nonlinear optics . 
 Amorphous metallic glasses are generally most easily prepared if one of the components is a metalloid or " near metalloid " such as boron , carbon , silicon , phosphorus or germanium . Aside from thin films deposited at very low temperatures , the first known metallic glass was an alloy of composition <unk> reported in 1960 . A metallic glass having a strength and toughness not previously seen , of composition <unk> , was reported in 2011 . 
 Phosphorus , selenium and lead , which are less often recognised as metalloids , are also used in glasses . Phosphate glass has a substrate of phosphorus pentoxide ( <unk> ) , rather than the silica ( SiO2 ) of conventional silicate glasses . It is used , for example , to make sodium lamps . Selenium compounds can be used both as <unk> agents and to add a red colour to glass . Decorative glassware made of traditional lead glass contains at least 30 % lead ( II ) oxide ( PbO ) ; lead glass used for radiation shielding may have up to 65 % PbO . Lead @-@ based glasses have also been extensively used in electronics components ; enamelling ; sealing and glazing materials ; and solar cells . Bismuth based oxide glasses have emerged as a less toxic replacement for lead in many of these applications . 
 = = = Optical storage and optoelectronics = = = 
 Varying compositions of GeSbTe ( " GST alloys " ) and <unk> and <unk> doped <unk> ( " <unk> alloys " ) , being examples of phase @-@ change materials , are widely used in rewritable optical discs and phase @-@ change memory devices . By applying heat , they can be switched between amorphous ( glassy ) and crystalline states . The change in optical and electrical properties can be used for information storage purposes . Future applications for GeSbTe may include , " <unk> , entirely solid @-@ state displays with <unk> @-@ scale pixels , semi @-@ transparent " smart " glasses , " smart " contact lenses and artificial retina devices . " 
 = = = Pyrotechnics = = = 
 The recognised metalloids have either pyrotechnic applications or associated properties . Boron and silicon are commonly encountered ; they act somewhat like metal fuels . Boron is used in pyrotechnic initiator compositions ( for igniting other hard @-@ to @-@ start compositions ) , and in delay compositions that burn at a constant rate . Boron carbide has been identified as a possible replacement for more toxic barium or <unk> mixtures in smoke munitions , signal flares and fireworks . Silicon , like boron , is a component of initiator and delay mixtures . <unk> germanium can act as a variable speed thermite fuel . Arsenic trisulfide <unk> was used in old naval signal lights ; in fireworks to make white stars ; in yellow smoke screen mixtures ; and in initiator compositions . Antimony trisulfide Sb2S3 is found in white @-@ light fireworks and in flash and sound mixtures . Tellurium has been used in delay mixtures and in blasting cap initiator compositions . 
 Carbon , aluminium , phosphorus and selenium continue the theme . Carbon , in black powder , is a constituent of fireworks rocket propellants , bursting charges , and effects mixtures , and military delay fuses and <unk> . Aluminium is a common pyrotechnic ingredient , and is widely employed for its capacity to generate light and heat , including in thermite mixtures . Phosphorus can be found in smoke and incendiary munitions , paper caps used in toy guns , and party poppers . Selenium has been used in the same way as tellurium . 
 = = = Semiconductors and electronics = = = 
 All the elements commonly recognised as metalloids ( or their compounds ) have been used in the semiconductor or solid @-@ state electronic industries . 
 Some properties of boron have limited its use as a semiconductor . It has a high melting point , single crystals are relatively hard to obtain , and introducing and retaining controlled impurities is difficult . 
 Silicon is the leading commercial semiconductor ; it forms the basis of modern electronics ( including standard solar cells ) and information and communication technologies . This was despite the study of semiconductors , early in the 20th century , having been regarded as the " physics of dirt " and not deserving of close attention . 
 Germanium has largely been replaced by silicon in semiconducting devices , being cheaper , more resilient at higher operating temperatures , and easier to work during the microelectronic fabrication process . Germanium is still a constituent of semiconducting silicon @-@ germanium " alloys " and these have been growing in use , particularly for wireless communication devices ; such alloys exploit the higher carrier mobility of germanium . The synthesis of gram @-@ scale quantities of semiconducting <unk> was reported in 2013 . This comprises one @-@ atom thick sheets of hydrogen @-@ terminated germanium atoms , analogous to <unk> . It conducts electrons more than ten times faster than silicon and five times faster than germanium , and is thought to have potential for optoelectronic and sensing applications . The development of a germanium @-@ wire based anode that more than doubles the capacity of lithium @-@ ion batteries was reported in 2014 . In the same year , Lee at al. reported that defect @-@ free crystals of graphene large enough to have electronic uses could be grown on , and removed from , a germanium substrate . 
 Arsenic and antimony are not semiconductors in their standard states . Both form type III @-@ V semiconductors ( such as GaAs , <unk> or <unk> ) in which the average number of valence electrons per atom is the same as that of Group 14 elements . These compounds are preferred for some special applications . Antimony nanocrystals may enable lithium @-@ ion batteries to be replaced by more powerful sodium ion batteries . 
 Tellurium , which is a semiconductor in its standard state , is used mainly as a component in type II / VI semiconducting @-@ chalcogenides ; these have applications in electro @-@ optics and electronics . Cadmium telluride ( CdTe ) is used in solar modules for its high conversion efficiency , low manufacturing costs , and large band gap of 1 @.@ 44 eV , letting it absorb a wide range of wavelengths . Bismuth telluride ( Bi2Te3 ) , alloyed with selenium and antimony , is a component of thermoelectric devices used for refrigeration or portable power generation . 
 Five metalloids — boron , silicon , germanium , arsenic and antimony — can be found in cell phones ( along with at least 39 other metals and nonmetals ) . Tellurium is expected to find such use . Of the less often recognised metalloids , phosphorus , gallium ( in particular ) and selenium have semiconductor applications . Phosphorus is used in trace amounts as a dopant for n @-@ type semiconductors . The commercial use of gallium compounds is dominated by semiconductor applications — in integrated circuits ; cell phones ; laser diodes ; light @-@ emitting diodes ; <unk> ; and solar cells . Selenium is used in the production of solar cells and in high @-@ energy surge protectors . 
 Boron , silicon , germanium , antimony and tellurium , as well as heavier metals and metalloids such as Sm , Hg , Tl , Pb , Bi and Se , can be found in topological insulators . These are alloys or compounds which , at ultracold temperatures or room temperature ( depending on their composition ) , are metallic conductors on their surfaces but insulators through their interiors . Cadmium arsenide <unk> , at about 1 K , is a Dirac @-@ semimetal — a bulk electronic analogue of graphene — in which electrons travel effectively as massless particles . These two classes of material are thought to have potential quantum computing applications . 
 = = Nomenclature and history = = 
 = = = Derivation and other names = = = 
 The word metalloid comes from the Latin <unk> ( " metal " ) and the Greek <unk> ( " resembling in form or appearance " ) . Several names are sometimes used synonymously although some of these have other meanings that are not necessarily interchangeable : amphoteric element , boundary element , half @-@ metal , half @-@ way element , near metal , meta @-@ metal , semiconductor , semimetal and <unk> . " <unk> element " is sometimes used more broadly to include transition metals capable of forming oxyanions , such as chromium and manganese . " Half @-@ metal " is used in physics to refer to a compound ( such as chromium dioxide ) or alloy that can act as a conductor and an insulator . " Meta @-@ metal " is sometimes used instead to refer to certain metals ( Be , Zn , Cd , Hg , In , Tl , β @-@ Sn , Pb ) located just to the left of the metalloids on standard periodic tables . These metals are mostly diamagnetic and tend to have distorted crystalline structures , electrical conductivity values at the lower end of those of metals , and amphoteric ( weakly basic ) oxides . " <unk> " sometimes refers , loosely or explicitly , to metals with incomplete metallic character in crystalline structure , electrical conductivity or electronic structure . Examples include gallium , ytterbium , bismuth and neptunium . The names amphoteric element and semiconductor are problematic as some elements referred to as metalloids do not show marked amphoteric behaviour ( bismuth , for example ) or <unk> ( polonium ) in their most stable forms . 
 = = = Origin and usage = = = 
 The origin and usage of the term metalloid is convoluted . Its origin lies in attempts , dating from antiquity , to describe metals and to distinguish between typical and less typical forms . It was first applied in the early 19th century to metals that floated on water ( sodium and potassium ) , and then more popularly to nonmetals . Earlier usage in mineralogy , to describe a mineral having a metallic appearance , can be sourced to as early as 1800 . Since the mid @-@ 20th century it has been used to refer to intermediate or borderline chemical elements . The International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry ( IUPAC ) previously recommended abandoning the term metalloid , and suggested using the term semimetal instead . Use of this latter term has more recently been discouraged by Atkins et al. as it has a different meaning in physics — one that more specifically refers to the electronic band structure of a substance rather than the overall classification of an element . The most recent IUPAC publications on nomenclature and terminology do not include any recommendations on the usage of the terms metalloid or semimetal . 
 = = Elements commonly recognised as metalloids = = 
 Properties noted in this section refer to the elements in their most thermodynamically stable forms under ambient conditions . 
 = = = Boron = = = 
 Pure boron is a shiny , silver @-@ grey crystalline solid . It is less dense than aluminium ( 2 @.@ 34 vs. 2 @.@ 70 g / cm3 ) , and is hard and brittle . It is barely reactive under normal conditions , except for attack by fluorine , and has a melting point of 2076 ° C ( cf. steel ~ 1370 ° C ) . Boron is a semiconductor ; its room temperature electrical conductivity is 1 @.@ 5 × 10 − 6 S • cm − 1 ( about 200 times less than that of tap water ) and it has a band gap of about 1 @.@ 56 eV . 
 The structural chemistry of boron is dominated by its small atomic size , and relatively high ionization energy . With only three valence electrons per boron atom , simple covalent bonding cannot fulfil the octet rule . Metallic bonding is the usual result among the heavier <unk> of boron but this generally requires low ionization energies . Instead , because of its small size and high ionization energies , the basic structural unit of boron ( and nearly all of its allotropes ) is the icosahedral B12 cluster . Of the 36 electrons associated with 12 boron atoms , 26 reside in 13 delocalized molecular orbitals ; the other 10 electrons are used to form two- and three @-@ centre covalent bonds between icosahedra . The same motif can be seen , as are <unk> variants or fragments , in metal borides and hydride derivatives , and in some halides . 
 The bonding in boron has been described as being characteristic of behaviour intermediate between metals and nonmetallic covalent network solids ( such as diamond ) . The energy required to transform B , C , N , Si and P from nonmetallic to metallic states has been estimated as 30 , 100 , 240 , 33 and 50 kJ / mol , respectively . This indicates the proximity of boron to the metal @-@ nonmetal borderline . 
 Most of the chemistry of boron is nonmetallic in nature . Unlike its heavier congeners , it is not known to form a simple B3 + or hydrated [ B ( H2O ) 4 ] 3 + cation . The small size of the boron atom enables the preparation of many interstitial alloy @-@ type borides . Analogies between boron and transition metals have been noted in the formation of complexes , and adducts ( for example , BH3 + CO → <unk> and , similarly , Fe ( CO ) 4 + CO → Fe ( CO ) 5 ) , as well as in the geometric and electronic structures of cluster species such as [ <unk> ] 2 − and [ <unk> ( CO ) 18 ] 2 − . The aqueous chemistry of boron is characterised by the formation of many different <unk> anions . Given its high charge @-@ to @-@ size ratio , boron bonds covalently in nearly all of its compounds ; the exceptions are the borides as these include , depending on their composition , covalent , ionic and metallic bonding components . Simple binary compounds , such as boron trichloride are Lewis acids as the formation of three covalent bonds leaves a hole in the octet which can be filled by an electron @-@ pair donated by a Lewis base . Boron has a strong affinity for oxygen and a duly extensive borate chemistry . The oxide B2O3 is polymeric in structure , weakly acidic , and a glass former . Organometallic compounds of boron have been known since the 19th century ( see organoboron chemistry ) . 
 = = = Silicon = = = 
 Silicon is a crystalline solid with a blue @-@ grey metallic lustre . Like boron , it is less dense ( at 2 @.@ 33 g / cm3 ) than aluminium , and is hard and brittle . It is a relatively unreactive element . According to <unk> , the massive crystalline form ( especially if pure ) is " remarkably inert to all acids , including hydrofluoric " . Less pure silicon , and the powdered form , are variously susceptible to attack by strong or heated acids , as well as by steam and fluorine . Silicon dissolves in hot aqueous alkalis with the evolution of hydrogen , as do metals such as beryllium , aluminium , zinc , gallium or indium . It melts at 1414 ° C. Silicon is a semiconductor with an electrical conductivity of 10 − 4 S • cm − 1 and a band gap of about 1 @.@ 11 eV . When it melts , silicon becomes a reasonable metal with an electrical conductivity of 1 @.@ 0 – 1 @.@ 3 × 104 S • cm − 1 , similar to that of liquid mercury . 
 The chemistry of silicon is generally nonmetallic ( covalent ) in nature . It is not known to form a cation . Silicon can form alloys with metals such as iron and copper . It shows fewer tendencies to anionic behaviour than ordinary nonmetals . Its solution chemistry is characterised by the formation of oxyanions . The high strength of the silicon @-@ oxygen bond dominates the chemical behaviour of silicon . <unk> silicates , built up by tetrahedral SiO4 units sharing their oxygen atoms , are the most abundant and important compounds of silicon . The polymeric borates , comprising linked trigonal and tetrahedral <unk> or <unk> units , are built on similar structural principles . The oxide SiO2 is polymeric in structure , weakly acidic , and a glass former . Traditional organometallic chemistry includes the carbon compounds of silicon ( see organosilicon ) . 
 = = = Germanium = = = 
 Germanium is a shiny grey @-@ white solid . It has a density of 5 @.@ 323 g / cm3 and is hard and brittle . It is mostly unreactive at room temperature but is slowly attacked by hot concentrated sulfuric or nitric acid . Germanium also reacts with molten caustic soda to yield sodium germanate <unk> and hydrogen gas . It melts at 938 ° C. Germanium is a semiconductor with an electrical conductivity of around 2 × 10 − 2 S • cm − 1 and a band gap of 0 @.@ 67 eV . Liquid germanium is a metallic conductor , with an electrical conductivity similar to that of liquid mercury . 
 Most of the chemistry of germanium is characteristic of a nonmetal . Whether or not germanium forms a cation is unclear , aside from the reported existence of the Ge2 + ion in a few esoteric compounds . It can form alloys with metals such as aluminium and gold . It shows fewer tendencies to anionic behaviour than ordinary nonmetals . Its solution chemistry is characterised by the formation of oxyanions . Germanium generally forms tetravalent ( IV ) compounds , and it can also form less stable divalent ( II ) compounds , in which it behaves more like a metal . Germanium analogues of all of the major types of silicates have been prepared . The metallic character of germanium is also suggested by the formation of various oxoacid salts . A phosphate [ ( <unk> ) <unk> · H2O ] and highly stable <unk> Ge ( <unk> ) 4 have been described , as have Ge2 ( SO4 ) 2 , Ge ( ClO4 ) 4 and <unk> ( C2O4 ) 3 . The oxide GeO2 is polymeric , amphoteric , and a glass former . The dioxide is soluble in acidic solutions ( the monoxide GeO , is even more so ) , and this is sometimes used to classify germanium as a metal . Up to the 1930s germanium was considered to be a poorly conducting metal ; it has occasionally been classified as a metal by later writers . As with all the elements commonly recognised as metalloids , germanium has an established organometallic chemistry ( see organogermanium chemistry ) . 
 = = = Arsenic = = = 
 Arsenic is a grey , metallic looking solid . It has a density of 5 @.@ 727 g / cm3 and is brittle , and moderately hard ( more than aluminium ; less than iron ) . It is stable in dry air but develops a golden bronze patina in moist air , which blackens on further exposure . Arsenic is attacked by nitric acid and concentrated sulfuric acid . It reacts with fused caustic soda to give the arsenate <unk> and hydrogen gas . Arsenic sublimes at 615 ° C. The vapour is lemon @-@ yellow and smells like garlic . Arsenic only melts under a pressure of 38 @.@ 6 atm , at 817 ° C. It is a semimetal with an electrical conductivity of around 3 @.@ 9 × 104 S • cm − 1 and a band overlap of 0 @.@ 5 eV . Liquid arsenic is a semiconductor with a band gap of 0 @.@ 15 eV . 
 The chemistry of arsenic is predominately nonmetallic . Whether or not arsenic forms a cation is unclear . Its many metal alloys are mostly brittle . It shows fewer tendencies to anionic behaviour than ordinary nonmetals . Its solution chemistry is characterised by the formation of oxyanions . Arsenic generally forms compounds in which it has an oxidation state of + 3 or + 5 . The halides , and the oxides and their derivatives are illustrative examples . In the trivalent state , arsenic shows some incipient metallic properties . The halides are hydrolysed by water but these reactions , particularly those of the chloride , are reversible with the addition of a hydrohalic acid . The oxide is acidic but , as noted below , ( weakly ) amphoteric . The higher , less stable , pentavalent state has strongly acidic ( nonmetallic ) properties . Compared to phosphorus , the stronger metallic character of arsenic is indicated by the formation of oxoacid salts such as <unk> , <unk> ( SO4 ) 3 and arsenic acetate As ( CH3COO ) 3 . The oxide As2O3 is polymeric , amphoteric , and a glass former . Arsenic has an extensive organometallic chemistry ( see <unk> chemistry ) . 
 = = = Antimony = = = 
 Antimony is a silver @-@ white solid with a blue tint and a brilliant lustre . It has a density of 6 @.@ 697 g / cm3 and is brittle , and moderately hard ( more so than arsenic ; less so than iron ; about the same as copper ) . It is stable in air and moisture at room temperature . It is attacked by concentrated nitric acid , yielding the hydrated pentoxide <unk> . Aqua regia gives the pentachloride <unk> and hot concentrated sulfuric acid results in the sulfate Sb2 ( SO4 ) 3 . It is not affected by molten alkali . Antimony is capable of displacing hydrogen from water , when heated : 2 Sb + 3 H2O → Sb2O3 + 3 H2 . It melts at 631 ° C. Antimony is a semimetal with an electrical conductivity of around 3 @.@ 1 × 104 S • cm − 1 and a band overlap of 0 @.@ 16 eV . Liquid antimony is a metallic conductor with an electrical conductivity of around 5 @.@ 3 × 104 S • cm − 1 . 
 Most of the chemistry of antimony is characteristic of a nonmetal . Antimony has some definite cationic chemistry , SbO + and Sb ( OH ) 2 + being present in acidic aqueous solution ; the compound <unk> ( <unk> ) 2 , which contains the <unk> , <unk> + , was prepared in 2004 . It can form alloys with one or more metals such as aluminium , iron , nickel , copper , zinc , tin , lead and bismuth . Antimony has fewer tendencies to anionic behaviour than ordinary nonmetals . Its solution chemistry is characterised by the formation of oxyanions . Like arsenic , antimony generally forms compounds in which it has an oxidation state of + 3 or + 5 . The halides , and the oxides and their derivatives are illustrative examples . The + 5 state is less stable than the + 3 , but relatively easier to attain than with arsenic . This is explained by the poor shielding afforded the arsenic nucleus by its <unk> electrons . In comparison , the tendency of antimony ( being a heavier atom ) to oxidize more easily partially offsets the effect of its <unk> shell . <unk> antimony is amphoteric ; <unk> antimony is ( predominately ) acidic . Consistent with an increase in metallic character down group 15 , antimony forms salts or salt @-@ like compounds including a nitrate Sb ( NO3 ) 3 , phosphate <unk> , sulfate Sb2 ( SO4 ) 3 and perchlorate Sb ( ClO4 ) 3 . The otherwise acidic pentoxide <unk> shows some basic ( metallic ) behaviour in that it can be dissolved in very acidic solutions , with the formation of the <unk> SbO + 
 2 . The oxide Sb2O3 is polymeric , amphoteric , and a glass former . Antimony has an extensive organometallic chemistry ( see organoantimony chemistry ) . 
 = = = Tellurium = = = 
 Tellurium is a silvery @-@ white shiny solid . It has a density of 6 @.@ 24 g / cm3 , is brittle , and is the softest of the commonly recognised metalloids , being marginally harder than sulfur . Large pieces of tellurium are stable in air . The finely powdered form is oxidized by air in the presence of moisture . Tellurium reacts with boiling water , or when freshly precipitated even at 50 ° C , to give the dioxide and hydrogen : Te + 2 H2O → TeO2 + 2 H2 . It reacts ( to varying degrees ) with nitric , sulfuric and hydrochloric acids to give compounds such as the sulfoxide <unk> or tellurous acid <unk> , the basic nitrate ( <unk> ) + ( NO3 ) − , or the oxide sulfate <unk> ( SO4 ) . It dissolves in boiling alkalis , to give the tellurite and telluride : 3 Te + 6 KOH = <unk> + 2 <unk> + 3 H2O , a reaction that proceeds or is reversible with increasing or decreasing temperature . 
 At higher temperatures tellurium is sufficiently plastic to extrude . It melts at 449 @.@ 51 ° C. Crystalline tellurium has a structure consisting of parallel infinite spiral chains . The bonding between adjacent atoms in a chain is covalent , but there is evidence of a weak metallic interaction between the neighbouring atoms of different chains . Tellurium is a semiconductor with an electrical conductivity of around 1 @.@ 0 S • cm − 1 and a band gap of 0 @.@ 32 to 0 @.@ 38 eV . Liquid tellurium is a semiconductor , with an electrical conductivity , on melting , of around 1 @.@ 9 × 103 S • cm − 1 <unk> liquid tellurium is a metallic conductor . 
 Most of the chemistry of tellurium is characteristic of a nonmetal . It shows some cationic behaviour . The dioxide dissolves in acid to yield the <unk> ( IV ) Te ( OH ) 3 + ion ; the red <unk> + and yellow @-@ orange <unk> + ions form when tellurium is oxidized in <unk> acid ( <unk> ) , or liquid sulfur dioxide ( SO2 ) , respectively . It can form alloys with aluminium , silver and tin . Tellurium shows fewer tendencies to anionic behaviour than ordinary nonmetals . Its solution chemistry is characterised by the formation of oxyanions . Tellurium generally forms compounds in which it has an oxidation state of − 2 , + 4 or + 6 . The + 4 state is the most stable . <unk> of composition <unk> are easily formed with most other elements and represent the most common tellurium minerals . <unk> is pervasive , especially with transition metals . Many tellurides can be regarded as metallic alloys . The increase in metallic character evident in tellurium , as compared to the lighter chalcogens , is further reflected in the reported formation of various other <unk> salts , such as a basic selenate <unk> · SeO3 and an analogous perchlorate and <unk> <unk> · <unk> . Tellurium forms a polymeric , amphoteric , glass @-@ forming oxide TeO2 . It is a " conditional " glass @-@ forming oxide — it forms a glass with a very small amount of additive . Tellurium has an extensive organometallic chemistry ( see <unk> chemistry ) . 
 = = Elements less commonly recognised as metalloids = = 
 = = = Carbon = = = 
 Carbon is ordinarily classified as a nonmetal but has some metallic properties and is occasionally classified as a metalloid . Hexagonal graphitic carbon ( graphite ) is the most thermodynamically stable allotrope of carbon under ambient conditions . It has a lustrous appearance and is a fairly good electrical conductor . Graphite has a layered structure . Each layer comprises carbon atoms bonded to three other carbon atoms in a honeycomb lattice arrangement . The layers are stacked together and held loosely by van der Waals forces and delocalized valence electrons . 
 Like a metal , the conductivity of graphite in the direction of its planes decreases as the temperature is raised ; it has the electronic band structure of a semimetal . The allotropes of carbon , including graphite , can accept foreign atoms or compounds into their structures via substitution , intercalation or doping . The resulting materials are referred to as " carbon alloys " . Carbon can form ionic salts , including a hydrogen sulfate , perchlorate , and nitrate ( C + 
 <unk> − <unk> , where X = <unk> , ClO4 ; and C + 
 <unk> – 
 <unk> ) . In organic chemistry , carbon can form complex cations — termed <unk> — in which the positive charge is on the carbon atom ; examples are CH + 
 3 and CH + 
 5 , and their derivatives . 
 Carbon is brittle , and behaves as a semiconductor in a direction perpendicular to its planes . Most of its chemistry is nonmetallic ; it has a relatively high ionization energy and , compared to most metals , a relatively high electronegativity . Carbon can form anions such as C4 − ( methanide ) , C2 – 
 2 ( acetylide ) and C3 – 
 4 ( <unk> or <unk> ) , in compounds with metals of main groups 1 – 3 , and with the lanthanides and actinides . Its oxide CO2 forms carbonic acid H2CO3 . 
 = = = Aluminium = = = 
 Aluminium is ordinarily classified as a metal . It is lustrous , malleable and ductile , and has high electrical and thermal conductivity . Like most metals it has a close @-@ packed crystalline structure , and forms a cation in aqueous solution . 
 It has some properties that are unusual for a metal ; taken together , these are sometimes used as a basis to classify aluminium as a metalloid . Its crystalline structure shows some evidence of directional bonding . Aluminium bonds covalently in most compounds . The oxide Al2O3 is amphoteric , and a conditional glass @-@ former . Aluminium can form anionic <unk> , such behaviour being considered nonmetallic in character . 
 Classifying aluminium as a metalloid has been disputed given its many metallic properties . It is therefore , arguably , an exception to the mnemonic that elements adjacent to the metal – nonmetal dividing line are metalloids . 
 Stott labels aluminium as a weak metal . It has the physical properties of a metal but some of the chemical properties of a nonmetal . Steele notes the paradoxical chemical behaviour of aluminium : " It resembles a weak metal in its amphoteric oxide and in the covalent character of many of its compounds ... Yet it is a highly electropositive metal ... [ with ] a high negative electrode potential " . Moody says that , " aluminium is on the ' diagonal borderland ' between metals and non @-@ metals in the chemical sense . " 
 = = = Selenium = = = 
 Selenium shows borderline metalloid or nonmetal behaviour . 
 Its most stable form , the grey trigonal allotrope , is sometimes called " metallic " selenium because its electrical conductivity is several orders of magnitude greater than that of the red monoclinic form . The metallic character of selenium is further shown by its lustre , and its crystalline structure , which is thought to include weakly " metallic " <unk> bonding . Selenium can be drawn into thin threads when molten and viscous . It shows reluctance to acquire " the high positive oxidation numbers characteristic of nonmetals " . It can form cyclic <unk> ( such as Se2 + 
 8 ) when dissolved in <unk> ( an attribute it shares with sulfur and tellurium ) , and a hydrolysed cationic salt in the form of <unk> ( IV ) perchlorate [ Se ( OH ) 3 ] + · ClO – 
 4 . 
 The nonmetallic character of selenium is shown by its brittleness and the low electrical conductivity ( ~ 10 − 9 to 10 − 12 S • cm − 1 ) of its highly purified form . This is comparable to or less than that of bromine ( 7 @.@ 95 × 10 – 12 S • cm − 1 ) , a nonmetal . Selenium has the electronic band structure of a semiconductor and retains its semiconducting properties in liquid form . It has a relatively high electronegativity ( 2 @.@ 55 revised Pauling scale ) . Its reaction chemistry is mainly that of its nonmetallic anionic forms Se2 − , SeO2 − 
 3 and SeO2 − 
 4 . 
 Selenium is commonly described as a metalloid in the environmental chemistry literature . It moves through the aquatic environment similarly to arsenic and antimony ; its water @-@ soluble salts , in higher concentrations , have a similar toxicological profile to that of arsenic . 
 = = = Polonium = = = 
 Polonium is " distinctly metallic " in some ways . Both of its allotropic forms are metallic conductors . It is soluble in acids , forming the rose @-@ coloured Po2 + cation and displacing hydrogen : Po + 2 H + → Po2 + + H2 . Many polonium salts are known . The oxide <unk> is predominantly basic in nature . Polonium is a reluctant oxidizing agent , unlike its lighter congener oxygen : highly reducing conditions are required for the formation of the Po2 − anion in aqueous solution . 
 Whether polonium is ductile or brittle is unclear . It is predicted to be ductile based on its calculated elastic constants . It has a simple cubic crystalline structure . Such a structure has few slip systems and " leads to very low ductility and hence low fracture resistance " . 
 Polonium shows nonmetallic character in its halides , and by the existence of polonides . The halides have properties generally characteristic of nonmetal halides ( being volatile , easily hydrolyzed , and soluble in organic solvents ) . Many metal polonides , obtained by heating the elements together at 500 – 1 @,@ 000 ° C , and containing the Po2 − anion , are also known . 
 = = = Astatine = = = 
 As a halogen , astatine tends to be classified as a nonmetal . It has some marked metallic properties and is sometimes instead classified as either a metalloid or ( less often ) as a metal . Immediately following its production in 1940 , early investigators considered it a metal . In 1949 it was called the most noble ( difficult to reduce ) nonmetal as well as being a relatively noble ( difficult to oxidize ) metal . In 1950 astatine was described as a halogen and ( therefore ) a reactive nonmetal . In 2013 , on the basis of relativistic modelling , astatine was predicted to be a monatomic metal , with a face @-@ centred cubic crystalline structure . 
 Several authors have commented on the metallic nature of some of the properties of astatine . Since iodine is a semiconductor in the direction of its planes , and since the halogens become more metallic with increasing atomic number , it has been presumed that astatine would be a metal if it could form a condensed phase . Astatine may be metallic in the liquid state on the basis that elements with an enthalpy of vaporization ( ∆ Hvap ) greater than ~ 42 kJ / mol are metallic when liquid . Such elements include boron , silicon , germanium , antimony , selenium and tellurium . Estimated values for ∆ Hvap of diatomic astatine are 50 kJ / mol or higher ; diatomic iodine , with a ∆ Hvap of 41 @.@ 71 , falls just short of the threshold figure . 
 " Like typical metals , it [ astatine ] is precipitated by hydrogen sulfide even from strongly acid solutions and is displaced in a free form from sulfate solutions ; it is deposited on the cathode on electrolysis . " Further indications of a tendency for astatine to behave like a ( heavy ) metal are : " ... the formation of <unk> compounds ... complexes of astatine cations ... complex anions of trivalent astatine ... as well as complexes with a variety of organic solvents " . It has also been argued that astatine demonstrates cationic behaviour , by way of stable At + and AtO + forms , in strongly acidic aqueous solutions . 
 Some of astatine 's reported properties are nonmetallic . It has the narrow liquid range ordinarily associated with nonmetals ( mp 302 ° C ; bp 337 ° C ) . <unk> gives a calculated band gap energy for astatine of 0 @.@ 7 eV ; this is consistent with nonmetals ( in physics ) having separated valence and conduction bands and thereby being either semiconductors or insulators . The chemistry of astatine in aqueous solution is mainly characterised by the formation of various anionic species . Most of its known compounds resemble those of iodine , which is a halogen and a nonmetal . Such compounds include astatides ( <unk> ) , <unk> ( <unk> ) , and monovalent interhalogen compounds . 
 Restrepo et al. reported that astatine appeared to be more polonium @-@ like than halogen @-@ like . They did so on the basis of detailed comparative studies of the known and interpolated properties of 72 elements . 
 = = Related concepts = = 
 = = = Near metalloids = = = 
 In the periodic table , some of the elements adjacent to the commonly recognised metalloids , although usually classified as either metals or nonmetals , are occasionally referred to as near @-@ metalloids or noted for their <unk> character . To the left of the metal – nonmetal dividing line , such elements include gallium , tin and bismuth . They show unusual packing structures , marked covalent chemistry ( molecular or polymeric ) , and <unk> . To the right of the dividing line are carbon , phosphorus , selenium and iodine . They exhibit metallic lustre , semiconducting properties and bonding or valence bands with delocalized character . This applies to their most thermodynamically stable forms under ambient conditions : carbon as graphite ; phosphorus as black phosphorus ; and selenium as grey selenium . 
 = = = Allotropes = = = 
 Different crystalline forms of an element are called allotropes . Some allotropes , particularly those of elements located ( in periodic table terms ) alongside or near the notional dividing line between metals and nonmetals , exhibit more pronounced metallic , <unk> or nonmetallic behaviour than others . The existence of such allotropes can complicate the classification of the elements involved . 
 Tin , for example , has two allotropes : tetragonal " white " β @-@ tin and cubic " grey " α @-@ tin . White tin is a very shiny , ductile and malleable metal . It is the stable form at or above room temperature and has an electrical conductivity of 9 @.@ 17 × 104 S · cm − 1 ( ~ 1 / 6th that of copper ) . Grey tin usually has the appearance of a grey micro @-@ crystalline powder , and can also be prepared in brittle semi @-@ lustrous crystalline or polycrystalline forms . It is the stable form below 13 @.@ 2 ° C and has an electrical conductivity of between ( 2 – 5 ) × 102 S · cm − 1 ( ~ 1 / 250th that of white tin ) . Grey tin has the same crystalline structure as that of diamond . It behaves as a semiconductor ( with a band gap of 0 @.@ 08 eV ) , but has the electronic band structure of a semimetal . It has been referred to as either a very poor metal , a metalloid , a nonmetal or a near metalloid . 
 The diamond allotrope of carbon is clearly nonmetallic , being translucent and having a low electrical conductivity of 10 − 14 to 10 − 16 S · cm − 1 . Graphite has an electrical conductivity of 3 × 104 S · cm − 1 , a figure more characteristic of a metal . Phosphorus , sulfur , arsenic , selenium , antimony and bismuth also have less stable allotropes that display different behaviours . 
 = = Abundance , extraction and cost = = 
 = = = Abundance = = = 
 The table gives crustal abundances of the elements commonly to rarely recognised as metalloids . Some other elements are included for comparison : oxygen and xenon ( the most and least abundant elements with stable isotopes ) ; iron and the coinage metals copper , silver and gold ; and rhenium , the least abundant stable metal ( aluminium is normally the most abundant metal ) . Various abundance estimates have been published ; these often disagree to some extent . 
 = = = Extraction = = = 
 The recognised metalloids can be obtained by chemical reduction of either their oxides or their sulfides . Simpler or more complex extraction methods may be employed depending on the starting form and economic factors . Boron is routinely obtained by reducing the trioxide with magnesium : B2O3 + 3 Mg → 2 B + <unk> ; after secondary processing the resulting brown powder has a purity of up to 97 % . Boron of higher purity ( > 99 % ) is prepared by heating volatile boron compounds , such as <unk> or BBr3 , either in a hydrogen atmosphere ( 2 <unk> + 3 H2 → 2 B + 6 HX ) or to the point of thermal decomposition . Silicon and germanium are obtained from their oxides by heating the oxide with carbon or hydrogen : SiO2 + C → Si + CO2 ; GeO2 + 2 H2 → Ge + 2 H2O . Arsenic is isolated from its pyrite ( <unk> ) or <unk> pyrite ( <unk> ) by heating ; alternatively , it can be obtained from its oxide by reduction with carbon : 2 As2O3 + 3 C → 2 As + 3 CO2 . Antimony is derived from its sulfide by reduction with iron : Sb2S3 → 2 Sb + 3 FeS . Tellurium is prepared from its oxide by dissolving it in aqueous NaOH , yielding tellurite , then by electrolytic reduction : TeO2 + 2 NaOH → Na2TeO3 + H2O ; Na2TeO3 + H2O → Te + 2 NaOH + O2 . Another option is reduction of the oxide by roasting with carbon : TeO2 + C → Te + CO2 . 
 Production methods for the elements less frequently recognised as metalloids involve natural processing , electrolytic or chemical reduction , or irradiation . Carbon ( as graphite ) occurs naturally and is extracted by crushing the parent rock and floating the lighter graphite to the surface . Aluminium is extracted by dissolving its oxide Al2O3 in molten cryolite <unk> and then by high temperature electrolytic reduction . Selenium is produced by roasting its coinage metal selenides <unk> ( X = Cu , Ag , Au ) with soda ash to give the selenite : <unk> + O2 + Na2CO3 → <unk> + 2 X + CO2 ; the selenide is neutralized by sulfuric acid H2SO4 to give selenous acid H2SeO3 ; this is reduced by bubbling with SO2 to yield elemental selenium . Polonium and astatine are produced in minute quantities by irradiating bismuth . 
 = = = Cost = = = 
 The recognised metalloids and their closer neighbours mostly cost less than silver ; only polonium and astatine are more expensive than gold . As of 5 April 2014 , prices for small samples ( up to 100 g ) of silicon , antimony and tellurium , and graphite , aluminium and selenium , average around one third the cost of silver ( US $ 1 @.@ 5 per gram or about $ 45 an ounce ) . Boron , germanium and arsenic samples average about three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half times the cost of silver . Polonium is available for about $ 100 per microgram , which is $ 100 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 a gram . <unk> and <unk> estimate a similar cost for producing astatine . Prices for the applicable elements traded as commodities tend to range from two to three times cheaper than the sample price ( Ge ) , to nearly three thousand times cheaper ( As ) . 
 = Paranoid Android = 
 " Paranoid Android " is a song by the English alternative rock band Radiohead from on their third album OK Computer ( 1997 ) . The darkly humourous lyrics were written primarily by singer Thom Yorke following an unpleasant experience in a Los Angeles bar . The song is more than six minutes long and contains four distinct sections . " Paranoid Android " takes its name from Marvin the Paranoid Android of Douglas Adams ' The Hitchhiker 's Guide to the Galaxy series . 
 Released as the lead single from OK Computer , " Paranoid Android " charted at number three on the UK Singles Chart . It was well received by music critics . It track has appeared regularly on lists of the best songs of all time , including Rolling Stone 's 500 Greatest Songs of All Time . Its animated music video , directed by Magnus Carlsson , was placed on heavy rotation on MTV , although the network censored portions containing nudity in the US . At the 1998 Brit Awards , the song was nominated for Best British Single . Since its release , the track has been covered by numerous artists working in a variety of musical genres . The song was included in the 2008 Radiohead : The Best Of collection . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 Radiohead fused together parts from three different songs , each written by a different member of the band . The idea to combine the pieces into a single track was inspired in part by the structure of The Beatles ' " Happiness Is a Warm Gun " . 
 " Basically an excuse to weld loads of half @-@ finished songs together , Abbey Road @-@ style . It 's Radiohead , pissed and having a party . I wasn 't there when it was all stuck together – I 'd been sent to sleep it off . What 's it all about ? The fall of the Roman Empire . " – Thom Yorke 
 Colin Greenwood admitted that the band , in attempting it to make the disparate elements work together , " felt like irresponsible schoolboys who were doing this ... naughty thing , ' cause nobody does a six @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ minute song with all these changes . It 's ridiculous " . The song was at first intended to be humorous , and took its title from Marvin the Paranoid Android in Douglas Adams ' The Hitchhiker 's Guide to the Galaxy series of books . Yorke said the title " was chosen as a joke . It was like , ' Oh , I 'm so depressed . ' And I just thought , that 's great . That 's how people would like me to be . And that was the end of writing about anything personal in the song . The rest of the song is not personal at all . " In an early interview , Colin Greenwood described it " just a joke , a laugh , getting wasted together over a couple of evenings and putting some different pieces together " . The band used Queen 's " Bohemian Rhapsody " and the work of the Pixies as reference points while writing ; yet Ed O 'Brien denies they wrote " a ' Bohemian Rhapsody ' for the nineties " , and Jonny Greenwood considers it too tense and simple to rival Queen 's song . 
 " Paranoid Android " was recorded in actress Jane Seymour 's 15th century mansion near the village of St Catherine , near Bath , Somerset . The first edit was over 14 minutes long and included a long organ interlude performed by Jonny Greenwood . Radiohead played this extended version during a tour with Alanis Morissette in September 1996 . " When we started playing it live , it was completely hilarious , " recalled O 'Brien . " There was a rave down section and a Hammond organ outro , and we 'd be pissing ourselves while we played . We 'd bring out the glockenspiel and it would be really , really funny . " Before the song 's first live performance , Yorke told audiences that " [ i ] f you can have sex to this one , you 're fucking weird . " He also sarcastically referred to the version of the song played during the tour as " a Pink Floyd cover " . 
 Inspired by the editing of The Beatles ' Magical Mystery Tour ( described by Colin Greenwood as " brutal " ) , Radiohead shortened the song to a final six and a half minutes , a process that led to Jonny Greenwood 's organ section being replaced by a substantially shorter guitar fade out . However , it took the band a year and a half to learn how to play the final version in live performance . 
 = = Composition and lyrics = = 
 " Paranoid Android " is a song described as alternative rock , art rock and progressive rock . It has four distinct sections , each played in standard tuning , and a 4 / 4 time signature , although several three @-@ bar segments in the second section are played in 7 / 8 timing . The opening segment is played in the key of C minor with a tempo of 84 beats per minute ( BPM ) , and begins with a mid @-@ tempo acoustic guitar backed by shaken percussion before layered with electric guitar and Yorke 's vocals . The melody of the opening vocal lines span an octave and a third . The second section is written in the key of A minor and begins about two minutes into the song . Although the second section retains the tempo of the first , it differs rhythmically . Ending the second section is a distorted guitar solo played by Jonny Greenwood , which lasts from 2 : 43 to 3 : 33 . The third section was written by Jonny Greenwood , and reduces the tempo to 63 BPM . The harmonies form a looped chord progression resembling a Baroque passacaglia , with the tonality split between C minor and D minor . This section uses multi @-@ tracked , choral vocal arrangement and according to Dai Griffiths , a " chord sequence [ that ordinarily ] would sound seedy , rather like something by the band Portishead " . 
 The fourth and final section , which begins at 5 : 35 , is a brief instrumental reprise of the second movement that serves as a coda . After a second solo , a brief guitar riff is introduced , which Jonny Greenwood says " was something I had floating around for a while and the song needed a certain burn . It happened to be the right key and the right speed and it fit right in . " The song ends , as does the second section , with a short chromatically descending guitar motif . 
 " Paranoid Android " is categorised by three distinct moods written in what Yorke referred to as three different states of mind . The song 's lyrics tie in with a number of themes common in OK Computer , including insanity , violence , slogans , and political objection to capitalism . Yorke 's lyrics were based on an unpleasant experience at a Los Angeles bar during which he was surrounded by strangers high on cocaine . In particular , Yorke was frightened by a woman who became violent after someone spilled a drink on her . Yorke characterised the woman as " inhuman " , and said " There was a look in this woman 's eyes that I 'd never seen before anywhere . ... Couldn 't sleep that night because of it . " The woman inspired the line " kicking squealing Gucci little piggy " in the song 's second section . Yorke , referring to the line " With your opinions , which are of no consequence at all " , said that " Again , that 's just a joke . It 's actually the other way around – it 's actually my opinion that is of no consequence at all . " 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 While Colin Greenwood said the song was " hardly the radio @-@ friendly , breakthrough , buzz bin unit shifter [ radio stations ] have been expecting , " Capitol supported the band 's choice for the song as a lead single . Radiohead premiered " Paranoid Android " on the BBC Radio 1 programme The Evening Session in April 1997 , nearly a month before its release as a single . Melody Maker revealed that a Radio 1 producer had to " have a bit of a lie down " after first hearing the song . It was released as a single on 26 May 1997 , chosen by the band to prepare listeners for the musical direction of its parent album . Despite an initial lack of radio play , " Paranoid Android " charted at number three on the UK Singles Chart , giving Radiohead their highest singles chart position . As the song 's popularity grew , Radio 1 played it up to 12 times a day . Yorke described the song 's appearance on Radio 1 as one of his proudest moments of the OK Computer era . The track also spent two weeks on Australia 's ARIA Singles Chart , where it charted at number 29 . 
 " Paranoid Android " was favourably reviewed by critics . NME chose it as its " Single of the Week " , and journalist Simon Williams described how the song " [ s ] <unk> out like a plump man on a small sofa , featuring all manner of crypto @-@ flamenco <unk> , medieval wailings , furiously wrenched guitars and <unk> over @-@ ambitious ideas . <unk> one of the most unorthodox ' axe ' solos known to mankind . " The style of the song was compared to that of Queen by Rolling Stone 's Mark Kemp , while other critics , including David Browne of Entertainment Weekly , Jon Lusk of the BBC and Simon Williams of NME wrote about its similarity to Queen 's " Bohemian Rhapsody " . Williams described the song as being " not unlike ' Bohemian Rhapsody ' being played backwards by a bunch of Vietnam vets high on Kings Cross @-@ quality crack " . Kemp praised the song 's mix of acoustic and electronic instrumentation , which he believed were melded to produce " complex tempo changes , touches of dissonance , ancient choral music and a King Crimson @-@ like melodic structure " . Meanwhile Browne wrote of " celestial call @-@ and @-@ response vocal passages , dynamically varied sections , and Thom Yorke 's high @-@ voiced bleat " . The A.V. Club called the song unforgettable and an " amazing epic single " . 
 Several reviewers noted the record 's ambition . Slant Magazine described the song 's lyrics as a " multipart anti @-@ yuppie anthem whose ambition is anything but ugly " , and Andy Gill wrote in The Independent that " Paranoid Android " could be the most ambitious single since Richard Harris ' " MacArthur Park " . Craig McLean of The Sydney Morning Herald described " Paranoid Android " as " a titanic guitar opera in three movements and 6 [ and a half ] minutes " . PopMatters ' Evan Sawdey called the song OK Computer 's " sweeping , multi @-@ tiered centerpiece " , Peter and Jonathan Buckley wrote in The Rough Guide to Rock that it was the album 's " breathtaking high point " . Allmusic 's Stephen Thomas Erlewine called " Paranoid Android " " complex , multi @-@ segmented ... tight , melodic , and muscular " , and said it displayed Radiohead at their most adventurous . Browne admitted that , partially because of " Paranoid Android " , OK Computer was significantly more expansive than The Bends . Rolling Stone placed the song at number 256 on its 500 Greatest Songs of All Time list , and Pitchfork Media included the song at number 4 on their Top 200 Tracks of the 90s . 
 = = Music video = = 
 Remarking on the band 's goals for the " Paranoid Android " music video , Yorke said that , " When it came time to make the video for that song , we had lots of people saying , ' Yeah , great , we can have another video like " Street Spirit " , all moody and black and dark . Well , no . We had really good fun doing this song , so the video should make you laugh . I mean , it should be sick , too . " Magnus Carlsson , Swedish creator of the animated series Robin , was commissioned by the band to make the video . Radiohead were fans of the show , and connected with the Robin character ; Jonny Greenwood described him as " affectionate " and " vulnerable " , while Yorke admitted that he found Robin " quite the vulnerable character , but he 's also violently cynical and quite tough and would always get up again . " At first Carlsson sought to work on a video for " No Surprises " and was uncertain as to how to approach " Paranoid Android " . Eventually he devised a scenario to the band 's liking after he locked himself in his office for over 12 hours to stare out of the window , while listening to the song on repeat while jotting down visual ideas . As Carlsson did not have access to the lyrics at the time , the concept for the video was based entirely on the song 's sound . According to Yorke , the band " deliberately didn 't send Magnus the lyrics " because they " didn 't want [ the video ] to be too literal . " 
 Like Robin , the " Paranoid Android " video is drawn in a simplistic style that emphasises bold colours and clear , strong lines . It features Robin and his friend Benjamin venturing into the world , running into miserable EU representatives , bullying pub patrons , a prostitute , two kissing <unk> , a drug addict , deranged businessmen , mermaids and an angel who plays table tennis with Robin . The band appears in cameo at a bar , where they are shown drinking while watching a man with a head coming out of his belly dancing on their table . However , in this cameo only the versions of Yorke and Jonny Greenwood resemble themselves ; O 'Brien said " If you freeze @-@ frame it on the video , the guy with the five strands of hair slicked back , that 's Colin . It looks nothing like him . " Colin Greenwood said " there was no way that we could appear in it to perform in it because that would be so Spinal Tap " and that having animations that did not resemble the band members allowed the video to be " twisted and colorful which is how the song is anyway " . Yorke was ultimately pleased with the video , saying that it " is really about the violence around [ Robin ] , which is exactly like the song . Not the same specific violence as in the lyrics , but everything going on around him is deeply troubling and violent , but he 's just drinking himself into oblivion . He 's there , but he 's not there . That 's why it works . And that 's why it does my head in every time I see it . " 
 While the single did not receive significant radio play in the US , MTV placed its video on high rotation . The version most often shown was edited to remove the mermaids ' bare breasts . Greenwood said , " we would 've understood if they had a problem with some guy chopping his arms and legs off , but I mean , a woman 's breasts ! And mermaids as well ! It 's fucked up . " MTV Europe played the video uncut for two weeks because the channel 's official censor was ill and unable to work ; after that time the channel ran the cut version of the video . A later US version of the video saw the mermaids wear bathing suits , while the uncut version was later compiled along with other Radiohead videos on the DVD and home video release 7 Television Commercials and The Best Of DVD . 
 Evan Sawdey of PopMatters described the video as " bizarre @-@ yet @-@ fitting " , and Melody Maker said it represented a stunning " psycho @-@ cartoon " . Adrian Glover of Circus called the animation incredible and the video " really cool " . MTV vice president of music Lewis Largent told Spin " You can watch ' Paranoid Android ' a hundred times and not figure it all out . " 
 = = Packaging = = 
 Stanley Donwood worked with Yorke to design the artwork for most of the " Paranoid Android " releases , although both the images and design were ultimately credited to " dumb computers " . The cover illustration accompanying the single depicts a hand @-@ drawn dome contains the phrase " God loves his children , yeah ! " , the last line of the song , written above on the uppermost plane . Images from the OK Computer artwork reappear , including a pig and two human figures shaking hands . Writer Tim Footman suggested that these images are borrowed from Pink Floyd , respectively corresponding to the Pink Floyd pigs and Wish You Were Here cover . The cover of the CD2 single is tinted differently from the CD1 single . The UK vinyl release did not include the dome artwork found on the CD singles , but feature images taken from the OK Computer release across the top banner area . 
 The two versions of the single have different messages on the reverse . Both the CD1 and Japanese releases state : 
 To kill a demon made of wet sawdust . This sort of demon is almost impossible to kill the only way to do it is to cover its face with wet bread and karate chop its head off otherwise you are in trouble and so is the neighbourhood . Wet sawdust demons like to terrorise . N.B. pressing its face into wet bread that is on the ground works best though you can get a result just by throwing the bread at its face . 
 Written on the back of the CD2 single is : 
 A cathedral of white in a suburban shanty town two up two down houses with just the asbestos and the skeletons left . 
 Each release of " Paranoid Android " included one or more B @-@ sides . " <unk> ( Parts 1 & 2 ) " , included on the CD1 , 7 @-@ inch vinyl , and Japanese releases of the single , were a multi @-@ section piece formatted much like " Paranoid Android " itself . The first part of the song consists of Yorke 's vocals over acoustic guitar ; the second part contains distorted guitar and organ and uses complex time signature changes . " Pearly * " , featured on the CD1 and Japanese releases of the single , was described by Yorke as a " dirty song for people who use sex for dirty things " . " A Reminder " , which appears on the CD2 release , features fuzzed guitar , thumping drums , and electric piano . According to Yorke , this song was inspired by " this idea of someone writing a song , sending it to someone , and saying : ' If I ever lose it , you just pick up the phone and play this song back to remind me . ' " " Melatonin " , also on the CD2 release , is a synthesiser @-@ based song with lyrics similar to that of a lullaby , but with an undercurrent of menace in lines like " Death to all who stand in your way " . The OK Computer track " Let Down " is also included on the Japanese single . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 YouTube cover artist Mike Massé recorded a live acoustic version of " Paranoid Android " with Jeff Hall on 9 / 8 / 08 at the Pie Pizzeria in Salt Lake City , Utah . 
 Jazz pianist Brad Mehldau recorded a nine @-@ minute cover of " Paranoid Android " on his album Largo ( 2002 ) , featuring percussionists Jim Keltner and Matt Chamberlain , as well as a horn section . Additionally , Mehldau performed a 19 @-@ minute version of the song on Live in Tokyo ( 2004 ) . 
 The University of Massachusetts Amherst Minuteman Marching Band covered the song live in a version featuring xylophones , chimes , snare drums , cymbals , bass drum and timpani . 
 Numerous Radiohead tribute albums include a version of " Paranoid Android " , including <unk> Baby ! Lullaby <unk> of Radiohead and Plastic Mutations : The Electronic Tribute to Radiohead . 
 The reggae group Easy Star All @-@ Stars covered OK Computer in its entirety for <unk> ( 2006 ) . Producer Michael G noted that " Paranoid Android " was particularly difficult to arrange for reggae , saying " There are songs like ' Paranoid Android ' , which flips between 4 / 4 time and 7 / 8 time about 13 times , and I also had to think about other ways to reinterpret those parts with horns , melodica , organ ... it was a great challenge . " 
 Sia Furler covered the song for the neo soul tribute Exit Music : Songs with Radio Heads ( 2006 ) , and this version later appeared on The O.C. episode " The <unk> @-@ huh ? " . 
 " Paranoid Android " has also been covered by classical musicians . Christopher O 'Riley arranged " Paranoid Android " for a single piano and performed the song on Hold Me to This ( 2005 ) . 
 Los Angeles string quartet The Section recorded the song for <unk> Out on OK Computer : The String Quartet Tribute to Radiohead ( 2001 ) ; half of this quartet went on to form the Section Quartet , who performed " Paranoid Android " and the rest of OK Computer during two concerts in October 2006 . 
 Weezer covered " Paranoid Android " in both a live studio version released as a YouTube video and in concerts during their 2011 summer tour . Pitchfork 's Tom Breihan called the Weezer cover " a fucking weird experience " , and Jenny Eliscu of Rolling Stone criticised the song as " mainly boring " for not venturing far enough from Weezer 's traditional sound . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 All songs written by Thom Yorke , Jonny Greenwood , Ed O 'Brien , Colin Greenwood , and Phil Selway . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Thom Yorke - vocals , acoustic guitar , laptop 
 Jonny Greenwood - electric guitar , electric piano , synthesizers , mellotron 
 Ed O 'Brien - electric guitar , effects , <unk> , backing vocals 
 Colin Greenwood - bass guitar , claves 
 Phil Selway - drums and percussion 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Zoo TV Tour = 
 The Zoo TV Tour ( also written as <unk> , <unk> TV or <unk> ) was a worldwide concert tour by rock band U2 . Staged in support of their 1991 album Achtung Baby , the tour visited arenas and stadiums from 1992 to 1993 . To mirror the new musical direction that the group took with Achtung Baby , the tour was intended to deviate from their past and confound expectations of the band . In contrast to U2 's austere stage setups from previous tours , the Zoo TV Tour was an elaborately staged multimedia event . It satirised television and media oversaturation by attempting to instill " sensory overload " in its audience . To escape their reputation for being overly serious , U2 embraced a more lighthearted and self @-@ deprecating image on tour . Zoo TV and Achtung Baby were central to the group 's 1990s reinvention . 
 The tour 's concept was inspired by disparate television programming , the desensitising effect of mass media , and " morning zoo " radio shows . The stage featured dozens of large video screens that showed visual effects , video clips , and flashing text phrases . Live satellite link @-@ ups , channel surfing , prank calls , and video confessionals were incorporated into the shows . Whereas U2 were known for their earnest live act in the 1980s , the group 's Zoo TV performances were intentionally ironic and theatrical ; on stage , Bono portrayed several characters he conceived , including " The Fly " , " Mirror Ball Man " , and " MacPhisto " . In contrast to other U2 tours , each of the Zoo TV shows opened with six to eight consecutive new songs before older material was played . 
 Comprising five legs and 157 shows , the tour began in Lakeland , Florida , on 29 February 1992 and finished in Tokyo , Japan , on 10 December 1993 . The first four legs alternated between North America and Europe , before the final leg visited Australasia and Japan . After two arena legs , the show 's production was expanded for stadiums for the final three legs , which were branded " Outside Broadcast " , " Zooropa " , and " Zoomerang / New <unk> " , respectively . Although the tour provoked a range of reactions from music critics , it was generally well received . Along with being the highest @-@ grossing North American tour of 1992 , Zoo TV sold around 5 @.@ 3 million tickets over its five legs . The band 's 1993 album Zooropa , which expanded on Zoo TV 's mass media themes , was recorded during a break in the tour , and its songs were played in 1993 . The tour was depicted in the Grammy Award – winning 1994 concert film Zoo TV : Live from Sydney . Critics regard the Zoo TV Tour as one of rock 's most memorable tours — in 2002 , Q 's Tom Doyle called it " the most spectacular rock tour staged by any band " . 
 = = Background = = 
 U2 's 1987 album The Joshua Tree and the supporting Joshua Tree Tour brought them to a new level of commercial and critical success , particularly in the United States . Like their previous tours , the Joshua Tree Tour was a minimalistic , austere production , and they used this outlet for addressing political and social concerns . As a result , the band earned a reputation for being earnest and serious , an image that became a target for derision after their much @-@ maligned 1988 motion picture and companion album Rattle and Hum , which documented their exploration of American roots music . The project was criticised as being " pretentious " , and " misguided and bombastic " , and U2 were accused of being grandiose and self @-@ righteous . Their 1989 Lovetown Tour did not visit the United States , and at the end of the tour , lead vocalist Bono announced on @-@ stage that it was " the end of something for U2 " and that " we have to go away and ... just dream it all up again " , foreshadowing changes for the group . 
 = = Conception = = 
 U2 's first ideas for Zoo TV emerged during the Lovetown Tour in 1989 , when various aspects of radio programming intrigued the group , particularly the large radio audience their Dublin concerts reached . The wild antics of " morning zoo " radio programmes inspired the band to consider taking a pirate radio station on tour . They were also interested in using video as a way of making themselves less accessible to their audiences . The band developed these ideas in late 1990 while recording Achtung Baby in Berlin at Hansa Studios . While in Berlin , they watched television coverage of the Gulf War on Sky News , which was the only English programming available . When they became tired of hearing about the conflict , they tuned into local programming to see " bad German soap operas " and automobile advertisements . The band believed that cable television had blurred the lines between news , entertainment , and home shopping over the previous decade , and they wanted to represent this on their next tour . 
 The juxtaposition of such disparate programming inspired U2 and Achtung Baby co @-@ producer Brian Eno to conceive an " audio @-@ visual show " that would display a rapidly changing mix of live and pre @-@ recorded video on monitors . The idea was intended to mock the desensitising effect of mass media . Eno , who was credited in the tour programme for the " Video Staging Concept " , explained his vision for the tour : " the idea to make a stage set with a lot of different video sources was mine , to make a chaos of uncoordinated material happening together ... The idea of getting away from video being a way of helping people to see the band more easily ... this is video as a way of obscuring them , losing them sometimes in just a network of material . " 
 While on a break from recording , the band invited production designer Willie Williams to join them in Tenerife in February 1991 . Williams had recently worked on David Bowie 's Sound + Vision Tour , which used film projection and video content , and he was keen to " take rock show video to a level as yet <unk> of " . The band played Williams some of their new music — inspired by alternative rock , industrial music , and electronic dance music — and they told him about the " Zoo TV " phrase that Bono liked . Williams also learned about the band 's affection for the Trabant , an East German automobile that derisively became a symbol for the fall of Communism . Williams thought their fondness for the car was " deeply , deeply bizarre " , but nonetheless , he incorporated it into his ideas for the tour . In May , he brainstormed the idea to construct a lighting system using Trabants by hanging them from the ceiling and hollowing them to carry spotlights . 
 On 14 June 1991 , the first tour production meeting was held , with Williams , the band , manager Paul McGuinness , artist Catherine Owens , and production managers Steve Iredale and Jake Kennedy in attendance . Williams presented his ideas , which included the Trabant lighting system and the placement of video monitors all over the stage ; both notions were well received . Eno 's original idea was to have the video screens on wheels and constantly in motion , although this was impractical . Williams and the group proposed many ideas that did not make it to the final stage design . One such proposal , dubbed " Motorway Madness " , would have placed billboards advertising real products across the stage , similar to their placement beside highways . The idea was intended to be ironic , but was ultimately scrapped out of fear that the band would be accused of selling out . Another proposed idea building a giant doll of an " <unk> baby " , complete with an inflatable penis that would spray on the audience , but it was deemed too expensive and was abandoned . 
 By August , a prototype of a single Trabant for the lighting system was completed , with the innards gutted and retrofitted with lighting equipment , and a paint job on the exterior . Williams spent most of the second half of 1991 designing the stage . Owens was insistent that her ideas be given priority , as she thought that men had been making all of U2 's creative decisions and were using male @-@ centred designs . With bassist Adam Clayton 's support , she recruited visual artists from Europe and the United States to arrange images for use on the display screens . These people included video artist Mark Pellington , photo / conceptual artist David Wojnarowicz , and satirical group Emergency Broadcast Network , who digitally manipulate sampled image and sound . Pellington envisaged a collection of text phrases into the visual displays , inspired by his working with artist Jenny Holzer . The idea was first put into practice in the video for Achtung Baby 's lead single , " The Fly " . Bono devised and collected numerous phrases during development of the album and the tour . Additional pre @-@ recorded video content was created by Eno , Williams , Kevin Godley , Carol Dodds , and Philip Owens . 
 On 13 November , U2 settled on the " Zoo TV Tour " name and the plans to place video screens across the stage and build a lighting system out of Trabants . McGuinness led a trip to East Germany to buy Trabants from a recently closed factory in Chemnitz , and in January 1992 , Catherine Owens began to paint the cars . As she described , " The basic idea was that the imagery on the cars should have nothing to do with the car itself . " One such design was the " fertility car " , which sported blown @-@ up newspaper personal ads and a drawing of a woman giving birth while holding string tied to her husband 's testicles . Williams and Chilean artist Rene Castro also provided artwork on the cars . 
 = = Stage design and show production = = 
 The Zoo TV stages were designed by Willie Williams , U2 's stage designer since the War Tour of 1982 – 1983 . In place of U2 's austere and minimalist productions of the 1980s , the Zoo TV stage was a complex setup , designed to instill " sensory overload " in its audience . The set 's giant video screens showed not only close @-@ ups of the band members performing , but also pre @-@ recorded video , live television transmissions ( intercepted by a satellite dish the group brought on tour ) , and text phrases . Electronic , tabloid @-@ style headlines ran on scrawls at the ends of the stage . The band 's embracing of such technology was meant as a radical departure in form , and as a commentary on the pervasive nature of technology . This led many critics to describe the show as " ironic " . 
 Several versions of the stage were used during the tour . The first two legs of 1992 were indoors and used the smallest of the sets , which included four <unk> ( Philips @-@ branded giant television screens ) ; six painted Trabants suspended above the stage ; 36 television monitors ; and a B @-@ stage , a small remote platform connected to the main stage by a ramp . A seventh Trabant by the B @-@ stage doubled as a DJ booth and a mirror ball . 
 To redesign the set for the 1992 North American stadium leg — dubbed " Outside Broadcast " — Williams collaborated with stage designers Mark Fisher and Jonathan Park , both of whom had worked on The Rolling Stones ' Steel Wheels Tour stage set . The set was expanded to include a 248 @-@ by @-@ 80 @-@ foot ( 76 by 24 m ) stage , and the <unk> were supplemented by four larger mega @-@ video screens . Williams faced difficulties in designing the outdoor lighting system , as the stage did not have a roof . He settled on using the venues ' house spotlights and strategically placed lights in the structure behind the band . The spires of the stage , intended to resemble transmission towers , were tall enough that the Federal Aviation Administration required them to have blinking warning lights . The stage 's appearance was compared to the techno @-@ future cityscapes from Blade Runner and the works of cyberpunk writer William Gibson . The B @-@ stage was located at the end of a 150 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 46 m ) catwalk . The larger set used 176 speaker enclosures , 312 18 @-@ inch ( 46 cm ) subwoofers , 592 10 @-@ inch ( 25 cm ) mid @-@ range speakers , 18 projectors , 26 on @-@ stage microphones , two <unk> and two Video @-@ 8 handheld video cameras , and 11 Trabants suspended by cranes over the stage . The outdoor stage used for the 1993 legs of the tour was smaller due to budget concerns , and it discarded the Trabants hung from cranes , instead featuring three cars hanging behind the drum kit . All of the projection screens were replaced with " video cubes " , as the projectors were not bright enough for the European summer nights , when daylight remained later into the evening . 
 To accommodate the video production , the equivalent of a television studio control room — costing US $ 3 @.@ 5 million — was built for the tour . Beneath the stage , Dodds , the video director , operated a system custom @-@ built by Philips called CD @-@ i . It used five broadcast camera systems , 12 Laser Disc players , and a satellite dish , and it required 12 directors , 19 video crew members , and two separate mix stations to operate . Despite the production 's complexity , the group decided that flexibility in the shows ' length and content was a priority . Guitarist The Edge said , " That was one of the more important decisions we made early on , that we wouldn 't sacrifice flexibility , so we designed a system that is both extremely complicated and high @-@ tech but also incredibly simple and hands @-@ on , controlled by human beings ... in that sense , it 's still a live performance . " This flexibility allowed for improvisations and deviations from the planned programme . Eno recommended that U2 film its own video tapes so that they could be edited and looped into the video displays more easily , instead of relying entirely on pre @-@ sequenced video . Eno explained , " their show depends on some kind of response to what 's happening at the moment in that place . So if it turns out they want to do a song for five minutes longer , they can actually loop through the material again so that you 're not suddenly stuck with black screens halfway through the fifth verse . " The band shot new video for the displays over the course of the tour . 
 The 180 @-@ person crew travelled in 12 buses and a chartered jet known as the Zoo Plane . For the American stadium shows , 52 trucks were required to transport 1 @,@ 200 short tons ( 1 @,@ 089 tonnes ) of equipment , 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) of cabling , 12 forklifts , and a 40 @-@ short @-@ ton ( 36 t ) crane ; the million @-@ dollar stage was constructed in a 40 @-@ hour process with the help of 200 local labourers . The sound system used over one million watts and weighed 30 short tons ( 27 t ) . 
 = = Planning , itinerary , and ticketing = = 
 Rehearsals for the tour began in December 1991 at The Factory in Dublin . During this time , Eno consulted U2 on the visual aspects of the show . The band found it challenging to recreate all the sounds from the new album . They considered using additional musicians , but their sentimental attachment to a four @-@ piece prevailed . They left Dublin on 19 February 1992 to set up at Lakeland Civic Center in Lakeland , Florida for rehearsals before the opening show at the venue on 29 February . 
 Unlike many of the group 's previous tours , which began ahead of or coincident with the release of a new album , Zoo TV started four months after Achtung Baby was released , giving fans more time to familiarise themselves with the new songs . By opening night , the album had already sold three million copies in the US and seven million worldwide . The first two legs of the 1992 tour were indoor arena shows , comprising 32 concerts in North America from February to April and 25 in Europe from May to June . While the band had toured North America every year between 1980 and 1987 , they were absent from the North American tour circuit for over four years before Zoo TV . The US concert business was in a slump at the time , and the routing of the first two legs generally allowed only one show per city . This was intended to announce the band 's return to major cities , to gauge demand for ticket sales , and to re @-@ introduce the notion of a " hot ticket " to concertgoers . Tickets for the opening show in Florida sold out over the phone in four minutes , demand exceeding supply by a factor of 10 to 1 . To combat ticket scalping , the band avoided selling tickets in box offices as much as possible , preferring to sell over the telephone instead . Several cities ' telephone systems were overwhelmed when Zoo TV tickets went on sale ; Los Angeles telephone company Pacific Bell reported 54 million calls in a four @-@ hour period , while Boston 's telephone system was temporarily shut down . 
 In Europe , ticketing details were kept secret until radio advertisements announced that tickets had gone on sale at box offices . In many cases , tickets were limited to two @-@ per @-@ person to deter scalping . Due to the production costs and relatively small arena crowds , the European arena leg lost money . McGuinness had planned larger outdoor concerts in Berlin , Turin , Poland , and Vienna to help the tour break even , but only the Vienna concert occurred . 
 Two stadium legs were tentatively planned and dependent on the success of the arena tour : the North American " Outside Broadcast " leg from August – November 1992 , and the European " Zooropa " leg from May – August 1993 . While their playing stadiums was motivated by pragmatic concerns , U2 saw it as an artistic challenge as well , imagining what Salvador Dalí or Andy Warhol would do with such spaces . Rehearsals for " Outside Broadcast " began in Hersheypark Stadium in Hershey , Pennsylvania in early August 1992 ; a public rehearsal show was held on 7 August . Technical problems and pacing issues forced refinement to the show . Six days before the official leg @-@ opening Giants Stadium show , the group delayed the concert by a day , due to the difficulty of assembling the large outdoor production and the destruction of the largest screen in a windstorm . By the time " Outside Broadcast " began , Achtung Baby had sold four million copies in the US . Tickets for the " Zooropa " leg went on sale in November 1992 . The leg , which began in May 1993 , was the band 's first full stadium tour of Europe and marked the first time they had visited certain areas . Scheduling for the " Zoomerang " stadium leg in the Pacific from November – December 1993 afforded the band more off @-@ days between shows than previous legs , but this amplified the exhaustion and restlessness that had set in by the tour 's end . 
 Although the tour was listed as co @-@ sponsored by MTV , the group decided against explicit corporate sponsorship ; band members , especially drummer Larry Mullen , Jr . , were uncertain that the tour would be profitable . The daily cost of producing the tour was US $ 125 @,@ 000 , regardless of whether a show was held on a given day . An attempt to convince Philips to donate the video equipment was unsuccessful , and the band had to pay for it themselves . In order to defray the heavy expenses of the Pacific shows , U2 asked for large guarantees from local promoters up front , rather than sharing the financial burden as they had in the past . This sometimes caused promoters to raise ticket prices above usual levels , which in turn sometimes resulted in less than full houses . Profit margin was a slim four to five percent at most sold @-@ out shows . 
 = = Show overview = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ show = = = 
 Between the support acts and U2 's performance , a disc jockey played records . For the 1992 legs , Irish rock journalist and radio presenter BP Fallon filled the role . Originally hired to write the Zoo TV tour programme , he played music from inside a Trabant on the B @-@ stage , while providing commentary and wearing a cape and top hat . His official title was " Guru , <unk> and DJ " . He hosted Zoo Radio , a November 1992 distributed radio special that showcased select live performances , audio oddities , and half @-@ serious interviews with members of U2 and the opening acts . At the group 's suggestion , Fallon eventually published a book about the tour entitled U2 Faraway So Close . Paul Oakenfold , who became one of the world 's most prominent club DJs by the decade 's end , replaced him later on the tour . 
 Beginning with the group 's 24 May 1992 show , Fallon played " Television , the Drug of the Nation " by hip @-@ hop artists The Disposable Heroes of <unk> as the last song before the venue darkened and U2 took the stage . U2 saw the song , a commentary on mass media culture , as encapsulating some of the tour 's principal themes . The Disposable Heroes of <unk> became one of the supporting acts for the " Outside Broadcast " leg , and after their supporting stint , " Television " was retained as the pre @-@ show closer until the tour 's conclusion . After the venue darkened , one of several audio @-@ video pieces was played to accompany the group taking the stage . During the " Outside Broadcast " leg , the piece was one by Emergency Broadcast Network that reorganised video clips of American President George H. W. Bush to make him sing Queen 's " We Will Rock You " . A different piece , created by Ned O 'Hanlon and Maurice Linnane of <unk> video productions , was used on the 1993 legs ; it wove looped video from Leni Riefenstahl 's films Triumph of the Will and Olympia with various video clips featuring war and news . 
 = = = Main set = = = 
 The concert began with a fixed sequence of six to eight consecutive Achtung Baby songs , a further sign that they were no longer the U2 of the 1980s . For the opening song , " Zoo Station " , Bono entered as his primary stage persona , " The Fly " , appearing silhouetted against a giant screen of blue and white video noise interwoven with glimpses of <unk> animations of the band members . " The Fly " usually followed , with the video monitors flashing a rapidly changing array of textual words and aphorisms . Some of these included " Taste is the enemy of art " , " Religion is a club " , " Ignorance is bliss " , " Watch more TV " , " Believe " with letters fading out to leave " lie " , and " Everything you know is wrong " . ( During the first week of the tour , media outlets incorrectly reported that the words shown included " Bomb Japan Now " , forcing the band to issue a statement denying the claim . ) Before " Even Better Than the Real Thing " , Bono channel surfed through live television programming , and during the song , as random images from television and pop culture flashed on screen , he filmed himself and the band with a camcorder . 
 In a Zoo Radio interview , The Edge described the visual material that accompanied the first three songs : 
 " ' Zoo Station ' is four minutes of a television that 's not tuned into any station , but giving you interference and <unk> and almost a TV picture . ' The Fly ' is information meltdown — text , sayings , truisms , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , etc . , all blasted at high speed , just fast enough so it 's impossible to actually read what 's being said . ' Even Better Than the Real Thing ' is whatever happens to be flying around the stratosphere on that night . Satellite TV pictures , the weather , shopping channel , cubic zirconium diamond rings , religious channels , soap operas ... " 
 " Mysterious Ways " featured a belly dancer on @-@ stage . For the 1992 indoor legs , Florida resident Christina Petro was the dancer . Tour choreographer Morleigh Steinberg assumed the role starting with the " Outside Broadcast " leg . " One " was accompanied by the title word shown in many languages , as well as Mark Pellington @-@ directed video clips of buffalos leading to a still image of David Wojnarowicz 's " Falling Buffalo " photograph . For " Until the End of the World " , Bono often played with a camera , kissing the lens and thrusting it into his crotch , a stark contrast from his more earnest stage behaviour of the past . Beginning with " Outside Broadcast " , the band began playing " New Year 's Day " afterwards . During " Tryin ' to Throw Your Arms Around the World " , Bono danced with a young female fan from the crowd ( a ritual he had done more solemnly on past tours ) , shared camcorder video filming duties with her , and sprayed champagne . At this point in the show , Mullen sometimes sang a solo performance of " Dirty Old Town " . 
 The group played many Achtung Baby songs very similarly to the way they had appeared on record . Since this material was complex and layered , most numbers featuring pre @-@ recorded or offstage percussion , keyboard , or guitar elements underlying the U2 members ' live instrumentals and vocals . U2 had used backing tracks in live performance before , but with the need to sync live performance to Zoo TV 's high @-@ tech visuals , almost the entire show was synced and sequenced . This practice has continued on their subsequent tours . 
 Zoo TV was one of the first large @-@ scale concerts to feature a B @-@ stage , where performances were intended " to be the antidote to Zoo TV " . The idea had been inspired by the successful informality of the Elvis Presley ' 68 Comeback Special . Here , the band played quieter songs , such as acoustic arrangements of " Angel of Harlem " , " When Love Comes to Town " , " Stay ( Faraway , So Close ! ) " , and Lou Reed 's " Satellite of Love " . Many critics compared the B @-@ stage performances to " busking " and singled them out as the shows ' highlights . 
 After leaving the B @-@ stage , U2 often played " Bad " or " Sunday Bloody Sunday " , with performances of " Bullet the Blue Sky " and " Running to Stand Still " following . For " Bullet the Blue Sky " , the video screens displayed burning crosses and swastikas ; during " Running to Stand Still " , Bono mimed the actions of a heroin addict from the B @-@ stage , rolling up his sleeves and then spiking his arm during the final lyric . Afterwards , red and yellow smoke flares came out from either end of the B @-@ stage , before the band re @-@ grouped on the main stage for U2 classics played straight . " Where the Streets Have No Name " was accompanied by sped @-@ up video of the group in the desert from The Joshua Tree 's photo shoot . U2 often finished their set with " Pride ( In the Name of Love ) " while a clip from Martin Luther King , Jr . ' s famed " I 've Been to the <unk> " speech was played on the video screens . The group was initially unconvinced that the leap from the rest of the show 's irony and artifice to something more sincere would be successful , but they thought that it was important to demonstrate that certain ideals were so strong and true that they could be held onto no matter the circumstance . The group alternated performances of " I Still Haven 't Found What I 'm Looking For " in acoustic form on the B @-@ stage with using it to close the main set . 
 = = = Encore = = = 
 Commencing with the " Outside Broadcast " leg , clips from the tour 's " video confessional booth " were displayed on the set 's screens between the main set and the encore . <unk> were encouraged to visit the booth prior to the concert and say whatever they wanted . These " confessions " varied from a woman flashing her breasts to a man revealing he had killed his friend in a car accident . Once the encore began , Bono would return as a different alter ego — Mirror Ball Man in 1992 , and MacPhisto in 1993 . Performances of " Desire " were accompanied by images of Richard Nixon , Margaret Thatcher , Paul Gascoigne , and Jimmy <unk> , and were meant as a criticism of greed ; cash rained the stage and Bono often portrayed Mirror Ball Man as an interpretation of the greedy preacher described in the song 's lyrics . Bono often made a crank call from the stage as his persona of the time . Such calls included dialing a phone sex line , calling a taxi cab , ordering 10 @,@ 000 pizzas ( the Detroit pizza parlor delivered 100 pizzas during the show ) , or calling a local politician . Bono regularly called the White House in an attempt to contact President Bush . Though Bono never reached the President , Bush did acknowledge the calls during a press conference . 
 " Ultraviolet ( Light My Way ) " and " With or Without You " were frequently played afterwards . Concerts initially ended with Achtung Baby 's slower " Love Is Blindness " . Beginning with the " Outside Broadcast " shows , it was often followed by Bono 's falsetto take on Elvis Presley 's long @-@ time show @-@ closing ballad , " Can 't Help Falling in Love " , culminating in Bono softly stating that " Elvis is still in the building " . Both songs presented a low @-@ key , introspective conclusion to the show , in contrast to the dynamic , aggressive opening ; the group also wanted to move away from its tradition of ending concerts with the fan sing @-@ along favourite " 40 " . The night finished with a single video message being displayed : " Thanks for shopping at Zoo TV " . 
 = = = Guest appearances = = = 
 On 11 June 1992 , Benny Andersson and Björn Ulvaeus of ABBA appeared on @-@ stage in Stockholm for the first time in years to perform " Dancing Queen " with the band , which U2 had frequently performed on the tour up to that point . Other guest performers on the tour included Axl Rose , Jo Shankar , and Daniel Lanois . 
 On 19 June 1992 , during the European indoor leg , U2 played the " Stop Sellafield " concert in Manchester , alongside Kraftwerk , Public Enemy , and Big Audio Dynamite II , to protest the operation of a second nuclear reactor at Sellafield . For the group 's performance , the stage was made to resemble their Zoo TV stage . The following day , the band participated in a demonstration organised by Greenpeace in which protesters landed on the beach at Sellafield in rubber dinghies and displayed 700 placards for the waiting media . 
 At the first " Outside Broadcast " show on 12 August 1992 at Giants Stadium , Lou Reed performed " Satellite of Love " with the band ; he and Bono dueted using their contrasting vocal styles . Bono re @-@ confirmed the singer 's influence on the band by announcing , " Every song we 've ever written was a rip @-@ off of a Lou Reed song . " For the second show and the remainder of the tour , a taping of Reed singing the song was used for a virtual duet between him and Bono . 
 Novelist Salman Rushdie joined the band on stage in London 's Wembley Stadium on 11 August 1993 , despite the death fatwā against the author and the risk of violence arising from his controversial novel The Satanic Verses . In reference to the novel 's satanic references , Rushdie , when confronted by Bono 's MacPhisto character , observed that " real devils don 't wear horns " . In 2010 , Clayton recalled that " Bono had been calling Salman Rushdie from the stage every night on the Zoo TV tour . When we played Wembley , Salman showed up in person and the stadium erupted . You [ could ] tell from Larry 's face that we weren 't expecting it . Salman was a regular visitor after that . He had a backstage pass and he used it as often as possible . For a man who was supposed to be in hiding , it was remarkably easy to see him around the place . " 
 = = Sarajevo satellite link @-@ ups = = 
 As the " Zooropa " leg unfolded in 1993 , U2 became concerned about the volatile political situation in post @-@ communist Europe and the resurgence of radical nationalism . The opening of the show was modified to reflect this , with sounds from Lenin 's Favourite Songs mixed with " Ode to Joy " mixed with monotone voices asking " What do you want ? " in different European languages . A visual of the Flag of Europe was presented which then crumbled after one of the stars fell off . 
 A number of these European shows featured live satellite link @-@ ups with people living in war @-@ torn Sarajevo during the siege of Sarajevo / Bosnian War . The transmissions were arranged with help from American aid worker Bill Carter . Before their 3 July show in Verona , Italy , the band met with Carter to give an interview about Bosnia for Radio Televizija Bosne I Hercegovina . Carter described his experiences helping <unk> while surviving the dangerous living conditions . While in Sarajevo , Carter had seen a television interview on MTV in which Bono mentioned the theme of the " Zooropa " leg was a unified Europe . Feeling that such an aim was empty if Bosnia went overlooked , Carter sought Bono 's help . He requested that U2 visit Sarajevo to bring attention to the war and break the " media fatigue " that had occurred from covering the conflict . Bono wanted the band to play a concert in the city , but their tour schedule prevented this , and McGuinness believed that a concert there would make them and their audience targets for the Serbian aggressors . 
 Instead , the group agreed to use the tour 's satellite dish to conduct live video transmissions between their concerts and Carter in Sarajevo . Carter returned to the city and was able to assemble a video unit . The band had to purchase a satellite dish to be sent to Sarajevo and had to pay a £ 100 @,@ 000 fee to join the European Broadcasting Union . Once set up , the band began satellite link @-@ ups to Sarajevo on a near nightly basis , the first airing on 17 July 1993 in Bologna , Italy . To connect with the EBU satellite feeds , Carter and two co @-@ workers had to traverse " Sniper Alley " at night to reach the Sarajevo television station , and they had to film with as little light as possible to avoid the attention of snipers . This was done a total of ten times over the course of a month . Carter discussed the deteriorating situation in the city , and Bosnians often spoke to U2 and their audience . These grim interviews deviated from the rest of the show , and they were completely unscripted , leaving the group unsure of who would be speaking or what they would say . U2 stopped the broadcasts in August 1993 after learning that the siege of Sarajevo was being reported on the front of many British newspapers . Though this trend had begun before the first link @-@ up , Nathan Jackson suggested that U2 's actions had brought awareness of the situation to their fans , and to the British public indirectly . 
 Reactions to the transmissions were mixed , triggering a media debate concerning the ethical implications of mixing rock entertainment with human tragedy . The Edge said , " A lot of nights it felt like quite an abrupt interruption that was probably not particularly welcomed by a lot of people in the audience . You were grabbed out of a rock concert and given a really strong dose of reality and it was quite hard sometimes to get back to something as frivolous as a show having watched five or ten minutes of real human suffering . " Mullen worried that the band were exploiting the Bosnians ' suffering for entertainment . In 2002 , he said , " I can 't remember anything more excruciating than those Sarajevo link @-@ ups . It was like throwing a bucket of cold water over everybody . You could see your audience going , ' What the fuck are these guys doing ? ' But I 'm proud to have been a part of a group who were trying to do something . " During a transmission for the band 's concert at Wembley Stadium , three women in Sarajevo told Bono via satellite , " We know you 're not going to do anything for us . You 're going to go back to a rock show . You 're going to forget that we even exist . And we 're all going to die . " Some people close to the band joined the War Child charity project , including Brian Eno . Writer Bill Flanagan believes that the link @-@ ups accomplished Bono 's goal for Zoo TV of " illustrating onstage the obscenity of idly flipping from a war on CNN to rock videos on MTV " . U2 vowed to perform in Sarajevo someday , eventually fulfilling this commitment on their 1997 PopMart Tour . 
 = = Bono 's stage personae = = 
 Bono assumed a number of costumed alter egos during Zoo TV performances . The three main personae that he used on stage were " The Fly " , " Mirror Ball Man " , and " MacPhisto " . Additionally , during performances of " Bullet the Blue Sky " and " Running to Stand Still " , he appeared on @-@ stage wearing a military utility vest and cap , and a microphone headset . As this character , he ranted and raved in an act he said was set in the Vietnam War . 
 To escape their reputation for being overly serious and self @-@ righteous , U2 decided to alter their image by being more facetious . Bono said , " All through the Eighties we tried to be ourselves and failed when the lights were on . Which is what set us up for Zoo TV . We decided to have some fun being other people , or at least other versions of ourselves . " The Edge said , " We were quite thrilled at the prospect of smashing U2 and starting all over again . " The group viewed humour as the appropriate response to their negative perception and that although their message would not change , they needed to change how they delivered it to their audience . 
 = = = The Fly = = = 
 Bono conceived his " Fly " persona during the writing of the song of the same name . The character began with Bono wearing an oversized pair of blaxploitation sunglasses , given to him by wardrobe manager Fintan Fitzgerald , to lighten the mood in the studio . Bono wrote the song 's lyrics as this character , composing a sequence of " single @-@ line aphorisms " . He developed the persona into a leather @-@ clad egomaniac , describing his outfit as having Lou Reed 's glasses , Elvis Presley 's jacket , and Jim Morrison 's leather pants . To match the character 's dark fashion , Bono dyed his naturally brown hair black . 
 Bono began each concert as The Fly and continued to play the character for most of the first half of the concert . In contrast to his earnest self of the 1980s , as The Fly , Bono strutted around the stage with " swagger and style " , exhibiting mannerisms of an egotistical rock star . He adopted the mindset that he was " licensed to be an egomaniac " . He often stayed in character away from the tour stage , including for public appearances and when staying in hotels . He said , " That rather cracked character could say things that I couldn 't " , and that it offered him a greater freedom of speech . 
 = = = Mirror Ball Man = = = 
 As the Mirror Ball Man , Bono dressed in a shining silver lamé suit with matching shoes and cowboy hat . The character was meant to parody greedy American televangelists , showmen , and car salesman , and was inspired by Phil Ochs ' Elvis persona from his 1970 tour . Bono said that he represented " a kind of showman America . He had the confidence and charm to pick up a mirror and look at himself and give the glass a big kiss . He loved cash and in his mind success was God 's blessing . If he 's made money , he can 't have made any mistakes . " As the character , Bono spoke with an exaggerated Southern American accent . Mirror Ball Man appeared during the show 's encore and made nightly prank calls , often to the White House . Bono portrayed this alter ego on the first three legs of the tour , but replaced him with MacPhisto for the 1993 legs . 
 = = = MacPhisto = = = 
 MacPhisto was created to parody the devil and was named after Mephistopheles of the Faust legend . Initially called " Mr. Gold " , MacPhisto wore a gold lame suit with gold platform shoes , pale make @-@ up , lipstick , and devil 's horns atop his head . As MacPhisto , Bono spoke with an exaggerated upper @-@ class English accent , similar to that of a down @-@ on @-@ his @-@ luck character actor . The character was created as a European replacement for the American @-@ influenced Mirror Ball Man . The initial inspiration for MacPhisto came from the stage musical The Black Rider . Realisation of the character did not come about until rehearsal the night before the first of the 1993 shows . According to Bono , " We came up with a sort of old English Devil , a pop star long past his prime returning regularly from sessions on The Strip in Vegas and regaling anyone who would listen to him at cocktail hour with stories from the good old , bad old days . " MacPhisto sang the closing " Can 't Help Falling in Love " with an oddly childlike manner that many reviewers found one of the most poignant moments of the show . 
 Bono continued making crank calls as MacPhisto , but the targets changed with the location of each concert . Many of them were local politicians that Bono wished to mock by engaging them in character as the devil . He enjoyed making these calls , saying , " When you 're dressed as the Devil , your conversation is immediately loaded , so if you tell somebody you really like what they 're doing , you know it 's not a compliment . " The band intended for MacPhisto to add humour while making a point . Said The Edge , " That character was a great device for saying the opposite of what you meant . It made the point so easily and with real humor . " A female Cardiff fan who was pulled on @-@ stage questioned Bono 's motives for dressing as the devil , prompting the singer to compare his act to the plot of the C. S. Lewis novel The Screwtape Letters . 
 = = Recording and release of Zooropa = = 
 U2 recorded their next album , Zooropa , from February to May 1993 during an extended break between the third and fourth legs of the tour . The album was intended as a companion EP to Achtung Baby , but soon expanded into a full LP . Recording could not be completed before the tour restarted , and for the first month of the " Zooropa " leg , the band flew home after shows , recording until the early morning and working on their off @-@ days , before travelling to their next destination . Clayton called the process " about the craziest thing you could do to yourself " , while Mullen said of it , " It was mad , but it was mad good , as opposed to mad bad . " McGuinness later said the band had nearly wrecked themselves in the process . The album was released on 5 July 1993 . Influenced by the tour 's themes of technology and mass media , Zooropa was an even greater departure in style from their earlier recordings than Achtung Baby was , incorporating further dance music influences and electronic effects into their sound . A number of songs from the album were incorporated into the subsequent " Zooropa " and " Zoomerang " legs , most frequently " Numb " and " Stay ( Faraway , So Close ! ) " . For the " Zoomerang " leg , " Daddy 's Gonna Pay For Your Crashed Car " and " Lemon " were added to the encore and " Dirty Day " to the main set . 
 = = Broadcasts , recordings , and releases = = 
 On 9 September 1992 , a portion of U2 's performance at the Pontiac Silverdome was broadcast live to the 1992 MTV Video Music Awards . The band performed " Even Better Than the Real Thing " while VMA host Dana Carvey , dressed as his Wayne 's World Garth persona , accompanied the band on drums in Los Angeles . A Zoo Radio special included live selections from 1992 shows from Toronto , Dallas , Tempe , and New York City . On 28 and 29 November 1992 , a TV special entitled Zoo TV Featuring U2 was aired , featuring portions of several " Outside Broadcast " leg shows as well as William S. Burroughs ' reading of the sardonic poem " Thanksgiving Prayer " ; directed by Kevin Godley , the programme was broadcast in North America on Fox , and in Europe via Channel 4 , Premiere , France 2 , Rai Uno , RTVE , <unk> , and Veronica . Several 1992 shows , including the 11 June concert in Stockholm and 27 October concert in El Paso , were broadcast into the homes of fans who had won contests . In October 1992 , U2 released Achtung Baby : The Videos , The Cameos , and a Whole Lot of Interference from Zoo TV , a VHS compilation of nine music videos from Achtung Baby . Interspersed between the music videos were clips of so @-@ called " interference " , comprising documentary footage , media clips , and other video similar to what was displayed on tour . 
 Two November 1993 " Zoomerang " shows in Sydney were filmed as part of a worldwide television broadcast . The 26 November show was to be a rehearsal for the production crew for the official filming the following night ; however , Clayton , who began drinking excessively on the latter stages of the tour , suffered an alcoholic blackout from the previous night and was unable to perform . Bass guitar technician Stuart Morgan filled in for him , marking the first time any member of U2 had missed a show . Clayton recovered in time to play the 27 November show , which was broadcast and was the only show used in the resulting video release . The concert was broadcast in the United States on tape @-@ delayed pay @-@ per @-@ view . U2 originally planned to produce the concert with MTV for a January 1994 " <unk> " that would have offered three different perspectives of the show on three separate channels . However , the group cancelled the " <unk> " after realising they had not fully developed the concept . The show was subsequently released as the concert video Zoo TV : Live from Sydney in 1994 , and the double CD Zoo TV Live in 2006 to subscribing members of U2 's website . The video won the Grammy Award for Best Long Form Music Video at the 37th Annual Grammy Awards ceremony . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Reviews written during the initial arena legs reflected the dramatic change in U2 's approach . Many critics published favourable reviews about the tour ; the San Francisco Chronicle praised the special effects for supplementing the music . The reviewer wrote , " The often @-@ surrealistic effects always served the songs , not the other way around . " The review concluded , " this magnificent multimedia production will serve as a pinnacle in rock 's onstage history for sometime [ sic ] to come " . Edna Gundersen of USA Today said that U2 was dismantling its myth and wrote that the show was " a trippy and decadent concert of <unk> visuals and adventurous music " . Melody Maker 's Jon Wiederhorn wrote that he expected to dislike the show based upon their past stage history , " But , alas , I cannot be negative about U2 tonight . Their Zoo TV show is visually stunning , musically unparalleled , downright moving and , dammit , truly entertaining . " Hot Press ' Bill Graham said of the show , " U2 don 't so much use every trick in the book as invent a whole new style of rock performance art . " For Graham , the tour resolved any doubts he had about the band — particularly about Bono — following their reinvention with Achtung Baby . 
 Other critics indicated befuddlement as to U2 's purpose . The Asbury Park Press wrote that the long string of Achtung Baby song presentations that opened the show made one forget about the band 's past , and that " almost everything you knew about U2 a couple years ago is , in fact , wrong now " . The Star @-@ Ledger said that the band shortchanged its music with its video presentations and that especially during the opening sequence , " one was only aware of the music as a soundtrack to the real ' show ' " . It concluded by saying that the group had lost the sense of mystery and yearning that made it great and that they had succumbed to the style of music videos . Jon Pareles of The New York Times acknowledged that U2 was trying to break its former earnest image and that they were a " vastly improved band " for being " trendy " and " funny " ; yet , he commented , " U2 wants to have its artifice and its sincerity at the same time — no easy thing — and it hasn 't yet made the breakthrough that will unite them . " 
 The stadium legs of the tour received more consistent praise than the arena shows . Critics noted that while the show and its setlist were largely the same as before , the tour mostly benefited from the increased scale . The New York Daily News said that the stage " looked like a city made of television sets — an electronic Oz " and that " glitz was used not as a mere distraction ( as it has been by so many video @-@ age artists ) , but as a determined conceit " . Gundersen also made the comparison to Oz , saying that even though the band was dwarfed by the setting , their adventurous musicianship still shone through . She concluded that the group had " deliver [ ed ] a brilliant high @-@ wire act " between mocking and exploiting rock music clichés , a comparison also made by stage designer Williams . Robert Hilburn of the Los Angeles Times said of the outdoor American leg , " Zoo TV is the yardstick by which all other stadium shows will be measured . " David Fricke of Rolling Stone said that the band had " regained critical and commercial favor by negotiating an inspired balance between rock 's cheap thrills and its own sense of moral burden " . He praised the band for " retool [ ing ] themselves as <unk> with heart and elephant bucks to burn " . Fricke noted that the increased visual effects for the " Outside Broadcast " leg increased the shows ' " mind @-@ fuck " factor . Many critics described the tour as " post @-@ modern " . The writers of Rolling Stone , in a best @-@ of @-@ 1992 issue , named U2 co @-@ winners of " Best Band " , while awarding the Zoo TV Tour honours for both " Best Tour " and " Worst Tour " . 
 The Independent praised the " Zooropa " leg , with the reviewer stating , " I came as a sceptic , and left believing I had witnessed the most sophisticated meeting of technical wizardry and mojo priestcraft ever mounted . " Dave Fanning of The Irish Times praised the " Zooropa " leg , stating , " If this is the show by which all other rock circuses must be measured , then God help the new music . " Fanning observed that the group , particularly Bono , exhibited " style , sex and self @-@ assurance " . Billboard wrote , " No one is dancing on the edges of rock 'n'roll 's contradictions as effectively these days as U2 . " The stadium legs had their detractors , as NME called the shows a " two @-@ hour post @-@ modernist pot noodle advert made by politically naive , culturally unaware squares with the help of some cool , arty people " . Graham thought that the scale of the stadium shows led to more predictability and less interaction with the audiences . 
 = = = Fan reaction = = = 
 The group and the music industry were unsure how fans would receive the tour beforehand . During the first week of shows , Bono said , " This show is a real roller coaster ride , and some people will want to get off , I 'm sure . " He remained optimistic that their devoted fans would continue following them , but cautioned he had no intention of resisting the glamour and fame : " Oh , but it 's fun to be carried away by the hype . Where would you be without the hype ? ... You can 't pretend all the promotion and all the fanfare is not happening . " Some hardcore fans , particularly in the US , objected to the tour as a blatant sellout to commercial values , while others misinterpreted the tour 's mocking of excess , believing that , according to VH1 's Legends , " U2 had ' lost it ' and that Bono had become an egomaniac " . Many Christian fans were offended the band 's antics and believed they had abandoned their religious faith . 
 By the outdoor legs , many fans knew what to expect , and Pareles observed that Bono 's admonitions to never cheer a rock star were greeted with idolatrous applause ; he concluded that the show 's message of scepticism was somewhat lost on the audience and that , " No matter what Bono tells his fans , they seem likely to trust him anyway . " By the end of the tour 's first year , U2 had won over many fans . In a 1992 end @-@ of @-@ year poll , readers of Q voted U2 " The Best Act in the World Today " . The band 's almost clean sweep of Rolling Stone 's end @-@ of @-@ year readers ' poll — which included " Best Artist " , " Best Tour " , and Bono as " Sexiest Male Artist " — reconfirmed for the magazine they were the " world 's biggest rock band " . 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 On the opening leg , U2 sold 528 @,@ 763 tickets and grossed US $ 13 @,@ 215 @,@ 414 in 32 shows . They grossed US $ 67 million overall in 73 North American shows in 1992 , easily the highest amount for any touring artist that year . At the time , this was the third @-@ highest gross for a North American tour , behind The Rolling Stones ' 1989 Steel Wheels Tour and New Kids on the Block 's 1990 Magic Summer Tour . For 1992 , Zoo TV ticket sales in America and Europe totalled 2 @.@ 9 million . The " Zooropa " stadium leg the following year played to more than 2 @.@ 1 million people over 43 dates between 9 May and 28 August . In total , the Zoo TV Tour played to about 5 @.@ 3 million people . The band incurred heavy expenses to produce the tour , leading to only a small profit . According to McGuinness , " We grossed $ 30 million in T @-@ shirt sales . Without those we 'd be fucked . " Bono later said , " When we built Zoo TV , we were so close to bankruptcy that if five percent fewer people went , U2 was bankrupt . Even in our irresponsible , youthful and fatal disregard of such material matters , it was terrifying . " 
 = = Impact and legacy = = 
 For the Zoo TV Tour , U2 embraced the " rock star " identity they had struggled with and were reluctant to accept throughout the 1980s . They drew the attention of celebrities , including American presidential candidate Bill Clinton , and they began partying more than they had in the past . During parts of the tour , the band attracted the fashion crowd ; Clayton 's romantic relationship with supermodel Naomi Campbell and Bono 's friendship with supermodel Christy Turlington made them the subjects of unwanted tabloid attention . By the " Zoomerang " leg , Clayton 's relationship with Campbell was fracturing and he was drinking frequently . After missing the group 's 26 November 1993 show in Sydney from an alcoholic blackout , Clayton quit drinking altogether . The incident resulted in tensions within the group in the tour 's final weeks . The Edge began dating the belly dancer Morleigh Steinberg during the tour , and the two later married in 2002 . 
 The tour 's two @-@ year length , then U2 's longest , exhausted the band as the final legs unfolded . Following the conclusion of Zoo TV , U2 took an extended break from recording as a group . Mullen and Clayton moved into Manhattan apartments in New York City , where they sought out music lessons to become better musicians . The Edge and Bono spent most of 1994 living in newly renovated houses in the South of France . 
 After the tour , although The Fly character was retired , Bono began to wear tinted glasses , similar to his Fly sunglasses , in most public appearances . The glasses have since become a stylistic trademark of the singer in both his musical and activist roles . The Fly and MacPhisto characters appeared in the animated music video to U2 's 1995 song " Hold Me , Thrill Me , Kiss Me , Kill Me " from the soundtrack to Batman Forever . Author <unk> Cogan wrote that " the video crystallises and concludes the Zoo TV period and the changes that occurred " . Director Joel Schumacher attempted to create a role for Bono as MacPhisto in Batman Forever , but both later agreed it was not suitable . 
 As the tour drew to a close , the group entered prolonged discussions about creating a Zoo TV television channel in partnership with MTV . This never materialised , but in 1997 , MTV ran a brief miniseries called Zoo @-@ TV , which featured Emergency Broadcast Network extending their tour role in creating contemporary surrealist satirical video . U2 endorsed the effort as a representation of what the tour would have been like as a news magazine , but their direct role was limited to providing half @-@ financing and outtakes from the Zooropa album . Wired magazine said the series " <unk> [ d ] the edge of commercial — even comprehensible — television " . 
 U2 's subsequent concert tour , 1997 's PopMart Tour , followed in Zoo TV 's footsteps by mocking another social trend , this time consumerism . Paul McGuinness said the group wanted " the production [ of PopMart ] to beat Zoo TV " , and accordingly , the tour 's spectacle was a further shift away from their austere stage shows of the 1980s ; PopMart 's stage featured a 150 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 46 m ) LED screen , a 100 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 30 m ) golden arch containing the sound system , and a mirrorball lemon that served as a transport to the B @-@ stage . Although critics were much less receptive to PopMart , in a 2009 interview , Bono said that he considers that tour to be their best : " Pop ( Mart ) is our finest hour . It 's better than Zoo TV aesthetically , and as an art project it is a clearer thought . " 
 The Pixies ' stint as a support act produced a controversy that partially contributed to their break @-@ up . In July 1992 , Spin featured a controversial cover story titled " U2 On Tour : The Story They Didn 't Want You to Read " , which detailed author Jim Greer 's travels on the tour 's first weeks with his unidentified girlfriend ( who turned out to be Pixies ' bassist Kim Deal ) . The article featured their criticisms of U2 for the supposed poor treatment the Pixies received . Both U2 and the Pixies disagreed and were livid at Deal , particularly Pixies frontman Black Francis . In 1993 , following tensions within the group , Francis announced the Pixies had dissolved . 
 In 2005 , during their Vertigo Tour , the group often played a short set of songs as a homage to the Zoo TV Tour — " Zoo Station " , " The Fly " , and " Mysterious Ways " — as part of the first encore ; performances of " Zoo Station " included the interference in the background visual effects , and " The Fly " used flashing text effects on the LED screens similar to the Zoo TV visuals . 
 Critics regard the Zoo TV Tour as one of rock 's most memorable tours . During the " Zooropa " leg of the tour , Guy Garcia of Time called Zoo TV " one of the most electrifying rock shows ever staged " . In 1997 , Robert Hilburn wrote that " It 's not unreasonable to think of it as the Sgt. Pepper 's of rock tours . " In 2002 , Tom Doyle of Q called it " still the most spectacular rock tour staged by any band " , and in 2013 , the magazine listed it as one of the " ten greatest gigs of all time " . In 2009 , critic Greg Kot said , " Zoo TV remains the finest supersized tour mounted by any band in the last two decades . " Ryan Dombal of Pitchfork wrote in a review of Achtung Baby 's 20th anniversary reissue , " Even 20 years on , the tour looks like something to behold , a singularly inventive experience that no band — including U2 itself — has been able to really expound upon in a meaningful way . " The Edge said , " as a band I think it stretched us all . We were a different band after that and touring was different . " Producer Nellee Hooper later told Bono that Zoo TV " ruined irony for everyone " . 
 = = Tour dates = = 
 = The Bishop Revival = 
 " The Bishop Revival " is the 14th episode of the second season of the American science fiction drama television series Fringe . The episode 's storyline followed Nazi scientist Alfred Hoffman ( Craig Robert Young ) as he specially designed airborne toxins to kill only surrounding people with similar genetic traits , such as people with brown eyes . 
 It was written by Glen Whitman and Robert Chiappetta , and directed by Adam Davidson . Along with Young and a number of small guest parts , the episode featured another guest appearance by Clark Middleton as rare book seller Edward Markham . " The Bishop Revival " first aired in the United States on January 28 , 2010 on the Fox network to an estimated 9 @.@ 153 million viewers . Critical reception for the episode ranged from positive to mixed , as reviewers were divided on the episode 's villain . 
 = = Plot = = 
 15 people suffocate at a Jewish wedding , appearing to have asphyxiated from the inside out . When the Fringe team arrives , Olivia ( Anna Torv ) identifies that all the victims were from the groom 's side , whose grandmother was a Holocaust survivor - and Walter ( John Noble ) surmises that they were all killed via their shared genetic traits . Later , a similar mass death occurs at a coffee shop , in which Walter recognizes the victims all had brown eyes , another common genetic trait . From fingerprints found at the scene , they discover the culprit is Alfred Hoffman ( Craig Robert Young ) , a Nazi scientist apparently somehow over 100 years old . Walter realizes that the man likely worked with his own father , Robert <unk> ( a German scientist who defected to the US in 1943 and anglicised his name ) , in creating a chemical agent that , once heated as a gas , could be used to target any specific trait using DNA from the target subject - especially those not of the master race . Though Walter originally had his father 's files on the subject , his son Peter ( Joshua Jackson ) , 10 years earlier , had sold them ; Peter tries to recover the files but finds some have been used by an artist to create sensationalism art , causing Walter to become distraught . 
 They trace Hoffman to his home , finding his equipment used to create the chemical agent downstairs but no sign of Hoffman . Walter nearly suffocates from an agent left by Hoffman , but Olivia and Peter are able to save him in time . As the FBI search the premises , they find evidence that points to a convention being held to promote world equality . Olivia and Peter depart to try to find Hoffman , while Walter remains behind , examining Hoffman 's equipment . 
 At the convention , Hoffman has replaced the heating elements for the chafing @-@ dishes with his own . Olivia and Peter struggle with locating Hoffman before Walter and Astrid ( Jasika Nicole ) arrive . Walter uses a <unk> to distribute his own chemical agent , this time specific to Hoffman , and soon the man is found dying . As the team regroups , Walter fully admits to killing Hoffman , a crime in itself , but Broyles ( Lance Reddick ) decides to let Walter go . Later , Peter has been able to recover the rest of his grandfather 's work and returns it to Walter ; Walter then goes through the files , finding an old photo of his father and Hoffman working together . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Bishop Revival " was the third episode to be written by writing partners Glen Whitman and Robert Chiappetta . It was the only Fringe episode directed by Adam Davidson . 
 " The Bishop Revival " revealed that the seahorse shown in promotions since the series began was in fact a genetically encoded " signature " created by Walter 's father Dr. Robert Bishop . In an interview after the episode 's broadcast , consulting producer Akiva Goldsman cited " The Bishop Revival " when discussing the use of flashbacks in Fringe ; he stated his disinclination to use too many flashbacks in the series , explaining " I think flashbacks are really useful and there are a couple of places where it will be useful . But fundamentally , no , I don 't think we 're a show that will be doing a lot of jumping back in time despite the single horde of calls for the ' Walter 's Grandfather Nazi Hunting ' series . I think not , but it was fun to do [ in the ' Peter ' episode ] . " 
 Guest stars for the episode included Craig Robert Young , Max Train , Sierra Pitkin , Brendon Zub , Barbara <unk> , John Macintyre , Lauren <unk> , Al Miro , Aaron Brooks , Magda Harout , Leonard <unk> , Alberta Mayne , Nancy <unk> , and Dan Joffre . Clark Middleton , who was last seen in the first season episode " Ability " , made his second guest appearance in " The Bishop Revival " as rare bookseller Edward Markham . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The episode contained two pieces of music from the 19th century German composer Johannes Brahms : his Piano Quartet No. 1 , <unk> in G Major : III . Andante Con Moto @-@ <unk> and Piano Quartet No. 1 , <unk> in G Minor : II . Intermezzo : Allegro Ma Non Troppo @-@ Trio : <unk> . Also in the episode , someone is seen holding a Dharma Initiative tea bag , a reference to the mysterious organization on the science fiction series Lost . 
 The Nazi in this episode appears to be Reichsführer of the Schutzstaffel , Heinrich Himmler . Aside from looking like the character , Himmler was also both a <unk> and a Nazi <unk> . At one point in the episode , a scared elderly woman points at him screaming , " It 's him ... it 's him ... ! " This has a double meaning , as she could have been saying " It 's him ! " or she could have been trying to say " It 's Himmler ! " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In a Thursday night filled mostly with repeats , Fox 's airing of new episodes Bones and Fringe finished # 1 among adults aged 18 – 49 , with an estimated 9 @.@ 153 million viewers tuning in . Fringe was up fifteen percent from the previous week with a 3 @.@ 0 rating , tying its highest 18 – 49 ratings share for the season . It was the second most viewed episode of the season after the season premiere " A New Day in the Old Town " . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The episode received mixed to positive reviews from television critics . Jane Boursaw of TV Squad wasn 't sure what to think about " The Bishop Revival " , but loved the plotline about Walter 's dad being a German spy working for the US government . Alternately , Annalee Newitz of io9 called the episode " surprisingly meh " ; while appreciating " all the weird family revelations about the Bishops " , she believed the revelations about Walter 's father to be " too much " because " we didn 't need that extra backstory " . Newitz wished Fringe had brought back Olivia 's childhood subplot and its ties with Walter and Peter . The A.V. Club columnist Noel Murray was also critical of the episode , explaining " <unk> , there wasn 't much going on in ' The Bishop Revival . ' ... The FD tracked down a criminal and felled that criminal ; that 's really it . " Murray did however praise the killer 's methods and " Aryan aloofness " as " cool " and " delightfully old @-@ school " . Like Newitz , Tim Grierson of the magazine New York believed the episode contained " stupid revelations " ; for instance , the Nazi connection of Walter 's father " just felt like a variation on season one 's episodes in which bizarre phenomena could always magically be linked back to Walter 's work for the government . Obviously , this info about Peter 's grandfather was supposed to be ' shocking , ' showing how the Bishop family 's scientific work can so easily be perverted for evil , but by this point it just seems like a very artificial , unnecessary ploy to keep us engaged . " 
 Other than a few minor complaints with the episode 's logic , IGN writer Ramsey Isler thought positively about " The Bishop Revival " and the Nazi story element in particular , stating " there 's a definite unique Fringe flavor that makes this story work " . Isler disliked the unsolved mystery of Hoffman however , writing the " story really had the feel of one of those intriguing but ultimately disposable stories in the Fringe library " . Jennifer Walker from TV Fanatic called the episode " amazing " and a " heart stopper " , while Andrew Hanson of the Los Angeles Times enjoyed the father @-@ son dynamic . Ken Tucker from Entertainment Weekly wrote " The Bishop Revival " was " one of the series ' most satisfying stand @-@ alone episodes " because it featured a " good threat " and gave more information about the Bishop family 's backstory . Tucker praised John Noble 's performance , as his " portrayal of Walter encompasses everything from endearing <unk> to ferocious concentration and commitment " . MTV 's Josh Wigler believed the episode was " terrific , " but wished there was more of a balance between the show 's three leads , and that Olivia was featured on a regular basis . He , Hanson , and other critics agreed that this and the previous week 's episode gave Fringe some strong momentum heading into the winter finale . Though normally skeptical of the series ' many fringe cases , Popular Mechanics called the episode Fringe 's " most plausible case yet " . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 At the 2011 Young Artist Awards , Sierra Pitkin received a nomination for Best Performance in a TV Series under the category " Guest Starring Young Actress Ten and Under " . 
 = George F. Kennan = 
 George Frost Kennan ( February 16 , 1904 – March 17 , 2005 ) was an American diplomat and historian . He was known best as an advocate of a policy of containment of Soviet expansion during the Cold War on which he later reversed himself . He lectured widely and wrote scholarly histories of the relations between USSR and the United States . He was also one of the group of foreign policy elders known as " The Wise Men " . 
 During the late 1940s , his writings inspired the Truman Doctrine and the U.S. foreign policy of " containing " the Soviet Union . His " Long Telegram " from Moscow during 1946 and the subsequent 1947 article " The Sources of Soviet Conduct " argued that the Soviet regime was inherently expansionist and that its influence had to be " contained " in areas of vital strategic importance to the United States . These texts provided justification for the Truman administration 's new anti @-@ Soviet policy . Kennan played a major role in the development of definitive Cold War programs and institutions , notably the Marshall Plan . 
 Soon after his concepts had become U.S. policy , Kennan began to criticize the foreign policies that he had seemingly helped begin . Subsequently , prior to the end of 1948 , Kennan became confident that positive dialogue could commence with the Soviet government . His proposals were discounted by the Truman administration and Kennan 's influence was marginalized , particularly after Dean Acheson was appointed Secretary of State during 1949 . Soon thereafter , U.S. Cold War strategy assumed a more assertive and militaristic quality , causing Kennan to lament about what he believed was an abrogation of his previous assessments . 
 During 1950 , Kennan left the Department of State — except for two brief ambassadorial stints in Moscow and Yugoslavia — and became a realist critic of U.S. foreign policy . He continued to analyze international affairs as a faculty member of the Institute for Advanced Study from 1956 until his death at age 101 . 
 He was a member of the Founding Council of the Rothermere American Institute at the University of Oxford . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life and career = = = 
 Kennan was born in Milwaukee , Wisconsin , to Kossuth Kent Kennan , a lawyer specializing in tax law , a descendant of dirt @-@ poor Scotch @-@ Irish settlers of 18th @-@ century Connecticut and Massachusetts , who was named after the Hungarian patriot Lajos Kossuth ( 1802 – 94 ) , and Florence James Kennan . Mrs. Kennan died two months later due to peritonitis from a ruptured appendix , though Kennan long believed that she died after giving birth to him . The boy always lamented not having a mother ; he was never close to his father or stepmother , however , he was close to his older sisters . 
 At the age of eight he went to Germany to stay with his stepmother in order to learn German . He attended St. John 's Military Academy in Delafield , Wisconsin , and arrived at Princeton University in the second half of 1921 . <unk> to the elite atmosphere of the Ivy League , the shy and introverted Kennan found his undergraduate years difficult and lonely . After receiving his bachelor 's degree in 1925 , Kennan considered applying to law school , but decided it was too expensive and instead opted to apply to the newly formed U.S. Foreign Service . He passed the qualifying examination and after seven months of study at the Foreign Service School in Washington he gained his first job as a vice consul in Geneva , Switzerland . Within a year he was transferred to a post in Hamburg , Germany . During 1928 Kennan considered quitting the Foreign Service to attend college , but was selected for a linguist training program that would give him three years of graduate @-@ level study without having to quit the service . 
 In 1929 Kennan began his program on history , politics , culture , and the Russian language at the University of Berlin 's Oriental Institute . In doing so , he would follow in the footsteps of his grandfather 's younger cousin , George Kennan ( 1845 – 1924 ) , a major 19th century expert on Imperial Russia and author of Siberia and the Exile System , a well @-@ received 1891 account of the Czarist prison system . During the course of his diplomatic career , Kennan would master a number of other languages , including German , French , Polish , Czech , Portuguese , and Norwegian . 
 In 1931 Kennan was stationed at the legation in Riga , Latvia , where , as third secretary , he worked on Soviet economic affairs . From his job , Kennan " grew to mature interest in Russian affairs " . When the U.S. began formal diplomacy with the Soviet government during 1933 after the election of President Franklin D. Roosevelt , Kennan accompanied ambassador William C. Bullitt to Moscow . By the mid @-@ 1930s Kennan was among the professionally trained Russian experts of the staff of the embassy in Moscow , along with Charles E. Bohlen and Loy W. Henderson . These officials had been influenced by the long @-@ time director of the State Department 's division of East European Affairs , Robert F. Kelley . They believed that there was little basis for cooperation with the Soviet Union , even against potential adversaries . Meanwhile , Kennan studied Stalin 's Great Purge , which would affect his opinion of the internal dynamics of the Soviet regime for the rest of his life . 
 Kennan found himself in strong disagreement with Joseph E. Davies , Bullitt 's successor as ambassador to the Soviet Union , who defended the Great Purge and other aspects of Stalin 's rule . Kennan did not have any influence on Davies 's decisions , and the latter even suggested that Kennan be transferred out of Moscow for " his health " . Kennan again contemplated resigning from the service , but instead decided to accept the Russian desk at the State Department in Washington . By September 1938 , Kennan had been reassigned to a job at the legation in Prague . After the occupation of the Czechoslovak Republic by Nazi Germany at the beginning of World War II , Kennan was assigned to Berlin . There , he endorsed the United States ' Lend @-@ Lease policy , but warned against displaying any notion of American endorsement for the Soviets , whom he considered to be an unfit ally . He was interned in Germany for six months after Germany , followed by the other Axis states , declared war on the United <unk> December 1941 . 
 In September 1942 Kennan was assigned as a counselor in Lisbon , Portugal , where he begrudgingly performed a job administrating intelligence and base operations . In January 1944 he was sent to London , where he served as counselor of the American delegation to the European Advisory Commission , which worked to prepare Allied policy in Europe . There , Kennan became even more disenchanted with the State Department , which he believed was ignoring his qualifications as a trained specialist . However , within months of beginning the job , he was appointed deputy chief of the mission in Moscow upon request of W. Averell Harriman , the ambassador to the U.S.S.R. 
 = = = Cold War = = = 
 = = = = The " long telegram " = = = = 
 In Moscow , Kennan again felt that his opinions were being ignored by Harry S. Truman and policymakers in Washington . Kennan tried repeatedly to persuade policymakers to abandon plans for cooperation with the Soviet government in favor of a sphere of influence policy in Europe to reduce the Soviets ' power there . Kennan believed that a federation needed to be established in western Europe to counter Soviet influence in the region and to compete against the Soviet stronghold in eastern Europe . 
 Kennan served as deputy head of the mission in Moscow until April 1946 . Near the end of that term , the Treasury Department requested that the State Department explain recent Soviet behavior , such as its disinclination to endorse the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank . Kennan responded on February 22 , 1946 , by sending a lengthy 5 @,@ 500 @-@ word telegram ( sometimes cited as being more than 8 @,@ 000 words ) from Moscow to Secretary of State James Byrnes outlining a new strategy for diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union . At the " bottom of the Kremlin 's neurotic view of world affairs is the traditional and instinctive Russian sense of insecurity " . After the Russian Revolution , this sense of insecurity became mixed with communist ideology and " Oriental secretiveness and conspiracy " . 
 Soviet international behavior depended mainly on the internal necessities of Joseph Stalin 's regime ; according to Kennan , Stalin needed a hostile world in order to legitimize his autocratic rule . Stalin thus used Marxism @-@ Leninism as a " justification for the Soviet Union 's instinctive fear of the outside world , for the dictatorship without which they did not know how to rule , for cruelties they did not dare not to inflict , for sacrifice they felt bound to demand ... Today they cannot dispense with it . It is the fig leaf of their moral and intellectual respectability " . 
 The solution was to strengthen Western institutions in order to render them invulnerable to the Soviet challenge , while awaiting the mellowing of the Soviet regime . 
 Kennan 's new policy of containment was that Soviet pressure had to " be contained by the adroit and vigilant application of counterforce at a series of constantly shifting geographical and political points " . 
 This dispatch brought Kennan to the attention of Secretary of the Navy James Forrestal , a major advocate of a confrontational policy with regard to the Soviets , the United States ' former wartime ally . Forrestal helped bring Kennan back to Washington , where he served as the first deputy for foreign affairs at the National War College and then strongly influenced his decision to publish the " X " article . 
 The goal of his policy was to withdraw all the U.S. forces from Europe . The settlement reached would give the Kremlin sufficient reassurance against the establishment of regimes in Eastern Europe hostile to the Soviet Union , tempering the degree of control over that area that the Soviet leaders felt it necessary to exercise . 
 Meanwhile , during March 1947 , Truman appeared before Congress to request funding for the Truman Doctrine to fight Communism in Greece . " I believe that it must be the policy of the United States to support free peoples who are resisting attempted subjugation by armed minorities or by outside pressures . " 
 = = = = " X " = = = = 
 Unlike the " long telegram " , Kennan 's well @-@ timed article appearing in the July 1947 issue of Foreign Affairs with the pseudonym " X " , entitled " The Sources of Soviet Conduct " , did not begin by emphasizing " traditional and instinctive Russian sense of insecurity " ; instead it asserted that Stalin 's policy was shaped by a combination of Marxist – Leninist ideology , which advocated revolution to defeat the capitalist forces in the outside world and Stalin 's determination to use the notion of " capitalist encirclement " in order to legitimize his regimentation of Soviet society so that he could consolidate his political power . Kennan argued that Stalin would not ( and moreover could not ) moderate the supposed Soviet determination to overthrow Western governments . Thus , 
 " the main element of any United States policy toward the Soviet Union must be a long @-@ term , patient but firm and vigilant containment of Russian expansive tendencies ... Soviet pressure against the free institutions of the Western world is something that can be contained by the adroit and vigilant application of counterforce at a series of constantly shifting geographical and political points , corresponding to the shifts and manoeuvers of Soviet policy , but which cannot be charmed or talked out of existence . " 
 His new policy of containment declared that Soviet pressure had to " be contained by the adroit and vigilant application of counter @-@ force at a series of constantly shifting geographical and political points " . The goal of his policy was to withdraw all the U.S. forces from Europe . " The settlement reached would give the Kremlin sufficient reassurance against the establishment of regimes in Eastern Europe hostile to the Soviet Union , tempering the degree of control over that area that the Soviet leaders felt it necessary to exercise " . 
 Kennan further argued that the United States would have to perform this containment alone but if it could do so without undermining its own economic health and political stability , the Soviet party structure would undergo a period of immense strain eventually resulting in " either the break @-@ up or the gradual mellowing of Soviet power " . 
 The publication of the " X " article soon began one of the more intense debates of the Cold War . Walter Lippmann , a leading American commentator on international affairs , strongly criticized the " X " article . Lippmann argued that Kennan 's strategy of containment was " a strategic monstrosity " that could " be implemented only by recruiting , subsidizing and supporting a heterogeneous array of satellites , clients , dependents , and puppets " . Lippmann argued that diplomacy should be the basis of relations with the Soviets ; he suggested that the U.S. withdraw its forces from Europe and reunify and demilitarize Germany . Meanwhile , it was soon revealed informally that " X " was indeed Kennan . This information seemed to give the " X " article the status of an official document expressing the Truman administration 's new policy toward Moscow . 
 Kennan had not intended the " X " article as a prescription for policy . For the rest of his life , Kennan continued to reiterate that the article did not imply an automatic commitment to resist Soviet " expansionism " wherever it occurred , with little distinction of primary and secondary interests . The article did not make it obvious that Kennan favored employing political and economic rather than military methods as the chief agent of containment . " My thoughts about containment " said Kennan in a 1996 interview to CNN , " were of course distorted by the people who understood it and pursued it exclusively as a military concept ; and I think that that , as much as any other cause , led to [ the ] 40 years of unnecessary , fearfully expensive and disoriented process of the Cold War " . 
 Additionally , the administration made few attempts to explain the distinction between Soviet influence and international Communism to the U.S. public . " In part , this failure reflected the belief of many in Washington " , writes historian John Lewis Gaddis , " that only the prospect of an undifferentiated global threat could shake Americans out of their isolationist tendencies that remained latent among them " . 
 In a PBS television interview with David Gergen during 1996 , Kennan again reiterated that he did not regard the Soviets as primarily a military threat , noting that " they were not like Hitler " . Kennan 's opinion was that this misunderstanding : 
 " all came down to one sentence in the " X " article where I said that wherever these people , meaning the Soviet leadership , confronted us with dangerous hostility anywhere in the world , we should do everything possible to contain it and not let them expand any further . I should have explained that I didn 't suspect them of any desire to launch an attack on us . This was right after the war , and it was absurd to suppose that they were going to turn around and attack the United States . I didn 't think I needed to explain that , but I obviously should have done it . " 
 The " X " article meant sudden fame for Kennan . After the long telegram , he recalled later , " My official loneliness came in fact to an end ... My reputation was made . My voice now carried . " 
 = = = = Influence under Marshall = = = = 
 Between April 1947 and December 1948 , when George C. Marshall was Secretary of State , Kennan was more influential than he was at any other period in his career . Marshall valued his strategic sense and had him create and direct what is now named the Policy Planning Staff , the State Department 's internal think tank . Kennan became the first Director of Policy Planning . Marshall relied heavily on him to prepare policy recommendations . Kennan played a central role in the drafting of the Marshall Plan . 
 Although Kennan regarded the Soviet Union as too weak to risk war , he nonetheless considered it an enemy capable of expanding into Western Europe through subversion , given the popular support for communist parties in Western Europe , which remained demoralized by the devastation of the Second World War . To counter this potential source of Soviet influence , Kennan 's solution was to direct economic aid and covert political help to Japan and Western Europe to revive Western governments and assist international capitalism ; by doing so the United States would help to rebuild the balance of power . During June 1948 , Kennan proposed covert assistance to left @-@ wing parties not oriented toward Moscow and to labor unions in Western Europe in order to engineer a rift between Moscow and working @-@ class movements in Western Europe . 
 As the United States was initiating the Marshall Plan , Kennan and the Truman administration hoped that the Soviet Union 's rejection of Marshall aid would strain its relations with its Communist allies in Eastern Europe . Kennan initiated a series of efforts to exploit the schism between the Soviets and Josip Broz Tito 's Yugoslavia . Kennan proposed conducting covert action in the Balkans to further decrease Moscow 's influence . 
 The administration 's new vigorously anti @-@ Soviet policy also became evident when , at Kennan 's suggestion , the U.S. changed its hostility to Francisco Franco 's anti @-@ communists regime in Spain in order to secure U.S. influence in the Mediterranean . Kennan had observed during 1947 that the Truman Doctrine implied a new consideration of Franco . His suggestion soon helped begin a new phase of U.S. – Spanish relations , which ended with military cooperation after 1950 . 
 = = = = Differences with Acheson = = = = 
 Kennan 's influence rapidly decreased when Dean Acheson became Secretary of State , succeeding the ailing George Marshall during 1949 and 1950 . Acheson did not regard the Soviet " threat " as chiefly political , and he saw the Berlin blockade starting during June 1948 , the first Soviet test of a nuclear weapon during August 1949 , the Communist revolution in China a month later , and the beginning of the Korean War during June 1950 as evidence . Truman and Acheson decided to delineate the Western sphere of influence and to create a system of alliances . 
 This policy was realized as NSC @-@ 68 , a classified report issued by the United States National Security Council during April 1950 and written by Paul Nitze , Kennan 's successor as director of policy planning . Kennan and Charles Bohlen , another State Department expert on Russia , argued about the wording of NSC @-@ 68 , which became the basis of Cold War policy . Kennan rejected the idea that Stalin had a grand design for world conquest implicit in Nitze 's report and argued that he actually feared overextending Russian power . Kennan even argued that NSC @-@ 68 should not have been drafted at all , as it would make U.S. policies too rigid , simplistic , and militaristic . Acheson overruled Kennan and Bohlen , endorsing the assumption of Soviet menace implied by NSC @-@ 68 . 
 Kennan opposed the building of the hydrogen bomb and the rearmament of Germany , which were policies encouraged by the assumptions of NSC @-@ 68 . During the Korean War ( which began when North Korea invaded South Korea during June 1950 ) , when rumors started circulating in the State Department that plans were being made to advance beyond the 38th parallel into North Korea , an act that Kennan considered dangerous , he engaged in intense arguments with Assistant Secretary of State for the Far East Dean Rusk , who apparently endorsed Acheson 's goal to forcibly unite the Koreas . 
 Kennan lost influence with Acheson , who in any case relied much less on his staff than Marshall had . Kennan resigned as director of policy planning during December 1949 but stayed in the department as counselor until June 1950 . Acheson replaced Kennan with Nitze during January 1950 , who was much more comfortable with the calculus of military power . Afterwards , Kennan accepted an appointment as Visitor to the Institute for Advanced Study from fellow moderate Robert Oppenheimer , Director of the Institute . 
 Despite his influence , Kennan was never really comfortable in government . He always regarded himself as an outsider and had little patience with critics . W. Averell Harriman , the U.S. ambassador in Moscow when Kennan was deputy between 1944 and 1946 , remarked that Kennan was " a man who understood Russia but not the United States " . 
 = = = = Ambassador to the Soviet Union = = = = 
 During December 1951 , President Truman nominated Kennan to be the next United States ambassador to the USSR . His appointment was endorsed strongly by the Senate . 
 In many respects ( to Kennan 's consternation ) the priorities of the administration emphasized creating alliances against the Soviets more than negotiating differences with them . In his memoirs , Kennan recalled , " So far as I could see , we were expecting to be able to gain our objectives ... without making any concessions though , only ' if we were really all @-@ powerful , and could hope to get away with it . ' I very much doubted that this was the case . " 
 At Moscow , Kennan found the atmosphere even more regimented than on his previous trips , with police guards following him everywhere , discouraging contact with Soviet citizens . At the time , Soviet propaganda charged the U.S. with preparing for war , which Kennan did not wholly dismiss . " I began to ask myself whether ... we had not contributed ... by the <unk> of our policies and statements ... to a belief in Moscow that it was war we were after , that we had settled for its inevitability , that it was only a matter of time before we would unleash it . " 
 During September 1952 , Kennan made a statement that cost him his ambassadorship . In an answer to a question at a press conference , Kennan compared his conditions at the ambassador 's residence in Moscow to those he had encountered while interned in Berlin during the first few months of the Second World War . While his statement was not unfounded , the Soviets interpreted it as an implied analogy with Nazi Germany . The Soviets then declared Kennan persona non grata and refused to allow him to re @-@ enter the USSR . Kennan acknowledged retrospectively that it was a " foolish thing for me to have said " . 
 = = = = Kennan and the Eisenhower administration = = = = 
 Kennan returned to Washington , where he became embroiled in disagreements with Dwight D. Eisenhower 's hawkish Secretary of State , John Foster Dulles . Even so , he was able to work constructively with the new administration . During the summer of 1953 President Eisenhower asked Kennan to manage the first of a series of top @-@ secret teams , dubbed Operation <unk> , examining the advantages and disadvantages of continuing the Truman administration 's policy of containment and of seeking to " roll back " existing areas of Soviet influence . Upon completion of the project , the president seemed to endorse the group 's recommendations . 
 By lending his prestige to Kennan 's position , the president tacitly signaled his intention to formulate the strategy of his administration within the framework of its predecessor 's , despite the misgivings of some within the Republican Party . The critical difference between the Truman and Eisenhower policies of containment had to do with Eisenhower 's concerns that the United States could not indefinitely afford great military spending . The new president thus sought to minimize costs not by acting whenever and wherever the Soviets acted ( a strategy designed to avoid risk ) but rather whenever and wherever the United States could afford to act . 
 = = = = Ambassador to Yugoslavia = = = = 
 During John F. Kennedy 's 1960 presidential election campaign Kennan wrote to the future president to offer some suggestions on how his administration should improve the country 's foreign affairs . Kennan wrote , " What is needed is a succession of ... calculated steps , timed in such a way as not only to throw the adversary off balance but to keep him off it , and prepared with sufficient privacy so that the advantage of surprise can be retained . " He also urged the administration to " assure a divergence of outlook and policy between the Russians and Chinese , " which could be accomplished by improving relations with Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev who had wanted to distance himself from the Communist Chinese . He wrote , " We should ... without deceiving ourselves about Khrushchev 's political personality and without nurturing any unreal hopes , be concerned to keep him politically in the running and to encourage the survival in Moscow of the tendencies he personifies " . Additionally , he recommended that the United States work toward creating divisions within the Soviet bloc by undermining its power in Eastern Europe and encouraging the independent propensities of satellite governments . 
 Although Kennan had not been considered for a job by Kennedy 's advisers , the president himself offered Kennan the choice of ambassadorship in either Poland or Yugoslavia . Kennan was more interested in Yugoslavia , so he accepted Kennedy 's offer and began his job in Yugoslavia during May 1961 . 
 Kennan was tasked with trying to strengthen Yugoslavia 's policy against the Soviets and to encourage other states in the Eastern bloc to pursue autonomy from the Soviets . Kennan found his ambassadorship in Belgrade to be much improved from his experiences in Moscow a decade earlier . He commented , " I was favored in being surrounded with a group of exceptionally able and loyal assistants , whose abilities I myself admired , whose judgment I valued , and whose attitude toward myself was at all times ... enthusiastically cooperative ... Who was I to complain ? " Kennan found the Yugoslav government treated the American diplomats politely , in contrast from the way in which the Russians treated him in Moscow . He wrote that the Yugoslavs " considered me , rightly or wrongly , a distinguished person in the U.S. , and they were pleased that someone whose name they had heard before was being sent to Belgrade " . 
 Kennan found it difficult to perform his job in Belgrade . President Josip Broz Tito and his foreign minister , Koča Popović , began to suspect that Kennedy would adopt an anti @-@ Yugoslav policy during his term . Tito and Popović considered Kennedy 's decision to observe Captive Nations Week as an indication that the United States would assist anticommunist liberation efforts in Yugoslavia . Tito also believed that the CIA and the Pentagon were the true directors of American foreign policy . Kennan attempted to restore Tito 's confidence in the American foreign policy establishment but his efforts were compromised by a pair of diplomatic blunders , the Bay of Pigs Invasion , and the U @-@ 2 spy incident . 
 Relations between Yugoslavia and the United States quickly began to worsen . During September 1961 , Tito held a conference of nonaligned nations , where he delivered speeches that the U.S. government interpreted as being pro @-@ Soviet . According to historian David Mayers , Kennan argued that Tito 's perceived pro @-@ Soviet policy was in fact a ploy to " buttress Khrushchev 's position within the Politburo against hardliners opposed to improving relations with the West and against China , which was pushing for a major Soviet – U.S. showdown " . This policy also earned Tito " credit in the Kremlin to be drawn upon against future Chinese attacks on his communist credentials " . While politicians and government officials expressed growing concern about Yugoslavia 's relationship with the Soviets , Kennan believed that the country had an " anomalous position in the Cold War that objectively suited U.S. purposes " . Kennan also believed that within a few years , Yugoslavia 's example would cause states in the Eastern bloc to demand more social and economic autonomy from the Soviets . 
 By 1962 , Congress had passed legislation to deny financial aid grants to Yugoslavia , to withdraw the sale of spare parts for Yugoslav warplanes , and to revoke the country 's most favored nation status . Kennan strongly protested the legislation , arguing that it would only result in a straining of relations between Yugoslavia and the U.S. Kennan came to Washington during the summer of 1962 to lobby against the legislation but was unable to elicit a change from Congress . President Kennedy endorsed Kennan privately but remained noncommittal publicly , as he did not want to jeopardize his slim majority support in Congress on a potentially contentious issue . With U.S. – Yugoslav relations getting progressively worse , Kennan tendered his resignation as ambassador during late July 1963 . 
 = = = Academic career and later life = = = 
 During 1957 Kennan was invited by the BBC to give the annual Reith Lectures — a series of six radio lectures , which were titled Russia , the Atom and the West . For these , Kennan explored the history , effect , and possible consequences of relations between Russia and the West . 
 After the end of his brief ambassadorial post in Yugoslavia during 1963 , Kennan spent the rest of his life in <unk> , becoming a major realist critic of U.S. foreign policy . Having spent 18 months as a scholar at the Institute for Advanced Study between 1950 and 1952 , Kennan permanently joined the faculty of the Institute 's School of Historical Studies during 1956 . During his career there , Kennan wrote seventeen books and scores of articles on international relations . He won the Pulitzer Prize for History , the National Book Award for Nonfiction , the Bancroft Prize , and the Francis Parkman Prize for Russia Leaves the War , published during 1956 . He again won a Pulitzer and a National Book Award during 1968 for Memoirs , 1925 – 1950 . A second volume , taking his reminiscences up to 1963 was published during 1972 . Among his other works were American Diplomacy 1900 – 1950 , Sketches from a Life , published during 1989 , and Around the <unk> Hill during 1993 . 
 His properly historical works amount to a six @-@ volume account of the relations between Russia and the West from 1875 to his own time ; the period from 1894 to 1914 was planned but not completed . He was chiefly concerned with : 
 The folly of the First World War as a choice of policy ; he argues that the costs of modern war , direct and indirect , predictably exceeded the benefits of eliminating the Hohenzollerns . 
 The ineffectiveness of summit diplomacy , with the Conference of Versailles as a type @-@ case . National leaders have too much to do to give any single matter the constant and flexible attention which diplomatic problems require . 
 The Allied intervention in Russia in 1918 – 19 . He was indignant with Soviet accounts of a vast capitalist conspiracy against the world 's first worker 's state , some of which do not even mention the First World War ; he was equally indignant with the decision to intervene as costly and harmful . He argues that the interventions , by arousing Russian nationalism , may have ensured the survival of the Bolshevik state . 
 = = = Realism = = = 
 Political realism formed the basis of Kennan 's work as a diplomat and diplomatic historian and remains relevant to the debate over American foreign policy , which since the 19th century has been characterized by a shift from the Founding Fathers ' realist school to the idealistic or Wilsonian school of international relations . According to the realist tradition , security is based on the principle of a balance of power , whereas <unk> ( considered impractical by realists ) relies on morality as the sole determining factor in statecraft . According to the <unk> the spread of democracy abroad as a foreign policy is important and morals are valid universally . During the Presidency of Bill Clinton , American diplomacy represented the Wilsonian school to such a degree that those in favor of the realism likened President Clinton 's policies to social work . According to Kennan , whose concept of American diplomacy was based on the realist approach , such moralism without regard to the realities of power and the national interest is self @-@ defeating and will result in the decrease of American power . 
 In his historical writings and memoirs , Kennan laments in great detail the failings of democratic foreign policy makers and those of the United States in particular . According to Kennan , when American policymakers suddenly confronted the Cold War , they had inherited little more than rationale and rhetoric " utopian in expectations , legalistic in concept , moralistic in [ the ] demand it seemed to place on others , and self @-@ righteous in the degree of high @-@ mindedness and rectitude ... to ourselves " . The source of the problem is the force of public opinion , a force that is inevitably unstable , unserious , subjective , emotional , and simplistic . Kennan has insisted that the U.S. public can only be united behind a foreign policy goal on the " primitive level of slogans and jingoistic ideological inspiration " . 
 Containment during 1967 , when he published the first volume of his memoirs , involved something other than the use of military " counterforce " . He was never pleased that the policy he influenced was associated with the arms build @-@ up of the Cold War . In his memoirs , Kennan argued that containment did not demand a militarized U.S. foreign policy . " <unk> " implied the political and economic defense of Western Europe against the disruptive effect of the war on European society . Exhausted by war , the Soviet Union posed no serious military threat to the United States or its allies at the beginning of the Cold War but rather an ideological and political rival . 
 During the 1960s , Kennan criticized U.S. involvement in Vietnam , arguing that the United States had little vital interest in the region . Kennan believed that the USSR , Britain , Germany , Japan , and North America remained the areas of vital U.S. interests . During the 1970s and 1980s , he was a major critic of the renewed arms race as détente was ended . 
 During 1989 President George H. W. Bush awarded Kennan the Medal of Freedom , the nation 's greatest civilian honor . Yet he remained a realist critic of recent U.S. presidents , urging the U.S. government to " withdraw from its public advocacy of democracy and human rights " , saying that the " tendency to see ourselves as the center of political enlightenment and as teachers to a great part of the rest of the world strikes me as <unk> @-@ through , vainglorious and undesirable " . These ideas were particularly applicable to U.S. relations with China and Russia . Kennan opposed the Clinton administration 's war in Kosovo and its expansion of NATO ( the establishment of which he had also opposed half a century earlier ) , expressing fears that both policies would worsen relations with Russia . He described NATO enlargement as a " strategic blunder of potentially epic proportions " . 
 Kennan remained vigorous and alert during the last years of his life , although arthritis had him using a wheelchair . During his later years , Kennan concluded that " the general effect of Cold War extremism was to delay rather than hasten the great change that overtook the Soviet Union " . At age 98 he warned of the unforeseen consequences of waging war against Iraq . He warned that attacking Iraq would amount to waging a second war that " bears no relation to the first war against terrorism " and declared efforts by the Bush administration to associate al Qaeda with Saddam Hussein " pathetically unsupportive and unreliable " . Kennan went on to warn : 
 Anyone who has ever studied the history of American diplomacy , especially military diplomacy , knows that you might start in a war with certain things on your mind as a purpose of what you are doing , but in the end , you found yourself fighting for entirely different things that you had never thought of before ... In other words , war has a momentum of its own and it carries you away from all thoughtful intentions when you get into it . Today , if we went into Iraq , like the president would like us to do , you know where you begin . You never know where you are going to end . 
 During February 2004 scholars , diplomats , and Princeton alumni gathered at the university 's campus to celebrate Kennan 's 100th birthday . Among those in attendance were Secretary of State Colin Powell , international relations theorist John Mearsheimer , journalist Chris Hedges , former ambassador and career Foreign Service officer Jack F. Matlock , Jr . , and Kennan 's biographer , John Lewis Gaddis . 
 = = = Death and legacy = = = 
 Kennan died on March 17 , 2005 , at age 101 at his home in Princeton , New Jersey . He was survived by his wife Annelise , whom he married during 1931 , and his four children , eight grandchildren , and six great @-@ grandchildren . Annelise died in 2008 at the age of 98 . 
 In an obituary in the New York Times , Kennan was described as " the American diplomat who did more than any other envoy of his generation to shape United States policy during the cold war " to whom " the White House and the Pentagon turned when they sought to understand the Soviet Union after World War II " . Of Kennan , historian Wilson D. Miscamble remarked that " [ o ] ne can only hope that present and future makers of foreign policy might share something of his integrity and intelligence " . Foreign Policy described Kennan as " the most influential diplomat of the 20th century " . Henry Kissinger said that Kennan " came as close to authoring the diplomatic doctrine of his era as any diplomat in our history " , while Colin Powell called Kennan " our best tutor " in dealing with the foreign policy issues of the 21st century . 
 During his career , Kennan received a number of awards and honors . As a scholar and writer , Kennan was a two @-@ time recipient of both the Pulitzer Prizes and the National Book Award , and had also received the Francis Parkman Prize , the Ambassador Book Award and the Bancroft Prize . Among Kennan 's numerous other awards and distinctions were the Testimonial of Loyal and Meritorious Service from the Department of State ( 1953 ) , Princeton 's Woodrow Wilson Award for Distinguished Achievement in the Nation 's Service ( 1976 ) , the Order of the Pour le Mérite ( 1976 ) , the Albert Einstein Peace Prize ( 1981 ) , the Peace Prize of the German Book Trade ( 1982 ) , the American Academy of Arts and Letters Gold Medal ( 1984 ) , the American Whig @-@ Cliosophic Society 's James Madison Award for Distinguished Public Service ( 1985 ) , the Franklin D. Roosevelt Foundation Freedom from Fear Medal ( 1987 ) , the Presidential Medal of Freedom ( 1989 ) , the Distinguished Service Award from the Department of State ( 1994 ) , and the Library of Congress Living Legend ( 2000 ) . Kennan had also received 29 honorary degrees and was honored in his name with the George F. Kennan Chair in National Security Strategy at the National War College and the George F. Kennan Professorship at the Institute for Advanced Study . 
 Historian Wilson D. Miscamble argues that Kennan played a critical role in developing the foreign policies of the Truman administration . He also states that Kennan did not believe in either global or strongpoint containment ; he simply wanted to restore the balance of power between the United States and the Soviets . Like historian John Lewis Gaddis , Miscamble concedes that although Kennan personally preferred political containment , his recommendations ultimately resulted in a policy directed more toward strongpoint than to global containment . 
 = = = Cultural views = = = 
 Noting the large @-@ scale Mexican immigration to the Southwestern United States , Kennan said in 2002 there were " unmistakable evidences of a growing differentiation between the cultures , respectively , of large southern and southwestern regions of this country , on the one hand " , and those of " some northern regions " . In the former , " the very culture of the bulk of the population of these regions will tend to be primarily Latin @-@ American in nature rather than what is inherited from earlier American traditions ... Could it really be that there was so little of merit [ in America ] that it deserves to be recklessly trashed in favor of a polyglot mix @-@ mash ? " Mayers argues that Kennan throughout his career represented the " tradition of militant nativism " that resembled or even exceeded the Know Nothings of the 1850s . Mayers adds that Kennan also believed American women had too much power . 
 = Irish Thoroughbred = 
 Irish Thoroughbred is American author Nora Roberts 's debut novel , originally published by Silhouette in January 1981 as a category romance . Like other category romances , the novel was less than 200 pages and was intended to be on sale for only one month . It proved so popular that it was repackaged as a stand @-@ alone romance and reprinted multiple times . Roberts wrote two sequels , Irish Rebel and Irish Rose . 
 Roberts drew on her Irish heritage to create an Irish heroine , Adelia " Dee " <unk> . In the novel , Dee moves to the United States , where her sick uncle arranges for her to marry his employer , wealthy American <unk> Travis Grant . Although the early part of their relationship is marked by frequent arguments and misunderstanding , by the end of the story Travis and Dee reconcile . According to critic Mary Ellen Snodgrass , the couple 's transformation from adversaries to a loving married couple is one of many formulaic elements in the book . Although the protagonists adhered to many stereotypes common to romance novels of the 1980s , Roberts 's heroine is more independent and feisty than most heroines of the time . This book 's popularity helped pave the way for other romance authors to experiment with heroes and heroines who had greater economic and emotional parity . 
 = = Publication = = 
 In 1979 , Nora Roberts was a stay @-@ at @-@ home mother with two small children . Stranded during a blizzard with nothing to read , Roberts amused herself by writing down one of the stories in her head . After developing her idea into a novel @-@ length contemporary romance , she continued writing and soon finished six more manuscripts . Roberts submitted her work to Harlequin Enterprises , a Canadian company considered the foremost publisher of romance novels in North America . Harlequin typically published works by British authors set in the British Commonwealth , but in 1975 Harlequin relaxed its criteria slightly and purchased several novels from American Janet Dailey . Unconvinced that the market would appreciate novels such as Dailey 's – all featuring American protagonists and set in the United States – Harlequin was unwilling to further expose itself to risk . As a result , the company quickly rejected Roberts 's work ; one editor explained that " they already had their American writer . " 
 In an effort to take advantage of the untapped talent of American writers , in 1980 Simon & Schuster created a new imprint , Silhouette Books , to serve as a counterpart to Harlequin . Roberts sent her seventh manuscript , Irish Thoroughbred , unsolicited to the new company . Nancy Jackson , the acquiring editor at Silhouette , pulled the manuscript from the slush pile and was impressed . She offered Roberts a contract , leaving the writer " awestruck " . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 The novel follows the relationship between Irishwoman Adelia " Dee " <unk> and American Travis Grant . As the story begins , the young and penniless Dee emigrates to the United States to live with her uncle , Paddy , who works on a large horse farm . Dee 's love for animals is evident , and she is given a job working alongside her uncle . Dee has a fiery temper and often argues with Travis , the wealthy farm owner ; many of their arguments lead to passionate embraces . Travis later rescues Dee from an attempted rape . 
 When Paddy suffers a heart attack , he becomes very concerned about his mortality and Dee 's future . He becomes overwrought and insists that Travis take care of Dee . After privately agreeing to a temporary marriage of convenience , Travis and Dee exchange vows in Paddy 's hospital room . As the story progresses , the protagonists become increasingly unhappy , with neither willing to admit their love for the other . 
 Although still unwilling to vocalize their feelings , Dee and Travis appear more confident in their relationship after they finally consummate their marriage . Soon , however , Dee 's insecurities are exploited by Travis 's sophisticated former girlfriend , Margot , who has returned to the area to win him back . Dee runs away . Travis follows , and the two confess their love and resolve to make their marriage work . 
 = = Genre = = 
 Irish Thoroughbred was initially published as a category romance novel . Books in this genre are short – usually between 175 and 200 pages , or about 55 @,@ 000 words – and are published in clearly delineated lines , or categories . Although each category romance novel is unique , it is required to conform to the general parameters that define its line . The small number of books published in each line every month are numbered sequentially within the line . Irish Thoroughbred was number 81 in the Silhouette Romance line . Novels in this line espouse more traditional family values and place greater emphasis on the characters ' emotions rather than their physical needs . Although these novels often describe sexual tension between the main characters , sexual intercourse is only described within the bounds of marriage . 
 Category romances are generally only available for a limited time , remaining on a bookseller 's shelves until they are sold out or until the next month 's titles are released . Popular category romances can be <unk> as stand @-@ alone romance novels ; Irish Thoroughbred received five printings by 1984 . In 2000 , the book was paired with its sequel , Irish Rose , and republished as Irish Hearts , with an initial print run of one million copies . This coincided with the release of a second sequel , Irish Rebel , which focused on Travis and Dee 's daughter . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Silhouette editors were originally concerned that the novel was too ethnic . Like many of her early novels , Roberts 's debut featured characters who shared the Irish culture in which Roberts had been raised . The opening pages , alluding to the introductory scene of Daphne du Maurier 's Rebecca , detailed the heroine 's awed reaction to the extravagance of an American estate . This plotline of an impoverished Irishwoman 's surprise at the wealth of America essentially reframed the Irish emigration to the United States of the 19th century . 
 According to literary critic Mary Ellen Snodgrass , Irish Thoroughbred is not as polished as later Roberts works . Snodgrass cites many predictable elements , including the core " confrontation between an overconfident male and an assertive girl @-@ woman " . Throughout the 1970s and early 1980s , romance novel heroines were generally " trembling virgins " , of an inferior class and power level than the hero . The hero often was very rich and powerful , while the heroine worked in traditional , subordinate , female roles , such as governess or secretary . The heroine of Irish Thoroughbred conformed to this pattern in part , by being sexually inexperienced , immature , and poor , but Roberts deliberately deviated from the rest of the stereotype by providing her with a hot @-@ tempered and independent personality . Her later books have continued in the same vein . As Roberts explains , " My heroine may have problems , she may be vulnerable , but she has to be strong , she has to be intelligent . She has to be independent and so does he , or I 'm not interested in telling their stories . " The popularity of this book and Roberts 's subsequent novels helped transform the genre , making authors more willing to give heroes and heroines economic and emotional parity . 
 Despite the greater independence that Roberts allotted her heroine , Dee is trapped within a patriarchal culture in which her uncle and prospective husband arrange her future . The arranged marriage and ensuing events , including the misunderstanding and her running away , were common plot elements for romance novels at that time . Dee 's reactions , however , veered from the formulaic . Her retorts brought to mind the " <unk> one @-@ upmanship of feminist literature " . When a man attempts to rape her , Dee responds with a series of sharp comments , calling him , among other things , " a filthy pig of a man " , before succumbing to the traditional feminine response of fainting in horror . 
 Roberts also includes the motif of jealousy . Dee is given a rival for Travis 's affections – an over @-@ sophisticated woman who is essentially Dee 's antithesis . Roberts reused this plot point in other novels , including Song of the West . 
 = Pulvermacher 's chain = 
 The Pulvermacher chain , or in full as it was sold the Pulvermacher hydro @-@ electric chain , was a type of voltaic battery sold in the second half of the 19th century for medical applications . Its chief market was amongst the numerous quack practitioners who were taking advantage of the popularity of the relatively new treatment of electrotherapy , or " electrification " as it was then known . Its unique selling point was its construction of numerous linked cells , rendering it mechanically flexible . A variant intended to be worn wrapped on part of the body for long periods was known as Pulvermacher 's galvanic chain or electric belt . 
 The Pulvermacher Company attracted a great deal of antagonism from the medical community due to their use of the names of well @-@ known physicians in their advertising without permission . The nature of their business ; in selling to charlatans and promoting quack practices also made them unpopular with the medical community . Despite this , the Pulvermacher chain was widely reported as a useful source of electricity for medical and scientific purposes , even amongst the most vocal critics of the Pulvermacher Company . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Electrically , the machine worked like a voltaic pile , but was constructed completely differently . The electrodes were copper for the cathode and zinc for the anode , with the electrolyte consisting of vinegar or some other weak acid , or a salt solution . 
 Each cell consisted of a wooden dowel with a <unk> winding of copper and zinc wires . The dowels were <unk> grooved like a screw thread to locate the wires precisely in position . This enabled the copper and zinc wires to be placed very close to each other without coming into electrical contact . Insulated wires could not be used as this would interfere with the operation of the electrolyte . Copper wires were inserted into the ends of the dowels to which the copper and zinc windings were soldered . These end wires were either attached to , or formed into , hooks and eyes for attaching to other cells . This arrangement is depicted in figure 2 . These attachments provided the electrical connections as well as the mechanical linkages . 
 Each cell was connected to the next with the copper winding of one being connected to the zinc winding of the next and so on . The cells could be connected end @-@ to @-@ end , or for a more compact assembly side @-@ by @-@ side , in the manner of links in a chain . The voltage delivered by the assembly was controlled by the number of links thus incorporated and could become quite high , even though the current available was no more than from a single cell ( to increase the current , the size of the cells must be increased ) . The shock delivered by such chains was described as " strong " for one chain of 120 links , and as " sharp " for another of 50 links . 
 Prior to use , the chain was soaked in vinegar so that the electrolyte was absorbed into the wooden dowels . The wood of which the dowels were made was chosen to be a very porous type so that the amount of electrolyte absorbed was maximised . The chain would continue to produce a voltage until the dowels dried out , then the chain would have to be <unk> . Typically , the chain would be charged by slowly drawing it through a bowl of vinegar as shown in figure 4 . 
 A special link could be included in the chain which incorporated an interrupter circuit . The purpose of the interrupter is to rapidly connect and disconnect the circuit so that the normally steady current of the battery is turned into a rapidly varying current . The usual practice in the use of medical electrical batteries was to feed the output of the interrupter to an induction coil in order to increase the voltage applied to the patient by transformer action . In Pulvermacher 's patent however , there is no mention of using induction coils - the Pulvermacher battery could produce large voltages merely by adding more links to the chain . However , the interrupter still had an effect in that an interrupted current produces a stronger sensation of electric shock in the patient than a steady current . A novel feature of Pulvermacher 's interrupter was that it was operated by the action of a vibrating spring kept in motion by the movements of the patient without the need for any external input . <unk> of the time typically had to be hand @-@ cranked by the physician , although there were already some in existence using electro @-@ mechanical automatic interrupters . Later versions of the Pulvermacher chain used clockwork driven interrupters whose rate of interruption could be adjusted so that the rate of shock to the patient could be controlled . Such a clockwork interrupter is fitted to the chain shown in figure 1 . It is wound up by turning the handle at the left end . 
 By 1869 a variant of this chain had appeared . In this the wooden dowels were dispensed with , and instead a hollow tube of zinc or magnesium was used . The zinc tube itself formed the anode of the cell , and over this was wound the copper wire cathode , or in yet another version , rings of copper plates . The zinc tube and copper wire were kept apart by stitches of thread . Magnesium was not commonly used by battery manufacturers of the time due to its very high price ( unlike today ) compared to zinc . However , a cell made with magnesium in place of zinc produces around twice the voltage . More importantly for Pulvermacher , the cell would still output some voltage if the electrolyte was replaced with plain water . Pulvermacher marketed a type of chain that was designed to be worn wrapped around a limb being treated and was claimed to operate with body sweat acting as the electrolyte and no need to charge it with electrolyte from an external source . Pulvermacher also produced a smaller " pocket version " of the chain which had fewer links than the full 120 @-@ cell version . 
 = = Pulvermacher = = 
 Isaac Lewis Pulvermacher was a physicist and inventor originally concerned with the electric telegraph . He first published details of his chain in August 1850 in German and in the winter of that same year came to Britain to demonstrate the machine to notable physicians . He visited London and Edinburgh on this trip . He gives his residence as Breslau , Kingdom of Prussia in his 1853 US patent . Prior to this , however , he had arrived in Britain from Vienna and all the British sources of the time describe him as " of Vienna " . 
 = = Medical opinion = = 
 At first , there was a very positive reaction to Pulvermacher . Early in 1851 Pulvermacher gave Golding Bird , a well known London physician with an interest in electrotherapy , a sample of the machine with which to experiment . Bird was impressed enough with it that he later gave a representative of the Pulvermacher Company a testimonial as a letter of introduction to physicians in Edinburgh . Bird thought that the battery would make a useful source of portable electricity and could be used for treating patients with some forms of paralysis in their homes . Contemporary equipment was not very portable , and in the case of friction machines required skilled operators to keep going . By October 1851 Bird felt that he had tested the device sufficiently to give it a glowing article in The Lancet . But even at this early stage there were signs of disquiet . Even as he wrote the favourable report in The Lancet Bird felt the need to level criticism at the Pulvermacher Company 's London agent , one C. Meinig , for promoting the device as a " universal panacea " for almost any imaginable complaint in the company 's advertisements . Bird was a tireless opponent of quack practitioners , and was particular quick to criticise medically unqualified electrical treatment , as he felt this was a reason professional acceptance of his own work in electrotherapy was being held back . The quack practitioner market was the very sector that the Pulvermacher Company 's unrestrained claims were aimed at . Nevertheless , Bird was gracious enough to specifically exclude Pulvermacher himself from responsibility for these " <unk> puffed " claims . 
 By April 1853 the situation had become very <unk> . Meinig had been using extracts from the testimonial provided by Bird without permission in order to bolster the Company 's , medically largely unsupported , quack advertising claims . Bird threatened a legal injunction but Meinig refused to desist and tried to imply that Bird was benefitting from the publicity . A letter writing campaign by one Dr. McIntyre against the Pulvermacher advertisements led to an exchange of letters in the Association Medical Journal . Bird made plain that he had only ever recommended the chain as a convenient source of electricity and did not support any of the claimed curative powers , most especially those that were supposed to produce instant results ( a typical course of electrotherapy at the time could last several months ) . He criticised some of the chains being sold as delivering " too feeble " a current to be of any medical use and pointed out that the proposed procedure of wrapping the device around an affected limb would make it useless since a conductive path through the skin across each cell would prevent a useful voltage being developed at the terminals ( Pulvermacher even suggests in his patent that contact with the body generates enough electricity to be effective even without electrolyte ) . This resulted in the Journal removing the Pulvermacher advertisements from its pages . The Association Medical Journal was quickly followed by the Medical Times and with growing pressure on The Lancet to do the same this pretty much ended professional medical support for the device , at least for the time being . 
 Despite this inauspicious start with the medical profession , the Pulvermacher chain continued to be described in scientific and medical journals and books as a useful tool throughout the late 1850s and 1860s , even being mentioned in the proceedings of the Royal Society . Even Bird , at the height of his dispute with the Pulvermacher company found himself able to say " the battery of Pulvermacher is an ingenious and useful source of electricity ... " Although banned from much of the medical press , the Pulvermacher Company did not restrain its advertising claims or its use of notable names . The College of Dentists investigated its possible use as an anaesthetic during tooth extraction but found no benefit with the device frequently adding to the pain . In 1869 , the Pulvermacher Company again found itself the subject of discussion in the medical press when they were involved in legal proceedings . This time the company was itself the victim of quacks when its product was pirated with poor quality imitations and this was the cause of the court case . The Medical Times was prompted by this to examine the efficacy of the Pulvermacher chain ending a long period of the paper ignoring it as a worthless quack instrument . The result was a very positive review of the chain 's function and the reviewer particularly praised the workmanship . 
 = = Competition and decline = = 
 Pulvermacher patented the chain battery in the US in 1853 . This was soon followed by the wearable chain battery belt , or electric belt . Electric belts became enormously popular in the US , far more so than in Europe . This led to the company headquarters being moved to Cincinnati by the 1880s as the Pulvermacher Galvanic Company , but still calling themselves Pulvermacher 's of London for the prestige of a European connection . Early models had to be soaked in vinegar before use as in England , but later on models that worked purely by galvanic action with body sweat were introduced . Since the device was being sold essentially as a quack cure it was only necessary to generate enough electricity that the wearer could feel it , no matter how slightly , and know that it was working . 
 Electric belts were made for every conceivable part of the human anatomy : limbs , abdomen , chest , neck – sometimes all worn at the same time . Pulvermacher even had a model designed to attach to the male genitals in a special sac which was claimed to cure impotence and erectile dysfunction . Pulvermacher promoted a theory that loss of " male vigour " in later life was a consequence of masturbation in early life and that a limited supply of semen , which provided the vigour , would run out before time if wasted . Pulvermacher 's device was meant to address this shortcoming . 
 Competition was very intense for this lucrative market and the claimed benefits became ever more extravagant . Amongst Pulvermacher 's many competitors in the US were the German Electric Belt Company ( actually New York based ) , Dr Crystal 's , Dr. Horn 's , Addison 's , Edson 's , Edison 's , Owen 's and Heidelberg 's . Edison 's was founded by Thomas Edison Junior , whose father was the famous Thomas Edison . Owen 's was originally New York based but expanded across the country until they were put out of business due to fraud . In Europe too , there were competitors . The Medical Battery Company of England made a popular belt . They attempted ( unsuccessfully ) to sue the Electrical Review when that paper accused them of quackery in 1892 . The Iona Company , an Oregon @-@ based company founded by Henry Gaylord Wilshire was still selling belts in 1926 and making large profits : $ 36 @,@ 000 ( $ 481 @,@ 000 inflation adjusted ) net from 2 @,@ 445 belts in five months . By the end of the 1920s the electric belt 's popularity had severely declined ( but not the public 's appetite for other quack electric cures ) and the scientific market had long since moved on to better electrical generation technology than chain batteries . 
 = = Popular culture = = 
 The Pulvermacher chain , especially in the form of one being worn on the body , was very familiar in the late 19th and early 20th century and would not have needed to be explained to an audience . For instance , there are references to it in the novel Madame Bovary when the character <unk> wearing a number of Pulvermacher chains is described as " more bandaged than a Scythian " . 
 = Mindomys = 
 Mindomys hammondi , also known as Hammond 's rice rat or Hammond 's oryzomys , is a species of rodent in the tribe Oryzomyini of family Cricetidae . Formerly considered to be related with Nectomys , Sigmodontomys , Megalomys , or Oryzomys , it is now placed in its own genus , Mindomys , but its relationships remain obscure ; some evidence supports a placement near Oecomys or as a basal member of Oryzomyini . 
 Mindomys hammondi is known only from Ecuador , where it occurs in montane forest ; a record from the Amazonian lowlands is dubious . Reportedly , it lives on the ground and is associated with water ; other suggest it lives in trees . A large , long @-@ tailed , and long @-@ whiskered rat , its fur is buff above and abruptly lighter below . The front part of the skull ( rostrum ) is heavily built . 
 The species is named after the collector who first found it , Gilbert Hammond . He supplied natural history specimens to Oldfield Thomas and others . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 = = = Discovery and classification in Nectomys = = = 
 In 1913 , Oldfield Thomas of the British Museum of Natural History ( BMNH ) in London published the first description of Mindomys hammondi , using two specimens collected at Mindo in Pichincha Province , Ecuador , in 1913 by Gilbert Hammond . He named the species Nectomys hammondi , classifying it in the genus Nectomys , which at the time included not only the large water rats currently placed in it , but also Sigmodontomys alfari and Oryzomys dimidiatus . He considered the animal to be most closely related to Nectomys <unk> , a species he had himself described in 1897 and which is now recognized as a synonym of Sigmodontomys alfari . 
 In his 1941 review The Families and Genera of Living Rodents , Sir John Ellerman retained N. hammondi as a species of Nectomys , but noted that the features of its teeth were atypical for the genus , as " the cusps appear to show no tendency to become suppressed . " Reviewing the genus Nectomys in 1944 , Philip Hershkovitz listed N. hammondi among species of Nectomys incertae sedis ( of uncertain position ) , and considered its placement in Nectomys as dubious . Characters he listed as conflicting with a Nectomys identity of the species included the short hindfoot with a long fifth toe , the weakly developed posterolateral palatal pits ( perforations of the palate near the third molars ) , and the orientation of the zygomatic plate . 
 = = = Classification in Oryzomys = = = 
 Hershkovitz published again on Nectomys in 1948 after examining additional material , including the holotype of N. hammondi . He now considered the latter to be a species of Oryzomys ( at the time a large genus that included most of the current members of the tribe Oryzomyini ) , but distinctive enough to be placed in its own subgenus . Noting that the species was " extremely long @-@ tailed " , he introduced the subgeneric name Macruroryzomys for hammondi . He also wrote that Oryzomys aphrastus ( currently Sigmodontomys aphrastus ) , then known only from Costa Rica , may be the closest relative of hammondi . 
 In his 1962 Ph.D. thesis , Clayton Ray considered O. hammondi to be most closely related to Megalomys , which includes giant rats from the Caribbean , and classified it as a member of the subgenus Megalomys of genus Oryzomys . In 1970 , Hershkovitz treated the species in another publication and noted that his name Macruroryzomys was a nomen nudum ( " naked name " ) because he had not explicitly mentioned characters differentiating it from other taxa in his 1948 publication . Nevertheless , he did not do anything to rectify the situation , and Macruroryzomys remains a nomen nudum . Hershkovitz rejected any relationship between O. hammondi and Nectomys or O. aphrastus and instead argued that O. hammondi was closely similar to Megalomys and may be close to the ancestor of Megalomys . In 1982 , Steadman and Ray mentioned the animal in passing under the name Macruroryzomys hammondi and reaffirmed its relationship to Megalomys . In the 2005 third edition of Mammal Species of the World , Guy Musser and Michael Carleton listed O. hammondi as an Oryzomys of obscure affinities , but suggested that it may be related to Megalomys . 
 = = = Classification in Mindomys = = = 
 In 2006 , Marcelo Weksler published a large @-@ scale cladistic analysis of Oryzomyini ( " rice rats " ) , the group ( tribe ) to which hammondi and the related species mentioned above belong . He used both morphological and molecular characters , but had only morphological data for Oryzomys hammondi . The placement of the species in his results was unstable ; some trees placed it close to the tree rice rats , Oecomys , within clade B and others placed it as an isolated lineage , basal to all other Oryzomyini . 
 Traits of O. hammondi that supported the latter placement include : a relatively short palate that does not extend behind the maxillary bones ; simple posterolateral palatal pits ; absence of a capsular process ( a raising of the bone of the mandible , or lower jaw , at the back end of the incisor ) ; and presence of the posteroloph on the upper third molar ( a crest at the back of the tooth ) . In these characters , O. hammondi differs from many or most Oryzomyini and is similar to some species outside Oryzomyini , but all traits of O. hammondi are present in at least one other member of the tribe . Traits shared by O. hammondi and Oecomys included : tail with the same coloration above and below ( unicolored ) ; parietal bones extending to the sides of the skull ; narrow zygomatic plate , without a zygomatic notch ; posteroloph present on upper third molar ; mesoflexus ( a valley in the molar crown in front of the mesoloph crest ) on upper second molar not divided in two . 
 In Weksler 's analysis , species placed in Oryzomys did not form a coherent ( monophyletic ) group , but instead were found at various positions across the oryzomyine tree , and he suggested that most of these species , including O. hammondi , should be placed in new genera . Later in 2006 , Weksler and others described ten new genera for species formerly placed in Oryzomys , including Mindomys for hammondi . Noting its " enigmatic distribution " and uncertain but perhaps basal position within Oryzomyini , they labeled the species an " extraordinary rat " worthy of continued inquiry . The generic name refers to Mindo , the type locality of M. hammondi . 
 Mindomys is now one of about 28 genera in the tribe Oryzomyini , which includes well over a hundred species distributed mainly in South America , including nearby islands such as the Galápagos Islands and some of the Antilles . Oryzomyini is one of several tribes recognized within the subfamily Sigmodontinae , which encompasses hundreds of species found across South America and into southern North America . Sigmodontinae itself is the largest subfamily of the family Cricetidae , other members of which include voles , lemmings , hamsters , and deermice , all mainly from Eurasia and North America . 
 = = Description = = 
 Mindomys hammondi is a large rice rat ; all other rats within its range are smaller . The fur is relatively short and woolly and is buffy with a grayish tone above and much paler — yellow or white — below , with the bases of the hairs grey . It has a long snout and small , dark ears that appear hairless . The vibrissae ( whiskers ) are long . The very long tail is dark both above and below and has rectangular scales . The hindfeet are broad , with long , narrow digits . They have poorly developed ungual tufts , patches of hair between the digits and along the plantar margins . The squamae , small structures resembling scales that cover the soles of the hindfeet in many oryzomyines , are indistinct . The fifth digit reaches to about half the length of the second phalange of the fourth . As in most oryzomyines , females have eight mammae . In specimens with published measurements , head and body length is 173 to 203 mm ( 6 @.@ 8 to 8 @.@ 0 in ) , tail length is 251 mm ( 9 @.@ 9 in ) , hindfoot length is 41 to 42 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 to 1 @.@ 7 in ) , ear length is 18 mm ( 0 @.@ 71 in ) , and greatest length of skull is 39 @.@ 4 to 43 @.@ 9 mm ( 1 @.@ 55 to 1 @.@ 73 in ) . 
 = = = Skull = = = 
 In the skull , the rostrum ( front part ) is large and robust . The nasal bones are short , not extending further back than the lacrimals , and the premaxillaries extend about as far back as the nasals . The zygomatic plate is narrow and lacks a zygomatic notch , an extension of the plate at the front . The plate 's back margin is level with the front of the first upper molar . The narrowest part of the interorbital region , located between the eyes , is to the front and its margins exhibit strong beading . Various crests develop on the long braincase , especially in old animals . The parietal bones form part of the roof of the braincase and , unlike in some other rice rats , also extend to the sides of the braincase . 
 The incisive foramina , perforations of the palate between the incisors and the molars , are short , not extending between the molars . The condition of the posterolateral palatal pits is variable , with some individuals having small pits and others having larger pits that may be recessed into a fossa ( depression ) . The palate is moderately long , extending beyond the molars but not beyond the posterior margins of the maxillary bone . In most specimens , the roof of the mesopterygoid fossa , the gap behind the back of the palate , is not perforated by sphenopalatine vacuities and thus it is fully ossified ; if present , these vacuities are small . Mindomys lacks an alisphenoid strut ; in some other oryzomyines , this extension of the alisphenoid bone separates two openings ( foramina ) in the skull , the masticatory – buccinator foramen and the foramen ovale accessorium . There are no openings in the mastoid bone . The squamosal bone lacks a suspensory process that contacts the tegmen tympani , the roof of the tympanic cavity , a defining character of oryzomyines . 
 In the mandible , the mental foramen , an opening in the mandible just before the first molar , opens to the outside , not upwards as in a few other oryzomyines . The upper and lower masseteric ridges , which anchor some of the chewing muscles , join at a point below the first molar and do not extend forward beyond that point . There is no capsular process of the lower incisor , a trait Mindomys shares with only a few other oryzomyines . 
 = = = Molars = = = 
 The molars are bunodont ( with the cusps higher than the connecting crests ) and brachydont ( low @-@ crowned ) . On the upper first and second molar , the outer and inner valleys between the cusps and crests interpenetrate . Many accessory crests are present , including the mesolophs and mesolophids . The anterocone and anteroconid , the front cusps on the upper and lower first molar , are not divided into smaller outer and inner cusps . Unlike in Nectomys , Oryzomys , and Megalomys , the first upper and lower molars usually lack accessory roots , so that each of the three upper molars has two roots on the outer side and one on the inner side and each of the lower molars has one root at the front and one at the back . 
 = = Distribution and ecology = = 
 A rare species , Mindomys hammondi is known only from Ecuador . Between 1913 and 1980 , eight specimens have been collected at Mindo , a " tiny agricultural community " at 1 @,@ 264 m ( 4 @,@ 147 ft ) elevation in Pichincha Province , northwestern Ecuador . Another specimen is labeled as having been collected on July 27 , 1929 , by the Olalla family of professional collectors in Concepción , a locality in the Amazonian lowlands of Napo Province , around 300 to 500 m ( 980 to 1 @,@ 640 ft ) above sea level . If this record is correct , Mindomys would be unique among small , non @-@ flying mammals native to Ecuador in occurring at relatively low elevations on both sides of the Andes . Furthermore , other collectors working in the same area in Napo have failed to find Mindomys , and the date the specimen was reportedly collected does not accord with the dates reported for the visit of the <unk> to Concepción , rendering its provenance dubious . There are two other locations named " Concepción " in northwestern Ecuador , and Diego Tirira suggested in 2007 that the specimen may instead be from one of these . Another specimen is known from Chaco , <unk> Province , at an altitude of 630 m ( 2 @,@ 070 ft ) . 
 Citing unpublished work by Tirira and Percequillo , the 2009 IUCN Red List reports that Mindomys is known from eleven specimens collected at four localities in northwestern Ecuador , and that its altitudinal range extends from 1 @,@ 200 to 2 @,@ 700 m ( 3 @,@ 900 to 8 @,@ 900 ft ) above sea level , but does not give details . The species occurs in moist , montane forest on the foothills of the western Andes . 
 Almost nothing is known of the biology of Mindomys . In 1999 , Eisenberg and Redford suggested that the species may live in trees ; in 2007 , Tirira agreed , citing the animal 's broad feet . Tirira also suggested that it is nocturnal ( active during the night ) and solitary and eats fruits , seeds , and insects . According to the 2009 IUCN Red List , it lives on the ground and " apparently has some affinity with water " . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 The IUCN Red List lists Mindomys hammondi as " endangered " in view of its small known distribution and a continuing decline in the extent and quality of its habitat . Up to 40 % of its habitat may already have been destroyed , and the species was last recorded in 1980 . It is not known to occur in any protected areas , but has been recorded close to the protected forest of Mindo @-@ <unk> . It prefers well @-@ conserved primary forest . 
 = Fusible plug = 
 A fusible plug is a threaded metal cylinder usually of bronze , brass or gunmetal , with a tapered hole drilled completely through its length . This hole is sealed with a metal of low melting point that flows away if a pre @-@ determined , high temperature is reached . The initial use of the fusible plug was as a safety precaution against low water levels in steam engine boilers , but later applications extended its use to other closed vessels , such as air conditioning systems and tanks for transporting corrosive or liquefied petroleum gasses . 
 = = Purpose = = 
 A fusible plug operates as a safety valve when dangerous temperatures , rather than dangerous pressures , are reached in a closed vessel . In steam engines the fusible plug is screwed into the crown sheet ( the top plate ) of the firebox , typically extending about an inch ( 25mm ) into the water space above . Its purpose is to act as a last @-@ resort safety device in the event of the water level falling dangerously low : when the top of the plug is out of the water it overheats , the low @-@ melting @-@ point core melts away and the resulting noisy release of steam into the firebox serves to warn the operators of the danger before the top of the firebox itself runs completely dry , which could result in catastrophic failure of the boiler . The temperature of the flue gases in a steam engine firebox can reach 1000 ° F ( 550 ° C ) , at which temperature copper , from which historically most fireboxes were made , softens to a state which can no longer sustain the boiler pressure and a severe explosion will result if water is not put into the boiler quickly and the fire removed or extinguished . The hole through the plug is too small to have any great effect in reducing the steam pressure and the small amount of water , if any , that passes through it is not expected to have any great impact in quenching the fire . 
 = = History = = 
 The device was invented in 1803 by Richard Trevithick , the proponent of high @-@ pressure ( as opposed to atmospheric ) steam engines , in consequence of an explosion in one of his new boilers . His detractors were eager to denounce the whole concept of high @-@ pressure steam , but Trevithick proved that the accident happened because his fireman had neglected to keep the boiler full of water . He publicised his invention widely , without patent , to counter these criticisms . 
 = = = Experiments = = = 
 Experiments conducted by the Franklin Institute , Boston , in the 1830s had initially cast doubt on the practice of adding water as soon as the escape of steam through the device was noted . A steam boiler was fitted with a small observation window of glass and heated beyond its normal operating temperature with the water level below the top of the firebox . When water was added it was found that the pressure rose suddenly and the observation glass shattered . The report concluded that the high temperature of the metal had vaporised the added water too quickly and that an explosion was the inevitable result . It was not until 1852 that this assumption was challenged : Thomas Redmond , one of the Institute 's own inspectors , specifically ruled out this theory in his investigation into the boiler explosion on the steam ship Redstone on the Ohio River on 3 April that year . A 1907 investigation in Wales came to a similar conclusion : a steam locomotive belonging to the Rhymney Railway was inadvertently sent out with its safety valves wrongly assembled . The pressure in the boiler built up to the extent that the injectors failed ; the crown sheet became uncovered , was weakened by the heat of the fire and violently blew apart . The investigation , led by Colonel Druitt of the Railway Inspectorate , dismissed the theory that the <unk> had succeeded in starting the injectors and that the sudden flood of cold water had caused such a generation of steam that the boiler burst . He quoted the results of experiments by the Manchester Steam Users ' Association , a national boiler certification and insurance body , that proved that the weight of copper present ( considered with its specific heat ) was insufficient to generate enough steam to raise the boiler pressure at all . Indeed , the addition of cold water had caused the pressure to fall . From then on it was accepted that the correct action in the event of the operation of the fusible plug was to add water . 
 = = = <unk> fusible plugs = = = 
 The original design was a simple solid plug filled with a slug of low @-@ melting @-@ point alloy . When this melts , it first melts as a narrow channel through the plug . Steam and water immediately begins to escape through this . The cored fusible plug was developed in the 1860s to give a wide opening as soon as the alloy softens . This version has a solid brass or bronze centre , soldered into place by a layer of the low @-@ melting @-@ point alloy . When overheated , the plug does not release any steam or water until the alloy melts sufficiently to release the centre plug . The plug now fails dramatically , opening its entire bore immediately . This full @-@ bore jet is then more likely to be noticed . 
 = = = Un @-@ noticed melted plugs = = = 
 A drawback to the device was found on 7 March 1948 , when the firebox crown sheet of Princess Alexandra , a Coronation Pacific of the London , Midland and Scottish Railway , failed while hauling a passenger train from Glasgow to London . Enquiries established that both water gauges were defective and on a journey earlier that day one or both of the fusible plugs had melted , but this had gone unnoticed by the engine crew because of the strong draught carrying the escaping steam away from them . 
 = = Maintenance = = 
 = = = Alloy composition = = = 
 Investigation showed the importance of the alloy on plug ageing . Alloys were initially favoured as they offered lower eutectic melting points than pure metals . It was found though that alloys aged poorly and could encourage the development of a matrix of oxides on the water surface of the plug , this matrix having a dangerously high melting point that made the plug inoperable . In 1888 the US Steamboat Inspection Service made a requirement that plugs were to be made of pure <unk> tin and replaced annually . This avoided lead and also zinc contamination . Zinc contamination was regarded as so serious a problem that the case of the plugs was also changed from brass ( a copper @-@ zinc alloy ) to a zinc @-@ free copper @-@ tin bronze , to avoid the risk of zinc migrating from the housing into the alloy plug . 
 = = = Plug ageing = = = 
 In the 1920s investigations by the U.S. Bureau of Standards , in conjunction with the Steamboat Inspection Service , found that in use encrustation and oxidation above the fusible core can increase melting point of the device and prevent it from working when needed : melting points in excess of 2000 ° F ( 1100 ° C ) in used examples have been found . Typical current practice in locomotives requires new plugs to be inspected after " 15 to 30 working days ( dependent upon water condition and use of locomotive ) or at least once every six months , " depending on the boiler operating pressure and temperature . 
 = = Other applications = = 
 The principle of the fusible plug is also applied to the transport of liquefied petroleum gases , where fusible plugs ( or small , exposed patches of the containers ' lining membrane ) are designed to melt or become porous if too high a temperature is reached : a controlled release , at a typical temperature of 250 ° F ( 120 ° C ) , is preferable to an explosive release ( a " <unk> " ) at a higher temperature . <unk> gas containers , such as those used for liquid chlorine , are fitted with one or more fusible plugs with an operating temperature of about 158 to 165 ° F ( 70 – 74 ° C ) . 
 Fusible plugs are common in aircraft wheels , typically in larger or high @-@ performance aircraft . The very large thermal loads imposed by abnormal landing and braking conditions ( and <unk> notably ) can cause already high pressure in the tyres to rise to the point that the tyre might burst , so fusible plugs are used as a relief mechanism . The vented gas may be directed to cool the braking surfaces . 
 Fusible plugs are sometimes fitted to the receivers of air compressors as a precaution against the ignition of any lubricating oil vapour that might be present . Should the action of the compressor heat the air above a safe temperature the core will melt and release the pressure . 
 Automobile air conditioning systems were commonly fitted with fusible plugs , operating at 100 – 110 ° C , but from concerns about the environmental effects of any released refrigerant gas this function has been taken over by an electrical switch . 
 A patented ( Patent published 1867 ) type of fireproof safe uses a fusible plug to douse its contents with water if the external temperature gets too high . 
 = Confessions ( Usher album ) = 
 Confessions is the fourth studio album by American singer Usher . It was released on March 23 , 2004 , by Arista Records . Recording sessions for the album took place during 2003 to 2004 , with its production handled by his longtime collaborator Jermaine Dupri , alongside with Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis and Lil Jon , among others . Primarily an R & B album , Confessions showcases Usher as a crooner and incorporates musical elements of hip hop and crunk . The album 's themes generated controversy about Usher 's personal relationships ; however , the album 's primary producer Jermaine Dupri claimed the record reflects his personal story . 
 The album became the instant commercial success in the United States , selling 1 @.@ 1 million copies in its first week . Its continued success was bolstered by its four chart @-@ topping singles . To begin strategizing of boosting its sales amid threats of bootlegging , the special edition for the album was issued , which includes the hit single , " My Boo " ; a duet with Alicia Keys . Despite some mixed criticism towards its lyrical substance , Confessions received mostly positive reviews and earned Usher several awards ; including the Grammy Award for Best Contemporary R & B Album . 
 The album has been regarded by music writers as Usher 's greatest work , and according to Billboard , is the second best @-@ selling album of the 2000s decade in the United States . With over eight million copies sold in 2004 , the album 's commercial success was viewed as a sign of recovering record sales in the US , following three years of decline . It was also exemplary of urban music 's commercial peak and dominance of the Billboard charts in 2004 . Confessions has been certified Diamond by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) and , as of 2016 , has sold over 10 million copies in the US and over 20 million copies worldwide . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 When he began recording Confessions in 2003 , Usher claimed he did not want to work with any new producers . Production began between Usher and Jermaine Dupri , who produced his last two albums , My Way ( 1997 ) and 8701 ( 2001 ) . In spite of his vision , Usher stated , " With this album I chose some new producers who I figured would definitely allow me to really articulate myself in a different way ... Every album you gotta grow . You gotta look for something different . " Dupri also invited his frequent collaborator Bryan @-@ Michael Cox . The album features productions by Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis , Just Blaze , R. Kelly , and Usher 's brother James Lackey . 
 With forty recorded songs , Usher felt the album had already been completed . Initially , he submitted the album to his record label , Arista . He and the company 's then @-@ president , L. A. Reid , who listened to the record ; however , they thought something was missing in it , " You know what , there 's like one or two more records that we just gotta get . " Usher was displeased with the decision ; he felt returning to the studio was the hardest part and needed to re @-@ motivate himself . He went on recording a few more tracks with help from fellow <unk> 's Lil Jon and Ludacris . Eventually , the team was able to produce songs like " Red Light " and " Yeah ! " . He also recorded songs with P. Diddy and The Neptunes during one of those sessions but were not released . 
 = = Composition = = 
 One of Usher 's first steps of recording Confessions was deciding to reveal " his own little secrets " . Friend and former A & R rep named Kawan " KP " Prather thought the album would let the public know Usher personally , as Kawan " KP " Prather speaks , " The music has never been the question , but people tend to buy into the artist . The more they know about you , the more they feel like they 're there with you . " Primarily because of its personal content , Usher said that this is his chance to be real . He named the album Confessions because he felt it is his most personal record to date : " All of us have our Pandora 's boxes or skeletons in our closets . I let a few of them out , you know . I 've got a lot to say . I 've got a lot of things and stuff built in me that I just want to let go of . " He wrote more songs than he contributed to his previous album . 
 Several of the songs in this album were conceptually based on a situation . For instance , " Burn " which it has built around the situation where Usher 's two @-@ year relationship with <unk> " Chilli " Thomas from an American R & B @-@ hip hop girl group TLC has almost ended . Dupri and Cox were talking and felt that there was a song in it , and started writing . Same through with the supposedly title track " Confessions Part II " ; they were conversing about an impregnated mistress , and its concept was written down . Usher has recorded " Confessions Part II " during a July 2003 's recording sessions in New York City , United States . With Usher singing the song 's lyrics , the theme of cheating inspired him and Dupri ; which both of them has decided to produce these two parts ; " Confessions Part I " and " Confessions Part II ( which the former has heard it at the beginning of the video for the latter ) . 
 = = = Music and style = = = 
 Confessions falls dominantly in the R & B genre . Usher commented that he chose to work with collaborators who know " ... how to interpret R & B from a jazz standpoint , an old school throwback standpoint , a new school point , a traditional classic standpoint ... " With producers and him set to produce such an album , however , other musical genres including hip hop were incorporated . While he wanted to do R & B , Usher also wanted his fans to experience hip hop at the same time : " I try to think outside the box . " When Lil Jon came on the scene , crunk was introduced to the R & B @-@ centered album , specifically on the Sean Garrett @-@ penned song " Yeah ! " . Usher said , " ' Yeah ! ' could be called the first consciously styled " crunk R & B " record . " The album also includes various slow jams . 
 This record also introduces a new style for Usher , focusing on his voice and technique . Andre " Dre " Harris and Vidal Davis listened to 8701 and felt that " Usher really needs to sing hard and let people know his vocal ability " . With efforts focused on the record to demonstrate his vocal ability to listeners , songs such as " Superstar " and " Follow Me " exhibited Usher in a type of " crooner mode " . The ballad @-@ oriented " Burn " also showcases his vocal aptitude . 
 = = Release = = 
 Confessions was slated to be released on November 6 , 2003 . However , due to marketing issues , the scheduled date was moved to March 23 of the following year . With several songs recorded , Usher faced the challenge of determining the final track listing . Usher , Dupri , Reid , and then @-@ A & R rep Mark Pitts have their favorites among the forty , but decided to choose those which " came up consistently more " . The collective was able to decide fifteen of them with two interludes completing the seventeen track list . Many songs were set aside for future use , including " Red Light " and a remix of " Yeah ! " . Usher and Arista held advance @-@ listenings for the album , few months before its actual release ; he also appeared on TV <unk> to promote Confessions . 
 With strategies to boost the album 's sales albeit threats of stealing music in the internet , Usher and his management readied a follow @-@ up release of Confessions with additional marketing blitz . The idea was considered " musically driven " after Zomba , who absorbed Arista , management was excited about " My Boo " , a song that was recorded for the original version of the album but failed to meet deadline . However , it actually began when American R & B and soul singer Alicia Keys , who is featured on the track , " brought in that the talk of repackaging started " . With the inclusion of " My Boo " , they thought of the album as complete . While they knew of other artists releasing special editions of their albums , the label felt that Confessions had the edge because of its previous success and its physical changes , including a new cover art , an expanded CD booklet , pullout poster and a letter to fans from Usher . The new version includes " My Boo " and " Red Light " , which were leaked alongside other songs that did not appear in the album , and a remix of " Confessions Part II " , and " Seduction " ; original tracks were also improved like the extended version of " Confessions Part I " and a rap added by American rapper Jadakiss in " Throwback " . The label itself treated the version a new album , with full media advertisements . The album was re @-@ issued in October 2004 , seven months after its initial release . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 When " Yeah ! " was issued , Usher and the label were plagued by marketing strategies . With many potential lead singles that could fare well in music markets , they were choosing between " Yeah ! " and " Burn " . Considering that the former sufficed what the label was looking for , they also believed the latter would be a blockbuster . Usher as well was skeptical that time if " Yeah ! " — which is largely composed around crunk — would be a good choice after doing an R & B record was in his mindset . Meanwhile , they felt " Burn " also failed to meet their expectations : " ' Burn ' being a great song is one thing , but it 's one of them things where people said , ' It 's strong , but can we make history with that ? ' At the end of the day , you want an event . " KP recalled , " Everybody was scared to make that first step . " 
 With much debate between two songs , " Burn " was originally chosen as the lead single , with plans of filming its music video in late 2003 . Meanwhile , Lil Jon leaked " Yeah ! " to DJs across the United States in November 2003 . Originally , the label did not intend " Yeah ! " as a proper single . Released to street DJs and mixtapes , it was meant to cultivate fans who waited for three years since the release of 8701 . While record labels stayed idle during the Christmas season , " Yeah ! " was getting favorable and quick response from radio stations though nobody was promoting ; it was finally released as the lead single . To keep the album atop the chart , " My Boo " was targeted for release after " Confessions Part II " was diminishing on the Hot 100 . The B @-@ side of the UK release includes " Red Light " and " Sweet Lies " . The single again topped the Hot 100 , giving the album its fourth consecutive number @-@ one . " Caught Up " was released as the album 's fifth and final single , and reached number eight in the United States . 
 = = = Tour = = = 
 Usher supported the album with a two @-@ month concert tour called " The Truth Tour " . The tour set featured a small stage up on top of the main stage , where the band played with Usher and his supporting dancers left with enough room to perform . The smaller stage had a mini platform attached to it — which lowered to the main stage — and had two big staircases on both sides of it . To the left , a group of circular staircases climbed to the top , and to the right , there was a fire escape replete with steps and an elevator . Kanye West , who had finished his own headlining tour for his 2004 album The College Dropout , was the opening act for " The Truth Tour " . 
 Preceding Usher 's entrance was a short movie showing him getting dressed , following on with him performing the opening song " Caught Up " , with Usher dressed in all white . The second song performed was " You Make Me Wanna ... " , where two dancers stayed on the top stage with Usher while two male dancers came out to the lower level with two chairs each in their hands . Each dancer threw one chair up to the top , with Usher already in hand with his own chair , with everyone following a set dance routine . Following this , Usher performed " U Remind Me " , where he danced by himself during a breakdown of the track . He then sang " That 's What It 's Made For " , following on with the song " Bad Girl " , where Usher was dressed up in a lavender suit and came out in a chrome chair . During the song , Usher picked out a female from the crowd , transitioning to " Superstar " , singing to the fan . Usher continued singing to the fan , performing " Can U Handle It ? " , closing the song by kissing the fan who then left the stage . Usher closed his performance with Confessions ' lead single " Yeah ! " . 
 " The Truth Tour " commenced on August 5 , 2004 in Hampton , Virginia and concluded on October 7 , 2004 in New York . It was ranked as one of the highest grossing tours of 2004 , grossing $ 29 @.@ 1 million . 
 = = Public reaction = = 
 After Usher along with his label held a few listening parties for the album , controversies spread about the mistress @-@ impregnating concept of " Confessions Part II " . Although Usher did not foresee such reaction of the album , Dupri already inferred , while making the album , what would be their reaction : " People are gonna question [ Usher ] on a couple of little lyrics ... " Coincidentally , Usher ended his relationship with Chilli early in 2004 . People were speculating about their breakup given the material of the album and his early interviews about its themes . With lyrics Usher admitted to have written because of his guilty conscience , people assumed that he and Chilli broke up because he was unfaithful . In a February 2004 radio interview , Chilli claimed that Usher " cheated " on her that caused their relationship to split . 
 Amidst widespread rumors , Usher stated , " People assume things , because as I said , I pull from my personal experiences to make my music . " He added that he loved Chilli , however , " ... it just didn 't work out . But cheating is not what caused the relationship to collide and crash ... " Although " Burn " is a reference to his dying relationship with Chilli — hence the title — Usher answered the press that the impregnating issue was not taken from a specific situation in his life . He also revealed that his friends who went through similar situations inspired him to write those songs : " ... it 's just something that I collectively got energy from everybody around me that had been through it . " In early 2006 , Dupri revealed that the story behind the album is his : " ... me cheating on my steady girlfriend , having a baby with that other woman and having to confess to everything that happened to my main girl . " 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Confessions was commercially successful , selling nearly 1 @.@ 096 million copies in the United States in its first week of release . It became the highest @-@ ever first week sales by an R & B artist , the second @-@ highest first week sales for a male artist , and the seventh @-@ highest first week sales of the recorded album charts history by SoundScan at the time of its release . It also equates the combined first @-@ week sales of his four previous album releases , including his live album called Live . The feat also carved history in Arista records having the first in any of their released albums to reach such sales . The success of the thirty @-@ year @-@ old record label , however , was attributed to its merging with Zomba Records . As of March 2013 it has the tenth highest first week album sales in history . 
 The album debuted at number one on the US Billboard 200 , becoming Usher 's first number @-@ one album . Confessions also hit number @-@ one on the Canadian Albums Chart and the US Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums . Its early , and successive , progress on the chart was said to be partly sustained by its strong single releases and plenty of press appearances and promotions . With " Yeah ! " propelling the album 's debut atop the chart , " Burn " , the second single off the album , facilitated Confessions 's continuing dominance as well . The first two released singles were competing on the Billboard Hot 100 ; the latter ended the twelve @-@ week number @-@ one chart run of the former . As the album 's third single , " Confessions Part II " , was about to top the chart and Usher to join with English pop and rock group The Beatles as the only acts to achieve three consecutive number @-@ one singles , American R & B singer Fantasia Barrino 's debut single " I Believe " prevented it from happening . Despite this , Usher became the first artist to top the Billboard Hot 100 Airplay with three consecutive number @-@ one singles . " Burn " achieved only eight non @-@ consecutive weeks on the Hot 100 after " Confessions Part II " topped the chart ; it became Usher 's second time to replace his own single at the top . " Yeah ! " and " Burn " were 2004 's top best @-@ selling singles in the United States , placing at number one and two respectively on the Billboard Chart Year @-@ Ender . Again , it honored Usher being the first act to achieve the feat since 1964 with the Beatles ' " I Want to Hold Your Hand " and " She Loves You " . 
 The album continued its dominance on the chart . D12 World by D12 ended its five consecutive weeks run at the top spot ; however , Confessions reclaimed the position the following week . The album spent a total 9 non @-@ consecutive weeks at number one on the Billboard 200 , becoming the longest @-@ running number one album of the millennium until 2009 , when country singer Taylor Swift spent 11 weeks atop the charts with Fearless . Over one month after its release , Confessions was certified three @-@ time platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America for three million US shipments . Confessions topped the list of the most @-@ shipped albums of 2004 in the United <unk> was the second best @-@ selling album of the 2000s decade in the US , behind Eminem 's The Marshall Mathers LP . In July 2012 , it reached sales of 10 million copies in the US , according to Nielsen SoundScan . It has sold over 20 million copies worldwide . To date , the album has shipped 10 @.@ 3 million copies in the US and has received a Diamond certification from the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Confessions received generally positive reviews from critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream publications , the album received an average score of 71 , based on 13 reviews . From an artistic viewpoint , the album has been considered as Usher 's best album to date , with writers calling it expansive and futuristic . Matt Cibula of PopMatters wrote that it " might be the best English @-@ language pop album of the year " . Entertainment Weekly 's Jem Aswad said that Usher " reveals his new @-@ found maturity by opening with the grittiest song he 's ever done . " Laura Checkoway of Vibe said that , " Though Confessions doesn 't bring Usher all the way to the artistic maturity one might hope for , tracking this star 's progression definitely has its satisfactions . " Q magazine observed " addictive R & B hooks and all @-@ dancin ' , all @-@ lovin ' subject matter boosted with hot production tweaks . " Amy Linden of The Village Voice commented that " Usher 's ( alleged ) character flaws are easily forgiven , though , because he can sing his cheating ass off , " and concluded , " Like 2002 's big @-@ selling but underrated 8701 , Confessions is a top @-@ of @-@ the @-@ line pop @-@ soul showcase that ... manages to be commercially savvy without coming off as too desperate . <unk> like Usher himself . " Kelefa Sanneh of The New York Times said that near the end , the songwriting " fails " Usher on a " heavily front @-@ loaded " R & B album , but felt that his performance is solid throughout : 
 The pleasure of listening to Usher is the pleasure of listening to a singer who knows exactly what he 's doing . ' Truth Hurts , ' a seemingly innocent ( if plaintive ) 1970 's throwback , turns nasty when the narrator suddenly reveals that the first two verses were full of lies . Which raises the question : are these supposed ' confessions ' true ? He loves toying with his audience this way , loves telling us exactly how bad he is , then daring us to believe him . 
 In a mixed review , Caroline Sullivan of The Guardian criticized its " production gloss " and said that , although Usher 's " fluid delivery " redeems weak tracks , there are only two " great songs " — " Yeah ! " and the title track — and " 17 less so . " Rolling Stone writer Laura Sinagra said that he " is coming of age , again " , but " still doesn 't quite cut it as a horny roughneck " . Jon Caramanica of Blender viewed that Usher 's songwriting " isn 't a strength , and his ballads often drown in their own inanity " . The Washington Post 's Elizabeth Mendez Berry called Confessions " Usher 's strongest recording to date " but found the more sexual songs mundane . Robert Christgau from The Village Voice cited " Confessions Part II " and " Bad Girl " as " choice cuts " , indicating " a good song on an album that isn 't worth your time or money " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The album earned Usher numerous accolades . At the 47th Grammy Awards , he was nominated for eight categories and won three : Best Contemporary R & B Album , Best R & B Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocal ( for " My Boo " ) and Best Rap / Sung Collaboration ( for " Yeah ! " ) . Usher won awards at the 2005 Soul Train Music Awards : R & B / Soul Album , Male ( for Confessions ) ; R & B / Soul Single , Male for ( " Confessions Part II " ) ; R & B / Soul Single , Group , Band or Duo ( for " My Boo " ) ; and R & B / Soul or Rap Dance Cut ( for " Yeah ! " ) . At the 2004 American Music Awards , he won four , including Favorite Soul / R & B Album and Favorite Male Soul / R & B Artist . At the 2004 Billboard Music Awards , Usher racked up eleven awards , including Artist of the Year , Male Artist of the Year , and Hot 100 Song of the Year for " Yeah ! " . In December 2009 it was ranked as the best solo album and second best overall album of the 2000 – 2009 decade . Its singles Yeah ! , Burn , and My Boo were all ranked as some of the best songs of the 2000 – 2009 decade , respectively placing in order at number two , number 21 , and number 36 . 
 = = Legacy and impact = = 
