 With sales of more than eight million in 2004 , Confessions was the most @-@ shipped album of the year in the US . Along with the success of the American singer Norah Jones 's second album , Feels like Home ( 2004 ) , as well as breakthroughs albums by many new and old artists , it was seen as a sign that US record sales were slowly recovering after three straight years of decline due to competing DVDs and video games and the prevalent music piracy . By the end of 2004 , the industry had sold 667 million albums , an increase of about 1 @.@ 6 percent , as recorded by Nielsen SoundScan . Compared with sales records in 2003 , the figures showed eight percent increase . The album 's success also exemplified urban music 's commercial dominance during the early 2000s , which featured massive crossover success on the Billboard charts by R & B and hip hop artists . In 2004 , all 12 songs that topped the Billboard Hot 100 were African @-@ American recording artists and accounted for 80 % of the number @-@ one R & B hits that year . Along with Usher 's streak of singles , Top 40 radio and both pop and R & B charts were topped by OutKast 's " Hey Ya ! " , Snoop Dogg 's " Drop It Like It 's Hot " , Terror Squad 's " Lean Back " , and Ciara 's " Goodies " . Chris <unk> of The Village Voice later remarked that " by the early 2000s , urban music was pop music . " 
 In a year @-@ end article for The New York Times , writer Ben Sisario dubbed 2004 " the year of Usher " . The success of the album put Usher in the mainstream , becoming the biggest artist of 2004 . Others also said that Usher might be the successor of Michael Jackson . The success of the album had also facilitated Usher to branch out to non @-@ musical ventures . He has opened a restaurant , starred in a film , launched his record label and recruited artists , and has done philanthropic activities like his efforts in helping 2005 Hurricane Katrina victims . Usher was not the only person who benefited from the album 's significant critical and commercial success . Bryan @-@ Michael Cox , who co @-@ wrote and co @-@ produced " Burn " , earned credibility in the music industry for his role in the album . Cox had been producing records for several notable American artists , including Alicia Keys , B2K , Mariah Carey and Destiny 's Child , among others , but he considered " Burn " as his crowning moment , which earned him two Grammy Award nominations . With 2004 deemed to be his introduction to a larger , more mainstream audience , Cox stated in an interview for MTV that many people were starting to recount what he had done . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Notes 
 ^ [ a ] signifies a vocal producer . 
 ^ [ b ] signifies a co @-@ producer . 
 " Throwback " contains a sample of Dionne Warwick 's 1973 " You 're Gonna Need Me " . 
 " Superstar " contains a sample of Willie Hutch ' 1973 " Mack 's Stroll / The Getaway ( Chase Scene ) " . 
 " Truth Hurts " uses the production of Janet Jackson 's " Could This Be Love " , an outtake from Damita Jo . 
 " Take Your Hand " contains a sample of Harold Melvin & The Blue Notes ' 1973 " Is There a Place for Me ? " . 
 Faith Evans performs uncredited background vocals on " Superstar " . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits for Confessions adapted from AllMusic . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Battle of Masan = 
 The Battle of Masan was an engagement between United Nations ( UN ) and North Korean ( NK ) forces , which took place early in the Korean War between August 5 and September 19 , 1950 , in the vicinity of Masan and the Naktong River in South Korea . It was part of the Battle of Pusan Perimeter , and was one of several large engagements fought simultaneously . The battle ended in a victory for the UN after large numbers of United States ( US ) and Republic of Korea ( ROK ) troops were able to repel the repeated attacks of two North Korean divisions . 
 Operating as the extreme southern flank of the Pusan Perimeter , the US Army 's 25th Infantry Division placed its regiments around the South Korean city of Masan , with the US 24th Infantry Regiment and 5th Regimental Combat Team based in Haman and nearby Sobuk @-@ san , and the US 35th Infantry Regiment based along the Nam River to the west of the city . Throughout the six @-@ week battle , the Korean People 's Army 6th and 7th Divisions attacked the 25th Division 's regiments in an attempt to break through the UN forces and attack Pusan . 
 An initial UN counteroffensive out of Masan proved ineffective in stopping the North Koreans from advancing . In the subsequent fight , the 35th Infantry was able to repel the North Koreans at the Battle of Nam River and were highly regarded for these actions . However , the 24th Infantry performed very poorly at the battles of Blue Mountain and Haman , forcing the 25th Division to muster reserves to counter the North Korean gains against the 24th . 
 The UN units were able to defeat and repel the North Koreans repeatedly , including through a coordinated offensive across the entire perimeter . In delaying and pushing back the North Koreans , the 25th Infantry Division was able to buy time for UN forces to counterattack at Inchon , effectively defeating the North Korean Army at the Pusan Perimeter . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Outbreak of war = = = 
 Following the 25 June 1950 invasion of the Republic of Korea ( South Korea ) by its northern neighbor , the Democratic People 's Republic of Korea ( North Korea ) , the United Nations decided to commit troops to the conflict on behalf of South Korea . The United States , a member of the UN , subsequently committed ground forces to the Korean peninsula with the goal of fighting back the North Korean invasion and preventing South Korea from collapsing . However , US forces in the Far East had been steadily decreasing since the end of World War II , five years earlier , and at the time the closest forces were the 24th Infantry Division , headquartered in Japan . The division was understrength , and most of its equipment was antiquated due to reductions in military spending . Regardless , the 24th Division was ordered to South Korea . 
 The 24th Infantry Division was the first US unit sent into Korea with the mission to take the initial " shock " of North Korean advances , delaying much larger North Korean units to buy time to allow reinforcements to arrive . The division was alone for several weeks as it attempted to delay the North Koreans , making time for the 1st Cavalry and the 7th and 25th Infantry Divisions , along with other Eighth Army supporting units , to move into position . Advance elements of the 24th Infantry Division were badly defeated in the Battle of Osan on July 5 , the first encounter between American and North Korean forces . For the first month after the defeat of Task Force Smith , the 24th Infantry Division was repeatedly defeated and forced south by superior North Korean numbers and equipment . The regiments of the 24th Infantry Division were systematically pushed south in engagements around Chochiwon , Chonan , and Pyongtaek . The division made a final stand in the Battle of Taejon , where it was nearly destroyed , but delayed North Korean forces until July 20 . By that time , the Eighth Army 's force of combat troops were roughly equal to North Korean forces attacking the region , with new UN units arriving every day . 
 = = = North Korean advance = = = 
 With Taejon captured , North Korean forces began surrounding the Pusan Perimeter in an attempt to envelop it . The 4th and 6th North Korean Infantry Divisions advanced south in a wide flanking maneuver . The two divisions attempted to envelop the UN 's left flank , but became extremely spread out in the process . They advanced on UN positions with armor and superior numbers , repeatedly pushing back U.S. and South Korean forces . 
 American forces finally halted the North Korean advance in a series of engagements in the southern section of the country . Forces of the 3rd Battalion , 29th Infantry Regiment , newly arrived in the country , were wiped out at Hadong in a coordinated ambush by North Korean forces on July 27 , opening a pass to the Pusan area . Soon after , North Korean forces took Chinju to the west , pushing back the US 19th Infantry Regiment and leaving routes to the Pusan open for more North Korean attacks . US formations were subsequently able to defeat and push back the North Koreans on the flank in the Battle of the Notch on August 2 . Suffering mounting losses , the KPA force in the west withdrew for several days to re @-@ equip and receive reinforcements . This granted both sides a reprieve to prepare for the attack on the Pusan Perimeter . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Task Force Kean = = = 
 Lieutenant General Walton Walker and the Eighth Army began preparing a counteroffensive , the first conducted by the UN in the war , for August . It would kick off with an attack by the US reserve units in the Masan area to secure Chinju from the North Korean 6th Division , followed by a larger general push to the Kum River in the middle of the month . One of his goals was to break up a suspected massing of North Korean troops near the Taegu area by forcing the diversion of some North Korean units southward . On August 6 , the Eighth Army issued the operational directive for the attack by Task Force Kean , named for the US 25th Infantry Division commander , Major General William B. Kean . Task Force Kean consisted of the 25th Division , less the 27th Infantry and a field artillery battalion , with the 5th Regimental Combat Team ( 5th RCT ) and the 1st Provisional Marine Brigade attached . Together this represented a force of about 20 @,@ 000 men . The plan of attack required the force to move west from positions held near Masan , seize the Chinju Pass , and secure the line as far as the Nam River . However , the offensive relied on the arrival of the entire 2nd Infantry Division , as well as three more battalions of American tanks . 
 Task Force Kean kicked off its attack on August 7 , moving out from Masan . At the Notch , a northern pass into the city and site of a previous battle , the 35th Infantry Regiment encountered 500 North Korean infantry , defeating them . The force surged forward to Pansong , inflicting another 350 casualties on the North Koreans . There , they overran the North Korean 6th Division 's headquarters . However the rest of the task force was slowed by North Korean resistance . Task Force Kean pressed on the Chindong @-@ ni area , resulting in a confused battle where the fragmented force had to rely on air strikes and airdrops to keep it effective . Task Force Kean 's offensive had collided with one being delivered simultaneously by the North Korean 6th Division . 
 Heavy fighting continued in the area for three days . By August 9 , Task Force Kean was poised to retake Chinju . The task force , aided by air power , initially advanced quickly though North Korean resistance was heavy . On August 10 the Marines picked up the advance , inadvertently discovering the North Korean 83rd Motorized Regiment of the 105th Armored Division . F4U Corsairs from the 1st Marine Air Wing strafed the retreating column repeatedly , inflicting 200 casualties and destroying about 100 of the regiment 's equipment vehicles . However the 1st Provisional Marine Brigade elements were withdrawn from the force on August 12 to be redeployed elsewhere on the perimeter . Task Force Kean continued forward supported by naval and field artillery , capturing the area around Chondong @-@ ni . However , Eighth Army requested several of its units to redeploy to Taegu to be used elsewhere on the front , particularly at the Naktong Bulge 
 An attempt to move the 25th Infantry Division 's division trains through the valley became mired in the mud through the night of August 10 – 11 and was attacked in the morning by North Koreans who had driven American forces from the high ground . In the confusion , North Korean armor was able to penetrate roadblocks and assault the supporting artillery positions . The surprise attack was successful in wiping out most of the 555th and 90th Field Artillery battalions , with much of their equipment . Both North Korean and American armor swarmed to the scene and US Marine aviation continued to provide air cover , but neither side was able to make appreciable gains despite inflicting heavy casualties on one another . American forces were unsuccessful in retaking the positions where the artillery was overrun , suffering numerous casualties in several failed attempts to do so . Upon later inspection , the bodies of 75 men , 55 from the 555th Field Artillery and 20 from the 90th Field Artillery , were found executed when the area again came under American control , in what was later known as the Bloody Gulch massacre . Task Force Kean was forced to withdraw back to Masan , unable to hold its gains , and by August 14 it was approximately in the same positions it had been in when it started the offensive . 
 Task Force Kean had failed in its objective of diverting North Korean troops from the north , and also failed in its objective of reaching the Chinju pass . However , the offensive is noted to have significantly increased morale among the troops of the 25th Infantry Division , which performed extremely well in subsequent engagements . The 6th Division had been reduced to 3 @,@ 000 – 4 @,@ 000 and had to replenish its ranks with South Korean conscripts from Andong . Fighting in the region continued for the rest of the month . 
 = = = UN <unk> battle lines = = = 
 Walker then ordered the US 25th Infantry Division , under Kean , to take up defensive positions on the Pusan Perimeter southern flank west of Masan . By August 15 , the 25th Infantry Division had moved into these positions . Rough terrain west of Masan limited the choice of the positions . The mountain group west of Masan was the first readily defensible ground east of the Chinju pass . The 2 @,@ 000 @-@ foot ( 610 m ) mountain ridges of Sobuk @-@ san dominated the area and protected the Komam @-@ ni @-@ Haman @-@ Chindong @-@ ni road , the only means of north @-@ south communication west of Masan . 
 Northwest of Komam @-@ ni was the broken spur of P 'il @-@ bong , dominated by 900 feet ( 270 m ) Sibidang @-@ san , along the Nam River . Sibidang was an excellent observation point for the surrounding area , and US artillery emplaced in the Komam @-@ ni area could interdict the road junction at Chungam @-@ ni . The US 35th Infantry Regiment set up positions at Sibidang @-@ Komam @-@ ni , in the northern part of the 25th Infantry Division defense line . The 35th Regiment line extended from a point 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) west of Komam @-@ ni to the Nam River and then turned east along that stream to its confluence with the Naktong River . It was a long regimental line , about 26 @,@ 000 yards ( 24 @,@ 000 m ) , twice the length a regiment was typically assigned . 
 The 1st Battalion , 35th Infantry held the regiment 's left flank west of Komam @-@ ni , while the 2nd Battalion held the right along the Nam River . 3rd Battalion , redesignated from the 1st Battalion , 29th Infantry , was in reserve on the road south of Chirwon from where it could move quickly to any part of the line . To the south was the US 24th Infantry Regiment and west of Chindong @-@ ni , the 5th Regimental Combat Team was on the division 's left flank . On division orders , the 5th Regimental Combat Team first held the ground above the Chindong @-@ ni coastal road only as far as <unk> @-@ san . Kean soon decided , however , that the 5th RCT should close the gap northward between it and the 24th Infantry . When the 5th sent a South Korean unit of 100 men under American officers to the higher slope of Sobuk @-@ san , North Korean troops already there drove them back . Kean then ordered the 5th RCT to take this ground , but it was too late . 
 = = = North Korean consolidation = = = 
 Meanwhile , the NK 6th Division was ordered to await reinforcements before continuing the attack . From north to south , the division had its 13th , 15th , and 14th Regiments . The first replacements arrived at Chinju on about August 12 . Approximately 2 @,@ 000 unarmed South Koreans conscripted in the Seoul area joined the division by August 15 . At Chinju , the 6th Division issued them grenades and told the recruits they would have to pick up weapons from killed and wounded on the battlefield . Another group of 2 @,@ 500 replacements conscripted in the Seoul area joined the 6th Division on August 21 , bringing the division strength to approximately 8 @,@ 500 men . In the last week of August and the first week of September , 3 @,@ 000 more recruits conscripted in southwest Korea joined the division . The 6th Division used this last body of recruits in labor details at first and only later employed them as combat troops . The South Korean conscripts were often forcibly taken from their homes by North Korean troops , and typically held very weak morale . The North Koreans realized they presented a weakness in the lines but were unable to acquire men using other means . The North Koreans placed rear @-@ guard troops behind the conscripts ' formations , who would threaten to shoot them if they attempted to defect , desert or surrender their positions . 
 As a part of the North Korean build @-@ up in the south , the untried NK 7th Division also arrived near Masan with another 10 @,@ 000 men . The 7th Division occupied key ports to protect the 6th Division against possible amphibious landings in its rear . Eventually , though , the division was committed to combat in conjunction with other North Korean units . The simultaneous attacks were hoped to overwhelm UN lines . 
 = = = North Korean advance = = = 
 On August 17 , the North Koreans resumed their attack . A battalion of North Korean troops drove the ROK police out of T 'ongyong but did not hold it long . UN naval forces heavily shelled T 'ongyong as three companies of ROK Marines from <unk> Island made an amphibious landing near the town . The ROK force then attacked the North Koreans and , supported by naval gun fire , drove them out . The North Koreans at T 'ongyong lost about 350 men , the survivors withdrew to Chinju . 
 The reinforced North Koreans had advanced on the 25th Infantry Division defensive line and had begun a series of probing attacks that were to continue throughout the month , sometimes of battalion strength . Most of these attacks came in the high mountains west of Haman , in the Battle Mountain , P 'il @-@ bong , and Sobuk @-@ san area . There the 6th Division attacked any UN @-@ held terrain features that afforded observation of its supply and concentration area in the deeply cut valley to the west . 
 = = = Battle of Komam @-@ ni = = = 
 The NK 6th Division shifted its axis of attack and its main attacking effort to the northern part of the Chinju @-@ Masan corridor just below the Nam River in the 35th Infantry 's sector . The 35th Infantry set to work to cover its front with trip flares , but they were in short supply and gradually it became impossible to replace them . Illuminating flares were also in short supply , and the reserve stocks had deteriorated to such a degree that only about 20 percent of the supply issued to the regiment was effective . Even when employed , the time lapse between a request for them and delivery by the big howitzers allowed some North Korean infiltration before the threatened area was illuminated . 
 The 64th Field Artillery Battalion , with C Battery , 90th Field Artillery Battalion , attached , and A Company , 88th Medium Tank Battalion , supported Fisher 's regiment . Three medium M4A3 Sherman tanks , from positions at Komam @-@ ni , acted as artillery and placed interdiction fire on Chungam @-@ ni . Six other medium M26 Pershing tanks in a similar manner placed interdiction fire on Uiryong across the Nam River . 
 In the pre @-@ dawn hours of August 17 , a North Korean attack hit the 35th Infantry . North Korean artillery fire began falling on the 1st Battalion command post in Komam @-@ ni at 03 : 00 , and an hour later North Korean infantry attacked A Company , forcing two of its platoons from their positions , and overrunning a mortar position . After daylight , a counterattack by B Company regained the lost ground . This was the beginning of a five @-@ day battle by 1st Battalion along the southern spurs of Sibidang , 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) west of Komam @-@ ni . The North Koreans attempted to turn the left flank of the 35th Regiment and split the 25th Division line . On the morning of August 18 , A Company again lost its position to North Korean attack and again regained it by counterattack . Two companies of South Korean police arrived to reinforce the battalion right flank . Against the continuing North Korean attack , artillery supporting the 1st Battalion fired an average of 200 rounds an hour during the night of August 19 – 20 . 
 After three days and nights of this battle , C Company of the 35th Infantry and A Company of the 29th Infantry moved up astride the Komam @-@ ni road during the morning of August 20 to bolster A and B Companies on Sibidang . A large concentration of North Koreans advanced to renew the attack . The US troops directed artillery fire on this force and called in an air strike . Observers estimated that the artillery fire and the air strike killed about 350 North Korean troops , half the attack group . 
 The North Koreans made another try on the same position . The morning of August 22 , North Korean infantry started a very heavy attack against the 1st Battalion . Employing no artillery or mortar preparatory fires , the force cut the barbed wire at the perimeter and attacked at close quarters with small arms and grenades . This assault engaged three American companies and drove one of them from its position . After three hours of fighting A Company counterattacked at 07 : 00 and regained its lost position . The next day , August 23 , the North Koreans , frustrated in this area , withdrew from contact in the 35th Infantry sector . 
 = = = Battle of Battle Mountain = = = 
 This high ground west of Haman on which the 24th Infantry established its defensive line was part of the Sobuk @-@ san mountain mass . Sobuk @-@ san reaches its 2 @,@ 400 @-@ foot ( 730 m ) peak at P 'il @-@ bong ( also called Hill 743 ) 8 miles ( 13 km ) northwest of Chindong @-@ ni and 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) southwest of Haman . From P 'il @-@ bong the crest of the ridge line curves northwestward , to rise again 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) away in the bald peak designated Hill 665 , which became known as Battle Mountain . US troops also occasionally referred to it variously as " Napalm Hill , " " Old Baldy , " or " Bloody Knob . " Between P 'il @-@ bong and Battle Mountain the ridge line narrows to a rocky ledge which the troops called the " Rocky Crags . " Northward from Battle Mountain toward the Nam River , the ground drops sharply in two long spur ridges . Men who fought there called the eastern one Green Peak . 
 At the western , North Korean @-@ held base of Battle Mountain and P 'il @-@ bong were the villages of Ogok and Tundok , 1 @.@ 25 miles ( 2 @.@ 01 km ) from the crest . A north @-@ south mountain trail crossed a high saddle just north of these villages and up the west slope about halfway to the top of Battle Mountain . This road gave the North Koreans an advantage in mounting and supplying their attacks in the area . A trail system ran from Ogok and Tundok to the crests of Battle Mountain and P 'il @-@ bong . From the top of Battle Mountain an observer could look directly down into the North Korean @-@ held valley . At the same time , from Battle Mountain the North Koreans could look down into the Haman valley eastward and observe the US 24th Infantry command post , supply road , artillery positions , and approach trails . Whichever side held the crest of Battle Mountain could see into the rear areas of the other . Both forces , seeing the advantages of holding the crest of Battle Mountain , fought relentlessly to capture it in a six @-@ week @-@ long battle . 
 The first attack against the mountain line of the 24th Infantry came on the morning of August 18 , when the North Koreans overran several E Company positions on the northern spur of Battle Mountain and killed the company commander . During the day , Lieutenant Colonel Paul F. Roberts succeeded Lieutenant Colonel George R. Cole in command of the 2nd Battalion , 24th Infantry there . The next day , the North Koreans attacked C Company on Battle Mountain and routed it . Officers could collect only 40 men to bring them back into position . Many ROK police on P 'il @-@ bong also ran from the fight , and only 56 of them remained in their defensive positions . American officers used threats and physical force to get others back into position . A 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) in the line north of P 'il @-@ bong existed in the 24th Infantry lines at the close of the day , and an unknown number of North Koreans were moving into it . 
 On August 20 , the NK 6th Division intensified its efforts to attack Battle Mountain , and began sending stronger attacks to capture the two peaks . In the face of these , all of C Company except the company commander and about 25 men abandoned their position on Battle Mountain . Upon reaching the bottom of the mountain those who had fled reported erroneously that the company commander had been killed and their position surrounded , then overrun by the North Koreans . On the basis of this misinformation , American artillery and mortars fired concentrations on C Company 's former position , and fighter @-@ bombers , in 38 sorties , attacked the crest of Battle Mountain , using napalm , fragmentation bombs , rockets , and machine guns . This action forced the company commander and his remaining 25 men off Battle Mountain after they had held it for 20 hours , having declined a call to surrender from the North Koreans . A platoon of E Company , except for about 10 men , also left its position on the mountain as soon as the attack progressed . On the regimental left , an ROK patrol from K Company 's position on Sobuk @-@ san captured the commanding officer of the NK 15th Regiment , but he was killed a few minutes later while trying to escape . The patrol removed several intelligence documents from his body . During the day of fighting on Battle Mountain and P 'il @-@ bong , the North Koreans drove off the ROK police from the 24th Infantry 's left flank on Sobuk @-@ san . 24th Infantry troops continued to <unk> from their positions , ignoring commands from officers to stay in place . Both African American and white officers , infuriated by the disobedience , wrote sworn statements implicating the deserters . The situation was so severe that those who stayed in their positions were often given Bronze Star Medals with Valor Devices because they were so far outnumbered in the fighting . 
 Battle Mountain changed hands so often during August that there is no agreement on the exact number of times . The intelligence sergeant of the 1st Battalion , 24th Infantry estimated the peak changed hands 19 times . From August 18 to the end of the month , North Korean troops attacked the mountain every night . The peak often changed hands two or three times in a 24 @-@ hour period . The usual pattern was for the North Koreans to take it at night and the US 24th Infantry to recapture it the next day . This type of fluctuating battle resulted in relatively high losses among artillery forward observers and their equipment . During the period of August 15 – 31 , seven forward observers and eight other members of the Observer and Liaison Section of the 159th Field Artillery Battalion were casualties , and they lost eight radios , 11 telephones , and two vehicles in the process . 
 The 24th Infantry consistently captured Battle Mountain in the same way . Artillery , mortar , and tank fire raked the crest and air strikes employing napalm blanketed the top of the peak . Then , the infantry attacked from the hill beneath the east slope of the summit . Supporting mortars would set up a base of fire and kept the heights under barrage until the infantry had arrived at a point just short of the crest . The mortar fire then lifted and the infantry moved rapidly up the last stretch to the top , usually to find it abandoned by the North Koreans . 
 = = = September push = = = 
 On August 31 , 1950 , the 25th Division held a front of almost 30 miles ( 48 km ) , beginning in the north at the Namji @-@ ri bridge over the Naktong River and extending west on the hills south of the river to the Nam 's confluence with it . It then bent southwest up the south side of the Nam to where the Sobuk @-@ san mountain mass tapered down in its northern extremity to the river . There the line turned south along rising ground to Sibidang @-@ san , crossed the saddle on its south face through which passed the Chinju @-@ Masan railroad and highway , and continued southward up to Battle Mountain and on to P 'il @-@ bong . From P 'il @-@ bong the line dropped down spur ridge lines to the southern coastal road near Chindong @-@ ni . The US 35th Infantry Regiment held the northern 26 @,@ 000 yards ( 24 @,@ 000 m ) of the division line , from the Namji @-@ ri bridge to the Chinju @-@ Masan highway . The regiment was responsible for the highway . The regiment 's weakest and most vulnerable point was a 3 @-@ mile ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) gap along the Naktong River between most of F Company on the west and its 1st Platoon to the east . This platoon guarded the Namji @-@ ri cantilever steel bridge on the division extreme right at the boundary with the US 2nd Infantry Division across the Naktong River . South of the highway , the 24th Infantry held the high ground west of Haman , including Battle Mountain and P 'il @-@ bong . Colonel John L. Throckmorton 's 5th Infantry Regimental Combat Team held the southern spur of Sobuk @-@ san to the coastal road at Chindong @-@ ni . From Chindong @-@ ni some ROK Marine Corps units continued the line to the southern coast . General Kean 's 25th Division command post was at Masan , the 35th Infantry command post was on the east side of the Chirwon @-@ Chung @-@ ni road , the 24th Infantry command post was at Haman and Throckmorton 's 5th Infantry command post was at Chindong @-@ ni . By August 31 , the division was suffering manpower shortages , and a limited number of KATUSAs were brought in to replenish its ranks . 
 Aerial reconnaissance in the last week of August had disclosed to Eighth Army a large amount of North Korean activity behind the lines opposite the US 2nd and 25th Divisions in the southern part of the Pusan Perimeter . The North Koreans had built three new underwater bridges across the Nam River in front of the 35th Infantry in the 25th Division sector . Aerial bombing only temporarily and partially destroyed these bridges , and they were repaired overnight . Eighth Army intelligence credited the North Koreans with having moved one or two new divisions and about 20 tanks to the <unk> 'on area on the west side of the Naktong River opposite the US 2nd Division . However , the US intelligence overestimated the strength of these divisions . On August 28 the Eighth Army intelligence officer warned that a general offensive may be expected at any time along the 2nd Division and 25th Division front aimed at severing the Taegu @-@ Pusan railroad and highway and capturing Masan . 
 Just before midnight August 31 , the NK I Corps started its portion of The Great Naktong Offensive , a coordinated attack all along the Pusan Perimeter with a goal of breaking the UN defensive lines and capturing Pusan . North Korean soldiers crossed the lower Naktong at a number of points in a well @-@ planned attack . From Hyongp 'ung southward to the coast , in the zones of the US 2nd and 25th Divisions , the North Koreans ' greatest effort struck in a single massive coordinated attack . 
 = = = Battle of Haman = = = 
 In the left center of the 25th Division line , Lieutenant Colonel Paul F. Roberts ' 2nd Battalion , 24th Infantry , held the crest of the second ridge west of Haman , 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) from the town . From Chungam @-@ ni , in North Korean territory , a secondary road led to Haman along the shoulders of low hills and across rice paddy ground , running east 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) south of the main Chinju @-@ Masan road . It came through Roberts ' 2nd Battalion position in a pass 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) west of Haman . Late in the afternoon of August 31 , observers with G Company , 24th Infantry , noticed activity 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) in front of their positions . They called in two air strikes that hit this area at dusk . US artillery sent a large concentration of fire into the area , but the effect of this fire was not known . All US units on the line were alerted for a possible North Korean attack . 
 That night the North Koreans launched The Great Naktong Offensive against the entire UN force . The NK 6th Division advanced first , hitting F Company on the north side of the pass on the Chungam @-@ ni @-@ Haman road . The ROK troops in the pass left their positions and fell back on G Company to the south . The North Koreans captured a 75 mm recoilless rifle in the pass and turned it on American tanks , knocking out two of them . They then overran a section of 82 mm mortars at the east end of the pass . South of the pass , at dawn , First Lieutenant Houston M. McMurray found that only 15 out of 69 men assigned to his platoon remained with him , a mix of US and ROK troops . The North Koreans attacked this position at dawn . They came through an opening in the barbed wire perimeter which was supposed to be covered by a man with a M1918 Browning Automatic Rifle , but he had fled . Throwing grenades and spraying the area with PPSh @-@ 41 " burp gun " fire , the North Koreans quickly overran the position . Numerous officers and non @-@ commissioned officers attempted to get the men back into line , but they would not follow these orders . In one instance South Korean troops killed their own company commander when he tried to stop them from escaping . 
 Shortly after the North Korean attack started most of the 2nd Battalion , 24th Infantry , fled its positions . One company at a time , the battalion was struck with strong attacks all along its front , and with the exception of a few dozen men in each company , each formation quickly crumbled , with most of the troops running back to Haman against the orders of the officers . The North Koreans passed through the crumbling US lines quickly and overran the 2nd Battalion command post , killing several men there and destroying much of the battalion 's equipment . With the 2nd Battalion broken , Haman was open to direct North Korean attack . As the North Koreans encircled Haman , Roberts , the 2nd Battalion commander , ordered an officer to take remnants of the battalion and establish a roadblock at the south edge of the town . Although the officer directed a large group of men to accompany him , only eight did so . The 2nd Battalion was no longer an effective fighting force . Pockets of its soldiers remained in place and fought fiercely , but the majority fled upon attack , and the North Koreans were able to move around the uneven resistance . They surrounded Haman as the 2nd Battalion crumbled in disarray . 
 When the North Korean attack broke through the 2nd Battalion , The 1st Battalion commander ordered his unit , which was about 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) south of Haman on the Chindong @-@ ni road , to counterattack and restore the line . Roberts assembled all the 40 men of the disorganized 2nd Battalion he could find to join in this counterattack , which got under way at 07 : 30 . Upon contact with the North Koreans , the 1st Battalion broke and fled to the rear . Thus , shortly after daylight the scattered and disorganized men of the 1st and 2nd Battalions of the 24th Infantry had fled to the high ground 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) east of Haman . The better part of two regiments of the NK 6th Division poured into and through the Haman gap , now that they had captured the town and held it . 
 At 14 : 45 on September 1 , Kean ordered an immediate counterattack to restore the 24th Infantry positions . For 30 minutes US Air Force aircraft struck North Korean positions around Haman with bombs , napalm , rockets , and machine gun fire . They also attacked the North Korean @-@ held ridges around the town . Fifteen minutes of concentrated artillery fire followed . Fires spread in Haman . Infantry from 3rd Battalion moved out in attack west at 16 : 30 , reinforced by a platoon of tanks from A Company , 79th Tank Battalion . Eight tanks , mounting infantry , spearheaded the attack into Haman , capturing the city easily , as most of the North Korean troops had abandoned it . North Koreans in force held the ridge on the west side of the town , and their machine gun fire swept every approach . North Korean fire destroyed one tank and the attacking infantry suffered heavy casualties . But Check 's battalion pressed the attack and by 18 : 25 had seized the first long ridge 500 yards west of Haman . By 20 : 00 it had secured half of the old battle position on the higher ridge beyond , 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) west of Haman . Just 200 yards ( 180 m ) short of the crest on the remainder of the ridge , the infantry dug in for the night . It had recaptured Haman and was pushing back to the 24th 's old positions . 
 The North Koreans attacked Haman daily for the next week . Following the repelling of North Korean infiltration on September 7 , the North Korean attack on Haman ground to a halt . The North Koreans , racked by logistical and manpower shortages , focused more heavily on their attacks against 24th Infantry positions on Battle Mountain , as well as 35th Infantry positions at the Nam River . 24th Infantry troops at Haman encountered only probing attacks until September 18 . 
 = = = Battle of Nam River = = = 
 Meanwhile , the North Korean 7th Division troops committed all of their effort into attacking the US 35th Infantry line . At 23 : 30 on August 31 , a North Korean SU @-@ 76 self @-@ propelled high @-@ velocity gun from across the Nam fired shells into the position of G Company , 35th Infantry , overlooking the river . Within a few minutes , North Korean artillery was attacking all front @-@ line rifle companies of the regiment from the Namji @-@ ri bridge west . Under cover of this fire a reinforced regiment of the NK 7th Division crossed the Nam River and attacked F and G Companies , 35th Infantry . Other North Korean soldiers crossed the Nam on an underwater bridge in front of the paddy ground north of Komam @-@ ni and near the boundary between the 2nd Battalion , led by Lieutenant Colonel John L. Wilkins , Jr . , holding the river front and Lieutenant Colonel Bernard G. Teeter 's 1st Battalion holding the hill line that stretched from the Nam River to Sibidang @-@ san and the Chinju @-@ Masan highway . The 35th Infantry , facing shortages of equipment and reinforcements , was under @-@ equipped but nonetheless prepared for an attack . 
 In the low ground between these two battalions at the river ferry crossing site , the 35th Infantry commander had placed 300 ROK National Police , expecting them to hold there long enough to serve as a warning for the rest of the forces . Guns from the flanking hills there could cover the low ground with fire . Back at Komam @-@ ni he held the 3rd Battalion ready for use in counterattack to stop an enemy penetration should it occur . Unexpectedly , the ROK police companies near the ferry scattered at the first North Korean fire . At 00 : 30 , North Korean troops streamed through this hole in the line , some turning left to take G Company in its flank and rear , and others turned right to attack C Company , which was on a spur of ground west of the Komam @-@ ni road . The I & R Platoon and elements of C and D Companies formed a defense line along the dike at the north edge of Komam @-@ ni where US tanks joined them at daybreak . But the North Koreans did not drive for the Komam @-@ ni road fork 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) south of the river as Colonel Fisher expected them to ; instead , they turned east into the hills behind 2nd Battalion . 
 At daybreak on September 1 , a tank @-@ led relief force of C Company headquarters troops cleared the road to Sibidang @-@ san and resupplied the 2nd Platoon , B Company , with ammunition just in time for it to repel another North Korean assault , killing 77 and capturing 21 North Koreans . Although Fisher 's 35th Infantry held all its original positions , except that of the forward platoon of G Company , 3 @,@ 000 North Korean soldiers were behind its lines . The farthest eastern penetration reached the high ground just south of Chirwon overlooking the north @-@ south road there . 
 By midafternoon , Kean felt that the situation was so dangerous that he ordered the 2nd Battalion , US 27th Infantry Regiment , to attack behind the 35th Infantry . A large part of the division artillery was under direct North Korean infantry attack . During the morning hours of September 1 , when the NK 7th Division troops had attacked , the first American unit they encountered was G Company , 35th Infantry , at the north shoulder of the gap . While some North Korean units peeled off to attack G Company , others continued on and engaged E Company , 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) downstream from it , and still others attacked scattered units of F Company all the way to its 1st Platoon , which guarded the Namji @-@ ri bridge . There , at the extreme right flank of the 25th Division , this platoon drove off a North Korean force after a fierce fight . By September 2 , E Company in a heavy battle had destroyed most of a North Korean battalion . 
 Bitter , confused fighting continued behind the 35th Infantry 's line for the next week . Battalions , companies , and platoons , cut off and isolated , fought independently of higher control and help except for airdrops which supplied many of them . Airdrops also supplied relief forces trying to reach the front @-@ line units . Tanks and armored cars drove to the isolated units with supplies of food and ammunition and carried back critically wounded on the return trips . In general , the 35th Infantry fought in its original battle line positions , while at first one battalion , and later two battalions , of the 27th Infantry fought toward it through the estimated 3 @,@ 000 North Koreans operating in its rear areas . 
 Although the 25th Division generally was under much less pressure after September 5 , there were still severe local attacks . Heavy rains caused the Nam and Naktong Rivers to rise on September 8 and 9 , reducing the danger of new crossings . However , North Korean attacks against 2nd Battalion , 35th Infantry occurred nightly . The approaches to the Namji @-@ ri bridge , one of their key targets to protect , were mined . At one time there were about 100 North Korean dead lying in that area . From September 9 to 16 , there were limited attacks on the 35th Infantry 's front but most of the North Koreans ' momentum had been broken and they could not muster strong attacks against the regiment again . 
 = = = Evacuation of Masan = = = 
 Civilians in Masan posed an unexpectedly dangerous problem for the UN forces . The town had a large community of Communist sympathizers and agents . At the peak of the North Korean offensive , Han Gum Jo , manager of the Masan branch of the Korean Press Association , confessed that he was chief of the South Korean Labor Party in Masan and that he had been funneling information to the North Koreans through a Pusan headquarters . Additionally , the chief of the Masan prison guards was found to be the head of a Communist cell that included seven of his subordinates . This , and other counterintelligence information , came to light at a time when the most intense fighting was in progress only a few miles away . Kean considered the situation so dangerous that he ordered Masan evacuated of all people except police , public officials , railroad and utility workers , and necessary laborers and their families . Evacuation was to be completed in five days . On September 10 and 11 alone the 25th Division evacuated more than 12 @,@ 000 people by Landing Ship Tank ( LST ) from Masan . 
 = = = North Korean withdrawal = = = 
 The UN counterattack at Inchon collapsed the North Korean line and forced them back on all fronts . On September 16 , however , the 25th Infantry Division was still fighting North Korean forces behind its lines , and North Korean strong points existed on the heights of Battle Mountain , P 'il @-@ bong , and Sobuk @-@ san . Kean felt that the division could advance along the roads toward Chinju only when the mountainous center of the division front was clear . He therefore believed that the key to the advance of the 25th Division lay in its center where the North Koreans held the heights and kept the 24th Infantry Regiment under daily attack . The 27th Infantry on the left and the 35th Infantry on the right , astride the roads between Chinju and Masan held their positions and could not advance until the situation in front of the 24th Infantry improved . 
 On September 19 the UN discovered the North Koreans had abandoned of Battle Mountain during the night , and the 1st Battalion , 24th Infantry , moved up and occupied it . On the right , the 35th Infantry began moving forward . There was only light resistance until it reached the high ground in front of Chungam @-@ ni where hidden North Korean soldiers in spider holes shot at 1st Battalion soldiers from the rear . The next day the 1st Battalion captured Chungam @-@ ni , and the 2nd Battalion captured the long ridge line running northwest from it to the Nam River . Meanwhile , the North Koreans still held strongly against the division left where the 27th Infantry had heavy fighting in trying to move forward . 
 The North Koreans withdrew from the Masan area the night of September 18 – 19 . The NK 7th Division withdrew from south of the Nam River while the 6th Division sideslipped elements to cover the entire front . Covered by the 6th Division , the 7th had crossed to the north side of the Nam River by the morning of September 19 . Then the NK 6th Division withdrew from its positions on Sobuk @-@ san . The US units rapidly pursued them north , passing over the Battle Mountain positions , which were no longer of strategic importance . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The US 5th Regimental Combat Team suffered 269 killed , 573 wounded and 4 missing during its battles at the Pusan Perimeter , most of these at Masan . The rest of the 25th Infantry Division suffered 650 killed , 1 @,@ 866 wounded , four captured and 10 missing during the fight . Another 138 were killed , 646 wounded , and two captured during the division 's breakout attack from the Masan battleground . 
 The North Korean troops suffered heavily in the fight , and most became casualties in the attack . By mid @-@ September , the NK 7th Division was reduced to just 4 @,@ 000 men , a loss of 6 @,@ 000 from when it was committed to the perimeter . Only 2 @,@ 000 men from the NK 6th Division returned to North Korea , a loss of 80 percent of its strength . Large groups of troops from the divisions were captured as they attempted to return to North Korea , including up to 3 @,@ 000 North Korean troops . The attacking force of over 20 @,@ 000 had been reduced to only 6 @,@ 000 by the end of the fighting at Masan . 
 The position around Masan remained locked in a bitter stalemate during the entire six weeks of the Battle of Pusan Perimeter . Each side attempted several offensives on the other in an attempt to force a withdrawal , but the North Koreans were unable to pierce the UN perimeter , and the UN troops were unable to overwhelm the North Koreans to the point they were forced to withdraw . The battle itself was tactically inconclusive , as neither side was able to decisively defeat the other , however the UN units achieved their strategic goal of preventing the North Koreans from advancing further east and threatening Pusan . Instead , they were able to hold the line against repeated attacks until the Inchon attack , and were thus successful in defeating the North Korean army in subsequent engagements . 
 Desertion had continued to be a problem for the 24th Infantry , a de facto segregated unit . Statistics compiled found the 25th Infantry Division had to detain 116 deserters from the 24th Infantry throughout August , compared to 15 from the 27th Infantry and 12 from the 35th Infantry . The regiment had already been criticized for its poor performance at the Battle of Sangju several weeks earlier . In late August , Kean began investigating the unit 's behavior , finding its poor performance was starting to bring other units of the division down as well . Kean considered the regiment a weak link in the chain , and after its poor performance at the battles of Battle Mountain and Haman , he suggested to Walker that the regiment be disbanded and its troops be used as replacements for other units in the field . Virtually all of the officers and enlisted men in the regiment were supportive of this idea , but Walker declined , feeling he could not afford to lose a regiment . Conversely , the 35th Infantry was widely praised for its actions at the Kum River line . The regiment had performed so well in repulsing the North Koreans that Kean nominated it for a Presidential Unit Citation . 
 = Pentonville Road = 
 Pentonville Road is a road in Central London that runs west to east from Kings Cross to City Road at The Angel , Islington . The road is part of the London Inner Ring Road and part of the boundary of the London congestion charge zone . 
 The road was originally built in the mid @-@ 18th century as part of the New Road , a bypass of Central London for coach traffic . It was named Pentonville Road after the new town of Pentonville , that encouraged manufacturing to move out of the city and into suburbia . Numerous factories and commercial premises became established on the road in the 19th and 20th centuries , particularly after the arrival of London railways in the 1840s . 
 As industrial manufacturing fell out of favour in London in the late 20th century , many properties are now residential or student accommodation . Current premises include the Crafts Council Gallery on the site of a former chapel , the Scala nightclub in a former cinema , and The Castle , a public house . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The road is 0 @.@ 7 miles ( 1 @.@ 1 km ) long and runs east from King 's Cross railway station as a continuation of Euston Road . It ends at the Angel , Islington , at a junction with Islington High Street and Goswell Road ; the road ahead becoming City Road . Only eastbound traffic can travel on the full extent of the road ; westbound traffic is diverted south via Swinton Street . The road is on the London Inner Ring Road ( <unk> ) and as such forms part of the boundary of the London congestion charge zone . Since 1995 , it has been a red route , prohibiting stopping of any kind , including loading and unloading . 
 Most of the road is in the London Borough of Islington but a small part near Kings Cross is in the London Borough of Camden , including the Kings Cross Thameslink railway station and the " Lighthouse " Block . London Underground and National Rail stations in the vicinity include Kings Cross and Angel tube station . 
 There has been a bus service on Pentonville Road since 1829 . Regular bus routes running along the road are 30 , 73 and 146 . 
 = = History = = 
 What is now Pentonville Road was built as the final section of the New Road in 1756 , connecting the City of London to the western suburbs , so that coach traffic could avoid Central London . At the time , the route now covered by Pentonville Road was mostly fields , with Battle Bridge occupying the space where King 's Cross now is . It included a tavern known as Busby 's Folly , a meeting place of a drinking group known as the Society of Bull Feathers . It is marked on John Ogilby 's map of London in 1675 . It was moved around 1780 to Penton Street and renamed the Belvedere Tavern . The current building dates from 1876 . 
 The road was designed as part of Pentonville , a new suburb away from the City and became a local hub for manufacturing in the area . There was some debate over the final route of the road ; the original plan to run straight through fields owned by the Skinners Company and the New River Company was rejected in favour of the route further north via Battle Bridge . As it was always intended to be a main road , a coach service began in 1798 between Paddington and Bank but was quickly withdrawn . The road was turnpiked in 1830 and renamed Pentonville Road after landowner Henry Penton in 1857 . Until 1882 , the upkeep of the road was paid by the local parish , paying a ground rent to Penton 's estate for the disused toll house at No. 274 . 
 The street is distinguished by the " set back " housing lines originally intended to provide an atmosphere of spaciousness along the thoroughfare . The original 1756 act to create the New Road prohibited the construction of any building within 50 feet ( 15 m ) of its side . Though the area had been designed to be a pleasant suburb , the arrival of railways in the 1840s turned the road into an industrial urban street , with factories and workshops aligning the road . The original bylaw restricting property on the front of the road was ignored and shops were built on top of gardens . 
 By the 21st century , most of the manufacturing base along Pentonville Road had disappeared . The original townhouses are now apartments . 
 = = Properties = = 
 Alexander Cumming , former clockmaker and organ builder to Archibald Campbell , 3rd Duke of Argyll , built a house at No. 166 Pentonville Road . In 1807 , the year after his death , the house became the London Female Penitentiary , housing " fallen women " and rehabilitating them into society . It was extended between 1811 – 12 , roughly tripling its capacity , and moved to Stoke Newington in 1884 . 
 The Thomas S. Jones organ builders were based at No. 25 Pentonville Road between 1860 and 1935 . The Dunn & Hewett cocoa factory was established at No. 9 Pentonville Road in 1833 by Daniel Dunn , who went into partnership with Charles Hewett in the 1850s . The business claimed to have invented soluble chocolate and cocoa , and moved to No. 136 , expanding to No. 138 in the 1870s . The building was enlarged and partially rebuilt over the 1880s and 90s , and included a staff tea @-@ room at No. 140 by 1907 . The factory closed around 1930 and was subsequently sub @-@ let to various businesses . The Ealing Radiator Company was established at Nos. 152 – 154 Pentonville Road in 1936 , manufacturing car radiators . A first floor extension was added in 1952 , while Nos. 136 – 150 were cleared to accommodate a low metal @-@ framed building . These premises have now been sub @-@ let to various businesses . 
 The Claremont Chapel was at No. <unk> Pentonville Road . It was named after Claremont House , home of the then @-@ recently deceased Princess Charlotte Augusta of Wales . The chapel was designed by Thomas Wilson , who acquired the 2 acre site in 1818 for £ 700 , spending an additional £ 6 @,@ 000 on building works . It opened in October 1819 , though a regular pastor was not appointed until 1822 . The building was extended in 1847 to accommodate a Sunday school , while sash windows were installed in 1853 . In 1860 , the building was refurbished and given a Classical facade , but reducing the capacity of the inside gallery . Attendance declined and the chapel was sold to the London Congregational Union , before closing in 1899 . It re @-@ opened in 1902 as Claremont Hall , a mission institute . It was let for commercial purposes in the 1960s , and sub @-@ let to the Crafts Council in 1991 . The building is now the Crafts Council Gallery , a public gallery funded by the Arts Council England . It contains a number of exhibition rooms that are available for use . 
 The block of properties at No. 295 – 297 Pentonville Road , at its junction with Gray 's Inn Road , is known as the " Lighthouse Block " owing to the lead clad tower at the top of the building . The site avoided being compulsory purchased and demolished ( in order to provide improvements to King 's Cross station 's eastern entrance ) and is now Grade II listed . 
 The Vernon Square school opened on Pentonville Road in 1913 , expanding to cover secondary school students in 1949 . It was renamed the Sir Philip Magnus School in 1952 and closed in the 1970s . It became part of Kingsway College before being purchased by the School of Oriental and African Studies in 2001 . The SOAS has several other halls of residence along Pentonville Road , including <unk> House . 
 The Scala at No. 275 – 277 Pentonville Road opened as the King 's Cross Cinema in 1920 with a capacity of 1 @,@ 300 . Construction had begun just before World War I and was halted because of it . It was damaged by bombs during World War II , and while it remained open during wartime , it eventually had to be shut between 1949 and 1952 for renovations and repair . It closed in 1970 , and re @-@ opened as an independent cinema , which showed old 16mm films including King Kong . The Stooges played their only gig in London at the venue in June 1972 , shortly before recording the album Raw Power with David Bowie ; a shot of Iggy Pop onstage here became the album 's front cover . The venue closed in 1992 , and is now a nightclub . 
 The Castle is a pub at No. 54 Pentonville Road , at the junction with Baron Street . In 2015 , the perpetrators of the Hatton Garden safe deposit burglary met at the pub to discuss the crime shortly after it occurred , but were secretly filmed there by the Flying Squad . All were subsequently arrested and sent to prison . The current owners , Geronimo Inns , wish to distance themselves from the burglary and forbid staff to discuss it with customers . 
 The original Angel , Islington , sits at the far east end of Pentonville Road , at its junction with Islington High Street . It was named after the Angel of the Annunciation that appeared on its sign . The inn pre @-@ dated the construction of Pentonville Road , and had become one of the largest coaching inns in the local area by the 18th century . The site was cut in two by the construction of the road , with the inn remaining on the north side . A new building was constructed in 1899 , later becoming a Lyons Corner House . It closed in 1959 , and was threatened with demolition as a plan to improve junction improvements around Pentonville Road , but survived and is now partly occupied by a branch of The Co @-@ operative Bank . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The poet John Betjeman 's parents ran a cabinet makers at No. 34 – 42 Pentonville Road . It was established since 1859 and produced the Tantalus drinks cabinet in 1881 . 
 Pentonville Road is one of the locations on the London version of the Monopoly board game . It is one of the light blue squares alongside The Angel , Islington and Euston Road , both of which it connects to . The magazine Mixmag 's main offices are at Nos. 90 – 92 Pentonville Road . 
 = Phoenix ( constellation ) = 
 Phoenix is a minor constellation in the southern sky . Named after the mythical phoenix , it was first depicted on a celestial atlas by Johann Bayer in his 1603 Uranometria . The French explorer and astronomer Nicolas Louis de Lacaille charted the brighter stars and gave their Bayer designations in 1756 . The constellation stretches from roughly − 39 ° to − 57 ° declination , and from <unk> to <unk> of right ascension . The constellations Phoenix , Grus , Pavo and Tucana , are known as the Southern Birds . 
 The brightest star , Alpha Phoenicis , is named Ankaa , an Arabic word meaning ' the Phoenix ' . It is an orange giant of apparent magnitude 2 @.@ 4 . Next is Beta Phoenicis , actually a binary system composed of two yellow giants with a combined apparent magnitude of 3 @.@ 3 . Nu Phoenicis has a dust disk , while the constellation has ten star systems with known planets and the recently discovered galaxy clusters El Gordo and the Phoenix Cluster — located 7 @.@ 2 and 5 @.@ 7 billion light years away respectively , two of the largest objects in the visible universe . Phoenix is the radiant of two annual meteor showers : the Phoenicids in December , and the July Phoenicids . 
 = = History = = 
 Phoenix was the largest of the twelve constellations established by Petrus Plancius from the observations of Pieter Dirkszoon Keyser and Frederick de Houtman . It first appeared on a 35 @-@ cm diameter celestial globe published in 1597 ( or 1598 ) in Amsterdam by Plancius with Jodocus Hondius . The first depiction of this constellation in a celestial atlas was in Johann Bayer 's Uranometria of 1603 . De Houtman included it in his southern star catalog the same year under the Dutch name Den <unk> <unk> , " The Bird Phoenix " , symbolising the phoenix of classical mythology . One name of the brightest star Alpha Phoenicis — Ankaa — is derived from the Arabic <unk> al- ‘ <unk> ’ " the phoenix " , and was coined sometime after 1800 in relation to the constellation . 
 Celestial historian Richard Allen noted that unlike the other constellations introduced by Plancius and La <unk> , Phoenix has actual precedent in ancient astronomy , as the Arabs saw this formation as representing young ostriches , Al Ri <unk> , or as a griffin or eagle . In addition , the same group of stars was sometimes imagined by the Arabs as a boat , Al <unk> , on the nearby river Eridanus . He observed , " the introduction of a Phoenix into modern astronomy was , in a measure , by adoption rather than by invention . " 
 The Chinese incorporated Phoenix 's brightest star , Ankaa ( Alpha Phoenicis ) , and stars from the adjacent constellation Sculptor to depict <unk> , a net for catching birds . Phoenix and the neighbouring constellation of Grus together were seen by Julius Schiller as portraying Aaron the High Priest . These two constellations , along with nearby Pavo and Tucana , are called the Southern Birds . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Phoenix is a small constellation bordered by Fornax and Sculptor to the north , Grus to the west , Tucana to the south , touching on the corner of Hydrus to the south , and Eridanus to the east and southeast . The bright star Achernar is nearby . The three @-@ letter abbreviation for the constellation , as adopted by the International Astronomical Union in 1922 , is ' Phe ' . The official constellation boundaries , as set by Eugène Delporte in 1930 , are defined by a polygon of 10 segments . In the equatorial coordinate system , the right ascension coordinates of these borders lie between 23h <unk> and <unk> <unk> , while the declination coordinates are between − 39 @.@ 31 ° and − 57 @.@ 84 ° . This means it remains below the horizon to anyone living north of the 40th parallel in the Northern Hemisphere , and remains low in the sky for anyone living north of the equator . It is most visible from locations such as Australia and South Africa during late Southern Hemisphere spring . Most of the constellation lies within , and can be located by , forming a triangle of the bright stars Achernar , Fomalhaut and Beta Ceti — Ankaa lies roughly in the centre of this . 
 = = Notable features = = 
 = = = Stars = = = 
 A curved line of stars comprising Alpha , Kappa , Mu , Beta , Nu and Gamma Phoenicis was seen as a boat by the ancient Arabs . French explorer and astronomer Nicolas Louis de Lacaille charted and designated 27 stars with the Bayer designations Alpha through to Omega in 1756 . Of these , he labelled two stars close together Lambda , and assigned Omicron , Psi and Omega to three stars , which subsequent astronomers such as Benjamin Gould felt were too dim to warrant their letters . A different star was subsequently labelled Psi Phoenicis , while the other two designations fell out of use . 
 Ankaa is the brightest star in the constellation . It is an orange giant of apparent visual magnitude 2 @.@ 37 and spectral type <unk> , 77 light years distant from Earth and orbited by a secondary object about which little is known . Lying close by Ankaa is Kappa Phoenicis , a main sequence star of spectral type <unk> and apparent magnitude 3 @.@ 90 . Located centrally in the asterism , Beta Phoenicis is the second brightest star in the constellation and another binary star . Together the stars , both yellow giants of spectral type G8 , shine with an apparent magnitude of 3 @.@ 31 , though the components are of individual apparent magnitudes of 4 @.@ 0 and 4 @.@ 1 and orbit each other every 168 years . Zeta Phoenicis is an Algol @-@ type eclipsing binary , with an apparent magnitude fluctuating between 3 @.@ 9 and 4 @.@ 4 with a period of around 1 @.@ 7 days ( 40 hours ) ; its dimming results from the component two blue @-@ white B @-@ type stars , which orbit and block out each other from Earth . The two stars are 0 @.@ 05 AU from each other , while a third star is around 600 AU away from the pair , and has an orbital period exceeding 5000 years . The system is around 300 light years distant . In 1976 , researchers Clausen , <unk> , and <unk> calculated that a nearby 8th magnitude star is a fourth member of the system . 
 Gamma Phoenicis is a red giant of spectral type <unk> and varies between magnitudes 3 @.@ 39 and 3 @.@ 49 . It lies 235 light years away . Psi Phoenicis is another red giant , this time of spectral type M4III , and has an apparent magnitude that ranges between 4 @.@ 3 and 4 @.@ 5 over a period of around 30 days . Lying 340 light years away , it has around 85 times the diameter , but only 85 % of the mass , of our sun . W Phoenicis is a Mira variable , ranging from magnitude 8 @.@ 1 to 14 @.@ 4 over 333 @.@ 95 days . A red giant , its spectrum ranges between <unk> and <unk> . Located 6 @.@ 5 degrees west of Ankaa is SX Phoenicis , a variable star which ranges from magnitude 7 @.@ 1 to 7 @.@ 5 over a period of a mere 79 minutes . Its spectral type varies between A2 and F4 . It gives its name to a group of stars known as SX Phoenicis variables . Rho and BD Phoenicis are Delta Scuti variables — short period ( six hours at most ) pulsating stars that have been used as standard candles and as subjects to study astroseismology . Rho is spectral type <unk> , and ranges between magnitudes 5 @.@ 20 and 5 @.@ 26 over a period of 2 @.@ 85 hours . BD is of spectral type A1V , and ranges between magnitudes 5 @.@ 90 and 5 @.@ 94 . 
 Nu Phoenicis is a yellow @-@ white main sequence star of spectral type F9V and magnitude 4 @.@ 96 . Lying some 49 light years distant , it is around 1 @.@ 2 times as massive as our sun , and likely to be surrounded by a disk of dust . It is the closest star in the constellation that is visible with the unaided eye . Gliese 915 is a white dwarf only 26 light years away . It is of magnitude 13 @.@ 05 , too faint to be seen with the naked eye . White dwarfs are extremely dense stars compacted into a volume the size of the Earth . With around 85 % of the mass of the Sun , Gliese 915 has a surface gravity of 108 @.@ 39 ± 0 @.@ 01 ( 2 @.@ 45 · 108 ) cm · s − 2 , or approximately 250 @,@ 000 of Earth 's . 
 Ten stars have been found to have planets to date , and four planetary systems have been discovered with the SuperWASP project . HD 142 is a yellow giant that has an apparent magnitude of 5 @.@ 7 , and has a planet ( HD 142 b ) 1 @.@ 36 times the mass of Jupiter which orbits every 328 days . HD 2039 is a yellow subgiant with an apparent magnitude of 9 @.@ 0 around 330 light years away which has a planet ( HD 2039 b ) triple the mass of Jupiter . WASP @-@ 18 is a star of magnitude 9 @.@ 29 which was discovered to have a hot Jupiter @-@ like planet ( WASP @-@ 18b ) taking less than a day to orbit the star . The planet is suspected to be causing WASP @-@ 18 to appear older than it really is . WASP @-@ 4 and WASP @-@ 5 are solar @-@ type yellow stars around 1000 light years distant and of 13th magnitude , each with a single planet larger than Jupiter . WASP @-@ 29 is an orange dwarf of spectral type <unk> and visual magnitude 11 @.@ 3 , which has a planetary companion of similar size and mass to Saturn . The planet completes an orbit every 3 @.@ 9 days . 
 WISE <unk> @-@ <unk> @.@ 4 and WISE <unk> @-@ <unk> @.@ 6 are two brown dwarfs discovered by the Wide @-@ field Infrared Survey Explorer , and are 63 and 49 light years away respectively . Initially hypothesised before they were belatedly discovered , brown dwarfs are objects more massive than planets , but which are of insufficient mass for hydrogen fusion characteristic of stars to occur . Many are being found by sky surveys . 
 Phoenix contains <unk> @-@ 5240 , possibly one of the oldest stars yet discovered . It has around 1 / 200 @,@ 000 the metallicity that the Sun has and hence must have formed very early in the history of the universe . With a visual magnitude of 15 @.@ 17 , it is around 10 @,@ 000 times dimmer than the faintest stars visible to the naked eye and is <unk> light years distant . 
 = = = Deep @-@ sky objects = = = 
 The constellation does not lie on the galactic plane of the Milky Way , and there are no prominent star clusters . NGC 625 is a dwarf irregular galaxy of apparent magnitude 11 @.@ 0 and lying some 12 @.@ 7 million light years distant . Only 24000 light years in diameter , it is an outlying member of the Sculptor Group . NGC 625 is thought to have been involved in a collision and is experiencing a burst of active star formation . NGC 37 is a lenticular galaxy of apparent magnitude 14 @.@ 66 . It is approximately 42 kiloparsecs ( 137 @,@ 000 light @-@ years ) in diameter and about 12 @.@ 9 billion years old . Robert 's Quartet ( composed of the irregular galaxy NGC 87 , and three spiral galaxies NGC 88 , NGC 89 and NGC 92 ) is a group of four galaxies located around 160 million light @-@ years away which are in the process of colliding and merging . They are within a circle of radius of 1 @.@ 6 arcmin , corresponding to about 75 @,@ 000 light @-@ years . Located in the galaxy ESO 243 @-@ 49 is <unk> @-@ 1 , an intermediate @-@ mass black hole — the first one of its kind identified . It is thought to be a remnant of a dwarf galaxy that was absorbed in a collision with ESO 243 @-@ 49 . Before its discovery , this class of black hole was only hypothesized . 
 Lying within the bounds of the constellation is the gigantic Phoenix cluster , which is around 7 @.@ 3 million light years wide and 5 @.@ 7 billion light years away , making it one of the most massive galaxy clusters . It was first discovered in 2010 , and the central galaxy is producing an estimated 740 new stars a year . Larger still is El Gordo , or officially ACT @-@ CL <unk> @-@ <unk> , whose discovery was announced in 2012 . Located around 7 @.@ 2 billion light years away , it is composed of two <unk> in the process of colliding , resulting in the spewing out of hot gas , seen in X @-@ rays and infrared images . 
 = = = Meteor showers = = = 
 Phoenix is the radiant of two annual meteor showers . The Phoenicids , also known as the December Phoenicids , were first observed on 3 December 1887 . The shower was particularly intense in December 1956 , and is thought related to the breakup of the short @-@ period comet <unk> / <unk> . It peaks around 4 – 5 December , though is not seen every year . A very minor meteor shower peaks around July 14 with around one meteor an hour , though meteors can be seen anytime from July 3 to 18 ; this shower is referred to as the July Phoenicids . 
 = Bismarck @-@ class battleship = 
 The Bismarck class was a pair of battleships built for Nazi Germany 's Kriegsmarine shortly before the outbreak of World War II . The ships were the largest warships built for the Kriegsmarine . Bismarck was laid down in July 1936 and completed in September 1940 , while her sister Tirpitz 's keel was laid in October 1936 and work finished in February 1941 . The two ships were broadly similar to the World War I @-@ era Bayern class , in that they mounted a similar main battery . 
 Both ships had short service careers . Bismarck conducted only one operation , Operation Rheinübung , a sortie into the North Atlantic to raid supply convoys sent from North America to Great Britain . During the operation , she destroyed the British battlecruiser HMS Hood and damaged the new battleship Prince of Wales in the Battle of the Denmark Strait . Bismarck was defeated and sunk in a final engagement after a three @-@ day chase by the Royal Navy . Disagreements over the cause of the sinking persist with chiefly British sources claiming responsibility for the sinking of the ship . Evidence reviewed by Robert Ballard and James Cameron indicates that her loss was most likely due to scuttling as originally claimed by her surviving crew @-@ members . 
 Tirpitz 's career was less dramatic ; she was sent to Norwegian waters in 1942 , where she acted as a fleet in being , threatening the convoys from Britain to the Soviet Union . She was repeatedly attacked by the Royal Navy and Royal Air Force . In 1944 , Lancaster bombers hit the ship with three Tallboy bombs , which caused extensive internal damage and capsized the battleship . Tirpitz was broken up for scrap between 1948 and 1957 . 
 = = Design = = 
 A series of conceptual designs were begun in 1932 to determine the ideal characteristics of a battleship built to the 35 @,@ 000 long tons ( 36 @,@ 000 t ) limit of the Washington Naval Treaty . These early studies determined that the ship should be armed with eight 33 cm ( 13 in ) guns , have a top speed of 30 knots ( 56 km / h ; 35 mph ) , and have strong armour protection . The design work for what became the Bismarck class was begun in 1933 and continued until 1936 . In June 1935 , Germany signed the Anglo @-@ German Naval Agreement , which allowed Germany to build battleships at a ratio of 35 percent to the total tonnage of the Royal Navy . It also made Germany party to the international treaty system begun at the Washington Conference . At the time , France , which had begun a program of naval expansion , was viewed as the most likely threat , not Great Britain . As a result , Bismarck and Tirpitz were intended to counter the new French battleships being built at the time . 
 A series of questions needed to be answered during the design process , including the calibre of the main battery , the propulsion system , and armour protection . The deciding factor for the adoption of 38 cm ( 15 in ) guns for Bismarck and Tirpitz was the decision of the French Navy to arm its four Richelieu @-@ class ships then under construction with 38 cm pieces . It was decided that four twin turrets would provide the best solution to distribution of the main battery , as it would provide equal firepower forward and aft , as well as simplify fire control . This arrangement was similar to the last German battleships of the Imperial period , the Bayern class . The similarity led to speculation that the Bismarcks were essentially copies of the earlier ships , though the arrangement of the main battery was the only shared trait , along with a three @-@ shaft propulsion system . 
 The naval constructors examined diesel geared drive , steam drive , and turbo @-@ electric drive engines ; the last system was the preferred choice , as it had been extremely successful in the two American Lexington @-@ class aircraft carriers and the French passenger ship Normandie . The design staff were also required to provide sufficient range to the new battleships ; they would have to make long voyages from German ports to reach the Atlantic , and Germany had no overseas bases where the ships could refuel . Due to the numerical inferiority of the German fleet and the assumption that naval battles would take place at relatively close range in the North Sea , the design placed great emphasis on stability and armour protection . Very thick vertical belt armour was adopted , along with heavy upper @-@ citadel armour plating and extensive splinter protection in the bow and stern of the ships . 
 The displacement of Bismarck and Tirpitz were limited by the capabilities of existing infrastructure in Kiel and Wilhelmshaven , and the Kaiser Wilhelm Canal . On 11 February 1937 , the Construction Office informed Generaladmiral ( General Admiral ) Erich Raeder that the ships could not displace more than 42 @,@ 000 long tons ( 43 @,@ 000 t ) due to harbour constraints and canal depths . The office also expressed a preference for building a third vessel and remaining within the 35 @,@ 000 @-@ ton treaty limit . Admiral Werner Fuchs , the head of the General Command Office of the Oberkommando der Marine , advised Raeder and Adolf Hitler that modifications would be necessary to reduce the displacement to ensure the new ships met the legal requirements of the London Naval Treaty . Japan refused to sign the new treaty , and so on 1 April 1937 an escalator clause permitting treaty signatories to build ships up to a limit of 45 @,@ 000 long tons ( 46 @,@ 000 t ) went into effect . The final design displacement of 41 @,@ 400 long tons ( 42 @,@ 100 t ) was well within this limit , so Fuchs 's modifications were discarded . 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 The Bismarck @-@ class battleships were 251 m ( 823 ft 6 in ) long overall and 241 @.@ 60 m ( 792 ft 8 in ) long at the waterline . The ships had a beam of 36 m ( 118 ft 1 in ) , and a designed draft of 9 @.@ 30 m ( 30 ft 6 in ) ; the draft at standard displacement was 8 @.@ 63 m ( 28 ft 4 in ) , and 9 @.@ 90 m ( 32 ft 6 in ) at a full load . The ships had a designed displacement of 45 @,@ 950 metric tons ; their standard displacement was 41 @,@ 700 metric tons , and when fully laden , the ships displaced 50 @,@ 300 metric tons . The ships had a double bottom for 83 percent of the length of the hull , and twenty @-@ two watertight compartments . The ships were 90 percent welded construction . The stern was weakly constructed ; this had significant consequences on Bismarck 's only combat mission . 
 The ships were very stable , primarily because of their wide beam . The ships suffered from only slight pitching and rolling , even in the heavy seas of the North Atlantic . Bismarck and Tirpitz were responsive to commands from the helm ; they were capable of manoeuvring with rudder deflections as small as 5 ° . With the rudder completely over , the ships heeled only 3 ° , but lost up to 65 % of their speed . The ships handled poorly at low speeds or when travelling astern . As a result , tugs were necessary in confined areas to avoid collisions or grounding . The ships had a standard crew of 103 officers and 1 @,@ 962 enlisted sailors . The ships carried smaller boats , including three picket boats , four barges , one launch , two pinnaces , two cutters , two yawls , and two dinghies . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 The Bismarck @-@ class ships both had three sets of geared turbine engines ; Bismarck was equipped with Blohm & Voss turbines , while Tirpitz used Brown , Boveri , and Co. engines . Each set of turbines drove a 3 @-@ bladed screw that was 4 @.@ 70 m ( 15 ft 5 in ) in diameter . Robert Ballard , the discoverer of Bismarck , noted that the adoption of the three @-@ shaft arrangement caused serious problems for Bismarck . The centre shaft weakened the keel , especially where it emerges from the hull . Ballard stated that a four @-@ shaft arrangement would have allowed a greater ability to steer the ship using only propeller revolutions than the three @-@ screw system . 
 At a full load , the high and medium @-@ pressure turbines ran at 2 @,@ 825 rpm , while the low @-@ pressure turbines ran at 2 @,@ 390 rpm . The ships ' turbines were powered by twelve Wagner ultra high @-@ pressure oil @-@ burning boilers . The two ships had different fuel stores ; Bismarck was designed to carry 3 @,@ 200 tons of fuel oil , but could store up to 6 @,@ 400 tons of fuel in a normal configuration ; with extra fuel bunkers , the fuel carried could be increased up to 7 @,@ 400 tons . Tirpitz was designed to carry 3 @,@ 000 tons of fuel , and with additional bunkers , was able to store up to 7 @,@ 780 tons . At 19 knots , Bismarck could steam for 8 @,@ 525 nautical miles ( 15 @,@ 788 km ) , and Tirpitz had a maximum range of 8 @,@ 870 nautical miles ( 16 @,@ 430 km ) at that speed . 
 The turbines were initially intended to use electric transmission , and would have produced 46 @,@ 000 hp ( 34 @,@ 000 kW ) apiece . The geared turbines were lighter , and as a result had a slight performance advantage . The geared turbines also had a significantly more robust construction . The ships mounted eight 500 kW diesel generators arranged in four pairs , five 690 kW turbo @-@ generators , and one 460 kW , the last of which was connected to a 400 kVA AC generator . Another 550 kVA diesel generator provided additional AC power . The electrical plant provided a total 7 @,@ 910 kW at 220 volts . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 = = = = Main battery = = = = 
 Bismarck 's and Tirpitz 's main battery consisted of eight 38 cm ( 15 in ) SK C / 34 guns in four twin turrets , Anton and Bruno in a superfiring pair forward of the superstructure and Caesar and Dora aft . The turrets allowed elevation to 30 ° , which gave the guns a maximum range of 36 @,@ 520 m ( 39 @,@ 940 yd ) . The guns fired 800 kg ( 1 @,@ 800 lb ) projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 820 metres per second ( 2 @,@ 690 ft / s ) . The main battery was supplied with between 940 – 960 shells total , for approximately 115 – 120 shells per gun . As with other German large @-@ calibre naval rifles , these guns were designed by Krupp and featured sliding wedge breech blocks , which required brass cartridge cases for the propellant charges . Under optimal conditions , the rate of fire was one shot every 18 seconds , or three per minute . The gun turrets were electrically trained and the guns were hydraulically elevated . Gun elevation was controlled remotely . The turrets required each gun to return to 2 @.@ 5 ° elevation for loading . Tirpitz was eventually provided with time @-@ fuzed shells to combat the repeated Allied bombing attacks . 
 The Bismarcks ' use of four twin turrets ( the 4 × 2 configuration ) was a design practice that hearkened back to the First World War . Almost all other post @-@ 1921 capital ships had triple or even quadruple turrets , which allowed for additional heavy caliber guns , while reducing the number of turrets . Fewer turrets reduced the length of the battleship 's armored citadel ( particularly magazine length and the armor needed to protect it ) and shortened the vessel itself . Although triple turrets were considered for the Bismarcks , there were concerns that the extra barrel would lower the overall rate of fire in each turret , along with fears that a single well @-@ aimed hit could disable a larger proportion of the ship 's firepower . It was also felt that four twin turrets allowed for a better field of fire and a more effective sequence of salvoes . 
 Although other contemporary vessels like the American North Carolina @-@ class battleships carried 40 @.@ 6 @-@ cm main guns , the Bismarcks used 38 @-@ cm naval guns as the Germans had experience with them ; a 40 @.@ 6 @-@ cm weapon would have had to have been designed from scratch . Bismarck was also authorized prior to the breakdown of the London Naval Treaty and the invocation of the 45 @,@ 000 @-@ ton , 406 @-@ mm main gun escalator clause ( which the United States did invoke with the North Carolinas ) ; building 40 @.@ 6 cm battleships would doubtless have seemed provocative , especially to the United Kingdom . As it was , the 38 cm main battery of the Bismarck class compared well to their contemporaries , out @-@ ranging almost all of the 38 cm and 40 @.@ 6 cm guns of contemporary navies ( with the exception of the Italian 38 @.@ 1 cm gun , which suffered exceptional bore erosion as a consequence ) . The German gun was superior to the World War I era BL 15 inch / 42 naval gun ( 381 mm ) of the Royal Navy in both range and penetration . 
 = = = = Secondary battery = = = = 
 The ships ' secondary battery consisted of twelve 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) SK C / 28 guns mounted in six twin turrets . The 15 cm gun turrets were based on the single @-@ gun turrets used aboard the Scharnhorst class . They could elevate to 40 ° and depress to − 10 ° ; they had a rate of fire of around six shots per minute . The 15 cm guns fired a 45 @.@ 3 kg ( 100 lb ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 875 m / s ( 2 @,@ 871 ft / s ) . At maximum elevation , the guns could hit targets out to 23 @,@ 000 m ( 25 @,@ 000 yd ) . As with the main battery guns , Tirpitz 's 15 cm guns were later supplied with time @-@ fused shells . 
 The decision to mount low @-@ angle 15 cm guns has been criticised by naval historians , including Antony Preston , who stated that they " imposed a severe weight penalty " , while American and British battleships were being armed with dual @-@ purpose guns . Naval historians William Garzke and Robert Dulin note that " the use of dual @-@ purpose armament would have possibly increased the number of anti @-@ aircraft guns , but might have weakened the defence against destroyer attack , which German naval experts deemed more important . " 
 = = = = Anti @-@ aircraft battery = = = = 
 As built , Bismarck and Tirpitz were equipped with an anti @-@ aircraft battery of sixteen 10 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) C / 32 65 @-@ calibre guns in eight twin mounts , sixteen 3 @.@ 7 cm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) C / 30 guns in eight dual mounts , and twelve 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) guns in individual mounts . The 10 @.@ 5 cm guns were the same weapons as used aboard the Scharnhorst class , and were mounted on the first superstructure deck . After Bismarck was sunk in 1941 , two amidships guns on Tirpitz were moved forward so as to provide them with better fields of fire . The sixteen guns were guided by four fire @-@ control directors , two just aft of the conning tower , a third positioned aft of the main mast , and the fourth directly behind turret Caesar . Tirpitz 's directors were covered by protective domes , though Bismarck 's were not . 
 The ships ' 37 mm 83 @-@ calibre guns were twin mounted and placed in the superstructure . The mounts were hand @-@ operated and automatically stabilised for roll and pitch . These guns were supplied with a total of 32 @,@ 000 rounds of ammunition . Bismarck and Tirpitz were initially armed with twelve 20 mm guns in single mounts , though these were augmented over time . Bismarck received a pair of quadruple gun mountings , for a total of twenty 20 mm guns . Over the course of her career , Tirpitz 's 20 mm battery was increased to 78 guns in single and quadruple mountings . 
 = = = Armour = = = 
 The Bismarck @-@ class ships had an armoured belt that ranged in thickness from 220 to 320 mm ( 8 @.@ 7 to 12 @.@ 6 in ) ; the thickest section of armour covered the central portion , where the gun turrets , ammunition magazines , and machinery spaces were located . This portion of the belt was capped on either end by 220 mm thick transverse bulkheads . The ships had an upper deck that was 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick , and an armoured deck that was between 100 – 120 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 – 4 @.@ 7 in ) thick amidships , and tapered down to 60 mm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) at the bow and 80 mm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) at the stern . The deck was mounted low in the hull , however , which reduced the volume of internal space protected by the armoured citadel . This contrasted with contemporary British and American designs that featured a single thick armoured deck mounted high in the ship . 
 The forward conning tower had a 200 mm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) thick roof and 350 mm ( 14 in ) thick sides , while the range finder had an armoured roof 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick and 200 mm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) thick sides . The aft conning tower had much lighter armour : the roof was 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick and the sides were 150 mm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) , while the aft range finder had a 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick roof and 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) sides . The main battery turrets were reasonably well @-@ protected : the turret roofs were 130 mm ( 5 @.@ 1 in ) thick , the sides were 220 mm ( 8 @.@ 7 in ) thick , and the faces were 360 mm ( 14 in ) thick with 220 mm ( 8 @.@ 7 in ) thick shields . These armour thicknesses were less than those of contemporary British ( King George V ) and French ( Richelieu ) designs . Conversely , the secondary battery was better @-@ protected than most rivals . The 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) gun turrets had 35 mm ( 1 @.@ 4 in ) thick roofs , 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) sides , and 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) fronts . The 10 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) guns had 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) shields . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Bismarck was laid down at the Blohm & Voss shipyard on 1 July 1936 . The ship was assigned construction number 509 , and the contract name Ersatz Hannover , as a replacement for the old battleship Hannover . The ship was launched on 14 February 1939 , with Adolf Hitler in attendance . The granddaughter of the ship 's namesake , Otto von Bismarck , christened the ship . As with other German capital ships , Bismarck was originally built with a straight bow . Experiences with other ships revealed the necessity of a clipper bow , which was installed on Bismarck during the fitting @-@ out process . The ship was commissioned into the fleet on 24 August 1940 , with Kapitän zur See Ernst Lindemann in command . Three weeks later , the ship left Hamburg for trials in the Baltic Sea , before returning in December for final fitting @-@ out work . Further trials and tests were conducted in the Baltic in March and April ; Bismarck was placed on active status the following month . 
 Tirpitz 's keel was laid at the Kriegsmarine dockyard in Wilhelmshaven on 20 October 1936 , under construction number 128 . She had been ordered under the contract name Ersatz Schleswig @-@ Holstein to replace the obsolete battleship Schleswig @-@ Holstein . Tirpitz was named for Grand Admiral Alfred von Tirpitz , the architect of the High Seas Fleet before World War I. His daughter , Frau von Hassel , christened the ship on 1 April 1939 . Fitting out work lasted until February 1941 ; Tirpitz was commissioned into the fleet on 25 February . A series of trials were then conducted , first in the North Sea and then in the Baltic . 
 = = Ships = = 
 = = Service history = = 
 = = = Bismarck = = = 
 After Bismarck joined the fleet , plans were drawn up for a sortie into the North Atlantic . The operation initially called for a force composed of Bismarck , Tirpitz , and the two Scharnhorst @-@ class battleships . Tirpitz was not yet ready for service by May 1941 , and Scharnhorst was being overhauled . The force was reduced to Bismarck , Gneisenau , and the heavy cruiser Prinz Eugen . Gneisenau was damaged by a British bombing raid on Brest , so it was decided that only Bismarck and Prinz Eugen would conduct the operation . Admiral Günther Lütjens was placed in command of the pair of ships . 
 Early on the morning of 19 May , Bismarck left Gotenhafen , bound for the North Atlantic . While on the trip through the Danish Belt , Bismarck and Prinz Eugen encountered the Swedish cruiser HSwMS Gotland ; the sighting was passed through the Swedish Navy to the British naval attaché in Stockholm . The British Royal Air Force conducted aerial reconnaissance of the Norwegian fjord in which Bismarck and Prinz Eugen had stopped , to confirm the sighting . While in Norway , Admiral Lütjens failed to replenish the approximately 1 @,@ 000 long tons ( 1 @,@ 000 t ) of fuel Bismarck had spent on the first leg of the voyage . 
 By 23 May , Bismarck and Prinz Eugen had reached the Denmark Strait . That evening , the British cruisers Suffolk and Norfolk briefly engaged Bismarck before dropping back to shadow the German ships . At 06 : 00 the following morning , observers aboard Bismarck spotted the masts of the battlecruiser Hood and the new battleship Prince of Wales . The British ships steamed directly towards Bismarck and Prinz Eugen , before attempting a turn to bring the two forces on a roughly parallel course . During the turn , at least one of Bismarck 's 38 cm shells penetrated one of the aft ammunition magazines aboard Hood , which caused a catastrophic explosion and destroyed the ship . There were only three survivors from Hood 's crew of 1 @,@ 421 . The German ships then concentrated their fire on Prince of Wales , which was forced to withdraw . Bismarck did not emerge unscathed ; a direct hit on her bow from Prince of Wales caused Bismarck to take in some 2 @,@ 000 long tons ( 2 @,@ 000 t ) of water . The ship was also leaking oil , which made it easier for the British to track her . 
 After retreating , Prince of Wales joined Norfolk and Suffolk ; the ships briefly engaged Bismarck at around 18 : 00 . Neither side scored a hit . By this time , 19 warships were involved in the chase . This included six battleships and battlecruisers and two aircraft carriers , along with a number of cruisers and destroyers . After the second engagement with Prince of Wales , Lütjens detached Prinz Eugen to continue the operation while Bismarck sailed for port . Shortly before midnight on 24 May , a group of Fairey Swordfish torpedo bombers from 825 Naval Air Squadron on Victorious attacked Bismarck . One torpedo struck the ship amidships , though without doing any serious damage . The shock from the explosion , coupled with Bismarck 's manoeuvring at high speed , damaged the temporary repairs that had stopped the flooding from the earlier battle damage . Her speed was reduced to 16 knots ( 30 km / h ; 18 mph ) to slow the flooding while repair teams fixed the reopened wounds . 
 Early on 25 May , Bismarck doubled back past her pursuers in a wide circle . The manoeuvre successfully shook off the British ships , which turned west in an attempt to find the ship . Despite the manoeuvre , Admiral Lütjens was unaware that he had evaded the British , and so sent a series of radio transmissions , which were intercepted by the British and used to gain a rough fix on his position . Due to the damage his ship had sustained , Lütjens decided to head for occupied France rather than continue his mission . On the morning of 26 May , a Coastal Command PBY Catalina flying boat spotted Bismarck 690 nmi ( 1 @,@ 280 km ; 790 mi ) to the north @-@ west of Brest ; she was steaming at a speed that would put her under the protective umbrella of German aircraft and U @-@ boats within 24 hours . The only British forces close enough to slow her down were the aircraft carrier Ark Royal and her escort , the battlecruiser Renown . At approximately 20 : 30 , a flight of fifteen Ark Royal 's 820 Naval Air Squadrons Swordfish torpedo bombers launched an attack on Bismarck . Three torpedoes were believed to have struck the ship ; the first two torpedoes failed to do serious damage to the ship , but the third hit jammed Bismarck 's rudders hard to starboard . The damage could not be repaired , and the battleship began turning in a large circle , back towards her pursuers . 
 An hour after the Swordfish attack , Lütjens transmitted the following signal to Naval Group Command West : " Ship unable to manoeuvre . We will fight to the last shell . Long live the Führer . " At 08 : 47 the following morning , the battleship Rodney opened fire , followed directly by King George V. Bismarck replied three minutes later , though at 09 : 02 a 16 inch shell from Rodney destroyed the forward turrets . Half an hour later , Bismarck 's rear turrets were silenced as well . At around 10 : 15 , both British battleships had ceased fire , their target a burning wreck . The British were running dangerously low on fuel , but Bismarck had not yet been sunk . The cruiser Dorsetshire fired several torpedoes into the crippled ship , which then took on a severe list to port . At approximately the same time as Dorsetshire 's attack , engine room crew detonated scuttling charges in the engine rooms . There is still significant debate as to the direct cause of Bismarck 's sinking . Only 110 men were rescued by the British before reports of U @-@ boats forced them from the scene . A further five men were rescued by German vessels . 
 = = = Tirpitz = = = 
 Tirpitz 's first action following her commissioning into the Kriegsmarine on 25 February 1941 was to act as a deterrent to a possible Soviet attempt to break out their Baltic Fleet following the German invasion of the Soviet Union . The ship was joined by the heavy cruiser Admiral Scheer and the light cruisers Leipzig , Nürnberg , and Köln . The force patrolled off the Åland Islands for a few days before returning to Kiel . On 14 January 1942 , Tirpitz left German waters for Norway , arriving on the 17th . 
 On 6 March , Tirpitz , escorted by three destroyers , launched a raid on the British convoys to the Soviet Union . The Germans attempted to intercept convoys PQ @-@ 12 and QP @-@ 8 , but the inclement weather prevented them from finding the convoys . The British located Tirpitz , and the aircraft carrier Victorious launched a strike of twelve Fairey Albacore torpedo bombers . The aircraft were repulsed without having scored any hits on the German ships . Tirpitz and the destroyers were back in port by 12 March . The close call prompted Hitler to mandate that Tirpitz was not to attack another convoy unless its escorting aircraft carrier had been sunk or disabled . 
 Over the next two months , the RAF launched a series of unsuccessful bombing raids against Tirpitz while she was moored in the <unk> . The first , by 34 Handley Page Halifax bombers , took place on 31 March . Two followed a month later , on 28 and 29 April . The first attack was conducted by 43 Halifax and Avro Lancaster bombers , the second by 34 Halifax and Lancaster . A combination of heavy German anti @-@ aircraft fire and poor weather caused all three missions to fail . Over the rest of the year and into late 1942 , Tirpitz underwent a refit in the <unk> , which lacked dockyard facilities of any type . As a result , the work was done incrementally ; a large caisson was built to allow the rudders to be replaced . Naval historians William Garzke and Robert Dulin stated that " the repairs to this ship were one of the most difficult naval engineering feats of World War II . " 
 In January 1943 , Tirpitz emerged from the lengthy overhaul , after which she was transferred to Altafjord . Here , she participated in extensive training operations with Scharnhorst and the heavy cruiser Lützow , which lasted until the middle of the year . In early September , Tirpitz , Scharnhorst , and ten destroyers bombarded the island of Spitzbergen , which served as a British refuelling station . The two battleships destroyed their targets and returned safely to Altenfjord ; this was the first time Tirpitz fired her main guns in anger . On 22 – 23 September , six British midget submarines attacked Tirpitz while at anchor . Two of the submarines successfully planted explosive charges against the battleship 's hull , which did serious damage . Tirpitz had been successfully neutralised . Over the next six months , a workforce of some 1 @,@ 000 men effected the needed repairs , which were finished by March 1944 . 
 The British resumed the series of air attacks almost immediately after repairs were completed . On 3 April , the Royal Navy launched Operation Tungsten , during which 40 fighters and 40 Barracuda bombers from six carriers attacked the ship . They scored 15 direct hits and two near misses , which caused heavy damage , killed 122 men , and wounded 316 more . The Royal Navy attempted to repeat the attack three weeks later on the 24th , but had to call the operation off due to inclement weather . Operation Brawn , another carrier @-@ launched attack , followed on 15 May , but again weather interfered . Another carrier strike was attempted on 28 May , but it too was cancelled due to poor weather conditions . Operation Mascot , which was to be conducted by Victorious , Furious , and Indefatigable on 17 July , was frustrated by the heavy smokescreen over the battleship . 
 The Royal Navy launched the Operation Goodwood series in late August . Goodwood I took place on 22 August , with 38 bombers and 43 fighters from five carriers . The attackers failed to score any hits . Goodwood III followed two days later , with 48 bombers and 29 fighters from Formidable , Furious , and Indefatigable . The bombers made two hits on the ship , which did only minor damage . The last Royal Navy operation , Goodwood IV , followed on 29 August . Thirty @-@ four bombers and 25 fighters , launched from Formidable and Indefatigable , attacked the ship , though fog prevented them from scoring any hits . 
 The task of sinking Tirpitz now fell to the RAF , which performed three airstrikes armed with new 5 @,@ 400 kg ( 11 @,@ 900 lb ) Tallboy bombs . The first attack , Operation Paravane , came on 15 September , when a force of 27 Lancasters dropped a single Tallboy each ; the bombers succeeded in hitting Tirpitz directly in the bow with one of the bombs . The bomb completely penetrated the ship and exploded directly under her keel . This caused 1 @,@ 500 t ( 1 @,@ 500 long tons ; 1 @,@ 700 short tons ) of water to flood the ship ; Tirpitz had again been disabled . A month later , on 15 October , Tirpitz was moved to <unk> Island off Tromsø to be used as a floating artillery battery . Two weeks later , on 29 October , the British launched Operation Obviate , which consisted of 32 Lancaster bombers . Only a near miss was achieved , though it caused Tirpitz to take in more water . The last attack , Operation Catechism , took place on 12 November . Thirty @-@ two Lancasters attacked the ship and scored a pair of direct hits and a near miss . The bombs detonated one of Tirpitz 's ammunition magazines and caused the ship to capsize . Casualties were high : 1 @,@ 204 men were killed in the attack . Another 806 men managed to escape the sinking ship , and a further 82 were rescued from the capsized hulk . The wreck was gradually broken up for scrap between 1948 and 1957 . 
 = = See Also = = 
 List of ships of the Second World War 
 List of ship classes of the Second World War 
 = Hastings Ismay , 1st Baron Ismay = 
 General Hastings Lionel Ismay , 1st Baron Ismay KG GCB CH DSO PC DL ( 21 June 1887 – 17 December 1965 ) , nicknamed Pug , was a British Indian Army officer and diplomat , remembered primarily for his role as Winston Churchill 's chief military assistant during the Second World War and his service as the first Secretary General of NATO from 1952 to 1957 . 
 Ismay was born in Nainital , India in 1887 , and educated in the United Kingdom at the Charterhouse School and Royal Military College , Sandhurst . After Sandhurst , he joined the Indian Army as an officer of the 21st Prince Albert Victor 's Own Cavalry . During the First World War , he served with the Camel Corps in British Somaliland , where he joined in the British fight against the " Mad Mullah " , Mohammed Abdullah Hassan . In 1925 , Ismay became an Assistant Secretary of the Committee of Imperial Defence . After being promoted to the rank of colonel , he served as the military secretary for Lord Willingdon , the Viceroy of India , then returned to the Committee of Imperial Defence as Deputy Secretary in 1936 . 
 On 1 August 1938 , shortly before the outbreak of the Second World War , Ismay became the Secretary of the Committee of Imperial Defence and began planning for the impending war . In May 1940 , when Winston Churchill became Prime Minister of the United Kingdom , he selected Ismay as his chief military assistant and staff officer . In that capacity , Ismay served as the principal link between Churchill and the Chiefs of Staff Committee . Ismay also accompanied Churchill to many of the Allied war conferences . For Ismay 's advice and aid , " Churchill owed more , and admitted that he owed more " to him " than to anybody else , military or civilian , in the whole of the war . " 
 After the end of the war , Ismay remained in the army for another year , and helped to reorganise the Ministry of Defence . He then retired from the military and served as Lord Mountbatten of Burma 's Chief of Staff in India , helping to oversee its partition . From 1948 to 1951 , he served as chairman of the council of the Festival of Britain , helping to organise and promote the event . Then , in 1951 , when Churchill again became Prime Minister , he appointed Ismay Secretary of State for Commonwealth Relations . Ismay accepted the position , but resigned after only six months to become the first Secretary General of NATO in 1952 . He served as Secretary General until 1957 , and helped to establish and define the position . After retiring from NATO , Ismay wrote his memoirs , The Memoirs of General Lord Ismay , served on a variety of corporate boards , and co @-@ chaired the Ismay – Jacob Committee , which reorganised the Ministry of Defence once again . He died on 17 December 1965 , at his home Wormington Grange , Gloucestershire . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Ismay was born in Nainital , India , on 21 June 1887 . His father , Sir Stanley Ismay , was a member of the Viceroy 's Legislative Council and his mother , Beatrice Ellen , was the daughter of an Army colonel . Ismay began his education in Britain at the Charterhouse School , and his parents hoped that after completing his education there he would attend Cambridge and enter the civil service . 
 Ismay , however , " had a sneaking desire to be a cavalry soldier " , and after doing poorly on his final examinations at Charterhouse , he was not eligible to attend Cambridge . As a result , he entered the Royal Military College , Sandhurst in 1904 . Ismay would later write : " Sandhurst never meant nearly so much to me as Charterhouse had " , but he enjoyed his time at the school and studied alongside many men who went on to become important military officers , including Lord Gort , Edgar Ludlow @-@ Hewitt and Cyril Newall . 
 = = = Indian Army = = = 
 After completing the course at Sandhurst , Ismay placed fourth overall on its examinations and was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the Indian Army . Ismay was then attached to the Gloucestershire Regiment of the British Army in Ambala , where he served a one year mandatory apprenticeship . After leaving the regiment , Ismay did not immediately find a place in the Indian cavalry , so he spent nine months floating among positions with various British and Indian units . 
 In 1907 , Ismay found a permanent position in the Indian cavalry , joining the 21st Prince Albert Victor 's Own Cavalry , based at <unk> . Ismay thoroughly enjoyed his time with the regiment , describing it as " blissful . " In 1908 , he saw his first action with the regiment , when it was sent into Afghanistan , pursuing Mohmand raiders who had taken several Hindu women as hostages . Immediately after Ismay 's regiment returned from action , he was hospitalised in Peshawar due to heat stroke , but he recovered quickly and , along with the rest of his regiment , received the India General Service Medal . 
 In 1910 , after a reorganisation of the Indian Army , Ismay 's regiment moved from <unk> to Jhelum , further from the frontier . Shortly thereafter , Ismay was appointed the adjutant of his regiment , a position which he held for four years , during which time he also read voraciously and developed a great admiration for Winston Churchill , whom he sought to emulate . 
 = = Somaliland = = 
 In early 1914 , just before Ismay 's appointment as adjutant was set to expire , he met <unk> Howard , another British officer serving in India , who told him about an opportunity to serve with the King 's African Rifles in British Somaliland . Ismay decided that this was " just the sort of job that [ he ] wanted , " and applied immediately . Due to his reputation " as a thorough and dependable officer of sound judgement , " Ismay was appointed second in command of the Somaliland Camel Corps , a cavalry unit led by Thomas Cubitt . 
 Ismay left India for Somaliland in late July 1914 , and arrived on 9 August , shortly after the outbreak of the First World War in Europe . Like other officers in Somaliland , Ismay was " unhappy at being left out of the great war " and repeatedly asked for a transfer to the European front . In the end , however , Ismay 's superiors decided that he was " so indispensable that , despite his longing for action in Europe , he was retained in Somaliland until 1920 . " 
 In Somaliland , the Camel Corps and other British soldiers were ordered to subdue an uprising by Mohammed Abdullah Hassan , known by the British as the " Mad Mullah " , who had been fighting against them for more than twenty years . Ismay 's commander , Thomas Cubitt , was determined to end the rebellion forcefully and quickly , so on 17 November 1914 , he launched a major assault against Hassan 's fortress at <unk> <unk> . In the attack , Ismay fought closely alongside Adrian Carton de Wiart , later an important British officer in both World Wars . Not long after the attack on <unk> <unk> , however , the Camel Corps received orders from London " forbidding all offensive operations in Somaliland " , due to the misfortunes of the Army elsewhere . As a result of this order , British operations were limited for the duration of the First World War , and Ismay 's unit undertook no further major offensives . 
 Despite limited British activity , a few operations combined with the effort of local forces led to " a drastic weakening " of Hassan 's forces by 1918 . Thus , after the armistice ending the First World War , the government sent Major General Arthur Hoskins to take control of the forces in Somaliland and defeat Hassan conclusively in battle . After Hoskins arrived , his initial plan for dealing with Hassan focussed on the use of the newly formed Royal Air Force , so Ismay and the Camel Corps were consigned to a minor role . Hoskins 's plans , however , were found " <unk> and far too costly " , so they were shelved throughout most of 1918 and 1919 . 
 In October 1919 , plans for Hoskins 's operation were finally approved , and on 21 January 1920 , the attack against Hassan commenced . After several days of bombing , Ismay was ordered to lead an assault by the Camel Corps against Hassan 's fortress at <unk> Ali . On 27 January , Ismay 's forces first attempted the attack and were repulsed by strong resistance . That night , however , Hassan and his forces fled <unk> Ali to take refuge in the countryside . Ismay was assigned to track down and capture Hassan , but he " had no idea of where he was " , and was forced to begin a large search . Ismay pursued Hassan for nearly two weeks , and managed to capture many members of his family and people close to him , including seven of his sons . Nonetheless , Hassan himself managed to evade Ismay and on 12 February , the effort to capture him was called off . Though Hassan was never captured , his power was broken , and he died in December 1920 of influenza . For his service in the effort against Hassan , Ismay received the Distinguished Service Order and was twice mentioned in despatches . 
 = = Interwar years = = 
 In April 1920 , Ismay left Somaliland for England . While en route , he received word that he had been nominated for a place at the Indian Army 's Staff College in Quetta . Depressed by the loss of life and destruction of the First World War , Ismay turned down the nomination , and " was even seriously thinking of resigning [ his ] commission " in the Army . After arriving in London , Ismay was given twelve months of medical leave , and decided to stay in the army . He then attempted to reclaim his seat at the Staff College , but was told that it had already been given to someone else . 
 = = = Service in India = = = 
 While on medical leave , Ismay met Laura Kathleen Clegg , with whom he quickly fell in love . The two were engaged only three weeks after meeting . After four months , however , Ismay was proclaimed fit for duty , despite his remaining eight months of leave , and ordered back to India , where he rejoined his old regiment . His time back in India was relatively quiet , as there was " no serious fighting " in the area of his regiment at the time . In February 1921 , Ismay took the qualifying exam for the Staff College in Rawalpindi , and passed , earning himself a seat for the next year . 
 In April , Ismay returned to London on leave , and married Clegg , with whom he eventually had three daughters . Ismay remained in London until February 1922 , when he entered the Staff College at Quetta . Ismay excelled at the Staff College , and its commandant called him " one of the two best , if not the best , of the students who have passed through my hands . " In his final thesis at the Staff College , Ismay correctly predicted that the next European war would be a total war , but he incorrectly predicted that cavalry would continue to play a role in future warfare . 
 After the Staff College , Ismay became Deputy Assistant Quartermaster General of the Indian Army . In that position , he worked closely with Claude Auchinleck , beginning a long @-@ standing personal and professional relationship between the two . Ismay found that his work as Deputy Assistant Quartermaster General " was a valuable experience " , but did not enjoy it . 
 = = = Service in England = = = 
 In 1924 , Air Vice @-@ Marshal Philip Game suggested to Ismay that he apply for a seat at the RAF Staff College , Andover . Although Ismay " had no desire to learn to be a pilot " , he was happy for the opportunity to return to England , and went to study at the college . After completing the programme , he was approached about the possibility of serving as an Assistant Secretary of the Committee of Imperial Defence ( CID ) under Maurice Hankey . Ismay gladly accepted the position , starting work in December 1925 . In the six months between finishing the Staff College and beginning at the CID , Ismay returned to India and held a staff position at the headquarters of the Indian Army in Simla . 
 As Assistant Secretary , Ismay directed several of the subcommittees of the Committee of Imperial Defence , including those for Censorship and War Emergency Legislation , Principal Supply Officers , and Co @-@ ordination of Departmental Action . As the Secretary of the Committee for the Co @-@ ordination of Departmental Action , Ismay " was responsible for seeing that all plans and preparations made by Government Departments or sub @-@ committees of the CID to meet the eventuality of war , were incorporated under appropriate headings in a document known as the War Book . " This task ended up consuming most of Ismay 's time as Assistant Secretary , and gave him " exceptional insight into the ways of Whitehall . " 
 While serving as Assistant Secretary , Ismay made important friends and gained the backing of Hankey , by whom he was " greatly valued " . Largely through Hankey 's influence , Ismay was nominated as a Companion of the Order of the Bath in the Civil Division , an honour which he received in 1931 . 
 = = = Lord Willingdon and the War Office = = = 
 In December 1930 , after five years , Ismay left his position at the CID . He was promoted to the rank of colonel and hoped to take command of the 12th Cavalry . Instead , he became the military secretary for Lord Willingdon , the newly appointed Viceroy of India . 
 In this role , Ismay served as the " unofficial link " between Willingdon and the Indian Army . He also led Willingdon 's personal staff , and organised his many trips throughout India . Ismay was also responsible for Willingdon 's safety , and took precautions after he was threatened by assassins . In December 1932 , Ismay was informed that his service with Willingdon was over and that he was expected to take up a position in the War Office during the next year . 
 At the War Office , Ismay served as an intelligence officer with responsibility for the Middle East , Far East , the Americas , the Soviet Union , Poland and the Baltic States . Ismay enjoyed his work , and wrote that " intelligence is perhaps the most interesting of all Staff work . " During his three years in the position , Ismay worked directly under Sir John Dill , who would later serve as the Chief of the Imperial General Staff . 
 = = Committee of Imperial Defence = = 
 In 1936 , Maurice Hankey became determined to " bring Ismay in as his deputy and eventual successor " at the CID . Hoping that the appointment would " strengthen the organization of the CID " and enhance its influence , Hankey offered Ismay the position of Deputy Secretary . Although the appointment meant that Ismay would probably never command troops again , he viewed it as an important opportunity and " accepted with scarcely a moment 's hesitation . " A week thereafter , Ismay received a letter offering him the command of a cavalry brigade in India , but declined , solidifying his choice to remain a staff officer . 
 As Deputy Secretary of the Committee of Imperial Defence , Ismay had broad responsibilities , and was " concerned with every aspect of planning and preparation for a war which seemed imminent . " Ismay dealt extensively with a variety of matters and focussed much of his attention on the preparation of anti @-@ aircraft defences and co @-@ ordination among the military services . As the crisis in Europe escalated , however , Hankey announced his intention to retire in June 1938 . Hankey hoped that one person , preferably Ismay , would inherit all of the positions he had occupied , including Secretary of the CID , clerk of the Privy Council , and Secretary to the Cabinet , but the Prime Minister , Neville Chamberlain , decided that the positions should be split and assigned to different people . 
 In the end , Ismay was named only to the position of Secretary of the Committee of Imperial Defence , effective 1 August 1938 . Ismay assumed the position scarcely more than a year before the outbreak of the Second World War , and the war totally dominated his time in office . Soon after Ismay took office , Hitler initiated a crisis over the Sudetenland . While Chamberlain was at the Munich Conference attempting to resolve the crisis , Ismay ordered the digging of trenches in London as protection against air attacks , should war occur . Ismay later said that he thought Britain should have gone to war at Munich instead of waiting , but said nothing at the time . As it became increasingly clear that war was inevitable in 1939 , Ismay also prepared for a " smooth , simple and practically instantaneous " transition from the Committee of Imperial Defence to the War Cabinet , or whatever other wartime authority the government might choose . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 With the outbreak of the Second World War , the CID was immediately absorbed into the War Cabinet as Ismay had planned . In the midst of the turmoil , Ismay was promoted to Major General , and began to work closely with Chamberlain , accompanying him on a visit to France in December 1939 . Ismay disagreed with several Allied strategic choices , including the decision to try to stop the German advance in Belgium , but kept his doubts to himself . 
 = = = Chiefs of Staff Committee = = = 
 In April 1940 , Winston Churchill took control of the Military Co @-@ ordination Committee , charged with overseeing all of the military services . He selected Ismay as his chief staff officer , which also gave Ismay the additional responsibility of serving on the Chiefs of Staff Committee . While serving under Churchill had been a life @-@ long dream for Ismay , he was initially sceptical about the duties of his new position , which seemed unclear and poorly defined . 
 On 10 May , after the beginning of the Battle of France , Chamberlain resigned , and Churchill became both Prime Minister and Minister of Defence . Ismay , who later called Churchill " the greatest War Prime Minister in our history " , was " thrilled " by this development , and continued to act as Churchill 's chief staff officer and military adviser . According to Churchill , the two developed a close " personal and official connection [ that ] was preserved unbroken and <unk> " throughout the war . As part of this relationship , not long after Churchill became Prime Minister , he arranged for Ismay to be appointed Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath in June 1940 . From the very moment he became Prime Minister , Churchill " relied heavily on General Pug Ismay , " who provided a crucial bridge to the military establishment . Ismay served as the " principal assistant to Mr. Churchill in his capacity as Minister of Defence " , continued to serve as the Secretary of the Imperial Defence Chiefs of Staff Committee , and became Deputy Secretary of the War Cabinet . Ismay was crucial to running the war effort , as he was able to effectively link the military and civilian leadership . Jock Colville , Churchill 's private secretary , wrote that Ismay had the " tact , patience , and skill in promoting compromise " needed to keep the war running smoothly . " Ismay had the additional advantage of being admired by the Service Chiefs for his long and distinguished record as a soldier . 
 In his role , Ismay handled " nearly all military messages " from Churchill to the Service Chiefs . Ismay also gave Churchill advice on military matters , and often " begged him to be reasonable " when he contemplated foolish actions , believing that Churchill 's greatest fault was his " impetuous nature and impatience with opposition . " When the Chiefs of Staff found Churchill 's demands unfeasible , Ismay took the role of " converting the Prime Minister " to their viewpoint . 
 = = = Allied conferences = = = 
 As Churchill 's chief military adviser , Ismay frequently attended wartime conferences and meetings of the Allies and accompanied other British leaders , such as Foreign Minister Anthony Eden , on their travels . Ismay 's travel to the conferences began in 1941 , when he went with Lord Beaverbrook to the first Moscow Conference . Because English participation in the conference was a secret , Ismay faked influenza to explain his absence from London while it was taking place . The Conference was also the first time that Ismay worked closely with the Americans , whom he found " quite congenial . " 
 Ismay would continue to work closely with the Americans throughout the remainder of the war , and he accompanied Churchill on his 1942 trip to the United States . Shortly after their return , US General Dwight D. Eisenhower arrived in Britain to command the American forces . He established close relations with Ismay , who liked him greatly , and assisted him in co @-@ ordinating with both British forces and the Cabinet . Eisenhower thought highly of Ismay , remembering him for his " stalwart support " , and calling him a man " of great ability " . Not long after Eisenhower arrived , on 16 August 1942 , Ismay was promoted to the rank of Lieutenant General . Around the same time , his good relations with the Americans were recognised by others in the government . Thus , in November 1942 , when Eleanor Roosevelt visited Britain , Lady Ismay was chosen to host her for one night of her stay . 
 = = = 1943 conferences = = = 
 In January 1943 , Ismay accompanied Churchill to the Casablanca Conference . Ismay attended nearly all of the proceedings of the Conference , and helped work towards consensus where the Americans and British disagreed on issues . Ismay was also appointed to the committee which wrote the formal report of the conference . After the conference , Ismay visited the American headquarters in Algiers to meet with Eisenhower , and helped resolve some differences of opinion between Eisenhower and his British colleagues . 
 After Casablanca , Ismay accompanied Churchill to the third Washington Conference in May 1943 . At the conference , Ismay first met the American Admiral William D. Leahy , who is often described as his American counterpart . The two developed a friendly relationship , and Leahy wrote in his memoirs : " General Sir Hastings Ismay became my favorite , perhaps because his position closely paralleled my own " . 
 After the Washington Conference came the Quebec Conference in August 1943 . Once again , Ismay attended along with Churchill . The Quebec Conference was the first time that the Allied leaders discussed the full details of Operation Overlord , so Ismay spent much of his time explaining details of the operation to Churchill and other leaders . During the conference , Ismay also observed that Dudley Pound " had had a breakdown " . He took the information to Churchill who demanded Pound 's resignation a week later . 
 Shortly after returning from Quebec , Ismay participated in his next conference , travelling with Anthony Eden to the Moscow Conference in October and November , where he served as Eden 's top military adviser . At the conference , Ismay handled all of the Soviet questions about the planning for Operation Overlord , and met Joseph Stalin personally for the first time . After the conference , Ismay wrote that he " was optimistic about [ sic ] post @-@ war relations with Russia " , showing his belief that the meeting had gone well . 
 Only four days after returning from the Moscow Conference , Ismay left England again for the Cairo Conference and Teheran Conference with Churchill . One major source of conflict at the Cairo Conference was an American proposal to appoint an overall commander for the strategic bombing of Germany . Ismay and the British were strongly opposed , and Ismay wrote a long paper against the idea , which became the basis of British policy on the subject . At Teheran , Ismay helped to argue the case for Operation Overlord , but immediately after the conference he developed bronchitis and returned to England by ship , scrapping his other plans for the trip . 
 = = = 1944 – 1945 = = = 
 In the first several months of 1944 , Ismay spent almost all of his time planning for the Normandy Landings . As part of the planning , Ismay personally coordinated the plans for Operation Bodyguard and Operation Fortitude , which were designed to deceive the Germans about the planned Normandy landings . In March , Duncan Sandys , Churchill 's nephew , told Ismay that Basil Liddell Hart , a noted strategist and historian , had somehow discovered the secret plans for the Normandy landings . This development had the potential to compromise the entire operation , so Ismay personally interviewed Liddell Hart , who claimed to have simply " worked it all out for himself " without any access to secret information . After their interview , Ismay directed the matter to the MI5 , who never found evidence of wrongdoing , although it is suspected that Liddell Hart may in fact have received information from military planners . 
 On 20 May 1944 , less than a month before the Normandy Landings were scheduled to take place , Ismay was promoted to the rank of full general . After the successful D @-@ Day landings , King George VI decided to visit the troops in Normandy , and selected Ismay to accompany him on the visit . In September , Ismay accompanied Churchill to another conference , the Second Quebec Conference . Ismay also accompanied Churchill on his visits to Moscow and Paris in late 1944 . 
 In February 1945 , Ismay attended the Yalta Conference . He found the conference different from the previous ones where " the military element had been the prima donna , occupying the centre of the stage . " Instead , at Yalta , political issues took precedence , leaving Ismay and other military advisers " waiting for calls that never came " . 
 On VE Day , Ismay found it " quite impossible to be completely happy about the future , " due to the lingering Japanese threat , and the rising threat of the Soviet Union . Nonetheless , he was happy to be one of only three men to hold the same high government position throughout the war in Europe , along with Edward Bridges , 1st Baron Bridges and the King . 
 = = Post @-@ war military service = = 
 After VE Day , Ismay accompanied Churchill to the Potsdam Conference . Like Yalta , the conference focussed primarily on political issues , so there was little for Ismay to do . After Clement Attlee defeated Churchill in the 1945 election , becoming Prime Minister , Ismay kept his position , working with Attlee at the conference , but remained loyal to Churchill . Ismay and Churchill remained friends for the remainder of their lives , and Ismay even helped Churchill write his memoirs , reviewing and commenting on each chapter of his manuscript . 
 Shortly after the Potsdam Conference , the war in Asia ended on VJ Day . After this victory , Ismay " would have liked to retire at once " , but at Attlee 's request he remained in the military for another year . Before continuing work , however , Ismay travelled to New York on 6 September , for a six @-@ week vacation ; he received a warm welcome . 
 Over the next year , Ismay worked largely on the issue of reform for the Ministry of Defence . From December 1945 to February 1946 , Ismay worked with a small committee to draft the Statement Relating to Defence , which formed the basis of reforms implemented by Attlee later that year . For his role , Ismay became known as the " ' chief architect ' of the post @-@ war Ministry of Defence . " 
 During the year following the war , Ismay received many honours for his service . In August 1945 , as part of Churchill 's resignation honours , he was appointed to the Order of the Companions of Honour , an honour rarely bestowed on soldiers . The next January , he received the Legion of Merit from the United States . He was also promoted to Knight Grand Cross of the Order of Bath in June . Finally , he was named the Chairman of the Council of the Royal National Institute for the Blind . 
 In November 1946 , Ismay announced his intention to retire . Attlee accepted his retirement , effective on 31 December 1946 . Immediately after retiring , in the 1947 New Year Honours , Ismay was created a baron taking the title Baron Ismay , of Wormington in the County of Gloucester . He accepted the barony and took his seat in the House of Lords in February . 
 = = Partition of India = = 
 Shortly after Ismay 's retirement , Lord Mountbatten of Burma was appointed as the last British Viceroy of India and Ismay offered to serve as his chief of staff . Thus , in March 1947 , Ismay left with Mountbatten for India to help preside over its transition to independence . After arriving in India , Ismay soon came to the conclusion that the situation there was dire , heading for civil war , and told Mountbatten that " India was a ship on fire in mid @-@ ocean with ammunition in her hold . " 
 When Ismay and Mountbatten arrived , they were committed to preserving a unified India , but Ismay soon realised " that the Moslem League would not agree to any plan which did not provide for the creation of Pakistan as an independent sovereign state . " In April , after several unsuccessful meetings with Muhammad Ali Jinnah , Mountbatten came to the same conclusion and began drawing up plans for the partition . Over the next month Mountbatten finalised his partition plan , and on 2 May 1947 , he sent Ismay back to London to present it to the British government . Ismay presented the plan to the Prime Minister and Cabinet , casting partition as a Hobson 's choice . Ismay stayed in England for the next month , and helped to alter the plan based on the cabinet 's suggestions , before returning to India on 31 May . 
 Once the partition plan had been accepted , Ismay worked on implementing the details . In particular , Ismay dealt with the issue of dividing the Indian Army . Based on his own experiences and love of the Indian Army , Ismay did his " utmost to persuade " the leaders of the new Indian and Pakistani states not to separate the army immediately . His efforts failed due to the opposition of Jinnah . 
 Ismay also travelled to Kashmir to ask Hari Singh to hold an immediate referendum over whether his territory would join India or Pakistan . Once again , Ismay was unsuccessful and Singh " changed the subject " each time that Ismay tried to discuss the referendum . Throughout the period immediately following independence , Ismay also tried to ensure that stories printed in the Indian and Pakistani press about the partition were accurate , but once again he was largely unsuccessful . 
 The situation in India continued to deteriorate throughout the summer and autumn of 1947 . Nevertheless , Ismay and Mountbatten had agreed that Ismay would remain in his position for only three to four months after partition . In December 1947 , he left India to return to England . Shortly after his return , Ismay served briefly on the British delegation to the United Nations to deal with the Kashmir issue . Ismay played only a limited role , as the Pakistanis suspected him of pro @-@ Indian sympathies . 
 = = Festival of Britain = = 
 Shortly after Ismay returned from the United Nations , Prime Minister Attlee asked him to become the Chairman of the Council of the Festival of Britain , scheduled to take place in 1951 . Ismay accepted the offer , and on 10 March 1948 , he officially took the position of chairman . The appointment was largely symbolic , and Ismay " was at least partly appointed to forestall potential criticism by his friend Winston Churchill . " The Council , however , wielded " slight , but not insignificant influence " and Ismay took his duties seriously . 
 Ismay helped to ensure that the festival would be truly national in character , rather than just confined to London . As such , in June 1949 , he called together all of the mayors in Britain to discuss the festival ; this was the first meeting of all British mayors since 1916 . Ismay also publicly defended the large cost of the festival , and emphasised its historic nature , saying , " We are consciously and deliberately determined to make history . " Once the festival opened , Ismay hosted various notable guests , including Margaret Truman , the daughter of US President Harry Truman . 
 = = Secretary of State for Commonwealth Relations = = 
 In the 1951 general election held shortly after the conclusion of the Festival of Britain , Churchill 's Conservative Party once again won a majority in Parliament , making Churchill Prime Minister for a second time . The day after the election , Churchill asked Ismay to become the Secretary of State for Commonwealth Relations in his cabinet . Ismay " was overjoyed at the prospect of serving under Churchill again " and accepted the post immediately . Although not a politician , Ismay was well @-@ suited for the position because of his close relationships with the leaders of the commonwealth countries , largely the result of his work during the war . 
 As a result of his military background and experience , Ismay became " more closely involved in defence matters than is usual for a Secretary of State for Commonwealth Relations , " and often served as de facto Minister of Defence and serving as temporary Minister of Defence until the permanent appointee , Harold Alexander , was able to take office . Through his close involvement in defence matters , Ismay began to be involved with the North Atlantic Treaty Organization . In January 1952 , he accompanied Churchill to a meeting in Ottawa about the alliance , and in February 1952 he attended the NATO Lisbon Conference as the British Ministry of Defence representative . When leaving the conference , Ismay remarked to Alfred Gruenther , " this is the first that I have seen of NATO , and thank heaven it 's the last . " 
 = = Secretary General of NATO = = 
 At the Lisbon Conference , the members of NATO agreed to appoint a Secretary General who would direct the organisation 's staff and serve as Vice @-@ Chairman of the Atlantic Council . The position was initially offered to Sir Oliver Franks , but he declined . As such , the allies scrambled to find someone else to take the position . Two weeks later , the countries agreed to ask Ismay to become Secretary General at the suggestion of Churchill and Anthony Eden . 
 Eden asked Ismay to accept the position , but his response " was an immediate and emphatic negative , " as he saw NATO as an overly bureaucratic and inefficient organisation and complained that the position of Secretary General was " divided and ill @-@ defined . " Churchill then personally asked Ismay to accept the position , telling him that " NATO provided the best , if not the only , hope of peace in our time . " After further urging , Ismay reluctantly agreed to take the job . On 12 March 1952 , the Atlantic Council officially passed a resolution appointing Ismay Secretary General , and he started work on 24 March . 
 Ismay 's appointment to the position was well @-@ received , enjoying the unanimous support of all the NATO members . The press and public also responded favourably . The Times wrote : " of all the candidates whose names have been mentioned , Lord Ismay would seem to have the strongest qualifications for the post . " The New York Times applauded his " vast experience in military planning , strategy , and administration , " and The Washington Post wrote that Ismay would bring NATO " great authority , experience and energy and a personal charm that can dissolve difficulties . " 
 As the first Secretary @-@ General , Ismay was " assuming an entirely new role in the history of international organizations , " and as such he helped to define the position itself . While Ismay " deemed it wise not to step too boldly in a political role " in disputes among the members , he asserted himself strongly on issues relevant to the organisation of NATO . From the very beginning of his time in office , Ismay worked to empower the permanent representatives to NATO , and emphasised that they had the same legal authority to make decisions as the NATO foreign ministers . 
 Ismay was also a proponent of NATO expansion , saying that NATO " must grow until the whole free world gets under one umbrella . " However , before Warsaw Pact was even put in place , he opposed the request to join NATO made by USSR in 1954 saying that " the Soviet request to join NATO is like an unrepentant burglar requesting to join the police force " thus making apparent that NATO alliance ( " the police force " ) was directed against USSR . As stated in the official NATO website " the request tested the limits of NATO 's willingness to admit new members " . 
 As Secretary General , Ismay also worked to encourage closer political co @-@ ordination among the members of the alliance . During the Suez Crisis he offered his good offices to help resolve issues among members of the alliance . Ismay also offered to help mediate disputes over Cyprus . 
 In December 1956 , Ismay decided to retire from NATO . He told the press that " he was not giving up his position for personal reasons , but because he felt it needed a fresh hand and a fresh brain . " Paul @-@ Henri Spaak was immediately chosen as his successor , but Ismay remained in office until May 1957 , when he left with " the affection and respect " of all the NATO members . While Secretary General , Ismay is also credited as having been the first person to say that the purpose of the alliance was " to keep the Russians out , the Americans in , and the Germans down , " a saying that has since become a common way to quickly describe the alliance . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 Immediately after leaving NATO , Ismay was honoured by Queen Elizabeth II with an appointment to the Order of the Garter . His youngest daughter Mary had married George Seymour , equerry to Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother , and their daughter Katharine is a god @-@ daughter of Princess Margaret . 
 He was appointed to boards of several corporations including the Ashanti Goldfields Corporation . Ismay also began writing his memoirs , The Memoirs of General Lord Ismay , which were published in 1960 by Viking Press . In his memoirs , Ismay focussed principally on his Second World War service , and as such , one reviewer called them " a most significant addition to the literature of the Second World War . " 
 In 1963 , Ismay was asked to again assist in a review of the organisation of the British military along with Sir Ian Jacob . Although Ismay was ill throughout most of the review and did relatively little of the work , " his influence was strong " , and the final product of the review largely reflected his opinions . In the end , the Ismay – Jacob Report recommended strengthening the central power of the Ministry of Defence substantially , and in 1964 , Parliament implemented its recommendations . 
 Ismay died on 17 December 1965 at his home Wormington Grange , Gloucestershire , at the age of 78 . As he had no male heir , his title became extinct . His Garter banner , which hung in St. George 's Chapel in Windsor during his lifetime , is now on display in the nave of Tewkesbury Abbey . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 General Ismay was portrayed in the television drama Churchill and the Generals by Paul Hardwick , and in Lord Mountbatten : The Last Viceroy by Nigel Davenport . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Overy , Richard ( 1989 ) . The Road To War . London : Macmillan . 
 <unk> , Ray ( 1990 ) . The Warrior Mullah . London : Bellew Publishing . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 43 @-@ 0 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Churchill , Winston ( 1948 ) . The Gathering Storm . The Second World War 2 . Boston : Houghton Mifflin Company . OCLC <unk> . 
 Colville , John ( 1981 ) . Winston Churchill and His Inner Circle . New York : Wyndham Books . ISBN 0 @-@ 671 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . OCLC <unk> . 
 <unk> , Becky ( 2003 ) . The Autobiography of a Nation : The 1951 Festival of Britain . Manchester : Manchester University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 7190 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Collins , Larry ; LaPierre , Dominique ( 1975 ) . Freedom at Midnight . New York : Simon & Schuster . ISBN 0 @-@ 671 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Eisenhower , Dwight ( 1948 ) . Crusade in Europe . Garden City , New York : Doubleday . OCLC <unk> . 
 Eisenhower , John ( 1982 ) . Allies : Pearl Harbor to D @-@ Day . Garden City , New York : Doubleday . ISBN 0 @-@ 385 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Gilbert , Martin ( 1991 ) . Churchill : A Life . New York : Henry Holt and Company . ISBN 0 @-@ 8050 @-@ <unk> @-@ X. OCLC <unk> . 
 Ismay , Hastings ( 1960 ) . The Memoirs of General Lord Ismay . New York : Viking Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 8371 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Johnson , Franklyn ( 1980 ) . Defence by Ministry . New York : Holmes & Meier Publisher , Inc . ISBN 0 @-@ 8419 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Jordan , Robert ( 1967 ) . The NATO International Staff / Secretariat 1952 – 1957 . London : Oxford University Press . OCLC <unk> . 
 Lamb , Richard ( 1991 ) . Churchill as War Leader . New York : Caroll & Graff Publishers , Inc . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 937 @-@ 5 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Leahy , William ( 1950 ) . I Was There . New York : Whittlesey House . OCLC <unk> . 
 Lewin , Ronald ( 2004 ) . " Hastings Lionel Ismay " . In Matthew , <unk> ; Harrison , Brian . Oxford Dictionary of National Biography 29 . Oxford : Oxford University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Naylor , John ( 1984 ) . A man and an institution . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 521 @-@ <unk> @-@ X. 
 <unk> , Harold ( 1985 ) . Great Britons . Oxford : Oxford University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Roskill , Stephen ( 1972 ) . Hankey : Man of Secrets 1 . London : Collins . ISBN 0 @-@ 00 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Roskill , Stephen ( 1972 ) . Hankey : Man of Secrets 2 . London : Collins . ISBN 0 @-@ 00 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Sainsbury , Keith ( 1985 ) . The Turning Point . Oxford : Oxford University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . OCLC <unk> . 
 US Department of State Historical Office ( 1968 ) . Foreign Relations of the United States : Conferences at Washington , 1941 – 1942 , and Casablanca , 1943 . Washington , DC : Government Printing Office . OCLC <unk> . 
 Wingate , Ronald ( 1970 ) . Lord Ismay : A Biography . London : Hutchinson of London . ISBN 0 @-@ 09 @-@ <unk> @-@ X. OCLC <unk> . 
 = = = Articles = = = 
 " Advice on Defence : Imperial Committee in Peace and War " . The Times . 12 January 1939 @.@ p . 12e . 
 " Allied Chiefs with the King " . The Times . 17 June 1944 @.@ p . 4d . 
 " Atlantic Council Deputies " . The Times . 20 March 1952 @.@ p . 3a . 
 " British Officers Decorated " . The Times . 17 January 1946 @.@ p . 7c . 
 " Cabinet Staff Change " . The Times . 17 December 1946 @.@ p . 4g . 
 Daniel , Clifton ( 28 February 1952 ) . " Franks Rejection of Post Confirmed " . The New York Times . 
 Daniel , Clifton ( 13 March 1952 ) . " Ismay Named Civilian Chief of Atlantic Pact Organization " . The New York Times . 
 " Commodity Markets " . The Times . 22 May 1957 @.@ p . <unk> . 
 " Court Circular " . The Times . 16 May 1957 @.@ p . 14b . 
 " Discussions in Ottawa " . The Times . 15 January 1952 @.@ p . 4a . 
 " Dulles Gives Pledge to Save Allied Unity " . The Washington Post . 10 December 1956 . 
 Evans , Michael ( 4 September 2006 ) . " Army writer came close to exposing secrets of D @-@ Day " . The Times ( London ) . Retrieved 13 April 2009 . 
 " First Chief of NATO , Lord Ismay , 78 , Dies " . The Washington Post . 19 December 1965 . 
 " General Ismay Promoted " . The Times . 7 November 1942 @.@ p . 4e . 
 " House of Lords " . The Times . 6 February 1947 @.@ p . 8a . 
 " Ismay to Study Service Unity " . The Washington Post . 13 January 1964 . 
 Joffe , Josef ( 19 March 2009 ) . " NATO : <unk> On " . Time . Retrieved 13 February 2009 . 
 " <unk> for the Services " . The Times . 11 July 1940 @.@ p . 5g . 
 Leventhal , F.M. ( Autumn 1995 ) . " A Tonic to the Nation : The Festival of Britain , 1951 " . Albion 27 ( 3 ) . 
 The London Gazette : ( Supplement ) no . <unk> @.@ p . 1 . 26 November 1920 . Retrieved 5 June 2009 . 
 The London Gazette : ( Supplement ) no . <unk> @.@ p . 411 . 21 January 1947 . Retrieved 5 June 2009 . 
 " Lord Ismay Appointed " . The Times . 11 March 1948 @.@ p . 4c . 
 " Lord Ismay , Ex @-@ Churchill Aide , Leader in NATO , Is Dead at 78 " . The New York Times . 18 December 1965 . 
 " M Spaak to Succeed Lord Ismay " . The Times . 15 December 1956 @.@ p . 6a . 
 MI5 . " 4 September 2006 releases : Other subjects of Security Service enquiries " . Archived from the original on 13 February 2009 . Retrieved 14 April 2009 . 
 " Miss Truman at South Bank Exhibition " . The Times . 5 June 1951 @.@ p . 4c . 
 " Mr. Eden at Kremlin " . The Times . 30 October 1943 @.@ p . 4d . 
 " Mr. Eden Sees Marshal Stalin " . The Times . 28 October 1943 @.@ p . 4c . 
 " <unk> Secretary General " . The Times . 13 March 1952 @.@ p . 4e . 
 " New Viceroy in Delhi " . The Times . 23 March 1947 @.@ p . 6e . 
 " New Years Honours List " . The Times . 1 January 1947 @.@ p . 4f . 
 " News in Brief " . The Times . 26 July 1946 @.@ p . 3a . 
 " Obituary : Lord Ismay " . The Times . 18 December 1965 @.@ p . 9a . 
 " Prime Minister in the United States " . The Times . 19 June 1942 @.@ p . 4a . 
 " Resignation Honours " . The Times . 14 August 1945 @.@ p . 4g . 
 " Secretary Ismay " . The Washington Post . 15 March 1952 . 
 Schorr , Daniel ( 1 April 2009 ) . " With No Clear Mission , NATO Has Little Power " . NPR . Retrieved 13 April 2009 . 
 " Scope of 1951 Festival " . The Times . 9 June 1949 @.@ p . 3a . 
 " Sir H. Ismay Promoted " . The Times . 20 May 1944 @.@ p . <unk> . 
 " Sir M. Hankey 's Successors " . The Times . 2 June 1938 @.@ p . <unk> . 
 " The Birthday Honours " . The Times . 13 June 1946 @.@ p . 8a . 
 " The Prime Minister in Canada " . The Times . 11 August 1943 @.@ p . 4a . 
 " The Queen Mary Sails with 15 @,@ 000 Troops " . The Times . 6 September 1945 @.@ p . 2c . 
 " Women 's Part in the War " . The Times . 9 November 1942 @.@ p . 2a . 
 = 2008 Yemen cyclone = 
 In October 2008 , the remnants of a tropical cyclone caused extensive damage in Yemen , a poor country on the southern tip of the Arabian Peninsula . The storm , officially known as Deep Depression ARB 02 , was the sixth tropical cyclone of the 2008 North Indian Ocean cyclone season , and the second tropical cyclone in the Arabian Sea that year . It formed on October 19 off the west coast of India from the same broader system that spawned a storm in the southern Indian Ocean . Moving generally westward , the depression failed to intensify much , reaching maximum sustained winds of only 55 km / h ( 35 mph ) . It was no longer classifiable as a tropical depression by October 23 , and later that day , its remnants struck near Ash <unk> in eastern Yemen . 
 The storm sent a plume of moisture throughout the Arabian Peninsula , contributing to dust storms as far north as Iraq . However , the effects were most severe in Yemen , becoming the second @-@ worst natural disaster in the country after deadly floods in 1996 . The storm dropped heavy rainfall in a normally arid region , reaching around 91 mm ( 3 @.@ 6 in ) , which caused flash flooding in valleys after waterways were unable to contain the approximately 2 billion km3 ( 528 billion gallons ) of water that fell . Poor drainage practices and an invasive species of weed contributed to the floods , which damaged or destroyed 6 @,@ 505 houses , leaving about 25 @,@ 000 people homeless . The floods killed 180 people and severely disrupted the livelihoods of about 700 @,@ 000 residents of Hadhramaut and Al Mahrah governorates , mostly farmers whose fields were washed away . Some of the buildings at the Shibam UNESCO World Heritage Site collapsed due to the floods . Overall damage was estimated at US $ 874 @.@ 8 million , although residual losses from damaged infrastructure were estimated to cost an additional US $ 726 @.@ 9 million . The overall economic impact of the storm was therefore estimated at US $ 1 @.@ 638 billion , equating to roughly 6 % of the country 's gross domestic product . 
 After the scale of the damage became clear , the government of Yemen requested for assistance from the international community . The hardest hit areas had poor infrastructure , which caused difficulties in communications as relief goods were distributed . Nations in the region , including Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates , sent money and supplies to help rebuild the damaged infrastructure and houses . Agencies under the United Nations provided food and logistical support . Relief efforts continued to make progress until 2011 due to a political uprising in Yemen . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On October 11 , an active phase of the Madden – Julian oscillation , in conjunction with an equatorial wind burst , produced twin areas of convection in the central Indian Ocean on both sides of the equator . The system in the southern hemisphere would become Moderate Tropical Storm Asma in the south @-@ west Indian Ocean , and the system in the northern hemisphere would ultimately strike Yemen . The northern hemisphere system originated in the Bay of Bengal , and moved westward for much of its duration , steered by a ridge to the north along <unk> N. On October 16 , a low pressure area developed over southern India near Kanyakumari . With low wind shear and warm waters of 27 to 28 ° C ( 81 to 82 ° F ) , the system slowly organized . On October 19 , the India Meteorological Department ( IMD ) classified the low as a depression about 725 km ( 450 mi ) southeast of the Yemeni island of Socotra . By that time , the convection had organized more , although it was displaced slightly from the center due to stronger wind shear . 
 The convection persisted along the western periphery of an elongated center , organizing enough for the American @-@ based Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) to issue warnings on the depression on October 20 , designating it Tropical Cyclone 03A . With marginally favorable conditions , the depression intensified slightly , and the IMD upgraded it to a 55 km / h ( 35 mph ) deep depression on October 21 , the same peak as the JTWC . That day , the system moved over Socotra as it reached an area of cooler water temperatures . Land interaction and dry air weakened the convection around the system as it approached the Gulf of Aden . The IMD downgraded the cyclone to depression status on October 22 . On the next day , the JTWC discontinued advisories , and the IMD downgraded the system further to a remnant low to the northeast of Cape Guardafui , Somalia . The JTWC continued tracking the system as it moved northwestward , and the circulation made landfall near Ash <unk> in southeastern Yemen late on October 23 , losing its identity shortly thereafter . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Moving ashore southeastern Yemen , the storm dropped heavy rainfall in the typically arid region , reaching 91 mm ( 3 @.@ 6 in ) in some areas , and possibly as high as 200 mm ( 8 in ) , over a 20 @,@ 000 km2 ( 7 @,@ 700 mi2 ) area . This equated to about 2 billion m3 ( 528 billion gallons ) of water , more than twice the capacity of most waterways . The thunderstorms and rainfall occurred over a 30 ‑ hour period , severely disrupting life in eastern Yemen . The precipitation coalesced into valleys , resulting in flash flooding that swelled water levels to 18 m ( 59 ft ) . Hundreds of residents became trapped in their homes , while businesses and schools were shut down . The storm sent a plume of moisture that spread into Saudi Arabia , reaching 74 mm ( 2 @.@ 9 in ) in Najran , and was drawn northward into Iraq by a trough over Syria , triggering dust storms . 
 A representative of UNICEF estimated that the magnitude of the flooding was the worst in 600 years , attributing the scope to climate change . The areas effected – primarily Hadhramaut and Al Mahrah governorates – are usually dry and unsuited for such flooding . This resulted in the second worst natural disaster on record in Yemen , following deadly floods in 1996 . Overall , the floods killed around 180 people in Yemen , with many corpses carried away by the deluge . Illegal alterations in canal and drainage systems caused the floods to impact many houses and buildings , and the governor of Hadhramaut credited the invasive Prosopis <unk> weed as exasperating floods after blocking waterways . Throughout the country , the floods destroyed 2 @,@ 826 houses and damaged another 3 @,@ 679 , leaving about 25 @,@ 000 people homeless ; many of these houses were made of mud , washed away by the floodwaters . The displaced utilized temporary shelters in mosques and schools , or stayed with family and friends . Damage to housing , hospitals , and education was estimated at $ 200 million . The UNESCO World Heritage Site at Shibam – dating back to the 3rd century and housing tall mud buildings from the 17th century – was surrounded by floodwaters , causing some of the dwellings to collapse . Businesses and other infrastructure projects were also destroyed . 
 Infrastructure damage was estimated at $ 113 million ( 2008 USD ) , most of which related to damaged roads , after thoroughfares were washed away . At the <unk> Airport , floods damaged runways and other facilities . 359 dams were damaged , alongside 65 reservoirs . Widespread irrigation systems were also damaged , including 117 @,@ 875 m ( 386 @,@ 729 ft ) of pipelines , 1 @,@ 241 wells , and 1 @,@ 229 water pumps . Electricity and telephone lines were disrupted in the region . The floods damaged 170 schools , as well as many health facilities . Along the coast , the storm damaged many fishing boats and equipment . In Al Mahrah Governorate , the storm washed a cargo ship ashore , although the 17 person crew was rescued . 
 Agriculture impacts were significant , estimated at $ 550 million , which affected 75 % of the farmers in Hadhramaut . Soil erosion from the floods damaged 22 @,@ 902 acres ( 9 @,@ 268 ha ) of farmlands , as well as 51 @,@ 455 acres ( 20 @,@ 823 ha ) of uncultivated lands . This mostly affected cereals , vegetables , and forage crops . Floods killed about 58 @,@ 500 livestock and wrecked 309 @,@ 103 beehives . The storm also knocked down 547 @,@ 185 palm trees , 16 @,@ 587 citrus trees , and another 161 @,@ 449 fruit trees . Despite the heavy agriculture damage , the floods did not disrupt the national food supply . 
 The effects of the flooding disrupted the livelihoods of about 700 @,@ 000 residents ; most of the storm 's damage affected people 's jobs , including farming , industry , and commerce , totaling $ 557 @.@ 3 million in damages . About 76 % of the overall effects of the flooding were the result of disruption of people 's jobs . Overall damage was estimated at $ 874 @.@ 8 million , although residual losses from damaged infrastructure were estimated to cost an additional $ 726 @.@ 9 million . The overall economic impact of the storm was therefore estimated at $ 1 @.@ 638 billion , equating to roughly 6 % of the country 's gross domestic product . Damage was heaviest in Hadhramaut Governorate , accounting for 67 @.@ 5 % of the material damages , and occurred mostly along the coast ; 16 of the 19 districts in the governorate reported damage . Also in Hadramaut , there were 57 people injured due to the storm . The government sent search and rescue teams into the flooded areas to help stranded residents , although strong winds in the region disrupted these efforts in the immediate aftermath . In <unk> , six soldiers died while attempting to rescue trapped residents . Lightning strikes killed six people . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 On October 27 , the Yemen government requested assistance from the international community , unable to provide disaster assessments or cope with the rebuilding . The storm affected areas of Yemen that already had poor infrastructure and lack of food , and were generally under a state of political unrest , which made recovery difficult . In some areas , relief distribution was duplicated due to lack of coordination while some areas did not receive help . Yemen 's Deputy Prime Minister for Internal Affairs coordinated the relief efforts , in conjunction with the governors of the most affected areas . The government focused on streamlining disaster activities and toward future mitigation . However , there was no coordinated disaster plan as of September 2009 , and the scale of the disaster proved too great for ministries to handle . The Ministry of Public Works helped reopen roads , which allowed for the transport of relief goods , and the damaged <unk> Airport was repaired to withstand future floods . By December 2008 , most roads , power systems , hospitals , and communication services were restored . The government also enacted the Fund for <unk> and Al @-@ <unk> Reconstruction , which failed to promptly distribute aid assistance . 
 In addition to requesting international aid , the Yemen government declared Hadhramaut and Al Mahrah governorates as disaster areas , after then @-@ president Ali Abdullah Saleh surveyed the affected areas . The president also utilized the nation 's military to assist storm victims , and sent aircraft with tents , food , and medicine to the worst hit areas . To raise money for the disaster recovery , the Yemeni government cut one day of salary for all workers , equating to $ 4 @.@ 25 million , and the government provided another $ 100 million from its annual budget . Local charities and residents collectively raised $ 8 @.@ 5 million . Yemen 's Red Cross provided meals and water to about 21 @,@ 000 people . The agency also provided school kits for 4 @,@ 500 students whose facilities were damaged . Ultimately , the Red Cross assisted over 70 @,@ 000 storm victims through health programs , and also helped residents cope with stress , hygiene promotion , and other ongoing vulnerabilities to their livelihoods . 
 Various agencies under the United Nations assisted in the recovery ; the World Health Organization provided medical kits to the worst hit areas , capable of helping 10 @,@ 000 residents each for three months . The United Nations Development Programme helped house displaced storm victims , and many of the mud @-@ built houses were repaired with the same construction materials as before . The World Bank led the assessment efforts , estimating the cost of recovery at $ 1 @.@ 046 billion , mostly toward rebuilding houses , regrowing crops , and restoring social services . The World Bank also provided $ 41 million toward the Yemen Flood Protection and Emergency Reconstruction , which rebuilt vital infrastructure and ensured they were flood @-@ proof . The World Food Programme assisted 43 @,@ 000 people with food and other emergency supplies . The Organisation of the Islamic Conference declared the situation a " national catastrophe " and started a drive to collect funds for the relief of flood victims . At an international donor conference , various individuals and countries pledged $ 301 million to help with the reconstruction in the country . Arab nations in the region also donated cash and supplies to Yemen ; Saudi Arabia pledged $ 100 million in assistance . The United Arab Emirates Red Crescent assisted in the reconstruction work , sending $ 27 @.@ 3 million to rebuild 1 @,@ 000 houses ; 750 of these were completed by December 2009 . The Arab Fund sent $ 135 million , including $ 35 million for road reconstruction . The Japanese government provided funding toward building shelter for 700 displaced Al @-@ <unk> people , designed to be away from the flood plain . Access to clean drinking water and proper shelter for the displaced helped mitigate the spread of disease . For many families , the effects of the disaster lasted several years due to insufficient assistance or disrupted jobs . By 2010 , about 40 % of the overall recovery cost was met by international donations , although funding was halted after political uprising in 2011 . 
 Over the long term , residents lost significant amounts of income in the storm @-@ affected areas , particularly farms in the year after the storm . Higher food prices also resulted in less income for other residents . The area 's economy largely recovered to pre @-@ flood levels by 2010 . 
 = Tom Welling = 
 Thomas John Patrick " Tom " Welling ( born April 26 , 1977 ) is an American actor , director , producer and model best known for his role as Clark Kent in The WB / CW superhero drama Smallville ( 2001 – 11 ) . 
 A high school athlete , Welling initially worked in construction and , in 1998 , he successfully modeled men 's clothing for several popular brands . In 2000 , he made a successful transition to television . He has been nominated for and received several awards for his role as Clark Kent . In 2001 , he had a recurring role as Rob " Karate Rob " Meltzer in the second season of the CBS drama Judging Amy . He has also been involved behind the camera as an executive producer and a director . His films include Cheaper by the Dozen , Cheaper by the Dozen 2 , The Fog , and Draft Day . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Welling was born on April 26 , 1977 , in the lower Hudson Valley , New York . His family moved frequently , making stops in Wisconsin , Delaware , and Michigan . Welling attended Okemos High School in Okemos , Michigan , where he started acting in plays , but then switched into sports . Welling played baseball and soccer , but his favorite sport is basketball . Welling is one of four children with two older sisters , Rebecca and Jamie . His younger brother , Mark Welling , is also an actor . 
 = = Career = = 
 Originally a construction worker , Welling was discovered in 1998 at a party in Nantucket by a catalog camera scout who suggested he try modeling . Welling modelled for Louisa Modeling Agency until 2000 , when he relocated to Los Angeles . There he modelled for Tommy Hilfiger , Abercrombie & Fitch , and Calvin Klein while pursuing an acting career . In 2000 , Welling appeared in Angela Via 's music video " Picture Perfect " where he played <unk> 's love interest . Welling has stated that he did not like modelling and that he was not good at it because it was all on the outside or from an external point of view . He pursued acting because he wanted to express a range of emotions , but Welling still models occasionally and appeared in the May 2008 issue of Vogue , the so @-@ called Superhero Issue . In his first major acting role , Welling played karate teacher Rob " Karate Rob " Meltzer , a younger love interest of Amy Gray ( Amy Brenneman ) in the second season of the CBS drama Judging Amy , which aired in 2001 . Welling was originally signed for three episodes ; after receiving enthusiastic fan reviews , the producers kept him for three more . Welling also had a small role in the UPN science fiction sitcom Special Unit 2 , and he appeared in the pilot episode of the FOX sitcom Undeclared . 
 = = = Smallville = = = 
 Welling was cast in the WB superhero drama Smallville after a nationwide search for an actor to play Clark Kent . In an interview with a teen magazine , Welling spoke about the day he auditioned for the role : " I was on my way back from the Warner Bros. studio , and I stopped in a gas station to call my manager and tell him how it went . I called and got him on the phone and he said , ' Can you hold on a second ? ' Next thing I know , there are literally seven people on the other line and almost in unison they say , ' Tom , you got it ! ' " The pilot aired in October 2001 and became the highest rated debut for The WB , with 8 @.@ 4 million viewers . Welling told TV Guide that he turned down the lead role twice , but after reading the script , decided to take the job . Like Christopher Reeve , he was not a Superman fan prior to being cast as Clark Kent . In fact , he said , he continues to not read Superman comics : " I made a conscious decision to stay away from that material . We 're doing something different at a time before all that , I don 't want that to affect what I 'm doing , even subconsciously . " He did get the chance to meet two previous Superman actors : Christopher Reeve , who appeared in season 2 : episode 17 titled " Rosetta " , and Dean Cain , who appeared in season 7 : episode 4 titled " Cure " . 
 Welling was named one of People magazine ’ s " Breakthrough Stars of 2001 " , and also won the Teen Choice Award as " Choice Breakout Star ( Male ) " in 2002 for his role as Clark Kent . Following the third season , Welling was interviewed by Smallville Magazine and stated that if he could play one character on the show that was not Clark Kent , it would be Lex Luthor ; " Lex Luthor ! I wouldn ’ t mind having my head shaved – as an actor , [ it is the ultimate , ] getting to play the complete opposite of your character . " 
 In 2004 , Welling was approached about starring in the big screen adaptation of Superman when director Brett Ratner was attached to the project . Comic book artist Alex Ross even did two sketches of Welling as the " Man of Steel " to see what the actor would look like in the famous costume . In August 2009 , Welling won another Teen Choice Award as " Choice TV Actor ( Action Adventure ) " for Smallville . 
 = = = Film = = = 
 In December 2003 , Welling made his feature film debut as Charlie Baker , the oldest son and second oldest in the Baker family which had 12 children , in the family comedy Cheaper by the Dozen with Steve Martin and Bonnie Hunt , which is a remake of the 1950 movie starring Clifton Webb and Myrna Loy , based on Frank and Lillian Gilbreth 's 1948 book . Welling talked about why he was interested in the project in an interview with Paul Fischer : " The top three reasons I decided to do this film were , one , Steve Martin , two , Steve Martin and three , Steve Martin . That was the number one draw for me . Then , after reading the script , I really liked this character , Charlie . I liked what he went through , what he had to go through , and I felt I understood where he was coming from . And I just wanted to be a part of it . " Welling had always been a fan of Martin 's and stated that he " absolutely loved " working with him . 
 In 2005 , Welling co @-@ starred in the horror film The Fog , a remake of John Carpenter 's 1980 film of the same name , as Nick Castle ( a character originally played by Tom Atkins ) . At the same time The Fog was in production , Welling was still working on the last few episodes of the fourth season of Smallville . The same year , he reprised his role as Charlie Baker in Cheaper by the Dozen 2 . 
 In 2013 , Welling co @-@ starred in the all @-@ star cast of Peter Landesman 's historical drama Parkland , based on the book Reclaiming History : The Assassination of President John F. Kennedy by author Vincent Bugliosi . The story centers on the chaotic events that occurred at Parkland Hospital in Dallas , Texas on the day President John F. Kennedy was assassinated on November 22 , 1963 . In 2014 , Welling co @-@ starred with Kevin Costner , Jennifer Garner , Frank Langella and Denis Leary in Ivan Reitman 's sports drama Draft Day . He played a veteran quarterback whose career is at a crossroads . 
 = = = Production = = = 
 For Smallville 's ninth season , Welling served as a co @-@ executive producer . He returned as Clark Kent for the show 's tenth and final season in Fall 2010 and became a full executive producer , as credited in a May 20 , 2010 press release by the CW . 
 Welling served as an executive producer on the CW comedy @-@ drama Hellcats based on journalist Kate Torgovnick 's book Cheer : Inside the Secret World of College Cheerleaders . The series first aired on The CW beginning in the fall of 2010 , and was cancelled on May 17 , 2011 . 
 = = = Directing = = = 
 Welling made his directorial debut in 2006 , with Smallville , 5 @.@ 18 " Fragile " . He also directed 6 @.@ 10 " Hydro " , the show 's 150th episode 7 @.@ 18 " Apocalypse " , 8 @.@ 21 " Injustice " , and the second part , " Legends " , of the two @-@ hour episode 9 @.@ 11 " Absolute Justice " . Later , he directed two episodes of Smallville 's final season , 10 @.@ 09 " Patriot " and 10 @.@ 18 " Booster " . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 On July 5 , 2002 , Welling married model Jamie White @-@ Welling in Martha 's Vineyard with Welling 's friends and then @-@ current Smallville co @-@ stars Kristin Kreuk and Michael Rosenbaum in attendance . Welling and White resided in Vancouver , British Columbia , Canada , but returned to Los Angeles in March 2011 . On October 17 , 2013 , White filed for divorce from Welling , citing " irreconcilable differences " . The divorce was finalized in November 2015 . 
 Welling has stated in YM that he dislikes interviews . He said , " I don 't want to be a celebrity for the sake of being a celebrity . I want to work and then go home and live in private . " 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = Hugo Danner = 
 Hugo Danner is a fictional character and the protagonist of Philip Wylie 's 1930 novel Gladiator . Born in the late 19th century with superhuman abilities via prenatal chemical experimentation , Danner tries to use his powers for good , making him a precursor of the superhero . However , Danner grows disillusioned with his inability to find a permanent outlet for his great strength , and dies frustrated . 
 Apart from Wylie 's novel , the character has also appeared in a feature film and publications by Marvel Comics and DC Comics . Comedic actor Joe E. Brown portrayed him in a 1938 movie adaptation of the book . Decades later the character starred in an adaptation titled " Man @-@ God " in Marvel 's black @-@ and @-@ white comics @-@ magazine Marvel Preview # 9 ( Winter 1976 ) . He next appeared in DC 's standard color comic book Young All @-@ Stars in 1988 and 1989 , as the estranged father of an illegitimate son named Iron Munro . In 2005 , he returned in the comic @-@ book miniseries Legend , published by the DC imprint Wildstorm . Here Danner , in the late 1960s , fights as a U.S. Army supersoldier in the Vietnam War rather than as a super Legionnaire in World War I. 
 = = Publication history = = 
 = = = Creation = = = 
 In early February 1930 , Wylie described the inspiration for Danner 's creation in the introduction to one of the earliest printings of Gladiator : 
 A temperamental consciousness of material force brought Hugo Danner into being . The frustration of my own muscles by things , and the alarming superiority of machinery started the notion of a man who would be invincible . I gave him a name and planned random deeds for him . I let him tear down Brooklyn Bridge and lift a locomotive . Then I began to speculate about his future and it seemed to me that a human being thus equipped would be foredoomed to vulgar fame or to a life of fruitless destruction . He would share the isolation of geniuses and with them would learn the inflexibility of man 's slow evolution . To that extent Hugo became symbolic and Gladiator a satire . The rest was adventure and perhaps more of the book derives from the <unk> excitement of imagining such a life than from a studious juxtaposition of incidents to a theme " 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The novel begins during the closing years of the 19th century , as Colorado science Professor Abednego Danner searches for a way to improve the innate weaknesses of human biology and create a new " race that doesn 't know fear — because it cannot know harm " . After 14 years of research he finally discovers " alkaline radicals " that vastly improve " muscular strength and the nervous discharge of energy " . Following very successful animal testing , which yields super @-@ strong tadpoles and a bulletproof kitten capable of taking down cattle as prey , he injects this super @-@ serum into the womb of his pregnant wife , Matilda . Hugo Danner is born on Christmas several months later . 
 His parents imbue him with a strong moral compass during his formative years and warn him never to use his great strength in anger . However , during kindergarten , Danner nearly kills the school 's bully in a one @-@ sided fight after being assaulted by the child . This event brands him as an outsider in the eyes of the other children . Because they treat him with such abhorrence , his only solace comes in the form of unleashing his powers within the Colorado wilderness ( uprooting trees , throwing huge boulders , leaping to the mountain tops , etc . ) . This stigma eventually wears off , though , and is forgotten by the time Danner enters high school . 
 Danner leaves Colorado after graduating high school to attend Webster University . There , he becomes an unstoppable football star and the most popular boy in school . During the summer months , he works as a circus strong man and even enters a fight competition for money . However , after returning to college and accidentally killing another player during a game , he quits school and becomes a sailor . A year later , his ship is trapped in France by the outbreak of World War I in 1914 . 
 He and a fellow American sign up with the French Foreign Legion and find themselves on the battlements after a short training period . He eventually reveals his powers to his Legionnaire superiors , who believe him to be a devil or supernatural Native American , and he is given free rein to roam the battlefield and kill as many German soldiers as he possibly can . Stories of " Le Colorado " ( The Colorado ) quickly spread from trench to trench and Danner becomes a sort of mythical hero . After a short stint in an American Legionnaire unit , Danner grows weary of war and devises a plan with an airplane : 
 He would drive it far into Germany . When its petrol failed , he would crash it . Stepping from the ruins , he would hasten on in the darkness , on , on , like Pheidippides , till he reached the centre of the enemy government . There , crashing through the petty human barriers , he would perform his last feat , strangling the Emperor , slaying the generals , pulling buildings apart with his <unk> arms , and disrupting the control of the war . 
 However , the Treaty of Versailles is signed the very day he prepares to leave , and so he is forced to abort his mission , much to his dismay . He returns to the United States and works in a number of professions — steel mill worker , bank teller , farm hand , and disarmament lobbyist — but his unique stature among mortal men forever brings him grief . He eventually offers his services to a noted history professor preparing a Mayan archaeological dig and travels with the group to the Yucatan Peninsula . 
 During the trip , Danner wonders if the Mayans and Egyptians had discovered the same formula as his father , " which could be poured into the veins of the slaves [ who built the pyramids ] , making them stronger than engines " . There , he works as the head steward of the hired Mayan helpers and proves himself an asset to the team . But when a mishap reveals his great strength to the professor , the elderly man suggests Danner use his father 's formula to create a new race of men known as the " Sons of Dawn " , who will use their powers to right the world 's wrongs . The idea appeals to him at first , but Danner fears that these sons would also be hated by humanity for their superiority and treated much the same as himself . In the end , he climbs a mountain amidst an oncoming thunderstorm , and is struck dead by lightning while praying to God . The formula is lost in the resulting fire . The professor discovers his charred remains three days later and buries him among the Mayan ruins . 
 = = Powers and abilities = = 
 Even during his early years , Danner displays superhuman strength . He demolishes his wooden crib as a newborn , saves a man 's life by lifting a two @-@ ton supply wagon at 6 years old , and <unk> entire trees at 10 . He progressively grows stronger as he gets older . During his twenties , he can stop and kill a charging bull with a single punch , bend a railroad rail , lift a seventy @-@ five millimeter howitzer cannon singlehandedly , lift a car and its driver singlehandedly , rip open a 5 @-@ foot @-@ thick ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) bank vault , and easily catch a falling 8 @,@ 000 @-@ pound block of stone . 
 Danner 's physical strength extends to his legs , allowing him to leap great heights and distances . At age 10 he can leap 40 feet into the air and run faster than a train . During his freshman year in college , he easily breaks a world track record , though he actually doesn 't run at his full speed . While in the service of the French Foreign Legion in World War I , he traverses thirty @-@ seven miles round trip in just thirty minutes ( a speed of about 148 mph ) ; all while carrying 2 @,@ 000 pounds of food , water , and ammunition for his unit . Despite his great strength , he is still susceptible to fatigue . 
 He first learns of his body 's superior resistance to physical injury during the war . Bullets and bayonets glance off his tough skin . He believes he can even survive a plane crash . The only weaponry capable of penetrating his skin at the time are the largest artillery shells . Although , he still feels the effects of the elements , sweating under the heat of the sun and freezing during winter . Danner 's only vulnerability is lightning , which ultimately kills him . 
 Danner 's bodily tissues have a somewhat greater density than those of an ordinary human being . Though he has an athletic build , his strength is far greater than what his frame would naturally allow . People guess him to be 155 pounds , but he actually weighs 211 . During his stint as a sailor , he goes pearl diving with the natives of Cristobal and is able to dive deeper and stay under longer because of his density . 
 His body can heal damaged tissue much faster and more extensively than an ordinary human can . He collapses from exhaustion and wounds sustained from artillery shells after he goes berserk against the Germans to avenge a friend 's death . When he wakes up in an army hospital , he finds " his wounds had healed without the necessity of a single stitch " . Long periods of comatose sleep ( up to 20 hours ) and the consuming of huge meals also aid in his regenerative process . 
 = = In other media = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 Danner was portrayed by comedic actor Joe E. Brown in the 1938 film The Gladiator , which loosely adapted science @-@ fiction drama as a comedy , and , among the many changes , renamed the protagonist " Hugo Kipp " . The film begins when Kipp wins a large sum of money in a contest and decides to return to college . There , he is talked into joining the football team and fails to live up to his athletic father 's legendary reputation . But after a Professor Danner ( Lucien Littlefield ) injects Kipp with a serum that gives him superhuman strength , he becomes an unstoppable player and wins the heart of the self @-@ centered quarterback 's girlfriend ( June Travis ) . In the end , he faces Man Mountain Dean in a wrestling match , but the serum runs out at the last minute . 
 = = = Comics = = = 
 In comics , Danner first appeared in the 52 @-@ page story " Man @-@ God " , by writer Roy Thomas and artist Tony <unk> ( credited as Antony <unk> ) in Marvel Comics ' Marvel Preview # 9 ( Winter 1976 ) . Only the first half of the novel is adapted . 
 Danner next appeared in DC Comics ' Young All @-@ Stars # 9 @-@ 11 ( <unk> 1988 ) and # 28 @-@ 31 ( <unk> 1989 ) , as the estranged father of Iron Munro , his illegitimate son . Munro was not a character or even a possibility in the original novel , where , as Danner 's ailing scientist father explained , " the effect of the process is not inherited by the future generations . It must be done over each time " . 
 In this storyline , Munro comes into possession of his father ’ s diary and learns of Danner 's troubled life as the 20th century ’ s first <unk> . After having read the diary , Munro turns to the government 's secret Project M , demanding to know the location of the " Dinosaur Island " mentioned by Danner . There he meets a person who leads him instead to Maple White Land in South America . Munro is surprised when he finds his father is alive . Danner apparently faked his death in the Yucatan and briefly returned home to have a one @-@ night stand with his former high school sweetheart Anna Blake . The resulting union bore Munro , who took his surname from his mother 's new husband ( who believed the child to be his own ) . Danner has , by this time , succeeded in rearing the first generation of the Sons of Dawn . He later reveals to the Young @-@ All Stars that the villain Übermensch has stolen the formula in order to create his own race of supermen . 
 Munro is forced to oppose his father when Danner orders the Sons of Dawn to attack a Brazilian city . The combined might of the All @-@ Star Squadron defeats the Sons of Dawn and Danner is killed during the final battle . 
 Danner starred in the four @-@ issue miniseries Legend ( April – July 2005 ) by writer Howard Chaykin and artist Russ Heath , published by the DC imprint Wildstorm . Cover blurbs on the first two issues read , " Inspired by Philip Wylie 's Novel Gladiator " . The story now takes place in the second half of the 20th century , with the Vietnam War replacing World War I , but the story remaining for the most part intact . 
 = = Comparison with later heroes = = 
 While no confirmation exists that Superman co @-@ creator Jerry Siegel was influenced by Gladiator , Siegel may have read the novel in 1932 . He and co @-@ creator Joe Shuster began developing Superman in 1934 . 
 Superman as originally conceived came from an unnamed planet whose inhabitants were millions of years more evolved than humans . When they reached maturity , " the people of his race became gifted with titanic strength " . Their advanced evolution and great strength accounted for Superman 's superhuman abilities on earth . As Siegel described them : " When maturity was reached , he discovered he could easily : leap 1 ⁄ 8th of a mile ; hurdle a twenty @-@ story building ... raise tremendous weights ... run faster than an express train ... and that nothing less than a bursting shell could penetrate his skin ! " 
 Siegel and Shuster compared Superman 's strength and leaping abilities to those of an ant and a grasshopper , respectively , as did Abednego for his son . Danner also claims descent from a far @-@ off land ( Colorado ) inhabited by a race of super @-@ strong , indestructible men . In order to keep his true " experimental " origins a secret , he tells his Legionnaire superiors , " [ Colorado is a ] place in America . A place that has scarcely been explored . I was born there . All the men of Colorado are born as I was born and are like me . We are very strong . We are great fighters . We cannot be wounded except by the largest shells . " Other examples of similarities include both of their biological fathers are scientists ( Jor @-@ El and Abednego ) , both grow up in rural settings ( Smallville and Indian Creek , Colorado ) , both are imbued with a strong moral compass from a young age both lift cars over their heads , and both hide their powers from the world . 
 One critic noted that Danner 's " creation and upbringing by a scientist father recall Doc Savage 's origins " and a " prototype for the famous scene in which the fledgling Spider @-@ Man defeats a hulking wrestler to make money is found in Wylie 's novel ; Hugo 's bout in the ring is similar to that in the Spider @-@ Man 's origin story in 1962 's Amazing Fantasy # 15 . " 
 = Stephen Trigg = 
 Stephen Trigg ( c . 1744 – August 19 , 1782 ) was an American pioneer and soldier from Virginia . He was killed ten months after the surrender of Cornwallis at Yorktown in one of the last battles of the American Revolution while leading the Lincoln County militia at the Battle of Blue Licks , Kentucky . 
 A son of William and Mary ( Johns ) Trigg , he mainly worked as a public servant and militia officer during the early years of the frontier counties of southwest Virginia , which then Kentucky . He was one reportedly of the wealthiest men on the frontier . Trigg was a delegate to the first Virginia Revolutionary conventions , and was a member of the Fincastle Committee of Safety that drafted the Fincastle Resolutions , a precursor to the Declaration of Independence passed by the Second Continental Congress on July 4 , 1776 . He was also elected to the Virginia House of Delegates . 
 Trigg was appointed to the Virginia Land Court Commission in 1779 , charged with settling land titles in Kentucky . He then settled in Kentucky himself . In 1782 , a raiding party of Shawnee Indians led by British and Loyalist officers attacked Bryan Station , but were driven off . Kentucky militia companies then pursued the fleeing invaders . Trigg commanded half of the men , Daniel Boone the other . Ignoring Boone 's warnings of a trap , the militiamen charged into an Indian ambush at Blue Licks . Trigg and many others , including Boone 's youngest son , were killed . Trigg 's body was later found cut into pieces . 
 Trigg County , Kentucky , was named in memory of Stephen Trigg . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 Trigg was the son of William Trigg ( 1716 – 1773 ) and Mary ( Johns ) Trigg ( 1720 – 1773 ) , whose family was prominent on the Virginia frontier . His father served as a Judge of the Court of Chancery , an equity court , and the Bedford County Court . Trigg had four brothers , William , John , Abram and Daniel , who were all soldiers in the Revolutionary War . Two of these brothers , John and Abram , later represented Virginia in the U.S. Congress . Stephen married Mary Christian , daughter of another Virginia pioneer , Israel Christian . Trigg lived the early part of his life in southwest Virginia and ran a tavern in Botetourt County . 
 Trigg and his wife had three sons and two daughters . His daughter Mary married General David Logan , and was the mother of was Stephen Trigg Logan , who would serve in the Illinois state legislature and become Abraham Lincoln law partner in Springfield , Illinois . 
 = = Virginia pioneer = = 
 The western county of Augusta in Virginia could no longer serve the needs of the far flung pioneers along the New River , and so in 1769 , the county of Botetourt was created . Trigg was one of several appointed as its first justices of the peace , which was a judge presiding over misdemeanors and other civil cases . From 1770 to 1771 , he served as magistrate , Justice of the County Court in Chancery and a Justice of Oyer and Terminer , which was a criminal court . When the town of Fincastle , Virginia was forming in 1770 , Trigg was instrumental in its development , helping to sell lots and build the town 's prison along with a courthouse with his father @-@ in @-@ law , Israel Christian . 
 Due to the needs of a growing population , the southwestern half of Botetourt County was separated in 1772 and named Fincastle County . Trigg was installed as one of its first justices of the peace . He was also made a Justice of the County Court in Chancery and a Justice of Oyer and Terminer in addition to his appointment as Deputy Clerk and surveyor of the road from New River to the Sinking Spring . Trigg also continued pursuing his livelihood as a merchant at <unk> Bottom in present @-@ day Pulaski County . From 1773 to 1774 , he partnered with David Ross and operated a community store in New Dublin , with branches located in Meadow Creek , Reed Creek and Reed Island . At this time , many indentured servants came to this area of the state . Short of money , they sold themselves to the ship owners for passage to America for a term of servitude that gained them land and tools upon completion . In October , Trigg advertised the sale of 30 white indentured servants at his home with a discount for " ready money " . Trigg also served as a delegate to the last session of the Virginia House of Burgesses in 1775 , representing Fincastle County , but he absented himself to serve as a captain in Dunmore 's War . 
 Settlers again agitated for another split , and so Fincastle County was split into three counties and became defunct in 1776 ; the new counties were Montgomery , Washington and Kentucky . Trigg was again a member of the first court of justices held for a new county , this time Montgomery . He also served in the Virginia House of Delegates in 1778 . 
 = = Early Kentucky pioneer = = 
 The new Virginia counties were growing rapidly , and with this growth came trouble . Trigg was appointed as one of the judges to the Virginia Land Court commission of 1779 – 80 charged with settling land disputes in Kentucky County , Virginia . The Virginia Land Act of 1779 had set up this court of four judges in order to examine the numerous land claims and to certify valid titles . The four judges arrived at St. Asaph in October and triggered emigration to Kentucky as people wished to either certify their claims or seek unclaimed land . They closed their court on February 26 , 1780 , and prepared to return home . However , in March they were told that they had to reopen the court and stay through April , as claimants were delayed due to weather . Trigg and two fellow judges reconvened on April 16 and heard another 134 cases . In all , the court judged 1 @,@ 328 claims covering over 1 million acres ( 4 @,@ 000 km ² ) of land . After these sessions ended , Trigg stayed and established his home on 1 @,@ 000 acres ( 4 km ² ) of land at Trigg 's Station about four miles ( 6 km ) north @-@ west of Harrodsburg in Kentucky County , Virginia . 
 When Kentucky County , Virginia , was split into three counties in 1780 , Trigg was made lieutenant colonel for the new county militia of Lincoln . He also continued his public service by being one of the first justices of the peace , was one of the trustees to lay out Louisville , and served in the Virginia House of Delegates by representing Kentucky County in the 1780 – 1781 session . It was during this session that he , along with his fellow delegate John Todd , secured passage of the act that allowed the formation of Louisville . 
 Despite the growth of settlement in Kentucky , white colonists there were far from secure . Historian Virginia Webb Howard wrote of this era : 
 This was the darkest and most critical period in the history of the early Kentucky settlements . It must be remembered that the settlement of Kentucky was much different from the settlement of most of the other places where the new colony joined the older settlements . Kentucky , instead of adjoining already settled districts , was like an island in the wilderness . There were more than two hundred miles of forest between the settlements of Kentucky and the settlements of the older states . 
 Trigg continued his service in the militia throughout this period . In 1781 , he was made colonel of the Lincoln County militia . In 1782 , the four delegates to the Virginia General Assembly from Kentucky pushed for Trigg 's recommendation as one of the assistant judges to the newly created Supreme Court for Kentucky , but his early death prevented him from taking this position . 
 = = Revolutionary War = = 
 Meanwhile , events had moved from local agitations against the British crown to outright war . Early on , Trigg served in local militias , but he also represented Fincastle in the Virginia Conventions . These were five political meetings that started after Lord Dunmore , the governor of Virginia , had dissolved the House of Burgesses after its delegates expressed solidarity with Boston , Massachusetts , where the harbor had been closed by the British . Trigg was at the first convention in 1774 and was elected a delegate to the second convention in 1775 , though he did not attend . He was elected to the third convention ( July – August 1775 ) , and did appear . He was also a delegate to the Fourth Convention ( December 1775 – January 1776 ) , but did not attend . 
 His other revolutionary activity at the time was as a member of the Fincastle County Committee of Safety , an outgrowth of the Virginia Committee of Correspondence . The Virginia Committee of Correspondence was formed on March 12 , 1773 , and requested each county to do the same . The British refused to address the issues that were of greatest concern to the colonists , and so the freeholders of Fincastle County met at the Lead Mines on January 20 , 1775 , forming a Committee of Safety in which Trigg was a member . They were one of the first to respond to the request of the Virginia Committee of Correspondence to form such a body . Committees of Safety basically served as provisional governments for their area . It was also at this meeting that they drew up the Fincastle Resolutions , which was a precursor to the Declaration of Independence issued by the Second Continental Congress on July 4 , 1776 ; Trigg was one of the signatories . The resolutions , addressed to the Virginia members of the Continental Congress , contained the boldest assertion of the grievances and rights of the American colonies . In February 1775 , he wrote to his brother @-@ in @-@ law William Christian , suggesting they call another meeting of the freeholders to elect their delegates to the second Virginia Convention . With the news that William Christian was leaving with the Fincastle militia company to Williamsburg to fight , Trigg took over as chairman of the Committee of Safety . On October 7 , 1775 , they met to express their appreciation of Trigg , writing that " together with the most exemplary zeal and attachment to the liberties of your country , and your indefatigable industry in the service thereof , you merit and deserve our particular thanks . " 
 In 1776 , Cherokees entered the war with the aim of driving colonists from their lands , which meant the people living in southwestern Virginia were facing British @-@ armed Cherokees . The members of the Committee of Safety met at Fort Chiswell on June 11 , 1776 , and drafted a letter to Oconostota and <unk> , chiefs of the Cherokee nation , to meet with them and come to terms for a peace agreement . The letter mentions the colonists ' dissatisfaction with Britain : 
 It is true that an unhappy Difference hath subsisted between the people beyond the great water , and the Americans for som [ sic ] years , which was intirely [ sic ] Owing to some of the great Kings Servants who wanted to take Our money without Our Consent , and otherwise to treat us , not like Children , but Slaves , which the people of America will not submit to . 
 Trigg was one of the signers of this letter . The conflict with the Cherokees was called the Christian Campaign ( presumably from Col. William Christian 's last name ) and Trigg was the paymaster in 1776 – 1777 . In 1777 , he was tasked with making a list of men who swore allegiance to several militia companies . By May 1778 , the inhabitants along the New River had either left or were ready to leave at a moment 's notice , due to increased hostilities with the Shawnee in the area . William Preston , an officer in the militia , felt exposed on the frontier , but was reluctant to abandon his home " Smithfield " , not only for the safety of his family , but also for the county records he safeguarded . Trigg was then leaving for his term in the General Assembly , and Preston urged him and the other delegate for a guard . When it was initially presented to the Governor 's Council , Preston 's petition was denied , but Trigg met several times with Governor Patrick Henry about Preston 's situation and won another hearing with the Council . Trigg made three separate appeals in all before carrying his point . When the governor agreed to send a guard of twelve men and a sergeant , Trigg sent Preston the news and also told him of the Treaty of Alliance that was signed in France in February . 
 = = = Last battle and death = = = 
 In 1782 , the British staged an invasion of Kentucky with the help of their Native American allies , including Wyandots , Ottawas and Ojibwas . When Trigg received word of their attack on Bryan Station , he was commanding the fort at Harrodsburg . He quickly assembled 135 local militiamen and met up with Colonel Daniel Boone and Major Levi Todd and more militia at Bryan Station . When they approached the Blue Licks , a salt lick next to the Licking River , officers suspected a trap and convened a war council , but unruly troops lost patience and crossed the river . The three leaders formed a column each , with Trigg commanding the right . When they met with the opposing force , Trigg 's column was ambushed . Trigg was killed and his men fell back after only five minutes of battle . When troops returned to the scene of battle , Trigg 's body was found quartered . 
 Trigg was buried in a mass grave near the battle site , in what is now Nicholas County , Kentucky . Kentucky later named a county Trigg County to honor him . There is a historical marker in Cadiz , on the courthouse lawn , US 68 . Historians Lewis and Richard Collins wrote of Trigg , " He was greatly beloved and very popular ; and if he had lived , would have taken rank among the most distinguished men of his time . " 
 = Jabba the Hutt = 
 Jabba the Hutt is a character appearing in George Lucas 's space opera film saga Star Wars . He is depicted as a large , slug @-@ like alien . His appearance has been described by film critic Roger Ebert as a cross between a toad and the Cheshire Cat . 
 In the original theatrical releases of the original Star Wars trilogy , Jabba the Hutt first appeared in Return of the Jedi ( 1983 ) , though he is mentioned in Star Wars ( 1977 ) and The Empire Strikes Back ( 1980 ) , and a previously deleted scene involving Jabba the Hutt was added to the 1997 theatrical re @-@ release and subsequent home media releases of Star Wars . Jabba 's role in Star Wars is primarily antagonistic ; he is introduced as the most powerful crime boss in Tatooine , who has a bounty on Han Solo 's head . He employs a retinue of criminals , bounty hunters , smugglers , assassins and bodyguards to operate his criminal empire . He keeps a host of entertainers at his disposal at his palace : slaves , droids and alien creatures . Jabba has a grim sense of humor , an insatiable appetite , and affinities for gambling , slave girls , and torture . 
 The character was incorporated into the Star Wars merchandising campaign that corresponded with the theatrical release of Return of the Jedi . Besides the films , Jabba the Hutt is featured in non @-@ canon Star Wars Legends expanded universe literature . Jabba the Hutt 's image has since played an influential role in popular culture , particularly in the United States . The name is used as a satirical literary device and a political caricature to underscore negative qualities such as morbid obesity and corruption . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 Jabba the Hutt appears in three of the seven live @-@ action Star Wars films and The Clone Wars . He has a recurring role in Star Wars expanded universe literature and stars in the comic book anthology Jabba the Hutt : The Art of the Deal ( 1998 ) , a collection of comics originally published in 1995 and 1996 . 
 = = = Star Wars films = = = 
 Jabba is first seen in 1983 with the third installment of the original Star Wars trilogy , Return of the Jedi . Directed by Richard Marquand and written by Lawrence Kasdan and George Lucas , the first act of Return of the Jedi features the attempts of Princess Leia Organa ( Carrie Fisher ) , the Wookiee Chewbacca ( Peter Mayhew ) , and Jedi Knight Luke Skywalker ( Mark Hamill ) to rescue their friend , Han Solo ( Harrison Ford ) , who had been imprisoned in carbonite in the previous film , The Empire Strikes Back . 
 The captured Han is delivered to Jabba by the bounty hunter Boba Fett ( Jeremy Bulloch ) and placed on display in the crime lord 's throne room . Lando Calrissian ( Billy Dee Williams ) , droids C @-@ 3PO ( Anthony Daniels ) and R2 @-@ D2 ( Kenny Baker ) , Leia , and Chewbacca infiltrate Jabba 's palace to save Han . Leia herself is soon enslaved by the Hutt , and she is forced to wear her iconic golden bikini , as well as being chained to Jabba . Soon after Leia is enslaved , Luke arrives to " bargain for Solo 's life " ; but Jabba condemns Luke , Han , and Chewbacca to the Sarlacc . At the Great Pit of <unk> , Luke escapes execution with the help of R2 @-@ D2 and defeats Jabba 's guards . During the subsequent confusion , Leia strangles Jabba to death ; whereafter Luke , Leia , Han , Lando , Chewbacca , C @-@ 3PO , and R2 @-@ D2 escape . 
 The second film appearance of Jabba the Hutt is in the Special Edition of Star Wars which was released in 1997 to commemorate the 20th anniversary of the original Star Wars . Here ( as in the original ) , Han Solo disputes with the alien bounty hunter Greedo ( Paul Blake and Maria De Aragon ) , whom he kills ; and Jabba confirms Greedo 's last words and demands that Han pay the value of the payload lost by him . Han promises to compensate Jabba as soon as he receives payment for delivering Obi @-@ Wan Kenobi ( Alec Guinness ) , Luke Skywalker , R2 @-@ D2 , and C @-@ 3PO to Alderaan ; but Jabba threatens to place a price on Solo himself , upon failure . This conversation was an unfinished scene of the original 1977 film , in which Jabba was played by Declan Mulholland in human form . In the 1997 Special Edition version of the film , a CGI rendering of Jabba replaces Mulholland , and his voice is redubbed in the fictional language of Huttese . 
 Jabba the Hutt makes his third film appearance in the 1999 prequel , Star Wars : Episode I – The Phantom Menace , in which Jabba gives the order to begin a podrace at Mos Espa on Tatooine . With this done , Jabba falls asleep , and misses the race 's conclusion . 
 Jabba makes his final appearance in Star Wars : The Clone Wars , wherein his son Rotta is captured by Separatists ; Anakin Skywalker and Ahsoka <unk> return him to Jabba , in exchange for the safe passage of Republic ships through his territory . Jabba has also appeared in three episodes of the third season of the series : In the episode " Sphere of Influence " , Jabba is faced by Chairman Papanoida , whose daughters were kidnapped by Greedo , and Jabba allows a sample of Greedo 's blood to be taken to prove him the kidnapper . In the episode " Evil Plans " , Jabba hires the bounty hunter Cad Bane to bring him plans for the Senate building . When Bane returns successful , Jabba and the Hutt Council send Bane to free Ziro the Hutt from prison . Jabba makes one short appearance in the episode " Hunt for Ziro " in which he is seen laughing at Ziro 's death at the hand of Sy <unk> , and pays her for delivering Ziro 's holo @-@ diary . In the fifth season 's episode " Eminence " , Jabba and the Hutt Council are approached by Darth Maul , Savage <unk> , and Pre <unk> ; and when disappointed by these , Jabba sends bounty hunters <unk> , Sugi , <unk> Razzi , and <unk> to capture them . After a battle , the Shadow Collective confront Jabba at his palace on Tatooine , where Jabba agrees to an alliance . 
 = = = Star Wars literature = = = 
 The first appearances of Jabba the Hutt in non @-@ canon Star Wars Legends literature were in Marvel Comics ' adaptations of A New Hope . In Six Against the Galaxy ( 1977 ) by Roy Thomas , What Ever Happened to Jabba the Hut ? ( 1979 ) and In Mortal Combat ( 1980 ) , both by Archie Goodwin , Jabba the Hutt ( originally spelled Hut ) appeared as a tall humanoid with a walrus @-@ like face , a topknot , and a bright uniform . The official " Jabba " was not yet established as he had yet to be seen . 
 While awaiting the sequel to Star Wars , Marvel kept the monthly comic going with their own stories , one of which includes Jabba tracking Han Solo and Chewbacca down to an old hideaway they use for smuggling . However , circumstances force Jabba to lift the bounty on Solo and Chewbacca , thus enabling them to return to Tatooine for an adventure with Luke Skywalker — who has returned to the planet in order to recruit more pilots for the Rebel Alliance . In the course of another adventure , Solo kills the space pirate Crimson Jack and busts up his operation , which Jabba bankrolled . Jabba thus renews the reward for Solo 's head and Solo later kills a bounty hunter who tells him why he is hunted once more . He and Chewbacca return to the rebels . ( Solo mentions an incident with a " bounty hunter we ran into on Ord Mantell " in the opening scenes of The Empire Strikes Back . ) 
 The Marvel artists based this Jabba on a character later named <unk> <unk> , an alien visible only briefly in the Mos Eisley cantina scene of A New Hope . The 1977 mass market paperback novelization of Lucas 's Star Wars script describes Jabba as a " great mobile tub of muscle and suet topped by a shaggy scarred skull " , but gives no further detail as to the character 's physical appearance or species . 
 Later Non @-@ Canonical Expanded Universe novels and comics adopt a version of the character 's image as seen in the film . They also elaborate on his background prior to the events of the Star Wars films . For example , Zorba the Hutt 's Revenge ( 1992 ) , a young adult novel by Paul and <unk> Davids , reveals that Jabba 's father is a powerful crime lord named Zorba the Hutt and that Jabba was born 596 years before the events of A New Hope , making him around 600 years old at the time of his death in Return of the Jedi . Ann C. Crispin 's novel The Hutt Gambit ( 1997 ) explains how Jabba the Hutt and Han Solo become business associates and portrays the events that lead to a bounty being placed on Han 's head . Other Expanded Universe stories — especially the anthology of Dark Horse comics by Jim Woodring titled Jabba the Hutt : The Art of the Deal ( 1998 ) — likewise detail Jabba the Hutt 's rise to the head of the <unk> clan , his role in the criminal underworld of the Star Wars universe , and the establishment of his crime syndicate on Tatooine in the Star Wars galaxy 's Outer Rim Territories . 
 Tales From Jabba 's Palace ( 1996 ) , a collection of short stories edited by science fiction author Kevin J. Anderson , pieces together the lives of Jabba the Hutt 's various minions in his palace and their relationship to him during the last days of his life . The stories reveal that few of the Hutt 's servants are loyal to him and most are in fact plotting to have him assassinated . When Jabba the Hutt is killed in Return of the Jedi , his surviving former courtiers join forces with his rivals on Tatooine and his family on the Hutt homeworld Nal <unk> make claims to his palace , fortune , and criminal empire . Timothy Zahn 's novel Heir to the Empire ( 1991 ) reveals that a smuggler named Talon <unk> eventually replaces Jabba as the " big fish in the pond " , and moves the headquarters of the Hutt 's criminal empire off Tatooine . 
 = = Characterization = = 
 Jabba the Hutt exemplifies lust , greed , and gluttony . The character is known throughout the Star Wars universe as a " vile gangster " who amuses himself by torturing and humiliating his subjects and enemies . He surrounds himself with scantily @-@ clad slave girls of all species , chained to his dais . The Star Wars Databank — an official online database of Star Wars information — remarks that residents of his palace are not safe from his desire to dominate and torture : in Return of the Jedi , the Twi 'lek slave dancer <unk> is fed to the rancor monster . 
 Jabba the Hutt 's physical appearance reinforces his personality as a criminal deviant : in Return of the Jedi , Han Solo entitles Jabba a " slimy piece of worm @-@ ridden filth " ; and film critic Roger Ebert describes him as " a cross between a toad and the Cheshire Cat " ; and astrophysicist and science fiction writer Jeanne <unk> gives Jabba the " award for most disgusting alien " . Science fiction authors Tom and Martha Veitch write that Jabba 's body is a " <unk> mass " , and that " The Hutt 's <unk> body seemed to periodically release a greasy discharge , sending fresh waves of rotten stench " into the air . Jabba 's appetite is insatiable , and some authors portray him threatening to eat his subordinates . 
 Nonetheless , in one Expanded Universe story , Jabba prevents a <unk> named <unk> Mon from freezing to death on an ice planet ; whereafter <unk> Mon becomes his servant . In Star Wars : The Clone Wars , Jabba seems to have genuine affection for his son Rotta , and is worried by his kidnapping and angered by his supposed death . 
 Lucas has noted that there was a potential role for Jabba in future Star Wars films . 
 = = Concept and creation = = 
 = = = Episode IV : A New Hope = = = 
 The original script to A New Hope describes Jabba as a " fat , slug @-@ like creature with eyes on extended feelers and a huge ugly mouth " , but Lucas stated in an interview that the initial character he had in mind was much furrier and resembled a Wookiee . When filming the scene between Han Solo and Jabba in 1976 , Lucas employed Northern Irish actor Declan Mulholland to stand @-@ in for Jabba the Hutt , wearing a shaggy brown costume . Lucas planned to replace Mulholland in post @-@ production with a stop @-@ motion creature . The scene was meant to connect Star Wars to Return of the Jedi and explain why Han Solo was imprisoned at the end of The Empire Strikes Back . Nevertheless , Lucas decided to leave the scene out of the final film on account of budget and time constraints and because he felt that it did not enhance the film 's plot . The scene remained in the novelization , comic book , and radio adaptations of the film . 
 Lucas revisited the scene in the 1997 Special Edition release of A New Hope , restoring the sequence and replacing Mulholland with a CGI version of Jabba the Hutt and the English dialogue with Huttese , a fictional language created by sound designer Ben Burtt . Joseph Letteri , the visual effects supervisor for the Special Edition , explained that the ultimate goal of the revised scene was to make it look as if Jabba the Hutt was actually on the set talking to and acting with Harrison Ford and that the crew had merely photographed it . Letteri stated that the new scene consisted of five shots that took over a year to complete . The scene was polished further for the 2004 release on DVD , improving Jabba 's appearance with advancements in CGI techniques , although neither release looks exactly like the original Jabba the Hutt puppet . 
 At one point of the original scene , Ford walks behind Mulholland . This became a problem when adding the CGI Jabba , since he had a tail that happened to be in the way . Eventually , this problem was solved by having Han stepping on Jabba 's tail , causing the Hutt to react with a yelp of pain . 
 Lucas confesses that people were disappointingly upset about the CGI Jabba 's appearance , complaining that the character " looked fake " . Lucas dismisses this , stating that whether a character is portrayed as a puppet or as CGI , it will always be " fake " since the character is not real . He says he sees no difference between a puppet made of latex and one generated by a computer . 
 = = = Episode VI : Return of the Jedi = = = 
 Lucas based the CGI on the character as he originally appeared in Return of the Jedi . In this film , Jabba the Hutt is an immense , sedentary , slug @-@ like creature designed by Lucas 's Industrial Light & Magic Creature Shop . Design consultant Ralph McQuarrie claimed , " In my sketches Jabba was huge , agile , sort of an <unk> figure . But then the design went into another direction , and Jabba became more like a worm kind of creature . " According to the 1985 documentary From Star Wars to Jedi , Lucas rejected initial designs of the character . One made Jabba appear too human — almost like a Fu Manchu character — while a second made him look too snail @-@ like . Lucas finally settled on a design that was a hybrid of the two , drawing for further inspiration on an O <unk> ( Marius <unk> ) cartoon figure flanking an early depiction of <unk> , the " Michelin Man . " Return of the Jedi costume designer Nilo Rodis @-@ <unk> commented , 
 My vision of Jabba was literally Orson Welles when he was older . I saw him as a very refined man . Most of the villains we like are very smart people . But Phil Tippett kept imagining him as some kind of slug , almost like in Alice in Wonderland . At one time he sculpted a creature that looked like a slug that 's smoking . I kept thinking I must be really off , but eventually that 's where it led up to . " 
 = = = Production and design = = = 
 Designed by visual effects artist Phil Tippett , Jabba the Hutt was inspired by the anatomy of several animal species . His body structure and reproductive processes were based on annelid worms , hairless animals that have no skeleton and are hermaphroditic . Jabba 's head was modeled after that of a snake , complete with bulbous , slit @-@ <unk> eyes and a mouth that opens wide enough to swallow large prey . His skin was given moist , amphibian qualities . Jabba 's design would come to represent almost all members of the Hutt species in subsequent Star Wars fiction . 
 In Return of the Jedi , Jabba is portrayed by a one @-@ ton puppet that took three months and half a million dollars to construct . While filming the movie , the puppet had its own makeup artist . The puppet required three puppeteers to operate , making it one of the largest ever used in a motion picture . Stuart Freeborn designed the puppet , while John Coppinger sculpted its latex , clay , and foam pieces . <unk> included David Alan Barclay , Toby Philpott , and Mike Edmonds , who were members of Jim Henson 's Muppet group . Barclay operated the right arm and mouth and read the character 's English dialogue , while Philpott controlled the left arm , head , and tongue . Edmonds , the shortest of the three men ( he also played the Ewok <unk> in later scenes ) was responsible for the movement of Jabba 's tail . Tony Cox , who also played an Ewok , would assist as well . The eyes and facial expressions were operated by radio control . 
 Lucas voiced displeasure in the puppet 's appearance and immobility , complaining that the puppet had to be moved around the set to film different scenes . In the DVD commentary to the Special Edition of Return of the Jedi , Lucas notes that if the technology had been available in 1983 , Jabba the Hutt would have been a CGI character similar to the one that appears in the Special Edition scene of A New Hope . 
 Jabba the Hutt only speaks Huttese on film , but his lines are subtitled in English . His voice and Huttese @-@ language dialogue were performed by voice actor Larry Ward , whose work is not listed in the end credits . A heavy , booming quality was given to Ward 's voice by pitching it an octave lower than normal and processing it through a subharmonic generator . A soundtrack of wet , slimy sound effects was recorded to accompany the movement of the puppet 's limbs and mouth . 
 Jabba the Hutt 's musical theme throughout the film , composed by John Williams , is played on a tuba . One reviewer of Return of the Jedi 's soundtrack comments , " Among the new thematic ideas [ of the score is ] Jabba the Hutt 's cute tuba piece ( playing along the politically incorrect lines of tubas representing fatness ) .... " The theme is very similar to one Williams wrote for a heavyset character in <unk> ( 1967 ) , though the theme does not appear on that film 's soundtrack album . Williams later turned the theme into a symphonic piece performed by the Boston Pops Orchestra featuring a tuba solo by Chester Schmitz . The role of the piece in film and popular culture has become a focus of study by musicologists such as Gerald Sloan , who says Williams ' piece " blends the monstrous and the lyrical . " 
 According to film historian Laurent Bouzereau , Jabba the Hutt 's death in Return of the Jedi was suggested by script writer Lawrence Kasdan . Lucas decided Leia should strangle him with her slave chain . He was inspired by a scene from The Godfather ( 1972 ) where an obese character named Luca <unk> ( Lenny Montana ) is <unk> by an assassin . 
 = = = Portrayal = = = 
 Jabba the Hutt was played by Declan Mulholland in scenes cut from the 1977 release of Star Wars . In Mulholland 's scenes as Jabba , Jabba is represented as a rotund human dressed in a shaggy fur coat . George Lucas has stated his intention was to use an alien creature for Jabba , but the special effects technology of the time was not up to the task of replacing Mulholland . In 1997 , the " Special Edition " re @-@ releases restored and altered the original scene to include a computer generated portrayal of Jabba . In Return of the Jedi , he was played by puppeteers Mike Edmonds , Toby Philpott , David Alan Barclay and voiced by Larry Ward . Jabba is played by an uncredited voice @-@ actor in the 1997 special edition of " Star Wars IV " , and in The Phantom Menace . In The Phantom Menace 's end credits , Jabba is credited as playing himself . His puppeteers have appeared in the documentaries From Star Wars to Jedi : The Making of a Saga and Classic Creatures : Return of the Jedi . David Alan Barclay , who was one of the puppeteers for Jabba in the film , voiced Jabba in the Super NES video game adaptation of Return of the Jedi . In the radio drama adaption of the original trilogy , Jabba is played by Ed Asner . In the film Star Wars : The Clone Wars and the following television series , Jabba is portrayed by Kevin Michael Richardson . All other video game appearances of Jabba were played by Clint Bajakian . Jabba was supposed to appear in Star Wars : The Force Unleashed , but was left out due to time constraints . A cutscene was produced featuring a conversation between Jabba and Juno Eclipse ( voiced by Nathalie Cox ) , which was scrapped from the game . He appears in the Ultimate Sith Edition . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 With the premiere of Return of Jedi in 1983 and the accompanying merchandising campaign , Jabba the Hutt became an icon in American popular culture . The character was produced and marketed as a series of action figure play sets by Kenner / Hasbro from 1983 to 2004 . In the 1990s , Jabba the Hutt starred in his own comic book series collectively titled Jabba the Hutt : The Art of the Deal . 
 Jabba 's role in popular culture extends beyond the Star Wars universe and its fans . In Mel Brooks ' Star Wars spoof Spaceballs ( 1987 ) , Jabba the Hutt is parodied as the character Pizza the Hutt , a cheesy blob shaped like a slice of pizza whose name is a double pun on Jabba the Hutt and the restaurant franchise Pizza Hut . Like Jabba , Pizza the Hutt is a loan shark and mobster . The character meets his demise at the end of Spaceballs when he becomes " locked in his car and [ eats ] himself to death . " The Smithsonian Institution 's National Air and Space Museum in Washington , D.C. , included a display on Jabba the Hutt in the temporary exhibition Star Wars : The Magic of Myth , which closed in 1999 . Jabba 's display was called " The Hero 's Return , " referencing Luke Skywalker 's journey toward becoming a Jedi . 
 = = = Mass media = = = 
 Since the release of Return of the Jedi , the name Jabba the Hutt has become synonymous in American mass media with repulsive obesity . The name is utilized as a literary device — either as a simile or metaphor — to illustrate character flaws . For example , in Under the <unk> ( 2001 ) , Marian Keyes references a problem with gluttony when she writes , " wheel out the birthday cake , I feel a Jabba the Hutt moment coming on . " Likewise , in the novel Steps and Exes : A Novel of Family ( 2000 ) , Laura <unk> uses Jabba the Hutt to emphasize the weight of a character 's father : " The girls used to call Janice 's parents Jabba the Hutt and the Wookiee . But then Jabba ( Janice 's father ) died , and it didn 't seem right to speak of the dead on those terms . " In Dan Brown 's first novel Digital Fortress , an NSA technician is affectionately nicknamed Jabba the Hutt . 
 In his book of humor and popular culture The Dharma of Star Wars ( 2005 ) , writer Matthew <unk> attempts to show similarities between Buddhist teachings and aspects of Star Wars fiction . <unk> insists that if a person makes decisions that Jabba the Hutt would make , then that person is not practicing the proper spiritual concept of dharma . <unk> 's book reinforces the idea that Jabba 's name is synonymous with negativity : 
 One way to see if we are practicing right livelihood is to compare our trade with that of Jabba the Hutt . Jabba has his fat , stubby fingers in many of the pots that led to the dark side . He dealt largely in illegal " spice " trade — an illicit drug in the Star Wars galaxy . He also <unk> business in the slave trade . He has many slaves himself , and some he fed to the Rancor , a creature he kept caged and tormented in his dungeon . Jabba uses deception and violence to maintain his position . 
 Outside literature , the character 's name has become an insulting term of disparagement . To say that someone " looks like Jabba the Hutt " is commonly understood as a slur to impugn that person 's weight and / or appearance . The term is often employed by the media as an attack on prominent figures . 
 In another sense of the term , Jabba the Hutt has come to represent greed and anarchy , especially in the business world . Jabba the Hutt ranked # 4 on the Forbes Fictional 15 list of wealthiest fictional characters in 2008 . 
 Jabba the Hutt has likewise become a popular means of caricature in American politics . William G. Ouchi uses the term to describe what he sees as the inefficient bureaucracy of the public school system : " With all of these unnecessary layers of organizational fat , school districts have come to resemble Jabba the Hutt — the pirate leader in Star Wars . " 
 = Charlotte Lewis ( Lost ) = 
 Dr. Charlotte Staples Lewis is a fictional character on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) television series Lost , played by Rebecca Mader . Charlotte is introduced in the second episode of season four and is a cultural anthropologist on a mission to the island where Oceanic Flight 815 crashed . On the island she is initially held hostage by one of the plane crash survivors , John Locke ( Terry O 'Quinn ) , but is freed when another person from her team switches place with her . She helps prevent poison gas from being released over the island , and develops a relationship with Daniel Faraday ( Jeremy Davies ) . Charlotte dies in Daniel 's arms after the frequent time traveling causes her headaches to worsen into something unexplainable . 
 Although conceived by the show 's creators to be American , Charlotte 's nationality was changed to British after the producers were impressed with English actress Rebecca Mader 's audition . She was supposed to feature in just eight episodes of season four , but after the 2007 – 2008 Writers Guild of America strike the role was expanded , which resulted in her starring in fifteen episodes over the fourth and fifth seasons . Charlotte 's introduction , along with the three other new characters from the freighter introduced in season four , was well received , but her storylines in later episodes had a mixed reception , though Mader 's acting was praised . 
 = = Arc = = 
 During season five , a young Charlotte Lewis is shown living with her parents as part of a scientific community known as the Dharma Initiative , on the island where Oceanic Flight 815 would later crash . She is confronted by an adult Daniel Faraday , who attempts to persuade her never to return to the island once she leaves , and is seen evacuating the island during the fifth season finale " The Incident " . Charlotte grows up in Bromsgrove , unaware of where she was born , and goes on to study at the University of Kent for her undergraduate degree . She earns a doctoral degree in cultural anthropology from the University of Oxford , with her interest in anthropology stemming from a desire to find her birthplace . While visiting an excavation site in the Sahara Desert , Charlotte discovers the remains of a polar bear , which has a collar bearing a Dharma Initiative logo . Businessman Charles Widmore ( Alan Dale ) selects Charlotte along with Daniel Faraday , Miles Straume ( Ken Leung ) , and Frank Lapidus ( Jeff Fahey ) , to travel on a freighter to the island where she was born , and find Widmore 's rival Ben Linus ( Michael Emerson ) . She is forced to eject from a helicopter during a lightning storm over the island . 
 Charlotte arrives on the island on December 23 , 2004 , where she is held hostage by a number of the survivors of Oceanic Flight 815 , who believe that she is dangerous . She spots a flare that belongs to a member of her team , but none of the survivors wish to investigate . Charlotte becomes impatient and attempts to leave , so Ben shoots her . As she is wearing a bulletproof vest she survives , forcing Ben to reveal that Charlotte 's team are looking for him , and not on a rescue mission for the survivors . When the group encounters fellow survivors Kate Austen ( Evangeline Lilly ) and Sayid Jarrah ( Naveen Andrews ) with Miles , they agree for Miles to switch places with Charlotte . After reuniting with Faraday , she tests his memory with playing cards , noting he has made progress when he can remember two out of three cards . That night , Charlotte and Faraday sneak off to the Tempest Dharma Initiative station , where they neutralize a potential source of poison gas . While getting medical supplies at the Staff Dharma Initiative station , Jin @-@ Soo Kwon ( Daniel Dae Kim ) notices Charlotte smiling after his wife Sun @-@ Hwa Kwon ( Yunjin Kim ) remarks in Korean that Charlotte will know Faraday likes her as she is a woman . Jin confronts Charlotte in Korean , saying he will hurt Faraday if she does not promise to take Sun off the island . Later Faraday begins to ferry survivors to the freighter , but Charlotte chooses to remain on the island , as she believes she has found her birthplace . She kisses him , then watches on as he leaves . 
 After Ben causes the island to vanish , Charlotte , Faraday and the remaining survivors begin to randomly travel through time . Charlotte experiences nosebleeds and headaches , and realizes she is unable to remember her mother 's maiden name . During one time jump Charlotte , Faraday and Miles are captured by the Others in 1954 , where Faraday proclaims his love for her . After a further time jump , her nosebleed becomes more severe , and she collapses . As she dies , Charlotte relays to Faraday that she now remembers living on the island as a child , and that she recognizes Faraday as the man who told her not to return once she left the island . In season six the afterlife experienced by the characters is shown , in which Charlotte is set up as a blind date for James " Sawyer " Ford ( Josh Holloway ) . The two spend the night together but when Sawyer catches her going through his belongings he throws her out of the apartment . He comes to her apartment later to apologize but she refuses , telling him he blew his chance . At a concert in the series finale , she and Faraday are reunited . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Creation and casting = = = 
 After Naomi ( Marsha Thomason ) parachuted onto the island in season three , the producers began to plan who else would be on the freighter she came from . They wanted these new characters to be scientists , who would be interested in finding the island for their own personal reasons . They decided to create a character who would be interested in lost civilizations , and named her Charlotte Staples Lewis as a reference to C. S. Lewis , which Lost producer Damon Lindelof said was a clue to the direction the show would be taking during season four . 
 The role was originally offered to Kristen Bell , however she chose to join Heroes as Elle Bishop instead . The producers cast English actress Rebecca Mader because " she won [ them ] over with her charm and presence and charisma " . During casting , Charlotte was described as " a hot twentysomething ... precocious , loquacious and funny ... a very successful academic who also knows how to handle herself in the real world " . She also has " lots of repressed and pent @-@ up emotions " beneath the surface . The Lost producers described her as a female version of Indiana Jones . During auditions , the producers provide fake scenes , to keep new characters ' identities a secret . Mader 's audition scene was a flashback that she was disappointed was not used for the show . Whilst recording her audition , a producer who was with her noticed that the shows on her résumé were from the British Broadcasting Corporation , so asked her to redo the audition again with a British accent . According to Lindelof , this " opened up another dimension [ to the character that the producers ] hadn 't foreseen " , so Charlotte was changed from American to English . Mader was pleased to be able to use her own accent , as many of her previous roles had been American characters . 
 Mader subsequently began to watch the first three seasons of Lost on DVD and was watching the fourth episode when she received the news that she had been chosen for the role . She watched all the previous episodes of Lost in the few weeks before she started working on the show . She found it " a really amazing moment " and felt like she had just stepped into the show . When she was cast , Mader was unaware of whether she would be a guest star , or would develop into a regular , and was planned to feature in eight episodes of season four . Mader helped develop Charlotte 's outfit and was pleased to be wearing comfortable jeans and boots for the role . She only required a small amount of hair and makeup done , and stated " I just wanted to rough it . I wanted to roll around in the mud with a gun " . This was a welcome change to her usual roles which required " full @-@ on hair , makeup and heels " . 
 = = = Storyline progression = = = 
 Charlotte 's discovery of a polar bear with a Dharma Initiative collar caused fan speculation about her connection with the island . Mader herself was unaware of Charlotte 's backstory beyond the flashback in " Confirmed Dead " — she noted " I feel like I 'm almost in the same seat as the audience , like ' What the hell is going on ? ' and ' What the hell is going to happen next ? ' , it 's really exciting actually " . She found it freeing to not know her character 's history , and felt it made her give a natural performance . Mader felt Charlotte 's relationship with Faraday allowed her character to develop and show a softer , more human side , and thought their relationship resonated with the audience as she and Jeremy Davies had good chemistry . Eight episodes of season four were written before production stopped due to the 2007 – 2008 Writers Guild of America strike . Once the strike was resolved , a further six episodes were written , two less than originally planned for the season , and as a result Charlotte 's role continued into season five . She enjoyed speaking Korean in " Something Nice Back Home " and wished the full scene had been aired . Mader was excited when she discovered that Charlotte grew up on the island , and hoped to have scenes with Nestor Carbonell who plays Richard Alpert , as his character also has a history on the island . However when negotiating contracts in June 2008 she found out that her character would die during season five ; Mader summed up Charlotte 's season five arc as her demise . Charlotte 's death scene was written by Eddy Kitsis and Adam Horowitz and was amongst their favourite scenes they wrote during season five . Horowitz loved the emotion in the scene due to the audience only just learning Charlotte 's backstory , and Kitsis thought Mader 's performance " elevate [ d ] the words to a whole other level " . Mader called it " the best thing [ she ] ha [ d ] ever done in [ her ] entire career " and enjoyed playing a significant role within the episode . 
 Three episodes after Charlotte 's death , Faraday sees a young Charlotte in a scene set in 1974 . This created a continuity error as her date of birth was given in " Confirmed Dead " as July 2 , 1979 . Lost producers Damon Lindelof and Carlton Cuse explained in the " Official Lost Audio Podcast " that Mader changed the age of Charlotte so she would not be portraying someone in their mid @-@ thirties . However Mader retaliated on her Facebook page that the timeline error was their fault and was unhappy about being blamed for it . Lindelof and Cuse clarified that it was their mistake and apologized for blaming Mader . Fellow Lost producer Greggory Nations had noticed Mader was eight years younger than the age Charlotte was originally conceived to be , so suggested Charlotte 's birthday be changed to the same as Mader 's , without realizing the effect this would have on the subsequent season . 
 Mader returned to the show for two guest appearances in season six to show Charlotte in the afterlife . Mader described Charlotte as " the role of a lifetime " , and cited it as a reason that she was cast in better roles following the series ' conclusion . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The producers of Lost were nervous about how well the new characters would be received after two characters introduced in season three , Nikki ( Kiele Sanchez ) and Paulo ( Rodrigo Santoro ) , were hated by the fan community . However , according to Jon Lachonis of UGO , Charlotte has been well received by fans , describing her as " one of the most speculated @-@ about characters " . Paige Albiniak of the New York Post praised the cast addition , while IGN 's Chris Carabott described Charlotte , as well as the other new characters from the freighter , as " great " and " exciting " . James Poniewozik of Time liked the introduction of the new characters from the freighter because " Each got just one flashback and a little time on the island , and yet by the end of the episode , [ he ] felt [ he ] had a true handle on what they were like as individuals " . Jeff Jensen from Entertainment Weekly liked that the " fascinating " new characters brought " mind @-@ blowing new possibilities , and exciting new theory fodder " . Oscar Dahl of BuddyTV called it the " perfect introduction " . Michael Ausiello of TV Guide also liked their introduction , and praised the actors ' performances . 
 During the season Charlotte 's storylines had mixed reactions . Jensen thought Charlotte and Faraday 's mission to the Tempest in " The Other Woman " felt " forced " . Dan Compora from Airlock Alpha liked Charlotte and Juliet 's fight scene in this episode . BuddyTV 's Oscar Dahl thought the whole plot at the Tempest was " filler " and wondered if it had been added just to give Charlotte and Faraday something to do . After Charlotte speaks Korean in " Something Nice Back Home " , James Poniewozik from Time became curious about her past because she is " the member of the four <unk> whom we know the least about , and the most secretive and sinister @-@ seeming of the bunch " . Chris Carabott was also intrigued after this scene , which he called " one of the more unexpected scenes " . 
 Carabott felt Charlotte 's death could have been explored further , but as there was so much happening in the episode not enough time was made for her death . Alan Sepinwall of The Star @-@ Ledger noted it was Jeremy Davies portrayal of Faraday 's grief that made him care about her death . Cynthia Littleton from Variety said this was one of the few times Charlotte did not annoy her , as she acts as a translator for Jin , " finally do [ ing ] something worthwhile " . Noel Murray of The A.V. Club felt distracted by Charlotte in this episode , because her reaction to time travel was different from what was shown in " The Constant " , and found it " incredibly awkward " when Charlotte explained her whole backstory to Faraday . TV Guide 's Mickey O 'Connor praised Mader 's acting , saying " Well done , Rebecca Mader , who has really done some fine work on Lost " . 
 = Nikki and Paulo = 
 Nikki Fernandez and Paulo / <unk> / are fictional characters on the ABC drama television series Lost , which chronicles the lives of over forty people after their plane crashes on a remote island somewhere in the South Pacific . American actress Kiele Sanchez and Brazilian actor Rodrigo Santoro play the survivors of the crash of Oceanic Flight 815 . 
 The couple is introduced early in the third season . The producers of the show were often asked what the rest of the plane @-@ crash survivors were doing because the show only focuses on approximately fifteen of the survivors , and the characters of Nikki and Paulo were created in response . Reaction to the characters was generally negative , with show runner , Damon Lindelof , acknowledging the couple are " universally despised " by fans . As a result of this , the couple was killed off later in the same season when they are accidentally buried alive while thought to be dead . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 Originally from Brazil , Paulo is a con artist working with his American girlfriend Nikki , an actress . Paulo works as a chef for a wealthy television executive in Sydney . Nikki guest stars on the executive 's show and also seduces him , which makes Paulo uncomfortable . Paulo murders the executive by poisoning his food , allowing him and Nikki to steal his bag of diamonds , which are worth $ 8 million . Three days later , on September 22 , 2004 , Nikki and Paulo board Oceanic Flight 815 to return to Nikki 's home in Los Angeles . 
 They lose the diamonds in the plane crash and spend much of their time on the island searching for them . Paulo suspects they are the only reason for their relationship , and thus does not tell Nikki when he finds them on their thirty @-@ third day after the crash . One day while looking in the jungle , they come across the DHARMA Initiative 's Pearl Station , a scientific research station built in the early 1980s . Nikki is uninterested , but Paulo later returns by himself on his forty @-@ ninth day on the island , hiding the diamonds in the toilet . While in the washroom , Paulo overhears two of the mysterious and dangerous island inhabitants known as the Others speak of capturing some of Paulo 's fellow survivors ; however , he keeps this information to himself . 
 On their seventy @-@ second day on the island , Nikki and Paulo join Locke when he ventures back to the Pearl Station , hoping to communicate with the Others . Paulo returns to the toilet to retrieve the diamonds , storing them in his underwear thereafter . As they leave , the group witnesses Mr. Eko 's death and burial not far from The Pearl . Eighty @-@ one days after the crash , Nikki finds out about Paulo hiding the diamonds from her . Furious , she releases a venomous spider on him that causes Paulo to be paralyzed for the next eight hours . As he is entering the state of paralysis , Paulo admits he only kept the diamonds from her because he thought she would leave him after she got them . To Nikki 's dismay , the death of the venomous spider only attracted more spiders which bite Nikki , so she is also temporarily paralyzed . The pair are mistaken for dead after being discovered by the survivors . Nikki and Paulo are then buried alive by James " Sawyer " Ford and Hugo " Hurley " Reyes after tossing the diamonds in the grave with them as they consider them to be of no value on the island . Much later , Miles Straume − a psychic who can read people 's thoughts from their time of death − indicates he knows about the diamonds . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Paulo was written to be unlikable , with the hope he would redeem himself when his backstory was revealed in his final episode . Paulo either resents or is indifferent toward the often heroic actions of some of the survivors , spending much of his time golfing . He complains to Nikki about not being included ; however , he does little to help out around the camp and does not try to improve his status in the survivors ' hierarchy . When he does get chances to participate in treks , for example , when Hurley finds a car , Paulo is uninterested and discourages Nikki from joining Hurley on his adventure . Nikki tries to participate , tending to a wounded Mr. Eko and volunteering to go with Locke to the Pearl station , much to the surprise of Paulo . Paulo accompanies her , and he exhibits a constant sarcastic behavior in the Pearl . 
 Nikki is manipulative of Paulo and appears to care more about the diamonds than her relationship . After the crash , Paulo becomes suspicious Nikki is just using him to get the diamonds . The first thing she asks him after the crash is the whereabouts of the diamonds , and avoids answering Paulo when he asks if they would still be together if she did not need him to help find the diamonds . Paulo does what Nikki tells him to because of his fear of losing her , which results in their deaths . 
 = = Creation = = 
 At the end of the first season , the writers had the idea one of the background survivors would emerge and receive an on @-@ island flashback episode to help answer the question , " What the hell is going on with the other 35 people who nothing ever happens to ? " The first of those was Leslie Arzt , only for him to explode a few episodes later . It was originally conceived only a woman , who was previously an actress , would be introduced into the main storyline , but the idea later changed to include her boyfriend as well . Nikki and Paulo were also originally set " to have anchored a winking arc of stories " . However the writers instead decided to tell their story in one episode and quickly remove the characters , due to complaints about the characters and the third season 's decline in viewership . It also became a running gag that Sawyer did not know who Nikki and Paulo were , calling them " Nina " and " Pablo " and asking " who the hell [ they were ] " . Lindelof later stated , " We had the feeling with Nikki and Paulo that it wasn 't right about a month before the fans started reacting . We were already starting to think , ' Maybe our instinct here has been wrong . ' " 
 Nikki and Paulo 's original introduction onto the show was deleted for time from the final cut of the episode , " Further Instructions " . They were supposed to be accidentally found by Claire Littleton in Jack 's tent having sex in the middle of the episode . They were instead introduced at the end of the episode when Locke makes a speech . 
 = = Casting = = 
 Half @-@ French , half @-@ Puerto Rican Kiele Michelle Sanchez portrayed Nikki in six episodes of the third season of Lost . She had trouble filming her burial scene due to her claustrophobia . Rodrigo Santoro , who has been called " the Brazilian Tom Cruise " and " the Brazilian Russell Crowe " , was cast in his first major American television role as Paulo on Lost . Appearing in a total of seven episodes , Santoro was reportedly paid " between $ <unk> and $ <unk> a week " . Lindelof called Santoro " talented " and " perfect for Lost because he 's a face that the American audience is not familiar with " , despite being an award @-@ winning actor in his home country of Brazil . Part of the reason Santoro was cast over other actors was because his physique was deemed attractive ; however , the writers said that they were not interested in writing for his character with that in mind , nor did he want them to . Santoro has stated he enjoyed working with Sanchez and hoped to return to work on Lost . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Reaction to the " devious , but doomed " characters was more negative than for other Lost characters . One Entertainment Weekly journalist gave Paulo the nickname " Paulo <unk> @-@ a @-@ Lot " , referencing scenes from the episodes " The Cost of Living " and " Enter 77 " . America Online 's TV Squad criticized the writing for the characters , and the characters were called " incredibly annoying " by Maclean 's magazine . Television Without Pity called Paulo " walking collateral damage " . TV Guide wrote they were " too darn perfect @-@ looking to be believable as humans " . Entertainment Weekly included them in their list of the " 21 Most Annoying TV Characters Ever " , commenting " no one could have predicted how grating the pair 's whiny inanity would become . " 
 When rumors circulated on the Internet and were mentioned in ABC commercials that the characters were going to die , some viewers hoped for a " double murder " of Nikki and Paulo and rejoiced when their wish was granted . Over three months before the episode aired on television , Santoro stated in an interview with Brazilian Rolling Stone that his character would die in the middle of the third season . It was also announced that Sanchez had signed on to film a fall 2007 pilot for another ABC show , Football Wives , and thus , it would have been unlikely for her to continue to act as a " murderous femme fatale " . 
 = HMS Hood ( 1891 ) = 
 HMS Hood was a modified Royal Sovereign @-@ class pre @-@ dreadnought battleship built for the Royal Navy in the early 1890s . She differed from the other ships of the class in that she had cylindrical gun turrets instead of barbettes and a lower freeboard . She served most of her active career in the Mediterranean Sea , where her low freeboard was less of a disadvantage . The ship was placed in reserve in 1907 and later became the receiving ship at Queenstown , Ireland . Hood was used in the development of anti @-@ torpedo bulges in 1913 and was scuttled in late 1914 to act as a blockship across the southern entrance of Portland Harbour after the start of World War I. 
 = = Design = = 
 Hood , the last of the eight Royal Sovereign @-@ class battleships to be built , differed significantly from the other ships of her class in that she had a forward freeboard of only 11 feet 3 inches ( 3 @.@ 43 m ) compared to 19 feet 6 inches ( 5 @.@ 94 m ) of the other ships . The Royal Sovereigns had reverted to a higher freeboard after several classes of low @-@ freeboard vessel had been constructed , the last being the Trafalgar class . Low freeboard had been popular for around ten years since it required less armour and made a smaller target for gunfire to hit , although it had the disadvantage that it reduced seaworthiness . This low freeboard meant that Hood was very wet in rough weather and her maximum speed reduced rapidly as the wave height increased , making her only suitable for service in the relatively calm Mediterranean . This was seen as a vindication of the barbette / high @-@ freeboard design in the rest of her class , and all subsequent British battleship classes had high freeboard . 
 The lower freeboard was required by her use of armoured gun turrets — a heavy type of rotating gun mounting of the mid @-@ and @-@ late 19th century very different from what would later be known as " turrets " . Hood 's half @-@ sisters mounted their guns exposed on top of barbettes , a much lighter arrangement that allowed their freeboard to be substantially increased . The heavy , old @-@ fashioned type of turrets added to the amount of weight high up in the ship compared to barbettes and decreased the ship 's stability . 
 Because the stability of a ship is largely due to freeboard at high rolling angles , she was given a larger metacentric height ( the vertical distance between the <unk> and the centre of gravity below it ) of around 4 @.@ 1 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) instead of the 3 @.@ 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 1 m ) of the rest of the Royal Sovereigns to make her roll less in rough seas . This had the effect of making her roll period shorter by around 7 % compared to her sisters , which in turn made her gunnery less accurate . Bilge keels were fitted in 1894 which improved her <unk> . 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 Hood had an overall length of 410 feet 6 inches ( 125 @.@ 1 m ) , a beam of 75 feet ( 22 @.@ 9 m ) , and a draught of 28 feet 6 inches ( 8 @.@ 7 m ) at deep load . She displaced 14 @,@ 780 long tons ( 15 @,@ 020 t ) at normal load and 15 @,@ 588 long tons ( 15 @,@ 838 t ) at deep load . Her crew numbered 690 officers and enlisted men . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 The ship was powered by two 3 @-@ cylinder vertical triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each driving one propeller . Eight water @-@ tube boilers provided steam to the engines , which produced a maximum of 11 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 8 @,@ 200 kW ) when forced . This was intended to allow them to reach a speed of 17 @.@ 5 knots ( 32 @.@ 4 km / h ; 20 @.@ 1 mph ) . She carried a maximum of 1 @,@ 490 long tons ( 1 @,@ 510 t ) of coal , enough to steam 4 @,@ 720 nautical miles ( 8 @,@ 740 km ; 5 @,@ 430 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The ship was armed with four 30 @-@ calibre BL 13 @.@ 5 @-@ inch Mk I – IV guns in two twin gun turrets , one each fore and aft of the superstructure . Each gun was provided with 80 shells per gun . Hood 's secondary armament consisted of ten 40 @-@ calibre 6 @-@ inch Mk I @-@ III guns mounted in casemates in the superstructure . A major problem with the four of these guns mounted on the upper deck was that they were mounted low in the ship and were unusable at high speed or in heavy weather . They were removed as useless in 1904 . The ship carried 200 rounds for each gun . 
 Defence against torpedo boats was provided by eight QF 6 @-@ pounder guns , although the exact type of gun is not known . Four of these were mounted on the main deck in casemates on the sides of the hull and suffered from the same problems as the six @-@ inch guns . Hood also mounted a dozen QF 3 @-@ pounder Hotchkiss guns mounted in the superstructure and fighting tops . Like her sisters , the ship was fitted with seven 18 @-@ inch Torpedo tubes . Two of these were mounted in the bow below the waterline , four were placed in the sides of the hull , two on each broadside , and one in the stern . These last five tubes were all above water . She also was fitted with a plough @-@ shaped underwater ram . 
 In 1897 one of these 3 @-@ pounder guns was mounted on each turret top and , three years later , the 3 @-@ pounders in the fighting tops were transferred to the forward superstructure . At the same time the above @-@ water torpedo tubes were removed . About 1902 – 03 the 6 @-@ pounders on the main deck were removed ; two were remounted on the superstructure , but the other two were not replaced . In 1905 the 3 @-@ pounders on the forward superstructure were removed while the 3 @-@ pounders in the lower fighting tops were removed while the ship was in reserve from 1907 – 09 . 
 = = = Armour = = = 
 Hood 's protection used both compound armour and nickel steel armour . Her waterline main belt ranged in thickness between 14 to 18 inches ( 356 to 457 mm ) thick . It covered the middle 250 feet ( 76 @.@ 2 m ) of the ship and was 8 @.@ 5 feet ( 2 @.@ 6 m ) high of which 5 feet 6 inches ( 1 @.@ 7 m ) was below the waterline at normal load . Fore and aft bulkheads , 16 – 14 @-@ inch ( 406 – 356 mm ) thick respectively , closed off the ends of the central citadel at the level of the waterline . The upper strake of 4 @-@ inch ( 102 mm ) armour was 150 feet ( 45 @.@ 7 m ) long and protected the ship 's side between the barbettes . Oblique bulkheads 3 inches ( 76 mm ) thick connected this strake to the armour protecting the bases of the turrets . The gun turrets and their bases were protected by 17 inches ( 432 mm ) of armour that thinned to 16 inches ( 406 mm ) behind the oblique bulkheads . Below the armoured deck their armour was reduced to 11 inches ( 279 mm ) . The armour of the main deck casemates was six inches thick and that of the forward conning tower was 14 inches thick . The armoured deck was three inches thick over the machinery , but thinned to 2 @.@ 5 inches ( 64 mm ) outside the central citadel and ran to the ends of the ship . At the bow it dipped down to reinforce the ship 's ram . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 Hood was laid down at Chatham Dockyard on 12 August 1889 and was launched on 30 July 1891 , the Viscountess Hood christening her . She finished her sea trials in May 1893 and was commissioned on 1 June 1893 at the cost of £ 926 @,@ 396 . Her assignment to the Mediterranean Fleet was delayed when she sprang a leak in her forward compartments on 7 June as a result of faulty riveting and excessive strain on the hull when she had been docked . Repairs took only two days , and the ship left Sheerness for the Mediterranean on 18 June . 
 Hood arrived at Malta on 3 July , relieving the battleship Colossus . In 1897 and 1898 the ship served as part of the International Squadron blockading Crete and maintaining order during the Greco @-@ Turkish uprising there . Captain Alvin Coote Corry was appointed in command in December 1898 . She was ordered to return home in April 1900 and paid off into reserve at Chatham Dockyard on 29 April 1900 . Seven months later , on 12 December 1900 , Hood recommissioned to relieve the elderly ironclad Thunderer as port guard ship at Pembroke Dock . 
 The ship rejoined the Mediterranean Fleet at the end of 1901 , and Captain Robert Lowry was appointed in command on 1 May 1902 . She participated in combined exercises with the Channel Squadron and the Cruiser Squadron off the coasts of Cephalonia and Morea in late 1902 . Two days before the exercises ended , Hood damaged her rudder on the seabed while leaving Argostoli Harbor on 4 October . She went first to Malta for temporary repairs , then on to England for permanent repairs at Chatham Dockyard , using her twin screws to steer for the entire voyage . The repairs began on 5 December 1902 and she transferred to Devonport for a refit upon their completion . 
 On 25 June 1903 Hood relieved the battleship Collingwood in the Home Fleet . She took part in combined exercises of the Channel Fleet , Mediterranean Fleet , and Home Fleet off the coast of Portugal from 5 to 9 August . The battleship Russell relieved Hood on 28 September 1904 . Hood was placed into reserve at Devonport on 3 January 1905 , where she remained until February 1907 . In April 1909 , the ship was refitted and partially stripped at Devonport , after which she began service as a receiving ship at Queenstown , Ireland . In September 1910 Hood recommissioned to serve as flagship of the Senior Naval Officer , Coast of Ireland while continuing as a receiving ship . On 2 April 1911 the ship was in Cork Harbour for the 1911 Census . 
 Later in 1911 , Hood was towed to Portsmouth and listed for disposal . During 1913 – 14 she was employed as a target for underwater protection experiments and was used in secret tests of anti @-@ torpedo bulges . Subsequently she was photographed in dry dock at Portsmouth by the crew of Naval Airship No. 18 in June 1914 , before being placed on the sale list in August 1914 . On 4 November 1914 Hood was scuttled in Portland harbour to block the Southern Ship Channel , a potential access route for U @-@ boats or for torpedoes fired from outside the harbour . Her wreck became known as " Old Hole in the Wall " . Despite her 1914 scuttling , the Royal Navy included Hood on its sale list in both 1916 and 1917 . 
 = The Legend of Zelda : Phantom Hourglass = 
 The Legend of Zelda : Phantom Hourglass ( Japanese : ゼルダの伝説 <unk> , Hepburn : Zeruda no Densetsu : Mugen no <unk> ) is an action @-@ adventure game developed and published by Nintendo for the Nintendo DS handheld game console . It is the fourteenth installment in the The Legend of Zelda series and the sequel to the 2002 GameCube title The Wind Waker . Phantom Hourglass was released in Japan in June 2007 ; in North America , Australia , and Europe in October 2007 ; and in Korea in April 2008 . The game was re @-@ released for the Wii U via the Virtual Console service in the PAL region in November 2015 and in North America in May 2016 . 
 The game features 3D cel @-@ shaded graphics with an overhead camera perspective , employs controls involving the console 's touchscreen and microphone , and takes advantage of the Nintendo Wi @-@ Fi Connection for online play . The game 's story follows that of The Wind Waker , focusing on series protagonist Link 's journey to save his friend Tetra from the story 's antagonist , Bellum , with the help of Captain Linebeck and his ship , the S.S. Linebeck . 
 Critics were generally positive towards Phantom Hourglass . Its control scheme was praised , while criticism focused on its online features , which were considered too simple . The game received several video game industry awards , including the Nintendo DS Game of the Year award from GameSpot , GameSpy , and IGN . Phantom Hourglass was the best @-@ selling game in its first month in Japan , with 302 @,@ 887 copies sold . In the United States , it was the fifth best @-@ selling game in the month it debuted , with 262 @,@ 800 copies sold . 4 @.@ 13 million copies of Phantom Hourglass were sold worldwide by March 2008 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The Legend of Zelda : Phantom Hourglass is an action @-@ adventure game with gameplay similar to other games in the The Legend of Zelda series . The player controls Link , the protagonist , and explores the world to find new items , information , and allies to help him save his friend Tetra and defeat the antagonist Bellum . The game is divided into two gameplay types : sailing between islands , and exploring the islands and their dungeons on foot . While on land , Link discovers and utilizes many items , including the classic boomerang , bow , and bombs . When sailing , the game shows a map of the area on the Nintendo DS 's top screen , and a 3D top @-@ down view of Link and his nearby surroundings on the lower touchscreen . The player can bring down the map from the top screen to the lower screen to make notes . During certain events , including most boss battles , a 3D view is shown on both screens , allowing the player to have a wider view of their surroundings . The player controls Link with the stylus , moves him by pointing to the sides of the screen , and uses the stylus to interact with objects and people or attack foes by pointing at them . To travel between islands on the Great Sea , the player controls a paddle steamer called the S.S. Linebeck . The player can plot a course by drawing on a sea chart , redraw the course to make any necessary alterations , shoot at enemies that attack the ship using a cannon , and jump to avoid obstacles . 
 The game includes a one @-@ on @-@ one multiplayer battle mode . In an arena , one player controls Link , while the other player , on defense , controls three Phantom Guardians . Players of both sides are aided by power @-@ up items that appear on the playing field . Link 's goal is to grab a Force Gem and carry it to his base . The other player , controlling the three Phantom Guardians , must find and catch Link before he returns any Force Gems . When Link is caught , or if the round is over , players switch sides . Each multiplayer game consists of three rounds , and in each round , each player takes a turn at both sides . The maximum length of a multiplayer game is 12 minutes , assuming Link does not get caught . The game supports multiplayer both locally and online through the Nintendo Wi @-@ Fi Connection , as well as Download Play . The game is the third The Legend of Zelda game to include multiplayer , following Four Swords and Four Swords Adventures . 
 Phantom Hourglass introduces the game mechanic of a large dungeon central to the game 's story , in this case the Temple of the Ocean King . Link visits the Temple multiple times during the course of the game 's story , in order to obtain sea charts that allow him to sail to other parts of the ocean . Throughout the game , the Temple has a curse placed on it that drains Link 's life whenever he is inside , but upon obtaining the Phantom Hourglass , Link is able to explore the Temple without being affected by the curse for a limited amount of time . In addition to the curse , Link must contend with Phantoms , a type of enemy exclusive to the Temple . Phantoms are invincible for the most part , necessitating the use of stealth in order to get past them . " Safe zones " are scattered throughout the Temple , and allow Link to avoid both the Phantoms and the Temple 's curse . As Link progresses through the game , he is able to access deeper levels of the Temple and stay inside for longer . The Temple , including the puzzles within , will reset whenever Link leaves , but as he obtains new items , he can unlock new routes and shortcuts that enable him to travel through the Temple quicker . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Picking up immediately after The Wind Waker , in which Link defeats Ganon who turns to stone and remains at the bottom of a now sealed away Hyrule , Link and Tetra travel over the flooded Hyrule called the Great Sea on board Tetra 's pirate ship . Along the way , the pair discover the Ghost Ship and Tetra enters it ; however , immediately after entering the Ghost Ship , she screams for help . While Link attempts to follow her , he slips and falls into the ocean . Washed ashore on an island , Link is awakened by Ciela , a fairy . Exploring the island , Link finds the Phantom Hourglass , filled with the Sands of Hours , and meets an old man named Oshus , who wants to help Link find the Ghost Ship and reunite with Tetra . To aid him in his quest , Link enlists the help of Captain Linebeck and his ship , the S.S. Linebeck , which Link , Ciela , and Linebeck use to visit islands across the Great Sea . While Linebeck was initially reluctant to team up with the two , Ciela makes mention of a huge treasure , prompting him to agree to help them . 
 After scouring the Great Sea , Link learns that he must use maps and clues hidden in the Temple of the Ocean King to find the Spirits of Courage , Wisdom , and Power , which in turn will help him locate the Ghost Ship . With the help of the Phantom Hourglass , Link finds the Spirits of Wisdom and Power . When Link asks Oshus where to find the Spirit of Courage , Oshus explains that it is in fact Ciela , after which she transforms into her true form . Now in possession of the three Spirits , Link , along with Ciela and Oshus , locate the Ghost Ship and find Tetra on board , who has been turned to stone . While Link determines how to save Tetra , Oshus reveals that he is the Ocean King and that he and Ciela had to change their appearances to hide from Bellum , a life @-@ eating monster that Link must destroy to save Tetra . Oshus also mentions that Bellum was the one who created the Ghost Ship and turned Tetra into a statue , and that he has taken residence deep in the Temple of the Ocean King . Linebeck quickly readies to abandon their quest ; outraged at the lack of treasure to be found . However , his loyalties instantly return when Oshus promises the captain one wish in return for his continued aid . 
 To defeat Bellum , Link learns that he must forge the Phantom Sword from three unique , " pure " metals located on nearby islands . After collecting and using the metals to forge the Phantom Sword , Link descends to the bottom level of the Temple of the Ocean King to face Bellum . After intense fighting , Link appears to defeat Bellum , and Tetra is freed from stone . After Link and Tetra hurry back to the S.S. Linebeck to find Oshus , Bellum emerges and sinks the ship , capturing Tetra and knocking Link unconscious in the process . Linebeck finally shows some devotion when he fights off Bellum while Link wakes up . Then , Linebeck gets possessed by Bellum , forcing Link to fight him , eventually defeating Bellum for good , saving Tetra and Linebeck , and releasing the sand from the Phantom Hourglass back into the sea . Oshus , now in his true form as a white whale , readies to depart with the three spirits , while Linebeck , surprising everyone , wishes not for treasure but for his ship back , and Tetra and Link teleport back onto Tetra 's pirate ship , where its crew tells them that only ten minutes had passed since the pair left the ship , insisting that their journey was a dream . However , Link still possesses the now @-@ empty Phantom Hourglass , and sees Linebeck 's ship on the horizon , knowing that his adventure was real . 
 = = Development = = 
 Development started in May 2004 , at which point the game still had gameplay similar to Four Swords Adventures . At a press conference in Japan for the Nintendo DS on October 6 , 2004 , Shigeru Miyamoto of Nintendo said , " We 're thinking of bringing Four Swords to the DS . " In an interview at E3 2005 , Nintendo 's Eiji Aonuma confirmed that they were working on a game for the Nintendo DS . In 2006 , Nintendo presented the keynote address at the annual Game Developers Conference , where they also revealed Phantom Hourglass for the first time and presented a demo . At the conference , Nintendo announced that the game would be released in late 2006 . For the holiday season , Nintendo launched two special edition Nintendo DS bundles , each in a different color , on November 23 , 2007 . One of the bundles , the Gold edition , was emblazoned with The Legend of Zelda 's signature Triforce logo and sold alongside Phantom Hourglass . 
 The same development team that worked on Four Swords Adventures also worked on what would become Phantom Hourglass . In the game 's first prototype , the action took place in the upper screen while the touchscreen was a flat map that allowed Link to be controlled . However , the developers believed that this interface caused the player to be too disconnected from the game 's action , thereby prompting them to switch the two screens . They felt that this interface would appeal to Japanese players , who they said prefer simple interfaces . The developers added a battle mode that was played over Wi @-@ Fi to appeal to American players . 
 The game takes advantage of the Nintendo DS 's stylus in several different ways . The player can draw shapes to open certain doors and plot out the path of ships on the ocean , among other tasks . The device 's touchscreen can also be used to direct Link 's boomerang . Phantom Hourglass features cel @-@ shaded graphics , similar to that of The Wind Waker , with some influence from Four Swords Adventures . Link and Zelda 's appearances in Phantom Hourglass closely resemble those from The Wind Waker . 
 At E3 2007 , Aonuma said that Phantom Hourglass " opened up the [ Zelda ] series and [ gave ] a fresh , new control scheme to the aging Zelda formula " . He also said that , despite the disappointing sales of The Wind Waker affecting him personally , he still wished to continue the game 's style in another Zelda iteration , leading to the inspiration for Phantom Hourglass . Aonuma believed that the game 's simple controls , with the help of the Nintendo DS 's touchscreen , helped make Phantom Hourglass the first Zelda game to attract casual gamers . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Phantom Hourglass was released in Japan on June 23 , 2007 , in North America on October 1 , 2007 , in Australia on October 11 , 2007 , in Europe on October 19 , 2007 , and in Korea on April 3 , 2008 . The game was considered to have received " universal acclaim " , receiving aggregated scores of 90 / 100 from Metacritic and 88 @.@ 82 % from GameRankings . Praise focused on the game 's use of unique Nintendo DS features , while criticism targeted its more casual gameplay compared to previous games in The Legend of Zelda series . Phantom Hourglass was the best @-@ selling game in its debut month of June 2007 in Japan , selling 302 @,@ 887 copies . In the United States , Phantom Hourglass was the fifth best @-@ selling game in its debut month of October 2007 , selling 262 @,@ 800 copies . As of March 2008 , 4 @.@ 13 million copies of the game have been sold worldwide , with 910 @,@ 000 of those copies in Japan . 
 Computer and Video Games called Phantom Hourglass one of the few " masterpieces " on the Nintendo DS , which made it " worth every penny " . Believing that Phantom Hourglass improves on everything that was great about its predecessor , The Wind Waker , GamePro predicted that the sequel would be another successful game in the franchise . Although feeling that the game does not live up to the standards set in Twilight Princess , Game Informer still felt that the adventure is worthy of The Legend of Zelda series , and noted that it " has enough great stuff going for it " for them to consider it one of the year 's best video game adventures . GameZone enjoyed the " spectacular blend of touch @-@ screen combat , brilliant puzzles , and Wind Waker beauty " in Phantom Hourglass , calling it a " can 't @-@ miss adventure " and one of Nintendo 's and the year 's best games . Hyper 's <unk> Davies commended Phantom Hourglass for its " perfect controls and supreme world and dungeon designs " . However , he criticized the game for only giving around 30 hours of gameplay . 
 Game Revolution appreciated the game 's graphics , and noted that it uses the Nintendo DS 's features better than any other game for the console . Praising its " innovative " and " fun " control scheme , GameSpot felt that Phantom Hourglass " gives new life to several of the series ' age @-@ old concepts " . X @-@ Play wrote that Phantom Hourglass definitely felt like a The Legend of Zelda game , calling it another successful video game for the franchise and a " must @-@ have " for anyone that owns a Nintendo DS . The Onion 's entertainment newspaper The A.V. Club remarked that Phantom Hourglass exploits the Nintendo DS 's touchscreen to the fullest extent in an " imaginative and genuinely fun way " . In a perfect 5 @-@ star review , Empire stated that " Phantom Hourglass is one of Nintendo 's greatest achievements and a contender for the best handheld adventure in console history . " 
 Issues that were mentioned in reviews regarding the game included its more casual gameplay compared to previous The Legend of Zelda games , which was not well received by some . GameSpy felt that the game was both easy and approachable enough for casual gamers to play , but sufficiently rewarding and challenging to satisfy hardcore fans of The Legend of Zelda series . IGN believed the game to be " more casual than we 'd like " , but still found it captivating , entertaining , and " a true adventure worthy of the Zelda name " , calling it " different , but it 's still the real deal " . GameTrailers stated that the short dungeon levels and hand @-@ holding exploration are " outright disappointing " , but when comparing Phantom Hourglass to other Nintendo DS games , they conceded that it was still an impressive game , but just a good game when compared to The Legend of Zelda standards . 1UP.com pointed out that the biggest problem with Phantom Hourglass is that it falls back on using innovations from previous The Legend of Zelda games , rather than including new and original ideas : " Innovation arrives in tiny steps , touch screen controls be damned . " 
 Finding it difficult for hardcore gamers to fully enjoy Phantom Hourglass , Nintendo World Report claimed that the game 's lack of alternative control schemes was a telling sign that Nintendo did not have The Legend of Zelda fans in mind when creating the game . They still described the game as " decent " , but felt that " it ’ s also a game apart from the rest of the series . It just feels different , and I think it demonstrates that Nintendo is reluctant to sail into the murky waters beyond Wind Waker . " The American newspaper The New York Times enjoyed Phantom Hourglass for the most part , but complained about the timer in the Temple of the Ocean King as unnecessary and gimmicky , remarking that the game 's dungeons are only " fun to go through once , but none of them are fun enough to go through 20 times " . They noted that the time spent traveling through dungeons " removed all thoughts of it being perfect " . 
 Several websites named Phantom Hourglass the 2007 DS Game of the Year , including IGN and GameSpy . It was also mentioned in Best of the Year lists from Wired , Time , and Edge . The game received Editor 's Choice awards from GameSpot and IGN . It was also named Best Adventure Game by 1UP.com. The game was designated the Best Handheld Game at the 2008 Golden Joystick awards , the 2007 Game Developers Choice Awards , the 2007 GamePro Editors ' Choice awards , the 2007 Spike Video Game Awards , and the 2008 Interactive Achievement Awards . At E3 2006 , Phantom Hourglass was designated as the Best Nintendo DS Game by GameSpot and the Best Handheld Game at the Game Critics Awards . The game placed 38th in Official Nintendo Magazine 's 100 Greatest Nintendo Games of All @-@ Time . 
 = Tupolev Tu @-@ 142 = 
 The Tupolev Tu @-@ 142 ( Russian : <unk> <unk> @-@ 142 ; NATO reporting name : Bear F / J ) is a maritime reconnaissance and anti @-@ submarine warfare ( ASW ) aircraft derived from the Tu @-@ 95 turboprop strategic bomber . A specialised communications variant designated Tu @-@ 142MR was tasked with long @-@ range communications duties with Soviet ballistic missile submarines . The Tu @-@ 142 was designed by the Tupolev design bureau , and manufactured by the Kuibyshev Aviation and Taganrog Machinery Plants from 1968 to 1994 . Formerly operated by the Soviet Navy and Ukrainian Air Force , the Tu @-@ 142 currently serves with the Russian and Indian Naval Air Arm . 
 Developed in response to the American Polaris programme , the Tu @-@ 142 grew out of the need for a viable Soviet ASW platform . It succeeded the stillborn Tu @-@ <unk> project , Tupolev 's first attempt at modifying the Tu @-@ 95 for maritime use . The Tu @-@ 142 differed from the Tu @-@ 95 in having a stretched fuselage to accommodate specialised equipment for its ASW and surveillance roles , a reinforced undercarriage to support rough @-@ field capability , improved avionics and weapons , and enhancements to general performance . The Tu @-@ 142 's capability was incrementally improved while the type was in service , eventually resulting in the Tu @-@ 142MZ , the final long @-@ range Tu @-@ 142 with highly sophisticated combat avionics and a large payload . Tupolev also converted a number of Tu @-@ 142s as avionics ( Tu @-@ 142MP ) and engine ( Tu @-@ 142LL ) testbeds . 
 = = Design and development = = 
 = = = Early designs = = = 
 In the late 1950s the US Navy developed the UGM @-@ 27 Polaris , a submarine @-@ launched ballistic missile ( SLBM ) with a range of more of than 1 @,@ 800 kilometres ( 1 @,@ 000 nm ) . The Navy test @-@ fired rocket boosters to perfect the design , culminating in the first underwater launch of a ballistic missile by USS George Washington on 20 July 1960 . Polaris became operational on 15 November that year , when the George Washington left Charleston , South Carolina , with a complement of nuclear @-@ armed Polaris missiles . 
 The Soviet government consequently ordered Tupolev and other aircraft design bureaus to study possible dedicated anti @-@ submarine warfare ( ASW ) designs . Tupolev initially designed the Tu @-@ <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , or ASW ) , a development of the Tu @-@ 95 equipped with sonobuoys , anti @-@ submarine mines and torpedoes . It was to carry a 9 @,@ 000 kg ( 19 @,@ 841 lb ) payload with a maximum loiter time of 10 @.@ 5 hours . The design was dropped , however , because it lacked a powerful radar , thermal imaging ( infrared ) system and magnetic anomaly detector ( MAD ) . On 28 February 1963 , the Council of Ministers ( the highest executive and administrative body of the Soviet Union ) issued a directive to Tupolev requiring his bureau to develop a long @-@ range ASW aircraft . 
 The resultant design was named Tu @-@ 142 and had features in common with the Tu @-@ <unk> . The ventral and dorsal gun turrets were removed , as was the large dielectric radome housing the <unk> radar system , which was replaced by a thermal imaging system located in a smaller fairing . This left the tail turret with twin 23 @-@ mm AM @-@ 23 cannons , along with electronic countermeasures , as the only defensive armament . The aircraft 's search @-@ and @-@ targeting system featured Berkut ( Golden Eagle ) 360 ° radar . A complex navigation system was integrated with the weapons targeting system . Structural differences included an airfoil change to the wing , expanding its area to 295 m2 ( 3 @,@ 172 ft2 ) . The area of the elevators was increased by 14 % , and improved hydraulic actuators were fitted . Metal fuel tanks replaced rubber bladders . To allow the Tu @-@ 142 to operate from semi @-@ prepared runways , the Tu @-@ 95 's four @-@ wheel main undercarriage bogies were replaced with six @-@ wheel units ; the main undercarriage fairings were also modified . 
 The first Tu @-@ 142 ( construction number 4200 ) was built at the Kuibyshev Aviation Plant in Samara . It performed its first flight on 18 June 1968 , with test pilot I. K. <unk> at the controls , taking off from Zhukovsky Airfield southeast of Moscow . Early testing indicated that the fuselage needed to be lengthened by at least 1 @.@ 5 m ( 4 @.@ 9 ft ) to accommodate new combat equipment . Therefore , the second prototype ( c / n <unk> ) joined the flight @-@ test programme on 3 September with a 1 @.@ 7 @-@ metre ( 5 @.@ 6 ft ) front fuselage stretch , a modification found on all subsequent Tu @-@ 142s . The third and final development Tu @-@ 142 entered flight test on 31 October , complete with the full equipment suite . In May 1970 , the Soviet Naval Aviation ( AV @-@ MF ) – the air arm of the Soviet Navy – began receiving production Tu @-@ 142s for operational trials . 
 = = = Improved variants = = = 
 During early operations , the Tu @-@ 142 revealed several shortcomings . The aircraft 's rough @-@ field capability was found to be of limited use , so the two six @-@ wheel bogies used on the first 12 of 36 aircraft were replaced with four @-@ wheel reinforced bogies from the Tu @-@ 114 airliner ; consequently , the wheel @-@ wells in the engine nacelle were made slimmer . These changes , along with the deletion of the thermal imaging system and parts of the electronic countermeasure ( ECM ) equipment , reduced the empty weight by 4 @,@ 000 kg ( 8 @,@ 818 lb ) . The modified aircraft also introduced a crew rest area for long @-@ duration missions , and was assigned the codename ( " Bear F " Mod 1 ) ; from 1968 to 1972 the Kuibyshev Plant produced a total of 18 Tu @-@ 142s . 
 In the early 1970s , production of Tu @-@ 142s was switched to the Taganrog Machinery Plant near the Black Sea . It has been speculated that the change to the idle plant was to give employment to the workers there . The move required many improvements to the plant and the surrounding area , including the establishment of new assembly shops , the installation of new machinery and tooling , the re @-@ training of the workforce , and the building of a new airfield . Preparation took place until 1975 , when production of the first Tu @-@ 142 began . The Tu @-@ 142s built by Taganrog incorporated the changes found on the last of the Kuibyshev aircraft . Differences included a 30 @-@ centimetre ( 12 in ) stretch to the front fuselage and a redesigned cockpit . Additional changes included new two @-@ axle main undercarriage bogies . This version was given the factory designation Tu @-@ 142M , which was not adopted by the Soviet Navy ; NATO codenamed it " Bear @-@ F " Mod 2 . 
 As the 1970s progressed , silencing technology in submarines rendered acoustic @-@ band sonobuoys and trigger devices ineffective . During 1961 and 1962 , the Soviet Union conducted research and development into an explosive sound system ( ESS ) – used to locate deep @-@ diving submarines – under the name Udar ( Blow ) . In 1965 , work had started on <unk> systems using ESS to be integrated with the Berkut radar . The programme was postponed when one of the aircraft intended to carry it , the Ilyushin Il @-@ 38 , was found to be incompatible . The developments instead resulted in the Udar @-@ 75 , which was featured in a new search and targeting system ( STS ) of the Taganrog @-@ built Tu @-@ <unk> . 
 A new target acquisition system dubbed Korshun @-@ K , the cornerstone of which was the Korshun ( Kite ) radar , was installed on all subsequent Tu @-@ 142s . This system was used for detecting surfaced and submerged submarines , communicating with other ASW aircraft and ground bases , and performing navigational and tactical tasks . The first three Tu @-@ <unk> were the first aircraft to be equipped with this system , and thus were redesignated Tu @-@ 142MK ( " Bear F " Mod . 3 ) . It was the first Tu @-@ 142 to feature a MAD , its MMS @-@ 106 Ladoga system being mounted in an aft @-@ facing fairing atop the vertical stabiliser . The first of three Tu @-@ 142MKs that underwent Stage A of the trials programme made its first flight on 4 November 1975 ; despite the dismal performance figures , a production go @-@ ahead was given . Stage B , conducted during April – October 1978 , found that the aircraft 's avionics were extremely unreliable ; like Stage A , these problems were apparently ignored when a directive issued on 19 November 1980 cleared the Tu @-@ 142MK for operational service . 
 = = = Technological upgrades = = = 
 Even as the Tu @-@ 142MK entered service , its Korshun @-@ K STS was already becoming obsolete . Work began on yet another improved Tu @-@ 142 , resulting in the Tu @-@ 142MZ ( " Bear F " Mod . 4 ) with the Korshun @-@ KN @-@ N STS . This consisted of <unk> @-@ <unk> ( Ammonia / Jade ) ASW avionics , which included the <unk> sonar system . As well as the RGB @-@ 1A and RGB @-@ 2 buoys of the Berkut , the Tu @-@ 142MZ was compatible with the RGB @-@ 16 and RGB @-@ 26 buoys . When working with the ASW avionics , these buoys provided 50 % greater coverage . The Kuznetsov NK @-@ <unk> were replaced by the more @-@ powerful NK @-@ 12MP engines , and for the first time , the Tu @-@ 142 had an independent engine @-@ starting capability with the addition of the TA @-@ 12 auxiliary power unit . This variant was distinguished from earlier " Bear Fs " by the chin fairings housing several antennas . 
 The flight test programme started in 1985 with the maiden flight of a converted Tu @-@ 142M fitted with the advanced avionics ; state acceptance trials began within two years . Test results proved excellent , as the aircraft successfully tracked nuclear @-@ powered submarines of the Northern and Pacific Fleets . The aircraft became operational with Russian Naval Aviation ( AV @-@ MP ) in 1993 . The last Tu @-@ 142MZ rolled off the Taganrog production line the following year , bringing an end to a 26 @-@ year production run during which 100 Tu @-@ 142s were produced . 
 A communications variant designated Tu @-@ 142MR ( " Bear J " ) was the last production version of the Tu @-@ 142 . It was tasked with long @-@ range communications duties with Soviet ballistic missile submarines , a role similar to that of the Boeing E @-@ 6 Mercury . The Tu @-@ 142MR differed from the ASW Tu @-@ 142s in having less @-@ sophisticated avionics , but had a long trailing wire radio aerial to relay messages to submerged Soviet submarines in times of nuclear war . This was amongst the many distinctive features of the Tu @-@ 142MR that allows it to communicate with satellites , airborne and ground @-@ based command posts , and submarines . The aircraft replaced the Ilyushin Il @-@ 80 in the airborne command and control role . Tu @-@ 142s are currently operated by the 76th Naval Aviation Regiment from <unk> . Other developments of the Tu @-@ 142 include the one @-@ off Tu @-@ <unk> maritime reconnaissance variant , and the unbuilt Tu @-@ <unk> missile @-@ carrying variant . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 To prepare for Tu @-@ 142 operations , on 22 June 1960 the Soviet Navy began selecting personnel for conversion training . The first group began its three @-@ month training period on 4 March 1970 at the seaside town of Nikolayev ( since renamed Mykolaiv ) . Meanwhile , the first Tu @-@ 142s were delivered to the Northern Fleet at <unk> AB , where they were initially tasked with tracking and monitoring nuclear @-@ powered submarines as part of the type 's operational trials . Throughout the test programme , effort focused on the verification of the ASW avionics , notably the Berkut @-@ 95 radar , as the airframe itself was not a major concern . The Tu @-@ 142 reached initial operational capability in December 1972 after a successful flight @-@ test programme . Prior to that , in December 1971 , the second group selected for Tu @-@ 142 operations started its own conversion training . Deliveries of the aircraft at first proceeded slowly ; as more Tu @-@ 142s were produced , the type was allocated to the Pacific Fleet . 
 Throughout its operational history , the Tu @-@ 142 demonstrated significant capabilities . On 19 – 22 August 1974 , four Tu @-@ 142s shadowed a foreign submarine in the Barents Sea ; one of the aircraft was reported to have maintained continuous contact for 2 hours and 55 minutes . In 1975 , a Tu @-@ 142 managed to trail a Soviet submarine for 3 hours and 16 minutes . On 10 October 1977 , a group of five Tu @-@ 142s tracked a US submarine in the Philippine Sea ; one of the Tu @-@ 142s reportedly trailed the submarine for 4 hours and 5 minutes . Soviet Tu @-@ 142s , besides operating domestically , were sent to friendly overseas bases in Angola , Cuba , Ethiopia , Vietnam , and Yemen . In the early 1990s , with the dissolution of the Soviet Union , the Soviet fleet of Tu @-@ 142s was handed to the Russian Navy , although the Ukrainian Air Force gained a few Tu @-@ 142s that had been left in its territory . Ukrainian Tu @-@ 142s were later dismantled as a result of the bilateral START I treaty signed between the United States and the Soviet Union in 1991 , which came into effect in late 1994 . 
 Besides the Tu @-@ 142 's military applications , a one @-@ off Tu @-@ 142MP was used to test a new ASW suite . Another Tu @-@ 142 was converted to replace the Tu @-@ <unk> for the testing of turbojet engines . Designated Tu @-@ 142LL , the ASW equipment and armament were removed to allow an engine test bed to be carried under the belly . Some of the engines installed were the NK @-@ 25 for the Tu @-@ <unk> , <unk> @-@ 51A for the Tu @-@ <unk> , and the NK @-@ 32 for the Tu @-@ 160 . The first Tu @-@ 142MK was converted for an airborne laboratory role , setting several altitude @-@ in @-@ horizontal and time @-@ to @-@ altitude records in its class . 
 In 1981 the Indian Navy began considering a long @-@ range maritime reconnaissance and anti @-@ submarine warfare aircraft for its Naval Air Arm . The Soviet Union initially offered to refurbish some of its own Tu @-@ 142s for India , rather than construct new aircraft . The Indian Navy was at first hesitant about the large Tu @-@ 142 , which was heavy and thus would require runways to be reinforced and lengthened at potential operating bases . Consequently , the service requested three Ilyushin Il @-@ 38s – then being phased out of service with the Soviet Navy – be refurbished for Indian operations . This request fell through , and so in December 1984 an agreement to purchase eight Tu @-@ 142s was signed . 
 For the twelve @-@ month period stating from May 1987 , the Indian Navy sent 40 pilots and observers , 16 technical officers and 128 sailors to Riga for training . On 30 March 1988 , the first three Tu @-@ 142s arrived at the Indian naval air station of INS Hansa , Goa , after a flight from Simferopol ( <unk> Air Base ) in the Crimean peninsula . On 13 April two more aircraft arrived , prior to the commissioning of INAS 312 , the operator of Indian Tu @-@ 142s ; by the end of October the fleet of eight Tu @-@ 142s was delivered . In May 1992 , the squadron was relocated to its current operating base at INS <unk> on the Indian east coast . The Tu @-@ 142s are expected to be replaced by twelve smaller Boeing P @-@ <unk> . 
 = = Variants = = 
 Tu @-@ 142 
 A lengthened Tu @-@ 95 with much defensive armament removed , and instead incorporating ASW systems . Twelve aircraft initially had six @-@ wheel main undercarriage bogies . Six later aircraft had four @-@ wheel bogies . Built by Kuibyshev Aviation Plant . 
 Tu @-@ 142M 
 A 30 @-@ centimetre ( 12 in ) stretch to front fuselage , redesigned cockpit and two @-@ axle main undercarriage bogies . Built by Taganrog . 
 Tu @-@ 142MK 
 Greatly improved variant with new Korshun radar , avionics and ASW equipment . 43 Tu @-@ 142MKs were constructed by Taganrog . 
 Tu @-@ 142MK @-@ E 
 Eight downgraded Tu @-@ 142MKs purchased by the Indian Naval Air Arm . E stands for " export " . 
 Tu @-@ 142MZ 
 The last production variant of the " Bear F " , with new NK @-@ 12MP engines and a new avionics suite . Can be distinguished from other Tu @-@ 142s by its chin fairings . Built by Taganrog . 
 Tu @-@ 142MZ @-@ K 
 Proposed commercial cargo variant of the Tu @-@ 142MZ ( the K standing for " <unk> " ) , with ASW avionics removed . Also designated Tu @-@ 142MZ @-@ C. 
 Tu @-@ 142MP 
 Modified single Tu @-@ 142M used as avionics testbed . 
 Tu @-@ 142MR 
 Modified Tu @-@ 142MKs built as submarine communications relay aircraft . Has distinctive external fairings and components . NATO codename " Bear J " . 
 Tu @-@ 142LL 
 Two converted earlier Tu @-@ 142s used for testing of turbofan engines . ASW equipment was removed . 
 = = Operators = = 
 India 
 The Indian Naval Air Arm had 8 Tu @-@ <unk> in service as of December 2010 , based at INS <unk> , Arakkonam , Tamil Nadu . 
 Russia 
 The Russian Naval Aviation had 15 Tu @-@ 142s in service as of December 2010 . 
 Former 
 Soviet Union 
 The Soviet Naval Aviation 's Tu @-@ 142s were distributed between the Russian Naval Aviation and Ukrainian Air Force following the collapse of the Soviet Union . 
 Ukraine 
 The Ukrainian Air Force inherited an unknown number of Tu @-@ 142s following the collapse of the Soviet Union . These were dismantled in accordance with the START I agreement . 
 = = Notable accidents = = 
 On 7 November 2009 , eleven crew were killed when their Tu @-@ 142 crashed over the Strait of Tartary near Japan during a training flight . Flights of aircraft belonging to the Pacific Fleet were suspended pending an investigation into the crash . There was no indication that the crew made use of emergency equipment , although a lifeboat on board the plane was fitted with a device that transmits a signal in the event of an accident . Chief of the General Staff Nikolay Makarov believed an engine failure could have caused the crash . A memorial service was held for the crew on 16 December 2009 . A search for the bodies of the eleven crew members was suspended several times due to ice floes and bad weather . 
 = = Specifications ( Tu @-@ 142MZ ) = = 
 Data from Donald and Lake 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : 11 – 13 
 Length : 53 @.@ 08 m ( 162 ft 5 in ) 
 Wingspan : 50 @.@ 00 m ( 167 ft 8 in ) 
 Height : 12 @.@ 12 m ( 39 ft 9 in ) 
 Wing area : 311 @.@ 10 m ² ( 3 @,@ 348 @.@ 76 ft ² ) 
 Empty weight : 90 @,@ 000 kg ( 198 @,@ 000 lb ) 
 Max. takeoff weight : 185 @,@ 000 kg ( 407 @,@ 848 lb ) 
 Powerplant : 4 × Kuznetsov NK @-@ 12MP turboprops , 11 @,@ 033 kW ( 14 @,@ 795 shp ) each 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : 925 km / h ( 500 kt , 575 mph ) 
 Cruise speed : 711 km / h ( 384 kt , 442 mph ) 
 Combat radius : 6 @,@ 500 km ( 3 @,@ 454 nmi , 3 @,@ 977 mi ) 
 Service ceiling : 12 @,@ 000 m ( 39 @,@ 000 ft ) 
 = SM UB @-@ 17 = 
 SM UB @-@ 17 was a German Type UB I submarine or U @-@ boat in the German Imperial Navy ( German : Kaiserliche Marine ) during World War I. The submarine disappeared during a patrol in March 1918 . 
 UB @-@ 17 was ordered in November 1914 and was laid down at the AG Weser shipyard in Bremen in February 1915 . UB @-@ 17 was a little under 28 metres ( 92 ft ) in length and displaced between 127 and 141 tonnes ( 125 and 139 long tons ) , depending on whether surfaced or submerged . She carried two torpedoes for her two bow torpedo tubes and was also armed with a deck @-@ mounted machine gun . UB @-@ 17 was broken into sections and shipped by rail to Antwerp for reassembly . She was launched in April 1915 and commissioned as SM UB @-@ 17 in May . 
 UB @-@ 17 spent her entire career in the Flanders Flotilla and sank 13 ships , most of them British fishing vessels . She also captured two ships as prizes and damaged one tanker . On 11 March 1918 , UB @-@ 17 departed for a patrol in the Hoofden but was never seen again . There have been several suggestions as to UB @-@ 17 's fate , but none match the U @-@ boat 's operation details . 
 In July 2013 , UB @-@ 17 was found off England 's east coast , near the county of Suffolk by archaeologists . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 After the German Army 's rapid advance along the North Sea coast in the earliest stages of World War I , the German Imperial Navy found itself without suitable submarines that could be operated in the narrow and shallow seas off Flanders . Project 34 , a design effort begun in mid @-@ August 1914 , produced the Type UB I design : a small submarine that could be shipped by rail to a port of operations and quickly assembled . Constrained by railroad size limitations , the UB I design called for a boat about 28 metres ( 92 ft ) long and displacing about 125 tonnes ( 123 long tons ) with two torpedo tubes . 
 UB @-@ 17 and sister boat UB @-@ 16 comprised an order of two submarines ordered on 25 November from AG Weser of Bremen , a little more than three months after planning for the class began . UB @-@ 17 was laid down by Weser in Bremen on 21 February 1915 . As built , UB @-@ 17 was 27 @.@ 88 metres ( 91 ft 6 in ) long , 3 @.@ 15 metres ( 10 ft 4 in ) abeam , and had a draft of 3 @.@ 03 metres ( 9 ft 11 in ) . She had a single 59 @-@ brake @-@ horsepower ( 44 kW ) Körting 4 @-@ cylinder diesel engine for surface travel , and a single 119 @-@ shaft @-@ horsepower ( 89 kW ) Siemens @-@ Schuckert electric motor for underwater travel , both attached to a single propeller shaft . Her top speeds were 7 @.@ 45 knots ( 13 @.@ 80 km / h ; 8 @.@ 57 mph ) , surfaced , and 6 @.@ 24 knots ( 11 @.@ 56 km / h ; 7 @.@ 18 mph ) , submerged . At more moderate speeds , she could sail up to 1 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 2 @,@ 800 km ; 1 @,@ 700 mi ) on the surface before refueling , and up to 45 nautical miles ( 83 km ; 52 mi ) submerged before recharging her batteries . Like all boats of the class , UB @-@ 17 was rated to a diving depth of 50 metres ( 160 ft ) , and could completely submerge in 33 seconds . 
 UB @-@ 17 was armed with two 45 @-@ centimeter ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedoes in two bow torpedo tubes . She was also outfitted for a single 8 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 31 in ) machine gun on deck . UB @-@ 17 's standard complement consisted of one officer and thirteen enlisted men . 
 After work on UB @-@ 17 was complete at the Weser yard , she was readied for rail shipment . The process of shipping a UB I boat involved breaking the submarine down into what was essentially a knock down kit . Each boat was broken into approximately fifteen pieces and loaded on to eight railway flatcars . In early 1915 , the sections of UB @-@ 17 were shipped to Antwerp for assembly in what was typically a two- to three @-@ week process . After UB @-@ 17 was assembled and launched on 21 April , she was loaded on a barge and taken through canals to Bruges where she underwent trials . 
 = = Early career = = 
 The submarine was commissioned into the German Imperial Navy as SM UB @-@ 17 on 4 May 1915 under the command of Kapitänleutnant ( Kapt . ) Ralph Wenninger , a 25 @-@ year @-@ old former skipper of UB @-@ 11 . On 10 May , UB @-@ 17 joined the Flanders Flotilla ( German : U @-@ boote des Marinekorps U @-@ Flotille Flandern ) , which had been organized on 29 March . When UB @-@ 17 joined the flotilla , Germany was in the midst of its first submarine offensive , begun in February . During this campaign , enemy vessels in the German @-@ defined war zone ( German : Kriegsgebiet ) , which encompassed all waters around the United Kingdom , were to be sunk . Vessels of neutral countries were not to be attacked unless they definitively could be identified as enemy vessels operating under a false flag . 
 On 18 July , Wenninger torpedoed the British tanker <unk> just off the Southwold lighthouse . Despite the loss of six men , <unk> 's crew was able to beach the ship , listed as 4 @,@ 054 gross register tons ( GRT ) . Early the next month , on 6 August , Wenninger and UB @-@ 17 sank four British fishing vessels while patrolling in the Yarmouth – Lowestoft area . All four of the sunken ships were smacks — sailing vessels traditionally rigged with red ochre sails — which were stopped , boarded by crewmen from UB @-@ 17 , and sunk with explosives . 
 On 18 August , the chief of the Admiralstab , Admiral Henning von Holtzendorff , issued orders suspending the first offensive in response to American demands after German submarines had sunk the Cunard Line steamer Lusitania in May 1915 and other high profile sinkings in August and September . Holtzendorff 's directive ordered all U @-@ boats out of the English Channel and the South @-@ Western Approaches and required that all submarine activity in the North Sea be conducted strictly along prize regulations . Six days later , UB @-@ 17 seized the Belgian sailing vessel Leon Mathilde as a prize off Ostende . 
 Enemy naval targets were not subject to the prize regulations , so on 23 September , Wenninger torpedoed and sank the Saint Pierre I , a trawler of the French Navy off the Dyck lightship . There was only one survivor from the 303 @-@ ton ship 's eighteen @-@ man crew . Three months later , Wenninger misidentified the 74 @-@ ton French fishing ship Jesus Maria as a destroyer . UB @-@ 17 launched a torpedo which struck the ship and killed all six men of Jesus Maria 's crew . 
 On 31 January 1916 , in the Lowestoft – Aldeburgh area , UB @-@ 17 sank an additional four fishing ships : three British , and one Belgian . The next day , UB @-@ 17 's war journal ( German : <unk> or <unk> ' ' ) records the torpedoing of the 957 @-@ ton British steamer Franz Fischer off the Kentish Knock . British records list the cargo ship as being sunk by bombs from a zeppelin . Franz Fischer was the last ship sunk with Wenninger in command . On 7 February , he was relieved by Oberleutnant zur See ( Oblt . ) Arthur Metz for a month , Kapt . Werner Fürbringer for a week , and Oblt . Friedrich Moecke for another month . Wenninger resumed command on 16 April . 
 In the meantime , Germany had begun its second submarine offensive against merchant shipping at the end of February in reaction to the British blockade of Germany . By early 1916 , the British blockade was having an effect on Germany and her imports . The Royal Navy had stopped and seized more cargo destined for Germany than the quantity of cargo sunk by German U @-@ boats in the first submarine offensive . UB @-@ 17 sank no ships during this offensive , which was called off near the end of April by Admiral Reinhardt Scheer , the commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the High Seas Fleet . 
 = = Grand Fleet ambush attempts = = 
 In mid @-@ May , Scheer completed plans to draw out part of the British Grand Fleet . The German High Seas Fleet would sortie for a raid on Sunderland , luring the British fleet across " ' nests ' of submarines and mine @-@ fields " . In support of the operation , UB @-@ 17 and five other Flanders boats set out at midnight 30 / 31 May to form a line 18 nautical miles ( 33 km ; 21 mi ) east of Lowestoft . This group was to intercept and attack the British light forces from Harwich , should they sortie north to join the battle . Unfortunately for the Germans , the British Admiralty had intelligence reports of the departure of the submarines which , coupled with an absence of attacks on shipping , aroused British suspicions . 
 A delayed departure of the German High Seas Fleet for its sortie ( which had been redirected to the Skagerrak ) and the failure of several of the U @-@ boats stationed to the north to receive the coded message warning of the British advance caused Scheer 's anticipated ambush to be a " complete and disappointing failure " . In UB @-@ 16 's group , only UB @-@ 10 sighted the Harwich forces , and they were too far away to mount an attack . The failure of the submarine ambush to sink any British capital ships allowed the full Grand Fleet to engage the numerically inferior High Seas Fleet in the Battle of Jutland , which took place 31 May – 1 June . 
 Wenninger left UB @-@ 17 for good on 27 June and was succeeded by Kapt . Günther <unk> , who commanded the boat for just under two weeks . He was followed by Oblt . Hans <unk> , who commanded the boat from July to December . Under <unk> 's leadership , UB @-@ 17 added another ship to her tally when she captured and sank the Dutch ship <unk> on 1 September . The 462 @-@ ton steamer was en route to London from Rotterdam with a cargo of piece goods when she was sunk 19 nautical miles ( 35 km ; 22 mi ) from the Mass Lightship . UB @-@ 17 's next success was the capture of the Norwegian steamer Birgit in the Hoofden area under the command of Kapt . Ulrich Meier , who had taken command on 4 December . Birgit was the last success for UB @-@ 17 for the next twelve months . 
 = = Conversion to minelayer = = 
 UB @-@ 17 and three sister boats , UB @-@ 10 , UB @-@ 12 , and UB @-@ 16 , were all converted to minelaying submarines by 1918 . The conversion involved removing the bow section containing the pair of torpedo tubes from each U @-@ boat and replacing it with a new bow containing four mine chutes capable of carrying two mines each . In the process , the boats were lengthened to 105 feet ( 32 m ) , and the displacement increased to 147 tonnes ( 145 long tons ) on the surface , and 161 tonnes ( 158 long tons ) below the surface . Exactly when this conversion was performed on UB @-@ 17 is not reported , but UB @-@ 17 was at the dockyard from November 1916 to January 1917 , and it is possible UB @-@ 17 was converted during this same timeframe . 
 While Meier remained in command of UB @-@ 17 , Kaiser Wilhelm II personally approved a resumption of unrestricted submarine warfare to begin on 1 February 1917 to help force the British to make peace . Although the new rules of engagement specified that no ship was to be left afloat , UB @-@ 17 did not contribute to the effort until December 1917 , when she captured and sank a single fishing smack off Aldeburgh under the direction of Oblt . Johannes Ries . In January 1918 , Ries was replaced by Oblt . Albert <unk> . 
 = = Sinking = = 
 On 11 March 1918 , <unk> led UB @-@ 17 out from Zeebrugge for a patrol in the Hoofden and the U @-@ boat was never seen again . One postwar account tells of two British seaplanes that bombed a U @-@ boat in the North Sea on 12 March , but , according to author Dwight Messimer , the account provides no details to support the claim . Messimer also discounts an account that attributes UB @-@ 17 's sinking to British destroyer Onslow on 25 February south of Portland by pointing out that UB @-@ 17 was in port in Zeebrugge on that date . A German postwar study also rejected a British claim that destroyers HMS <unk> , Retriever , and Sturgeon sank UB @-@ 17 at 21 : 25 on 11 March at position 57 ° 7 ′ N 2 ° 43 ′ E because UB @-@ 17 didn 't depart Zeebrugge until 30 minutes after the attack took place . Whatever the specific cause of UB @-@ 17 's demise , all eighteen crewmen on board the submarine were killed . 
