 Though quite agile on land ( capable of running as fast as a horse ) , capybaras are equally at home in the water . They are excellent swimmers , and can remain completely submerged for up to five minutes , an ability they use to evade predators . Capybaras can sleep in water , keeping only their noses out of the water . As temperatures increase during the day , they wallow in water and then graze during the late afternoon and early evening . They also spend a lot of time wallowing in mud . They rest around midnight and then continue to graze before dawn . 
 = = Conservation and human interaction = = 
 Capybaras are not considered a threatened species ; their population is stable throughout most of their South American range , though in some areas hunting has reduced their numbers . 
 Capybaras are hunted for their meat and pelts in some areas , and otherwise killed by humans who see their grazing as competition for livestock . In some areas , they are farmed , which has the effect of ensuring the wetland habitats are protected . Their survival is aided by their ability to breed rapidly . 
 Capybaras have adapted well to the urbanization in South America . They can be found in many areas in zoos and parks , and may live for 12 years in captivity . Capybaras are gentle and will usually allow humans to pet and hand @-@ feed them , but physical contact is normally discouraged as their ticks can be vectors to Rocky Mountain spotted fever . 
 The European Association of Zoos and Aquaria ( EAZA ) tasked <unk> Park in <unk> , Sussex to keep the studbook for capybaras , to monitor captive populations in Europe . The studbook includes information about all births , deaths and movements of capybaras , as well as how they are related . 
 Capybaras are farmed for meat and skins in South America . The meat is considered unsuitable to eat in some areas , while in other areas it is considered an important source of protein . In parts of South America , especially in Venezuela , capybara meat is popular during Lent and Holy Week as the Catholic Church previously gave a special dispensation that allows for its consumption while other meats are generally forbidden . 
 Although it is illegal in some states , capybaras are occasionally kept as pets in the United States . 
 The image of a capybara features on the $ 2 coin of the Uruguayan peso . 
 = M @-@ 67 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 67 is a north – south state trunkline highway in the Upper Peninsula of the U.S. state of Michigan . It connects with US Highway 41 ( US 41 ) and M @-@ 94 between Trenary and Chatham . The highway has largely been unchanged during its history , although the highways that connect to M @-@ 67 on each end have changed several times . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 67 starts at an intersection with US 41 near Trenary east of the West Branch of the Whitefish River . From that intersection the highway runs east crossing Scott Creek before running into downtown Trenary along relatively flat terrain . East of town , the highway turns north running parallel to the <unk> River Basin . The trunkline crosses Dexter Creek between Paulsen and Trout Lake roads . About halfway along the north – south segment of the highway , M @-@ 67 passes through the community of Limestone and crosses Johnson Creek . After running for 12 @.@ 044 miles ( 19 @.@ 383 km ) , M @-@ 67 ends at a four @-@ way intersection with M @-@ 94 and <unk> Road . 
 Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) traffic surveys in 2007 show that between 1 @,@ 200 and 1 @,@ 400 vehicles traveled the road daily in 2007 in a measure of the annual average daily traffic ( AADT ) . The same surveys showed that only 90 trucks are included in that average . In comparison , US 41 south of M @-@ 67 carried an average of 2 @,@ 300 vehicles and 270 trucks . No segment of the trunkline is listed on the National Highway System , a system of strategically important highways . 
 = = History = = 
 M @-@ 67 is an original state trunkline dating back to 1919 . Its routing has been largely unchanged since designation . The southern terminus has been moved once , but the northern terminus has remained in the same location since 1919 . US 41 was rerouted in the Trenary area to run west of town in late 1937 and 1938 . M @-@ 67 was extended westerly along a former portion of US 41 to connect to the new highway on the south end of M @-@ 67 . The highway was fully paved at the end of the 1950s . 
 While the highway itself is largely unchanged since 1919 , the connections with other trunklines have changed . The intersection south of the community of Chatham where M @-@ 67 has ended since designation has remained unchanged . The other highways running through the intersection have changed twice . The first highway to connect with M @-@ 67 was M @-@ 25 . M @-@ 25 was replaced by M @-@ 28 in 1926 . The second change came in 1941 when the routings of M @-@ 28 and M @-@ 94 were exchanged between Harvey and Munising . 
 The original southern terminus was at an intersection with M @-@ 15 in Trenary . In 1926 , M @-@ 15 was replaced by US 41 . As stated previously , the southern terminus of M @-@ 67 was shifted to a new intersection with US 41 west of Trenary when the latter was rebuilt in the late 1930s resulting in the only physical change to M @-@ 67 's routing . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is in Alger County . 
 = Miracle on Evergreen Terrace = 
 " Miracle on Evergreen Terrace " is the tenth episode of The Simpsons ' ninth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on December 21 , 1997 . Bart accidentally ruins Christmas for the Simpson family by burning down the tree and all their presents . It was written by Ron Hauge , directed by Bob Anderson , and guest starred Alex Trebek as himself . Hauge was inspired to write the episode after learning of an orphanage that had been ripped off . The episode was selected , among other Christmas @-@ themed episodes of the series , on a 2005 Christmas special DVD boxed set . The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide criticized the episode as a rehash of older themes , but it was also described as one of The Simpsons ’ more memorable episodes in a review of the 2005 DVD boxed set release . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Simpson family are making their last @-@ minute Christmas preparations . At bedtime on Christmas Eve , Marge tells everyone nobody can open presents until 7 AM . However , Bart wakes up early to secretly unwrap his gifts . One of the presents is a remote @-@ controlled fire truck . Bart has fun playing with the truck , until it sprays water on an overloaded electrical socket , and the Christmas tree bursts into flames . The flames immediately engulf the plastic Christmas tree and all of the presents . Bart manages to extinguish the fire before it spreads , and hides the burned evidence outside beneath the snow in the front yard . 
 When the family come downstairs , and discover that the Christmas tree and presents are gone , Marge asks Bart what happened . Bart makes up a story about how he caught a burglary in progress . The police investigate , and Kent Brockman decides to do a story on what he believes is the Simpsons ' yuletide misfortune . 
 As a result of Brockman 's report , everyone in Springfield shows their community spirit by giving them $ 15 @,@ 000 . With the donations , Homer buys a new car . Driving it home , a speeding Homer unintentionally drives the car onto a frozen lake , where the ice cracks , causing the car to sink and explode . 
 The next morning , Bart 's conscience gets to him , and finally he admits the truth when he disobeyed his family , which prompts Homer and Lisa to choke him . Soon , Brockman and the news crew arrive to do a follow @-@ up story . After the family go along with the lie , the story quickly unravels when a cameraman , with help from Santa 's Little Helper , finds the burned remains of the Christmas tree . The family is forced to explain , but it is too late for the viewers , who feel they have been scammed . The citizens shun and harass them until the family can pay back the $ 15 @,@ 000 . 
 Later , when arriving home , the family find that everyone in Springfield is stealing their belongings in order to cover the $ 15 @,@ 000 debt . In the end , the family playfully fight over a tattered <unk> , the only item they have left . 
 = = Production = = 
 Writer Ron Hauge said he got the idea for the episode one day when he was heading to work . He was listening to the radio and heard of an orphanage getting ripped off , and they were getting back more than they gave . The spectators in the stands during Bart 's dreams are various animators . When Krusty says " 15 @,@ 000 Missoulians " it is a reference to Ron Hauge having lived in Missoula , Montana . When the Simpsons ' car says " I 'll Keell you " , this is a reference to a <unk> bat in the writer 's office that said that . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The episode has several references to Christmas films . The title is a play on Miracle on 34th Street while the scene where everyone rallies around to support the Simpsons is reminiscent of the last scene of the classic holiday movie It 's a Wonderful Life . The film is further spoofed when Homer tells Lisa to stop playing the piano which parodies a similar scene involving George Bailey . A Charlie Brown Christmas is also parodied when the senior citizens are dancing at the Springfield Retirement Castle — their dancing is based on the way the Peanuts characters dance . Marge appears as a contestant on Jeopardy ! with host Alex Trebek guest starring . One of the stuffed animals Chief Wiggum is carrying is Binky from Matt Groening 's comic strip Life in Hell . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Miracle on Evergreen Terrace " finished 23rd in ratings for the week of December 15 – 21 , 1997 , with a Nielsen rating of 9 @.@ 8 , equivalent to approximately 9 @.@ 6 million viewing households . It was the second highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following King of the Hill . 
 The episode received mixed to positive reviews from critics . The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide said " A deliberately mawkish Christmas episode that is low on good jokes ( although the Simpsons watching their own fire on TV is a good start ) and a retread of any number of episodes where Bart does wrong , feels guilty and eventually has to fess up . The only real ray of sunshine is the closing moments when the neighbours get their revenge but the Simpsons find the family spirit after all . " In its review of a 2005 DVD boxed set of Christmas @-@ themed episodes of The Simpsons , The Journal described " Simpsons Roasting on an Open Fire " , " Miracle On Evergreen Terrace " , " Skinner 's Sense of Snow " , and " Dude , Where 's My Ranch ? " among memorable episodes of the series . In his review of the same DVD , Digitally Obsessed critic Joel Cunningham wrote that " Miracle on Evergreen Terrace " is " a good one [ ... ] A nice combo of humor , satire , and heartwarming holiday fuzzies " . Andy Dougan wrote in Evening Times that the episode is " one of the darkest , blackest Christmas cartoons ever animated " . 
 = Typhoon Joan ( 1997 ) = 
 Typhoon Joan of October 1997 was the longest @-@ lasting super typhoon at the time , maintaining 1 @-@ minute maximum sustained winds of at least 240 km / h ( 150 mph ) for 4 @.@ 5 days . Joan , concurrently with Typhoon Ivan to its west , also became the strongest typhoons at the same time in the northwest Pacific Ocean . The 25th named storm during the active 1997 Pacific typhoon season , Joan developed from the same trough as Typhoon Ivan on October 11 . It moved northwestward and later to the west , undergoing explosive deepening to its peak intensity on October 15 . One typhoon warning agency estimated that Joan was among the strongest storms on record in the basin , and that Ivan and Joan marked the first occurrence of simultaneous super typhoons . While near peak intensity , Joan passed between Anatahan and Saipan in the Northern Marianas Islands . Later , the typhoon weakened and turned to the north and east , becoming extratropical on October 24 . 
 On Saipan , Typhoon Joan destroyed 37 houses and caused an island @-@ wide power outage . Three people were injured due to boarding up their house during the storm . On nearby Anatahan , high winds caused $ 200 @,@ 000 ( 1997 USD ) worth of crop and property damage . Later , high waves affected southern Japan and northwestern Hawaii . On Chichi @-@ jima , Joan caused a boat to capsize , killing one of its occupants and leaving two others missing . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 In the first week of October 1997 , westerly winds near the equator in the western Pacific Ocean produced troughs – extended areas of low pressure – at a low latitude in the northern and southern hemisphere . The system in the South Pacific eventually developed into Tropical Cyclone Lusi , while the trough in the northern hemisphere eventually spawned two systems – Typhoon Ivan formed to the west , and the system that would eventually become Typhoon Joan developed along the eastern periphery . By October 10 , the eastern system consisted of an area of poorly @-@ organized convection , moving slowly to the northwest . On the next day , satellite imagery suggested a circulation had developed . The system increased in size and the convection organized further , prompting the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) to initiate advisories on Tropical Depression <unk> on October 13 . Also on that day , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) estimated that a tropical depression had developed near the Marshall Islands . 
 After its development , the depression turned more to the west , intensifying into Tropical Storm Joan on October 14 . Early in the storm 's duration , neither the JTWC nor most tropical cyclone forecast models anticipated significant strengthening beyond 1 @-@ minute winds of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) ; this was due to a fairly weak monsoon trough and normal atmospheric pressures in the region . Late on October 15 , the JTWC upgraded Joan to typhoon status , and the JMA followed suit the next day . Over a 36 ‑ hour period beginning at 1800 UTC on October 15 , the JTWC estimated that the pressure decreased by 100 mbar ( 3 @.@ 0 inHg ) , or roughly 2 @.@ 4 mbar ( 0 @.@ 071 inHg ) per hour ; based on the agency 's assessment , Joan underwent explosive deepening during that time , reaching an estimated minimum pressure of 872 mbar ( 25 @.@ 8 inHg ) . Near peak intensity , Joan had a well @-@ defined eye within a circular area of very deep convection , organized to such an extent that it warranted a Dvorak rating of at least T8.0 , the highest number on the scale used to estimate tropical cyclone intensities via satellite imagery . If the estimate were correct , it would make Joan among the top five Pacific typhoons on record . On October 17 , the JTWC estimated 1 @-@ minute peak winds of 295 km / h ( 185 mph ) , making Joan a super typhoon , the ninth of the season . By contrast , the JMA estimated peak 10 @-@ minute winds of 195 km / h ( 120 mph ) with a pressure of 905 mbar ( 26 @.@ 7 inHg ) . 
 While near peak intensity on October 17 , Joan was located about 2100 km ( 1300 mi ) east of Typhoon Ivan , which had also reached super typhoon status ; the JTWC later noted that it was " the first observation of two tropical cyclones of such extreme intensity existing simultaneously in the Northwest Pacific . " Despite the proximity to Ivan , the two typhoons did not undergo the Fujiwhara effect . The JTWC estimated that Joan weakened slightly after reaching peak winds , although the JMA maintained the typhoon at peak intensity for nearly three whole days . Joan gradually turned more to the northwest , passing between Anatahan and Saipan in the Northern Marianas Islands ( NMI ) on October 18 . On October 20 , the JMA estimated that the typhoon began weakening , and on the same day Joan turned sharply to the north . On the next day , Joan weakened below super typhoon intensity for the first time in 4 @.@ 5 days , a record at the time based on JTWC analysis . This record was later surpassed by Typhoon Fengshen in 2002 and Typhoon Ioke in 2006 . By October 21 , the typhoon had accelerated to the east and was quickly weakening . The next day , Joan passed about 230 km ( 145 mi ) north of the Japanese island of Iwo Jima . On October 24 , the typhoon turned to the northeast while losing tropical characteristics , and that day the JMA ceased tracking Joan . The JTWC declared the typhoon as extratropical on October 25 around the same time it crossed the international date line . Former Typhoon Joan merged with a cold front and re @-@ intensified while approaching the Aleutian Islands , and was noted by the Mariners Weather Log as an extratropical storm on October 26 . 
 = = Impact and records = = 
 While passing about 80 km ( 50 mi ) of Saipan , Joan produced wind gusts of 157 km / h ( 98 mph ) , strong enough to destroy 37 homes and damage the roofs of several other houses . Residents were slow to prepare for the typhoon , and as a result , three people were injured while boarding up their house during the arrival of the strong winds . The passage of Joan left the entire island of Saipan without power , although electrical crews quickly worked to restore the outages . During the storm 's passage , about 900 people stayed in shelters , after the government opened six schools for residents . In nearby Anatahan , Joan left heavy damage to boats , machinery , and public buildings . The typhoon damaged various crops , and monetary damage was estimated at $ 200 @,@ 000 ( 1997 USD ) . As a result of the damage , both islands within the NMI were declared disaster areas , which allowed residents and businesses to apply for federal loans through the United States Small Business Administration . 
 While passing between Saipan and Anatahan in the NMI , the eye of Joan was visible by NEXRAD from Guam , despite being 285 km ( 180 mi ) north of the island . An outer rainband moved across the island , producing 56 mm ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) of rainfall at Anderson Air Force Base and a wind gust of 66 km / h ( 41 mph ) at the National Weather Service office in Tiyan . 
 Typhoon Joan produced waves as high as 7 m ( 22 ft ) in the southern islands of Japan . In Chichi @-@ jima , the typhoon dropped 115 mm ( 4 @.@ 5 in ) and brought winds as strong as 91 km / h ( 60 mph ) . The combination of strong winds and high waves on the island broke a boat from a moorings , causing it to capsize when the boat struck rocks . Of the five people on board , two swam safely to shore , two were reported missing , and one person was confirmed killed . The extratropical remnants of Joan also produced high swells in Hawaii , with wave heights of 4 @.@ 6 m ( 15 ft ) along northern shores . 
 = From Elvis in Memphis = 
 From Elvis in Memphis is the fifteenth studio album by American rock and roll singer Elvis Presley , released on RCA Records . It was recorded at American Sound Studio in Memphis in January and February 1969 under the direction of producer Chips Moman and backed by its house band , informally known as " The Memphis Boys " . Following the success of Presley 's 1968 Christmas television special and its soundtrack , the album marked Presley 's return to non @-@ soundtrack albums after the completion of his film contract with Paramount Pictures . 
 Presley 's entourage convinced him to leave the RCA studios and record this album at American Sound , a new Memphis studio at the peak of a hit @-@ producing streak . The reason for going to Moman 's studio was for the soul sound of the house band , ' the Memphis Boys ' . The predominance of country songs among those recorded in these sessions gives them the feel of the " country soul " style . This impression is emphasized by the frequent use of the dobro in the arrangements . In any case , the Memphis Boys have a solidly southern soul sound . 
 From Elvis in Memphis was released in June 1969 to favorable reviews . The album peaked at number 13 on the Billboard 200 , number two on the country charts and number one in the United Kingdom , and its single " In the Ghetto " reached number three on the Billboard Hot 100 . The album was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America in 1970 . In later years , it garnered further favorable reviews , while it was ranked number 190 on Rolling Stone magazine 's 2003 list of the 500 greatest albums of all time . 
 = = Background = = 
 After Presley 's 1960 return from military service , his manager , Colonel Tom Parker , shifted the focus of the singer 's career from live music and albums to films and soundtracks . In March 1961 , he performed what would become his last live concert for the next eight years : a benefit for the construction of the USS Arizona Memorial at Boch Arena in Pearl Harbor , Hawaii . During the first half of the 1960s , three of Presley 's soundtrack albums reached number one on the pop charts and a number of his most popular songs were from his films , including 1961 's " Can 't Help Falling in Love " and 1962 's " Return to Sender " . 
 After 1964 , Parker decided that Presley should only record soundtrack albums . He viewed the films and soundtracks as complementary , with each helping to promote the other . As it turned out , the commercial success of Presley 's films and soundtracks steadily diminished ( Paradise , Hawaiian Style ; Easy Come , Easy Go ; Speedway ) , while he was increasingly disappointed with the quality of his work . From 1964 to 1968 , Presley had just one top @-@ ten hit : " Crying in the Chapel " ( 1965 ) , a gospel number recorded in 1960 . Only one LP of new material by Presley was issued : the gospel album How Great Thou Art ( 1967 ) , which won him his first Grammy Award in the Best Sacred Performance category . 
 In 1968 , Colonel Parker arranged a deal with NBC for a Christmas television special starring Presley in front of a live audience . Parker originally planned to have Presley sing Christmas carols only , but producer Steve Binder convinced the singer to perform songs from his original repertoire . The high ratings received by the special and the success of its attendant LP re @-@ established Presley 's popularity . During the making of the special , Presley said to Binder : " I 'll never sing another song that I don 't believe in , I 'm never going to make another movie that I don 't believe in . " As part of his decision to refocus on music rather than film , Presley decided to record a new album . 
 = = Recording = = 
 Presley left his usual musicians and studios ( Radio Recorders in Hollywood , California and RCA Studio B in Nashville , Tennessee ) , recording new material in Memphis . After the special he approached Scotty Moore and D. J. Fontana , who had played with Presley during his early hit @-@ making career , and who rejoined him on the television show . Presley asked Moore about using Music City Recorders in Nashville , but that suggestion never came to fruition . 
 During a January 1969 meeting at Graceland , Presley told his usual producer , Felton Jarvis , that he did not want to record his next album at RCA Studios . Two of Presley 's friends , DJ George Klein and Marty Lacker , suggested that he use American Sound Studio , an up @-@ and @-@ coming studio with which Lacker was involved . RCA contacted the studio 's producer Chips Moman . Willing to work with Presley , Moman postponed a session with Neil Diamond after being asked to produce the sessions with Felton Jarvis as second producer . It was agreed that Presley 's recordings would take ten days and cost $ 25 @,@ 000 . He would be backed by the studio 's house band , the 827 Thomas Street Band ( informally known as " The Memphis Boys " ) , which consisted of Reggie Young on guitar , Tommy <unk> and Mike Leech on bass , Gene Chrisman on drums , Bobby Wood on piano , and Bobby Emmons on organ . 
 Although RCA Records oversaw their company policy to record only in their own studios , the label sent their personnel out to American Sound . Recording began on January 13 , 1969 , when Presley arrived at the studio nursing a cold . In addition to his personal entourage , he was accompanied by Hill & Range publisher Freddy Bienstock , Colonel Parker 's assistant Tom Diskin , producer Felton Jarvis , executive Harry Jenkins and engineer Al Pachucki , representing RCA Records . With Pachucki on the board , American Sound engineer Ed <unk> joined the musicians on harmonica . The session , which produced recordings of " Long Black Limousine " , " <unk> ' That Loved On Look " and several non @-@ album songs , continued until 5 : 00 am . After the first day 's recording , Moman and his colleagues expressed discomfort with the size of Presley 's entourage , and the singer was accompanied by fewer people for the remaining sessions . 
 The next day Presley recorded " I 'm Moving On " and " Gentle on My Mind " , leaving the studio while working on the latter to rest his throat . The following night , he did not appear , as his cold worsened , and on January 15 and 16 the house band recorded backing tracks for subsequent sessions . Presley returned on January 20 , recording " In the Ghetto " in 23 takes and finishing the vocal track for " Gentle on My Mind " . On January 22 , he recorded Eddy Arnold 's " I 'll Hold You in My Heart ( Till I Can Hold You in My Arms ) " and the non @-@ album single " Suspicious Minds " . Presley then took a break from recording for a vacation trip to Aspen , Colorado to celebrate his daughter Lisa Marie 's first birthday . 
 During Presley 's absence , Moman was approached by Bienstock , who was concerned about possible future disputes concerning the songs ' publication . Moman and Presley decided not to record Hill & Range compositions , instead using songs by American Sound writers . Bienstock , particularly interested in the non @-@ album " Suspicious Minds " and " Mama Liked the Roses " , warned that Moman would have to surrender the publishing rights to release the songs . In response , Moman told Bienstock to take all the recordings and leave the studio . RCA vice @-@ president Harry Jenkins interceded , siding with Moman and ordering Bienstock to stay away from the studio and let Presley work with the staff . Meanwhile , Diskin informed Presley about the publishing issues . Presley supported Moman , assuring Diskin that he and the producer would handle the session work . Diskin contacted Parker , who told him to return to California . Moman retained the publishing rights , and the sessions were scheduled to resume several weeks later . 
 Presley returned on February 17 , recording " True Love Travels on a Gravel Road " and " Power of My Love " , and Eddy Arnold 's " After Loving You " and " Do You Know Who I Am ? " the following day . On February 19 , he devoted most of the session to the non @-@ album single " Kentucky Rain " , one of the few Hill & Range songs used on the American Sound recordings . Presley followed with a recording of " Only the Strong Survive " , a hit for Jerry Butler the previous year , which took twenty @-@ nine takes . On February 20 , he recorded Johnny Tillotson 's " It Keeps Right on a Hurtin ' " in three takes and " Any Day Now " in six . Presley 's final session was on February 22 , when he recorded vocal overdubs for " True Love Travels on a Gravel Road " and " Power of My Love " and vocals for several non @-@ album cuts . The following month , Mike Leech and Green <unk> began work on the string and horn overdubs to finish the album ; several brass overdubs were recorded by The Memphis Horns . 
 = = Music = = 
 Moman moved away from the usual Presley pop recordings aimed at an established audience . A developer of the Stax Records sound , he incorporated a Memphis sound integrating soul , country , gospel and rural and electric blues . Many arrangements lean heavily on the rhythm section , with lesser contributions from strings , brass and woodwinds . Arrangers Green <unk> and Mike Leech changed Presley 's image on the tracks with the addition of violas , cellos and French horns . The arrangers intended to blend the tracks for a distinctive sound ; the strings are used in counterpoint , rising when the track fades and vice versa . The violas play the same lines as the French horns , with cello used for darker tones . Syncopation was incorporated by bowing . 
 The twelve tracks on the album were selected from thirty @-@ one which were recorded in the American Sound sessions . The first song , " <unk> ' That Loved On Look " features an electric @-@ bass lead for the first time in a Presley recording . The second is " Only the Strong Survive " , with Presley backed by bass and drums . He plays piano on the third track , the country song " I Hold You in My Heart ( ' Till I Can Hold You in My Arms ) " . Presley 's voice is roughened by a cold on the fourth song , the country @-@ rhythm @-@ and @-@ blues " Long Black Limousine " featuring a trumpet solo . The fifth song , Johnny Tillotson 's traditional country @-@ western " It Keeps Right on A @-@ Hurtin ' " , was arranged to sound more like Memphis soul . Side one ends with a version of Hank Snow 's country @-@ western " I 'm Moving On " with a strong bass line and driving rhythm . 
 Side two begins with Florence Kaye and Bernie Baum 's " Power of My Love " . The song has a blues @-@ based sound , with Presley backed by a brass section , drums and electric guitar and organ . The lyrics include double entendres ( " Crush it , kick it / You can never win / I know baby you can 't lick it / I 'll make you give in ) " , with groans by backing female singers emphasizing sexuality . The second track , a cover of John Hartford 's " Gentle on My Mind " follows . The string @-@ laden arrangement was inspired by Glen Campbell 's 1967 Grammy @-@ winning version of the song . The next song , Eddy Arnold 's 1962 hit " After Loving You " , is arranged in a 12 / 8 tempo rhythm @-@ and @-@ blues style . This is followed by Dallas Frazier 's " True Love Travels on a Gravel Road " and Chuck Jackson 's 1962 hit , " Any Day Now " . 
 The twelfth and final song of the album , selected as a single , is Mac Davis ' " In The Ghetto " . The song was chosen by Billy Strange , who had previously picked material for other Presley sessions . The protest song denounces the consequences of poverty , with compassion for inner @-@ city youth . Because of " In the Ghetto " ' s lyrics , controversial for its time , Presley originally did not plan to record the song because he thought it might alienate fans . After Moman said he might give the song to Rosey Grier , Presley 's friends Joe Esposito and George Klein ( initially opposed to " In the Ghetto " ) , convinced the singer to record it . 
 The album cover is a still from the " Trouble " - " Guitar Man " production number of NBC 's Elvis special . Presley is featured with a red electric guitar , wearing a black leather suit with a red scarf around his neck , with silhouettes of guitar players at the back of the set . From Elvis in Memphis became one of American Sound Studio 's best @-@ known productions , with Dusty Springfield 's Dusty in Memphis ; both albums reflected similar times and musical trends on the Memphis scene . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The single " In the Ghetto " was released on April 15 , with 300 @,@ 000 copies shipped by RCA . In its second week after release it entered the charts , where it remained for thirteen weeks ( reaching number three on June 14 ) . The single sold a million copies in the United States . Meanwhile , it reached number two on the British Singles chart . However , its success triggered a confrontation between RCA and American Sound . During the sessions , Presley 's usual producer , Jarvis , grew increasingly worried about losing control of Presley and his recordings . During its first two weeks on the chart , " In the Ghetto " ' s production was credited to Jarvis . Lacker then called Billboard and had them correct the producer credit to Moman . During the fourth week , Parker asked Billboard to remove the production credit from the song 's entry entirely ( arguing that Presley 's records did not traditionally list a producer credit ) . 
 From Elvis in Memphis was released in June 1969 . The album topped the UK Albums Chart , disposing for one week Jethro Tull 's Stand Up . In the United States , it reached number thirteen on Billboard 's Top LP 's , and was ranked number seventeen on the magazine 's Top Country albums of 1969 . By January 28 , 1970 , the album was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America after selling over 500 @,@ 000 copies . 
 On August 23 , 1969 Presley was featured on the cover of Rolling Stone , with the album receiving the lead review . Peter Guralnick , the magazine 's reviewer , described it as " great ... <unk> and unequivocally the equal of anything ( Presley ) has ever done " and praised the " evident passion which ( Presley ) has invested in this music " , adding : " ( he ) is trying , and trying very hard , to please <unk> he needs to have our attention ... It is his involvement after all which comes as the surprise . " Billboard also published a positive review , saying that Presley had " never sounded better , and the choice of material is perfect " . High Fidelity wrote , " Elvis has been through a number of stages , and his latest is the best " . 
 From Elvis in Memphis has continued to receive praise in retrospective reviews . In 2009 Rolling Stone described it as " extraordinary " and attributed the sessions ' success to Presley 's " newfound maturity and soulfulness " and Moman 's " warm , distinctly Southern musical backing " . AllMusic gives it five stars out of five , and highlights it as an " AllMusic album pick " . Critic Bruce Eder said that together with 1956 's Elvis Presley , From Elvis in Memphis was Presley 's " greatest album " . Eder called it " one of the greatest white soul albums ( and one of the greatest soul albums ) ever cut " , with Presley " rejuvenated artistically ( while ) he 's supported by the best playing and backup singing of his entire recording history " . 
 PopMatters has described From Elvis in Memphis as " some of the best music Elvis Presley ever made " . Sputnik Music 's reviewer considered that the album " rivaled " Presley 's early recordings in " terms of historical importance and innovation " , and was " downright essential , for any Elvis fan and for any music fan " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Following the American Sound sessions , Presley returned to Hollywood . Between March – April 1969 , he recorded the soundtrack and starred in his thirty @-@ first and last motion picture as an actor , Change of Habit . 
 When the album was due for release , Parker arranged Presley 's return to live performing . He made a deal with Kirk Kerkorian , owner of the Las Vegas International Hotel for Presley to play the newly built , 2 @,@ 000 @-@ seat showroom for four weeks ( two shows per night , with Mondays off ) for $ 400 @,@ 000 . For his appearance , he assembled a band later known as the <unk> Band : James Burton ( guitar ) , John Wilkinson ( rhythm guitar ) , Jerry Scheff ( bass @-@ guitar ) , Ronnie Tutt ( drums ) , Larry Muhoberac ( piano ) and Charlie Hodge ( rhythm guitar , background vocals ) . The band was complimented by the backing vocals of The Sweet inspirations and The Imperials . His initial Las Vegas show attracted an audience of 101 @,@ 500 , setting a new Vegas performance record . By 1970 , Presley began to tour the United States for the first time in thirteen years . 
 = = = Reissues = = = 
 In 2000 RCA released a remastered compact disc of From Elvis in Memphis , including six bonus tracks ( released as A- or B @-@ sides ) recorded during the album sessions . The reissue received five stars out of five from Rolling Stone . " Don 't Cry Daddy " and " Kentucky Rain " were minor hits in 1970 , but " Suspicious Minds " became one of Presley 's signature songs and was the final chart @-@ topper of his career . In 2003 , the album was number 190 on Rolling Stone 's list of the 500 greatest albums of all time . In 2009 , Sony Music Entertainment issued a Legacy RCA Edition of the album for its 40th anniversary : two discs ( From Elvis In Memphis and the studio disk of From Memphis To Vegas / From Vegas To Memphis ) , four outtakes and ten tracks originally released as monaural singles ( including " Suspicious Minds " and " Kentucky Rain " ) . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = = Original release = = = 
 = = = 1998 CD reissue = = = 
 = = = 2009 CD reissue = = = 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = = = Album = = = 
 = = = Certifications / sales = = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = American popular music = 
 American popular music has had a profound effect on music across the world . The country has seen the rise of popular styles that have had a significant influence on global culture , including ragtime , blues , jazz , swing , rock , bluegrass , country , R & B , doo wop , gospel , soul , funk , heavy metal , punk , disco , house , techno , salsa , grunge and hip hop . In addition , the American music industry is quite diverse , supporting a number of regional styles such as zydeco , klezmer and slack @-@ key . 
 Distinctive styles of American popular music emerged early in the 19th century , and in the 20th century the American music industry developed a series of new forms of music , using elements of blues and other genres of American folk music . These popular styles included country , R & B , jazz and rock . The 1960s and 1970s saw a number of important changes in American popular music , including the development of a number of new styles , such as heavy metal , punk , soul , and hip hop . Though these styles were not popular in the sense of mainstream , they were commercially recorded and are thus examples of popular music as opposed to folk or classical music . 
 = = Early " popular " music = = 
 The earliest songs that could be considered American popular music , as opposed to the popular music of a particular region or ethnicity , were sentimental parlor songs by Stephen Foster and his peers , and songs meant for use in minstrel shows , theatrical productions that featured singing , dancing and comic performances . Minstrel shows generally used African instruments and dance , and featured performers with their faces blackened , a technique called blackface . [ 1 ] By the middle of the 19th century , touring companies had taken this music not only to every part of the United States , but also to the UK , Western Europe , and even to Africa and Asia . Minstrel shows were generally advertised as though the music of the shows was in an African American style , though this was often not true . 
 Black people had taken part in American popular culture prior to the Civil War era , at least dating back to the African Grove Theatre in New York in the 1820s and the publication of the first music by a black composer , Francis Johnson , in 1818 . However , these important milestones still occurred entirely within the conventions of European music . The first extremely popular minstrel song was " Jump Jim Crow " by Thomas " Daddy " Rice , which was first performed in 1832 and was a sensation in London when Rice performed it there in 1836 . Rice used a dance that he copied from a stable boy with a tune adopted from an Irish jig . The African elements included the use of the banjo , believed to derive from West African string instruments , and accented and additive rhythms . [ 2 ] Many of the songs of the minstrel shows are still remembered today , especially those by Daniel Emmett and Stephen Foster , the latter being , according to David Ewen , " America 's first major composer , and one of the world 's outstanding writers of songs " . [ 3 ] Foster 's songs were typical of the minstrel era in their unabashed sentimentality , and in their acceptance of slavery . Nevertheless , Foster did more than most songwriters of the period to humanize the blacks he composed about , such as in " Nelly Was a Lady " , a plaintive , melancholy song about a black man mourning the loss of his wife . [ 4 ] 
 The minstrel show marked the beginning of a long tradition of African American music being appropriated for popular audiences , and was the first distinctly American form of music to find international acclaim , in the mid @-@ 19th century . As Donald Clarke has noted , minstrel shows contained " essentially black music , while the most successful acts were white , so that songs and dances of black origin were imitated by white performers and then taken up by black performers , who thus to some extent ended up imitating themselves " . Clarke attributes the use of blackface to a desire for white Americans to glorify the brutal existence of both free and slave blacks by depicting them as happy and carefree individuals , best suited to plantation life and the performance of simple , joyous songs that easily appealed to white audiences . [ 5 ] 
 Blackface minstrel shows remained popular throughout the last part of the 19th century , only gradually dying out near the beginning of the 20th century . During that time , a form of lavish and elaborate theater called the extravaganza arose , beginning with Charles M. Barras ' The Black Crook . [ 6 ] Extravaganzas were criticized by the newspapers and churches of the day because the shows were considered sexually titillating , with women singing bawdy songs dressed in nearly transparent clothing . David Ewen described this as the beginning of the " long and active careers in sex exploitation " of American musical theater and popular song . [ 7 ] Later , extravaganzas took elements of burlesque performances , which were satiric and parodic productions that were very popular at the end of the 19th century . [ 8 ] 
 Like the extravaganza and the burlesque , the variety show was a comic and ribald production , popular from the middle to the end of the 19th century , at which time it had evolved into vaudeville . This form was innovated by producers like Tony Pastor who tried to encourage women and children to attend his shows ; they were hesitant because the theater had long been the domain of a rough and disorderly crowd . [ 9 ] By the early 20th century , vaudeville was a respected entertainment for women and children , and songwriters like Gus Edwards wrote songs that were popular across the country . [ 10 ] The most popular vaudeville shows were , like the Ziegfeld Follies , a series of songs and skits that had a profound effect on the subsequent development of Broadway musical theater and the songs of Tin Pan Alley . 
 = = = Tin Pan Alley = = = 
 Tin Pan Alley was an area called Union Square in New York City , which became the major center for music publishing by the mid @-@ 1890s . The songwriters of this era wrote formulaic songs , many of them sentimental ballads . [ 11 ] During this era , a sense of national consciousness was developing , as the United States became a formidable world power , especially after the Spanish – American War . The increased availability and efficiency of railroads and the postal service helped disseminate ideas , including popular songs . 
 Some of the most notable publishers of Tin Pan Alley included Willis Woodward , M. Witmark & Sons , Charles K. Harris , and Edward B. Marks and Joseph W. Stern . Stern and Marks were among the more well @-@ known Tin Pan Alley songwriters ; they began writing together as amateurs in 1894 . [ 12 ] In addition to the popular , mainstream ballads and other clean @-@ cut songs , some Tin Pan Alley publishers focused on rough and risqué . Coon songs were another important part of Tin Pan Alley , derived from the watered @-@ down songs of the minstrel show with the " verve and electricity " brought by the " assimilation of the ragtime rhythm " . [ 13 ] The first popular coon song was " New Coon in Town " , introduced in 1883 , and followed by a wave of coon <unk> like Ernest Hogan and May Irwin . [ 14 ] 
 = = = Broadway = = = 
 The early 20th century also saw the growth of Broadway , a group of theatres specializing in musicals . Broadway became one of the preeminent locations for musical theater in the world , and produced a body of songs that led Donald Clarke to call the era , the golden age of songwriting . The need to adapt enjoyable songs to the constraints of a theater and a plot enabled and encouraged a growth in songwriting and the rise of composers like George Gershwin , Vincent Youmans , Irving Berlin and Jerome Kern . [ 15 ] These songwriters wrote songs that have remained popular and are today known as the Great American Songbook . 
 Foreign operas were popular among the upper @-@ class throughout the 19th century , while other styles of musical theater included operettas , ballad operas and the opera bouffe . The English operettas of Gilbert and Sullivan were particularly popular , while American compositions had trouble finding an audience . George M. Cohan was the first notable American composer of musical theater , and the first to move away from the operetta , and is also notable for using the language of the vernacular in his work . By the beginning of the 20th century , however , black playwrights , composers and musicians were having a profound effect on musical theater , beginning with the works of Will Marion Cook , James Reese Europe and James P. Johnson ; the first major hit black musical was Shuffle Along in 1921 . [ 16 ] 
 Imported operettas and domestic productions by both whites like Cohan and blacks like Cook , Europe and Johnson all had a formative influence on Broadway . Composers like Gershwin , Porter and Kern made comedic musical theater into a national pastime , with a feel that was distinctly American and not dependent on European models . Most of these individuals were Jewish , with Cole Porter the only major exception ; they were the descendants of 19th century immigrants fleeing persecution in the Russian Empire , settled most influentially in various neighborhoods in New York City . [ 17 ] Many of the early musicals were influenced by black music , showing elements of early jazz , such as In Dahomey ; the Jewish composers of these works may have seen connections between the traditional African American blue notes and their own folk Jewish music . 
 Broadway songs were recorded around the turn of the century , but did not become widely popular outside their theatrical context until much later . Jerome Kern 's " They Didn 't Believe Me " was an early song that became popular nationwide . Kern 's later innovations included a more believable plot than the rather shapeless stories built around songs of earlier works , beginning with Show Boat in 1927 . George Gershwin was perhaps the most influential composer on Broadway , beginning with " Swanee " in 1919 and later works for jazz and orchestras . His most enduring composition may be the opera Porgy and Bess , a story about two blacks , which Gershwin intended as a sort of " folk opera " , a creation of a new style of American musical theater based on American idioms . [ 18 ] 
 = = = Ragtime = = = 
 Ragtime was a style of dance music based around the piano , using syncopated rhythms and chromaticisms ; [ 19 ] the genre 's most well @-@ known performer and composer was undoubtedly Scott Joplin . Donald Clarke considers ragtime the culmination of coon songs , used first in minstrel shows and then vaudeville , and the result of the rhythms of minstrelsy percolating into the mainstream ; he also suggests that ragtime 's distinctive sound may have come from an attempt to imitate the African American banjo using the keyboard . [ 20 ] 
 Due to the essentially African American nature of ragtime , it is most commonly considered the first style of American popular music to be truly black music ; ragtime brought syncopation and a more authentic black sound to popular music . Popular ragtime songs were notated and sold as sheet music , but the general style was played more informally across the nation ; these amateur performers played a more free @-@ flowing form of ragtime that eventually became a major formative influence on jazz . [ 21 ] 
 = = Early recorded popular music = = 
 Thomas Edison 's invention of the phonograph cylinder kicked off the birth of recorded music . The first cylinder to be released was " Semper Fidelis " by the U.S. Marine Band . At first , cylinders were released sparingly , but as their sales grew more profitable , distribution increased . These early recorded songs were a mix of vaudeville , barbershop quartets , marches , opera , novelty songs , and other popular tunes . Many popular standards , such as " The Good Old Summertime " , " Shine On Harvest Moon " , and " Over There " come from this time . There were also a few early hits in the field of jazz , beginning with the Original Dixieland Jazz Band 's 1917 recordings , and followed by King Oliver 's Creole Jazz Band , who played in a more authentic New Orleans jazz style . [ 22 ] 
 Blues had been around a long time before it became a part of the first explosion of recorded popular music in American history . This came in the 1920s , when classic female blues singers like Ma Rainey , Bessie Smith and Mamie Smith grew very popular ; the first hit of this field was Mamie Smith 's " Crazy Blues " . These urban blues singers changed the idea of popular music from being simple songs that could be easily performed by anyone to works primarily associated with an individual singer . Performers like Sophie Tucker , known for " Some of These Days " , became closely associated with their hits , making their individualized interpretations just as important as the song itself . [ 23 ] 
 At the same time , record companies like Paramount Records and <unk> Records launched the field of race music , which was mostly blues targeted at African American audiences . The most famous of these acts went on to inspire much of the later popular development of the blues and blues @-@ derived genres , including Charley Patton , Lonnie Johnson and Robert Johnson . 
 = = = Popular jazz ( 1920 – 1935 ) and swing ( 1935 – 1947 ) = = = 
 Jazz is a kind of music characterized by blue notes , syncopation , swing , call and response , polyrhythms , and improvisation . Though originally a kind of dance music , jazz has now been " long considered a kind of popular or vernacular music ( and has also ) become a sophisticated art form that has interacted in significant ways with the music of the concert hall " . [ 24 ] Jazz 's development occurred at around the same time as modern ragtime , blues , gospel and country music , all of which can be seen as part of a continuum with no clear demarcation between them ; jazz specifically was most closely related to ragtime , with which it could be distinguished by the use of more intricate rhythmic improvisation , often placing notes far from the implied beat . The earliest jazz bands adopted much of the vocabulary of the blues , including bent and blue notes and instrumental " growls " and smears . 
 Paul Whiteman was the most popular bandleader of the 1920s , and claimed for himself the title " The King of Jazz . " Despite his hiring many of the other best white jazz musicians of the era , later generations of jazz lovers have often judged Whiteman 's music to have little to do with real jazz . Nonetheless , his notion of combining jazz with elaborate orchestrations has been returned to repeatedly by composers and arrangers of later decades . 
 Whiteman commissioned Gershwin 's " Rhapsody in Blue " , which was debuted by Whiteman 's Orchestra . Ted Lewis 's band was second only to the Paul Whiteman in popularity during the 1920s , and arguably played more real jazz with less pretension than Whiteman , especially in his recordings of the late 1920s . Some of the other " jazz " bands of the decade included those of : Harry <unk> , Leo Reisman , Abe Lyman , Nat Shilkret , George Olsen , Ben Bernie , Bob Haring , Ben Selvin , Earl <unk> , Gus Arnheim , Rudy Vallee , Jean Goldkette , Isham Jones , Roger Wolfe Kahn , Sam <unk> , Vincent Lopez , Ben Pollack and Fred Waring . 
 In the 1920s , the music performed by these artists was extremely popular with the public and was typically labeled as jazz . Today , however , this music is disparaged and labeled as " sweet music " by jazz purists . The music that people consider today as " jazz " tended to be played by minorities . In the 1920s and early 1930s , however , the majority of people listened to what we would call today " sweet music " and hardcore jazz was categorized as " hot music " or " race music . " 
 The largest and most influential recording label of the time , The Victor Talking Machine ( RCA Victor after 1928 ) was a restraining influence on the development of “ sweet jazz ” until the departure of Eddie King in October 1926 . King was well known as an authoritarian who would not permit drinking on the job or severe departure from the written music , unless within solos acceptable by popular music standards of the time . This irritated many Victor jazz artists , including famed trumpeter Bix Beiderbecke . Sudhalter , in Lost Chords , cites an example of a 1927 recording by the Goldkette Orchestra in which musicians were allowed considerable freedom , and remarks “ What , one wonders , would this performance have been if Eddie King had been in charge , and not the more liberal Nat Shilkret . Since the Victor ledgers show no less than five recording sessions in January and February 1926 , when King actually conducted Goldkette ’ s Orchestra , comparison between the approach of Goldkette and King is readily available . 
 In 1935 , swing music became popular with the public and quickly replaced jazz as the most popular type of music ( although there was some resistance to it at first ) . Swing music is characterized by a strong rhythm section , usually consisting of a double bass and drums , playing in a medium to fast tempo , and rhythmic devices like the swung note . Swing is primarily a kind of 1930s jazz fused with elements of the blues and the pop sensibility of Tin Pan Alley . [ 25 ] Swing used bigger bands than other kinds of jazz had and was headed by bandleaders that tightly arranged the material , discouraging the improvisation that had been an integral part of jazz . David Clarke called swing the first " jazz @-@ oriented style ( to be ) at the center of popular music ... as opposed to merely giving it backbone " . [ 26 ] By the end of the 1930s , vocalists became more and more prominent , eventually taking center stage following the American Federation of Musicians strike , which made recording with a large band prohibitively expensive . [ 27 ] Swing came to be accompanied by a popular dance called the swing dance , which was very popular across the United States , among both white and black audiences , especially youth . 
 = = = Blues diversification and popularization = = = 
 In addition to the popular jazz and swing music listened to by mainstream America , there were a number of other genres that were popular among certain groups of people — e.g. , minorities or rural audiences . Beginning in the 1920s and accelerating greatly in the 1940s , the blues began rapidly diversifying into a broad spectrum of new styles . These included an uptempo , energetic style called rhythm and blues ( R & B ) , a merger of blues and Anglo @-@ Celtic song called country music and the fusion of hymns and spirituals with blues structures called gospel music . Later than these other styles , in the 1940s , a blues , R & B and country fusion eventually called rock and roll developed , eventually coming to dominate American popular by the beginning of the 1960s . 
 Country music is primarily a fusion of African American blues and spirituals with Appalachian folk music , adapted for pop audiences and popularized beginning in the 1920s . Of particular importance was Irish and Scottish tunes , dance music , balladry and vocal styles , [ 28 ] as well as Native American , Spanish , German , French and Mexican music . The instrumentation of early country revolved around the European @-@ derived fiddle and the African @-@ derived banjo , with the guitar added later . Country music instrumentation used African elements like a call @-@ and @-@ response format , improvised music and syncopated rhythms . Later still , string instruments like the ukulele and steel guitar became commonplace due to the popularity of Hawaiian music in the early 20th century and the influence of musicians such as Sol <unk> and Lani McIntyre . [ 29 ] The roots of modern country music are generally traced to 1927 , when music talent scout Ralph Peer recorded Jimmie Rodgers and The Carter Family . Their recordings are considered the foundation for modern country music . There had been popular music prior to 1927 that could be considered country , but , as Ace Collins points out , these recordings had " only marginal and very inconsistent " effects on the national music markets , and were only superficially similar to what was then known as hillbilly music . [ 30 ] In addition to Rodgers and the Carters , a musician named Bob Wills was an influential early performer known for a style called Western swing , which was very popular in the 1920s and 30s , and was responsible for bringing a prominent jazz influence to country music . 
 Rhythm and blues ( R & B ) is a style that arose in the 1930s and 1940s , a rhythmic and uptempo form of blues with more complex instrumentation . Author Amiri Baraka described early R & B as " huge rhythm units smashing away behind screaming blues singers ( who ) had to shout to be heard above the clanging and strumming of the various electrified instruments and the churning rhythm sections . [ 31 ] . R & B was recorded during this period , but not extensively , and it was not widely promoted by record companies that felt it was not suited for most audiences , especially middle @-@ class whites , because of the suggestive lyrics and driving rhythms . [ 32 ] <unk> like Louis Jordan innovated the sound of early R & B. Jordan 's band featured a small horn section and prominent rhythm instrumentation and used songs with bluesy lyrical themes . By the end of the 1940s , he had produced nineteen major hits , and helped pave the way for contemporaries like Wynonie Harris , John Lee Hooker and Roy Milton . 
 Christian spirituals and rural blues music were the origin of what is now known as gospel music . Beginning in about the 1920s , African American churches featured early gospel in the form of worshipers proclaiming their religious devotion ( testifying ) in an improvised , often musical manner . Modern gospel began with the work of composers , most importantly Thomas A. Dorsey , who " ( composed ) songs based on familiar spirituals and hymns , fused to blues and jazz rhythms " . [ 33 ] From these early 20th @-@ century churches , gospel music spread across the country . It remained associated almost entirely with African American churches , and usually featured a choir along with one or more virtuoso soloists . 
 Rock and roll is a kind of popular music , developed primarily out of country , blues and R & B. Easily the single most popular style of music worldwide , rock 's exact origins and early development have been hotly debated . Music historian Robert Palmer has noted that the style 's influences are quite diverse , and include the Afro @-@ Caribbean " Bo Diddley beat " , elements of " big band swing " and Latin music like the Cuban son and " Mexican rhythms " . [ 34 ] Another author , George <unk> claims that rock arose in America 's urban areas , where there formed a " polyglot , working @-@ class culture ( where the ) social meanings previously conveyed in isolation by blues , country , polka , zydeco and Latin musics found new expression as they blended in an urban environment " . [ 35 ] 
 = = 1950s and 1960s = = 
 The middle of the 20th century saw a number of very important changes in American popular music . The field of pop music developed tremendously during this period , as the increasingly low price of recorded music stimulated demand and greater profits for the record industry . As a result , music marketing became more and more prominent , resulting in a number of mainstream pop stars whose popularity was previously unheard of . Many of the first such stars were Italian @-@ American crooners like Dean Martin , Rudy Vallee , Tony Bennett , Perry Como , Frankie Laine and , most famously , the " first pop vocalist to engender hysteria among his fans " Frank Sinatra . [ 36 ] The era of the modern teen pop star , however , began in the 1960s . Bubblegum pop groups like The Monkees were chosen entirely for their appearance and ability to sell records , with no regard to musical ability . The same period , however , also saw the rise of new forms of pop music that achieved a more permanent presence in the field of American popular music , including rock , soul and pop @-@ folk . By the end of the 1960s , two developments had completely changed popular music : the birth of a counterculture , which explicitly opposed mainstream music , often in tandem with political and social activism , and the shift from professional composers to performers who were both singers and songwriters . 
 Rock and roll first entered mainstream popular music through a style called rockabilly , which fused the nascent rock sound with elements of country music . Black @-@ performed rock and roll previously had limited mainstream success , and some observers at the time believed that a white performer who could credibly sing in an R & B and country style would be a success . Sam Phillips , of Memphis , Tennessee 's Sun Records , found such a performer in Elvis Presley , who became one of the best @-@ selling musicians in history , and brought rock and roll to audiences across the world . [ 37 ] Presley 's success was preceded by Bill Haley , a white performer whose " Rock Around the Clock " is sometimes pointed to as the start of the rock era . However , Haley 's music was " more arranged " and " more calculated " than the " looser rhythms " of rockabilly , which also , unlike Haley , did not use saxophones or chorus singing . [ 38 ] 
 R & B remained extremely popular during the 1950s among black audiences , but the style was not considered appropriate for whites , or respectable middle @-@ class blacks , because of its suggestive nature . Many popular R & B songs instead were performed by white musicians like Pat Boone , in a more palatable , mainstream style , and turned into pop hits . [ 39 ] By the end of the 1950s , however , there was a wave of popular black blues @-@ rock and country @-@ influenced R & B performers gaining unprecedented fame among white listeners ; these included Bo Diddley and Chuck Berry . [ 40 ] Over time , producers in the R & B field gradually turned to more rock @-@ based acts like Little Richard and Fats Domino . 
 Doo wop is a kind of vocal harmony music performed by groups who became popular in the 1950s . Though sometimes considered a kind of rock , doo wop is more precisely a fusion of vocal R & B , gospel and jazz with the blues and pop structures , [ 41 ] though until the 1960s , the lines separating rock from doo wop , R & B and other related styles were very blurry . Doo wop became the first style of R & B @-@ derived music " to take shape , to define itself as something people recognized as new , different , strange , theirs " ( emphasis in original ) . [ 42 ] As doo wop grew more popular , more innovations were added , including the use of a bass lead vocalist , a practice that began with Jimmy Ricks of The Ravens . [ 43 ] Doo wop performers were originally almost all black , but a few white and integrated groups soon became popular . These included a number of Italian @-@ American groups such as Dion & the Belmonts , while others added female vocalists and even formed all @-@ female groups in the nearly universally male field ; these included The Queens and The Chantels . [ 44 ] 
 The 1950s saw a number of brief fads that went on to have a great impact on future styles of music . Performers like Pete Seeger and The Weavers popularized a form of old @-@ time revival of Anglo @-@ American music . [ 45 ] This field eventually became associated with the political left @-@ wing and Communism , leading to a decline in acceptability as artists were increasingly blacklisted and criticized . Nevertheless , this form of pop @-@ folk exerted a profound influence in the form of 1950s folk @-@ rock and related styles . Alongside the rather sporadic success of popularized Anglo folk music came a series of Latin dance fads , including mambo , rumba , <unk> and boogaloo . Though their success was again sporadic and brief , Latin music continued to exert a continuous influence on rock , soul and other styles , as well as eventually evolving into salsa music in the 1970s . 
 = = = Country : Nashville Sound = = = 
 Beginning in the late 1920s , a distinctive style first called " old @-@ timey " or " hillbilly " music began to be broadcast and recorded in the rural South and Midwest ; early artists included the Carter Family , Charlie Poole and his North Carolina Ramblers , and Jimmie Rodgers . The performance and dissemination of this music was regional at first , but the population shifts caused by World War II spread it more widely . After the war , there was increased interest in specialty styles , including what had been known as race and hillbilly music ; these styles were renamed to rhythm and blues and country and western , respectively . [ 46 ] Major labels had some success promoting two kinds of country acts : Southern novelty performers like Tex Williams and singers like Frankie Laine , who mixed pop and country in a conventionally sentimental style . This period also saw the rise of Hank Williams , a white country singer who had learned the blues from a black street musician named Tee @-@ Tot , in northwest Alabama . [ 47 ] Before his death in 1953 , Hank Williams recorded eleven singles that sold at least a million copies each and pioneered the Nashville sound . 
 The Nashville sound was a popular kind of country music that arose in the 1950s , a fusion of popular big band jazz and swing with the lyricism of honky @-@ tonk country . [ 48 ] The popular success of Hank Williams ' recordings had convinced record labels that country music could find mainstream audiences . Record companies then tried to strip the rough , honky @-@ tonk elements from country music , removing the unapologetically rural sound that had made Williams famous . Nashville 's industry was reacting to the rise of rockabilly performer Elvis Presley by marketing performers that crossed the divide between country and pop . Chet Atkins , head of RCA 's country music division , did the most to innovate the Nashville sound by abandoning the rougher elements of country , while Owen Bradley used sophisticated production techniques and smooth instrumentation that eventually became standard in the Nashville Sound , which also grew to incorporate strings and vocal choirs . By the early part of the 1960s , the Nashville sound was perceived as watered @-@ down by many more traditionalist performers and fans , resulting in a number of local scenes like the Lubbock sound and , most influentially , the Bakersfield sound . 
 Throughout the 1950s , the most popular kind of country music was the Nashville Sound , which was a slick and pop @-@ oriented style . Many musicians preferred a rougher sound , leading to the development of the Lubbock Sound and Bakersfield Sound . The Bakersfield Sound was innovated in Bakersfield , California in the mid to late 1950s , by performers like Wynn Stewart , who used elements of Western swing and rock , such as the breakbeat , along with a honky tonk vocal style . [ 49 ] He was followed by a wave of performers like Buck Owens and Merle Haggard , who popularized the style . 
 = = = Soul = = = 
 Soul music is a combination of R & B and gospel that began in the late 1950s in the United States . Soul music is characterized by its use of gospel techniques with a greater emphasis on vocalists , and the use of secular themes . The 1950s recordings of Sam Cooke , Ray Charles , and James Brown are commonly considered the beginnings of soul music . Solomon Burke 's early recordings for Atlantic Records codified the style , and as Peter Guralnick writes , " it was only with the coming together of Burke and Atlantic Records that you could see anything resembling a movement " . [ 50 ] 
 The Motown Record Corporation in Detroit , Michigan became successful with a string of heavily pop @-@ influenced soul records , which were palatable enough to white listeners so as to allow R & B and soul to crossover to mainstream audiences . An important center of soul music recording was Florence , Alabama , where the FAME Studios operated . Jimmy Hughes , Percy Sledge and Arthur Alexander recorded at Fame ; later in the 1960s , Aretha Franklin would also record in the area . Fame Studios , often referred to as Muscle Shoals , after a town neighboring Florence , enjoyed a close relationship with Stax , and many of the musicians and producers who worked in Memphis also contributed to recordings done in Alabama . 
 In Memphis , Stax Records produced recordings by soul pioneers Otis Redding , Wilson Pickett , and Don Covay . Other Stax artists such as Eddie Floyd and Johnnie Taylor also made significant contributions to soul music . By 1968 , the soul music movement had begun to splinter , as James Brown and Sly & the Family Stone began to expand upon and abstract both soul and rhythm and blues into other forms . Guralnick wrote that more " than anything else ... what seems to me to have brought the era of soul to a grinding , unsettling halt was the death of Martin Luther King in April 1968 " . [ 51 ] 
 = = = 1960s rock = = = 
 Among the first of the major new rock genres of the 1960s was surf , pioneered by Californian Dick Dale . Surf was largely instrumental and guitar @-@ based rock with a distorted and twanging sound , and was associated with the Southern California surfing @-@ based youth culture . Dale had worked with Leo Fender , developing the " Showman amplifier and ... the reverberation unit that would give surf music its distinctively fuzzy sound " . [ 52 ] 
 Inspired by the lyrical focus of surf , if not the musical basis , The Beach Boys began their career in 1961 with a string of hits like " Surfin ' U.S.A. " . Their sound was not instrumental , nor guitar @-@ based , but was full of " rich , dense and unquestionably special " " floating vocals ( with ) Four Freshman @-@ ish harmonies riding over a <unk> , propulsive burden " . [ 53 ] The Beach Boys ' songwriter Brian Wilson grew gradually more eccentric , experimenting with new studio techniques as he became associated with the burgeoning counterculture . 
 The counterculture was a youth movement that included political activism , especially in opposition to the Vietnam War , and the promotion of various hippie ideals . The hippies were associated primarily with two kinds of music : the folk @-@ rock and country rock of people like Bob Dylan and Gram Parsons , and the psychedelic rock of bands like Jefferson Airplane and The Doors . This movement was very closely connected to the British Invasion , a wave of bands from the United Kingdom who became popular throughout much of the 1960s . The British Invasion initially included bands like the Beatles , the Rolling Stones , and The Zombies who were later joined by bands like the Moody Blues and The Who . The sound of these bands was hard @-@ edged rock , with the Beatles originally known for songs that resembled classic black rock songs by Little Richard , Chuck Berry , Smokey Robinson , The Shirelles and the Isley Brothers . [ 54 ] Later , as the counterculture developed , The Beatles began using more advanced techniques and unusual instruments , such as the sitar , as well as more original lyrics . 
 Folk @-@ rock drew on the sporadic mainstream success of groups like the Kingston Trio and the Almanac Singers , while Woody Guthrie and Pete Seeger helped to politically <unk> rural white folk music . [ 55 ] The popular musician Bob Dylan rose to prominence in the middle of the 1960s , fusing folk with rock and making the nascent scene closely connected to the Civil Rights Movement . He was followed by a number of country @-@ rock bands like The Byrds and the Flying Burrito Brothers and folk @-@ oriented singer @-@ songwriters like Joan Baez and the Canadian Joni Mitchell . However , by the end of the decade , there was little political or social awareness evident in the lyrics of pop @-@ singer @-@ songwriters like James Taylor and Carole King , whose self @-@ penned songs were deeply personal and emotional . 
 Psychedelic rock was a hard , driving kind of guitar @-@ based rock , closely associated with the city of San Francisco , California . Though Jefferson Airplane was the only psychedelic San Francisco band to have a major national hit , with 1967 's " Somebody to Love " and " White Rabbit " , the Grateful Dead , a folk , country and bluegrass @-@ flavored jam band , " embodied all the elements of the San Francisco scene and came ... to represent the counterculture to the rest of the country " ; the Grateful Dead also became known for introducing the counterculture , and the rest of the country , to the ideas of people like Timothy Leary , especially the use of hallucinogenic drugs like LSD for spiritual and philosophical purposes . [ 56 ] 
 = = 1970s and 1980s = = 
 Following the turbulent political , social and musical changes of the 1960s and early 1970s , rock music diversified . What was formerly known as rock and roll , a reasonably discrete style of music , had evolved into a catchall category called simply rock music , an umbrella term which would eventually include diverse styles like heavy metal music , punk rock and , sometimes even hip hop music . During the 1970s , however , most of these styles were not part of mainstream music , and were evolving in the underground music scene . 
 The early 1970s saw a wave of singer @-@ songwriters who drew on the introspective , deeply emotional and personal lyrics of 1960s folk @-@ rock . They included James Taylor , Carole King and others , all known just as much for their lyric ability as for their performances . The same period saw the rise of bluesy Southern rock and country rock groups like the Allman Brothers Band and Lynyrd Skynyrd . [ 57 ] In the 1970s , soft rock developed , a kind of simple , unobtrusive and mellow form of pop @-@ rock , exemplified by a number of bands like America and Bread , most of whom are little remembered today ; many were one @-@ hit wonders . [ 58 ] In addition , harder arena rock bands like Chicago and Styx also saw some major success . 
 The early 1970s saw the rise of a new style of country music that was as rough and hard @-@ edged , and which quickly became the most popular form of country . This was outlaw country , a style that included such mainstream stars as Willie Nelson and Waylon Jennings . [ 59 ] Outlaw country was very rock @-@ oriented , and had lyrics that focused on the criminal , especially drug and alcohol @-@ related , antics of its performers , who grew their hair long , wore denim and leather and looked like hippies in contrast to the clean @-@ cut country singers that were pushing the Nashville sound . [ 60 ] 
 By the mid @-@ 1970s , disco , a form of dance music , was becoming popular , evolving from underground dance clubs to mainstream America . Disco reached its zenith following the release of Saturday Night Fever and the phenomenon surrounding the movie and the soundtrack by The Bee Gees . Disco 's time was short , however , and by 1980 was soon replaced with a number of genres that evolved out of the punk rock scene , like new wave . Bruce Springsteen became a major star , first in the mid to late 1970s and then throughout the 1980s , with dense , inscrutable lyrics and anthemic songs that resonated with the middle and lower classes . [ 61 ] 
 = = = 1970s funk and soul = = = 
 In the early 1970s , soul music was influenced by psychedelic rock and other styles . The social and political ferment of the times inspired artists like Marvin Gaye and Curtis Mayfield to release album @-@ length statements with hard @-@ hitting social commentary . Artists like James Brown led soul towards more dance @-@ oriented music , which eventually evolved into funk . Funk was typified by 1970s bands like Parliament @-@ Funkadelic , The Meters , and James Brown himself , while more versatile groups like War , The Commodores and Earth , Wind and Fire also became popular . During the 1970s , some highly slick and commercial blue @-@ eyed soul acts like Philadelphia 's Hall & Oates achieved mainstream success , as well as a new generation of street @-@ corner harmony or city @-@ soul groups like The <unk> and Howard University 's <unk> . 
 By the end of the 1970s , Philly soul , funk , rock and most other genres were dominated by disco @-@ inflected tracks . During this period , funk bands like The O 'Jays and The Spinners continued to turn out hits . After the death of disco in 1980 , soul music survived for a short time before going through yet another metamorphosis . With the introduction of influences from electro music and funk , soul music became less raw and more slickly produced , resulting in a genre of music that was again called R & B , usually distinguished from the earlier rhythm and blues by identifying it as contemporary R & B. 
 = = = 1980s pop = = = 
 By the 1960s , the term rhythm and blues had no longer been in wide use ; instead , terms like soul music were used to describe popular music by black artists . In the 1980s , however , rhythm and blues came back into use , most often in the form of R & B , a usage that has continued to the present . Contemporary R & B arose when sultry funk singers like Prince became very popular , alongside dance @-@ oriented pop stars like Michael Jackson and Madonna . [ 62 ] 
 By the end of the 1980s , pop @-@ rock largely consisted of the radio @-@ friendly glam metal bands , who used images derived from the British glam movement with macho lyrics and attitudes , accompanied by hard rock music and heavy metal virtuosic soloing . Bands from this era included many British groups like Def Leppard , as well as heavy metal @-@ influenced American bands Mötley Crüe , Guns N ' Roses , Bon Jovi and Van Halen . [ 63 ] 
 The mid @-@ 1980s also saw Gospel music see its popularity peak . A new form of gospel had evolved , called Contemporary Christian music ( CCM ) . CCM had been around since the late 1960s , and consisted of a pop / rock sound with slight religious lyrics . CCM had become the most popular form of gospel by the mid @-@ 1980s , especially with artists like Amy Grant , Michael W. Smith , and Kathy <unk> . Amy Grant was the most popular CCM , and gospel , singer of the 1980s , and after experiencing unprecedented success in CCM , crossed over into mainstream pop in the 1980s and 1990s . Michael W. Smith also had considerable success in CCM before crossing over to a successful career in pop music as well . Grant would later produce CCM 's first # 1 pop hit ( " Baby Baby " ) , and CCM 's best @-@ selling album ( Heart In Motion ) . 
 In the 1980s , the country music charts were dominated by pop singers with only tangential influences from country music , a trend that has continued since . The 1980s saw a revival of honky @-@ tonk @-@ style country with the rise of people like Dwight Yoakam and the new traditionalists Emmylou Harris and Ricky Skaggs , [ 64 ] as well as the development of alternative country performers like Uncle Tupelo . Later alternative country performers , like Whiskeytown 's Ryan Adams and Wilco , found some mainstream success . 
 = = = Birth of the underground = = = 
 During the 1970s , a number of diverse styles emerged in stark contrast to mainstream American popular music . Though these genres were not largely popular in the sense of selling many records to mainstream audiences , they were examples of popular music , as opposed to folk or classical music . In the early 1970s , African Americans and Puerto Ricans in New York City developed hip hop culture , which produced a style of music also called hip hop . At roughly the same time , Latinos , especially Cubans and Puerto Ricans , in New York also innovated salsa music , which combined many forms of Latin music with R & B and rock . The genres of punk rock and heavy metal were most closely associated with the United Kingdom in the 1970s , while various American derivatives evolved later in the decade and into the 1980s . Meanwhile , Detroit slowly evolved a series of electronic music genres like house and techno that later became a major part of popular music worldwide . 
 = = = = Hip hop = = = = 
 Hip hop is a cultural movement , of which music is a part , along with graffiti and breakdancing . The music is composed of two parts , rapping , the delivery of swift , highly rhythmic and lyrical vocals , and DJing , the production of instrumentation either through sampling , instrumentation , turntablism or beatboxing . [ 65 ] Hip hop arose in the early 1970s in The Bronx , New York City . Jamaican immigrant DJ Kool Herc is widely regarded as the progenitor of hip hop ; he brought with him the practice of toasting over the rhythms of popular songs . In New York , DJs like Kool Herc played records of popular funk , disco and rock songs . Emcees originally arose to introduce the songs and keep the crowd excited and dancing ; over time , the DJs began isolating the percussion breaks ( the rhythmic climax of songs ) , thus producing a repeated beat that the emcees rapped over . 
 Rapping included greetings to friends and enemies , exhortations to dance and colorful , often humorous boasts . By the beginning of the 1980s , there had been popular hip hop songs like " Rappers Delight " by the Sugarhill Gang and a few major celebrities of the scene , like LL Cool J and Kurtis Blow . Other performers experimented with politicized lyrics and social awareness , while others performed fusions with jazz , heavy metal , techno , funk and soul . Hip hop began to diversify in the latter part of the 1980s . New styles appeared , like alternative hip hop and the closely related jazz rap fusion , pioneered by rappers like De La Soul and Guru . The crews Public Enemy and N.W.A did the most during this era to bring hip hop to national attention ; the former did so with incendiary and politically charged lyrics , while the latter became the first prominent example of gangsta rap . 
 = = = = Salsa = = = = 
 Salsa music is a diverse and predominantly Caribbean rhythm that is popular in many Latin American countries . Salsa incorporates multiple styles and variations ; the term can be used to describe most any form of the popular Cuban @-@ derived musical genres ( like <unk> and mambo ) . Most specifically however , salsa refers to a particular style was developed by mid @-@ 1970s groups of New York City @-@ area Cuban and Puerto Rican immigrants to the United States , and stylistic descendants like 1980s salsa romantica . [ 66 ] 
 Salsa music always has a 4 / 4 meter . The music is phrased in groups of two bars , using recurring rhythmic patterns , and the beginning of phrases in the song text and instruments . Typically , the rhythmic patterns played on the percussion are rather complicated , often with several different patterns played simultaneously . The clave rhythm is an important element that forms the basis of salsa . Apart from percussion , a variety of melodic instruments are commonly used as accompaniment , such as a guitar , trumpets , trombones , the piano , and many others , all depending on the performing artists . Bands are typically divided into horn and rhythm sections , led by one or more singers ( <unk> or <unk> ) . [ 67 ] 
 = = = Punk and alternative rock = = = 
 Punk was a kind of rebellious rock music that began in the 1970s as a reaction against the popular music of the day - especially disco , which was seen as insipid and uninspired . Punk drew on American bands including the Velvet Underground , The Stooges and the New York Dolls . [ 68 ] Punk was loud , aggressive and usually very simple , requiring little musical training to play . Later in the decade , British bands like the Sex Pistols and The Clash found short @-@ lived fame at home and , to a lesser degree , in the United States . American bands in the field included most famously The Ramones , as well as groups like the Talking Heads that played a more artsy kind of music that was closely associated with punk before eventually evolving into pop @-@ new wave . [ 69 ] Other major acts include Blondie , Patti Smith and Television . Most of these bands got their start at what is considered " ground zero " of punk rock , a club named CBGB . The small club in New York threw a festival in 1975 that showed off the " top 40 unrecorded rock bands " . Among these bands were the previously mentioned The Ramones , Sex Pistols , <unk> and the like . 
 Hardcore punk was the response of American youths to the worldwide punk rock explosion of the late 1970s . Hardcore stripped punk rock and New Wave of its sometimes elitist and artsy tendencies , resulting in short , fast , and intense songs that spoke to disaffected youth . Hardcore exploded in the American metropolises of Los Angeles , Washington , DC , New York and Boston and most American cities had their own local scenes by the end of the 1980s . [ 70 ] 
 Alternative rock is a diverse grouping of rock bands that in America developed largely from the hardcore scene in the 1980s in stark opposition to the mainstream music scene . Alternative rock subgenres that developed during the decade include indie rock , Gothic rock , noise rock , grunge , and college rock . Most alternative bands were unified by their collective debt to punk , which laid the groundwork for underground and alternative music in the 1970s . Though the genre is considered to be rock , some styles were influenced by American folk , reggae and jazz . Like punk and hardcore , alternative rock had little mainstream success in America in the 1980s , but via the grassroots establishment of an indie scene through touring , college radio , fanzines , and word @-@ of @-@ mouth , alternative bands laid the groundwork for the breakthrough of the genre in the American public consciousness in the next decade . 
 = = = Heavy metal = = = 
 Heavy metal is a form of music characterized by aggressive , driving rhythms and highly amplified distorted guitars , generally with grandiose lyrics and virtuosic instrumentation . Heavy metal is a development of blues , blues rock , rock and prog rock . Its origins lie in the British hard rock bands who between 1967 and 1974 took blues and rock and created a hybrid with a heavy , guitar @-@ and @-@ drums @-@ centered sound . Most of the pioneers in the field , like Black Sabbath , were English , though many were inspired by American performers like Blue Cheer and Jimi Hendrix . 
 In the early 1970s , the first major American bands began appearing , like Blue Öyster Cult and Aerosmith , and musicians like Eddie Van Halen began their career . Heavy metal remained , however , a largely underground phenomenon . During the 1980s , a pop @-@ based form of hard rock , with a party @-@ hearty spirit and a glam @-@ influenced visual aesthetic ( sometimes referred to as " hair metal " ) dominated the music charts , led by superstars like Poison , Bon Jovi , Mötley Crüe , and Ratt . The 1987 debut of Guns N ' Roses , a hard rock band whose image reflected the grittier underbelly of the Sunset Strip , was at least in part a reaction against the overly polished image of hair metal , but that band 's wild success was in many ways the last gasp of the hard @-@ rock and metal scene . By the mid @-@ 1980s , as the term " heavy metal " became the subject of much <unk> , the style had branched out in so many different directions that new classifications were created by fans , record companies , and fanzines , although sometimes the differences between various subgenres were unclear , even to the artists purportedly belonging to a given style . The most notable of the 1980s metal subgenres in the United States was the swift and aggressive thrash metal style , pioneered by bands like Anthrax , Megadeth , Metallica , and Slayer . 
 = = 1990s = = 
 Perhaps the most important change in the 1990s in American popular music was the rise of alternative rock through the popularity of grunge . This was previously an explicitly anti @-@ mainstream grouping of genres that rose to great fame beginning in the early 1990s . The genre in its early stages was largely situated on Sub Pop Records , a company founded by Bruce Pavitt and John Poneman . Significant grunge bands signed to the label were Green River ( half of the members from this band would later become founding members of Pearl Jam ) , Sonic Youth ( although not a grunge band they were influential on grunge bands and in fact it was upon the insistence of Kim Gordon that the David Geffen Company signed Nirvana ) and Nirvana . Grunge is an alternative rock subgenre with a " dark , brooding guitar @-@ based sludge " sound , [ 71 ] drawing on heavy metal , punk , and elements of bands like Sonic Youth and their use of " unconventional tunings to bend otherwise standard pop songs completely out of shape . " [ 72 ] With the addition of a " melodic , Beatlesque element " to the sound of bands like Nirvana , grunge became wildly popular across the United States . [ 73 ] Grunge became commercially successful in the early 1990s , peaking between 1991 and 1994 . Bands from cities in the U.S. Pacific Northwest especially Seattle , Washington , were responsible for creating grunge and later made it popular with mainstream audiences . The supposed Generation X , who had just reached adulthood as grunge 's popularity peaked , were closely associated with grunge , the sound which helped " define the desperation of ( that ) generation . " [ 74 ] Later Post Grunge bands such as The Foo Fighters and Creed became popular form of Alternative rock because it was and still is very radio friendly unlike the Grunge band of which they were musically influenced by . Pop punk bands like Green Day and Blink 182 also gained popularity . In the second half of the 1990s nu metal arose with bands such as Linkin Park , Korn , Limp Bizkit and Slipknot . The independent culture <unk> in the underground scenes with new genres such as lo @-@ fi ( Beck , Sparklehorse , Guided By Voices ) , math rock ( Slint , Shellac ) and post @-@ rock ( Mogwai , Explosions in the Sky ) . <unk> and Post @-@ hardcore became more known with bands such as At the Drive @-@ In and Fugazi . 
 Gangsta rap is a kind of hip hop , most importantly characterized by a lyrical focus on macho sexuality , physicality and a dangerous , criminal image . Though the origins of gangsta rap can be traced back to the mid @-@ 1980s raps of Philadelphia 's Schoolly D and the West Coast 's Ice @-@ T , the style is usually said to have begun in the Los Angeles and Oakland area , where Too Short , NWA and others found their fame . This West Coast rap scene spawned the early 1990s G @-@ funk sound , which paired gangsta rap lyrics with a thick and hazy tone , often relying on samples from 1970s P @-@ funk ; the best @-@ known proponents of this sound were the breakthrough rappers Dr. Dre and Snoop Doggy Dogg . 
 = = 2000s = = 
 By the end of the 1990s and into the early 2000s pop music consisted mostly of a combination of pop @-@ hip hop and R & B @-@ tinged pop , including a number of boy bands . Notable female singers also cemented their status in American and Worldwide popular music , such as Beyonce ( with her solo career and as lead singer of Destiny 's Child ) , Britney Spears , Christina Aguilera , Katy Perry , Lady Gaga and Taylor Swift . Also notable was the influence of hip @-@ hop producers on popular music in the mid @-@ late 2000s , including the Neptunes and Timbaland , who made the sounds first heard on Justin Timberlake 's FutureSex / LoveSounds and Nelly Furtado 's Loose imitated throughout popular radio with artists Madonna , Akon and Lady Gaga . In the late 2000s into the early 2010s , pop music began to move towards being heavily influenced by the European electronic dance music scene , taking root in the college crowd through producers like David Guetta , Calvin Harris , Swedish House Mafia and Skrillex . 
 Hip hop / pop combination had also begun to dominate 2000s and early 2010s . In the early 2010s , prominent artists like Bruno Mars , Drake , Lil Wayne , 2 Chainz , Kendrick Lamar , Machine Gun Kelly , and Macklemore began to dominate the mainstream music scene . 
 The predominant sound in 1990s country music was pop with only very limited elements of country . This includes many of the best @-@ selling artists of the 1990s , like Clint Black , Shania Twain , Faith Hill and the first of these crossover stars , Garth Brooks . [ 75 ] 
 On the other hand a guitar revival took place and raised a new generation of alternative guitar bands often described as post @-@ punk revival or garage rock revival . Prominent US bands of this generation are White Stripes , The Strokes , and The Killers . New Weird America or sometimes called Freak Folk is a new movement emphasizing the artistic individuality of genre crossing artists such as Antony and the Johnsons , Joanna Newsom , The Dodos , Animal Collective and Cat Power . 
 = = International and social impact = = 
 American popular music has become extremely popular internationally . Rock , hip hop , jazz , country and other styles have fans across the globe . BBC Radio DJ Andy Kershaw , for example , has noted that country music is popular across virtually the entire world . [ 76 ] Indeed , out of " all the contributions made by Americans to world culture ... ( American popular music ) has been taken ( most ) to heart by the entire world " . [ 77 ] Other styles of American popular music have also had a formative effect internationally , including funk , the basis for West African Afrobeat , R & B , a major source for Jamaican reggae , and rock , which has profoundly influenced most every genre of popular music worldwide . Rock , country , jazz and hip hop have become an entrenched part of many countries , leading to local varieties like Australian country music , Tanzanian Bongo Flava and Russian rock . 
 Rock has had a formative influence on popular music , which had the effect of transforming " the very concept of what popular music " is . [ 78 ] while Charlie Gillett has argued that rock and roll " was the first popular genre to incorporate the relentless pulse and sheer volume of urban life into the music itself " . [ 79 ] 
 The social impacts of American popular music have been felt both within the United States and in foreign countries . Beginning as early as the extravaganzas of the late 19th century , American popular music has been criticized for being too sexually titillating and for encouraging violence , drug abuse and generally immoral behavior . 
 = Won 't Back Down ( Eminem song ) = 
 " Won 't Back Down " is a song by American hip hop artist Eminem , featuring American pop singer Pink , recorded as the fourth track on his seventh studio album Recovery ( 2010 ) . It features production from Aftermath Entertainment producer DJ Khalil , who helped write the song along with Eminem , Erik Alcock , and Columbus " Rahki " Smith . 
 Upon the release of Recovery , the song received generally positive reviews from music critics , who praised its aggressive nature and production . Although not released as a single , " Won 't Back Down " appeared on four national charts . It was used in the video game Call of Duty : Black Ops and its trailer as well as the trailers for the films Mission : Impossible – Ghost Protocol and Hitman : Agent 47 . It was performed on Saturday Night Live and Late Night with Jimmy Fallon . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Won 't Back Down " was written by Eminem , DJ Khalil , Erik Alcock and Columbus " Rahki " Smith . Along with most of the songs from Recovery , " Won 't Back Down " was recorded at 54 Sound and Effigy Studios in Ferndale , Michigan , with recording carried out by Mike Strange . The song is one of the only Eminem songs not in a 4 : 4 time signature , along with Untitled ( also from Recovery ) and Underground ( from Relapse ) . Originally , the song was set to be a solo record , with Eminem singing the chorus himself . Later , Liz Rodriguez , who is also featured on Recovery 's " 25 to Life " and " Almost Famous " , recorded the song 's chorus . Eminem however , explained in an interview that after recording his vocals for the song , he decided to include Pink on the song as he " felt like she would really smash this record . " Rahki co @-@ produced the song with Khalil . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Although " Won 't Back Down " was not released as a single , it charted on four national charts worldwide due to digital sales on the release of Recovery . The song reached its highest position on the US Billboard Hot 100 , where it peaked at number 62 on the chart for the week ending of July 10 , 2010 , although it fell off the chart the following week . The song also charted in Australia , Canada and the United Kingdom , peaking at number eighty @-@ seven , sixty @-@ five and eighty @-@ two on their respective national charts , although on all three the song again only appeared for one week . 
 Upon its release , " Won 't Back Down " received generally positive reviews from most music critics . David Jeffries of Allmusic wrote positively of the song , describing the song as a " lurching heavy metal monster " that " could be used as the lead @-@ in to ' Lose Yourself ' on any ego @-@ boosting mixtape " , but wrote more critically of the lyrics , denouncing the pop culture jokes featured throughout the song , particularly ones aimed at Michael J. Fox , calling the line " Make like Michael J. Fox in your drawers , <unk> ' with an Etch @-@ A @-@ Sketch " " less effective " than other jokes aimed at him . Steve Jones of USA Today described it as " rock @-@ tinged " and stated that Pink 's appearance provides " outside star power " . 
 = = Appearances in media = = 
 A remixed version of the ESPN trailer of the video game Call of Duty : Black Ops featuring " Won 't Back Down " was released on June 14 , prior to the E3 Activision conference for which he also performed . The song was also featured in the game 's credits and zombie mode map " Five " as an easter egg . The official trailer for the 2011 action film , Mission : Impossible – Ghost Protocol , features " Won 't Back Down " . The song is also featured in TV spots for the 2015 movie Hitman : Agent 47 . 
 Eminem has performed the song on live sketch comedy show Saturday Night Live accompanied by Lil Wayne and hypeman and D12 member Mr. Porter . Eminem wore a black jacket and a skull cap . Idolator reacted positively to Eminem 's performance , stating that he proved " once again what a dynamic and energetic live performer he is on this exceptionally angry tune ( even by Slim Shady standards ) . " He also performed the song on Late Night with Jimmy Fallon . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Recorded at : Effigy Studios in Ferndale , Michigan . 
 Personnel 
 Eminem – vocals , audio mixing and songwriting 
 DJ Khalil – producer , additional keyboards and drum programming 
 Mike Strange – recording and audio mixing 
 Joe Strange – engineering assistant 
 Eric Alcock – guitar 
 Pink – vocals 
 Rahki – keyboards and additional drum programming 
 Notes 
 Credits and recording information from Recovery 's booklet . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = 2005 – 06 Arsenal F.C. season = 
 The 2005 – 06 season was the 108th season of competitive football played by Arsenal . It was the final season in which home matches were played at the club 's Highbury stadium after 93 years ; Arsenal intended to move to its new 60 @,@ 000 capacity Emirates Stadium in time for the following season . The club ended their Premier League campaign in fourth , having pipped local rivals Tottenham Hotspur to the position on the final day . Arsenal became the first London club to reach a UEFA Champions League final , though lost 2 – 1 to Barcelona in Paris . In the League Cup the club was eliminated in the semi @-@ finals on aggregate score by Wigan Athletic and knocked out of the FA Cup , against Bolton Wanderers in the fourth round . 
 Before the season commenced midfielder Patrick Vieira was sold to Juventus ; striker Thierry Henry assumed his club captaincy role . Alexander Hleb was purchased from Stuttgart for an undisclosed fee in July 2005 ; in the winter transfer window Arsenal signed midfielder Abou Diaby , and forwards Emmanuel Adebayor and Theo Walcott . 
 Arsenal lost to league champions Chelsea in the 2005 FA Community Shield at the Millennium Stadium . An indifferent start in the league saw Arsenal peak in second position after 13 matches , but a run of three consecutive defeats a month later had effectively ruled them out of title contention . On the final day , they beat Wigan Athletic 4 – 2 at Highbury ; Tottenham Hotpsur 's defeat at West Ham United meant Arsenal secured fourth place . The team 's performances in Europe were more striking ; they eliminated Real Madrid , Juventus and Villarreal in the knockout stages . In the 2006 UEFA Champions League Final held at the Stade de France in Paris on 17 May 2006 , goalkeeper Jens Lehmann was sent off for a professional foul on Barcelona 's Samuel Eto 'o . Although defender Sol Campbell gave Arsenal a first half lead from a set piece , the team conceded twice in the final 15 minutes to lose the match . 
 To mark the final season at Highbury , Arsenal held a valedictory campaign titled " Highbury – The Final Salute " . The club staged several themed matchdays and a redcurrant home kit replaced the common red to honour the shirts worn in 1913 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Arsenal began the preceding season as league champions ; a win against Blackburn Rovers in August 2004 ensured they eclipsed Nottingham Forest 's record of 42 league matches unbeaten . The run extended to six more matches , before losing 2 – 0 to Manchester United at Old Trafford on 24 October 2004 . Poor form throughout November allowed league leaders Chelsea to extend the gap at the top ; Wenger conceded retaining the title in April 2005 , calling his opponents " worthy champions ... they have been remarkably consistent . " A run of twelve league matches unbeaten , culminating in a 7 – 0 home win against Everton helped Arsenal finish in second place . In spite of exiting the Champions League to Bayern Munich in the second round , the team won the 2005 FA Cup Final against Manchester United – winning 5 – 4 on penalties after a goalless draw . 
 = = = Highbury – The Final Salute = = = 
 The 2005 – 06 season marked Arsenal 's final season at Highbury , their home since 1913 . The club planned to move half a mile to the Emirates Stadium , considered " vital to our future " by Wenger , as it financially would help them to compete at the top level . To mark the valedictory campaign titled " Highbury – The Final Salute " , the club staged many special activities on matchdays " ... to celebrate the many great players and moments that this fantastic stadium has witnessed . " A redcurrant home kit was designed to honour the shirts worn in the club 's first season at Highbury . It was adorned with gold lettering and accompanied by white shorts and redcurrant socks . 
 = = = Transfers = = = 
 Arsenal signed youth players Nicklas Bendtner , Vito <unk> and Armand Traoré in the summer transfer window . Belarusian Alexander Hleb joined the club for an undisclosed fee on 12 July 2005 . Arsenal made four more additions during the season : goalkeeper Mart Poom , signed on a permanent deal , midfielder Abou Diaby , who reportedly turned down an offer to join Chelsea and forwards Emmanuel Adebayor and Theo Walcott . 
 After the early departures of Jermaine Pennant and Stuart Taylor , club captain Patrick Vieira joined Italian side Juventus in a £ 13 @.@ 7 million deal . Wenger did not intend to sign a replacement , saying " I am not in a hurry . We have Gilberto , Flamini and Fàbregas . Pirès can play in there also so we have plenty of players . " English midfielder David Bentley made his loan deal at Blackburn Rovers permanent in the January transfer window . 
 = = Pre @-@ season = = 
 = = FA Community Shield = = 
 As winners of the FA Cup in the previous season , Arsenal contested the 2005 FA Community Shield against league champions Chelsea . Two goals scored by striker Didier Drogba in the first half meant Arsenal lost the match . Wenger commented afterwards that Chelsea 's gameplan made it difficult for the Arsenal defenders , and noted his opposition 's strength was playing long balls . When asked if he was concerned by the performance , Wenger replied : " Why should I worry ? Did you see the game ? You can worry for the Chelsea supporters . " 
 = = Premier League = = 
 = = = August – October = = = 
 Arsenal began their final league season at Highbury against Newcastle United on 14 August 2005 . In spite of having a man advantage after midfielder Jermaine <unk> was sent off for a challenge on Gilberto Silva , striker Thierry Henry scored from the penalty spot in the 81st minute . Robin van Persie added a second , four minutes from the end of the match . A fortunate goal from Drogba inflicted Arsenal 's first defeat against Chelsea in the league for almost a decade . The team responded with a 4 – 1 victory against Fulham , whereby Henry and defender Pascal Cygan both scored twice . Arsenal lost away to Middlesbrough on 10 September 2005 , in a performance derided by Wenger as being " unacceptable " . A brace ( two goals ) from Sol Campbell against Everton was followed by a goalless draw against newly promoted West Ham United . 
 An own goal scored by Stephen Clemence gave Arsenal a 1 – 0 victory in the first week of October at home to Birmingham City . Despite being " technically the better side " away to West Bromwich Albion , Arsenal lost 2 – 1 ; Wenger after the match commented that the team " played with great spirit but … were punished for a lack of experience and maturity because we didn 't take advantage of the chances we created . " A penalty scored by Robert Pirès was enough to secure three points against Manchester City . The midfielder wasted a second penalty in the second half , choosing to recreate a spot kick executed by Johan Cruyff and Jesper Olsen for Ajax . Having attempted to roll the ball towards onrushing Henry , Pirès inadvertently flicked the ball twice , enabling referee Mike Riley to award a free @-@ kick to Manchester City . Although both players were scrutinised by Chelsea manager José Mourinho , they were commended by <unk> for showing a desire to try something different . The final league match of October ended in a 1 – 1 draw against local rivals Tottenham Hotpsur . 
 = = = November – February = = = 
 A 3 – 1 win at home to Sunderland on 5 November 2005 meant Arsenal moved third in the league table . This was followed by a trip to the JJB Stadium ; Arsenal beat Wigan Athletic 3 – 2 in a " hugely entertaining game on a cold , frosty afternoon " . Henry scored his 100th goal at Highbury against Blackburn Rovers to extend a club unbeaten run of nine matches . Defeat at Bolton Wanderers in early December concerned Wenger , admitting the opponents showed the template required to beat his team . A further defeat against Newcastle United , where Gilberto Silva was sent off in the second half highlighted the " physical absence " of Vieira in midfield . In losing 2 – 0 to Chelsea a week after – their third successive defeat for the first time under Wenger , Arsenal lay in eighth position , 11 points behind Manchester United . An early morning kick @-@ off away to Charlton Athletic ended in a 1 – 0 victory for Arsenal ; José Antonio Reyes scored his second goal in the league . Four first @-@ half goals against Portsmouth helped Arsenal to close the gap on second place by nine points . They ended the calendar year and began 2006 with goalless draws against Aston Villa and Manchester United respectively . 
 Arsenal recorded the biggest win of the league season , against Middlesbrough at Highbury . Henry scored a hat @-@ trick in a 7 – 0 victory ; the striker post @-@ match deemed it was vital for the club to finish in the top four " … for me , for the club and for the fans . " They suffered two consecutive defeats : away to Everton and at home to West Ham United . In the latter match , Campbell was substituted at his request before the second half , having been at fault for Nigel Reo @-@ Coker and Bobby Zamora ’ s goals . He " went missing " after the match , subsequently returning to training five days later . Emmanuel Adebayor scored his first goal for Arsenal in a 2 – 0 win against Birmingham City on 4 February 2006 . A stoppage time goal scored by Gilberto earned the team a point against Bolton Wanderers at Highbury ; they went 1 – 0 down in the 12th minute after Kevin Nolan chipped the ball past goalkeeper Jens Lehmann . Arsenal conceded a late goal away to Liverpool on Valentine 's Day – a result which left the club 10 points behind their opponents . Defeat against Blackburn Rovers meant they lost for the second consecutive game . Having collected just three wins out of a possible 14 away from home , Wenger admitted the form of the team remained " a big worry " given they needed to play five more . 
 = = = March – May = = = 
 In the first week of March , Arsenal beat Fulham 4 – 0 with a " commanding performance " from Henry , who scored two goals . The striker scored the winning goal against Liverpool in their next match , from a Steven Gerrard backpass . A polished performance against Charlton Athletic was followed by a five @-@ goal win at home to Aston Villa on 1 April 2006 . Arsenal lost 2 – 0 to Manchester United and dropped two points against relegation @-@ threatened Portsmouth , meaning a fourth @-@ place finish was in Tottenham Hotspur 's favour . 
 Dennis Bergkamp scored his final goal for Arsenal against West Bromwich Albion in a 3 – 1 win ; he came on as a substitute in the second half to set up Pirès to score the winning goal , moments after Nigel <unk> had levelled the scoreline . Arsenal drew 1 – 1 at home to Tottenham Hotspur , with Wenger choosing to rest players in mind for the club 's Champions League semi @-@ final . A 3 – 0 win away at Sunderland was overshadowed by a tackle on Abou Diaby , ruling him out for the remainder of the season . Two late goals scored by Reyes against Manchester City moved Arsenal a point behind Tottenham Hotspur in fourth . In the final competitive match played at Highbury , Arsenal faced Wigan Athletic , needing to better their rivals result to guarantee Champions League qualification . Henry scored a hat @-@ trick in a six @-@ goal match , helping Arsenal end the season with 67 points from 38 matches . Tottenham Hotspur 's defeat against West Ham United meant Arsenal finished fourth , a position Gilberto felt the club " deserved " . 
 = = = Match results = = = 
 = = = Classification = = = 
 Source : 
 Rules for classification : 1 ) points ; 2 ) goal difference ; 3 ) number of goals scored ( C ) 
 = Champion ; ( R ) = 
 Relegated ; ( P ) 
 = Promoted ; ( E ) = 
 Eliminated ; ( O ) 
 = Play @-@ off winner ; ( A ) = 
 Advances to a further round . 
 Only applicable when the season is not finished : ( Q ) 
 = Qualified to the phase of tournament indicated ; ( TQ ) = 
 Qualified to tournament , but not yet to the particular phase indicated ; ( RQ ) 
 = Qualified to the relegation tournament indicated ; ( DQ ) = 
 Disqualified from tournament . 
 = = = = Results summary = = = = 
 Source : 
 = = = = Results by round = = = = 
 Source : 
 Rules for classification : 1 ) points ; 2 ) goal difference ; 3 ) number of goals scored ( C ) 
 = Champion ; ( R ) = 
 Relegated ; ( P ) 
 = Promoted ; ( E ) = 
 Eliminated ; ( O ) 
 = Play @-@ off winner ; ( A ) = 
 Advances to a further round . 
 Only applicable when the season is not finished : ( Q ) 
 = Qualified to the phase of tournament indicated ; ( TQ ) = 
 Qualified to tournament , but not yet to the particular phase indicated ; ( RQ ) 
 = Qualified to the relegation tournament indicated ; ( DQ ) = 
 Disqualified from tournament . 
 = = FA Cup = = 
 Arsenal entered the competition in the third round , receiving a bye as a Premier League club . Their opening match was a 2 – 0 home win against Cardiff City on 7 January 2006 , with both goals scored by Pirès . Arsenal faced Bolton Wanderers the following round ; an understrength team lost 1 – 0 after <unk> headed in the winning goal , six minutes from the end of the match . 
 = = Football League Cup = = 
 Arsenal entered the Football League Cup in the third round , where they were drawn away to Sunderland . A 3 – 0 victory meant they progressed to the fourth round , where they beat First Division club Reading by an identical scoreline . Extra time and penalties was required in Arsenal 's fifth round tie against Doncaster Rovers , after a 2 – 2 draw in 90 minutes . Two saves by goalkeeper Manuel Almunia helped Arsenal win 3 – 1 on penalties and reach the semi @-@ finals of the competition for the first time since 1998 . They faced Wigan Athletic , losing 1 – 0 in the first leg and in spite of winning the second leg 2 – 1 with a full strength team , Arsenal was eliminated on aggregate score . 
 = = UEFA Champions League = = 
 = = = Group stage = = = 
 Arsenal qualified for the group stages of the Champions League in the 2005 – 06 season on virtue of finishing runners @-@ up in the Premier League the preceding season . They were drawn in Group B , along with Swiss ' Thun , Czech club Sparta Prague and Ajax of the Netherlands . In spite of Van Persie 's dismissal against Thun in the opening group match , Arsenal won 2 – 1 , courtesy of a late goal by substitute Bergkamp . A 2 – 1 win against Ajax was followed by a 2 – 0 victory against Sparta Prague ; Henry scored both goals to surpass Ian Wright 's all @-@ time leading scorer record . A goal from Henry and two from Van Persie in the reverse fixture meant the club reached the knockout stages . A win at Thun on 22 November 2005 ensured Arsenal topped the group ; they ended the group stages with a draw at Highbury against Ajax . 
 = = = Knockout phase = = = 
 = = = = First knockout round = = = = 
 The club faced Real Madrid in the last 16 – the first encounter between both clubs in the competition . A solo goal by Henry at the Estadio Santiago Bernabéu in the first leg , inflicted the home team 's first defeat in 18 Champions League matches . A disciplined display at home a fortnight after helped Arsenal to reach the quarter @-@ finals and become the sole English representative left in the competition . 
 = = = = Quarter @-@ finals = = = = 
 At home to Juventus , Arsenal won 2 – 0 with goals from Fàbregas and Henry ; the match was overshadowed by the return of former captain Vieira . A goalless draw at the Stadio delle Alpi meant the club progressed into the semi @-@ finals against Villarreal . 
 = = = = Semi @-@ finals = = = = 
 In the club 's final European match at Highbury , Touré scored a first @-@ half goal to give Arsenal a 1 – 0 win . A late penalty save by goalkeeper Lehmann in the second leg helped Arsenal become the first London club to reach a Champions League final . The result , another goalless draw was Arsenal 's tenth <unk> in a row – a new competition record . Campbell , returning from injury praised the team performance in his post @-@ match interview : " It 's brilliant for us . It 's also great for the manager Arsène Wenger to get to the final in France – I 'm sure he will get a great reception . " 
 = = = = Final = = = = 
 In the final against Barcelona at the Stade de France in Saint @-@ Denis , Paris , Arsenal fielded a 4 – 5 – 1 formation , with Eboué replacing the injured Lauren , and Cole making a return at left @-@ back for Flamini . 
 Lehmann was sent off in 18th minute for a professional foul on striker Samuel Eto 'o . Wenger reacted by substituting Pirès for goalkeeper Manuel Almunia , altering the formation . In spite of the disadvantage , Arsenal took the lead in the 37th minute , after Henry 's free kick was headed in by Campbell . Henry missed a chance in the second half to give Arsenal a two @-@ nil lead before Eto 'o equalised with 14 minutes left . Substitute Henrik Larsson set up Juliano Belletti to score the winner for Barcelona . Wenger used his post @-@ match press conference to criticise referee Terje Hauge for sending off Lehmann , a view later shared by club captain Henry and FIFA president Sepp Blatter . 
 = = Squad statistics = = 
 Arsenal used a total of 34 players during the 2005 – 06 season and there were 16 different goalscorers . There were also six squad members who did not make a first @-@ team appearance in the campaign . The team played in a 4 – 4 – 2 formation for much of the season , though Wenger deployed a 4 – 5 – 1 formation in Europe – a five @-@ man midfield with Ljungberg playing behind the main striker Henry . Fàbregas featured in 50 matches – the most of any Arsenal player in the campaign ; Lehmann started in all 38 league matches . 
 The team scored a total of 90 goals in all competitions . The highest scorer was Henry , with 33 goals , followed by Van Persie who scored 12 goals . Four Arsenal players were sent off during the season : Lehmann , Fàbregas , Van Persie and Gilberto . 
 Key 
 Numbers in parentheses denote appearances as substitute . Players with number struck through and marked left the club during the playing season . Players with names in italics and marked * were on loan from another club for the whole of their season with Arsenal . 
 Source : 
 = Cliff Alexander = 
 Cliff Alexander ( born November 16 , 1995 ) is an American professional basketball player who last played for the Portland Trail Blazers of the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) . He completed his freshman season at the University of Kansas for the Jayhawks ' on their 2014 – 15 team . He declared himself eligible for the 2015 NBA draft but was undrafted . 
 He played in high school at Curie High School in Chicago where he won Naismith and Mr. Basketball USA recognition as national player of the year . He did not play organized basketball until eighth grade , but by late in his freshman season he became a notable contributor to his high school 's varsity team . He was ranked among the top 20 prospects in the national class of 2014 prior to his sophomore season . As a junior , he moved into the top 10 of the national class and was recognized as an All @-@ American . By the beginning of his senior season , he was considered to be a top 5 player by most talent evaluators and his stock was still on the rise . Following a Martin Luther King Day performance during his senior year against the number one team in the country , many experts considered him to be the best player in the national class of 2014 . 
 In 2013 , he represented USA Basketball in international play . Several talent scouts praised his powerful game . As a high schooler , Alexander felt he was most often compared to Amar 'e Stoudemire . He was also contrasted with crosstown rival Jahlil Okafor , especially as a senior when they vied for national attention . Alexander was heavily recruited by many top Division I basketball programs and his recruitment was widely followed . He played in the 2014 McDonald 's All @-@ American Boys Game , 2014 Jordan Brand Classic and the 2014 Nike Hoop Summit , earning co @-@ MVP of the Jordan Brand Classic . Alexander led Curie to the 2014 Chicago Public High School League city championship in a quadruple @-@ overtime game against Okafor that was the lead story on SportsCenter . The championship was later forfeited . As a freshman with Kansas , he did not play in the latter part of the season after the National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) launched an investigation into his eligibility . 
 = = High school career = = 
 = = = Freshman = = = 
 Alexander , who was also a highly regarded football player , did not play organized basketball until eighth grade . Alexander played on Curie 's 2010 – 11 varsity team as a freshman , but had little impact at first and sat out some games in December . He missed the first ten games due to a heart murmur . In late December , he started getting local attention as part of the reason Curie remained undefeated . During the Chicago Public High School League ( CPL ) and Illinois High School Association ( IHSA ) playoffs , he contributed significant performances . On March 9 , 2011 , Curie was eliminated from the IHSA playoffs in a Class 4A sectional semifinal by Lyons Township High School as freshman Alexander posted 9 points , 13 rebounds , and 2 blocks in a 66 – 64 loss . His late @-@ season contributions gave Curie an added dimension , as the team finished with a 28 – 3 record . Following his freshman season , Alexander began to be recognized by local evaluators as a potential top national recruit . After Jabari Parker and Jahlil Okafor , Alexander was already considered the best Chicago area basketball prospect . He earned Red @-@ Central all @-@ conference recognition . 
 = = = Sophomore = = = 
 As late as August 2011 , Alexander remained unrecognized by most national evaluators . However , as Alexander entered his sophomore season , he was one of three area prospects that were firmly among the national class of 2014 's top 25 prospects ( along with Whitney M. Young Magnet High School teammates Okafor and Paul White ) . As of September 1 , 2011 Alexander was ranked 13 by ESPN.com and 9 by Rivals.com. On December 30 in the Pontiac Holiday Tournament , Parker 's Simeon Career Academy defeated Alexander 's Curie 44 – 27 as Alexander was almost shut out by Simeon 's Steve Taylor . On January 22 , 2013 , Okafor and Alexander went head to head in CPL play . Curie defeated Young by a 57 – 46 margin as Alexander had 10 points , six rebounds and three blocks before having a personal foul disqualification . Despite fouling out , Alexander had the better game with nearly a dozen Division I programs in attendance . Curie had a rematch against Simeon in the February 17 CPL championship game with Alexander again being ineffective on offense with four points against Parker and Taylor as Curie lost 53 – 49 . The game broadcast on ESPN3 . Following the season , a statewide panel of sportswriters and broadcaster voted Alexander as an Associated Press boys basketball Class 4A all @-@ state honorable mention honoree . 
 = = = Junior = = = 
 At the June 2012 Pangos All @-@ American Camp , Alexander was selected as the Most Outstanding Player . Alexander , who was already a top 5 recruit according to some sources , endured a Summer 2012 foot injury that sidelined him . By mid @-@ July 2012 , as ESPN 's number 10 ranked prospect , he received an offer from Kentucky and was being recruited by DePaul , Indiana , Ohio State and Wisconsin . Upon receiving his offer from Kentucky , he told Rivals.com that his two leading schools were Kentucky and Michigan State . 
 By the fall of his junior season , the Illinois class of 2014 was being mentioned as one of the all @-@ time great statewide classes of basketball players . Chicago Sun @-@ Times writer Joe Henricksen noted that there was a high chance that this would be the fifth Illinois class and first since 2002 to include three McDonald 's All @-@ Americans . He also noted that the class has a chance to rival if not surpass the classes of 1998 and 2011 which each had nine top 100 players . 
 On November 30 , at a <unk> , Kentucky tournament game against Oak Hill Academy , Alexander scored 26 of his teams 39 points on 12 – 14 field goal shooting in a 72 – 39 defeat . On December 29 , Curie again faced Parker and Simeon in the Pontiac Holiday Tournament ( this time in the semifinals ) . Alexander posted 21 points on 9 – 10 field goal shooting , but Simeon still prevailed 62 – 57 . Notably , Parker assumed Alexander as a defensive assignment after Alexander gave Curie a 48 – 47 lead with 4 : 58 time remaining and Alexander went scoreless the rest of the game . Despite 11 points , 9 rebounds and 8 blocked shots from Alexander , Curie was eliminated from the CPL playoffs in a February 11 quarterfinals 60 – 58 loss to the Billy Garrett , <unk> Morgan Park High School that went on to become 2013 IHSA Class 3A state champion . On February 26 , the Associated Press Illinois Class 4A basketball rankings showed Whitney Young at number 1 , and it was also expected that Young 's road to the sectional finals would include a March 6 meeting with Curie . According to Henricksen , the March 6 state playoff meeting between Young and Curie was anticipated because it would pit Okafor against Alexander , making it the most highly touted IHSA playoff matchup of centers since 1988 when <unk> Ellis led East Saint Louis ' Lincoln High School against Eric Anderson 's St. Francis de Sales High School . Mike Helfgot of the Chicago Tribune said that there have not been many matchups between big men this good with so much at stake . On March 2 , Alexander attended Senior night at University of Illinois at Urbana – Champaign 's Assembly Hall . The February 2013 Great Plains blizzard caused controversial postponements of several IHSA games including the March 6 Young @-@ Curie game , which was delayed one day . Young defeated Curie 62 – 58 as the supporting cast made up for Alexander 's 14 – 13 scoring edge over Okafor . 
 In late April 2013 , Okafor 's father believed it was very possible that Okafor and Tyus Jones would matriculate together as a package . By late April 2013 , there were rumors that Alexander and <unk> Winslow would attend whatever school Jones and Okafor attended . Although Alexander was ranked as the fifth best player in the class of 2014 by Rivals.com and had offers from four of the six schools common to Jones and Okafor by the beginning of June , he said the chances of him matriculating with Jones and Okafor was slim . 
 Alexander was recognized as a 2013 All @-@ CPL first team selection by the Chicago Sun @-@ Times along with Parker , Okafor , Kendrick Nunn and Garrett . Alexander was recognized as an Associated Press All @-@ State Class 4A first team selection along with Parker , Okafor , Malcolm Hill and Sterling Brown . The Chicago Tribune named him to its All @-@ State first team along with Parker , Okafor , Jalen Brunson and Tyler Ulis . Alexander was one of five underclassmen selected by HighSchoolHardwood.com as an All @-@ American , along with Okafor , Jones and Stanley Johnson ( all first team ) and Joel Berry ( second team along with Alexander ) . 
 = = = Senior = = = 
 = = = = Summer and preseason = = = = 
 Alexander has become a member of the Mac Irvin Fire AAU team along with Okafor . During the Nike @-@ backed Pro @-@ Am summer basketball Chi @-@ League Alexander , Okafor and Parker were on the same team . He showed potential that LeBron James himself noticed at the July LeBron James Skills Academy . He also stood out at the July Under Armour Summa Jam , where his Mac Irvin Fire opposed teams led by Myles Turner and Karl @-@ Anthony Towns . On September 4 , 2013 , Rivals.com updated their ranking with Alexander maintaining his number 4 ranking . At the time , Eric Bossi of Rivals described Alexander as " perhaps the most powerful player in the high school ranks " . 
 In September , Alexander believed that he would make his final selection with a December verbal commitment and an April signing of his National Letter of Intent . On October 7 , the Hoophall Classic schedule was announced and Curie was scheduled to play Montverde Academy on January 20 . By some accounts Kansas was a favorite because his girlfriend was a student at Kansas and the 2013 – 14 Kansas Jayhawks were scheduled to play the 2013 – 14 Duke Blue Devils at Chicago 's United Center in the ESPN Champions Classic on November 12 just before his scheduled announcement . In 2013 <unk> Manning @-@ Allen became a freshman on the Kansas women 's basketball team . However , Illinois was very excited to be in serious contention for Alexander . It was the first time since Derrick Rose in 2006 that a top 5 prospect was still considering Illinois so late into his senior year and Alexander 's level of interest seemed much higher than Rose 's . Following his Illinois visit , his scheduled announcement date had moved forward to November 15 . On October 31 , Alexander officially eliminated Michigan State from his candidate list , leaving Kansas , Illinois , DePaul and Memphis in contention . 
 On November 7 Alexander was ranked second behind points leader Emmanuel Mudiay in the Mr. Basketball USA preseason tracker . Although he had only one first place vote on the ten ballots , he was ranked ahead of Okafor and Stanley Johnson who combined for seven first place votes . Alexander and Mudiay were the only players named on 9 of the 10 ballots . The preseason points leader has gone on to win the award in four of the prior five years . His November 15 verbal commitment announcement was scheduled on the same date as Okafor , Jones and Stanley Johnson . According to ESPN , all four were among the top 10 in the national class ( Okafor # 1 , Alexander # 3 , Jones # 4 and Johnson # 9 ) . On the eve of his announcement , Kansas and Illinois were the favorites for his services . He made his verbal commitment on ESPNU to Kansas basketball on November 15 . He was flanked by his father ( Clifton Terry ) and mother ( <unk> Alexander ) . Prior to his senior season , USA Today named him to its 10 @-@ man preseason All @-@ USA team along with Stanley Johnson , Jones , Trey Lyles , Emmanuel Mudiay , Malik Newman , Okafor , Oubre , D 'Angelo Russell , and Turner . Alexander was joined on the Chicago Tribune 's preseason Illinois Mr. Basketball top 5 by Okafor , Brunson , Ulis and Keita Bates @-@ Diop . 
 = = = = 2013 – 14 regular season = = = = 
 Alexander posted 22 points , 20 rebounds , and 5 blocks in a December 7 66 – 62 victory at UIC Pavilion against USA Today 's Super 25 number 11 ranked Bishop Gorman High School and its highly touted Stephen Zimmerman . Alexander almost had to serve a one @-@ game suspension from the game due to having been assessed two technical fouls on December 1 against St. Rita High School . Alexander had an impressive start to his season . On December 12 , he posted a triple double against Dunbar High School with 30 points , 24 rebounds , and 15 blocked shots . That week ( December 9 – 17 ) , he earned the Midwest player of the week from <unk> As a senior , he finally led Curie past three @-@ time defending tournament champion and four @-@ time defending Class 4A state champion Simeon to win the Pontiac Holiday Tournament with 16 points , 16 rebounds , and 6 blocks , earning tournament MVP honors . Even as a top 5 selection , Alexander 's stock continued to rise as a senior , according to the Chicago Sun @-@ Times ' Joe Henricksen . Some of the stats that Alexander posted were so impressive as to cause disbelief to some , including Chicago Tribune high school basketball writer Mike Helfgot and several of his associates . In early January , Alexander continued to be a leading contender for national player of the year , holding on to second place in the Mr. Basketball USA race . On January 10 , Alexander led Curie past Villa Angela @-@ St. Joseph High School , which featured Rivals.com Class of 2015 number 10 ranked Carlton Bragg . In the January 20 Hoophall Classic , Alexander led Curie to a victory over D 'Angelo Russell , Ben Simmons and Montverde Academy , the number one rated team in the country . Curie trailed by 9 points entering the fourth quarter , but Alexander had 13 of his 30 points in the final 4 minutes and 30 seconds to key the comeback . Alexander also had 12 rebounds and 5 blocks . Following the game , several writers , including CBS Sports college basketball writer Jeff <unk> said that Alexander has a valid case to present in terms of being the best high school basketball player in the country ( along with Okafor , Turner and Mudiay ) . High school basketball writer Ronnie Flores regards the performance as one of the top 5 performances against a nationally highly rated high school basketball team since the turn of the century , ranking it with Louis Williams ( 2005 ) , Kevin Durant ( 2006 ) , Kevin Love ( 2007 ) and LeBron James ( 2001 ) . The win bolted Curie to the number one ranking in the nation according to <unk> Alexander 's performance moved him to the top of the rankings in the Mr. Basketball USA midseason tracker . He was ranked first by a wide margin and held the number one position on 7 out of 10 ballots . 
 = = = = 2014 postseason = = = = 
 As the CPL playoffs began on February 5 , a February 21 championship game clash between Okafor and Alexander was pondered in the local press after the 32 @-@ team brackets were announced . The CPL playoffs began with victories over Perspectives Charter by 71 – 37 and North Lawndale Charter High School 75 – 63 . Against North Lawndale , Alexander had 27 points , 15 rebounds and 5 blocks . On February 16 , Curie defeated Simeon 71 – 64 . Alexander had 16 points , 12 rebounds , and 6 blocks earning a February 19 CPL semifinals rematch against Hyde Park Academy High School who they have already beaten twice this season . Alexander and Curie won 58 – 56 to reach the anticipated city championship matchup with Young and Okafor at the Jones Convocation Center . Alexander had a triple double with 10 points , 10 rebounds and 10 blocks . The matchup was the most anticipated city championship game since at least 1998 when fellow McDonald 's All @-@ Americans Quentin Richardson of Young and Corey Maggette of Fenwick High School were both top 15 players . On February 20 , Alexander improved his first place total in the Mr. Basketball USA Tracker , holding eight first place and two second place votes . Curie won the city championship 69 – 66 in quadruple overtime as Alexander had 20 points , 14 rebounds and 4 blocks according to Chicago Tribune and Comcast SportsNet , while the Chicago Sun @-@ Times and Sports Illustrated credited him with just 12 rebounds . This came against Okafor who had 16 points and 9 , 8 or 4 rebounds before fouling out with 2 : 13 remaining in regulation depending on which of the three sources you believe . The CPL Championship game was attended by Mayor of Chicago Rahm Emanuel and was the lead story on the late edition of SportsCenter . Seven days later , Curie was forced to forfeit all of its wins and the CPL championship due to the academic ineligibility of seven of its players . The title will remain vacant . 
 Okafor and Alexander vied for a host of local and national player of the year awards , with each winning multiple national player of the year awards . Young and Curie were both in the Marist Class 4A sectional in the 2014 IHSA playoffs and could have met again in the round of sixteen on March 14 if they had both won three regional contests . Despite forfeiting all wins in CPL games , Curie remained eligible to compete in the IHSA playoffs due to differences in eligibility rules . On March 4 , Curie lost their opening IHSA playoff game to 11 – 11 DuSable High School by an 88 – 85 margin in overtime . It marked Curies first loss of the season on the court with Alexander in the lineup . Alexander posted 25 points , 15 rebounds , and 8 blocks despite fouling out in the final minute of regulation time . Curie trailed 13 – 2 early and led 47 – 32 midway through the third quarter . Curie starters Josh and Joseph Stamps were ineligible for IHSA play as was Malik Washington . 
 In the April 2 , 2014 , McDonald 's All @-@ American Game Alexander posted 9 points and a game @-@ high ( tied with Kevon Looney ) 11 rebounds for the losing east team . In the April 18 Jordan Brand Classic , he was co @-@ MVP ( with Okafor ) . In the game he posted 23 points , 8 rebounds and 5 blocks . 
 = = = = Awards and honors = = = = 
 Alexander was selected to the 10 @-@ man Team USA for the 17th annual Nike Hoop Summit on April 12 , 2014 at the Moda Center . He was selected along with fellow Chicagoan Okafor and fellow Kansas commit Oubre . He was also selected to the 24 @-@ player 37th annual April 2 , 2014 McDonald 's All @-@ American Boys Game at the United Center . He was joined as a McDonald 's All @-@ American by fellow Chicagoans Ulis and Okafor as well as Oubre . He was recognized as first team All @-@ City along with Young teammates White and Okafor as well as Louis Adams , Jr. of Orr High School , and <unk> <unk> of Bogan High School by the Chicago Sun @-@ Times . On February 18 , he became one of three finalists for the Naismith Prep Player of the Year Award along with Okafor and Stanley Johnson . On March 7 Alexander won the Chicago Sun @-@ Times Player of the Year as well as the Naismith Player of the Year . On March 10 , he was one of 26 players selected for the April 18 , 2014 Jordan Brand Classic again along with fellow Chicagoans Ulis and Okafor as well as fellow Kansas commit Oubre . He was recognized as one of twenty Parade All @-@ Americans . He was named Associated Press Class 4A 1st team All @-@ state with Okafor , Brunson , Ulis and Sean O 'Mara . Alexander lost out to Okafor in the Illinois Mr. Basketball voting by a 492 – 402 vote . He was a USA Today first team All @-@ USA Boys Basketball Team selection along with Okafor , Oubre , Mudiay , and Stanley Johnson . He earned first team All @-@ American recognition from MaxPreps on April 13 . On April 16 , he earned another national player of the year award Mr. Basketball USA . 
 = = = Comparisons = = = 
 Prior to his sophomore season , he was considered more raw , but more athletic than Okafor , according to the Chicago Sun @-@ Times basketball reporter Joe Henricksen . At that stage in head @-@ to @-@ head competition , Alexander was overmatched by Okafor . Following his sophomore season , Reggie Rose ( Derrick Rose 's brother ) noted that Alexander was more suited toward a fast break offense while Okafor would be more likely to excel in a half @-@ court set . He is also compared to Anthony Bennett , although Alexander needs to improve his outside shooting to make the comparison valid and he needs to improve his low post mastery for a valid comparison to Jared Sullinger . Alexander feels he is most often compared to Amar 'e Stoudemire , which he is comfortable with because he views Stoudemire as someone who " ... can shoot the 15 @-@ footer , put it on the floor , post moves , sets good screens . " NBADraft.net compares Alexander to Thomas Robinson , while Bleacher Report 's Kerry Miller compared him to Robinson and Julius Randle , noting despite his phenomenal physicality , he is undersized to play center and lacking the midrange jump shot necessary to play power forward . 
 He is known as the type of player likely to get a slam dunk if he gets the ball near the rim . His high dunk frequency is attributed to his multidimensional quickness , intuitive sense for the ball and his " brute physicality " . His " sheer dominance , along with his physical and athletic presence " are what make him a unique talent . At the July 2013 LeBron James Skills Academy , James told him to develop his ballhandling and strength . 
 Alexander is also compared to local products Jabari Parker and Jahlil Okafor for off the court reasons . Whereas , they have been groomed to think about behaving like future celebrity athletes , Alexander is a star from off the street who has to be reminded of his role now . For example , when WGN named him athlete of the month in December 2013 , they quoted his coach Mike Oliver who said , " People fail to realize ( Simeon and Duke star ) Jabari Parker and ( Duke @-@ bound Young center ) Jahlil Okafor were groomed for this . For Cliff , this came out of nowhere , like a big wind thrown in his face . " As a senior , he and crosstown fellow Naismith Prep Player of the Year Award finalist Okafor were compared by a Chicago Sun @-@ Times photographer as follows : " Okafor is Beverly Hills , Cliff is Inglewood . " because Okafor is known for his polished footwork and finesse , Alexander is known for his dominating power game of dunks and blocks . Sun @-@ Times reporter Michael O 'Brien stated the comparison more eloquently saying that for the next generation area big men will be compared to the duo : " Alexander as the gold standard for speed , power and athleticism ; Okafor for technique , poise and polish . " 
 = = College career = = 
 Alexander entered his college career as the Big 12 Conference Preseason Co @-@ Freshmen of the Year ( along with Myles Turner ) according to a vote of the league 's head coaches . In its preseason top 100 player ranking , Alexander was listed at number 27 by ESPN . USA Today named him to its Preseason All @-@ American third team and NBCSports.com named him as an honorable mention for its Preseason All @-@ American team . He was also listed as a John R. Wooden Award Preseason Top 50 candidate and a Wayman Tisdale Award Watch list selection . Alexander was also included in the early December Naismith Award top 50 watch list . 
 Alexander began the season coming off the bench . On November 24 , Alexander had his first double @-@ digit output with 10 points against Rider . In the 2014 Orlando Classic semifinals against Tennessee on November 28 , he posted 16 points . Then in the finals against # 20 Michigan State on November 30 , he contributed 4 blocks . On December 5 during the Big 12 / SEC Challenge contest against Florida , Alexander posted a team @-@ high 10 rebounds along with 12 points for his first collegiate double @-@ double . On December 20 , Alexander was expected to be in the starting lineup for the first time against Lafayette , but he was not . However , he started on December 22 against Temple . On January 19 against # 19 Oklahoma , Alexander posted 13 points and 13 rebounds . The 13 rebounds in just 23 minutes played marked a career high for Alexander and an individual season high for the Jayhawks . Alexander was named Big 12 newcomer of the week on January 26 , 2015 . Alexander made his second start of the season on February 10 against Texas Tech , replacing Jamari Traylor in the lineup and posting 10 points , 4 blocks and 5 rebounds . On February 28 , Alexander was inactivated due to an undisclosed NCAA investigation as a precautionary measure . He did not play any games after February 23 because of the investigation of his mother 's initiation of pre @-@ NBA draft loan processing . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Portland Trail Blazers ( 2015 – 2016 ) = = = 
 On April 7 , in the face of a battle for NCAA reinstatement that saw him miss the last 8 games of the season , Alexander declared for the June 25 , 2015 NBA draft . On May 31 , Alexander suffered a right knee injury in draft workout with the Los Angeles Lakers . After going undrafted , Alexander joined the Brooklyn Nets for the 2015 NBA Summer League . He averaged 6 @.@ 7 rebounds , 0 @.@ 3 assists , and 1 @.@ 5 blocks in 22 minutes per game in the summer league . On July 24 , 2015 , Alexander signed with the Portland Trail Blazers . By the beginning of training camp , Alexander 's injury caused him to be expected to miss two weeks . He was one of five non @-@ guaranteed contract players vying for three roster spots . Alexander missed the entire preseason with the Trail Blazers due to his knee but made the roster and entered the season behind Meyers Leonard , Mason Plumlee , Ed Davis , Noah Vonleh , and Al @-@ Farouq <unk> on the depth chart . Despite minor torn cartilage issues , Alexander was active for the first time on November 8 in Portland 's seventh game of the season . Alexander played 17 minutes on November 15 , posting 4 points , 4 rebounds and a block against Charlotte . 
 On March 10 , 2016 , using the flexible assignment rule , Alexander was assigned to the Santa Cruz Warriors , the D @-@ League affiliate of the Golden State Warriors . On March 20 , he was recalled by Portland . 
 On July 7 , 2016 , Alexander was waived by the Trail Blazers . The transaction was a maneuver to create salary cap space for Festus <unk> . After he cleared waivers , the Trail Blazers added him to its NBA Summer League roster . 
 = = National team career = = 
 Alexander was selected by USA Basketball to represent Team USA in the inaugural 2013 FIBA Americas 3x3 U18 Championship in August . He helped the team achieve gold . In the September 26 – 29 , 2013 FIBA 3x3 U18 World Championship in Jakarta , Indonesia , Team USA finished 9th with a 7 – 1 record , losing in the opening round of 16 in the playoffs . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Alexander 's father is 6 @-@ foot @-@ 7 @-@ inch ( 2 @.@ 01 m ) Clifton Terry , who played basketball for Robeson High School and Kennedy – King College . Following his time at the two @-@ year Kennedy @-@ King , Terry declared for the 2001 NBA draft . His professional career included time in the NBA Development League . Alexander picked up basketball late due to the lack of available safe courts to play on in his Chicago West Side neighborhood known as the Brian Piccolo community . 
 = Good Vibrations = 
 " Good Vibrations " is a song composed and produced by Brian Wilson with words by Mike Love for the American rock band the Beach Boys . Released as a single in October 1966 , it was an immediate critical and commercial hit , topping record charts in several countries including the US and UK . Characterized for its complex soundscapes , episodic structure , and subversions of pop music formula , it was the most expensive single ever made at the time of its release . " Good Vibrations " later became widely acknowledged as one of the greatest masterpieces of rock music . 
 Initiated during the sessions for the album Pet Sounds ( 1966 ) , it was not taken from or issued as a lead single for an album , but rather as a stand @-@ alone single , with the Pet Sounds instrumental " Let 's Go Away for Awhile " as a B @-@ side . It was considered for the Smile project , but instead appeared on the album Smiley Smile ( 1967 ) . Most of the song was developed as it was recorded . Its title derived from Wilson 's fascination with cosmic vibrations , after his mother once told him as a child that dogs sometimes bark at people in response to their " bad vibrations " . He used the concept to suggest extrasensory perception , while Love 's lyrics were inspired by the Flower Power movement that was then burgeoning in Southern California . 
 The making of " Good Vibrations " was unprecedented for any kind of recording , with a total production cost estimated between $ 50 @,@ 000 and $ 75 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to $ 360 @,@ 000 and $ 550 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) . Building upon the multi @-@ layered approach he had formulated with Pet Sounds , Wilson recorded the song in different sections at four Hollywood studios over an eight month period , resulting in a cut @-@ up mosaic of several musical episodes marked by disjunctive key and modal shifts . Band publicist Derek Taylor dubbed the unusual work a " pocket symphony " . It contained previously untried mixes of instruments , including jaw harp and Electro @-@ Theremin , and was the first pop hit to have a cello playing juddering rhythms . 
 For " Good Vibrations " , Wilson is credited with further developing the use of the recording studio as an instrument . The single revolutionized rock music from live concert performances to studio productions which could only exist on record , heralding a wave of pop experimentation and the onset of psychedelic and progressive rock . It is also frequently cited for its use of theremin , which led to the instrument 's revival and to an increased interest in analog synthesizers . Its success earned the Beach Boys a Grammy nomination for Best Vocal Group performance in 1966 ; the song was eventually inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame in 1994 . It has featured highly in many charts , being voted number one in the Mojo " Top 100 Records of All Time " chart in 1997 and number six on Rolling Stone 's list of the " 500 Greatest Songs of All Time " . The Rock and Roll Hall of Fame included " Good Vibrations " in its list of the " 500 Songs that Shaped Rock and Roll " . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Beach Boys ' leader Brian Wilson was responsible for the musical composition and virtually all of the arrangement for " Good Vibrations " . His cousin and bandmate Mike Love contributed the song 's lyrics and its bass vocalization in the chorus . During the recording sessions for Pet Sounds ( 1966 ) , Wilson began changing his writing process . Rather than going to the studio with a completed song , he would record a track containing a series of chord changes he liked , take an acetate disc home , and then write the song 's melody and lyrics . For " Good Vibrations " , Wilson explains , " I had a lot of unfinished ideas , fragments of music I called ' feels . ' Each feel represented a mood or an emotion I 'd felt , and I planned to fit them together like a mosaic . " Most of the song 's structure and arrangement was written as it was recorded . Engineer Chuck Britz is quoted saying that Wilson considered the song to be " his whole life performance in one track . " Wilson stated : " I was an energetic 23 @-@ year @-@ old . ... I said : ' This is going to be better than [ the Phil Spector production ] ' You 've Lost That Lovin ' Feelin ' ' .' " 
 = = Inspiration and lyricism = = 
 Brian explained that the song was inspired by his mother : " [ She ] used to tell me about vibrations . I didn 't really understand too much of what it meant when I was just a boy . It scared me , the word ' vibrations ' . She told me about dogs that would bark at people and then not bark at others , that a dog would pick up vibrations from these people that you can 't see , but you can feel . " Brian first enlisted Pet Sounds lyricist Tony Asher for help in putting words to the idea . When Brian presented the song on piano , Asher thought that it had an interesting premise with the potential for hit status , but could not fathom the end result due to Brian 's primitive piano playing style . Asher remembers : " Brian was playing what amounts to the hook of the song : ' Good , good , good , good vibrations ' . He started telling me the story about his mother . ... He said he ’ d always thought that it would be fun to write a song about vibes and picking them up from other people . ... So as we started to work , he played this little rhythmic pattern – a riff on the piano , the thing that goes under the chorus . " Brian wanted to call the song " Good Vibes " , but Asher advised that it was " lightweight use of the language , " suggesting that " Good Vibrations " would sound less " trendy . " The two proceeded to write a lyric for the verses , later to be discarded , in what was then the most basic section of the song . 
 From the start , Wilson envisioned a theremin for the track . AllMusic reviewer John Bush pointed out : " Radio listeners could easily pick up the link between the title and the obviously electronic riffs sounding in the background of the chorus , but Wilson 's use of the theremin added another delicious parallel – between the single 's theme and its use of an instrument the player never even touched . " At that time , theremins were most associated with the Alfred Hitchcock film Spellbound ( 1945 ) , but its most common presence was in the theme music for the television sitcom My Favorite Martian ( 1963 – 66 ) . Britz speculates : " He just walked in and said , ' I have this new sound for you . ' I think he must have heard the sound somewhere and loved it , and built a song around it . " 
 Brian has credited his brother and bandmate Carl for suggesting the cello as an instrument to use . He also stated that its triplet beat on the chorus was his own idea , and that it was based on the Crystals ' " Da Doo Ron Ron " ( 1963 ) , produced by Spector . Alternatively , multi @-@ instrumentalist songwriter Van Dyke Parks says that he suggested having the <unk> play triplets for Brian . Parks believes that having Brian exploit the cello " to such a hyperbolic degree " was what encouraged the duo to immediately collaborate on the ultimately unfinished album Smile . At some point , Brian asked Parks to pen lyrics for the song , although Parks declined . 
 Mike Love submitted the final lyrics for " Good Vibrations " , claiming to have written them on the drive to the studio . Love reacted upon hearing the unfinished backing track : " [ It ] was already so avant @-@ garde , especially with the theremin , I wondered how our fans were going to relate to it . How 's this going to go over in the Midwest or Birmingham ? It was such a departure from ' Surfin ' U.S.A. ' or ' Help Me , Rhonda ' . " Feeling that the song could be " the Beach Boys ' psychedelic anthem or flower power offering " , he based the lyrics on the burgeoning psychedelic music and Flower Power movements occurring in San Francisco and some parts of the Los Angeles area . He described the lyrics : " ... just a flowery poem . Kind of almost like ' If you ’ re going to San Francisco be sure to wear flowers in your hair ' . " Writer Bruce Golden observed : 
 The new pastoral landscape suddenly being uncovered by the young generation provided a quiet , peaceful , harmonious trip into inner space . The hassles and frustrations of the external world were cast aside , and new visions put in their place . " Good Vibrations " succeeds in suggesting the healthy emanations that should result from psychic tranquility and inner peace . The word " vibrations " had been employed by students of Eastern philosophy and acid @-@ heads for a variety of purposes , but Wilson uses it here to suggest a kind of extrasensory experience . 
 Capitol Records executives were worried that the lyrics contained psychedelic overtones , and Brian is said to have based the song 's production on his LSD experiences . Brian clarified that the song was written under the influence of marijuana , not LSD . He explained : " I made ‘ Good Vibrations ’ on drugs ; I used drugs to make that . ... I learned how to function behind drugs , and it improved my brain ... it made me more rooted in my sanity . " In Steven Gaines ' 1986 biography , Wilson is quoted on the lyrics : " We talked about good vibrations with the song and the idea , and we decided on one hand that you could say … those are sensual things . And then you 'd say , ' I 'm picking up good vibrations , ' which is a contrast against the sensual , the extrasensory perception that we have . That 's what we 're really talking about . " Brian claimed in 2012 that the song 's " gotta keep those good vibrations " bridge was inspired by Stephen Foster . Al Jardine compared the section to Foster 's " Down by the Riverside . " According to Love , the lyric " ' she goes with me to a blossom world ' was originally meant to be followed by the words ' we find , ' " but Brian elected to cut off the line to highlight the bass track linking into the chorus . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 = = = Modular approach = = = 
 " Good Vibrations " established a new method of operation for Wilson . Instead of working on whole songs with clear large @-@ scale syntactical structures , Wilson limited himself to recording short interchangeable fragments ( or " modules " ) . Through the method of tape splicing , each fragment could then be assembled into a linear sequence , allowing any number of larger structures and divergent moods to be produced at a later time . This was the same modular approach used during the sessions for Smile and Smiley Smile . To mask each tape edit , vast reverb decays were added at the mixing and sub @-@ mixing stages . 
 For instrumentation , Wilson employed the services of " the Wrecking Crew " , nickname for the conglomerate of session musicians active in Los Angeles at that time . Most pop singles of the time were typically recorded in a day or two , but production for " Good Vibrations " spanned more than a dozen recording sessions at four different Hollywood studios . It was reported to have used over 90 hours of magnetic recording tape , with an eventual budget estimated between $ 50 @,@ 000 and $ 75 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to $ 360 @,@ 000 and $ 550 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) , at that time the largest sum ever spent on a single . In comparison , the whole of Pet Sounds had cost $ 70 @,@ 000 ( $ 510 @,@ 000 ) , itself an unusually high cost for an album . According to Wilson , the Electro @-@ Theremin work alone cost $ 15 @,@ 000 ( $ 110 @,@ 000 ) . It 's said that Wilson was so puzzled by " Good Vibrations " that he would often arrive at a session , consider a few possibilities , and then leave without recording anything , which exacerbated costs . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The instrumental of the first version of the song was recorded on February 17 , 1966 , at Gold Star Studios and was logged as a Pet Sounds session . On that day 's session log , it was given the name " # 1 Untitled " or " Good , Good , Good Vibrations " , but on its master tape , Wilson distinctly states " ' Good Vibrations ' ... take one . " After twenty @-@ six takes , a rough mono mix completed the session . Some additional instruments and rough guide vocals were overdubbed on March 3 . 
 The original version of " Good Vibrations " contained the characteristics of a " funky rhythm and blues number " and would not yet resemble a " pocket symphony " . There was no cello at this juncture , but the Electro @-@ Theremin was present , played by its inventor Paul Tanner . It was Brian 's second ever recorded use of the instrument , just three days after the Pet Sounds track " I Just Wasn 't Made for These Times " . Brian then placed " Good Vibrations " on hold in order to devote attention to the Pet Sounds album , which saw release on May 16 . More instrumental sections for " Good Vibrations " were recorded between April and June . Brian then forewent additional instrumental tracking until early September , when it was decided to revisit the song 's bridge section and apply Electro @-@ Theremin overdubs . 
 According to Brian 's then @-@ new friend David Anderle , during an early stage , Brian considered giving " Good Vibrations " to one of the black rhythm and blues groups signed with Warner Bros. Records such as Wilson Pickett , and then at Anderle 's suggestion to singer Danny Hutton . He thought about junking the track , but after receiving encouragement from Anderle , eventually decided on it as the next Beach Boys single . In the meantime , he worked on writing and recording material for the group 's forthcoming album Smile . 
 The first Beach Boy to hear " Good Vibrations " in a semi @-@ completed form was Carl Wilson , who had previously participated in rough guide vocals with Brian for the initial February mix . Following a performance with the touring group in North Dakota : " I came back up into my hotel room one night and the phone rang . It was Brian on the other end . He called me from the recording studio and played this really bizarre sounding music over the phone . There were drums smashing , that kind of stuff , and then it refined itself and got into the cello . It was a real funky track . " In 1976 , Brian revealed that before the final mixdown , he had been confronted with resistance by members of the group whom Brian declined to name . The subject of their worries and complaints was the song 's length and " modern " sound : " I said no , it 's not going to be too long a record , it 's going to be just right . … They didn 't quite understand what this jumping from studio to studio was all about . And they couldn 't conceive of the record as I did . I saw the record as a totality piece . " 
 The vocals for " Good Vibrations " were recorded at CBS Columbia Square , starting on August 24 and continuing sporadically until the very last day of assembly on September 21 . The episodic structure of the composition was continuously revised as the group experimented with different ideas . Brian remembers that he began recording the " bop bop good vibrations " parts first , and that he came up with " the high parts " a week later . Mike Love recalled : " I can remember doing 25 – 30 vocal overdubs of the same part , and when I mean the same part , I mean same section of a record , maybe no more than two , three , four , five seconds long . " Dennis Wilson was to have sung the lead vocal , but due to a bout of laryngitis , Carl replaced him at the last minute . In early September , the master tapes for " Good Vibrations " were stolen . <unk> , they reappeared inside Brian 's home two days later . 
 On September 21 , Brian completed the track after Tanner added a final Electro @-@ Theremin overdub . In 1976 he elaborated on the event : " It was at Columbia . I remember I had it right in the sack . I could just feel it when I dubbed it down , made the final mix from the 16 @-@ track down to mono . It was a feeling of power , it was a rush . A feeling of exaltation . Artistic beauty . It was everything … I remember saying , ' Oh my God . Sit back and listen to this ! ' " 
 = = Composition and analysis = = 
 There are six unique sections to the piece , as labelled by music theorist Daniel Harrison : 
 Verse 
 Refrain ( chorus ) 
 First episodic digression 
 Second episodic digression 
 Retro @-@ refrain 
 Coda 
 Each section has a distinct musical texture , partly due to the nature of the song 's recording . The track 's instrumentation changes radically from section to section . Music journal Sound on Sound explains : " Typical pop songs of that era ( or indeed any era ) usually have a basic groove running throughout the track which doesn 't change a great deal from start to finish ... pop records were either guitar , bass and drum combos or traditional orchestrated arrangements for vocalists … The exotic instruments , the complex vocal arrangements , and the many dynamic crescendos and decrescendos all combine to set this record apart from most pop music . In short , if there 's an instruction manual for writing and arranging pop songs , this one breaks every rule . " For the AM radio standards of late 1966 , the song 's final runtime ( 3 minutes 35 seconds ) was considered a " very long " duration . Wilson is quoted in 1979 : 
 It had a lot of riff changes ... movements ... It was a pocket symphony — changes , changes , changes , building harmonies here , drop this voice out , this comes in , bring this echo in , put the theremin here , bring the cello up a little louder here ... It was the biggest production of our lives ! 
 He characterized the song as " advanced rhythm and blues , " while its theremin and cello has been called the song 's " psychedelic ingredient . " In his book discussing music of the counterculture era , James <unk> stated that the song represented a type of impressionistic psychedelia , in particular for its cello playing repeated bass notes and its theremin . Professor of American history John Robert Greene named " Good Vibrations " among examples of psychedelic or acid rock . Stebbins wrote that the song was " replete with sunshine [ and ] psychedelia . " Uncut wrote that " Good Vibrations " was " three minutes and thirty @-@ six seconds of avant @-@ garde pop . " Steve Valdez says that , like Pet Sounds , Brian was attempting a more experimental rock style . It has since been marketed as pop music , " possibly because it comes across relatively innocent compared with the hard @-@ edged rock we have since come to know , " says historian Lorenzo Candelaria . Sound on Sound argues that the song " has as many dramatic changes in mood as a piece of serious classical music lasting more than half an hour " . Tom Roland of American Songwriter described the piece : " with its interlocking segments – a sort of pop version of the classical sonata , consisting of a series of musical movements " . New York Magazine compared it to " a fugue with a rhythmic beat " . John Bush compared the track 's fragmented cut @-@ and @-@ paste style to 1960s experimentalists such as William S. Burroughs . 
 According to academic Rikky Rooksby , " Good Vibrations " is an example of Brian 's growing interest in musical development within a composition , something antithetical to popular music of the time . Suppressing tonic strength and cadential drive , the song makes use of descending harmonic motions through scale degrees controlled by a single tonic and " radical disjunctions " in key , texture , instrumentation , and mood while refusing to develop into a predictable formal pattern . It instead develops " under its own power , " and " luxuriates in harmonic variety , " exemplified by beginning and ending not only in different keys but also in different modes . Comparing " Good Vibrations " to Brian 's previous work Pet Sounds , biographer Andrew Hickey has said : " [ T ] he best way of thinking about [ the song ] is that it 's taking the lowest common denominator of ' Here Today ' and ' God Only Knows ' and turned the result into an R & B track . We have the same minor @-@ key change between verse and chorus we 've seen throughout Pet Sounds , the same descending scalar chord sequences , the same mobile bass parts , but here , rather than to express melancholy , these things are used in a way that 's as close as Brian Wilson ever got to funky . " Stebbins adds that " unlike Pet Sounds , the chorus of ' Good Vibrations ' projects a definite ' rock and roll ' energy and feel . " 
 = = = Verses and choruses = = = 
 " Good Vibrations " begins without introduction in a traditional verse / refrain format , opening with Carl Wilson singing the word " I " , a triplet quaver before the downbeat . The sparse first verse contains a repetition of chords played on a Hammond organ filtered through a Leslie speaker ; underneath is a two @-@ bar Fender bass melody . This sequence repeats once ( 0 : 15 ) , but with the addition of two piccolos sustaining over a falling flute line . For percussion , bongo drums double the bass rhythm and every fourth @-@ beat is struck by either a tambourine or a bass @-@ drum @-@ and @-@ snare combination , in alternation . The beat projects a triplet feel despite being in 4 / 4 time ; this is sometimes called a " shuffle beat " or " threes over fours " . The chord progression used is i – ♭ VII – ♭ VI – V , also called an Andalusian cadence . Although the verses begin in the minor mode of E ♭ , the mode is not used to express sadness or drudgery . Occurring at the very end of these verses is a passing chord , D ♭ . 
 The refrain ( 0 : 25 ) begins in the newly <unk> relative major G ♭ , which suggests ♭ III . Providing a backdrop to the Electro @-@ Theremin is a cello and string bass playing a bowed tremolo triplet , a feature that was an exceedingly rare effect in pop music . The Fender bass is steady at one note per beat while tom drums and tambourine provide a backbeat . This time , the rhythm is stable , and is split into four 4 @-@ bar sections which gradually build its vocals . The first section consists of only the line " I 'm picking up good vibrations " ; the second adds an " ooo bop bop " figure ; the third adds a " good , good , good , good vibrations " higher harmony . This type of polyphony ( counterpoint ) is also rare in contemporary popular styles . Meanwhile , the song transposes up by two whole steps , ascending from G ♭ to A ♭ and then B ♭ . It then returns to the verse , thus making a perfect cadence back into E ♭ minor . Unusually , when the verse and chorus are repeated , there are no changes to the patterns of its instrumentation and harmony . Normally , a song 's arrangement adds something once it reaches the second verse . 
 = = = Episodic digressions = = = 
 The first episode ( 1 : 41 + ) begins <unk> . The refrain 's B ♭ , which had received a dominant ( V ) charge , is now maintained as a tonic ( I ) . There is harmonic ambiguity , where the chord progression may be either interpreted as I – IV – I ( in B ♭ ) or V – I – V ( in G ♭ ) . Biographer Jon Stebbins says that this section " might be called a bridge under normal circumstances , but the song 's structure takes such an abstract route that traditional labels don 't really apply . " A new sound is created by tack piano , jaw harp , and bass relegated to strong beats which is subsequently ( 1 : 55 ) augmented by a new electric organ , bass harmonica , and sleigh bells shaken on every beat . This section lasts for ten measures ( 6 + 2 + 2 ) , which is unexpectedly long in light of previous patterns . 
 Another tape splice occurs at 2 : 13 , transitioning to an electric organ playing sustained chords set in the key of F accompanied by a maraca shaken on every beat . Sound on Sound highlights this change as the " most savage edit in the track ... most people would go straight into a big splash hook @-@ line section . Brian Wilson decided to slow the track even further , moving into a 23 @-@ bar section of church organ ... Most arrangers would steer clear of this kind of drop in pace , on the grounds that it would be chart suicide , but not Brian . " Harrison says : " The appearance of episode 1 was unusual enough but could be explained as an extended break between verse and refrain sections . Episode 2 however , makes that interpretation untenable , and both listener and analyst must entertain the idea that ' Good Vibrations ' develops under its own power , as it were , without the guidance of overdetermined formal patterns . Brian ’ s own description of the song — a three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ minute ' pocket symphony ' — is a telling clue about his formal ambitions here . " The slowed pace is complemented by the lyric ( " Gotta keep those loving good vibrations a @-@ happening with her " ) , sung once first as a solo voice , with the melody repeated an octave higher the second time with an accompanying harmony . This two @-@ part vocal fades as a solo harmonica plays a melody on top of the persistent quarter @-@ note bass line and maraca that maintain the only rhythm throughout Episode 2 . The section ends with a five @-@ part harmony vocalizing a whole @-@ note chord that is sustained by reverb for a further 4 beats . Lambert calls it the song 's " wake @-@ up chord at the end of the meditation that transports the concept into a whole new realm : it 's an iconic moment among iconic moments . As it rouses us from a blissful dream and echoes into the silence leading into the chorus , it seems to capture every sound and message the song has to say . " 
 = = = Retro @-@ refrain and coda = = = 
 The refrain reappears for an additional five measures , marching through a <unk> structure that begins in B ♭ , repeats at A ♭ , and then ends at G ♭ for an unexpectedly short single measure . There follows a short section of vocalizing in three @-@ part counterpoint that references the original refrain by reproducing upward transposition . However , this time it settles on A ♭ , the concluding key of the song . By the end of " Good Vibrations " , all seven scale degrees of the opening E ♭ <unk> tonic are activated on some level . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 In July 1966 , an ad was placed in Billboard for the Pet Sounds album which thanked the industry for the sales of their latest album , and that , " We 're moved over the fact that our Pet Sounds brought on nothing but Good Vibrations . " This was the first public hint of the new single . Later in the year , Brian told journalist Tom Nolan that the new Beach Boys single was " about a guy who picks up good vibrations from a girl " and that it would be a " monster " . He then suggested : " It 's still sticking pretty close to that same boy @-@ girl thing , you know , but with a difference . And it 's a start , it 's definitely a start . " Newly employed band publicist Derek Taylor is credited for originally coining the work a " pocket symphony " . He promoted the single stating : " Wilson 's instinctive talents for mixing sounds could most nearly equate to those of the old painters whose special secret was in the blending of their oils . And what is most amazing about all outstanding creative artists is that they are using only those basic materials which are freely available to everyone else . " 
 To promote the single , four different music videos were shot . The first of these — with Caleb Deschanel as cameraman — features the group at a fire station , sliding down its pole , and roaming the streets of Los Angeles in a fashion comparable to The Monkees . The second features the group during vocal rehearsals at United Western Recorders . The third is footage recorded during the making of The Beach Boys in London , a documentary by Peter Whitehead of their concert performances . The fourth is an alternative edit of the third . Brian also made a rare personal appearance on local television station KHJ @-@ TV for its Teen Rock and Roll Dance Program , introducing the song to its in @-@ studio audience and presenting an exclusive preview of the completed record . 
 = = Critical reaction and sales = = 
 On October 15 , 1966 , Billboard predicted that the single would reach the top 20 in the Billboard Hot 100 chart . " Good Vibrations " was the Beach Boys ' third US number one hit after " I Get Around " and " Help Me , Rhonda " , reaching the top of the Hot 100 in December , as well as being their first number one in Britain . It sold over 230 @,@ 000 copies in the US during its first four days of its release and entered the Cash Box chart at number 61 on October 22 . In the UK , the song sold over 50 @,@ 000 copies in the first 15 days of its release . " Good Vibrations " quickly became the Beach Boys ' first million @-@ selling single . In December 1966 , the record was their first single certified gold by the RIAA . After the criteria for a gold record was modified , the RIAA failed to correct the listing , despite " Good Vibrations " being eligible for status as a platinum record as of 2015 . On March 30 , 2016 , the single was certified platinum by the RIAA . 
 Both New Musical Express and Melody Maker gave positive reviews at the time of the single 's release . Soon after , the Beach Boys were voted the number one band in the world in a readers ' poll conducted by NME , ahead of the Beatles , the Walker Brothers , the Rolling Stones , and the Four Tops . Billboard speculated that this was influenced by the success of " Good Vibrations " , and that " The sensational success of the Beach Boys , however , is being taken as a portent that the popularity of the top British groups of the last three years is past its peak . " In a Danish newspaper , readers ' polls voted Brian the winner of its " best foreign @-@ produced recording award " for the single , its first that the publication awarded to an American . A 1972 New York Magazine article would call the song " harmonically perfect " . 
 When asked about the song in 1990 , Paul McCartney of the Beatles responded " I thought it was a great record . It didn 't quite have the emotional thing that Pet Sounds had for me . I 've often played Pet Sounds and cried . It 's that kind of an album for me . " Pete Townshend of the Who was quoted in the 1960s saying " ' Good Vibrations ' was probably a good record but who 's to know ? You had to play it about 90 bloody times to even hear what they were singing about , " and feared that the single would lead to a trend of overproduction . In an Arts Magazine issue published in 1966 , Jonathan King said : " With justification , comments are being passed that ' Good Vibrations ' is an inhuman work of art . Computerized pop , mechanized music . Take a machine , feed in various musical instruments , add a catch phrase , stir well , and press seven buttons . It is long and split . ... impressive , fantastic , commercial — yes . Emotional , soul @-@ destroying , shattering — no . " In the 2000s , record producer Phil Spector criticized the single for depending too much on tape manipulation , negatively referring to it as an " edit record ... It 's like Psycho is a great film , but it 's an ' edit film . ' Without edits , it 's not a film ; with edits , it 's a great film . But it 's not Rebecca ... it 's not a beautiful story . " 
 = = Influence and legacy = = 
 Virtually every pop music critic recognizes " Good Vibrations " as one of the most important compositions and recordings of the entire rock era , and it is regularly hailed as one of the finest pop productions of all time . To the counterculture of the 1960s , it served as an anthem . The A.V. Club theorized that the song helped turn around the perception of Pet Sounds ; that the " un @-@ hip orchestrations and pervasive sadness baffled some longtime fans , who didn 't immediately get what Wilson was trying to do . " Encouraged by the success of the song , Brian continued working on the Smile project , intending it as an entire album using the writing and production techniques devised for " Good Vibrations " . " Heroes and Villains " , a follow @-@ up single , continued Brian 's modular recording practices , spanning nearly thirty recording sessions between May 1966 and June 1967 . 
 = = = Advancements = = = 
 = = = = Recording and popular music = = = = 
 " Good Vibrations " is acknowledged to have further developed the use of recording studios as a musical instrument . Author Domenic Priore noted that the song 's making was " unlike anything previous in the realms of classical , jazz , international , soundtrack , or any other kind of recording " . A milestone in the development of rock music , it was a prime proponent in revolutionizing rock music from live concert performances to studio productions which could only exist on record . Musicologist Charlie Gillett called it " one of the first records to flaunt studio production as a quality in its own right , rather than as a means of presenting a performance " . In a 1968 editorial for Jazz & Pop , Gene Sculatti predicted : 
 " Good Vibrations " may yet prove to be the most significantly revolutionary piece of the current rock renaissance ; executed as it is in conventional Beach Boys manner , it is one of the few organically complete rock works ; every audible note and every silence contributes to the whole three minutes , 35 seconds , of the song . It is the ultimate in @-@ studio production trip , very much rock ' n ' roll in the emotional sense and yet un @-@ <unk> in its <unk> , [ sic ] dimensional conceptions . In no minor way , " Good Vibrations " is a primary influential piece for all producing rock artists ; everyone has felt its import to some degree , in such disparate things as the Yellow Balloon 's " Yellow Balloon " and the Beatles ' " A Day in the Life " , in groups as far apart as ( recent ) Grateful Dead and the Association , as Van Dyke Parks and the Who . 
 Popmatters wrote : " ' Good Vibrations ' changed the way a pop record could be made , the way a pop record could sound , and the lyrics a pop record could have . " It contained previously untried mixes of instruments , and was the first pop hit to have cellos in a juddering rhythm . <unk> composer Frank <unk> agreed that it " sounds like no other pop song recorded up to that point " . Stebbins reflected that : " This signature sound would be duplicated , cloned , commercialized , and re @-@ fabricated in songs , commercials , TV shows , movies , and elevators to the point of completely diluting the genius of the original . But ' Good Vibrations ' was probably the quintessential ' sunshine pop ' recording of the century . " He added that the single " vaulted nearly every other rock act in their delivery of a Flower Power classic . It was just strange enough to be taken seriously , but still vibrant , happy , accessibly Beach Boys @-@ esque pop . " John Bush wrote that the single " announced the coming era of pop experimentation with a rush of riff changes , echo @-@ chamber effects , and intricate harmonies . " Gillett noted : " For the rest of the sixties , countless musicians and groups attempted to represent an equivalently blissful state , but none of them ever applied the intense discipline and concentration that Wilson had devoted to the recording . " 
 Priore argued that the song served as a forerunner to later works such as Marvin Gaye 's What 's Going On ( 1971 ) and Isaac Hayes ' Shaft ( 1971 ) which presented soul music in a similar , multi @-@ textured context imbued with ethereal sonic landscapes . Tom Roland believed that the song 's " format " would later be " borrowed " by Wings ( " Band on the Run " ) , the Beatles ( " A Day in the Life " ) , and Elton John ( " Funeral for a Friend / Love Lies Bleeding " ) . The song 's approach was repeated in Queen 's 1975 single " Bohemian Rhapsody " , which was also pieced together using various different sections . Upon release , Wilson praised Queen 's effort , calling it " the most competitive thing that 's come along in ages " and " a fulfillment and an answer to a teenage prayer — of artistic music " . 
 = = = = Psychedelic and progressive rock = = = = 
 With " Good Vibrations " , the Beach Boys ended 1966 as the only band besides the Beatles to have a high @-@ charting psychedelic rock song , a time when the genre was still in its formative stages . Barney Hoskyns proclaimed it the " ultimate psychedelic pop record " from Los Angeles in its time . Popmatters added : " Its influence on the ensuing psychedelic and progressive rock movements can ’ t be overstated , but its legacy as a pop hit is impressive as well . " Former Atlantic Records executive Phillip <unk> is quoted saying , " I was in the music business at the time , and my very first recognition of acid rock — we didn 't call it progressive rock then — was , of all people , the Beach Boys and the song ' Good Vibrations ' . ... That [ theremin ] sent so many musicians back to the studio to create this music on acid . " Author Bill Martin suggested that the Beach Boys were clearing a pathway toward the development of progressive rock , writing : " The fact is , the same reasons why much progressive rock is difficult to dance to apply just as much to ' Good Vibrations ' and ' A Day in the Life ' . " 
 = = = = Use of theremin = = = = 
 Even though the song does not technically contain a theremin , " Good Vibrations " is the most frequently cited example of the instrument in pop music . Upon release , the single prompted an unexpected revival in theremins and increased the awareness of analog synthesizers . 
 When the Beach Boys needed to reproduce its sound onstage , Wilson first requested that Tanner play the Electro @-@ Theremin live with the group , but he declined due to commitments . He recalls saying to Wilson , " I 've got the wrong sort of hair to be on stage with you fellas , " to which Wilson replied , " We 'll give you a Prince Valiant wig . " The Beach Boys then requested the services of Walter Sear , who then asked Bob Moog to design a ribbon controller , since the group was used to playing the <unk> of a guitar . Sears remembers marking fretboard @-@ like lines on the ribbon " so they could play the damn thing " . Moog then set out to manufacture his own models of theremins . He ultimately noted : " The pop record scene cleaned us out of our stock which we expected to last through Christmas . " 
 In Steven M. Martin 's 1993 documentary Theremin : An Electronic Odyssey , in which Wilson makes an appearance , it was revealed that the attention being paid to the theremin after the release of " Good Vibrations " caused Russian authorities to exile the inventor Leon Theremin . 
 = = = Cover versions = = = 
 The song has been covered by a range of artists including Groove Holmes , the Troggs , Charlie McCoy , and Psychic TV . John Bush argued " ' Good Vibrations ' was rarely reprised by other acts , even during the cover @-@ happy ' 60s . Its fragmented style made it essentially cover @-@ proof . " In 1976 , a nearly identical cover version was released as a single by Todd Rundgren for his album Faithful . When asked for an opinion , Brian responded : " Oh , he did a marvelous job , he did a great job . I was very proud of his version . " The single peaked at 34 on the Billboard Hot 100 Pop Singles . Rundgren explained : " I used to like the sound of the Beach Boys , but it wasn 't until they began to compete with the Beatles that I felt that what they were doing was really interesting – like around Pet Sounds and " Good Vibrations " ... when they started to shed that whole surf music kind of burden and start to branch out into something that was a little more universal . ... I tried to do [ the song ] as literally as I could because in the intervening 10 years , radio had changed so much . Radio had become so formatted and so structured that that whole experience was already gone . " 
 In 2004 , Wilson rerecorded the song as a solo artist for his album Brian Wilson Presents Smile . It was placed as the album 's closer , immediately following the track " In Blue Hawaii " . It is the only track on the album that eschewed the modular recording method . Its verses and chorus were recorded as part of one whole take , and were not spliced . 
 = = = In popular culture = = = 
 In 1996 , experimental rock group His Name Is Alive recorded an homage entitled " Universal Frequencies " on their album Stars on <unk> .. Reportedly , Warren <unk> listened to " Good Vibrations " repeatedly for one week before deciding that the song " needed a sequel , " explaining that : " ' Good Vibrations ' is one of the first pop hits where you can actually hear the tape edits and I think that 's wonderful . " " Good Vibrations " inspired the title of French duo Air 's fifth LP : Pocket Symphony , released in 2007 . The song 's lyrics " I 'm picking up good vibrations " are quoted in Cyndi Lauper 's 1984 single " She Bop " . 
 = = Release history = = 
 Smiley Smile marks " Good Vibrations " ' s first album appearance , with no differences from the single version . Both Good Vibrations : Thirty Years of The Beach Boys ( 1993 ) and The Smile Sessions ( 2011 ) box sets contain extracts and highlights from the song 's extensive recording sessions . In early 2011 , the single was remastered and reissued as a four @-@ sided 78 rpm vinyl for Record Store Day as a teaser to the forthcoming The Smile Sessions box set . It contained " Heroes and Villains " as a B @-@ side along with previously released alternate takes and mixes . It was the first single issued by the group since " I Just Wasn 't Made for These Times " in 1996 . 
 Live versions appear on Live in London ( 1970 ) , Endless Harmony Soundtrack ( 1998 ) , Hawthorne , CA ( 2001 ) , and Good <unk> ' : Live at Knebworth England 1980 ( 2002 ) . 
 = = = Stereo version = = = 
 There had never been an official true stereo release of the final track until the 2012 remastered version of Smiley Smile due to the loss of the original multi @-@ track tape . The 2012 stereo mix was made possible by newly invented digital technology by Derry Fitzgerald , with the blessings of Brian Wilson and Mark <unk> . This software extracted individual instrumental and vocal stems from the original mono master — as the multi @-@ track vocals remained missing — to construct the stereo version that appears on the 2012 re @-@ issue of Smiley Smile . 
 = = = 40th Anniversary Edition = = = 
 In celebration of its 40th year , the Good Vibrations : 40th Anniversary Edition EP was released . The EP includes " Good Vibrations " , four alternate versions of the song , and the stereo mix of " Let 's Go Away for Awhile " . 
 = = Awards and accolades = = 
 In 2004 , Rolling Stone magazine ranked " Good Vibrations " at number 6 in " The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time " , the highest position of seven Beach Boys songs cited in the list . In 2001 , the song was voted number 24 in the RIAA and NEA 's listing of Songs of the Century . As of 2014 , " Good Vibrations " is ranked as the number three song of all time in an aggregation of critics ' lists at Acclaimed Music . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 The following people are identified as players on the " Good Vibrations " single . 
 The Beach Boys 
 Mike Love – co @-@ lead vocals 
 Brian Wilson – vocals , production , mixing 
 Carl Wilson – lead vocals 
 Dennis Wilson – Hammond organ during 2 : 14 – 2 : 56 
 Additional musicians and production staff 
 Hal Blaine – drums , timpani , other percussion 
 Al De Lory – piano , harpsichord 
 Jesse Ehrlich – cello 
 Larry Knechtel – organ in verses and choruses 
 Tommy Morgan – harmonica 
 Ray <unk> – electric bass 
 Paul Tanner – Electro @-@ Theremin 
 Bassist Carol Kaye played on several of the " Good Vibrations " sessions , and has been identified as a prominent contributor to the track . However , analysis by Beach Boys archivist Craig Slowinski indicates that none of those recordings made the final edit as released on the single . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 Session dates , track distinctions , studios , and notes adapted from Andrew Doe . 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = HMS Pomone ( 1897 ) = 
 HMS Pomone was a Pelorus @-@ class protected cruiser built for the Royal Navy in the late 1890s . The ship 's boilers were so troublesome that she was decommissioned in 1904 after only a single foreign deployment . She was hulked in 1910 and served as a stationary training ship until 1922 when she was sold for scrap . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 These " third @-@ class " cruisers were designed by Sir William White . They were designed for colonial service rather than support of the main fleet . This class served as testbeds for a variety of water @-@ tube boiler designs and those used by Pomone were so unsatisfactory that the ship was decommissioned after only five years of service . 
 HMS Pomone displaced 2 @,@ 135 long tons ( 2 @,@ 169 t ) , with an overall length of 313 feet 6 inches ( 95 @.@ 6 m ) , a beam of 36 feet 6 inches ( 11 @.@ 1 m ) and a draft of 16 feet ( 4 @.@ 9 m ) . She was powered by two inverted 3 @-@ cylinder vertical triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each driving one propeller shaft . Steam was supplied by 16 coal @-@ fired Blechynden water @-@ tube boilers . The engines were intended to develop a maximum of 7 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 5 @,@ 200 kW ) under forced draft , but developed a total of 7 @,@ 340 indicated horsepower ( 5 @,@ 470 kW ) during her sea trials and gave a maximum speed of 20 @.@ 8 knots ( 38 @.@ 5 km / h ; 23 @.@ 9 mph ) . The ship had a crew of 224 officers and men . 
 Pomone was armed with eight single QF 4 @-@ inch ( 102 mm ) guns , eight QF 3 @-@ pounder guns , three machine guns , and two 18 @-@ inch ( 457 mm ) torpedo tubes . Her protective deck ranged from 1 @.@ 5 to 2 inches ( 38 to 51 mm ) in thickness and the ship had a conning tower with walls 3 inches ( 76 mm ) thick . The four @-@ inch guns were protected by gun shields 0 @.@ 25 inches ( 6 @.@ 4 mm ) thick . 
 = = Service = = 
 HMS Pomone was laid down at Sheerness Dockyard on 21 December 1896 , launched on 25 November 1897 , and completed in May 1899 . The ship only served a single commission , with the East Indies Squadron and suffered from continuous boiler problems . In January 1902 she was stationed in the Persian Gulf to protect British interests there , and especially in Kuwait . Commander Harry Jones was appointed in command in late March 1902 . In November and December 1903 , Pomone and three other cruisers escorted Lord Curzon 's tour of the Middle East . Her Blechynden boilers were so unreliable that she was removed from the effective list in October 1904 when Admiral Lord Fisher started disposing of ineffective ships upon becoming First Sea Lord . She was laid @-@ up pending a decision on her final disposal . Pomone was disarmed and hulked on 5 January 1910 as a stationary training ship for engineers at the Royal Naval College , Dartmouth . She was sold for scrap on 25 October 1922 to J. H. Lee of Dover . 
 = Gravity the Seducer = 
 Gravity the Seducer is the fifth studio album by electronic music band Ladytron . The album was released by Nettwerk in the United Kingdom on 12 September 2011 and in the United States , a day later . Recorded in Kent , England , the album has been described as " haunted , evocative , romantic " , and having " a feminine warmth " . 
 Three singles have been released from the album , " White Elephant " , " Ambulances " and " Mirage " . The song " Ace of Hz " had previously been released as a single from the greatest hits album Best of 00 – 10 before appearing on Gravity the Seducer . Release of the album coincided with a tour across Canada and the United States . 
 Gravity the Seducer earned generally positive reviews and reached number seventy @-@ two on the UK Albums Chart , the group 's highest @-@ peaking album in their home country as of September 2012 . 
 = = Production = = 
 Gravity the Seducer was Ladytron 's second studio album produced for record label Nettwerk , with whom they signed in 2007 . Their first release through the <unk> label was the 2008 studio album Velocifero , followed in March 2011 by the greatest hits album Best of 00 – 10 . Ladytron also self @-@ released the live album , Live at London Astoria 16 @.@ 07 @.@ 08 in 2009 . 
 Gravity the Seducer was recorded in Kent , England , and was co @-@ produced by <unk> <unk> , who had previously collaborated with Arctic Monkeys and <unk> as well has having worked on Ladytron 's 2005 album Witching Hour . The band felt that the production of the album was different from that of Velocifero , with band member Daniel Hunt noting that the latter record had been " made with performance in mind " , as the band had recently finished touring when it was produced . Gravity the Seducer was produced " while removed from that thinking " . 
 In an interview with Rolling Stone magazine , singer Helen Marnie described the album as " the warmest , most emotional , thing we 've ever done " . The vocal parts on the album have been mixed at a lower volume than previous Ladytron albums , while four tracks are entirely instrumental . The title Gravity the Seducer is taken from a line in the song " Ninety Degrees " , which Hunt has described as " expanding our creative horizons " . The cover artwork , designed by Neil Krug , has been described as an " endless vista " thematically linked the music 's " vast atmospheres " , and has been compared to the works of design group Hipgnosis . 
 = = Release = = 
 Gravity the Seducer was released on 12 September 2011 in the United Kingdom , and the following day in the United States . The album 's release coincided with a number of tour dates in Canada and the United States throughout September and October . During the album 's active promotion in 2011 , Ladytron also toured in Mexico , Brazil , Chile , Thailand , Indonesia , and Singapore . 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 " Ace of Hz " , the fourth song from Gravity the Seducer , also appeared on band 's greatest hits compilation Best of 00 – 10 and on their Ace of Hz EP . " Ace of Hz " had been released as a single on 30 November 2010 . The song was also included in the video game FIFA 11 . " White Elephant " was officially released as the lead single from Gravity the Seducer on 17 May 2011 . 
 For further promotion , the songs " Ambulances " and " Mirage " were released as digital downloads on 21 June and 9 August , respectively . The video for " Mirage " was filmed at the Callanish Stones , a five @-@ thousand @-@ year @-@ old stone circle near the Scottish village of Callanish . The video was co @-@ directed by Michael Sherrington and Daniel Hunt . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Gravity the Seducer was met with generally positive reviews from critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalised rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 68 , based on 20 reviews , which indicates " generally favorable reviews " . 
 Heather Phares , writing for Allmusic , rated the album three @-@ and @-@ half stars out of five , describing it as " an admirable artistic choice , even though it doesn ’ t always pay off " . Phares felt that Gravity the Seducer was " more focused " than the band 's previous album Velocifero , but was " not as accessible " as that record . The A.V. Club 's Christopher Bahn gave the album a B- rating , calling it " heart @-@ on @-@ sleeve and icily detached at the same time " ; however , Bahn felt that " the lack of a propulsive single ... as well as an overabundance of instrumentals , suggests a band that ’ s spinning its wheels " . 
 Chris Todd of Clash magazine scored Gravity the Seducer nine out of ten , describing the album as having " a feminine warmth " compared to the band 's earlier work . Todd felt that the album added " a new found spaciousness to [ the band 's ] sound " , and described the tracks " Mirage " , " Ritual " and " White Gold " as being " three of Ladytron ’ s finest songs " . 
 The Independent 's Simon Price described the album as " faultless " , noting that it represented the band " at their most electronically pure " . Price found the song " Transparent Days " to be a highlight , and added that the album makes " the world feel a more haunted , evocative , romantic place " . NME 's Jamie Crossan rated Gravity the Seducer seven out of ten , finding it to be " nothing new " , but feeling that the album 's content is more of what " the band have always excelled " at . Crossan also singled out the song " Moon Palace " as a highlight of the album . 
 Larry Fitzmaurice of Pitchfork Media gave the album a score of six out of ten , describing it as " <unk> uneven " . Fitzmaurice felt that Gravity the Seducer represented a transition away from the sound of band 's earlier work , which he felt was still evident in " Ace of Hz " and " Mirage " , towards a " <unk> , airy feel " . Drowned in Sound 's John Calvert gave the album a rating of five out of ten , finding it to be " slightly bland " and " nondescript in its understated sophistication " . Calvert felt that the album 's overall direction was " well realised " , but ultimately found that " Gravity the Seducer never manages to get under your skin the way the band intended " . 
 Slant Magazine 's Eric Henderson rated the album three stars out of five , describing it as " uniformly sleek [ and ] polished like a summer skyline " . Henderson also compared Gravity the Seducer to the soundtrack to the 2011 film Drive , and praised singer Helen Marnie 's " lightly lilting " vocals . However , he felt that the similarity between several songs — including " Mirage " , " Ace of Hz " and " Ritual " , all written in the key of D minor — left the album feeling " almost barren " . 
 Michael Hann , writing for The Guardian , rated the album three stars out of five , finding it did not measure up to the band 's earlier work , picking out their earlier single " Destroy Everything You Touch " as a yardstick " that subsequent work will always be judged against " . Hann found that some of Gravity the Seducer 's tracks , particularly " Ritual " , seemed " unfinished and unsatisfactory " . Spin magazine 's Barry Walters rated the album six out of ten , finding that it " lacks the infectious , dark @-@ disco rumble " of Ladytron 's earlier work , noting that it " withhold [ s ] the hooks that previously put the sweet in their bitter " . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 In the band 's home country , the United Kingdom , Gravity the Seducer peaked at number 72 on the UK Albums Chart , spending one week on the chart . This was the band 's highest position on the chart , as their only other charting album was Velocifero , which reached number 75 . 
 The album 's highest chart position was on the United States ' Heatseekers Albums chart , where it peaked at number two . The album reached 112 on the Billboard 200 , as well as number 27 on the Billboard Independent Albums chart and number six on the Dance / Electronic Albums chart . 
 Gravity the Seducer reached number 50 on the Finnish Albums Chart , spending one week on the chart ; number 90 in the Canadian Albums Chart ; and number four on the Belgian Heatseekers Albums Chart , spending a week on that chart . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Ladytron . 
 = = Gravity the Seducer ( Remixed ) = = 
 On 29 November 2013 , Ladytron released the remix album Gravity the Seducer ( Remixed ) , a collection of remixes of Gravity the Seducer songs . They also will release an exclusive limited @-@ edition blue vinyl of this remix album on Record Store Day special Black Friday . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from Gravity the Seducer album liner notes . 
 Ladytron – production 
 Daniel Hunt – production 
 <unk> <unk> – additional production , engineering , mixing 
 Alessandro Cortini – additional production 
 Neil Krug – artwork 
 Trevor <unk> – design 
 Tim <unk> – management 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Music of Final Fantasy XIII = 
 The music of the video game Final Fantasy XIII was composed by Masashi Hamauzu . Former regular series composer Nobuo Uematsu did not contribute any pieces to the soundtrack . Music from the game has been released in several albums . The main soundtrack album , Final Fantasy XIII Original Soundtrack , was released on four Compact Discs in 2010 by Square Enix , the developers and producers of the game . Selections from the soundtrack have been released on two gramophone record albums , W / F : Music from Final Fantasy XIII and W / F : Music from Final Fantasy XIII Gentle Reveries , both in 2010 by Square Enix . An album of arranged pieces from the soundtrack , Final Fantasy XIII Original Soundtrack <unk> , was also released by Square Enix in 2010 , as was an album of piano arrangements , Piano Collection Final Fantasy XIII . The theme song for the Japanese version of the game , " Kimi ga Iru Kara " ( 君がいるから , " Because You 're Here " ) , was released as a single by For Life Music in 2009 . 
 The soundtrack received good reviews from critics , who felt that it was Hamauzu 's best work to date and an excellent mix of material and genres which took the series ' music in a new direction . The " Plus " album received weaker reviews , primarily due to its perceived lack of tracks that were significantly different from those in the original soundtrack album , while " Kimi ga Iru Kara " was considered bland and disappointing . The " Piano " album 's reception was split between critics who felt that the tracks did not deviate enough from the original pieces and those who felt that the straightforward arrangements were sophisticated . Music from the game was played at a live orchestral concert in Stockholm , Sweden , and was added to the permanent rotation of the international Distant Worlds concert series , while tracks from the piano album have been played in concerts in Japan and Paris . 
 = = Creation and influence = = 
 Masashi Hamauzu composed the game 's soundtrack . His previous work on the series was as a co @-@ composer for Final Fantasy X and as the main composer for Dirge of Cerberus : Final Fantasy VII . The game was the first main @-@ series Final Fantasy game not to include any compositions by original series composer Nobuo Uematsu ; although he was originally announced to compose the main theme of the game , this role was taken over by Hamauzu after Uematsu signed on to compose the soundtrack to Final Fantasy XIV . Game producer Yoshinori Kitase chose Hamauzu because he felt that Hamauzu would be the best for the job as he was composing an orchestral @-@ based soundtrack then for Dirge of Cerberus and the Final Fantasy XIII team wanted that style for the game . Hamauzu described the soundtrack in the liner notes for the soundtrack album as comprising multiple genres of music so that the player would not get tired of it , while also using several motifs so as to tie the varying pieces together ; particularly in grouping the themes from the Cocoon and Pulse areas in the game . He tried to match each piece and theme to his sense of the narrative and characters involved in the scenes that they would be played in , and feels that being the sole composer for the project allowed him to ensure that the overall direction of the soundtrack was consistent . 
 Besides some pieces he did for promotional events in 2006 and 2007 , Hamauzu began composing the soundtrack in Autumn 2008 and finished it around one year later . When he began the bulk of the composition , he started by composing the motifs he wanted to use , rather than any particular piece . The first track that he composed was " Blinded by Light " , as one of the promotional pieces ; it was based on the director Motomu Toriyama 's vision of the game as a mixture of fantasy and near @-@ future , as the storyline for the game had not yet been finalized . As the game was intended to be a conscious departure from the staples of previous Final Fantasy games , Hamauzu was not constrained in keeping the music in line with previous soundtracks from the series . Despite this , he did not compose the music specifically to " break from the series ' past " , but rather focused it on the game as it was presented . 
 The score features some recordings by the Warsaw Philharmonic Orchestra , arranged by Yoshihisa Hirano , Toshiyuki Oomori and <unk> Shiina . Hamauzu had previously worked with the orchestra on his album <unk> Dank , released in 2007 . Four songs in the soundtrack include vocals by Mina Sakai , an artist whom Hamauzu works as a producer for . Two of the songs are in English rather than Japanese , and " The <unk> Whitewood " was intended to be as well , but during practice Sakai and Hamauzu changed it to use a fictitious language as they felt her focus on pronouncing the English words was detracting from the melody . The two English tracks were re @-@ recorded for the English version of the game , as the localization team felt that they did not sound natural to native speakers . On three of the pieces from the soundtrack : " Sazh 's Theme , " " Daddy 's Got the Blues " , and " Can 't Catch a Break " , described as jazzy pieces related to the character Sazh , Hamauzu 's compositions were arranged by Toru <unk> , a friend of his , who Hamauzu describes as being more familiar with that style of music . 
 The theme song for the international version of the game is " My Hands " , from British singer Leona Lewis ' second album Echo ; it was chosen to replace Final Fantasy XIII 's original theme song from the Japanese version , " Kimi ga Iru Kara " by Sayuri Sugawara . Square Enix President Yoichi Wada has stated that it would have been better if the American branch of the company had produced a theme song from scratch , but the lack of staff led to the decision of licensing an existing song instead . Hamauzu , who composed the music for " Kimi ga Iru Kara " , only met Sugawara once , and was not involved in producing the vocal song . He was not involved in the decision to use " My Hands " for the international version . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 Final Fantasy XIII Original Soundtrack is the soundtrack album of Final Fantasy XIII , containing all of the musical tracks from the game , and was composed and produced by Masashi Hamauzu . The soundtrack spans four discs and 85 tracks , covering a duration of 4 : 04 : 06 . It was released on January 27 , 2010 in Japan by Square Enix , bearing the catalog numbers SQEX @-@ <unk> ~ 6 . The limited edition of the soundtrack included a bonus disc containing a radio drama written by novelist Jun Eishima . The radio drama does not include any music not already in the album . The album sold 16 @,@ 000 copies the day of its release . It reached # 3 on the Japanese Oricon charts , and remained on the charts for nine weeks . The soundtrack incorporates both orchestral and electronic music , sometimes within the same track . Almost two dozen of the tracks include vocal performances to some degree , the most of any Final Fantasy soundtrack to date . It does not include many of the mainstay tracks from previous games in the series such as Uematsu 's " Prelude " and " Main Theme " , and its variation on his " Chocobo " , the only repeat track , is so different as to not credit him as the original composer in the album . 
 In addition to the full soundtrack CD release , two vinyl record albums have been released by Square Enix , each including a selection of songs from the full soundtrack . The first of these , W / F : Music from Final Fantasy XIII , was released on February 26 , 2010 , while the second , W / F ： Music from Final Fantasy XIII Gentle Reveries , was released on June 30 , 2010 . W / F : Music from Final Fantasy XIII is the first vinyl record that Square Enix has ever released . Each album contains eight tracks , four per side . The first album has a total length of 32 : 06 and a catalog number of SE @-@ <unk> , while the second has the catalog number SE @-@ <unk> . 
 The album received good reviews from critics . Patrick Gann of RPGFan called it an " excellent soundtrack " that exceeded his expectations . He applauded Hamauzu 's use of motifs and repetition of melodies across different tracks for tying together a widely disparate collection of material , and called the mix of orchestral and electronic pieces as " incredible " . He concluded that the work represents Hamauzu 's " masterpiece " , though some of the tracks do not fit well outside of the context of the scene in the game they represent . Don Kotowski of Square Enix Music Online similarly approved of the soundtrack , also highlighting the repetition of themes as well done . He particularly called out the variance of musical styles used in different tracks , from the " jazz fusion " of " Pulse de Chocobo " to the rock music of " Snow 's Theme " . The bonus drama CD was critiqued by Gann as " fun for bonus content " if the listener understood Japanese and as having high production values for a drama CD , but he noted that it did not add any real information to the story of the game . 
 Track list 
 Literal translation of the original titles appear in ( parenthesis ) if different 
 = = Soundtrack Plus = = 
 Final Fantasy XIII Original Soundtrack PLUS is a soundtrack album of Final Fantasy XIII , containing a selection of arrangements of musical tracks from the game . It was composed and produced by Masashi Hamauzu , and arranged by Hamauzu , Ryo Yamazaki , Mitsuto Suzuki , Toshiyuki Oomori , and Yoshihisa Hirano . The single @-@ disc soundtrack contains 16 tracks , covering a duration of 50 : 10 . It was released on May 26 , 2010 in Japan by Square Enix , bearing the catalog number SQEX @-@ <unk> . Only tracks 5 , 9 , and 15 are pieces actually used in the game but not included in the original album . The tracks in the album include pieces made for early previews of the game , modified versions of songs used in the international version of the game rather than the Japanese version that the original soundtrack album was based on , and early versions or arrangements of pieces that were not used in the game — for example , " Hope _ <unk> " uses a piano while Hamauzu ended up using a guitar for the final piece . 
 For the unused versions of songs included in this album , Hamauzu re @-@ recorded and produced them to match the quality of the songs that were eventually used in the original soundtrack . The numbers following the " M " in the title of some pieces refer to the version number of the track , which Hamauzu used to keep track of changes made to pieces during their development , occasionally <unk> them by hundreds for major changes . Hamauzu came up with the idea for the album originally because he wanted to release the English version of " Pulse de Chocobo " as a downloadable song ; when he started adding in promotional tracks and alternative @-@ version tracks he found that he had enough material to release as a full album . Several of the alternate version tracks appeared in the game during specific scenes , or were cut towards the end of development . Hamauzu feels that the album represents how large of an undertaking the Final Fantasy XIII project was , in that even the outtakes were enough to fill an album . 
 The album reached # 70 on the Oricon charts , and remained on the charts for two weeks . It received a lukewarm review from Patrick Gann of RPGFan , who said that while the music included was " beautiful " and a few specific tracks were " pretty cool " , " anyone hoping for a proper arrangement of this music will be sorely disappointed " . He claimed that there was not much difference between many of the alternate versions of songs and their final versions in the original soundtrack , which meant that in his opinion owners of the original soundtrack would not get much out of the " Plus " album . Jayson Napolitano of Original Sound Version gave a similar review for the album ; he felt that while it included several interesting pieces that could not be found elsewhere , it was in his opinion more of a collector 's item than a stand @-@ alone album and likely not worth the cost for most listeners . 
 = = Piano Collections = = 
 Piano Collections Final Fantasy XIII is a soundtrack album of Final Fantasy XIII , containing a selection of piano arrangements of musical tracks from the game . It was composed and arranged by Masashi Hamauzu , and the pieces were performed by Aki Kuroda . Hamauzu and Kuroda had previously worked together when Hamauzu arranged the Final Fantasy X piano soundtrack album , and this previous collaboration made it easy for the two to work together . Hamauzu intended the arrangements to " stay away from recording the same music " on the piano . Though he noted that many of the tracks are similar to the originals , he wanted to " bring out subtle properties of the in @-@ game melodies and making them more distinct , " rather than greatly change the songs . The single @-@ disc soundtrack contains 10 tracks , covering a duration of 45 : 09 . It was released on July 21 , 2010 in Japan by Square Enix , bearing the catalog number SQEX @-@ <unk> . 
 Chris Greening of Square Enix Music Online reviewed the album as " a sophisticated piano collection " that was enjoyable to listen to , though he noted that the arrangements were " straightforward " rather than ambitious . Jayson Napolitano of Original Sound Version gave a similar review for the album ; he felt that it was an amazing album that , while not as technically difficult or different enough from the source material for some listeners , was still very beautiful and well @-@ arranged . Gann of RPGFan , however , felt disappointed by the album , calling the arrangements " soul @-@ less " and full of " needless grandiosity " . He concluded that the original pieces were too rich and complex to translate well to solo piano arrangements , which left the works without substance as they did not deviate enough from the source material . 
 = = " Kimi ga Iru Kara " = = 
 " Kimi ga Iru Kara " ( 君がいるから , Because You 're Here ) is the theme song of the Japanese version of Final Fantasy XIII . Sung by Sayuri Sugawara , it was composed by Masashi Hamauzu and had its lyrics written by Sugawara and Nakajima Yukino . The English version of the game used a song by Leona Lewis , " My Hands " , which was not specially written for the game like the Japanese song . " Kimi ga Iru Kara " was released as a single on December 2 , 2009 by For Life Music , and included in addition to the piece five other tracks . These tracks are " Eternal Love " , another song written for Final Fantasy XIII , and " Christmas Again " , a J @-@ Pop song by Sugawara that incorporates some music from 19th @-@ century composer Franz Liszt . The last three tracks are instrumental versions of these three songs . The single has a length of 30 : 04 , and has the catalog number of <unk> @-@ <unk> . A special edition of the single includes a bonus DVD , containing a seven @-@ minute video of a compilation of promotional videos for the game . 
 " Kimi ga Iru Kara " reached # 11 on the Japanese Oricon charts , and remained on the charts for 11 weeks . The single received generally unfavourable reviews from video game music critics . Gann of RPGFan called it " vanilla " and said that the single , especially the headline track , was over @-@ produced and uninteresting . While he did not mind " Eternal Love " as much , he still felt that the CD was his least favorite Final Fantasy theme single . Square Enix Music Online had similar opinions of the release , calling it " bland " . They felt that while " Kimi ga Iru Kara " was better than " My Hands " , and " Eternal Love " better still , the single was disappointing both in the context of Final Fantasy singles and of Sugawara 's previous discography . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Final Fantasy XIII won the 2010 Soundtrack of the Year Golden Joystick Award . Music from Final Fantasy XIII was performed live in concert at the Distant Worlds II - More Music from Final Fantasy concert in Stockholm , Sweden by the Royal Stockholm Philharmonic Orchestra on June 12 , 2010 . The concert is part of the Distant Worlds concert series , the latest of several Final Fantasy concert series , and the tracks from Final Fantasy XIII , " The Promise " and " Fang 's Theme " , have been added to the series ' permanent rotation . The official album for the concert does not include those two tracks . The full Piano Collections Final Fantasy XIII album was played at a concert by Aki Kuroda in Osaka on October 29 , 2010 and in Yokohama on September 3 , 2010 , and selections were played in a concert of Hamauzu 's work in Paris on April 22 , 2011 . 
 A book of piano sheet music arrangements from the original soundtrack has been arranged for the piano and published by DOREMI Music Publishing . All songs in each book have been rewritten by Asako Niwa as beginning to intermediate level piano solos , though they are meant to sound as much like the originals as possible . The actual piano sheet music from the Final Fantasy XIII Piano Collection album has been published as a corresponding music book by Yamaha Music Media . Yamaha has additionally published its own sheet music book for piano arrangements from the original soundtrack , as well as a book of piano and vocal sheet music for the vocal tracks on the original soundtrack . 
 = Stanley Marcus = 
 Harold Stanley Marcus ( April 20 , 1905 – January 22 , 2002 ) was an early president ( 1950 – 1972 ) and later chairman of the board ( 1972 – 1976 ) of the luxury retailer Neiman Marcus in Dallas , Texas , which his father and aunt had founded in 1907 . During his tenure at the company , he also became a published author , writing his memoir Minding the Store and also a regular column in The Dallas Morning News . After Neiman Marcus was sold to Carter Hawley Hale Stores , Marcus initially remained in an advisory capacity to that company , but later began his own consulting business , which continued until his death . He served his local community as an avid patron of the fine arts and as a civic leader . In a chapter titled " Mr. Stanley " — the name by which Marcus was known locally for decades — in his 1953 work Neiman @-@ Marcus , Texas , Frank X. Tolbert called him " Dallas ' most internationally famous citizen " and worthy of being called " the Southwest 's No. 1 businessman @-@ intellectual . " 
 Marcus introduced many of the innovations for which Neiman @-@ Marcus became known , creating a national award for service in fashion and hosting art exhibitions in the store itself , as well as weekly fashion shows and an annual Fortnight event highlighting a different foreign country for two weeks each year . He established the Neiman @-@ Marcus Christmas Catalogue , which became famous for extravagant " His and Hers " gifts such as airplanes and camels . Marcus prided himself on his staff 's ability to provide service and value for each client , often citing his father 's dictum , " There is never a good sale for Neiman Marcus unless it 's a good buy for the customer . " 
 He received the Chevalier Award from the French Legion of Honor , was listed in the Houston Chronicle 's list of the 100 most important Texans , and was named by Harvard Business School among the greatest American Business Leaders of the 20th century . The Advertising Hall of Fame notes : " Stanley Marcus was among the most important figures in the history of American retail merchandising and marketing . Through his many innovations , he transformed a local Dallas clothing store into an international brand synonymous with high style , fashion and gracious service . " 
 = = Personal life and retail career = = 
 Marcus was born in The Cedars , Dallas , Texas , the son of Herbert Marcus , Sr. , who later became a co @-@ founder of the original Neiman @-@ Marcus store with his sister Carrie and her husband , Al Neiman . Stanley was the first of four sons born to Herbert , Sr. , and his wife , the former Minnie Lichtenstein . The pregnancy indirectly led to the eventual founding of Neiman @-@ Marcus , as Herbert Sr. decided to leave Sanger 's , where he was a buyer of boys ' clothing , when he deemed his raise insufficient to support a family . Returning from two years spent in Atlanta , Georgia , establishing a successful sales @-@ promotion business , the <unk> and <unk> used the $ 25 @,@ 000 made in the sale of that business to establish their store at the corner of Elm and Murphy . Given that the family 's other option for the money was to invest in the then @-@ unknown Coca @-@ Cola Company , Marcus loved to say that Neiman @-@ Marcus was established " as a result of the bad judgment of its founders . " In his memoir , Marcus recalled his father as " affectionate " and his mother as even @-@ handed in her attention to each of their children , making sure even into their adulthood to give them equivalent gifts and make sure they were praised equally . 
 One of Stanley Marcus 's first jobs was as a 10 @-@ year @-@ old salesman of Saturday Evening Post , bringing him into the family 's business tradition from a young age . He attended Forest Avenue High School , where he studied debate as well as English with teacher Myra Brown , whom he later credited with much of his early interest in books . He began his university studies at Amherst College , but when traditions preventing Jews from joining clubs or fraternities drastically curtailed his social life , he transferred to Harvard University after the first year . At his new school , he became a member of the historically Jewish fraternity Zeta Beta Tau , later rising to become the group 's president . 
 While living in Boston and pursuing his chosen major , English literature , Marcus began a lifelong hobby of collecting rare and antique books . To finance his pursuits , he began The Book Collector 's Service Bureau , a mail @-@ order book service , beginning with a letter of introduction sent to 100 homes . The venture proved so successful that for a time Marcus considered entering that line of work full time , concerned that entering the retail business might curtail his freedom of expression in politics and other areas of interest ; his father persuaded him that he would always be granted the liberty of his own views , and pointed out that retailing was more profitable and thus would allow him to amass a large book collection that much sooner . 
 = = = Early years at Neiman @-@ Marcus = = = 
 After receiving a B.A. degree from Harvard in 1925 , he began his career at the retailer that same year as a simple <unk> organizing inventory , but upon beginning in sales , quickly outstripped other sales staff . He went back to study at Harvard Business School in 1926 , leaving after one year to participate in a massive expansion of the retail operation in Dallas . 
 He married the former Mary " Billie " Cantrell in 1932 ; she initially worked in the Neiman @-@ Marcus Sports Shop department until she retired in 1936 after the birth of their first child , Jerrie , followed two years later by twins Richard and Wendy . ( One year after his wife 's 1978 death , he married Linda Robinson , a longtime librarian at the Dallas Public Library , in a marriage that lasted until Stanley Marcus 's own death in 2002 . ) In 1935 the <unk> commissioned Frank Lloyd Wright to design a home for them on Nonesuch Road , but rejected the eventual design , which included cantilevered steel beams and terraces swathed in mosquito netting . Instead , the couple chose a design by local firm DeWitt & Washburn , whose creation became a Texas Historic Landmark . As of 1937 , Marcus was one of only 22 Texans to earn a salary of $ 50 @,@ 000 or more , according to the House Ways and Means Committee ; his father , Herbert , was another , earning $ 75 @,@ 000 as company president while vice president Stanley drew an even $ 50 @,@ 000 . 
 Marcus was responsible for a number of innovations at the Dallas retailer . He created the annual Neiman @-@ Marcus Award for Distinguished Service in Fashion , beginning in 1938 , which led to the Neiman @-@ Marcus Exposition , a fall fashion show held annually from 1938 to 1970 , then periodically thereafter . His department store was the first American haute couture boutique to introduce weekly fashion shows , and the first to host concurrent art exhibitions at the store itself . In 1939 , he established the annual Christmas Catalogue , which in 1951 offered the first of its extravagant " His & Hers Gifts , " starting with a matching pair of <unk> coats , and going on to include matching bathtubs , a pair of Beechcraft airplanes , " Noah 's Ark " ( including pairs of animals ) , camels , and live tigers . 
 = = = The war years = = = 
 For all his professional emphasis on glitz and glamour , he made another , very different mark on the American fashion industry when he was asked to join the War Production Board in Washington , D.C. on December 27 , 1941 , less than three weeks after the United States entered World War II . Ineligible for military service due to his age , he instead helped the war effort by championing the conservation of scarce resources normally devoted to fashion trends . He encouraged men to wear drooping socks ( to save much @-@ needed rubber that would normally be used for elastic ) and devised regulations for the manufacture of women 's and children 's clothing that would enable the nation to divert more textile resources to uniforms and other war @-@ related needs : 
 In addition to these restrictions , Marcus recommended to the WPB that coats , suits , jackets and dresses be sold separately " to make them go further . " The changes were expected to create a total savings of 100 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 yards ( 91 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 m ) of fabric to be used in the war effort . 
 Conscious of the role of the media in fashion promotion , Marcus prompted the members of the National Retail Dry Goods Association to convince their local press outlets to treat women 's fashions as a serious subject rather than as an object of ridicule . He solicited nationally famous women to proclaim their support of the new standards ; TIME 's report on the WPB quoted author Adela Rogers St. Johns predicting , " The overdressed woman will be as <unk> conspicuous as though she wore a Japanese kimono . " 
 Marcus addressed the fashion press in national meetings , encouraging editors to reassure women that stores would carry adequate supply of attractive styles , in order to prevent shoppers from flooding the stores or hoarding stock . TIME reported on meetings of " 70 fantastic hats , " representing the presence of national magazine editors from Ladies ' Home Journal and Harper 's Bazaar , as well as from newspapers in the urban centers of New York , Boston , and Philadelphia , all complying with the WPB 's instructions for their coverage of women 's and children 's fashions . 
 His work promoting cooperation with the WPB 's mandates did not still Marcus 's competitive instincts . With the fall of Paris , the traditional fashion capital , New York mayor Fiorello LaGuardia began to declare his city the new leader at every opportunity . To this claim , Marcus retorted in the international press , " New York is finished as a manufacturing center . ... They 're making clothes in Kansas , Philadelphia and Texas now and they won 't give it up . The day is gone when only a New York dress is a good dress . " 
 Faced with increasing shortages in silk and even new synthetics such as rayon , which seemed likely to create long lines of dissatisfied customers seeking a product in inadequate supply , Marcus created the Neiman Marcus <unk> @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Month Club , which sent two pair of stockings in fashionable shades to each female charge @-@ card customer , with no membership fees . In his memoirs Marcus recalled , " Many women opened charge accounts just to become members of the club , and in a short time we had a membership of over 100 @,@ 000 , extending all over the country . " 
 = = = Taking the helm = = = 
 In 1950 , with the death of Herbert Marcus , Sr. , Stanley Marcus was elected president and CEO of the company , with Carrie Marcus Neiman as chairman of the board and other family members like Minnie Lichtenstein Marcus and Lawrence Marcus taking on more responsibilities . Neiman died in 1953 , in which year TIME proclaimed that Stanley Marcus 's " combination of showmanship and salesmanship " had been instrumental in increasing the company 's annual revenue from $ 2 @.@ 6 million in 1926 to $ 20 million . 
 Marcus began yet another Neiman @-@ Marcus tradition , the " International Fortnight , " in 1957 as a way to attract customers in the lull between the fall fashion rush and the Christmas shopping crunch . The idea was inspired by seeing a store in Stockholm , Sweden , that was having a France @-@ themed sales promotion , leading Marcus to propose to the French government a sponsorship of an even more elaborate event in his own store . The initial Fortnight included concurrent events of art , symphonic music , and film at other locations around Dallas , with an Air France jet bringing " writers , painters , government officials , models , and industry leaders . " In the years following , the Fortnight focused on various other countries and added related food service as well as items from the relevant country in every department , ending in 1986 with the Australian Fortnight . Other international traditions introduced at Neiman 's included Dallas ' first espresso bar , brought by Marcus after World War II . 
 As a retailer , Marcus believed strongly in making his store into a place where everything a customer needed could be found and , if necessary , brought to the customer 's front door . He was said to have helped one customer discover the shoe size of Queen Elizabeth II so as to give the gift of stockings and a pair of shoes , and he ordered that the store stock such items as a set of Steuben plates with the Mexican national crest , " because sooner or later somebody will be going to call on the President of Mexico and need a proper gift . " He personally delivered a fur coat to a St. Louis , Missouri , customer who could not make the trip to Dallas . Another story often recounted is that of a shopper who , in searching for a present for his wife , said that he was not sure what to buy , but that he would know it when he saw it . In response , Marcus inquired about the woman 's clothing sizes and asked the customer to wait briefly . Taking an oversized brandy <unk> from a display , Marcus gathered cashmere sweaters of various colors , arranged them in imitation of a <unk> @-@ café , topped with a white angora sweater to simulate whipped cream , and in place of a cherry , garnished the concoction with a 10 @-@ karat ruby ring , at a total cost of $ 25 @,@ 350 , which the customer gladly paid . When one customer decided his Christmas purchases were not sufficiently impressive , Marcus helped to arrange a full duplication of the store 's display window , complete with mannequins and lighting , inside the man 's home . 
 Despite his love of such larger @-@ than @-@ life salesmanship , Marcus also maintained the assertion of his father , Herbert , that " there is no good sale for Neiman @-@ Marcus unless it is a good buy for the customer . " Stanley Marcus would sometimes persuade the buyer to purchase a lower @-@ priced item that he considered more suitable , as when a man shopping for a mink coat for his 16 @-@ year @-@ old daughter was personally steered by Marcus toward a $ 295 muskrat coat instead , as being more appropriate to her youth . Marcus also routinely insisted customers would be wiser to buy the top quality of a reasonably priced line rather than scaled @-@ down or second @-@ rate versions of an expensive product . 
 Marcus continued throughout his tenure to hold tightly to his father 's assurance that he would be able to maintain and act on his political convictions while running the business . He supported the United Nations in its early years , an unpopular position in Dallas for that time . In the early 1950s he began to explore the ramifications of ending the store 's participation in the then @-@ common practice of excluding black customers from shopping in the store , and while his legal advisors cautioned against that step , he offered support for any black entrepreneur looking to establish a quality store and , in 1954 , began to hire black staff in some departments . 
 Moving into the 1960s , Marcus became ever more convinced that his city and his company needed to take action to promote racial equality , both as a moral issue and to reduce the growing civil unrest . In 1968 , he announced that Neiman @-@ Marcus 's buyers would give preference to companies employing and training significant numbers of minority employees , making his firm one of the first companies in the nation to have such a policy . 
 = = = Civic leadership = = = 
 The Marcus family had been among the founders of Dallas ' Temple Emanu @-@ El , a Reform synagogue that is today the largest in the Southwest . Stanley Marcus became a leading figure in the temple in the 1950s and a member of the American Council for Judaism despite being largely a secular Jew who once joked that he was afraid to visit Israel " because he might be converted . " 
 Marcus was well known for cultivating the arts and for defending even unpopular political causes . He introduced art exhibits at Neiman @-@ Marcus as well as providing corporate sponsorship of artwork elsewhere in the city , and cultivated an extensive private collection . He helped found the Dallas Opera , helped save the Dallas Symphony from a financial crisis , and served as chairman of the board for the Dallas Museum of Fine Art ( now the Dallas Museum of Art ) . 
 While serving as museum chair , Marcus was once called upon by Fred Florence , then chairman of a major local bank and a fellow Temple Emanu @-@ El leader , to explain his inclusion of " a lot of Communist art " he 'd been told would be included in an upcoming <unk> " Sports in Art " exhibit , co @-@ sponsored by Sports Illustrated and United States Information Agency as a fund @-@ raiser for the 1956 Olympic team . Artists represented in the show included four supposed Communist supporters , Leon Kroll , Yasuo Kuniyoshi , Ben Shahn , and William Zorach . Asking Florence to indicate which pieces were being questioned , Marcus dismissed each claim one by one : " I don 't know how anybody could think hitting a baseball was communist , " Marcus said when shown Shahn 's " The National Pastime . " His response to Zorach 's " Fisherman " was similar , as he shook his head and remarked , " I don 't think too many people think fishing is communist either . " Marcus followed up by going to local newspapers The Dallas Morning News and the Dallas Times @-@ Herald and getting the publishers of both to agree that they would not stand for censorship in the arts . 
 In organizing a 1952 exhibition of abstract art , Marcus lured local leaders to the show by two means . First , he solicited the donation of art from the collections of David Rockefeller and his brothers , along with those from other noted national business leaders . Second , he requested that the donors personally write letters of invitation to their Dallas colleagues , feeling that the otherwise suspect art would benefit from the imprimatur of respected figures known for their fine taste . His efforts were rewarded by a numerous and appreciative turnout for the show . 
 Marcus also involved himself in issues of civil rights and social justice . One unusual case involved three male students at W. W. Samuell High School who , in 1966 , were stopped at the school 's front door and ordered to cut their hair in order to be admitted to the school . The young men filed a lawsuit against the Dallas Independent School District , claiming the restriction interfered with their constitutional freedom of expression . Despite not knowing the boys involved , Marcus stepped forward to champion their case before the public , taking out a newspaper ad defending the choice as a simple fashion decision rather than rebellion against authority . Additionally , he offered legal support if needed , noting in a telegram to school board president Lee McShan , Jr . , " I don ’ t like long hair any more than the principal does , but I will fight for the rights of those students to wear hair any way they choose . " Though the case was lost and appealed all the way to the U.S. Supreme Court without success , decades letter the men still appreciated Marcus ' support . Paul Jarvis , one of the plaintiffs , said of Marcus after his death in 2002 : " He was just a nice man and a great contributor to Dallas and to the arts . He wanted to do what was right . " 
 = = = Presidential connections = = = 
 Marcus used his public @-@ relations skills once again when Dallas was labeled " City of Hate " following the November 22 , 1963 , assassination of United States President John F. Kennedy . An early supporter of Kennedy 's run for the presidency , Marcus had tolerated the closing of several customers ' accounts when he announced his support for the candidate in the 1960 elections . In fact , he had cautioned that Kennedy 's visit be reconsidered in light of the city 's earlier poor reception of Adlai Stevenson and Vice @-@ President Lyndon Baines Johnson . In Kennedy 's memory , Marcus arranged to have 500 hand @-@ typeset and bound copies printed of Kennedy 's scheduled speech at the Dallas Trade Mart , of which the first copy went to Kennedy 's widow , Jacqueline . The following New Year 's Day , 1964 , Marcus took out a full @-@ page <unk> in The Dallas Morning News titled , " What 's Right With Dallas ? " 
 The editorial ad – a Neiman @-@ Marcus tradition introduced by his father in the store 's early days – both defended the city against outside critiques and offered more intimate criticisms from one who knew the town and its people well . The message said that Dallas needed to address four areas for community improvement : one , its slum problem ; two , its political extremism ( called " absolutism " in the text ) ; three , too much attention to physical growth at the expense of " quality " in civic endeavors such as " schools , colleges , symphonies , operas , and museums " ; and four , a need to focus less on " civic image " and more on " doing good things and not doing bad things " , which he described as " the best public relations . " In a 2003 article on the 40th anniversary of the assassination , Ralph Blumenthal of The New York Times praised the message as " <unk> [ ing ] a perfect balance " , though he notes the author met not only with support from some , but from canceled accounts and " anti @-@ Semitic attacks " that only increased after an article in Life referenced Marcus 's Jewish heritage . 
 Following Kennedy 's death , Marcus maintained close ties with Johnson and his administration , being considered for diplomatic posts to France and to the United Nations General Assembly while continuing to run his company and providing the wedding dresses for both the Johnsons ' daughters , personally assisting Luci Johnson in selecting the designer for her own dress and the styles for the bridesmaids ' gowns . After Johnson 's retirement , Marcus 's invitations were among the few the former president and his wife continued to accept . Marcus 's own daughter Wendy joined Mrs. Johnson 's staff for a time in 1963 , working under Mrs. Johnson 's personal secretary , Liz Carpenter . 
 = = = Stepping down = = = 
 In 1969 Stanley Marcus recommended to the board of directors that the company merge with Broadway @-@ Hale of California in order to have enough capital to expand . Neiman 's subsequently became a subsidiary of Carter @-@ Hawley Hale , Inc . , and Marcus accepted a position as corporate executive vice president and director of <unk> . He retired as Chairman Emeritus in 1975 , turning over the store to his son , Richard C. Marcus . 
 Despite retiring officially from the company , Marcus continued to be closely involved as an advisor even through the final weeks of his life . He established a sideline as a retailing consultant , maintaining regular business hours in his offices at Crescent Court for more than a decade and offering advice locally to luxury car dealership Sewell Corporation and hotelier Rosewood Corporation as well as internationally to such businessmen as Mohamed Al @-@ Fayed of Harrods . Called on to consult for Amazon.com 's Jeff Bezos , the 94 @-@ year @-@ old businessman recalled arriving in his customary expensive tailored suit to discover 300 casually dressed employees : " I took off my coat , my necktie and my shirt , down to my T @-@ shirt . And then I said , ' Okay . Let ’ s talk . ' I couldn ’ t have planned it better . It broke the ice . I was on stage for two hours . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In addition to writing a weekly column for The Dallas Morning News for 15 years , Marcus was the author of multiple retailing @-@ oriented books , including Minding the Store : A Memoir ( 1974 ) , the sequel Quest for the Best ( 1979 ) , and His & Hers : The Fantasy World of the Neiman Marcus Catalogue ( 1982 ) He was a close friend of other writers , including Jane <unk> , an author and longtime advertising copywriter who at one time worked for Neiman Marcus , and historian David McCullough . A television presenter for the public broadcasting program American Experience , McCullough said he once asked Stanley Marcus – " one of the wisest men I know " – what single problem or aspect of American life , if given a magic wand , he would change , to which Marcus replied , " I 'd try to do something about television . " When asked why , he explained , " Because " , he said , " If you could do something about television , think how far you could go to solve all the other problems . " 
 Marcus was an avid art collector , as well as amassing a collection of masks from around the world . In 2002 , the Sotheby 's auction house mounted a sale of works from his estate , calling Marcus " an insightful and forward @-@ looking collector and a generous lender whose contributions to exhibitions helped bring notice to the world of Latin American Art during the 40s , 50s and 60s . " The auction house also noted that Marcus had begun collecting at age five ( influenced by his parents ) , but had found his interest in good design vastly deepened by a 1925 graduation trip to Europe , where he visited a famed international exhibition of decorative arts and thus was introduced to the earliest works of Art Deco . The Marcus collections included significant works by Mexican artists Rufino Tamayo , David Alfaro Siqueiros , Diego Rivera , and Rivera 's lesser @-@ known friend and colleague Antonio Ruíz ; the American sculptor Alexander Calder , and American painter Georgia O 'Keeffe . Marcus was friends with Rivera and Tamayo – playing a major role in bringing one of Tamayo 's murals to the Dallas Museum of Art – and one of the first board members of the O 'Keeffe museum , which honored him at the time of his death with a paid notice in The New York Times that stated " Stanley 's generous support , leadership , enthusiasm , friendship and keen artistic judgment were instrumental in the Museum 's inception and success . We shall miss him greatly . " 
 Another Marcus contribution to the arts was his own work in the area of photography . Over the course of his adult life , Marcus took thousands of photographs , both of famous and anonymous subjects , which he turned over to granddaughter Allison V. Smith , a professional photographer , upon moving out of his Nonesuch Road home into a smaller residence in the late 1990s . Two years after his death , Smith began making digital scans of the photos and posting them to the sharing site Flickr ; despite the fact that their authorship was not identified , within a year the photographs had drawn 10 @,@ 000 views . For the 100th anniversary of Neiman Marcus , Smith and her mother , Jerrie Marcus Smith , decided to assemble a representative selection of the nearly 5 @,@ 000 images into a book ; titled Reflection of a Man , the 192 @-@ page book was published by Cairn Press in October , 2007 , and accompanied by an exhibit at the Dallas Museum of Art . 
 Southern Methodist University hosts a Stanley Marcus collection at its DeGolyer Library in Dallas , including photographs , correspondence , and clippings . The library also houses a collection of more than 8 @,@ 000 books donated by Marcus , including 1 @,@ 100 miniature books , many from the press he founded . 
 = = Awards and honors = = 
 Inaugural inductee , Retailing Hall of Fame ( 2004 ) 
 First recipient of the Design Patron award , National Design Awards ( 2001 ) 
 Inductee , Advertising Hall of Fame ( 1999 ) 
 Honoree , Linz Award ( 1995 ) 
 Inductee , Texas Business Hall of Fame ( 1984 ) 
 Honorary doctoral degree recipient , North Texas State University ( 1983 ) 
 Honorary Fellow , American Institute of Architects ( 1972 ) 
 Honorary doctoral degree recipient , Southern Methodist University ( 1965 ) 
 Recipient , National Retail Merchants Association gold medal ( 1961 ) 
 New York Fashion Designers Annual Award ( 1958 ) 
 Chevalier Award , French Legion of Honor , presented on March 27 , 1949 , by Henri Bonnet , French Ambassador to the United States , " for eminent services to the cause of French industrial and commercial recovery " 
 Elected chairman , American Retailing Federation 
 Listed , " The Tallest Texans " , Houston Chronicle - profiles of 100 key figures in the state 's history 
 Listed , " 20th Century Great American Business Leaders " , Harvard Business School 
 = = Additional references = = 
 <unk> . Noteworthy Deaths , 2002 
 " Farewell to the Merchant Prince " , The Dallas Morning News multimedia obituary tribute 
 Tolbert , Frank X. ( 1953 ) . Neiman Marcus , Texas : the story of the proud Dallas store . New York : Henry Holt . 
 = SMS Brummer = 
 SMS Brummer was a minelaying light cruiser of the German Kaiserliche Marine ; she was the lead ship of her class . Her sister ship was Bremse . Brummer was laid down at AG Vulcan 's shipyard in Stettin in 1915 and launched on 11 December 1915 and completed on 2 April 1916 . Armed with a main battery of four 15 @-@ centimeter ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) guns in single mounts , she carried 400 mines . 
 Despite being designed as a minelayer , the German Navy never operated her as such . She and her sister were used to raid a British convoy to Norway in October 1917 . The two cruisers sank two escorting destroyers and nine of the twelve merchant ships of the convoy . The Kaiserliche Marine considered sending the two ships to attack convoys in the Atlantic Ocean , but the difficulties associated with refueling at sea convinced the Germans to abandon the plan . Brummer was included in the list of ships interned at Scapa Flow following the Armistice . On 21 June 1919 , the commander of the interned fleet , Rear Admiral Ludwig von Reuter , ordered the scuttling of the fleet . Brummer was successfully scuttled , and unlike most of the other wrecks , she was never raised for scrapping . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Brummer was ordered under the contract name " C " and was laid down at the AG Vulcan shipyard in Stettin in 1915 . She was launched on 11 December 1915 , after which fitting @-@ out work commenced . Completed in less than four months , she was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet on 2 April 1916 . The ship was 140 @.@ 4 meters ( 461 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 13 @.@ 2 m ( 43 ft ) and a draft of 6 m ( 20 ft ) forward . She displaced 5 @,@ 856 t ( 5 @,@ 764 long tons ; 6 @,@ 455 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two sets of 33 @,@ 000 @-@ shaft @-@ horsepower ( 25 @,@ 000 kW ) steam turbines powered by two coal @-@ fired and four oil @-@ fired Marine @-@ type boilers . These provided a top speed of 28 kn ( 52 km / h ; 32 mph ) and a range of 5 @,@ 800 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 700 km ; 6 @,@ 700 mi ) at 12 kn ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . In service however , the ship reached 34 kn ( 63 km / h ; 39 mph ) . 
 The ship was armed with four 15 cm SK L / 45 guns in single pedestal mounts ; two were arranged side by side forward and two were placed in a superfiring pair aft . These guns fired a 45 @.@ 3 @-@ pound ( 20 @.@ 5 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 840 meters per second ( 2 @,@ 800 ft / s ) . The guns had a maximum elevation of 30 degrees , which allowed them to engage targets out to 17 @,@ 600 m ( 57 @,@ 700 ft ) . They were supplied with 600 rounds of ammunition , for 150 shells per gun . Brummer also carried two 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) L / 45 anti @-@ aircraft guns mounted on the centerline astern of the funnels . She was also equipped with a pair of 50 cm ( 19 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes with four torpedoes in a swivel mount amidships . Designed as a minelayer , she carried 400 mines . The ship was protected by a waterline armored belt that was 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) thick amidships . The conning tower had 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick sides , and the deck was covered with 15 mm ( 0 @.@ 59 in ) thick armor plate . 
 = = Service = = 
 Brummer was ready for service with the fleet by May 1916 , though she did not steam with the rest of the High Seas Fleet for the Battle of Jutland at the end of the month . Despite the fact that they had been built as minelaying cruisers , Brummer and Bremse were never used in this capacity . In the autumn of 1917 , Admiral Reinhard Scheer , the chief of the Admiralstab , decided to supplement the U @-@ boat campaign with surface raiders to attack the British convoys to Scandinavia . In addition to damaging British shipping , Scheer sought to divert escorts from the Atlantic theater , where his U @-@ boats were concentrated . Brummer , commanded by Fregattenkapitän <unk> , and Bremse , commanded by Fregattenkapitän <unk> , were selected for the first such operation . Their high speed and large radius of action , coupled with their resemblance to British light cruisers , made them suited to the task . In preparation for the raid , their crews painted the ships dark gray to further camouflage them as British vessels . 
 Half an hour after dawn on the morning of 17 October , Brummer and Bremse attacked a westbound convoy about 70 nautical miles ( 130 km ; 81 mi ) east of Lerwick . The convoy consisted of twelve merchantmen and was escorted by the destroyers HMS Strongbow and Mary Rose and a pair of armed trawlers . The German ruse worked , and the British destroyers initially thought they were friendly ships . They flashed recognition signals until the Germans opened fire at a range of 2 @,@ 700 m ( 8 @,@ 900 ft ) . Strongbow was quickly destroyed , and as Mary Rose rushed to engage , she too was sunk . The Germans then quickly sank nine of the merchant vessels ; the two trawlers and three merchant ships managed to escape . The British Admiralty was not informed of the attack until Brummer and Bremse were on the return leg of the voyage . Kaiser Wilhelm II celebrated the results of the attack with champagne . The success of the two ships and the commitment of heavier British convoy escorts led Scheer to attempt to attack one of the heavily defended convoys with the entire High Seas Fleet in April 1918 , though this ended without success . 
 Late in the war , the Admiralstab considered sending Brummer and Bremse on a commerce raiding mission into the Atlantic . They were to operate off the Azores in concert with an oiler . The central Atlantic was out of the normal range of the U @-@ boats , and convoys were therefore lightly defended in the area . The Admiralstab canceled the plan , however , after it was determined that refueling at sea would be too difficult . Another problem was the tendency of the two ships to emit clouds of red sparks when steaming at speeds over 20 kn ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) ; this would hamper evading Allied ships at night . Brummer was to have been part of the final sortie of the High Seas Fleet in October 1918 , but this operation was cancelled due to the mutiny of the High Seas Fleet in Wilhelmshaven , after which Brummer was moved to Sassnitz . 
 Along with the most modern units of the High Seas Fleet , Brummer and Bremse were included in the ships specified for internment at Scapa Flow by the victorious Allied powers . The ships steamed out of Germany on 21 November 1918 in single file , commanded by Rear Admiral Ludwig von Reuter . They were met at sea by a combined fleet of 370 British , American , and French warships . The fleet arrived in the Firth of Forth later that day , and between 25 and 27 November , they were escorted to Scapa Flow . Upon arrival , all wireless equipment was removed from the ships and the breech blocks of their heavy guns were removed to prevent their use . Crews were reduced to minimum levels . 
 The fleet remained in captivity during the negotiations that ultimately produced the Treaty of Versailles . Reuter believed that the British intended to seize the German ships on 21 June 1919 , which was the deadline for Germany to have signed the peace treaty . Unaware that the deadline had been extended to the 23rd , Reuter ordered the ships to be sunk at the next opportunity . On the morning of 21 June , the British fleet left Scapa Flow to conduct training maneuvers , and at 11 : 20 Reuter transmitted the order to his ships . Brummer sank at 13 : 05 ; she was never raised for scrapping and remains on the bottom of Scapa Flow . 
 = Yugoslav submarine Mališan = 
 Mališan ( pennant number : P @-@ 901 ) was a CB @-@ class midget submarine in service with the Yugoslav Navy ( Serbo @-@ Croatian : Jugoslavenska ratna mornarica ; JRM ) . Mališan was laid down in 1943 as CB @-@ 20 for the Regia Marina ( Royal Navy ) . Following the Italian Armistice in September 1943 , the unfinished boat was captured by the Germans who handed it to the Navy of the Italian Social Republic . The boat was captured by Yugoslav Partisans in Pula in 1945 and commissioned in the JRM shortly after the war . 
 The boat was decommissioned at some point in the 1950s after a brief service life . In 1959 , it was handed over to the Technical Museum in Zagreb , where it has been on display ever since . Beginning in 2008 , Mališan underwent restoration of its interior and exterior which included returning its original Italian paint scheme and designation . 
 = = Design and building = = 
 Mališan was laid down in 1943 by Caproni , Milan as CB @-@ 20 for service in the Regia Marina ( English : Royal Navy ) . The boat measures 15 m ( 49 ft 3 in ) in length , with a 3 m ( 9 ft 10 in ) beam and a 2 @.@ 05 – 3 m ( 6 ft 9 in – 9 ft 10 in ) draught . <unk> it displaced 45 tonnes ( 44 long tons ) compared to 35 @.@ 4 tonnes ( 34 @.@ 8 long tons ) when surfaced . Maximum diving depth was 55 m ( 180 ft 5 in ) . The boat 's complement during wartime was made of four crew members , one officer and three seamen , while during peacetime the boat could have been operated by a crew of just two . Armament consisted of two 450 mm ( 18 in ) external torpedo tubes located on the sides of the hull . 
 Propulsion consisted of a 88 @.@ 4 hp ( 65 @.@ 9 kW ) <unk> <unk> D 80 diesel engine and a 60 hp ( 45 kW ) Marelli <unk> <unk> <unk> MG 754 S electric motor , mounted on a single shaft . Maximum speed was 7 @.@ 5 knots ( 13 @.@ 9 km / h ; 8 @.@ 6 mph ) surfaced and 6 knots ( 11 km / h ; 6 @.@ 9 mph ) when underwater . Traveling surfaced at a speed of 5 knots ( 9 @.@ 3 km / h ; 5 @.@ 8 mph ) the boat had a range of 1 @,@ 000 – 1 @,@ 400 nmi ( 1 @,@ 900 – 2 @,@ 600 km ; 1 @,@ 200 – 1 @,@ 600 mi ) , with the exact figure varying between sources . Traveling underwater at a speed of 3 knots ( 5 @.@ 6 km / h ; 3 @.@ 5 mph ) the boat had a range of 50 – 60 nmi ( 93 – 111 km ; 58 – 69 mi ) . 
 = = Service history = = 
 After the Kingdom of Italy surrendered to the Allies on 3 September 1943 , the unfinished CB @-@ 20 was captured by German forces and completed by March 1944 . The boat was then handed over to the Italian Social Republic where it saw service with the Tenth Flotilla performing reconnaissance and landing saboteurs . At some point between September and October 1944 , CB @-@ 20 was relocated to its new home port in Pula , where it was captured by the Partisans on 3 May 1945 . Renamed Mališan ( P @-@ 901 ) , translating as <unk> in English , the boat was overhauled at the <unk> Shipyard and commissioned in 1948 . The Yugoslav Navy used it for training new submariners as well as evaluating the concept of midget submarines for future use , which eventually materialized in the form of the Una @-@ class midget submarines three decades later . Depending on the source , the exact time Mališan was decommissioned differs from the early 1950s to 1957 . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In 1959 , the boat was donated to the Technical Museum in Zagreb , where it has remained since . It the only known preserved boat of its class . In 2007 , the museum decided to restore the boat , which was beginning to show signs of deterioration . Work started in 2008 , and was focused on restoring the interior by dismantling all removable parts from the command section and the engine room . The removed parts were preserved and restored with a detailed documentation about their state before and after restoration . A custom crane had to be constructed and mounted in order to extract the compressor , electric motor and other equipment weighing more than 100 kilograms ( 220 lb ) . 
 Work on the exterior began in 2009 ; the tail section with the propeller and the torpedo tubes were dismantled and restored . The boat itself was raised by 80 cm ( 31 in ) and placed on new carriers to make it more accessible for visitors from the museum gallery . Work on the exterior also included the restoration of the boat 's original Italian paint scheme and name in favor of its later Yugoslav service . Although the decision was questioned by some , the changes were allegedly carried out because of " greater historical relevance " and a " more reliably documented history under its original name and flag " . The fully restored boat was reopened for the public in early April 2010 . 
 = Ordsall Hall = 
 Ordsall Hall is a historic house and a former stately home in Ordsall , an area of Salford , in Greater Manchester , England . It dates back more than 750 years , although the oldest surviving parts of the present hall were built in the 15th century . The most important period of Ordsall Hall 's life was as the family seat of the Radclyffe family , who lived in the house for more than 300 years . The hall was the setting for William Harrison Ainsworth 's 1842 novel Guy Fawkes , written around the plausible although unsubstantiated local story that the Gunpowder Plot of 1605 was planned in the house . 
 Since its sale by the Radclyffes in 1662 the hall has been put to many uses ; a working men 's club , a school for clergy , and a radio station among them . The house was bought by the old Salford Council in 1959 and opened to the public in 1972 , as a period house and local history museum . The hall is a Grade I listed building . It was closed to the public between 2009 and 2011 during refurbishment , and reopened in May 2011 . Entrance is free . 
 = = History = = 
 Ordsall Hall is a formerly moated Tudor mansion , the oldest parts of which were built during the 15th century , although there has been a house on the site for over 750 years . David de Hulton is recorded as the owner of the original hall , in 1251 . The manor of Ordsall came into the possession of the Radclyffe family in about 1335 , but it was not until 1354 that Sir John Radclyffe established his right of inheritance . The manor was described in 1351 as a <unk> , 120 acres ( 48 @.@ 6 ha ) of land , 12 acres ( 4 @.@ 9 ha ) of meadow and 12 acres ( 4 @.@ 9 ha ) of wood . 
 = = = Radclyffe family home = = = 
 During the 1340s Sir John Radclyffe campaigned with Edward III in France , distinguishing himself at the battles of Caen , <unk> and Calais . As a reward for his service , the king allowed Sir John to take some Flemish weavers back to his Ordsall estate , where he built cottages for them to live in . English weaving skills at that time were poor , and textiles from Manchester were considered to be of particularly poor quality , so the Flemish weavers were employed in instructing the local weavers . They also started up a silk weaving industry , the foundation for Manchester 's later cotton industry . 
 The Dutch humanist and theologian Erasmus stayed at Ordsall Hall in 1499 , and described it thus : 
 ... the floors are made of clay and are covered with layers of rushes , constantly replenished , so that the bottom layer remains for 20 years harbouring spittle , vomit , the urine of dogs and men , the dregs of beer , the remains of fish and other nameless filth ... 
 The original cruck hall was replaced by the present Great Hall in 1512 , after Sir Alexander Radclyffe was appointed High Sheriff of Lancashire . The hall is typical of others built at that time in the northwest of England , although it is one of the largest , and is unusual for the period in having no wall fireplace . The hall has an elaborate roof structure , as in the similar Rufford Old Hall . There is a slightly later small room above the large oriel bay , which may be an early addition as at Samlesbury Hall . 
 Other alterations and additions were made during the 17th century , including a modest brick house added onto the west end in 1639 , perhaps intended as a home for Sir Alexander 's bailiff , as he himself no longer used the hall as his main residence by that time . The house was built at 90 ° to the timber @-@ framed building , to which it was later joined . During the Civil War Sir Alexander , as a Royalist , was imprisoned and suffered financial hardship . Reduced means eventually forced his heir , John Radclyffe , into selling the hall to Colonel John Birch in 1662 , thus ending more than 300 years of his family 's occupation . 
 = = = Later use = = = 
 At the time of the 1666 hearth tax survey , Ordsall Hall was the largest house in Salford , with 19 hearths . The Oldfield family of Leftwich , near Northwich , bought the estate at the end of the 17th century , and in 1704 it was sold again , to John Stock , a trustee of Cross Street Chapel . His family were probably the last owners to reside at the hall . The Stocks lived in the hall 's central section , comprising " a large hall , lounge dining room , a chapel , six rooms on a floor , with brewhouse , large courts , stable , etc " , while the two wings were leased tenants from about 1700 . In 1756 the hall was sold to Samuel Hill of Shenstone , Staffordshire . Two years later , on Hill 's death , the house passed to his nephew , Samuel Egerton of Tatton . 
 The hall remained in occupation until 1871 , the last residents being the descendants of John <unk> , who had taken over the lease of the building in 1814 . The land surrounding the hall was used by the Mather family of <unk> and butchers for many years . During the last quarter of the 19th century Ordsall Hall became engulfed " in mean streets and industry " . From 1875 Haworth 's Mill rented the hall and used it as a working men 's club . The Great Hall was converted into a gymnasium after being cleared of the inserted floor and later partitions , and provision was made elsewhere for billiards , a skittle alley , and a bowling green . In 1883 the hall was bought by the Earl Egerton of Tatton , and restored during 1896 – 98 by the Manchester architect Alfred <unk> at a cost of £ 6 @,@ 000 ( £ 600 @,@ 000 as of 2016 ) . The restoration allowed the earl to found a clergy training school at the hall . Provisions for the school included the construction of a church dedicated to St Cyprian in the north forecourt , and a new servants ' wing on the south side . In 1908 the school was moved to Egerton Hall , changing its name to the Manchester Theological College . The men 's social club at Ordsall Hall survived until 1940 . During the Second World War the hall was used as a radio station . In the 1960s the church and servants ' wing built for the clergy school were demolished . 
 Salford Corporation purchased Ordsall Hall from the executors of the Baron Egerton of Tatton in 1959 . After major restoration work , it was opened to the public in April 1972 , as a period house and local history museum . 
 In March 2007 the Extraordinary Ordsall Campaign applied for a grant of £ 5 @.@ 1 million from the Heritage Lottery Fund ( HLF ) , to regenerate Ordsall Hall and secure its future . After supporters had raised £ 1 million by September 2008 , the HLF provided the remaining £ 4 @.@ 1 million . Only 40 per cent of the building was then open to the public , but following restoration work further rooms were expected to be opened . The building closed for refurbishment in early 2009 , and re @-@ opened to the public on 15 May 2011 . In 2013 the newly restored building received a Bronze Award in the Small Visitor Attraction category organised by tourist body <unk> , one of 320 nominations from across the country . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 There are two separate elements to the present @-@ day house : the timber @-@ framed south range built in the 15th century , and the brick west range constructed in 1639 . The hall was originally built around a central quadrangle , but the other wings making up that space are no longer present . Drawing on the earliest description of the house , from 1380 , the Salford City Council describes how it comprised " a hall , five chambers , a kitchen and a chapel . It was associated with two stables , three granges , two <unk> , a garner , a dovecote , an orchard and a windmill , together with 80 acres [ 32 @.@ 4 ha ] of arable land and six acres [ 2 @.@ 4 ha ] of meadow . " 
 Substantial alterations appear to have taken place during the early years of Samuel Egerton 's ownership in the mid @-@ 18th century . The canopy at the dais end of the Great Hall was destroyed – although part of it can still be seen in the north wall – when a floor was inserted and new rooms were formed with lath and plaster partitions . The east wing of the hall was probably demolished at about the same time , but certainly before 1812 , the date of the earliest estate map . 
 There are believed to have been underground passages leading from the hall into Manchester . One , running under the River Irwell to the Hanging Bridge Hotel at the northern end of Deansgate , was described in 1900 , following the rediscovery of the Hanging Bridge after it had been buried for <unk> : 
 ... I was shown a door in Hanging Bridge Hotel cellar where the arches could be seen and a door made up ... it was the entrance to an underground passage under the Irwell , possibly to Ordsall Hall ... the owner had not traversed the passage himself , but the previous owner had , but had to turn back because of bad smells .... 
 = = Guy Fawkes = = 
 Harrison Ainsworth , in his 1842 novel Guy Fawkes , wrote about the local story that the Gunpowder Plot of 1605 was planned by Guy Fawkes and Robert Catesby in Ordsall Hall 's Star Chamber . Guy Fawkes is supposed to have escaped capture by the king 's soldiers by way of an underground tunnel from Ordsall Hall to an inn at the cathedral end of Hanging Bridge , at the northern end of present @-@ day Deansgate . There is no firm supporting evidence , but the Radclyffes were prominent Roman Catholics and were acquainted with the Catesby family . The legend is remembered in the name of the modern road that runs to the east of the hall , Guy Fawkes Street . 
 = = Hauntings = = 
 Like many old buildings , Ordsall Hall has stories of hauntings . The White Lady who is said to appear in the Great Hall or Star Chamber is popularly believed to be Margaret Radclyffe , who died of a broken heart in 1599 following the death at sea of her twin , Alexander . There are webcams overseeing the areas that are said to be the most haunted . An episode of the television programme Most Haunted was filmed in the hall in 2005 . 
 = Hurricane Hattie = 
 Hurricane Hattie was the strongest and deadliest tropical cyclone of the 1961 Atlantic hurricane season , reaching a peak intensity equivalent to that of a Category 5 hurricane . The ninth tropical storm and seventh hurricane and major hurricane of the season , Hattie originated from an area of low pressure that strengthened into a tropical storm over the southwestern Caribbean Sea on October 27 . Moving generally northward , the storm quickly became a hurricane and later major hurricane the following day . Hattie then turned westward west of Jamaica and strengthened into a Category 5 hurricane , with maximum sustained winds of 160 mph ( 260 km / h ) . It weakened to Category 4 before making landfall south of Belize City on October 31 . The storm turned southwestward and weakened rapidly over the mountainous terrain of Central America , dissipating on November 1 . 
 Hattie first affected the southwestern Caribbean , where it produced hurricane @-@ force winds and caused one death on San Andres Island . It was initially forecast to continue north and strike Cuba , prompting evacuations on the island . While turning west , Hattie dropped heavy rainfall of up to 11 @.@ 5 in ( 290 mm ) on Grand Cayman . The country of Belize , at the time known as British Honduras , sustained the worst damage from the hurricane . The former capital , Belize City , was buffeted by strong winds and flooded by a powerful storm surge . The territory governor estimated that 70 % of the buildings in the city had been damaged , leaving more than 10 @,@ 000 people homeless . The destruction was so severe that it prompted the government to relocate inland to a new city , Belmopan . Overall , Hattie caused about $ 60 million in losses and 307 deaths in the territory . Although damage was heavier in Hattie than a hurricane in 1931 that killed 2 @,@ 000 people , the death toll from Hattie was less due to advance warnings . Elsewhere in Central America , Hattie killed 11 people in Guatemala and one in Honduras . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 For several days toward the end of October 1961 , a low @-@ pressure area persisted in the western Caribbean Sea , north of the Panama Canal Zone . On October 25 , an upper @-@ level anticyclone moved over the low ; the next day , a trough over the western Gulf of Mexico provided favorable outflow for the disturbance . At 0000 UTC on October 27 , a ship nearby reported southerly winds of 46 mph ( 74 km / h ) . Later that day , the airport on San Andres Island reported easterly winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) . The two observations confirmed the presence of a closed wind circulation , centered about 70 miles ( 110 km ) southeast of San Andres , or 155 mi ( 250 km ) east of the Nicaraguan coast ; as a result , the Miami Weather Bureau began issuing advisories on the newly formed Tropical Storm Hattie . 
 After being classified , Hattie moved steadily northward , passing very near or over San Andres Island . A station on the island recorded a pressure of 991 mbar ( 29 @.@ 3 inHg ) and sustained winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) , which indicated that Hattie had reached hurricane status . Late on October 28 , a Hurricane Hunters flight encountered a much stronger hurricane , with winds of 125 mph ( 200 km / h ) in a small area near the center . At the time , gale @-@ force winds extended outward 140 mi ( 225 km ) to the northeast and 70 miles ( 115 km ) to the southwest . Early on October 29 , a trough extending from Nicaragua to Florida was expected to allow Hattie to continue northward , based on climatology for similar hurricanes . Later that day , Hattie was forecast to be an imminent threat to the Cayman Islands and western Cuba . Around that time , a strengthening ridge to the north turned the hurricane northwestward , which spared the Greater Antilles but increased the threat to Central America . 
 With the strengthening ridge to its north , Hattie began restrengthening after retaining the same intensity for about 24 hours . Initially , forecasters at the Miami Weather Bureau predicted the storm to turn northward again . Late on October 29 , the center of the hurricane passed about 90 miles ( 145 km ) southwest of Grand Cayman , at which time the interaction between Hattie and the ridge to its north produced squally winds of around 30 mph ( 50 km / h ) across Florida . Early on October 30 , the Hurricane Hunters confirmed the increase in intensity , reporting winds of 140 mph ( 225 km / h ) . The storm 's minimum central pressure continued to drop throughout the day , reaching 924 mbar ( 27 @.@ 3 inHg ) by 1300 UTC ; a lower pressure of 920 mbar ( 27 inHg ) was computed at 1700 UTC that day , based on a flight @-@ level reading from the Hurricane Hunters . Hattie later curved toward the west @-@ southwest , passing between the Cayman Islands and the Swan Islands . Late on October 30 , Hattie attained peak winds of 160 mph ( 260 km / h ) about 190 mi ( 310 km ) east of the border of Mexico and British Honduras . This made Hattie the equivalence of a Category 5 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale , making it the latest hurricane on record to reach the status until a reanalysis of the 1932 season revealed that Hurricane Fourteen had a similar intensity on November 5 , six days after Hattie . Additionally , Hattie was the strongest October hurricane in the northwest Caribbean until Hurricane Mitch in 1998 . 
 Hattie maintained much of its intensity as it continued toward the coast of British Honduras . After moving through several small islands offshore , the hurricane made landfall a short distance south of Belize City on October 31 , with an eyewall of about 25 miles ( 40 km ) in diameter . Based on a post @-@ season analysis , it was determined that Hattie had weakened to winds of 140 mph ( 225 km / h ) before moving ashore . The hurricane deteriorated rapidly over land , dissipating on November 1 as it moved into the mountains of Guatemala . During its dissipation , Tropical Storm Simone was developing off the Pacific coast of Guatemala . There was speculation that Hattie contributed to the development of Simone , and later Tropical Storm Inga after the remnants of Simone merged with nearby disturbed weather . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Upon initiating advisories on Hattie , the Miami Weather Bureau noted the potential for heavy rainfall and flash flooding in the southwestern Caribbean . The advisories recommended for small ships to remain at harbor across the region . Initially , the hurricane was predicted to move near or through the Cayman Islands , Jamaica , and Cuba . As a result , Cuban officials advised residents in low @-@ lying areas to evacuate . 
 Hurricane Hattie first posed a threat to the Yucatán Peninsula and British Honduras on October 30 when it turned toward the area . Officials at the Miami Weather Bureau warned of the potential for high tides , strong winds , and torrential rainfall . The warnings allowed for extensive evacuations in high @-@ risk areas . Most people in the capital , Belize City , were evacuated or moved to shelters , and a school was operated as a refuge . A hospital in the city was evacuated , and over 75 % of the population of Stann Creek fled to safer locations . After Hattie made landfall , officials in Mexico ordered the closure of ports along the Isthmus of Tehuantepec . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Despite predictions for heavy rainfall in the southwestern Caribbean , the hurricane 's movement was more northerly than expected , resulting in less precipitation along the Central American coast than anticipated . In its early developmental stages , Hattie struck San Andrés Island , located offshore eastern Nicaragua , with maximum sustained winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) and gusts of 104 mph ( 167 km / h ) . As the hurricane neared the island , the airport was closed due to tropical @-@ storm @-@ force winds . Rough seas and winds damaged private property and two hotels . Many palm tree plantations were devastated . The schooner <unk> , anchored in one of the island 's bays , capsized during the storm . Overall , Hattie resulted in one death , fifteen injuries , and $ 300 @,@ 000 in damage ( 1961 USD ) in San Andrés . The hurricane was the fourth on record to strike the island , and of the four was the only to approach from the south . 
 In the northwestern Caribbean , Hattie passed close to Grand Cayman with heavy rainfall . At least 11 @.@ 5 inches ( 292 mm ) of rain were reported on the island , including 7 @.@ 8 inches ( 198 mm ) in six hours . Winds on Grand Cayman were below hurricane force , and only minor damage occurred due to the rain . 
 The interaction between Hattie and the ridge of high pressure to its north produced sustained winds of 20 mph ( 35 km / h ) across most of Florida , with a gust of 72 mph ( 116 km / h ) reported at Hillsboro Inlet Light ; the winds caused some beach erosion in the state . The U.S. Weather Bureau issued a small craft warning for the west and east Florida coastlines , as well as northward to Brunswick , Georgia . 
 Later , Hattie impacted various countries in Central America with flash floods , causing 11 deaths in Guatemala and one fatality in Honduras . The Swan Islands reported wind gusts just below hurricane force , resulting in minor damage and one injury . 
 = = = British Honduras = = = 
 Hurricane Hattie moved ashore in British Honduras with a storm tide of up to 14 feet ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) near Belize City , a city of 31 @,@ 000 people located at sea @-@ level ; its only defenses against the storm tide were a small seawall and a strip of swamp lands . The capital experienced high waves and a 10 ft ( 3 m ) storm tide along its waterfront that reached the third story of some buildings . A trained observer estimated winds of over 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) , and winds in the territory were unofficially estimated as strong as 200 mph ( 325 km / h ) . When Hattie affected the area , most buildings in Belize City were wooden , and most of this type were destroyed . Offshore , the hurricane heavily damaged 80 % of the Belize Barrier Reef , although the reef recovered after the storm . 
 High winds caused a power outage , downed trees across the region , and destroyed the roofs of many buildings . Governor Colin Thornley estimated that over 70 % of the buildings in the territory were damaged , and more than 10 @,@ 000 people were left homeless . Some shelters set up before the storm were destroyed in the hurricane . The hurricane destroyed the wall at an insane asylum , which allowed the residents to escape . High waves damaged a prison , prompting officials to institute a " daily parole " program for the inmates . Hattie also flooded the Government House , washing away all records . All of Belize City was coated in a layer of mud and debris , and majority of the city was destroyed or severely damaged , as was nearby Stann Creek . The hurricane left significant crop damage across the region , including $ 2 million in citrus fruits and similar losses to timber , cocoa , and bananas . The year 's production of sugar cane was also heavily damaged . About 70 % of the territory 's mahogany trees were downed , as were most citrus and grapefruit trees . The hurricane damaged several factories and oil rigs in the region . Damage throughout the territory totaled $ 60 million ( 1961 USD ) , and a total of 307 deaths were reported ; more than 100 of the fatalities were in Belize City , including 36 who evacuated to a British administration building that was later destroyed in the storm . The government of British Honduras considered Hurricane Hattie more damaging than a hurricane in 1931 that killed 2 @,@ 000 people ; the lower death toll of Hattie was due to advance warning . 
