 = = Aftermath = = 
 After Hattie struck , officials in Belize City declared martial law . A manager of United Press International described Belize City as " nothing but a huge pile of matchsticks , " and many roads were either flooded for days or covered with mud . Doctors provided typhoid vaccinations to 12 @,@ 000 residents in two days to prevent the spread of the disease . Due to the high death toll , officials ordered mass cremations to stop additional disease from spreading . At the city 's police station , workers provided fresh water and rice to storm victims . Many residents throughout British Honduras donated supplies to the storm victims , such that an airlines manager described it as " taxing ... manpower and facilities . " One airline allowed donations to be flown to Belize City at no cost . The city 's three newspapers were unable to operate due to lack of power after the storm . By November 5 , Belize City 's post office reopened on a limited basis , and all business initially remained closed . About 4 @,@ 000 homeless residents from Stann Creek were moved by boat to the northern portion of the territory . Many homeless people from the Belize City area set up a tent city on bushland about 16 mi ( 26 km ) inland , which was initially intended to be temporary . In December 1961 , barracks were erected near a Red Cross Hospital to house the homeless in the camp . The site was named <unk> and became a proper city , with utilities installed in the subsequent decade . 
 About 200 British soldiers arrived from Jamaica to quell looting and maintain order . At least 20 people were arrested in the day after Hattie struck . The British government sent flights of aid to the territory containing food , clothing , and medical supplies . The House of Commons quickly passed a bill to provide £ 10 @,@ 000 in aid . The Save the Children fund sent £ 1 @,@ 000 to British Honduras , and the Mexican government sent three flights with food and medicine to the territory . Two American destroyers arrived in the country by November 2 , reporting the need for assistance . The USS Antietam remained at port for weeks after the storm with six medical officers and six Marine helicopters . Four other ships sailed to the territory to provide 458 @,@ 000 lb ( 208 @,@ 000 kg ) of food . The United States government allocated about $ 300 @,@ 000 in assistance through the International Development Association . The Canadian government provided C $ 75 @,@ 000 worth of aid , including food , blankets , and medical supplies . 
 By Hattie 's one year anniversary , private and public workers repaired and rebuilt buildings affected by the storm . New hotels were constructed , and many stores were reopened . Prime Minister George <unk> Price successfully appealed for assistance from the British government , which ultimately provided £ 20 million in loans . In the days after the storm , the government announced plans to relocate the capital of British Honduras farther inland on higher ground . Work on the new capital , Belmopan , was completed in 1970 . On the 44th anniversary of the hurricane in 2005 , the government of Belize unveiled a monument in Belize City to recognize the victims of the hurricane . 
 Due to the destruction and loss of life attributed to the hurricane , the name Hattie was retired by the World Meteorological Organization and will never again be used for an Atlantic hurricane . 
 = You 're Mine ( Eternal ) = 
 " You 're Mine ( Eternal ) " is a song by American singer and songwriter Mariah Carey included on her fourteenth studio album , Me . I Am Mariah ... The Elusive Chanteuse ( 2014 ) . It premiered on February 12 , 2014 , as the third single from the album . It was written and produced by Carey with Rodney Jerkins . An R & B song , the lyrics revolve around the singer reminiscing about a past lover . Critical response to the song was positive : Carey 's breathy vocal style and use of the whistle register at the climax earned praise from critics . It also garnered several comparisons to one of Carey 's previous singles , " We Belong Together " ( 2005 ) . 
 In the United States , " You 're Mine ( Eternal ) " reached number 88 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart , but it experienced greater success on the Dance Club Songs chart , becoming her seventeenth number @-@ one song . Elsewhere , it reached the top 20 in Hungary and on the UK R & B Chart and the top 30 in Spain . Carey co @-@ directed the music video with photographer Indrani , which depicted the singer as a mermaid swimming around the lakes at the El Yunque National Forest in Puerto Rico . Recording artist Trey Songz appears as a love interest in the video . He also features on the urban remix of the song , performing his verses in the remix video . Carey has performed the song at the BET Honors and during a performance at the Empire State Building . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 On December 31 , 2013 , Carey appeared on NBC 's New Year 's Eve with Carson Daly show to perform some songs . Before giving the audience some advice on love for 2014 and prior to singing " The Art of Letting Go " from Me . I Am Mariah ... The Elusive Chanteuse , the singer announced that she would be releasing a new single on February 14 , 2014 , to coincide with Valentine 's Day . On February 12 , Carey released " You 're Mine ( Eternal ) " as the album 's third single . The single 's artwork consists of Sweethearts , a brand of sugar candies . 
 In the United States , the song was released to contemporary , rhythmic , and urban adult contemporary radio stations around the country on February 18 . An urban remix featuring vocals by American recording artist Trey Songz was also made available to download digitally on February 13 . In an interview with MTV News , Carey praised Songz vocal ability , saying that most artists are not able to sing and rap while maintaining " a sound that 's current yet also classic " . Carey further released multiple dances remixes of " You 're Mine ( Eternal ) " , including the Jump Smokers Radio Remix , Jump Smokers Extended Remix , and Jermaine Dupri X Kurd Maverick Germany To Southside Remix . Additional remixes by Fedde le Grand , Gregor Salto and Funkin ' Matt , and <unk> and Ceballos were released on March 15 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " You 're Mine ( Eternal ) " is an R & B love song written and produced by Carey and Rodney Jerkins . " . The song is composed in the key of D major using common time and a moderately slow feel of 75 beats per minute . Carey employs a breathy vocal style as she sings the lyric " I can 't seem to live without your love " . Lyrically , Carey reminisces about a past lover , singing " I can 't seem to live without your love / <unk> here by myself / Dying for your touch " . Instrumentation consists of hypnotic , " smooth , steady " piano beat , which slowly builds to a climax with Carey hitting a whistle note for a sustained period of time at the end of the song . Music Times writer Carolyn Menyes described the " up @-@ and @-@ down " melodic structure as " captivating " , which causes the listener to be drawn " deep into Carey 's musical abyss " . The urban remix featuring Songz incorporates an enhanced pop feel compared to the original , with additional drums and Auto @-@ Tune on Songz vocals . " You 're Mine " garnered comparisons to one of Carey 's previous singles " We Belong Together " ( 2005 ) . While Christina Garibaldi of MTV News and Jamieson Cox of Time simply highlighted that they have similar melodic structures and vocals styles , Alexa Camp of Slant Magazine was critical of the likeness between the two songs , writing that she was disappointed to hear a " retread " of " We Belong Together " following the positively received " retro " first and second singles " # Beautiful " featuring Miguel and " The Art of Letting Go " , respectively . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " You 're Mine ( Eternal ) " garnered a generally positive response amongst music critics . Christina Garibaldi of MTV News was complimentary of the song , praising Carey 's " impressive " vocal range and specifically drawing attention to the high note that she ends the song with . Garibaldi stated that " You 're Mine ( Eternal ) " serves as a reminder as to why Carey is " still the fiercest diva in the game " . Writing for Billboard , Jason Lipshutz noted that the slow structure for the majority of the song could have made it a " sleepy " R & B song , but noted that the " inevitable " high note saves it from becoming so . Jamieson Cox of Time echoed Garibaldi 's sentiments , writing " It 's a gaseous , fluffy ballad that feels like a direct descendant of the song that rang in her mid @-@ career renaissance , 2005 's mega @-@ hit ' We Belong Together ' : plinking piano melodies , a typically fluttering Carey vocal take , and a very similar beat . Only time will tell if ' You 're Mine ( Eternal ) ' can duplicate that song 's record @-@ breaking success " . 
 Melinda Newman of HitFix questioned if Carey could have achieve success with the song , describing it as " breathless " and too reliant on the singer 's " vocal pyrotechnics " . She continued to write that the song would most probably not achieve any success on the Billboard Hot 100 , but would find " some love " on the adult contemporary and R & B radio stations . Jeff Benjamin of Fuse compared the production of the song to Carey 's previous singles " Always Be My Baby " ( 1995 ) and " Touch My Body " ( 2008 ) . He also wrote that the " drawn @-@ out whistle " at the end of the song was " impressive " . Carolyn Menyes for Music Times felt that Songz overshadowed Carey with his vocals on the urban remix . Slant Magazine writer Alexa Camp thought that while Carey 's voice sounded good , Darkchild 's production was " utterly trivial " . She concluded by expressing that the remix featuring Songz was " slightly more interesting " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United Kingdom , " You 're Mine ( Eternal ) " spent one week on the UK Singles Chart , debuting at number 87 on February 16 , 2014 , just four days after being released . It fared better on the UK R & B Chart , spending one week at number 16 . In Hungary , the song reached the top twenty , peaking at number 14 , and the top 30 in Spain , reaching number 21 . In the Flanders region of Belgium and in France , the song only managed peaked at number 49 and 96 , respectively . On the Belgium Urban chart , it peaked at number 29 . In Japan , " You 're Mine ( Eternal ) " reached number 91 . 
 In the United States , the song peaked at number 88 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart , with 32 @,@ 000 digital downloads accounting for 62 % of its charting points . It became Carey 's 46th chart entry since her debut in 1990 ; it was also the her first song since " Obsessed " in 2009 to chart on the Hot 100 which was neither a festive / holiday song nor a collaboration nor a cover song . " You 're Mine ( Eternal ) " became her seventeenth number @-@ one song on the Dance Club Songs chart since her 1991 single " Someday " topped the chart , placing her in joint fifth place with Donna Summer for artist with the most number @-@ one songs . At the time , only Janet Jackson , Beyoncé ( 19 each ) , Rihanna ( 22 ) and Madonna ( 43 ) had achieved more . On the R & B charts , it peaked at number 24 on Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart , number 12 on the R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Digital Songs chart , number 41 on the R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Airplay chart , number 15 on the Hot R & B Songs chart. and number 20 on the Adult R & B Songs chart . On the pop charts , it reached number 26 on the Adult Contemporary chart , number 36 on the Mainstream Top 40 ( Pop Songs ) chart. and number 35 on the Rhythmic chart . According to Nielsen SoundScan , the song has sold 56 @,@ 000 digital downloads as of April 2014 . The song garnered 245 plays across all radio stations in its first day of release . 
 = = Music video = = 
 Carey co @-@ directed the music video for " You 're Mine ( Eternal ) " with Indo @-@ Canadian photographer Indrani at the El Yunque National Forest in Puerto Rico . The video premiered on MTV on February 12 , 2014 . Carey explained how she created the concept for the video and the decided to being in <unk> to direct specific scenes in a radio interview : 
 I would say it was a directorial collaborative effort . We went to the rainforest and that was interesting . Part of the reason was [ because ] I love Puerto Rico [ – it 's ] one of my favorite places ever and I did one of my favorite videos , ' Honey ' , in Puerto Rico at the El Conquistador hotel . I was involved every step of the way ... I like [ d ] a lot of the shots in the video ... There was a moment where I had to do an additional water sequence with no director , just myself and a camera man with an underwater camera . I was looking at the take at 5 in the morning , [ they 're ] ready to kill me . But if we didn 't have those shots there wouldn 't be anything to cut away to , except me . 
 Scenes of the music video include Carey sitting beside a river in the forest covered in gold glitter , sitting in front of waterfalls and tropical wildlife , and imitating a mermaid by swimming underwater while wearing an evening gown . The remix video with Songz premiered two days later on Valentine 's Day on BET 's 106 & Park . Songz appears in both versions of the video , whereby he is seen modelling shirtless at a photoshoot , but only performs his verses in the remix video . Carey praised Songz for bringing something artistically different to the videos . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Carey performed " You 're Mine ( Eternal ) " at the BET Honors in Washington , D.C. on February 8 , 2014 ; the performance aired on February 24 . On February 13 , 2014 , Carey performed at the lighting up of the Empire State Building in pink and red ; she appeared with three couples who won a contest that gave them the opportunity to get married at the top of the building on Valentine 's Day . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Original Digital Download 
 " You 're Mine ( Eternal ) " – 3 : 44 
 Urban Remix Digital Download 
 " You 're Mine ( Eternal ) " [ featuring Trey Songz ] – 4 : 15 
 Dance Remix Streaming 
 " You 're Mine ( Eternal ) " [ Jermaine Dupri × Kurd Maverick Germany To Southside Remix ] – 5 : 25 
 " You 're Mine ( Eternal ) " [ Jermaine Dupri × Kurd Maverick Germany To Southside Remix Edit ] – 3 : 27 
 " You 're Mine ( Eternal ) " [ Jump Smokers Extended Remix ] – 4 : 07 
 " You 're Mine ( Eternal ) " [ Jump Smokers Radio Edit ] – 3 : 39 
 " You 're Mine ( Eternal ) " [ Fedde le Grand Main Mix ] – 5 : 39 
 " You 're Mine ( Eternal ) " [ Gregor Salto and Funkin ' Matt Main Mix ] – 4 : 34 
 " You 're Mine ( Eternal ) " [ <unk> & Ceballos Remix ] – 7 : 01 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Recorded at Rapture Studios , Bel Air , CA ; Metrocity Studios , New York , NY ; Jungle City Studios , New York , NY ; Studio at the Palms , Las Vegas , NV . 
 Mixed at Ninja Beat Club , Atlanta , GA 
 Personnel 
 Songwriting – Mariah Carey , Rodney Jerkins 
 Production – Mariah Carey , Rodney " Darkchild " Jerkins 
 Recording – Brian Garten , Matt Champlin , Greg Morgan 
 Assistant recording – Keith Parry , Rob Katz 
 Mixing – Phil Tan 
 Assistant mixing – Daniela Rivera 
 Background vocals – Mariah Carey 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Me . I Am Mariah ... The Elusive Chanteuse . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Robert Bacher = 
 Robert Fox Bacher ( August 31 , 1905 – November 18 , 2004 ) was an American nuclear physicist and one of the leaders of the Manhattan Project . Born in Loudonville , Ohio , Bacher obtained his undergraduate degree and doctorate from the University of Michigan , writing his 1930 doctoral thesis under the supervision of Samuel Goudsmit on the Zeeman effect of the hyperfine structure of atomic levels . After graduate work at the California Institute of Technology ( Caltech ) and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology ( MIT ) , he accepted a job at Columbia University . In 1935 he accepted an offer from Hans Bethe to work with him at Cornell University in Ithaca , New York , a university town similar to Ann Arbor , where Bacher and his wife Jean had been raised . At Cornell , Bacher worked with Bethe on his book Nuclear Physics . A : Stationary States of Nuclei ( 1936 ) , the first of three books that would become known as the " Bethe Bible " . 
 In December 1940 , Bacher joined the Radiation Laboratory at MIT , although he did not immediately cease his research at Cornell into the neutron cross section of cadmium . The Radiation Laboratory was organized into two sections , one for incoming radar signals , and one for outgoing radar signals . Bacher was appointed to handle the incoming signals section . Here he gained valuable experience in administration , coordinating not just the efforts of his scientists , but also those of General Electric and RCA . In 1942 , Bacher was approached by Robert Oppenheimer to join the Manhattan Project at its new laboratory in Los Alamos , New Mexico . It was at Bacher 's insistence that Los Alamos became a civilian rather than a military laboratory . At Los Alamos , Bacher headed the project 's P ( Physics ) Division , and later its G ( Gadget ) Division . Bacher worked closely with Oppenheimer , and the two men discussed the project 's progress on a daily basis . 
 After the war , Bacher became director of the Laboratory of Nuclear Studies at Cornell . He also served on the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission , the civilian agency that replaced the wartime Manhattan Project , and in 1947 he became one of its inaugural commissioners . He left in 1949 to become head Division of Physics , Mathematics , and Astronomy at Caltech . He was appointed a member of the President 's Science Advisory Committee ( PSAC ) in 1958 . In 1962 , he became Caltech 's vice president and provost . He stepped down from the post of provost in 1970 , and became a professor emeritus in 1976 . He died in 2004 at the age of 99 . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Bacher was born in Loudonville , Ohio , on August 31 , 1905 , the only child of Harry and <unk> Fox Bacher . In 1908 , the family moved to Ann Arbor , Michigan , where Harry worked as a banker and <unk> as a voice teacher on the University of Michigan faculty . Bacher attended the W. S. Perry School , and later Ann Arbor High School . While there he met Professor Harrison M. Randall , the head of the physics department at the University of Michigan , who encouraged him to study physics . 
 Bacher entered the University of Michigan , where he joined the Kappa Sigma fraternity and lived in the frat house . He became the house manager in his sophomore year , but moved back home in his junior year to concentrate on physics . At Randall 's suggestion he applied to the Harvard Graduate School of Arts and Sciences , which he entered in 1926 to study for his doctorate . His fees were paid by his family , but his father had a heart attack and could no longer afford them , so in 1927 Bacher moved back to Ann Arbor , where he lived at home , and attended the University of Michigan . He received a Charles A. Coffin Foundation Fellowship from General Electric . 
 To build up the theoretical physics department at the University of Michigan , Randall recruited four distinguished young physicists to work at Ann Arbor in 1927 : Otto Laporte , George Uhlenbeck , Samuel Goudsmit , and David M. Dennison . The University of Michigan was no longer a backwater in theoretical physics . Bacher immediately signed up for Goudsmit 's course on atomic structure . With Goudsmit he investigated the Zeeman effect of hyperfine structure of atomic levels , which became the subject of his 1930 PhD thesis . 
 On May 30 , 1930 , Bacher married Jean Dow . His mother gave them a Ford Model A and the use of the family 's lakeside holiday house , where they entertained guests including Paul Ehrenfest and Enrico Fermi . In 1931 , with a National Research Council Fellowship , he spent a year at the California Institute of Technology ( Caltech ) because Ira Bowen taught there . At Caltech Bacher attended lectures by Robert Oppenheimer , but spent most of his time at the Mt . Wilson Observatory , which had a better library . Bacher decided to create a work listing the energy , coupling constant , parity and electron configurations of all the known atoms and ions , working with Goudsmit back in Ann Arbor . The result was a book , Atomic Energy States as Derived from the Analysis of Optical Spectra ( 1932 ) , which they dedicated to Randall . 
 In the second year of his National Research Council Fellowship , Bacher moved across the country to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology to work with John C. Slater , who had taught Bacher at Harvard . While there , Slater asked him to conduct a seminar on John Chadwick 's recent discovery of the neutron . Reading Chadwick 's paper , he realized that anomalies in then @-@ current theory would be resolved if the spin of the neutron was ½ . This became the subject of a letter he submitted to the Physical Review with visiting scholar Edward Condon . A year later , Bacher became the first to suggest the neutron had a magnetic moment equal to about minus one nuclear magneton , based on the unusually small magnetic moment of nitrogen determined from its hyperfine structure . 
 Afterwards Bacher returned to the University of Michigan on an Alfred H. Lloyd Fellowship . Jobs were hard to find at this time due to the Great Depression , and in 1934 he accepted a job at Columbia University , where he worked with Isidor Isaac Rabi , Jerrold Zacharias , Jerome Kellogg and Sid Millman . However it was difficult living in New York on his salary , and Jean gave birth to their first child , Martha , in December 1935 . A second child , Andrew , was born in 1938 . Bacher therefore accepted an offer from Hans Bethe to work with him at Cornell University in Ithaca , New York . Ithaca was a university town similar to Ann Arbor , where Bacher and Jean had been raised . At Cornell Bacher worked with Bethe on his book Nuclear Physics . A : Stationary States of Nuclei ( 1936 ) , the first of three books that would become known as the " Bethe Bible " . 
 = = World War II = = 
 = = = Radiation Laboratory = = = 
 In December 1940 Bacher joined the Radiation Laboratory at MIT , but did not immediately cease his research . He reached an arrangement with its director , Lee Alvin DuBridge , to return to Cornell for four days every three weeks until it was completed . He was researching the neutron cross section of cadmium , a topic of interest to Enrico Fermi , who was attempting to build a nuclear reactor , but whose figures did not agree with Bacher 's . Bacher carefully checked his results , and Fermi , convinced of their correctness , urged Bacher to publish them . Bacher submitted a paper to the Physical Review with instructions to withhold publication until after the war , and the paper was not published until 1946 . 
 DuBridge organized the Radiation Laboratory into two sections , one for incoming radar signals , and one for outgoing radar signals . Bacher was appointed to handle the incoming signals section . Here he gained valuable experience in administration , coordinating not just the efforts of his scientists , but also those of General Electric and RCA . He later recalled : 
 We quickly concluded that the ultimate discrimination between signals reflected from a target , as opposed to noise from the transmitter , should be done finally on the cathode @-@ ray tube . We had to develop the tubes , and then contract with GE and RCA to work together on producing them . I supervised the contracts myself , visiting GE one week and RCA the next , and the following week we would hold a joint meeting at the Rad Lab in Cambridge . I was getting into contract management . " 
 = = = Manhattan Project = = = 
 In 1942 , Bacher and Rabi , the Radiation Laboratory 's assistant director , were approached by Oppenheimer to join the Manhattan Project at its new laboratory in Los Alamos , New Mexico . They convinced Oppenheimer that the plan for a military laboratory would not work , since a scientific effort would need to be a civilian affair . The plan was modified , and the new laboratory would be a civilian one , run by the University of California under contract from the War Department . Bacher felt that this was his first contribution to the success of the project . He met with Oppenheimer at Los Alamos in April 1943 , but was not convinced that he was needed . Oppenheimer wrote to him that : 
 You know that I have been extremely eager to have your help in this work . I think perhaps you have not fully realized how much I appreciate your administrative experience and obvious administrative wisdom , nor how aware I am of our need for just this in the present project . Perhaps too you do not evaluate highly enough the fact that you have worked so much in neutron physics , and that you are so well informed about the last year ’ s developments at MIT . These three qualifications make you , in my opinion , very nearly unique . In addition , I want to express in writing my own confidence in your stability and judgement , qualities on which this stormy enterprise puts a very high premium . 
 Bacher then accepted the job at Los Alamos , moving there in May 1943 to become the head of the Experimental Physics Division ( P Division ) . For his seven group leaders he had John H. Williams , Robert R. Wilson , John H. Manley , Darol K. Froman , Emilio G. Segrè , Bruno B. Rossi and Donald W. Kerst . Bacher worked closely with Oppenheimer , and the two men discussed the project 's progress on a daily basis . 
 In July 1944 , Oppenheimer reorganized the laboratory to focus on the problem of building an implosion @-@ type nuclear weapon , which was necessary because the gun @-@ type design would not work with plutonium . P Division was broken up , and Bacher became the head of the G ( for Gadget ) Division . This much larger division contained eleven groups headed by leaders who included William Higinbotham , Seth Neddermeyer , Edwin McMillan , Luis Alvarez and Otto Frisch . 
 While George Kistiakowsky 's Explosives Division ( X Division ) developed the explosive lenses , G Division designed the rest of the weapon . There were numerous difficulties to overcome , not the least of which was devising a means of detonating the lenses with the required speed . Robert F. Christy 's solid core design was chosen as the most likely design to succeed . 
 To coordinate the efforts of the laboratory , Oppenheimer created the " Cowpuncher Committee " , so @-@ called because they were to " ride herd " on the implosion effort and coordinate all the efforts of the laboratory . It included Bacher , along with Samuel Allison , George Kistiakowsky , Deak Parsons , Charles Lauritsen and Hartley Rowe . 
 Three days before the day the bomb was to be test detonated in the New Mexico desert , Bacher was part of the pit assembly team , which assembled the nuclear capsule ( a cylindrical section of the uranium tamper , containing the plutonium core and initiator ) in an old farmhouse near the Alamogordo testing site . When the capsule was driven to the shot tower and inserted into the spherical tamper , inside the explosive assembly , it stuck . Bacher recognized that expansion of the capsule due to the heat given off by the plutonium core was causing the jam , and that leaving the two parts in contact would equalize temperatures and allow the capsule to be inserted fully . After watching the test , his reaction was merely " Well , it works . " 
 Bacher was packaging the third core for shipment to Tinian on August 12 at the Ice House at Los Alamos when he received word that the Japanese had initiated surrender negotiations . He had already set G Division the task of designing and building new types of cores and assemblies , and he co @-@ authored a report with Robert Wilson urging the development of Edward Teller 's Super bomb . He served on a committee chaired by Richard Tolman that looked into declassifying documents produced by the Manhattan Project , and one chaired by Manson Benedict that investigated the technical feasibility of international control of nuclear energy . For his services to the Manhattan Project Bacher was awarded the Medal for Merit on January 12 , 1946 . 
 = = Post @-@ World War II = = 
 = = = Atomic Energy Commission = = = 
 After the war , Bacher returned to Ithaca to head Cornell 's Laboratory for Nuclear Studies . He agreed with Bethe that what Cornell needed to become a major player in high energy nuclear physics was a new synchrotron , but first he needed to find somewhere to put it . However , in 1946 Bacher was appointed to the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee of the new United Nations Atomic Energy Commission , along with fellow United States representatives Tolman and Oppenheimer . Bacher therefore had to divide his time between Ithaca and New York City . 
 In October 1946 David Lilienthal asked Bacher to become one of the inaugural commissioners of the United States Atomic Energy Commission , the civilian agency that was being formed to replace the wartime Manhattan Project . As a Republican , Bacher was easily confirmed by the Senate members of the United States Congress Joint Committee on Atomic Energy by an 8 – 0 vote . As he was the only one of the five commissioners who was a scientist — an important factor in his decision to accept the post — he played a leading role in the selection of the Atomic Energy Commission 's influential General Advisory Committee to which nine scientists were appointed : James Conant , Lee DuBridge , Enrico Fermi , Robert Oppenheimer , Isidor Isaac Rabi , Hartley Rowe , Glenn Seaborg , Cyril Smith and Hood Worthington . 
 Bacher and fellow commissioner Sumner Pike began with an inspection of Los Alamos and the Hanford Site , and conducted an inventory of the fissionable material at Los Alamos with Norris Bradbury , who had succeeded Oppenheimer as its director . He found that only nine atomic bombs had been built in 1946 ; only four would be in 1947 , primarily due to production problems with the reactors at Hanford . These problems were on their way to resolution when Bacher observed the Operation Sandstone nuclear tests at Enewetak Atoll in 1948 as the Atomic Energy Commission 's representative . Bacher 's original two @-@ year term would have expired on January 1 , 1949 , but President Harry Truman convinced him to stay on . Bacher resigned in May 1949 , and this time the President was unable to dissuade him . 
 Bacher wished to return to academia , but Robert Wilson was now the head of Cornell 's Laboratory for Nuclear Studies , and Bacher felt that it would be awkward working for someone who was one of his group leaders at Los Alamos . He therefore accepted an offer from Lee DuBridge of the chair of the Division of Physics , Mathematics , and Astronomy at Caltech . However the work at the Atomic Energy Commission was not so easily left behind . Senator Bourke Hickenlooper charged the Commission with mismanagement , specifically cost overruns at Hanford , awarding a scholarship to a communist , and the loss of 289 grams ( 10 @.@ 2 oz ) of uranium from the Argonne National Laboratory . Bacher felt obligated to return to Washington to testify on Lilienthal 's behalf before the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy . 
 Another crisis broke in September 1949 when the Air Force picked up signs of the Soviet Union 's RDS @-@ 1 nuclear test . Bacher joined Oppenheimer , Parsons , General Hoyt Vandenberg , the Atomic Energy Commissioners and a British delegation under William Penney to discuss what to do . The recent devaluation of the British pound had already triggered a financial crisis , and there was concern about how the markets would react to the news . Oppenheimer and Bacher saw the evidence of a nuclear test as conclusive , and Bacher in particular came down strongly on the side of making a public announcement , as the number of people who already knew made a leak almost inevitable . Truman made the announcement a few days later . 
 = = = Caltech = = = 
 The division chair that Bacher now occupied at Caltech had been vacant since Robert A. Millikan had retired in 1945 . Although nominally a professorship , it was primarily an administrative post . In 1949 there were 17 professors in the department , of whom nine were physicists , two were astrophysicists , and the remaining six were mathematicians . There were two world class research laboratories funded by the Office of Naval Research , the Cosmic Ray Laboratory that had been founded by Millikan , which was now directed by Carl Anderson , and the W. K. Kellogg Radiation Laboratory which was directed by Charles Lauritsen . But there were no facilities for high energy physics ; these would have to be created from scratch . 
 In moving into high energy physics Bacher had the full support not just of DuBridge , but of Anderson and Lauritsen as well . Lauritsen had already hired Robert Langmuir to begin designing a new 600 MeV synchrotron , and Bacher found a large building to house it that had originally been used for grinding and polishing the Palomar Observatory 's 200 @-@ inch ( 5 @,@ 100 mm ) mirror , but which had been empty since 1948 . He arranged for Atomic Energy Commission and Office of Naval Research grants worth $ 1 million to build it and the other required facilities , and $ 300 @,@ 000 a year to run it . 
 Facilities were not enough ; Bacher needed physicists . Lauritsen had made a start on this too , by hiring Robert Christy . Bacher hired experimental physicists Alvin V. <unk> , Robert M. Walker and Matthew Sands . The physicist that Bacher decided he wanted most , though , was Richard Feynman . To get him , Bacher offered a large salary , and agreed to pay for Feynman 's 1950 – 1951 sabbatical in Brazil . Feynman would go on to win the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1965 . In 1955 Bacher hired Murray Gell @-@ Mann , who would win the Nobel Prize in 1969 . 
 The relatively new field of radio astronomy sparked Bacher 's interest , and he hired John Bolton and Gordon Stanley from the Australian Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation in 1955 . A grant from the Office of Naval Research allowed Bolton to build the Owens Valley Radio Observatory , which became an important center for the study of quasars . 
 Caltech did not spell an end to Bacher 's service in Washington . He served two terms as a member of the President 's Science Advisory Committee ( PSAC ) under President Dwight D. Eisenhower , from November 18 , 1953 , to June 30 , 1955 , and from December 9 , 1957 , to December 31 , 1959 . During his first term he testified on behalf of his old friend at the Oppenheimer security hearing in 1954 . During his second , he worked with James L. Fisk and Ernest Lawrence to examine how a Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty could be monitored . 
 Bacher remained chair of the division of physics , mathematics and astronomy at Caltech until 1962 , when he was appointed as vice president and provost . He stepped down from the post of provost in 1970 at the age of 65 , and became a professor emeritus in 1976 . He still did some research at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory , and visited Caltech from time to time . In 1983 he was master of ceremonies at Los Alamos for events commemorating the 40th anniversary of the founding of the laboratory in 1943 . 
 Bacher died on November 18 , 2004 , at a retirement home in Montecito , California . He was survived by his daughter , Martha Bacher Eaton , and son , Andrew Dow Bacher , a nuclear physicist working at Indiana University , his wife Jean having died on May 28 , 1994 . His papers are in the California Institute of Technology Archives . 
 = Final Blackout = 
 Final Blackout is a dystopic science fiction novel by author L. Ron Hubbard . The novel is set in the future and follows a man known as " the Lieutenant " as he restores order to England after a world war . First published in serialized format in 1940 in the science fiction magazine Astounding Science Fiction , Final Blackout was published in book form in 1948 by The Hadley Publishing Co .. Author Services Inc. published a hardcover edition of the book in 1988 , and in 1989 the Church of Scientology @-@ affiliated organization Bridge Publications said that a film director named Christopher Cain had signed a contract to write and direct a movie version based on the book . 
 The novel was generally well received by literature critics , and is seen as an early classic of the Golden Age of Science Fiction . It has received positive mention in the Chicago Sun @-@ Times and the Daily News of Los Angeles , and has been used in a science @-@ fiction writing class at California State Polytechnic University , Pomona . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 The story appeared in print in a 3 @-@ part serialized format , beginning with the April 1940 issue of Astounding Science Fiction . Final Blackout was first published in book form in 1948 by The Hadley Publishing Co. in an edition of 1 @,@ 000 copies and with a new preface by Hubbard . The book was re @-@ released in a hardcover format in 1988 by the Church of Spiritual Technology subsidiary company Author Services Inc . 
 In 1989 , Young Guns film director Christopher Cain optioned the rights to Final Blackout and developed a script for a possible film @-@ version of the book . The film was not made . According to the Church of Scientology company Bridge Publications , Cain signed a contract to write a screenplay based on the book and to direct the film . " The book is massive in scope and transcends time . It 's a powerful look at the idiocy and futility of war . I look forward to making ' Final Blackout ' into a major movie , " said Cain in a press release put out by Bridge Publications . An audiobook was released by Bridge Publications in 1991 and read by Planet of the Apes actor Roddy McDowall , who also voiced audiobook versions of Hubbard 's novels Battlefield Earth and Fear . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Set in the future , the novel follows the rise of a Lieutenant ( known in the book only as " The Lieutenant " ) as he becomes dictator of England after a world war . The Lieutenant leads a ragtag army fighting for survival in a Europe ravaged by 30 years of atomic , biological and conventional warfare . As a result of the most recent war , a form of biological warfare called soldier ’ s sickness has ravaged England , and America was devastated by nuclear war . At the start of the novel , a quarantine placed on England due to the soldier ’ s sickness prevents The Lieutenant from returning to England from his encampment in France . The Lieutenant commands the Fourth Brigade , which is composed of one hundred and sixty @-@ eight soldiers from multiple nations , leading them throughout France in search of food , supplies , arms and ammunition . Soon , Captain Malcolm informs The Lieutenant that all field officers are being recalled to General Headquarters ( G.H.Q. ) with their brigades to report to General Victor , the commanding officer at G.H.Q. 
 Upon the brigade 's arrival at G.H.Q. , The Lieutenant is informed by General Victor and his adjutant Colonel Smythe that he is to be reassigned and will be stripped of his command . He is confined to his quarters and is told his entire brigade will be broken apart and assimilated into another brigade . Meanwhile , in the barracks at G.H.Q. , the Fourth Brigade learns of crucial news through back channels : a vaccine exists for the soldier 's sickness , and General Victor ’ s plans for their brigade . The men decide to rebel , and break through the defenses of the barracks , free The Lieutenant and kill Captain Malcolm . The Fourth Brigade successfully escapes G.H.Q. in France and begins to make their way to London , along with other soldiers who are dissatisfied with General Victor 's command . A battle ensues between General Victor 's men and The Lieutenant 's troops . The Lieutenant and his expanded Fourth Brigade eventually successfully take control of London and subsequently all of England and Wales . 
 The Lieutenant 's government runs smoothly for years , until the battleship U.S.S. New York arrives from the U.S. carrying two United States Senators and Captain Johnson , captain of the New York and commander of the U.S. fleet . Under threat from the U.S. battleship , The Lieutenant negotiates terms to transfer power to the Senators ' associates – General Victor and Colonel Smythe . If anything happens to General Victor and Colonel Smythe , the country would be controlled by its officer <unk> chaired by the Lieutenants confidant Swinburne . In addition , The Lieutenant requests that immigration of Americans to England be kept to no more than 100 @,@ 000 per month , and demands that a favorable price be set for the purchase of land from their English owners . After these terms are established , The Lieutenant opens fire on General Victor and his men and a battle ensues . General Victor , Colonel Smythe and The Lieutenant and several of his men are killed . Years later The Lieutenant ’ s men still control England , and a flag flies honoring his memory . A memorial plaque at <unk> Gate on Tower Hill reads : " When that command remains , no matter what happens to its officer , he has not failed . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Final Blackout is seen as an early classic of the Golden Age of Science Fiction . In his book The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction and Fantasy , Donald H. Tuck described the book as " Hubbard 's masterpiece " . Thomas D. Clareson writes in Understanding Contemporary American Science Fiction that prior to formalizing Dianetics and Scientology , Hubbard was " perhaps best known for Final Blackout " . In his book Scientology : The Now Religion , George Malko writes that Hubbard 's works including Slaves of Sleep , Kingslayer , Typewriter in the Sky , Fear , Death 's Deputy , and Final Blackout " were eagerly welcomed by devoted fans " . In his 1967 book Seekers of Tomorrow : Masters of Modern Science Fiction , Sam Moskowitz writes that the book " ... was a stunning achievement , certainly the most powerful and readable ' warning ' story that had appeared in science fiction to that date . " Moskowitz comments : " The progress of today 's events has made much of Final Blackout prophetic " . Astounding reviewer P. Schuyler Miller described the book as one of the most " memorable " serials the magazine had published , saying it would be a " lasting volume . " 
 Roland J. Green of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times called the book " One of the highwater marks of his [ Hubbard 's ] literary career " , and " perhaps the best single novel yet of what the Pentagon once so charmingly christened ' the broken @-@ backed war ' after a nuclear exchange " . Jon Stone of <unk> described Final Blackout and Fear as " pulp in composition and not great in length , they are straight stories with few or no elements of Hubbard 's other career " , and compared the " pages of battles and tactics " in Final Blackout to Hubbard 's later work Battlefield Earth . 
 Final Blackout and Fear are often cited by critics as the best examples of Hubbard 's pulp fiction works . Chuck Moss of Daily News of Los Angeles called the book " extremely good science fiction " . The book has been included in the curriculum of a science @-@ fiction writing class at California State Polytechnic University , Pomona . Cal Poly Pomona professor Steve Whaley told The Press @-@ Enterprise that he thinks Hubbard was a " damn good storyteller " . Karl Edward Wagner cited Final Blackout as one of the thirteen best science @-@ fiction horror novels . 
 = Shaun Whalley = 
 Shaun James Whalley ( born 7 August 1987 ) is an English footballer who plays as a midfielder for Shrewsbury Town . Born in Prescot , Merseyside , Whalley played for Norwich City and Southport as a youth before making his Football League debut with Chester City in 2004 . 
 After leaving Chester , he spent time in non @-@ League football with Runcorn F.C. Halton and Witton Albion . While on the books at Witton , he spent five weeks on trial with Football League One side Crewe Alexandra but was not offered a contract , so he signed for League Two side Accrington Stanley in 2006 . Whalley spent almost two years with the Lancashire club , but following his release in the summer of 2008 , he returned to non @-@ League , initially with Wrexham . While at Wrexham , he had a short loan spell with Southport where he helped the team to the Conference North play @-@ offs . He subsequently played at Droylsden , where he was part of the team that won the Manchester Premier Cup in 2010 , and Hyde before joining Southport again on a permanent basis in January 2011 . He was signed by Luton Town in the summer of 2013 for an undisclosed fee , and joined AFC Telford United on loan in 2014 . Both Luton and Telford won their respective leagues during the 2013 – 14 season , making Whalley a winner of both the Conference Premier and the Conference North in the same season . He left Luton in May 2015 , later joining Shrewsbury . 
 Described as an " express @-@ train down the wings " by former team @-@ mate Paul Mullin , Whalley was called up to the Football Association XI standby squad for a game against Hallam , the game taking place to celebrate the 150th anniversary of the club . He is the son of the former Preston North End captain Neil Whalley , who was also a midfielder . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Whalley was born and raised in Prescot , Merseyside . As a child , he played football for his local teams until 2001 when he was spotted by Norwich City . He went to play for their academy , where he played for three years before leaving in 2004 . He subsequently returned to Merseyside and joined Southport , where he played several reserve @-@ team matches . In the summer of the same year , Whalley turned professional when he signed for Football League side Chester City . 
 Whalley 's father , Neil Whalley , was also a professional footballer in the early 1990s . He too played in midfield and made more than 50 appearances for Preston North End , where he was also captain for a period of time . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 With Chester , Whalley played mostly for the youth and reserve teams , but he made his Football League debut for the club in a 0 – 0 draw with Cambridge United on 18 September 2004 , coming on as a substitute for Darryn Stamp . His debut came just one day after he signed a professional contract with Chester ; manager Ian Rush had only included him on the substitutes ' bench as a result of injuries to Daryl Clare and Michael Branch . The following week , he was part of the side that defeated Sheffield Wednesday at Hillsborough Stadium in the second round of the Football League Trophy . Whalley made three further senior appearances for Chester , all as a substitute , before leaving the club in the summer of 2005 . 
 In August of that year , Whalley moved into non @-@ League football with Runcorn as one of several new signings for the Northern Premier League outfit . He made his first appearance for the club in the 1 – 1 draw with Frickley Athletic and subsequently established himself as a regular first @-@ team player . Whalley scored his first goal for Runcorn in the 5 – 1 defeat of his hometown club , Prescot Cables and he netted again the following week in the loss to Matlock Town . He went on to play 21 league matches for Runcorn before joining Witton Albion in March 2006 . During his short spell with the club , he scored 6 goals in 18 league appearances . 
 = = = Accrington Stanley = = = 
 In September 2006 , while at Witton , Whalley spent five weeks on trial at League One club Crewe Alexandra , but he was not offered a permanent contract . He subsequently joined League Two side Accrington Stanley on loan two months later . Whalley made his debut for the club in the 1 – 2 defeat to Hartlepool United at the Crown Ground . However , two weeks later , he was sent off in the Football League Trophy match against Doncaster Rovers following a high tackle on Theo Streete , although Accrington manager John Coleman felt that the challenge was not deserving of a red card . The subsequent suspension meant that Whalley spent almost a month out of the side before returning in late December in the loss to Bristol Rovers . He made his transfer to Accrington permanent in January 2007 , signing a two @-@ year contract with the club , and the following week he scored a late winner in the 3 – 2 victory over Mansfield Town , his first goal for the team . Whalley remained a first @-@ team regular for the rest of the 2006 – 07 season and retained his place in the starting line @-@ up throughout most of the following season , and scored his first Accrington goal away from the Crown Ground in the 8 – 2 loss at Peterborough United on 15 January 2008 . Whalley made a total of 51 league appearances for Accrington , scoring 5 goals , but in May 2008 , he was one of 10 players released by the club . 
 = = = Return to non @-@ League = = = 
 In June 2008 , he moved down a division to join Conference Premier side Wrexham . He scored his first goal for Wrexham on his debut in a 5 – 0 win over Stevenage . Whalley followed it up with another goal in a 1 – 1 draw with Rushden & Diamonds . He scored his third and fourth goals of the month as Wrexham beat Salisbury City 4 – 1 , which proved to be his last game for that club . He then joined Conference North side Southport on loan in February 2009 for the remainder of the 2008 – 09 season . Whalley made his Southport debut in the 2 – 0 win over Hyde United at Haig Avenue . He went on to play 13 league matches for the team as they reached the Conference North play @-@ offs , but they were defeated in the semi @-@ finals by Gateshead . During the loan spell , Whalley played in the quarter @-@ finals of the FA Trophy , but he could not prevent Southport losing 3 – 2 on aggregate over two legs against AFC Telford United . In the summer of 2009 , he was released by Wrexham along with eight other out @-@ of @-@ contract players . 
 In August 2009 , following his release from Wrexham , Whalley returned to the Conference North to join Droylsden . Whalley scored his first two goals for the club as Droylsden beat Northwich Victoria 5 – 1 . He added another goal to his tally , scoring in a 2 – 0 win over league favourites Fleetwood Town , before adding another two goals to his name as Droylsden beat Harrogate Town 5 – 0 . He scored two goals in a match for the third time in the season as Droylsden recorded a 5 – 3 win over Solihull Moors at the Butcher 's Arms Ground . He won Manchester Premier Cup winners medal in his one season at Droylsden before he left at the end of the 2009 – 10 season , having scored a total of 15 goals in 32 league appearances . 
 = = = Hyde = = = 
 Whalley joined Hyde on 21 August 2010 after his release from Droylsden . He made his debut just hours after he signed for the Tigers in a 5 – 1 home defeat to Alfreton Town . In just his third appearance for Hyde , he was sent off in a 1 – 0 defeat to Guiseley . Whalley scored his first goal for Hyde in a 2 – 1 home win over Corby Town . 
 In early October , while still on the books at Hyde , he was called up to the Football Association XI squad alongside teammate Scott Mooney for a game against Hallam FC to celebrate the 150th anniversary of the Sheffield @-@ based club . Whalley scored his first cup goal for the club in a 4 – 0 win over Oldham Boro in the Manchester Premier Cup , but less than a week later , he scored an own goal as part of a 3 – 0 away loss to Blyth Spartans , and was then sent off again for two bookable offences against Vauxhall Motors 
 Whalley scored his first goal of the new year in a 2 – 1 victory over local rivals Stalybridge Celtic . He scored again in the quarter final of the Manchester Premier Cup against his old club Droylsden , which proved to be his last for the club . 
 = = = Southport = = = 
 Whalley was released by Hyde in order to join Southport for the second time in January 2011 . He made his debut the following Saturday in a 4 – 0 win over York City , scoring Southport 's second and fourth goals . On 1 February , less than a week later , Whalley scored again in a 2 – 2 draw with Grimsby Town to take his record to three goals in two games , before being sent off for violent conduct on and later receiving a four match ban . On 26 February after missing the best @-@ part of that month through his suspension , he returned , to start in a 2 – 1 loss to Bath City , but he was unable to score a goal . He followed this game up by scoring in his next two , netting in the 3 – 1 win over Histon and then by scoring Southport 's only goal , in a 4 – 1 defeat to Eastbourne Borough . He finished March having scored four goals that month , after adding another two in the latter part , the first in a 4 – 2 defeat to the hands of Barrow and the other coming as @-@ part of a 2 – 2 draw with Rushden & Diamonds . 
 He opened his goalscoring account for the 2011 – 12 season on the opening day as part of a 2 – 2 draw with Lincoln City . He scored his second of the season in a 3 – 2 win over Telford United . On 15 March 2012 , he signed a new two @-@ year contract with the club . He scored a total of ten goals in all @-@ competitions for Southport in the 2011 – 12 season , helping them to their highest league finish in ten years — 7th in the Conference Premier . 
 Whalley had a good start to the 2012 – 13 season , scoring two goals in four games , including in a 3 – 3 draw with Alfreton Town . He went on to play in all but three of Southport 's league games , scoring seven further goals and at the end of the season was named the club 's player of the year . 
 = = = Luton Town = = = 
 On 1 May 2013 , Whalley was signed by fellow Conference Premier club Luton Town for an undisclosed fee on a two @-@ year contract . He missed a penalty on his debut in a 1 – 0 defeat , coincidentally against former club Southport . 
 After failing to win a regular starting place in the Luton line @-@ up , Whalley moved on loan on 23 January 2014 to Conference North side AFC Telford United , led by his former Southport manager Liam Watson . He scored five goals in 18 games as Telford won the Conference North title , scoring in the crucial final game of the season . With Luton also winning their league , Whalley had the unique distinction of being awarded both Conference Premier and Conference North winners ' medals in the same season . 
 Whalley played a more active part in Luton 's return to the Football League , playing in 18 league games , often in the starting XI , and scoring three goals . 
 On 27 April 2015 , Whalley and team @-@ mate Ricky Miller were both arrested by Bedfordshire Police in connection with an alleged assault following Luton Town 's end of season awards night . Both were released on bail , but were suspended by the club pending a police inquiry . Whalley was not charged due to a lack of evidence . On 18 May 2015 , Whalley left Luton by mutual consent two months before the end of his contract . 
 = = = Shrewsbury Town = = = 
 Following his departure from Luton , Whalley joined Shrewsbury Town , recently promoted to League One , on 6 June 2015 . Making only sporadic substitute appearances in the early part of the season , Whalley had to wait until 28 December to make his first league start for the club , scoring a late winning goal in a 2 – 1 away victory over Crewe Alexandra . He scored another late winner away at the then @-@ league @-@ leaders Burton Albion the following month . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 Whalley is a winger but can also play as a striker . On his arrival at Southport , manager Liam Watson said " Shaun will fit right into out style of play and with the players we have here " . Whalley 's former team @-@ mate Paul Mullin described him as " an absolute express @-@ train down the wings " , and said that he possessed good ability on the ball . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 As of match played 8 May 2016 . 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 Droylsden 
 Manchester Premier Cup ( 1 ) : 2009 – 10 
 Luton Town 
 Conference Premier : 2013 – 14 
 AFC Telford United 
 Conference North : 2013 – 14 
 = Vala Mal Doran = 
 Vala Mal Doran is a fictional character in the American military science fiction television series Stargate SG @-@ 1 , a science fiction show about a military team exploring the galaxy via a network of alien transportation devices . Played by former Farscape actress Claudia Black , Vala was created by Damian Kindler and Robert C. Cooper as a guest character for the season 8 episode " Prometheus Unbound " ( 2004 ) . Because of the on @-@ screen chemistry between Black 's Vala and Michael Shanks ' character Daniel Jackson , and the character 's popularity with the producers and the audience , Claudia Black became a recurring guest star in season 9 ( 2005 – 2006 ) and joined the main cast in season 10 ( 2006 – 2007 ) . 
 " Prometheus Unbound " introduces Vala as a sexy and mischievous human with a Goa 'uld background from an unnamed planet . In season 9 , Vala and Daniel set off the arc of the show 's new villain race , the Ori . After giving birth to the Ori 's new leader in season 10 , Vala joins the SG @-@ 1 team to stop the enemy , eventually becoming a permanent member of both SG @-@ 1 and Stargate Command . Claudia Black resumed her role in the 2008 direct @-@ to @-@ DVD film Stargate : The Ark of Truth , which finishes the Ori arc . Black also appeared as Vala and her Goa 'uld alter ego Qetesh in the 2008 film Stargate : Continuum . She was , however , not supposed to be returning for the announced third Stargate SG @-@ 1 direct @-@ to @-@ DVD film that was scheduled to be filmed in spring 2009 , but abandoned since then . For her portrayal of Vala , Claudia Black was nominated for a 2006 Saturn Award in the category " Best Supporting Actress on Television " , and won a Constellation Award in the category " Best Female Performance in a 2006 Science Fiction Television " in 2007 . 
 = = Role in Stargate = = 
 = = = Character arc = = = 
 Information about Vala 's past is revealed over the course of several episodes of seasons 8 through 10 of Stargate SG @-@ 1 . " Family Ties " gives insight into Vala 's background with her father Jacek , a con artist who had left her and her mother to pursue his scams . As mentioned in " Flesh and Blood " , Vala also had a stepmother named Adria , whom she held in little regard . Vala became an involuntary host to a Goa 'uld named Qetesh in her adult life , but the Tok 'ra were able to remove the symbiote . At the time of Vala 's first encounter with SG @-@ 1 team member Daniel Jackson in the season 8 episode " Prometheus Unbound " , she has become a thief and a con artist . She attempts to steal the Earth ship Prometheus for her own purposes , but when Daniel evades her sexual advances and thwarts her plans , she escapes . 
 In the season 9 opener " Avalon " , Vala seeks out Daniel at Stargate Command . Needing his linguistic skills , she uses a Kor mak bracelet to bind them together for a treasure hunt on Earth . The discovery of an Ancient communication device transports Vala 's and Daniel 's minds to a village in a distant galaxy where the local villagers kill Vala in a trial by fire , but a Prior , a servant of a race named the Ori , resurrects her . After Vala 's and Daniel 's safe return to Earth , the removed bracelets cause temporary after @-@ effects that prolong Vala 's stay at Stargate Command . In an attempt to stop the Ori from invading the galaxy in " Beachhead " , Vala goes missing and appears to have died . Vala re @-@ appears in the late season 9 episode " Crusade " and informs SG @-@ 1 via the communication device that she is in the Ori galaxy . The Ori have impregnated her against her will many months before , and Vala saw herself forced to marry a local villager named Tomin to make the pregnancy plausible . When Vala tells SG @-@ 1 about the Ori army approaching , the communication link is severed . Vala is last seen onboard one of the invading Ori battlecruisers in the closing scene of the season 9 finale " Camelot " when she goes into labor . 
 Season 10 opens with Vala giving birth to a female . The Ori call the rapidly growing child <unk> , but Vala gives her the name Adria after her stepmother . Attempts to turn the child away from the Ori remain unsuccessful . Having escaped the Ori , Vala is allowed sanctuary at Stargate Command and joins SG @-@ 1 on several missions , during one of which she comes face @-@ to @-@ face with her fully @-@ grown daughter . Vala 's <unk> acceptance on Earth is only lifted in the eighth episode of the season , " Memento Mori " , in which she is finally made a full member of SG @-@ 1 . Vala meets Tomin again in " Line in the Sand " and tells him the true story behind the Ancients and Ori . A final showdown in the series between Vala and Adria occurs in " Dominion " , which leaves Vala with the loss of her daughter . In " Unending " , the last episode of the series , SG @-@ 1 gets stuck in a time dilation field aboard the Earth ship Odyssey , and a romance between Vala and Daniel finally comes to fruition . Before the time dilation field is reversed after fifty years , erasing all linked memories in the process , Daniel and Vala express their feelings for each other . The Ori story concludes with Adria 's disempowerment and Vala 's and Tomin 's amicable separation in the 2008 direct @-@ to @-@ DVD film Stargate : The Ark of Truth . Vala and her alter ego , Qetesh , appear in the alternate @-@ timeline film Stargate : Continuum . 
 = = = Characterization = = = 
 Official Stargate sources advertised Vala as a " scheming , unscrupulous , thieving con artist " , " feisty " and " occasionally fickle " , with a " mysterious agenda " and a seemingly " amorous interest in Dr. Daniel Jackson " . Genre magazine TV Zone subtitled Vala as a " thief , arms dealer , mercenary " who , when given an inch , will " take a mile , and whatever else she can get her hands on . " SFX described Vala as a " mischievous minx " , whereas The San Diego Union @-@ Tribune interpreted Vala as " ethically challenged " . Steven <unk> of Starburst gave Vala the attributes " sexy , smart and always resourceful " . Claudia Black characterized early Vala as " sassy " , " intelligent " , " manipulative " , and " mercurial " , but found it " very hard to tell what the real core of Vala is . " Black later described Vala as " a new , weird element " , " irritating " , " very vibrant " , " sort of the hair @-@ pulling variety " , " really infuriating " and " [ hopefully ] funny " . With Vala being a departure from Black 's former Farscape role as <unk> Sun , Black regarded Vala as a comedic and energetic character with streaks of irreverence and naughtiness who " says everything that everyone else is thinking , but doesn 't dare say " , although both characters share " being damaged goods [ in the beginning ] and on a path to becoming a better person " . Robert C. Cooper thought of Vala as " a bit of a wild card " and " a very sexy character , who isn 't afraid to take whatever she wants in any given situation . " Cooper and Black believed the character had a moral compass to her actions . 
 = = = Relationships = = = 
 Claudia Black and Michael Shanks ( Daniel Jackson ) linked their characters ' early relationship to a Spencer Tracy / Katharine Hepburn dynamic of " not so much of tension , but rather constant antagonism " . Despite the concern in early season 9 that their relationship would stagnate and dumb down their characters , Shanks felt Vala brought out a side of Daniel that he had not had the chance to play before , and Black advocated the slow revelation of Vala 's layers of denial . The writers continued to develop the friendship between Vala and Daniel throughout season 10 , aiming not to lose their sexual chemistry . Michael Shanks stated that by " Memento Mori " , " Daniel legitimately cares about Vala and has seen some sort of redemption in her and wants that process to continue . " From Black 's point of view , Daniel offers " an interesting window " into " Vala 's external façade to be playful with people " . He helps Vala grow as a person and forces her to " develop coping mechanisms that allow her to be more adult and learn that it 's OK to be honest and talk how you feel . " Asked about a possible romance between Vala and Daniel before the filming of the series finale , Black predicted that a consummation of the relationship would end badly in terms of both story and on @-@ screen chemistry . When producer Robert C. Cooper presented his preliminary script for the series finale , " Unending " , both Black and Shanks protested his intended story of having Vala and Daniel sleep together without a confrontation . Shanks felt that " [ t ] here 's always been this underlining , keeping [ Vala ] at arms length because of the fear of getting too close . " After Cooper rewrote the scene to increase Vala 's vulnerability to Daniel , and have Daniel truthfully explain his feelings of a relationship , the actors decided to play the confrontation scene as genuinely as possible , with both characters being neither completely in @-@ character nor totally out @-@ of @-@ character . 
 Describing Vala 's attitude towards bonding with other characters as " in a strange way quite level @-@ headed " and " quite honest " , Black interpreted Vala 's behavior as a reaction to growing attached to people where the relationships never seem to work out . Cooper explained that by Vala 's contacting of Stargate Command about the imminent threat at the end of season 9 , she " has reached a point of honesty with [ the SG @-@ 1 ] characters and possibly herself on a level that she 's never had before . " From the beginning of season 10 , Claudia Black and Amanda Tapping requested a similarly positive camaraderie between their characters as male characters have . Tapping noted Carter 's respect for Vala despite them being at opposite ends in their actions ; Tapping also thought Carter finds Vala amusing rather than annoying . A scene in " Morpheus " that was intended to establish this relationship was cut for time , and until the late season 10 episode " Family Ties " would accommodate this with a shopping scene , the actresses acknowledged their connection through looks and subtle nuances . By joining SG @-@ 1 , Vala also shared a spot with stoic warrior Teal 'c as the only alien members of the team , and actor Christopher Judge ( Teal 'c ) explained that his character 's amusement with Vala contributed to Teal 'c's loosening up . The relationship between Vala and SG @-@ 1 team leader Colonel Cameron Mitchell ( played by Ben Browder ) was rarely emphasized in the series since Black and Browder were well known for formerly starring as star @-@ crossed lovers in the cult sci @-@ fi series Farscape . 
 According to Black , Vala 's motivation to hide her miraculous pregnancy by marrying the local villager Tomin ( played by Tim <unk> ) in late season 9 stems from " genuinely car [ ing ] for the man . She does something wrong , but she must in order to survive . " Against the audience 's expectation , Vala and Tomin are shown as a seemingly functioning normal couple , and Vala makes several efforts to save him despite his deep indoctrination . Throughout season 10 , Vala has to come to terms with her maternal feelings for Adria ( as adult played by Morena Baccarin ) , well knowing from the beginning that Adria embodies a destructive entity that must be fought . Black believed Vala had to " try her best to connect with her daughter in the hope of finding ways to humanize her " , despite her own lack of maturity . When Vala meets her father Jacek ( Fred Willard ) in " Family Ties " , Vala shows " a slightly more dramatic and vulnerable side " that was new to the audience . 
 = = Conceptual history = = 
 = = = Creation and casting = = = 
 Stargate SG @-@ 1 supervising producer Damian Kindler wrote " Prometheus Unbound " as a second @-@ unit bottle episode for the middle of Stargate SG @-@ 1 's season 8 in 2004 . The main cast 's availability was limited , as Richard Dean Anderson had a reduced season schedule , and Amanda Tapping and Christopher Judge filmed " Gemini " in parallel to " Prometheus Unbound " . Kindler therefore centered the episode on Michael Shanks ' character Daniel Jackson and created Vala , a human character from an unnamed planet , as Daniel 's one @-@ episode adversary . Not fully content with Kindler 's conservative approach , producer Robert C. Cooper amplified the character 's cheeky and sexy personality in his own passes of the script . Although Cooper tried to respect Stargate SG @-@ 1 's reputation as a sex @-@ free family show , he was aware that the character 's flirtatiousness might cause a strong audience reaction . 
 Robert . C. Cooper suggested Australian actress Claudia Black for the role of Vala and contacted her agent two days before the filming of " Prometheus Unbound " began . The Stargate producers had approached Black several times before , but she had always been busy with other projects . At " Prometheus Unbound " ' s casting stage , the actress had just finished dialogue looping sessions for Farscape : The Peacekeeper Wars in Australia . She thought the script of " Prometheus Unbound " was funny and self @-@ contained enough for creative experiments , so she accepted the role and called the episode 's director , Andy Mikita , in advance . He suggested an Out of Sight @-@ kind chemistry for Vala and Daniel , and encouraged the actress to push the character as far as possible . On set , Claudia Black and Michael Shanks decided to make one of their first scenes , a fight sequence , as funny and non @-@ machismo as possible to mirror Daniel 's non @-@ military background . In the meantime , Black tried to transform her day @-@ long jetlag and lack of sleep into humour . When the producers saw the on @-@ screen chemistry between Black and Shanks , they decided to make the character a bigger part of the show . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 With actor Richard Dean Anderson 's departure from the show in 2005 , Stargate SG @-@ 1 saw cast changes at the beginning of season 9 . Ben Browder and Beau Bridges joined the main cast as Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Cameron Mitchell and Major General Hank Landry , respectively . At the same time , the producers re @-@ introduced Vala in a six @-@ episode story arc to cover for the maternity leave of SG @-@ 1 regular Amanda Tapping ( Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Samantha Carter ) . The producer intended to use Vala 's unpredictability and wildcard status to break the bigger story arc and to acquaint the audience with the new characters . Claudia Black wished to broaden her horizon in comedic acting and agreed to the recurring role , but declined the producers ' offer of a permanent role for personal reasons . 
 Because Ben Browder and Claudia Black were well known for formerly starring as star @-@ crossed lovers in the cult sci @-@ fi series Farscape , the Stargate producers refrained from emphasizing the pairing of Mitchell and Vala beyond in @-@ jokes . The producers instead opted to further the comedic chemistry between Claudia Black and Michael Shanks , who linked their characters ' early relationship to a Spencer Tracy / Katharine Hepburn dynamic of " not so much of tension , but rather constant antagonism " . Mirroring Vala 's sexiness in season 8 , " The Powers That Be " writer Martin Gero chose Qetesh , the Egyptian Goddess of Love and Beauty , as a fitting former Goa 'uld identity for Vala . Nevertheless , Black and the producers refrained from portraying the character as too sexually manipulative . A scene from " The Ties That Bind " , which was later cut for time , originally made clear that Wallace Shawn 's character greatly exaggerated the sexual relationship between him and Vala . Claudia Black was brought back into the show for the last two episodes of season 9 , at which time the actress was seven months pregnant . Producer Robert C. Cooper , who wrote and directed " Crusade " , used the circumstances to set the stage for Adria , Vala 's future daughter and the show 's new villain in season 10 . 
 Claudia Black joined the cast full @-@ time in season 10 . Had Stargate SG @-@ 1 not been picked up for a new season , the producers would have considered the character for a spin @-@ off series . To justify the character in a regular capacity , the producers toned her down and tried to find a suitable balance of sexual tension , fun and friendship . Claudia Black was convinced that Vala 's actual stay with Stargate Command was justified despite the character 's personality . Vala 's renegade qualification to infiltrate the Ori served as a useful complement to the military @-@ oriented SG teams , and Vala had already proven a degree of allegiance through her actions in " Beachhead " , holding off an immediate invasion of the enemy . The writers tested this loyalty through confrontation in the story , and writer Damian Kindler later compared Vala 's character growth in season 10 to smuggler Lando Calrissian from Star Wars , a " former swindler who 's gone legit " . Careful to never have Vala become too earnest , Kindler never saw Vala " as the type of character who should be on the show for five , six , seven years . But definitely the sort of character who could come in for a couple of seasons , spice things up and then move on and come back and forth . " Evolving the relationship between Vala and the other SG @-@ 1 members , the producers also grew comfortable with pairing Browder 's and Black 's characters more often , and even teased ( and misled ) viewers about them " end [ ing ] up in a motel room bed together " in the episode " Memento Mori " , involving underwear , " handcuffs as well as creamy Twinkies " . A scene in the milestone episode " 200 " also parodied the show 's connection to Farscape . In hindsight , Claudia Black would see season 10 as a personal challenge as her baby deprived her of sleep during the filming period . Her relocation to Vancouver and sickness in the family put her on a self @-@ confessed personal and professional low . She nevertheless tried to stay true to her character " and not go for the cheap laugh " . 
 After a miscarriage scare during the filming of the first direct @-@ to @-@ DVD SG @-@ 1 film , Stargate : The Ark of Truth , Claudia Black 's work on the film Stargate : Continuum was limited on strict doctor 's orders . Although Black considered Continuum " not a Vala @-@ centric piece " as she only " makes a brief appearance " , Stargate producer Joseph Mallozzi thought " she 's got some great , juicy scenes " . Claudia Black mentioned an interest in portraying her character in the future , but Mallozzi rated the chances of her appearing in the planned Stargate Universe spin @-@ off series as " not so good " . Producer Brad Wright announced that Vala would not be returning for the announced third Stargate SG @-@ 1 direct @-@ to @-@ DVD film that was scheduled to be filmed in spring 2009 . Claudia Black is the only SG @-@ 1 main cast member besides Corin Nemec ( playing Jonas Quinn between SG @-@ 1 's season 5 and 7 ) and Ben Browder ( playing Cameron Mitchell from season 9 onward ) who never appeared in Stargate Atlantis , although Vala is mentioned by Rodney McKay ( played by David Hewlett ) in the Atlantis season 5 episode " Identity " . 
 = = = Costumes and make @-@ up = = = 
 Claudia Black made her entrance in Stargate SG @-@ 1 in a full @-@ body Kull Warrior costume , not dissimilar to her first appearance as a Peacekeeper in Farscape . For her entrance in season 9 's " Avalon " , however , the costume designers intended her to wear a dress that the producers later deemed too revealing . Leaving the dress for Vala 's appearance as Qetesh in " The Powers That Be " , Vala 's outfit for " Avalon " was switched to a black fetish leather gear which a costume designer described as " a dominatrix outfit " . Black admitted the wildness of her " Avalon " wardrobe was not for her liking . But since it mirrored the attention @-@ seeking personality of the character , and because the character does not spend much time in the same outfit anyway , the actress did not mind wearing it . 
 Vala started wearing the normal SG team uniform in " Origin " , the third episode of season 9 . Claudia Black was later included in the design process and was given full control over her wardrobe for scenes that required civilian clothes . As such , Black chose Vala 's underwear for the seduction scene in " The Ties That Bind " and her shopping tour outfit in " Family Ties " . The latter episode also showed Vala with seven distinctly different hairstyles and outfits in total . Fearing the lack of seriousness , the producers opposed the make @-@ up department 's decision of having Vala wear curlers , but the scene could not be reshot . Similarly , a scene showing Vala unpacking her hair dryer and curling iron during an offworld mission in " The Quest " was deemed too silly and was trimmed to the basics ; it would have been cut if the footage had allowed it . Due to Black 's pregnancy during the filming of the films , the costume department needed to hide Black 's bump with appropriate dressing . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The character of Vala was immediately popular with the Stargate writers , producers and crew . During the filming of " Prometheus Unbound " , people on set responded " very well " to the chemistry between Vala and Daniel . Director Andy Mikita called executive producer Robert C. Cooper during the first lunch break and told him to " hire this gal " , and Cooper thought Vala / Black " was absolutely wonderful . The character really worked out . " Writer Damian Kindler " really loved " what Black brought to the show , believing that " her character , when used properly , is just absolutely wonderful grist for the mill on SG @-@ 1 . " Stargate writer Martin Gero called Vala " so much fun to write , almost too fun . You do kind of get carried away . " Michael Shanks repeatedly stated in interviews that Claudia Black revitalized his interest in acting . 
 While TV Guide called Vala a " saucy [ and ] bodacious babe who immediately clicked with viewers " , GateWorld 's Darren Sumner and <unk> 's Gilles <unk> commented on her " warm reception .. by fans " and her being " an instant hit with fans of the show " . 71 percent of over 8000 GateWorld readers rated Claudia Black 's portrayal of Vala in season 9 as " perfect " . In a later GateWorld poll among over 12000 participants , 51 percent answered that Claudia Black 's joining the main cast was " about time ! " , while 22 percent were concerned or had no opinion . The actress was not as confident about the character 's reception , and Robert C. Cooper advertised Vala 's last season 9 appearance as the return of " a much loved and much hated character . " Vala Mal Doran ranked second ( 25 % ) out of five behind SG @-@ 1 's Cameron Mitchell ( 27 % ) in the viewer @-@ voted 2006 Spacey Awards for " Favourite New TV Character " , and was voted third ( 22 % ) out of five places in the 2007 Spacey Awards for " Favourite Character You Love to Hate " ( 26 % Battlestar Galactica 's Gaius Baltar , 28 % Smallville 's Lex Luthor ) . Per popular demand , Diamond Select Toys included Vala in their third series of Stargate action figures . 
 The Sun Herald thought of the character as " a thoroughly charming intergalactic thief famed for using her allure to get what she wants " , and Matt Roush of TV Guide called Claudia Black " great fun to watch in [ seasons 8 and 9 ] " . TV Zone 's Stephen Graves believed that Browder and Black 's first post @-@ Farscape encounter in Stargate SG @-@ 1 's " Avalon " was " somewhat underplayed – but Black makes up for this with her sparky , snarky characterization of Vala . " He welcomed the producers ' decision to not cast a carbon copy of Samantha Carter , and thought that Claudia Black 's Vala in her six @-@ episode arc remained " the best thing in the series " . By season 10 's " Memento Mori " , TV Zone 's Anthony Brown felt that " Ben Browder and Claudia Black have ... reached a point where they can play out an amusing take on Misery without you feeling that [ their Farscape characters ] have somehow <unk> onto SG @-@ 1 's Earth " . Maureen Ryan of The Chicago Tribune called Browder and Black 's interaction in season 10 " great fun ; the rapport they developed on the stellar Farscape was still much in evidence , even though they played radically different characters on SG @-@ 1 . " 
 Maureen Ryan described the chemistry between Black and Michael Shanks as " sparky " and " one of the most diverting parts of the latter seasons of the show " . According to Ultimate DVD , the scenes between Vala and Daniel as the object of her affection resulted in " some of the freshest and funniest scenes in the show for some time " . In reviewing " Unending " , Anthony Brown called Vala " a character who 's always had a little too much of comic relief [ getting ] torn apart by the nice guy of the team . " SyFy Portal attributed Stargate SG @-@ 1 not going stale after ten years to Black , as she " quite literally steals the show from the existing cast of heroes " . For her portrayal of Vala , Claudia Black was nominated for a Saturn Award in the category " Best Supporting Actress on Television " in 2006 , and won a Constellation Award in the category " Best Female Performance in a 2006 Science Fiction Television " for the episode " Memento Mori " in 2007 . 
 = Richard Wagner = 
 Wilhelm Richard Wagner ( / <unk> / ; German : [ <unk> <unk> ] ; 22 May 1813 – 13 February 1883 ) was a German composer , theatre director , polemicist , and conductor who is primarily known for his operas ( or , as some of his later works were later known , " music dramas " ) . Unlike most opera composers , Wagner wrote both the libretto and the music for each of his stage works . Initially establishing his reputation as a composer of works in the romantic vein of Weber and Meyerbeer , Wagner revolutionised opera through his concept of the Gesamtkunstwerk ( " total work of art " ) , by which he sought to synthesise the poetic , visual , musical and dramatic arts , with music subsidiary to drama . He described this vision in a series of essays published between 1849 and 1852 . Wagner realised these ideas most fully in the first half of the four @-@ opera cycle Der Ring des Nibelungen ( The Ring of the Nibelung ) . 
 His compositions , particularly those of his later period , are notable for their complex textures , rich harmonies and orchestration , and the elaborate use of leitmotifs — musical phrases associated with individual characters , places , ideas or plot elements . His advances in musical language , such as extreme chromaticism and quickly shifting tonal centres , greatly influenced the development of classical music . His Tristan und Isolde is sometimes described as marking the start of modern music . 
 Wagner had his own opera house built , the Bayreuth Festspielhaus , which embodied many novel design features . The Ring and Parsifal were premiered here and his most important stage works continue to be performed in an annual festival run by his descendants . His thoughts on the relative contributions of music and drama in opera were to change again , and he reintroduced some traditional forms into his last few stage works , including Die Meistersinger von Nürnberg ( The Mastersingers of Nuremberg ) . 
 Until his final years , Wagner 's life was characterised by political exile , turbulent love affairs , poverty and repeated flight from his creditors . His controversial writings on music , drama and politics have attracted extensive comment since the late 20th century , especially where they express antisemitic sentiments . The effect of his ideas can be traced in many of the arts throughout the 20th century ; his influence spread beyond composition into conducting , philosophy , literature , the visual arts and theatre . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Richard Wagner was born to an ethnic German family in Leipzig , where his family lived at No. 3 , the Brühl ( The House of the Red and White Lions ) in the Jewish quarter . He was baptized at St. Thomas Church . He was the ninth child of Carl Friedrich Wagner , who was a clerk in the Leipzig police service , and his wife , Johanna Rosine ( née <unk> ) , the daughter of a baker . Wagner 's father Carl died of typhus six months after Richard 's birth . Afterwards his mother Johanna lived with Carl 's friend , the actor and playwright Ludwig Geyer . In August 1814 Johanna and Geyer probably married — although no documentation of this has been found in the Leipzig church registers . She and her family moved to Geyer 's residence in Dresden . Until he was fourteen , Wagner was known as Wilhelm Richard Geyer . He almost certainly thought that Geyer was his biological father . 
 Geyer 's love of the theatre came to be shared by his stepson , and Wagner took part in his performances . In his autobiography Mein Leben Wagner recalled once playing the part of an angel . In late 1820 , Wagner was enrolled at Pastor Wetzel 's school at <unk> , near Dresden , where he received some piano instruction from his Latin teacher . He struggled to play a proper scale at the keyboard and preferred playing theatre overtures by ear . Following Geyer 's death in 1821 , Richard was sent to the <unk> , the boarding school of the Dresdner <unk> , at the expense of Geyer 's brother . At the age of nine he was hugely impressed by the Gothic elements of Carl Maria von Weber 's opera Der Freischütz , which he saw Weber conduct . At this period Wagner entertained ambitions as a playwright . His first creative effort , listed in the Wagner @-@ Werk @-@ Verzeichnis ( the standard listing of Wagner 's works ) as WWV 1 , was a tragedy called <unk> . Begun when he was in school in 1826 , the play was strongly influenced by Shakespeare and Goethe . Wagner was determined to set it to music , and persuaded his family to allow him music lessons . 
 By 1827 , the family had returned to Leipzig . Wagner 's first lessons in harmony were taken during 1828 – 31 with Christian Gottlieb Müller . In January 1828 he first heard Beethoven 's 7th Symphony and then , in March , the same composer 's 9th Symphony ( both at the Gewandhaus ) . Beethoven became a major inspiration , and Wagner wrote a piano transcription of the 9th Symphony . He was also greatly impressed by a performance of Mozart 's Requiem . Wagner 's early piano sonatas and his first attempts at orchestral overtures date from this period . 
 In 1829 he saw a performance by dramatic soprano Wilhelmine Schröder @-@ Devrient , and she became his ideal of the fusion of drama and music in opera . In Mein Leben , Wagner wrote " When I look back across my entire life I find no event to place beside this in the impression it produced on me , " and claimed that the " profoundly human and ecstatic performance of this incomparable artist " kindled in him an " almost demonic fire . " 
 In 1831 , Wagner enrolled at the Leipzig University , where he became a member of the Saxon student fraternity . He took composition lessons with the Thomaskantor Theodor <unk> . <unk> was so impressed with Wagner 's musical ability that he refused any payment for his lessons . He arranged for his pupil 's Piano Sonata in B @-@ flat major ( which was consequently dedicated to him ) to be published as Wagner 's Op. 1 . A year later , Wagner composed his Symphony in C major , a <unk> work performed in Prague in 1832 and at the Leipzig Gewandhaus in 1833 . He then began to work on an opera , Die Hochzeit ( The Wedding ) , which he never completed . 
 = = = Early career and marriage ( 1833 – 42 ) = = = 
 In 1833 , Wagner 's brother Albert managed to obtain for him a position as choir master at the theatre in Würzburg . In the same year , at the age of 20 , Wagner composed his first complete opera , Die Feen ( The Fairies ) . This work , which imitated the style of Weber , went unproduced until half a century later , when it was premiered in Munich shortly after the composer 's death in 1883 . 
 Having returned to Leipzig in 1834 , Wagner held a brief appointment as musical director at the opera house in Magdeburg during which he wrote Das Liebesverbot ( The Ban on Love ) , based on Shakespeare 's Measure for Measure . This was staged at Magdeburg in 1836 but closed before the second performance ; this , together with the financial collapse of the theatre company employing him , left the composer with serious money problems . Wagner had fallen for one of the leading ladies at Magdeburg , the actress Christine Wilhelmine " Minna " Planer . After the disaster of Das Liebesverbot , he followed her to Königsberg where she helped him to get an engagement at the theatre . The two married in <unk> Church on 24 November 1836 . In May 1837 , Minna left Wagner for another man ; this was but the first débâcle of a troubled marriage . In June 1837 , Wagner moved to Riga ( then in the Russian Empire ) , where he became music director of the local opera ; having in this capacity engaged Minna 's sister Amalie ( also a singer ) for the theatre , he presently resumed relations with Minna during 1838 . 
 By 1839 , the couple had amassed such large debts that they fled Riga to avoid their creditors ; debt would plague Wagner for most of his life . Initially they took a stormy sea passage to London , from which Wagner drew the inspiration for Der fliegende Holländer ( The Flying Dutchman ) , with a plot based on a sketch by Heinrich Heine . The Wagners settled in Paris in September 1839 and stayed there until 1842 . Richard made a scant living by writing articles and arranging operas by other composers , largely on behalf of the Schlesinger publishing house . He also completed during this stay his third and fourth operas Rienzi and Der fliegende Holländer . 
 = = = Dresden ( 1842 – 49 ) = = = 
 Wagner had completed Rienzi in 1840 . With the strong support of Giacomo Meyerbeer , it was accepted for performance by the Dresden Court Theatre ( Hofoper ) in the Kingdom of Saxony and in 1842 , Wagner moved to Dresden . His relief at returning to Germany was recorded in his " <unk> Sketch " of 1842 , where he wrote that , en route from Paris , " For the first time I saw the Rhine — with hot tears in my eyes , I , poor artist , swore eternal fidelity to my German fatherland . " Rienzi was staged to considerable acclaim on 20 October . 
 Wagner lived in Dresden for the next six years , eventually being appointed the Royal Saxon Court Conductor . During this period , he staged there Der fliegende Holländer ( 2 January 1843 ) and Tannhäuser ( 19 October 1845 ) , the first two of his three middle @-@ period operas . Wagner also mixed with artistic circles in Dresden , including the composer Ferdinand Hiller and the architect Gottfried Semper . 
 Wagner 's involvement in left @-@ wing politics abruptly ended his welcome in Dresden . Wagner was active among socialist German nationalists there , regularly receiving such guests as the conductor and radical editor August <unk> and the Russian anarchist Mikhail Bakunin . He was also influenced by the ideas of Pierre @-@ Joseph Proudhon and Ludwig Feuerbach . Widespread discontent came to a head in 1849 , when the unsuccessful May Uprising in Dresden broke out , in which Wagner played a minor supporting role . Warrants were issued for the revolutionaries ' arrest . Wagner had to flee , first visiting Paris and then settling in Zürich where he at first took refuge with a friend , Alexander Müller . 
 = = = In exile : Switzerland ( 1849 – 58 ) = = = 
 Wagner was to spend the next twelve years in exile from Germany . He had completed Lohengrin , the last of his middle @-@ period operas , before the Dresden uprising , and now wrote desperately to his friend Franz Liszt to have it staged in his absence . Liszt conducted the premiere in Weimar in August 1850 . 
 Nevertheless , Wagner was in grim personal straits , isolated from the German musical world and without any regular income . In 1850 , Julie , the wife of his friend Karl Ritter , began to pay him a small pension which she maintained until 1859 . With help from her friend Jessie Laussot , this was to have been augmented to an annual sum of 3 @,@ 000 <unk> per year ; but this plan was abandoned when Wagner began an affair with Mme. Laussot . Wagner even planned an elopement with her in 1850 , which her husband prevented . Meanwhile , Wagner 's wife Minna , who had disliked the operas he had written after Rienzi , was falling into a deepening depression . Wagner fell victim to ill @-@ health , according to Ernest Newman " largely a matter of overwrought nerves " , which made it difficult for him to continue writing . 
 Wagner 's primary published output during his first years in Zürich was a set of essays . In " The Artwork of the Future " ( 1849 ) , he described a vision of opera as Gesamtkunstwerk ( " total work of art " ) , in which the various arts such as music , song , dance , poetry , visual arts and stagecraft were unified . " Judaism in Music " ( 1850 ) was the first of Wagner 's writings to feature antisemitic views . In this polemic Wagner argued , frequently using traditional antisemitic abuse , that Jews had no connection to the German spirit , and were thus capable of producing only shallow and artificial music . According to him , they composed music to achieve popularity and , thereby , financial success , as opposed to creating genuine works of art . 
 In " Opera and Drama " ( 1851 ) , Wagner described the aesthetics of drama that he was using to create the Ring operas . Before leaving Dresden , Wagner had drafted a scenario that eventually became the four @-@ opera cycle Der Ring des Nibelungen . He initially wrote the libretto for a single opera , <unk> Tod ( Siegfried 's Death ) , in 1848 . After arriving in Zürich , he expanded the story with the opera Der <unk> Siegfried ( Young Siegfried ) , which explored the hero 's background . He completed the text of the cycle by writing the libretti for Die Walküre ( The Valkyrie ) and Das Rheingold ( The Rhine Gold ) and revising the other libretti to agree with his new concept , completing them in 1852 . The concept of opera expressed in " Opera and Drama " and in other essays effectively renounced the operas he had previously written , up to and including Lohengrin . Partly in an attempt to explain his change of views , Wagner published in 1851 the autobiographical " A Communication to My Friends " . This contained his first public announcement of what was to become the Ring cycle : 
 I shall never write an Opera more . As I have no wish to invent an arbitrary title for my works , I will call them Dramas ... 
 I propose to produce my myth in three complete dramas , preceded by a lengthy Prelude ( <unk> ) . ... 
 At a specially @-@ appointed Festival , I propose , some future time , to produce those three Dramas with their Prelude , in the course of three days and a fore @-@ evening [ emphasis in original ] . 
 Wagner began composing the music for Das Rheingold between November 1853 and September 1854 , following it immediately with Die Walküre ( written between June 1854 and March 1856 ) . He began work on the third Ring opera , which he now called simply Siegfried , probably in September 1856 , but by June 1857 he had completed only the first two acts . He decided to put the work aside to concentrate on a new idea : Tristan und Isolde , based on the Arthurian love story Tristan and Iseult . 
 One source of inspiration for Tristan und Isolde was the philosophy of Arthur Schopenhauer , notably his The World as Will and Representation , to which Wagner had been introduced in 1854 by his poet friend Georg <unk> . Wagner later called this the most important event of his life . His personal circumstances certainly made him an easy convert to what he understood to be Schopenhauer 's philosophy , a deeply pessimistic view of the human condition . He remained an adherent of Schopenhauer for the rest of his life . 
 One of Schopenhauer 's doctrines was that music held a supreme role in the arts as a direct expression of the world 's essence , namely , blind , impulsive will . This doctrine contradicted Wagner 's view , expressed in " Opera and Drama " , that the music in opera had to be subservient to the drama . Wagner scholars have argued that Schopenhauer 's influence caused Wagner to assign a more commanding role to music in his later operas , including the latter half of the Ring cycle , which he had yet to compose . Aspects of <unk> doctrine found their way into Wagner 's subsequent libretti . 
 A second source of inspiration was Wagner 's infatuation with the poet @-@ writer Mathilde Wesendonck , the wife of the silk merchant Otto Wesendonck . Wagner met the <unk> , who were both great admirers of his music , in Zürich in 1852 . From May 1853 onwards Wesendonck made several loans to Wagner to finance his household expenses in Zürich , and in 1857 placed a cottage on his estate at Wagner 's disposal , which became known as the <unk> ( " asylum " or " place of rest " ) . During this period , Wagner 's growing passion for his patron 's wife inspired him to put aside work on the Ring cycle ( which was not resumed for the next twelve years ) and begin work on Tristan . While planning the opera , Wagner composed the Wesendonck Lieder , five songs for voice and piano , setting poems by Mathilde . Two of these settings are explicitly subtitled by Wagner as " studies for Tristan und Isolde " . 
 Amongst the conducting engagements that Wagner undertook for revenue during this period , he gave several concerts in 1855 with the London Philharmonic Society , including one before Queen Victoria . The Queen enjoyed his Tannhäuser overture and spoke with Wagner after the concert , writing of him in her diary that he was " short , very quiet , wears spectacles & has a very finely @-@ developed forehead , a hooked nose & projecting chin . " 
 = = = In exile : Venice and Paris ( 1858 – 62 ) = = = 
 Wagner 's uneasy affair with Mathilde collapsed in 1858 , when Minna intercepted a letter to Mathilde from him . After the resulting confrontation with Minna , Wagner left Zürich alone , bound for Venice , where he rented an apartment in the Palazzo <unk> , while Minna returned to Germany . Wagner 's attitude to Minna had changed ; the editor of his correspondence with her , John Burk , has said that she was to him " an invalid , to be treated with kindness and consideration , but , except at a distance , [ was ] a menace to his peace of mind . " Wagner continued his correspondence with Mathilde and his friendship with her husband Otto , who maintained his financial support of the composer . In an 1859 letter to Mathilde , Wagner wrote , half @-@ satirically , of Tristan : " Child ! This Tristan is turning into something terrible . This final act ! ! ! — I fear the opera will be banned ... only mediocre performances can save me ! Perfectly good ones will be bound to drive people mad . " 
 In November 1859 , Wagner once again moved to Paris to oversee production of a new revision of Tannhäuser , staged thanks to the efforts of Princess Pauline von Metternich , whose husband was the Austrian ambassador in Paris . The performances of the Paris Tannhäuser in 1861 were a notable fiasco . This was partly a consequence of the conservative tastes of the Jockey Club , which organised demonstrations in the theatre to protest at the presentation of the ballet feature in act 1 ( instead of its traditional location in the second act ) ; but the opportunity was also exploited by those who wanted to use the occasion as a veiled political protest against the pro @-@ Austrian policies of Napoleon III . The work was withdrawn after the third performance and Wagner left Paris soon after . He had sought a reconciliation with Minna during this Paris visit , and although she joined him there , the reunion was not successful and they again parted from each other when Wagner left . 
 = = = Return and resurgence ( 1862 – 71 ) = = = 
 The political ban that had been placed on Wagner in Germany after he had fled Dresden was fully lifted in 1862 . The composer settled in Biebrich , on the Rhine near Wiesbaden in Hesse . Here Minna visited him for the last time : they parted irrevocably , though Wagner continued to give financial support to her while she lived in Dresden until her death in 1866 . 
 In Biebrich , Wagner at last began work on Die Meistersinger von Nürnberg , his only mature comedy . Wagner wrote a first draft of the libretto in 1845 , and he had resolved to develop it during a visit he had made to Venice with the <unk> in 1860 , where he was inspired by Titian 's painting The Assumption of the Virgin . Throughout this period ( 1861 – 64 ) Wagner sought to have Tristan und Isolde produced in Vienna . Despite numerous rehearsals , the opera remained unperformed , and gained a reputation as being " impossible " to sing , which added to Wagner 's financial problems . 
 Wagner 's fortunes took a dramatic upturn in 1864 , when King Ludwig II succeeded to the throne of Bavaria at the age of 18 . The young king , an ardent admirer of Wagner 's operas , had the composer brought to Munich . The King , who was homosexual , expressed in his correspondence a passionate personal adoration for the composer , and Wagner in his responses had no scruples about counterfeiting a similar atmosphere . Ludwig settled Wagner 's considerable debts , and proposed to stage Tristan , Die Meistersinger , the Ring , and the other operas Wagner planned . Wagner also began to dictate his autobiography , Mein Leben , at the King 's request . Wagner noted that his rescue by Ludwig coincided with news of the death of his earlier mentor ( but later supposed enemy ) Giacomo Meyerbeer , and regretted that " this operatic master , who had done me so much harm , should not have lived to see this day . " 
 After grave difficulties in rehearsal , Tristan und Isolde premiered at the National Theatre Munich on 10 June 1865 , the first Wagner opera premiere in almost 15 years . ( The premiere had been scheduled for 15 May , but was delayed by bailiffs acting for Wagner 's creditors , and also because the Isolde , Malvina <unk> von <unk> , was hoarse and needed time to recover . ) The conductor of this premiere was Hans von Bülow , whose wife , Cosima , had given birth in April that year to a daughter , named Isolde , a child not of Bülow but of Wagner . 
 Cosima was 24 years younger than Wagner and was herself illegitimate , the daughter of the Countess Marie d 'Agoult , who had left her husband for Franz Liszt . Liszt initially disapproved of his daughter 's involvement with Wagner , though nevertheless the two men were friends . The indiscreet affair scandalised Munich , and Wagner also fell into disfavour with many leading members of the court , who were suspicious of his influence on the King . In December 1865 , Ludwig was finally forced to ask the composer to leave Munich . He apparently also toyed with the idea of abdicating to follow his hero into exile , but Wagner quickly dissuaded him . 
 Ludwig installed Wagner at the Villa Tribschen , beside Switzerland 's Lake Lucerne . Die Meistersinger was completed at Tribschen in 1867 , and premiered in Munich on 21 June the following year . At Ludwig 's insistence , " special previews " of the first two works of the Ring , Das Rheingold and Die Walküre , were performed at Munich in 1869 and 1870 , but Wagner retained his dream , first expressed in " A Communication to My Friends " , to present the first complete cycle at a special festival with a new , dedicated , opera house . 
 Minna had died of a heart attack on 25 January 1866 in Dresden . Wagner did not attend the funeral . Following Minna 's death Cosima wrote to Hans von Bülow on a number of occasions asking him to grant her a divorce , but Bülow refused to concede this . He only consented after she had two more children with Wagner ; another daughter , named Eva , after the heroine of Meistersinger , and a son Siegfried , named for the hero of the Ring . The divorce was finally sanctioned , after delays in the legal process , by a Berlin court on 18 July 1870 . Richard and Cosima 's wedding took place on 25 August 1870 . On Christmas Day of that year , Wagner arranged a surprise performance ( its premiere ) of the Siegfried Idyll for Cosima 's birthday . The marriage to Cosima lasted to the end of Wagner 's life . 
 Wagner , settled into his new @-@ found domesticity , turned his energies towards completing the Ring cycle . He had not abandoned polemics : he republished his 1850 pamphlet " Judaism in Music " , originally issued under a pseudonym , under his own name in 1869 . He extended the introduction , and wrote a lengthy additional final section . The publication led to several public protests at early performances of Die Meistersinger in Vienna and Mannheim . 
 = = = Bayreuth ( 1871 – 76 ) = = = 
 In 1871 , Wagner decided to move to Bayreuth , which was to be the location of his new opera house . The town council donated a large plot of land — the " Green Hill " — as a site for the theatre . The Wagners moved to the town the following year , and the foundation stone for the Bayreuth Festspielhaus ( " Festival Theatre " ) was laid . Wagner initially announced the first Bayreuth Festival , at which for the first time the Ring cycle would be presented complete , for 1873 , but since Ludwig had declined to finance the project , the start of building was delayed and the proposed date for the festival was deferred . To raise funds for the construction , " Wagner societies " were formed in several cities , and Wagner began touring Germany conducting concerts . By the spring of 1873 , only a third of the required funds had been raised ; further pleas to Ludwig were initially ignored , but early in 1874 , with the project on the verge of collapse , the King relented and provided a loan . The full building programme included the family home , " Wahnfried " , into which Wagner , with Cosima and the children , moved from their temporary accommodation on 18 April 1874 . The theatre was completed in 1875 , and the festival scheduled for the following year . Commenting on the struggle to finish the building , Wagner remarked to Cosima : " Each stone is red with my blood and yours " . 
 For the design of the Festspielhaus , Wagner appropriated some of the ideas of his former colleague , Gottfried Semper , which he had previously solicited for a proposed new opera house at Munich . Wagner was responsible for several theatrical innovations at Bayreuth ; these include darkening the auditorium during performances , and placing the orchestra in a pit out of view of the audience . 
 The Festspielhaus finally opened on 13 August 1876 with Das Rheingold , at last taking its place as the first evening of the complete Ring cycle ; the 1876 Bayreuth Festival therefore saw the premiere of the complete cycle , performed as a sequence as the composer had intended . The 1876 Festival consisted of three full Ring cycles ( under the baton of Hans Richter ) . At the end , critical reactions ranged between that of the Norwegian composer Edvard Grieg , who thought the work " divinely composed " , and that of the French newspaper Le Figaro , which called the music " the dream of a lunatic " . Amongst the disillusioned were Wagner 's friend and disciple Friedrich Nietzsche , who , having published his eulogistic essay " Richard Wagner in Bayreuth " before the festival as part of his <unk> Meditations , was bitterly disappointed by what he saw as Wagner 's pandering to increasingly <unk> German nationalism ; his breach with Wagner began at this time . The festival firmly established Wagner as an artist of European , and indeed world , importance : attendees included Kaiser Wilhelm I , the Emperor Pedro II of Brazil , Anton Bruckner , Camille Saint @-@ Saëns and Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky . 
 Wagner was far from satisfied with the Festival ; Cosima recorded that months later , his attitude towards the productions was " Never again , never again ! " Moreover , the festival finished with a deficit of about 150 @,@ 000 marks . The expenses of Bayreuth and of Wahnfried meant that Wagner still sought additional sources of income by conducting or taking on commissions such as the Centennial March for America , for which he received $ 5000 . 
 = = = Last years ( 1876 – 83 ) = = = 
 Following the first Bayreuth Festival , Wagner began work on Parsifal , his final opera . The composition took four years , much of which Wagner spent in Italy for health reasons . From 1876 to 1878 Wagner also embarked on the last of his documented emotional liaisons , this time with Judith Gautier , whom he had met at the 1876 Festival . Wagner was also much troubled by problems of financing Parsifal , and by the prospect of the work being performed by other theatres than Bayreuth . He was once again assisted by the liberality of King Ludwig , but was still forced by his personal financial situation in 1877 to sell the rights of several of his unpublished works ( including the Siegfried Idyll ) to the publisher Schott . 
 Wagner wrote a number of articles in his later years , often on political topics , and often reactionary in tone , repudiating some of his earlier , more liberal , views . These include " Religion and Art " ( 1880 ) and " Heroism and Christianity " ( 1881 ) , which were printed in the journal <unk> Blätter , published by his supporter Hans von Wolzogen . Wagner 's sudden interest in Christianity at this period , which infuses Parsifal , was contemporary with his increasing alignment with German nationalism , and required on his part , and the part of his associates , " the rewriting of some recent Wagnerian history " , so as to represent , for example , the Ring as a work reflecting Christian ideals . Many of these later articles , including " What is German ? " ( 1878 , but based on a draft written in the 1860s ) , repeated Wagner 's antisemitic preoccupations . 
 Wagner completed Parsifal in January 1882 , and a second Bayreuth Festival was held for the new opera , which premiered on 26 May . Wagner was by this time extremely ill , having suffered a series of increasingly severe angina attacks . During the sixteenth and final performance of Parsifal on 29 August , he entered the pit unseen during act 3 , took the baton from conductor Hermann Levi , and led the performance to its conclusion . 
 After the festival , the Wagner family journeyed to Venice for the winter . Wagner died of a heart attack at the age of 69 on 13 February 1883 at Ca ' <unk> <unk> , a 16th @-@ century palazzo on the Grand Canal . The legend that the attack was prompted by argument with Cosima over Wagner 's supposedly amorous interest in the singer Carrie Pringle , who had been a Flower @-@ maiden in Parsifal at Bayreuth , is without credible evidence . After a funerary gondola bore Wagner 's remains over the Grand Canal , his body was taken to Germany where it was buried in the garden of the Villa Wahnfried in Bayreuth . 
 = = Works = = 
 Wagner 's musical output is listed by the Wagner @-@ Werk @-@ Verzeichnis ( WWV ) as comprising 113 works , including fragments and projects . 
 = = = Operas = = = 
 Wagner 's operatic works are his primary artistic legacy . Unlike most opera composers , who generally left the task of writing the libretto ( the text and lyrics ) to others , Wagner wrote his own libretti , which he referred to as " poems " . 
 From 1849 onwards , he urged a new concept of opera often referred to as " music drama " ( although he later rejected this term ) , in which all musical , poetic and dramatic elements were to be fused together — the Gesamtkunstwerk . Wagner developed a compositional style in which the importance of the orchestra is equal to that of the singers . The orchestra 's dramatic role in the later operas includes the use of leitmotifs , musical phrases that can be interpreted as announcing specific characters , locales , and plot elements ; their complex interweaving and evolution illuminates the progression of the drama . These operas are still , despite Wagner 's reservations , referred to by many writers as " music dramas " . 
 = = = = Early works ( to 1842 ) = = = = 
 Wagner 's earliest attempts at opera were often uncompleted . Abandoned works include a pastoral opera based on Goethe 's Die <unk> des <unk> ( The Infatuated Lover 's Caprice ) , written at the age of 17 , Die Hochzeit ( The Wedding ) , on which Wagner worked in 1832 , and the <unk> <unk> <unk> als <unk> ( Men are More Cunning than Women , 1837 – 38 ) . Die Feen ( The Fairies , 1833 ) was unperformed in the composer 's lifetime and Das Liebesverbot ( The Ban on Love , 1836 ) was withdrawn after its first performance . Rienzi ( 1842 ) was Wagner 's first opera to be successfully staged . The compositional style of these early works was conventional — the relatively more sophisticated Rienzi showing the clear influence of Grand Opera à la Spontini and Meyerbeer — and did not exhibit the innovations that would mark Wagner 's place in musical history . Later in life , Wagner said that he did not consider these works to be part of his oeuvre ; none of them has ever been performed at the Bayreuth Festival , and they have been performed only rarely in the last hundred years ( although the overture to Rienzi is an occasional concert piece ) . Die Feen , Das Liebesverbot and Rienzi were performed at both Leipzig and Bayreuth in 2013 to mark the composer 's bicentenary . 
 = = = = " Romantic operas " ( 1843 – 51 ) = = = = 
 Wagner 's middle stage output began with Der fliegende Holländer ( The Flying Dutchman , 1843 ) , followed by Tannhäuser ( 1845 ) and Lohengrin ( 1850 ) . These three operas are sometimes referred to as Wagner 's " romantic operas " . They reinforced the reputation , among the public in Germany and beyond , that Wagner had begun to establish with Rienzi . Although distancing himself from the style of these operas from 1849 onwards , he nevertheless reworked both Der fliegende Holländer and Tannhäuser on several occasions . These three operas are considered to represent a significant developmental stage in Wagner 's musical and operatic maturity as regards thematic handling , portrayal of emotions and orchestration . They are the earliest works included in the Bayreuth canon , the mature operas that Cosima staged at the Bayreuth Festival after Wagner 's death in accordance with his wishes . All three ( including the differing versions of Der fliegende Holländer and Tannhäuser ) continue to be regularly performed throughout the world , and have been frequently recorded . They were also the operas by which his fame spread during his lifetime . 
 = = = = " Music dramas " ( 1851 – 82 ) = = = = 
 = = = = = Starting the Ring = = = = = 
 Wagner 's late dramas are considered his masterpieces . Der Ring des Nibelungen , commonly referred to as the Ring or " Ring cycle " , is a set of four operas based loosely on figures and elements of Germanic mythology — particularly from the later Norse mythology — notably the Old Norse Poetic Edda and Volsunga Saga , and the Middle High German Nibelungenlied . Wagner specifically developed the libretti for these operas according to his interpretation of <unk> , highly alliterative rhyming verse @-@ pairs used in old Germanic poetry . They were also influenced by Wagner 's concepts of ancient Greek drama , in which <unk> were a component of Athenian festivals , and which he had amply discussed in his essay " Oper und Drama " . 
 The first two components of the Ring cycle were Das Rheingold ( The <unk> ) , which was completed in 1854 , and Die Walküre ( The Valkyrie ) , which was finished in 1856 . In Das Rheingold , with its " relentlessly talky ' realism ' [ and ] the absence of lyrical ' numbers ' " , Wagner came very close to the musical ideals of his 1849 – 51 essays . Die Walküre , which contains what is virtually a traditional aria ( Siegmund 's <unk> in the first act ) , and the quasi @-@ choral appearance of the Valkyries themselves , shows more " operatic " traits , but has been assessed by Barry Millington as " the music drama that most satisfactorily embodies the theoretical principles of ' Oper und Drama ' ... A thoroughgoing synthesis of poetry and music is achieved without any notable sacrifice in musical expression . " 
 = = = = = Tristan und Isolde and Die Meistersinger = = = = = 
 While composing the opera Siegfried , the third part of the Ring cycle , Wagner interrupted work on it and between 1857 and 1864 wrote the tragic love story Tristan und Isolde and his only mature comedy Die Meistersinger von Nürnberg ( The Mastersingers of Nuremberg ) , two works that are also part of the regular operatic canon . 
 Tristan is often granted a special place in musical history ; many see it as the beginning of the move away from conventional harmony and tonality and consider that it lays the groundwork for the direction of classical music in the 20th century . Wagner felt that his <unk> @-@ dramatical theories were most perfectly realised in this work with its use of " the art of transition " between dramatic elements and the balance achieved between vocal and orchestral lines . Completed in 1859 , the work was given its first performance in Munich , conducted by Bülow , in June 1865 . 
 Die Meistersinger was originally conceived by Wagner in 1845 as a sort of comic pendant to Tannhäuser . Like Tristan , it was premiered in Munich under the baton of Bülow , on 21 June 1868 , and became an immediate success . Barry Millington describes Meistersinger as " a rich , perceptive music drama widely admired for its warm humanity " ; but because of its strong German nationalist overtones , it is also cited by some as an example of Wagner 's reactionary politics and antisemitism . 
 = = = = = Completing the Ring = = = = = 
 When Wagner returned to writing the music for the last act of Siegfried and for Götterdämmerung ( Twilight of the Gods ) , as the final part of the Ring , his style had changed once more to something more recognisable as " operatic " than the aural world of Rheingold and Walküre , though it was still thoroughly stamped with his own originality as a composer and suffused with leitmotifs . This was in part because the libretti of the four Ring operas had been written in reverse order , so that the book for Götterdämmerung was conceived more " traditionally " than that of Rheingold ; still , the self @-@ imposed strictures of the Gesamtkunstwerk had become relaxed . The differences also result from Wagner 's development as a composer during the period in which he wrote Tristan , Meistersinger and the Paris version of Tannhäuser . From act 3 of Siegfried onwards , the Ring becomes more chromatic melodically , more complex harmonically and more developmental in its treatment of leitmotifs . 
 Wagner took 26 years from writing the first draft of a libretto in 1848 until he completed Götterdämmerung in 1874 . The Ring takes about 15 hours to perform and is the only undertaking of such size to be regularly presented on the world 's stages . 
 = = = = = Parsifal = = = = = 
 Wagner 's final opera , Parsifal ( 1882 ) , which was his only work written especially for his Bayreuth Festspielhaus and which is described in the score as a " <unk> " ( " festival play for the consecration of the stage " ) , has a storyline suggested by elements of the legend of the Holy Grail . It also carries elements of Buddhist renunciation suggested by Wagner 's readings of Schopenhauer . Wagner described it to Cosima as his " last card " . It remains controversial because of its treatment of Christianity , its eroticism , and its expression , as perceived by some commentators , of German nationalism and antisemitism . Despite the composer 's own description of the opera to King Ludwig as " this most Christian of works " , Ulrike <unk> has commented that " Wagner 's turn to Christian mythology , upon which the imagery and spiritual contents of Parsifal rest , is idiosyncratic and contradicts Christian dogma in many ways . " Musically the opera has been held to represent a continuing development of the composer 's style , and Barry Millington describes it as " a diaphanous score of unearthly beauty and refinement " . 
 = = = Non @-@ operatic music = = = 
 Apart from his operas , Wagner composed relatively few pieces of music . These include a symphony in C major ( written at the age of 19 ) , the Faust Overture ( the only completed part of an intended symphony on the subject ) , some overtures , and choral and piano pieces . His most commonly performed work that is not an extract from an opera is the Siegfried Idyll for chamber orchestra , which has several motifs in common with the Ring cycle . The Wesendonck Lieder are also often performed , either in the original piano version , or with orchestral accompaniment . More rarely performed are the American Centennial March ( 1876 ) , and Das <unk> der <unk> ( The Love Feast of the Apostles ) , a piece for male choruses and orchestra composed in 1843 for the city of Dresden . 
 After completing Parsifal , Wagner expressed his intention to turn to the writing of symphonies , and several sketches dating from the late 1870s and early 1880s have been identified as work towards this end . The overtures and certain orchestral passages from Wagner 's middle and late @-@ stage operas are commonly played as concert pieces . For most of these , Wagner wrote or rewrote short passages to ensure musical coherence . The " Bridal Chorus " from Lohengrin is frequently played as the bride 's processional wedding march in English @-@ speaking countries . 
 = = = Prose writings = = = 
 Wagner was an extremely prolific writer , authoring numerous books , poems , and articles , as well as voluminous correspondence . His writings covered a wide range of topics , including autobiography , politics , philosophy , and detailed analyses of his own operas . 
 Wagner planned for a collected edition of his publications as early as 1865 ; he believed that such an edition would help the world understand his intellectual development and artistic aims . The first such edition was published between 1871 and 1883 , but was doctored to suppress or alter articles that were an embarrassment to him ( e.g. those praising Meyerbeer ) , or by altering dates on some articles to reinforce Wagner 's own account of his progress . Wagner 's autobiography Mein Leben was originally published for close friends only in a very small edition ( 15 – 18 copies per volume ) in four volumes between 1870 and 1880 . The first public edition ( with many passages suppressed by Cosima ) appeared in 1911 ; the first attempt at a full edition ( in German ) appeared in 1963 . 
 There have been modern complete or partial editions of Wagner 's writings , including a centennial edition in German edited by Dieter <unk> ( which , however , omitted the essay " Das Judenthum in der Musik " and Mein Leben ) . The English translations of Wagner 's prose in eight volumes by W. Ashton Ellis ( 1892 – 99 ) are still in print and commonly used , despite their deficiencies . A complete edition of Wagner 's correspondence , estimated to amount to between 10 @,@ 000 and 12 @,@ 000 items , is still under way under the supervision of the Institute for Music Research at the University of Würzburg . As of November 2014 , 21 volumes have appeared , covering the period to 1870 . 
 = = Influence and legacy = = 
 = = = Influence on music = = = 
 Wagner 's later musical style introduced new ideas in harmony , melodic process ( leitmotif ) and operatic structure . Notably from Tristan und Isolde onwards , he explored the limits of the traditional tonal system , which gave keys and chords their identity , pointing the way to atonality in the 20th century . Some music historians date the beginning of modern classical music to the first notes of Tristan , which include the so @-@ called Tristan chord . 
 Wagner inspired great devotion . For a long period , many composers were inclined to align themselves with or against Wagner 's music . Anton Bruckner and Hugo Wolf were greatly indebted to him , as were César Franck , Henri Duparc , Ernest Chausson , Jules Massenet , Richard Strauss , Alexander von Zemlinsky , Hans <unk> and numerous others . Gustav Mahler was devoted to Wagner and his music ; aged 15 , he sought him out on his 1875 visit to Vienna , became a renowned Wagner conductor , and his compositions are seen by Richard Taruskin as extending Wagner 's " <unk> " of " the temporal and the sonorous " in music to the world of the symphony . The harmonic revolutions of Claude Debussy and Arnold Schoenberg ( both of whose oeuvres contain examples of tonal and atonal modernism ) have often been traced back to Tristan and Parsifal . The Italian form of operatic realism known as verismo owed much to the Wagnerian concept of musical form . 
 Wagner made a major contribution to the principles and practice of conducting . His essay " About Conducting " ( 1869 ) advanced Hector Berlioz 's technique of conducting and claimed that conducting was a means by which a musical work could be re @-@ interpreted , rather than simply a mechanism for achieving orchestral unison . He exemplified this approach in his own conducting , which was significantly more flexible than the disciplined approach of Felix Mendelssohn ; in his view this also justified practices that would today be frowned upon , such as the rewriting of scores . Wilhelm Furtwängler felt that Wagner and Bülow , through their interpretative approach , inspired a whole new generation of conductors ( including Furtwängler himself ) . 
 Amongst those claiming inspiration from Wagner 's music are the German band Rammstein , and the electronic composer Klaus Schulze , whose 1975 album <unk> consists of two 30 @-@ minute tracks , Bayreuth Return and Wahnfried 1883 . Joey <unk> of the band Manowar has described Wagner as " The father of heavy metal " . The Slovenian group Laibach created the 2009 suite <unk> , using material from Wagner 's operas . Phil Spector 's Wall of Sound recording technique was , it has been claimed , heavily influenced by Wagner . 
 = = = Influence on literature , philosophy and the visual arts = = = 
 Wagner 's influence on literature and philosophy is significant . Millington has commented : 
 [ Wagner 's ] protean abundance meant that he could inspire the use of literary motif in many a novel employing interior monologue ; ... the Symbolists saw him as a mystic <unk> ; the <unk> found many a frisson in his work . 
 Friedrich Nietzsche was a member of Wagner 's inner circle during the early 1870s , and his first published work , The Birth of Tragedy , proposed Wagner 's music as the Dionysian " rebirth " of European culture in opposition to Apollonian rationalist " decadence " . Nietzsche broke with Wagner following the first Bayreuth Festival , believing that Wagner 's final phase represented a pandering to Christian pieties and a surrender to the new German Reich . Nietzsche expressed his displeasure with the later Wagner in " The Case of Wagner " and " Nietzsche contra Wagner " . 
 Charles Baudelaire , Stéphane Mallarmé and Paul Verlaine worshipped Wagner . Édouard Dujardin , whose influential novel Les <unk> sont <unk> is in the form of an interior monologue inspired by Wagnerian music , founded a journal dedicated to Wagner , La Revue <unk> , to which J. K. Huysmans and <unk> de <unk> contributed . In a list of major cultural figures influenced by Wagner , Bryan Magee includes D. H. Lawrence , Aubrey Beardsley , Romain Rolland , Gérard de <unk> , Pierre @-@ Auguste Renoir , Rainer Maria Rilke and numerous others . 
 In the 20th century , W. H. Auden once called Wagner " perhaps the greatest genius that ever lived " , while Thomas Mann and Marcel Proust were heavily influenced by him and discussed Wagner in their novels . He is also discussed in some of the works of James Joyce . Wagnerian themes inhabit T. S. Eliot 's The Waste Land , which contains lines from Tristan und Isolde and Götterdämmerung and Verlaine 's poem on Parsifal . 
 Many of Wagner 's concepts , including his speculation about dreams , predated their investigation by Sigmund Freud . Wagner had publicly analysed the Oedipus myth before Freud was born in terms of its psychological significance , insisting that incestuous desires are natural and normal , and perceptively exhibiting the relationship between sexuality and anxiety . Georg <unk> considered the Ring as the first manual of psychoanalysis . 
 = = = Influence on cinema = = = 
 Wagner 's concept of the use of leitmotifs and the integrated musical expression which they can enable has influenced many 20th and 21st century film scores . The critic Theodor Adorno has noted that the Wagnerian leitmotif " leads directly to cinema music where the sole function of the leitmotif is to announce heroes or situations so as to allow the audience to orient itself more easily " . Amongst film scores citing Wagnerian themes are Francis Ford Coppola 's Apocalypse Now , which features a version of the Ride of the Valkyries , Trevor Jones 's soundtrack to John Boorman 's film Excalibur , and the 2011 films A Dangerous Method ( dir . David Cronenberg ) and Melancholia ( dir . Lars von Trier ) . Hans @-@ Jürgen <unk> 's 1977 film Hitler : A Film from Germany 's visual style and set design are strongly inspired by Der Ring des Nibelungen , musical excerpts from which are frequently used in the film 's soundtrack . 
 = = = Opponents and supporters = = = 
 Not all reaction to Wagner was positive . For a time , German musical life divided into two factions , supporters of Wagner and supporters of Johannes Brahms ; the latter , with the support of the powerful critic Eduard Hanslick ( of whom <unk> in Meistersinger is in part a caricature ) championed traditional forms and led the conservative front against Wagnerian innovations . They were supported by the conservative leanings of some German music schools , including the conservatories at Leipzig under Ignaz Moscheles and at Cologne under the direction of Ferdinand Hiller . Another Wagner detractor was the French composer Charles @-@ Valentin Alkan , who wrote to Hiller after attending Wagner 's Paris concert on 25 January 1860 at which Wagner conducted the overtures to Der fliegende Holländer and Tannhäuser , the preludes to Lohengrin and Tristan und Isolde , and six other extracts from Tannhäuser and Lohengrin : " I had imagined that I was going to meet music of an innovative kind but was astonished to find a pale imitation of Berlioz ... I do not like all the music of Berlioz while appreciating his marvellous understanding of certain instrumental effects ... but here he was imitated and caricatured ... Wagner is not a musician , he is a disease . " 
 Even those who , like Debussy , opposed Wagner ( " this old poisoner " ) could not deny his influence . Indeed , Debussy was one of many composers , including Tchaikovsky , who felt the need to break with Wagner precisely because his influence was so unmistakable and overwhelming . " <unk> 's Cakewalk " from Debussy 's Children 's Corner piano suite contains a deliberately tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek quotation from the opening bars of Tristan . Others who proved resistant to Wagner 's operas included Gioachino Rossini , who said " Wagner has wonderful moments , and dreadful quarters of an hour . " In the 20th century Wagner 's music was parodied by Paul Hindemith and Hanns Eisler , among others . 
 Wagner 's followers ( known as <unk> or Wagnerites ) have formed many societies dedicated to Wagner 's life and work . 
 = = = Film and stage portrayals = = = 
 Wagner has been the subject of many biographical films . The earliest was a silent film made by Carl Froelich in 1913 and featured in the title role the composer Giuseppe <unk> , who also wrote the score for the film ( as Wagner 's music , still in copyright , was not available ) . Amongst other film portrayals of Wagner are : Alan <unk> in Magic Fire ( 1955 ) ; Lyndon Brook in Song Without End ( 1960 ) ; Trevor Howard in Ludwig ( 1972 ) ; Paul Nicholas in Lisztomania ( 1975 ) ; and Richard Burton in Wagner ( 1983 ) . 
 Jonathan Harvey 's opera Wagner Dream ( 2007 ) intertwines the events surrounding Wagner 's death with the story of Wagner 's uncompleted opera outline Die Sieger ( The Victors ) . 
 = = = Bayreuth Festival = = = 
 Since Wagner 's death , the Bayreuth Festival , which has become an annual event , has been successively directed by his widow , his son Siegfried , the latter 's widow Winifred Wagner , their two sons Wieland and Wolfgang Wagner , and , presently , two of the composer 's great @-@ granddaughters , Eva Wagner @-@ Pasquier and Katharina Wagner . Since 1973 , the festival has been overseen by the Richard @-@ Wagner @-@ Stiftung ( Richard Wagner Foundation ) , the members of which include a number of Wagner 's descendants . 
 = = Controversies = = 
 Wagner 's operas , writings , politics , beliefs and unorthodox lifestyle made him a controversial figure during his lifetime . Following his death , debate about his ideas and their interpretation , particularly in Germany during the 20th century , has continued . 
 = = = Racism and antisemitism = = = 
 Wagner 's writings on Jews , including Jewishness in Music , corresponded to some existing trends of thought in Germany during the 19th century ; however , despite his very public views on these themes , throughout his life Wagner had Jewish friends , colleagues and supporters . There have been frequent suggestions that antisemitic stereotypes are represented in Wagner 's operas . The characters of Mime in the Ring , Sixtus <unk> in Die Meistersinger , and Klingsor in Parsifal are sometimes claimed as Jewish representations , though they are not identified as such in the librettos of these operas . The topic of Wagner and the Jews is further complicated by allegations , which may have been credited by Wagner , that he himself was of Jewish ancestry , via his supposed father Geyer . 
 Some biographers have noted that Wagner in his final years developed interest in the racialist philosophy of Arthur de Gobineau , notably Gobineau 's belief that Western society was doomed because of miscegenation between " superior " and " inferior " races . According to Robert Gutman , this theme is reflected in the opera Parsifal . Other biographers ( such as Lucy Beckett ) believe that this is not true , as the original drafts of the story date back to 1857 and Wagner had completed the libretto for Parsifal by 1877 ; but he displayed no significant interest in Gobineau until 1880 . 
 = = = Other interpretations = = = 
 Wagner 's ideas are amenable to socialist interpretations ; many of his ideas on art were being formulated at the time of his revolutionary inclinations in the 1840s . Thus , for example , George Bernard Shaw wrote in The Perfect Wagnerite ( 1883 ) : 
 [ Wagner 's ] picture of <unk> under the reign of Alberic is a poetic vision of unregulated industrial capitalism as it was made known in Germany in the middle of the 19th century by Engels 's book The Condition of the Working Class in England . 
 Left @-@ wing interpretations of Wagner also inform the writings of Theodor Adorno among other Wagner critics . Walter Benjamin gave Wagner as an example of " bourgeois false consciousness " , alienating art from its social context . 
 The writer Robert Donington has produced a detailed , if controversial , Jungian interpretation of the Ring cycle , described as " an approach to Wagner by way of his symbols " , which , for example , sees the character of the goddess Fricka as part of her husband Wotan 's " inner femininity " . Millington notes that Jean @-@ Jacques <unk> has also applied psychoanalytical techniques in an evaluation of Wagner 's life and works . 
 = = = Nazi appropriation = = = 
 Adolf Hitler was an admirer of Wagner 's music and saw in his operas an embodiment of his own vision of the German nation ; in a 1922 speech he claimed that Wagner 's works glorified " the heroic Teutonic nature ... Greatness lies in the heroic . " Hitler visited Bayreuth frequently from 1923 onwards and attended the productions at the theatre . There continues to be debate about the extent to which Wagner 's views might have influenced Nazi thinking . Houston Stewart Chamberlain ( 1855 – 1927 ) , who married Wagner 's daughter Eva in 1908 but never met Wagner , was the author of the racist book The Foundations of the Nineteenth Century , approved by the Nazi movement . Chamberlain met Hitler on a number of occasions between 1923 and 1927 in Bayreuth , but cannot credibly be regarded as a conduit of Wagner 's own views . The Nazis used those parts of Wagner 's thought that were useful for propaganda and ignored or suppressed the rest . 
 While Bayreuth presented a useful front for Nazi culture , and Wagner 's music was used at many Nazi events , the Nazi hierarchy as a whole did not share Hitler 's enthusiasm for Wagner 's operas and resented attending these lengthy epics at Hitler 's insistence . 
 Guido Fackler has researched evidence that indicates that it is possible that Wagner 's music was used at the Dachau concentration camp in 1933 – 34 to " <unk> " political prisoners by exposure to " national music " . There seems to be no evidence to support claims , sometimes made , that his music was played at Nazi death camps during the Second World War . 
 Because of the associations of Wagner with antisemitism and Nazism , the performance of his music in the State of Israel has been a source of controversy . 
 = = = Operas = = = 
 Richard Wagner Opera , Richard Wagner operas , Wagner interviews , CDs , DVDs , Wagner calendar , Bayreuth Festival 
 Wagner Operas , site featuring photographs , video , MIDI files , scores , libretti , and commentary 
 <unk> , contains libretti of his operas , with English translations 
 Wagner website , assortment of articles on Wagner and his operas 
 Wilhelm Richard Wagner site by Stanford University 
 The Wagnerian , Richard Wagner news , operas , reviews , articles . 
 = = = Writings = = = 
 The Wagner Library . English translations of Wagner 's prose works , including some of Wagner 's more notable essays . 
 Works by Richard Wagner at Project Gutenberg 
 Works by or about Richard Wagner at Internet Archive 
 Works by Richard Wagner at LibriVox ( public domain audiobooks ) 
 = = = Scores = = = 
 Free scores by Richard Wagner in the Choral Public Domain Library ( ChoralWiki ) 
 Free scores by Wagner at the International Music Score Library Project 
 = = = Other = = = 
 Richard Wagner material in the BBC Radio 3 archives 
 The National Archive of the Richard Wagner Foundation 
 Richard Wagner Museum in the country manor <unk> beside Lucerne , Switzerland where he and Cosima lived and worked from 1866 to 1872 . 
 = Dunster Castle = 
 Dunster Castle is a former motte and bailey castle , now a country house , in the village of Dunster , Somerset , England . The castle lies on the top of a steep hill called the Tor , and has been fortified since the late Anglo @-@ Saxon period . After the Norman conquest of England in the 11th century , William de Mohun constructed a timber castle on the site as part of the pacification of Somerset . A stone shell keep was built on the motte by the start of the 12th century , and the castle survived a siege during the early years of the Anarchy . At the end of the 14th century the de Mohuns sold the castle to the Luttrell family , who continued to occupy the property until the late 20th century . 
 The castle was expanded several times by the Luttrell family during the 17th and 18th centuries ; they built a large manor house within the Lower Ward of the castle in 1617 , and this was extensively modernised , first during the 1680s and then during the 1760s . The medieval castle walls were mostly destroyed following the siege of Dunster Castle at the end of the English Civil War , when Parliament ordered the defences to be slighted to prevent their further use . In the 1860s and 1870s , the architect Anthony Salvin was employed to remodel the castle to fit Victorian tastes ; this work extensively changed the appearance of Dunster to make it appear more Gothic and Picturesque . 
 Following the death of Alexander Luttrell in 1944 , the family was unable to afford the death duties on his estate . The castle and surrounding lands were sold off to a property firm , the family continuing to live in the castle as tenants . The Luttrells bought back the castle in 1954 , but in 1976 Colonel Walter Luttrell gave Dunster Castle and most of its contents to the National Trust , which operates it as a tourist attraction . It is a Grade I listed building and scheduled monument . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 11th to 12th centuries = = = 
 Dunster Castle was positioned on a steep , 200 @-@ foot ( 61 m ) high hill , sometimes called the Tor , overlooking the village of Dunster in Somerset . During the early medieval period the sea reached the base of the hill , close to the mouth of the River Avill , offering a natural defence and making the village an inland port . Several Iron Age hillforts were built close to Dunster , including Bat 's Castle , Black Ball Camp and Grabbist Hill , but the earliest evidence of a fortification at Dunster was an Anglo @-@ Saxon burgh . This was built on the summit of the hill and was possibly intended to protect the region against sea @-@ borne raiders ; by the mid @-@ 11th century it was controlled by a local nobleman called Aelfric . 
 In 1066 the Normans invaded south @-@ east England , defeating the English forces at the battle of Hastings : in the aftermath of the victory , William the Conqueror entrusted the conquest of the south @-@ west of England to his half @-@ brother Robert of Mortain . Expecting stiff resistance , Robert marched west into Somerset , supported by forces under Walter of Douai , who entered from the north ; a third force , under the command of William de Mohun , landed by sea along the Somerset coast . William had been granted 68 manors in the region and by 1086 had established a castle at Dunster ; this would form both the caput , or principal castle , for his new lands , and help guard the coast against the threat of any fresh sea @-@ borne attack , as well as controlling the coastal road running from Somerset to Gloucestershire . This first castle was a motte and bailey design , built upon the former Anglo @-@ Saxon burgh ; the top of the Tor was scarped to form the motte , or Upper Ward , and an area below shaped to form the bailey , or Lower Ward . 
 Somerset became more stable in the aftermath of the post @-@ invasion period and the unsuccessful 1068 rebellion against Norman rule . It was common in the period for the Normans to build religious houses to accompany major castles , and accordingly William de Mohun endowed a Benedictine priory at Dunster in 1090 , along with its parent abbey at Bath . The River Avill was important for trade ; the region around Dunster was rich with fisheries and vineyards , and Dunster Castle prospered . Stone fortifications were built on the site during the early 12th century , probably forming a shell keep around the top of the motte . 
 In the late 1130s England began to descend into a period of civil war known as the Anarchy , during which the supporters of King Stephen fought with those of the Empress Matilda for control of the kingdom . William de Mohun 's eldest son , also called William , was a noted supporter of Matilda , and Dunster was considered one of her faction 's strongest castles in the south @-@ west . In 1138 forces loyal to Stephen besieged the castle ; a siege castle was built nearby , but all trace of it has been lost . William successfully held the castle and was made the Earl of Somerset by the grateful Empress . Chroniclers subsequently complained of the way in which he subsequently raided and controlled the region by force during the war , causing much destruction . In the aftermath of the conflict , William 's son , another William , inherited the castle after a short period of royal ownership under Henry II . William appears to have insisted that his tenants agree to help repair and maintain the castle walls as part of their feudal service . 
 = = = 13th to 17th centuries = = = 
 In the 13th century the Lower Ward was rebuilt in stone by Reynold Mohun ; this was paid for in part by Reynold commuting his tenants ' ongoing duty to repair the castle walls into a single , one @-@ off financial payment to their lord , and partially through his marriage to a rich local heiress . A survey of the castle in 1266 described the Upper Ward on the top of the motte as containing a hall with a buttery , a pantry , a kitchen , a bakehouse , the chapel of Saint Stephen and a knight 's hall , guarded by three towers . The Lower Ward included a granary , two towers and a gatehouse ; one of the towers , called the Fleming Tower , was used as a prison . The castle stables lay outside the defences , further down the slope . By the end of the 13th century some of the castle 's roofing had been covered in lead , while other parts still used wooden shingles . 
 In 1330 Sir John de Mohun inherited the castle ; John , although a notable knight , was childless and fell into considerable debt . His wife Joan took over the running of their estates , and when John died in 1376 she agreed to sell the castle to Lady Elizabeth Luttrell , the leading member of another major Norman family , for 5 @,@ 000 marks , with the castle to transfer to Elizabeth on Joan 's death . At some point during this period additional stone buildings were constructed along the Lower Ward , on the side of the current mansion , and records suggest that a ditch , or moat , may have existed around the base of the Tor in the 14th century . 
 Joan outlived Elizabeth , and in the event Sir Hugh Luttrell , who was Henry V 's seneschal in Normandy , finally took over the castle on Joan 's death in 1404 . The castle had suffered from a lack of investment during the final years of the Mohan 's ownership , and Luttrell repaired and extended the castle at a cost of £ 252 , constructing the Great Gatehouse and a barbican between 1419 and 1424 . The new entrance lay at right @-@ angles to the old and was three storeys high , built of imported Bristol red sandstone , and contained extensive apartments ; it formed a grand , if ill @-@ defended , ceremonial route into the castle . The castle was reroofed with Cornish stone tiles . By the 15th century the sea had receded , and the Luttrells created a deer park for the castle at Marshwood . Such a park would have been highly prestigious and allowed the Luttrells to engage in hunting , providing the castle with a supply of venison as well as generating income . 
 During the 15th century , England was divided by the prolonged period of civil war called the Wars of the Roses : the Luttrells were supporters of the House of Lancaster . In 1461 , Sir James Luttrell died following the Lancastrian defeat at the Second Battle of St Albans , and his family were deprived of their estates by the Yorkist Edward IV . The castle was given to the Herberts , but the Luttrells regained it on the accession of the <unk> Henry VII in 1485 , when Dunster was restored to James ' son , Sir Hugh Luttrell . Hugh repaired the castle chapel and in the early 16th century his son , Sir Andrew Luttrell , built a new wall on the east side of the castle . Andrew 's son Sir John Luttrell , who inherited the castle , was a famous soldier , diplomat , and courtier under Henry VIII and Edward VI , serving in France and in Scotland during the conflicts of the Rough Wooing . In In 1542 the antiquarian John Leland reported the castle keep and buildings to be considerable disrepair , with the exception of the chapel , and after Sir John 's death the castle was leased out for several years , first by his daughter , Mary , and then under his brother , Thomas . 
 By the time George Luttrell inherited the castle in 1571 , it was dilapidated , with the family preferring to live in their house , now known as Court House , at East Quantoxhead . In 1617 George employed the architect William Arnold , to create a new house in the Lower Ward of the castle . Arnold was an important architect in the south @-@ west of England , and had managed the building of nearby Montacute and Cranborne House . The redesign expanded on some of the existing buildings and walls to create a 16th @-@ century Jacobean mansion with a symmetrical front and square towers , set within the older castle walls and overlooked by the keep above . The building was decorated in the latest styles , including ornamental plaster ceilings . The project ran almost three times over budget , costing Luttrell more than £ 1 @,@ 200 . 
 = = = = English Civil War and the Restoration = = = = 
 In the 1640s the English Civil War broke out between the supporters of King Charles I and Parliament . Thomas Luttrell , George 's eldest son , initially supported Parliament and after the outbreak of war William Russell , the Duke of Bedford and Parliamentary commander in Devon and Somerset , ordered him to increase the garrison at Dunster to resist a potential Royalist attack . The Royalist commander William Seymour , the Duke of Somerset , attacked the castle in 1642 but was driven back by the garrison , led by Thomas ' wife , Jane . The war in the south @-@ west turned in favour of the King , and on 7 June 1643 the Royalists mustered forces to attack the castle again : this time Luttrell surrendered , switching sides to support the Royalists until his death the following February . Colonel Wyndham was appointed the Royalist governor of the castle . The young Prince Charles , the later Charles II , stayed at the castle in May 1645 . 
 During 1645 the Royalist military cause largely collapsed , and Colonel Robert Blake led a Parliamentary force against Dunster in October . In November Blake began his siege of the castle , setting up his artillery in Dunster village and starting to dig tunnels to plant mines beneath the walls . The castle was briefly relieved by reinforcements in February 1646 , but the siege was resumed and by April the Royalists situation was untenable – an honourable surrender was negotiated and a Parliamentary garrison installed . After the end of the Second English Civil War in 1649 , however , Parliament decided to deliberately destroy , or slight , the defences of castles in key Royalist areas , including the south @-@ west . In the case of Dunster , Thomas 's son George Luttrell was able to convince the authorities to destroy only the medieval defensive walls , rather than the entire castle , leaving Dunster damaged from the recent siege but still habitable ; the walls were demolished over 12 days in August 1650 by a team of 300 workmen . The only parts of the medieval walls to survive were the Great Gatehouse and the bases of the two towers in the Lower Ward . 
 George Luttrell died without children , and Dunster Castle passed to his brother Francis , who survived the political turmoil of both the Commonwealth years and the Restoration of Charles II to power in 1660 . Francis ' heir , another Francis , married a wealthy heiress worth £ 2 @,@ 500 a year ( £ 331 @,@ 000 at 2009 prices ) and with this income set about modernising the castle during the 1680s , in particular building a grand staircase in the latest style . Francis was a colonel in the local militia and in 1688 backed William of Orange 's attempt to oust James II ; when William landed in Devon , Francis mustered a number of companies of infantry at Dunster on 19 November to support him , which formed the basis for the later Green Howards regiment . During this period the castle still kept an armoury of 43 muskets . Francis died heavily in debt in 1690 , and his widow Mary moved the contents of the castle to London , where they were destroyed in a fire in 1696 . 
 = = = 18th century = = = 
 At the start of the 18th century the Luttrells and Dunster Castle faced many financial challenges . Francis 's son Alexander , inherited the castle when he came of age in 1704 , but it was still mostly empty and carried large debts with it . Alexander died young in 1711 and his widow , Dorothy , spent almost twenty years paying off the debts . Dorothy built a new chapel , designed by Sir James Thornhill in white Portland stone , on the rear of the mansion at a cost of £ 1 @,@ 300 ( £ 178 @,@ 000 at 2009 prices ) ; few records of this remain , but the interior probably resembled that of the chapel at Wimpole Hall . A safer , if less grand , approach road to the castle was created , called the New Way , and the remains of the Upper Ward on top of the motte were flattened to be used as a bowling green , complete with an octagonal summer house . Dorothy 's son , Alexander Luttrell , took over the castle in 1726 but ran up new debts , and the castle was handed over into the control of a receiver . 
 Henry Fownes Luttrell , who married Margaret , Alexander 's daughter , and took the Luttrell name , moved to Dunster in 1747 . The couple redesigned and redecorated the castle in a Rococo style , including the extensive use of the recently invented and highly fashionable wallpaper . Henry Luttrell raised the ground height of the Lower Ward between 1764 and 1765 to extend the New Way all around to the front of his mansion , adding additional ornamental towers onto the inside of the Great Gatehouse in the process . A folly , Conygar Tower , was constructed by architect Richard Phelps to improve the view from the castle , and a larger park of 141 hectares ( 348 acres ) was built just to the south of the castle , requiring the eviction of a number of tenant farmers . 
 = = = 19th and 20th centuries = = = 
 Henry 's son , John , inherited the castle in 1780 , but when his son , also called John , inherited in 1816 he chose to live in London instead , opening up Dunster Castle to the public . By 1845 the castle appeared to visitors to be past its prime : with only two of John 's sisters living there and no horses or hunting dogs left in the castle grounds , the remaining servants had little to do . John 's brother Henry inherited in 1857 , but he too lived in London rather than at Dunster . 
 George Luttrell inherited the castle in 1867 and began an extensive modernisation , backed by the considerable income from the Dunster estates – in a period of agricultural boom in England , the estates were producing £ 22 @,@ 000 in revenue a year ( £ 1 @.@ 49 million at 2010 prices ) . It was fashionable during the mid @-@ Victorian period to remodel existing castles to produce what was felt to be a more consistent Gothic or sometimes Picturesque appearance and George , a keen historian , decided to follow this trend at Dunster ; in the process , he also hoped to accommodate the larger household and facilities required for a 19th @-@ century landowner : by 1881 , the castle required 15 " living @-@ in " servants alone . He employed Anthony Salvin , a noted architect then most famous for his work at Alnwick Castle , to carry out the work between 1868 and 1872 at a total cost of £ 25 @,@ 350 ( equivalent to £ 1 @.@ 76 million in 2010 ) . The work included the construction of an underground reservoir , holding 40 @,@ 000 imperial gallons ( 180 @,@ 000 l ; 48 @,@ 000 US gal ) of water to provide running water for the castle and village . 
 Salvin aimed to create a castle that would appear to have grown up organically over time , but still appeal to Victorian aesthetic taste . Accordingly , a large , square tower was built on the west side of the castle and another smaller tower on the east , both creating additional space but also making the castle deliberately asymmetrical . The 18th @-@ century chapel at the rear was demolished and replaced with another tower , alongside a modern conservatory . A variety of windows in the styles of different historical periods were inserted in the walls , while modern Victorian technology , including gas lighting @-@ supported by a gas plant in the basement @-@ central heating and new kitchens were installed within the castle . The roof of the Great Gatehouse was raised to create a more uniform sequence of battlements , and a large hall for gatherings of the local farmers installed . A new wing of servants ' quarters and offices were sunk into the hill , spread over two floors leading away from the main part of the mansion . 
 Internally , Salvin knocked through existing rooms to create the Outer Hall , a new gallery on the first floor , a billiard room , a new library and a drawing room . Much of the wooden 17th @-@ century panelling in the parlour and the hall had to be stripped out as part of the renovations . As part of his work , Salvin appears to have used a number of rolled wrought @-@ iron beams to span the resulting structural gaps in the building , an advanced use of that technology for the time . The house was refurnished with newly bought 16th and 17th @-@ century artwork , two brass Italian cannons and a stuffed polar bear . 
 Alexander Luttrell , who inherited Dunster Castle in 1910 , chose to live at East Quantoxhead instead , and it was left empty until his son Geoffrey reoccupied the castle in 1920 , redecorating some of the rooms in a contemporary style and building a polo ground alongside the castle . The castle and the surrounding countryside at this time was very popular with the Luttrells for fox hunting and shooting . During the Second World War the castle was used as a convalescent home for injured naval and American officers between 1943 and 1944 . 
 Alexander died in 1944 , and the death duties proved crippling to Geoffrey . In 1949 he sold the castle and 3 @,@ 480 hectares ( 8 @,@ 600 acres ) of the lands to the Ashdale Property Company , retaining a tenancy of the castle for himself . The Crown Estate bought the estate from Ashdale and sold the castle back to Geoffrey in 1954 . His son Colonel Walter Luttrell lived away from Dunster , and following the death of his mother – the last Luttrell to live in the property – gave the castle and most of its contents to the National Trust in 1976 . 
 = = Today = = 
 Dunster Castle is operated by the National Trust as a tourist attraction . Little remains of the medieval castle except for the Great Gatehouse and the remains of several towers in the Lower Ward ; the heart of the modern castle today is the much altered 17th @-@ century manor house . The key features of the castle include the original 13th @-@ century gates and several pieces of art , including a Tudor copy of Hans Eworth 's famous allegorical portrait of Sir John Luttrell , and a sequence of leather tapestries showing scenes from the story of Antony and Cleopatra . The castle also holds a piano that once belonged to the composer Vivian Ellis . The gardens surrounding the castle cover approximately 6 hectares ( 15 acres ) and include the National Plant Collection of Strawberry Trees ; the wider parkland beyond totals 277 hectares ( 680 acres ) . The gardens and parkland are listed , Grade II * , on the Register of Historic Parks and Gardens of special historic interest in England . 
 Just to the south of the castle is the restored 18th @-@ century castle watermill . In 2010 the castle received 128 @,@ 242 visitors . Dunster Castle has been designated by English Heritage as a Grade I listed building and Scheduled Ancient Monument . The castle has required continuing maintenance work , in particular to its roof , itself an important historical feature . Efforts have been made to gradually redecorate the castle in a period style , using reproductions of original wallpapers and materials . The National Trust installed solar panels behind the battlements on the roof in 2008 to provide electricity and make the premises more environmentally friendly . This was the first time the National Trust have taken this approach to a Grade I listed building , and it is expected to save 1 @,@ 714 kg ( 3 @,@ 778 lb ) of carbon a year . In 2015 , the National Trust announced plans to make the 19th @-@ century reservoir open to the public . 
 = Crackdown = 
 Crackdown is an open world action @-@ adventure video game developed by Realtime Worlds and distributed by Microsoft Game Studios for the Xbox 360 . It was released in North America on February 20 , 2007 , and worldwide by February 23 , 2007 . Crackdown was conceived by Realtime Worlds ' founder , David Jones , who also created Grand Theft Auto and Lemmings . 
 Set in the fictional Pacific City , the player controls a biologically enhanced Agent , tasked with defeating three crime lords and their organized crime syndicates . The Agent 's abilities improve by defeating both crime lords and their supporters , as well as by completing optional activities , such as street races and scavenger hunts . The gameplay is nonlinear : instead of following a rigid mission sequence , players are free to select the approach to completing their missions and activities . The game features a two @-@ player cooperative play mode via Xbox Live . 
 Crackdown , initially planned for release on the original Xbox console , was envisioned as a vast world in which players could experiment and explore freely . Microsoft Game Studios bundled specifically marked copies of Crackdown with an access code to the multiplayer test version of the much @-@ anticipated Halo 3 Beta . The game sold 1 @.@ 5 million copies in its first six months of release . It received critical acclaim and has garnered several awards for its innovative gameplay . A sequel , Crackdown 2 , was released in July 2010 by Ruffian Games without Jones ' input , and a third title is planned for Xbox One in 2016 , with support from Jones . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Crackdown takes place in the fictional metropolis of Pacific City , whose several districts and areas are divided among four islands . The city is controlled by three crime organizations : Los Muertos ( which means " the dead ones " in Spanish ) , of Central American origin ; an Eastern European gang , the Volk ( Russian for " Wolf " ) ; and the formerly above @-@ board Shai @-@ Gen Corporation , from East Asia . Normally , a police @-@ like organization called the Peacekeepers kept the city under control ; their forces , however , were overwhelmed by the sudden rise in crime . The city , therefore , sought additional help from " the Agency " , an organization that , in addition to outfitting and supporting Peacekeepers , has used advanced surgical and cybernetic technology to create supersoldiers known as " Agents " . The Agency is based out of a former hotel in the very centre of the city . The player takes on the role of one of their Agents , and is tasked with systematically bringing down all three organized gangs , while keeping both the populace and Peacekeepers safe . The Agent 's actions are continuously monitored by the Agency , and its Director ( voiced by Michael <unk> ) provides continuous reports to him of his progress . 
 Throughout the game , the player roams Pacific City , systematically eliminating the leaders and subordinates of the three gangs . Upon defeating the gangs ' Kingpins and generals , the Agent must put down a final riot by the remaining gang members in the area which after completion will cause that city to be almost crime free . Once all three gangs are fully exterminated , in the closing cutscene of the game , the Director reveals to the Agent that there was an ulterior motive for the Agency 's actions : the Agency had secretly empowered the three gangs in the first place to instill fear in Pacific City 's residents , thus creating a need for the Agency to control the city , and acceptance in the populace when they did take over . The Agency Director 's comments suggest that the Agency will replicate this plan in other cities across the globe to create a New World Order . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Crackdown is a third @-@ person shooter set in a sandbox environment , akin to Mercenaries : Playground of Destruction . After selecting one of the predefined Agent characters , the player is assigned to defeat the Kingpin of each gang , though there is no precise approach to do this , leaving players to select their preferred method . While the player may face the Kingpin and his bodyguards at any time , they can improve their chances of taking out the Kingpin by facing and defeating the various Generals responsible for certain aspects of the Kingpin 's offense and defense , removing them from play . For example , by eliminating a gang 's weapon dealer , gang members will no longer be as heavily armed or will fire fewer shots to conserve ammunition ; assassinating the gang recruitment officer similarly reduces the size of the Kingpin 's protective force . It is at the player 's discretion whether to kill the Generals or skip them entirely before facing the Kingpin . However , the gangs cannot be completely eradicated from the city without tracking down and killing all Generals and Kingpins . 
 Much like other sandbox games , the player uses melee attacks , guns , and explosives to fight the opposing forces , and can run , climb buildings , jump across rooftops , or use vehicles to navigate the city . Crackdown features a series of character @-@ based skills that can be upgraded to increase specific traits that can be used in combat , driving , or on @-@ foot agility . These skills include : " Agility " , which increases the Agent 's ability to jump , run , and swim ; " Driving " , affecting how well he can handle a vehicle ; " Explosives " , which affects the power and range of explosive weapons ; " Strength " that increases the Agent 's strength , namely by increasing his ability to lift and throw , as well as how hard he can strike an opponent ; and " Firearms " , which improves the character 's aptitude with weapons . Crackdown 's skills make few concessions to realism : character abilities are similar to those of comic book superheroes or cartoon characters . This concept is further highlighted by the ink @-@ like outlines drawn around in @-@ game characters . 
 Skills are usually improved by gaining experience orbs , which are released from defeated enemies . The type of orb released varies , depending on how the player dispatched the foe ; for instance , killing an enemy with a gun will earn Firearms orbs , while running them over with a vehicle earns Driving orbs . More powerful enemies release more experience orbs . However , Agility orbs are awarded differently : they can be earned by either climbing buildings and seeking them on rooftops , or by killing an enemy from a high altitude . The player can also compete in " rooftop races " — a race through a series of waypoints across the rooftops of Pacific City — or car races to gain Agility and Driving orbs , respectively . A few special orbs , well @-@ hidden , increase all character abilities when found . A final way to collect orbs is by earning Xbox Live Achievements , which rewards the player with orbs from every skill category . Each skill has five levels — beginning with zero stars , and ending with four — with a numeric gauge on the display to indicate how close the player is to the next level . Should the character die , or injure civilians or Agency peacekeepers , their experience gain will be slowed , making it temporarily harder to improve the character 's traits . 
 The entirety of Pacific City may be explored from the start of the game , allowing the player to locate the hideouts of each General and Kingpin , which can be made easier by accessing supply points scattered around the city . Once a supply point is unlocked , the player has the option of returning there to travel to any other supply point , restock on weapons and ammunition , or drop off newly acquired weapons , to permanently add them to their weapon selection . Should the player die , they can respawn at any open supply point . While exploring , the player is likely to come across enemy resistance , with their aggressiveness based on how badly the player has damaged that particular gang recently . If the player is too aggressive against the non @-@ gang residents of Pacific City , including the Peacekeepers , they are flagged as rogue , and Agency hit squads are dispatched to take them down . 
 Crackdown features an online two @-@ player cooperative play mode that allows drop @-@ in play . Both players may explore the city freely , with the other player 's position noted on the HUD map . Players can fight alongside each other , and also inflict friendly @-@ fire damage . The state of the city , including which Generals and Kingpins remain , is determined by the host player 's progress . Both players are credited with the defeat of a General or Kingpin in the game — which will affect the state of the guest 's progress — but are required to obtain supply points and gain experience independently . Co @-@ op players can race against each other in both rooftop and road races , should they both choose to participate . 
 = = Development = = 
 Crackdown was envisioned to exceed the gameplay of Grand Theft Auto , giving the player " toys " to create their own in @-@ game moments that could be verbally shared with others . The entire playfield was to be open at the start , requiring the need to create a progression for the player , while still allowing for experimentation . Realtime Worlds had hired a number of former Grand Theft Auto developers who experimented with refining the game 's sandbox element . " It was a big part of the idea to just let people do things " , Realtime Worlds producer Phil Wilson said about the gameplay ; " testers would do things we were completely blown away by " . Dave Jones , CEO of Realtime Worlds , described the concept of the game as " How do we reward somebody for just having fun ? " They had initially planned to have 200 Xbox Live Achievements for the game towards this purpose , exceeded the then @-@ current cap of 50 set by Microsoft , and pressured Microsoft to lift the cap . Microsoft subsequently increased the maximum number of Achievements in a game to 80 . Through playtesting , the team noticed that many players performed certain out @-@ of @-@ the @-@ way actions , such as climbing to the top of the Agency Tower . They created in @-@ game content to reward the player for performing these actions ; for example , they created a special rendering procedure for the clouds during the in @-@ game day / night cycle . The renderer would behave differently each day , and could only be viewed from atop the Agency Tower . An initial fear of Jones ' was that in the early part of the game , when the Agent is underpowered , the player may not realize the potential of the game and would not complete it ; " People weren 't quite sure , because at that level , you 're kind of like most characters in most other games " . Jones also expressed concern that " This game does not look good in screenshots " . They took two major steps to overcome this . First , the demo for the game on Xbox Marketplace allowed for accelerated growth of the player 's abilities . Second , the full game included five in @-@ game movies that would be presented early on to the player that would give them a taste for what a fully powered character could do . 
 Wilson stated that development of the game began in 2002 with a target release in 2005 on the original Xbox . Nine people were involved in the initial development for twelve months with plans to expand to 35 during full development . By February 2004 , they were able to provide a playable demo , but recognized there were still several challenges with the game 's progression . For example , the team introduced " skills for kills " where skill points were only rewarded for killing foes instead of allowing the player to gain them by less risky opportunities . They also included the frequent reporting of the player 's current chance of success for a player of defeating a Kingpin to prevent the player from being frustrated by trying to fight Kingpins beyond their level . 
 By 2004 , Microsoft brought the team the Xbox 360 hardware and suggested moving the game to that system , with a release date in the spring of 2006 . By November 2004 , the whole of Pacific City was in place , and cooperative mode was possible . However , in January 2005 they switched to the <unk> 4 engine , which caused many problems and was considered a " gross mistake " by Wilson . Microsoft was able to provide additional programmers to help during 2006 to correct the problems , just in time to create a demo for the 2006 E3 Convention . Wilson admitted that when Crackdown was first unveiled , the team thought the game was too early to debut . " By the time we got to the end of pre @-@ production we were woefully understaffed and over budget " , Wilson commented . 
 Microsoft found that by October 2006 , the game had fallen into the bottom 30 percent in test player reaction of all games currently in testing , and the bottom 50 percent in interest , though the numbers improved after a month . To help the struggling game , Microsoft decided to package the Halo 3 multiplayer trial with the game . " It was a great boost " , said Wilson . Jones also was positive about the tie @-@ in with the Halo 3 trial ; " We kind of knew Crackdown would need as much help as it could get to get into players ' hands ... Like we 've always said : It 's a game player 's game . It 's not something that 's going to sell in screenshot . So [ the Halo 3 beta ] was good " . 
 Pacific City within the game consists of 495 " city blocks " which the player could travel among , according to Microsoft Game Studios ' Jami Johns . Each block had to be tested separately , so Microsoft Game Studios designed a software tool to track issues when the game was in testing . For example , the tool was able to identify blocks where the performance dropped or the game crashed , allowing the developers to redesign the area to remove the issues . A further tool was used for the " seams " between city blocks , and included a screenshot just prior to any problem , which significantly reduced the debugging time for the game ; this tool was further used with Forza Motorsport 2 . However , the team had found some bugs during testing that actually worked well as game mechanics without throwing off the game balance . For example , the ability to drive the Agency SUV up a vertical wall when the player has maxed out his driving skill was originally a bug within the game . 
 = = = Promotion = = = 
 A Crackdown demo was released via Xbox Live Marketplace on January 23 , 2007 . It was originally dated for January 18 , 2007 , but was delayed due to Microsoft 's certification process . This demo includes both single player and co @-@ op play , but does not allow for jump @-@ in co @-@ op as seen in Gears of War . Silver account members received the demo one week later . The demo lasts for , at most , one hour , with a timer starting when either the player trains a skill to the second level , has eliminated two of the gang Generals , or has been playing for a half @-@ hour . At that point , a 30 @-@ minute timer will start , after which the demo automatically ends . During the demo , in @-@ game skills can be trained up to the highest level , and this occurs at an accelerated rate in order to give players an example of higher @-@ level abilities . The Crackdown demo quickly broke download records for Microsoft 's Xbox Live Marketplace by becoming the most downloaded demo over a 24 @-@ hour period and a seven @-@ day ( week @-@ long ) period . In the week after its release , the Crackdown demo was the second most played Xbox Live game after Gears of War . The demo went on to become the most downloaded and most played overall by March 2007 . 
 Every pre @-@ ordered and specially marked copy of Crackdown included an invitation to the beta test of the highly anticipated Halo 3 . The Crackdown game disc was required to download and launch the Halo 3 beta through the in @-@ game menus . On April 10 , 2007 , Bungie announced that the beta would become available for download for those that own this copy of Crackdown on May 16 , 2007 . This beta was playable for three weeks from when it was downloadable . 
 = = = Downloadable content = = = 
 On February 19 , 2007 , a free downloadable pack was made available for the game . The pack includes four new playable male agents , three of whom have unique , upgradable headgear . A free update was released on May 11 , 2007 , which allows the player to reset gangs , makes it easier to find orbs , improves stunt ring visibility , enhances targeting and camera angles when driving , and provides several other minor fixes . This update also includes a new ground strike attack . 
 Two packs of downloadable content were released on May 10 , 2007 . The " Free @-@ For @-@ All " pack , which is available free , adds a mode called " Keys to the City " to the main menu . It allows the player to impound any vehicle and store it at the Agency and allows the player to enter a " Keys to the City " mode that allows them to alter the Agent 's statistics or create several items , and other effects , but disables progress within the game . " Gettin ' Busy " bonus pack , introduces new vehicles and weapons , new side missions , and street racing . As of September 6 , 2007 , the " Gettin ' Busy " pack has been purchased from Xbox Live around 200 @,@ 000 times . 
 The May 2007 title update and downloadable content were linked to a glitch which reset a number of players ' saved games when they played the game 's co @-@ operative mode . The developers apologized for the glitch and offered a temporary workaround , however , saved games already lost to the glitch were not recoverable . On May 16 , 2007 , a further title update was released , resolving the issue , in addition to fixing issues with access to the Halo 3 beta . 
 = = = Soundtrack = = = 
 The main theme of the game is ' Paradise Bird Theory ' by DJ Krush . 
 Crackdown features over 100 tracks of electronica and sample @-@ based music by a number of independent and video game musicians , including Amon Tobin , Atlas Plug , <unk> and Hybrid . Music supervisor Peter Davenport was in charge of selecting the music for the game , a task that took three years to complete . Davenport was allowed to select music from any source given the premise and missions within the game , and worked with the audio leads at Realtime Worlds to shape the full soundtrack , keeping it to a " dark and ominous " vibe , rather than " super high energy " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Crackdown was critically acclaimed by game critics who praised the open @-@ world approach . Reviewers commented highly on the graphics of the game , both in its detailed city and large draw distances , and the cel @-@ like shading of the characters ; 1UP said that " it 's just better to let a game approach reality on its own aesthetic terms than to go hyperrealistic " . X @-@ Play stated , " It 's an absolute blast to play , and arguably one of the finest superhero games made thus far " , and IGN stated , " Overall the thrill of jumping like a mutant kangaroo from rooftop to rooftop is unrivaled ! " The co @-@ op play feature over Xbox Live was well received ; Eurogamer wrote , " Being able to pick and leap into any of your friends ' or even complete strangers ' cities is likely to keep that buzz going though " , and 1UP agreed , remarking " That it represents the best , if not the first , online multiplayer sandbox game on a console is just gravy " . Reviews did critique the lack of any appreciable story within the game , and how short the core game itself may be ; IGN argued " Crackdown won 't last that long , it 's uneven , and the story and the music are weak sauce " . 
 Crackdown was not expected to be a good game , due to it being tied to the anticipated Halo 3 multiplayer beta . However , the game surpassed many expectations ; in his review , GameSpy 's Gabe Graziani asked readers the rhetorical question ; " Notice that I didn 't mention the Halo 3 beta offer during this whole article ? That 's because it 's completely irrelevant when looking at Crackdown , it 's a solid game that delivers exactly what it promises : a giant sandbox to blow the crap out of " . 
 The game was named the 2007 BAFTA " Best Action and Adventure Game " and " Best Use of Audio " . and also won the " Best Debut " award at the 2008 Game Developers Choice Awards . The game received the Innovation Award at the 2007 Develop Awards , held by Develop magazine . Game Informer listed it as one of the top 50 games of 2007 , citing its unique experience and several other elements . They listed the agents as the number eight top heroes of 2007 and climbing the tallest building in the city as the number nine top moment of 2007 . 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 Crackdown premiered to very strong sales . During the week of its worldwide release of February 22 , 2007 , it was the top selling Xbox 360 game in North America , Japan , and the UK . The game was the top selling game in North America for the month of February 2007 , selling 427 @,@ 000 units . Ultimately , by the end of 2007 , the game sold 1 @.@ 5 million copies worldwide . The game is not sold in Germany due to the USK 's decision not to rate the game ; according to GameSpot , this was due to pending legislation at the time to create criminal penalties for games that included " cruel violence on humans or human @-@ looking characters " . 
 = = Sequels = = 
 Wilson and lead designer Billy Thomson had previously confirmed that Crackdown was designed from the outset to be a long @-@ running series of games , stating that sequels for the game are very likely to be produced , especially if Crackdown performed well commercially . However , during the Industry All Stars event in September 2007 , Wilson confirmed that Realtime Worlds was not working on a sequel to the game , saying " Microsoft was a little late in stepping up to the plate to ask for Crackdown 2 , and by then we had already started working on bigger , better things " . However , then @-@ corporate vice president of Microsoft Game Studios , Shane Kim , stated that Microsoft still holds the intellectual property rights for Crackdown and that a Crackdown sequel was still a possibility . Realtime Studios manager Colin MacDonald clarified that if they have the resources after completion of APB , they could approach Microsoft to discuss a sequel . 
 At Microsoft 's E3 conference on June 1 , 2009 , it was announced that Crackdown 2 was at that point of time being developed by a Scottish studio ( Ruffian Games ) formed by members of the Realtime Worlds team . Along with the announcement , an accompanying trailer was released . Crackdown 2 was released on July 6 , 2010 in the U.S. and Canada and on July 9 throughout the rest of the world . 
 A third title in the series , Crackdown 3 , was announced at Microsoft 's press conference at the Electronic Entertainment Expo 2014 in June 2014 ( under the name Crackdown ) as an Xbox One exclusive under development at <unk> Games and <unk> , both run by Dave Jones . The game was then formally revealed in August 2015 . 
 = Battle of Muong Khoua = 
 The Battle of Muong Khoua took place between April 13 and May 18 , 1953 , in northern Laos during the French Indochina War . A garrison of a dozen French and 300 Laotian troops occupied a fortified outpost in the hills above the village of Muong Khoua , across the border from Điện Biên Phủ . Muong Khoua was among the last French outposts in northern Laos following the decision of the French High Command to string several isolated garrisons through the region in order to buy time to fortify the major Laotian cities against Việt Minh attack . 
 Many of these garrisons were given orders by radio to dig in and fight the approaching Việt Minh forces . Following the fall of a satellite strong point at Sop @-@ Nao , the troops at Muong Khoua under Captain Teullier resisted a Việt Minh siege force for thirty @-@ six days while supported by air @-@ dropped supplies and air strikes . The small French force repelled several direct attacks and endured a series of artillery bombardments . Two of the three strong points of the outpost eventually fell in the early morning of May 18 , and by midday the French force lay defeated . 
 Four soldiers — two French and two Laotian — reached another French position 50 miles ( 80 km ) away after six days of travel through the jungle , however no one else escaped . The resistance of the French garrison became a popular rallying cry for French troops in Indochina as well serving as a precursor to French and Việt Minh strategies at the decisive Battle of Điện Biên Phủ the following year . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = Việt Minh in Laos = = = 
 In early 1953 , the Việt Minh under Võ Nguyên Giáp commenced an invasion of Laos to exert additional pressure on Paris and on the French forces stationed in Indochina . In the area of Muong Khoua were the Việt Minh 312th , 308th , and 316th divisions , whose long supply lines were maintained by a veritable army of 200 @,@ 000 porters . The French command — headed then by Raoul Salan — ordered the establishment of a series of French outposts in northern Laos to resist the Việt Minh invading forces for as long as possible to buy time for the fortification of Luang Prabang and Vientiane , the capital cities of Laos . The King of Laos , <unk> <unk> , remained in Luang Prabang , which added greater impetus to French efforts . The terrain of northern Laos , and the local climate , isolated many of the outposts with a night @-@ time fog known as <unk> , thick jungle , a lack of roads , and steep terrain . Each outpost was given a certain number of days to withstand Việt Minh forces , including Muong Khoua which was issued orders on April 13 to hold for fourteen days — until April 27 . 
 Muong Khoua , together with its satellite outpost Sop @-@ Nao , was under the command of Captain Teullier , with the satellite outpost being overseen by Lieutenant Grézy . Muong Khoua was situated at the confluence of the rivers Nam Pak and Nam Hou , 40 miles ( 64 km ) from Điện Biên Phủ , and approximately 100 miles ( 160 km ) to the south @-@ west of the Black River in Vietnam . The outpost itself consisted of three separate strongholds , referred to as the Mousetrap , Pi and Alpha , situated on three hills to the west , south @-@ south @-@ east , and south @-@ south @-@ west of the confluence of the Nam Hou and Nam Pak . Each was roughly 220 yards ( 200 m ) from the other , forming a triangle . The village of Muong Khoua itself lay at the western foot of the Mousetrap , protected from the river by a large sandbank , and straddling the road to Phong Saly , another French outpost 50 miles ( 80 km ) to the north . 
 = = = Sop @-@ Nao = = = 
 Sop @-@ Nao lay 30 miles ( 48 km ) to the east of Muong Khoua , along the path of the Việt Minh advance , roughly 20 miles ( 32 km ) south @-@ west of Điện Biên Phủ and only a few miles from the Vietnam @-@ Laos border , 75 miles ( 121 km ) south of the T 'ai Highlands . Grézy , in command of the Sop @-@ Nao garrison , led a reinforced platoon . On the evening of April 3 , a Viet Minh battalion entered Laos near Điện Biên Phủ and Na San and reached Sap @-@ Nao . 
 Finding themselves surrounded by the Viet Minh , the French at Sop @-@ Nao stood for six days while in radio contact with Teullier at the main strong point . The survivors , following authorisation from the French captain , retreated during the night of April 9 / 10 along a round @-@ about route following the assumption by Grézy that the Viet Minh had laid ambushes along the most direct path . The French hacked a new path through the jungle until they reached Laotian tribesmen on April 11 , who warned them of Viet Minh units following them . The French attempted to turn for Phong @-@ Saly to the north and met an allied convoy travelling down the Nam Hou in canoes . The two forces combined and sailed down the river towards Muong Khoua . 
 On April 12 , the convoy ran into a Viet Minh ambush 600 yards ( 550 m ) from the Muong Khoua strong point . Using a barrier of floating tree trunks , the Viet Minh attacked the convoy with machine guns and mortars , destroying the first canoe . The remaining French and Laotian troops returned fire and , with the assistance of forces from Muong Khoua who had heard the firing , routed the Viet Minh troops , who left behind 13 dead and four wounded . The French themselves suffered seven missing , one dead , and one wounded . The remainder joined the French at Muong Khoua , with the canoes and the convoy ’ s equipment incorporated into the defence . Meanwhile , the Viet Minh ’ s <unk> Battalion of the 148th Regional Regiment of the 312th Division and a heavy mortar company from the 316th Division drew near . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Siege = = = 
 While the French troops from Sop @-@ Nao were making their way via canoe to the mother strong point , Teullier and his forces were feeling what one chronicler referred to as l <unk> par le vide ( “ choking @-@ off by creating a void ” ) , the result of a Viet Minh presence in the area . The local villagers no longer spoke to the French , when they had previously been communicative , and the population began leaving ; both the farms and the markets were deserted . The French viewed this as an indicator of imminent enemy attack . Furthermore , the thick jungle and steep slopes isolated the French strong points from all but river and airborne supply . The Viet Minh , on the other hand , were adequately supplied by over 200 @,@ 000 porters , or coolies . Referred to officially as a " relatively small " force , the 300 Chasseurs <unk> and " handful " of French NCOs and two officers were equipped with three 81 @-@ mm and two 60 @-@ mm mortars and two machine guns . They were ordered on April 13 to hold for fourteen days by Colonel Boucher de <unk> , who promised air support . 
 At 23 : 00 hours that evening , April 13 , mortar shells began landing on the slopes of position Alpha . These bombardments would take place every night , and the Viet Minh launched their first direct assault , which failed and left Viet Minh 22 dead . This defeat prompted a reversion to previous tactics of slowly " gnawing away " at the French outpost , and Giap ordered the 312th to leave some forces behind to continue a siege while the remainder of the division moved on . Meanwhile , overhead , French B @-@ 26s bombed Viet Minh positions , and cargo planes dropped supplies , <unk> ( firefly ) flares , and ammunition on the French positions . This " air bridge " enabled the garrison to survive , and fourteen days later on April 27 it was still intact ; the French High Command dropped a Legion of Honor for Teullier and several Croix de <unk> for his men . Teullier and a small group left the Mousetrap to deliver the relevant decorations to Pi and Alpha , although movement between the positions was extremely difficult . 
 What was possible , however , was a small patrol through the village of Muong Khoua , which had been by now deserted . These French patrols served as an early warning system and an ambush for Viet Minh assaults during the <unk> @-@ dominated night . This pattern continued into May . Meanwhile , other French forces had liberated <unk> <unk> and reached a position 40 miles ( 64 km ) from Muong Khoua . On May 17 , the French patrol deployed to the Muong Khoua village overheard barking dogs — one of which <unk> — alerting the French to an impending Viet Minh attack . By 23 : 00 , the Viet Minh were visible in the fog , and the patrol returned to the Mousetrap . Teullier issued an alert via radio . 
 A bombardment from Soviet Russian 120 @-@ mm mortars , 57 @-@ mm recoilless rifles , and phosphorus grenades began at 00 : 30 on May 18 . Teullier instructed his radio operator , Sergeant René Novak , to request air @-@ dropped flares and air support , while mortar fire landed on Alpha and the Mousetrap , but not Pi , where Grézy was in command . Pi continued to support the other two areas of the outpost with its own mortar fire . 
 By 01 : 10 hours , the western flank of the Mousetrap had fallen to Viet Minh bombardment . By 01 : 30 , the garrison was informed that weather conditions prevented air support , and by 02 : 30 the Viet Minh forces launched successive assault waves which overran Teullier and his men , including attacks which flanked the position using the nearby sandbanks . At the same time , Alpha was overrun by Viet Minh forces , and by 03 : 50 no more firing was heard from the Mousetrap . Alpha survived the remainder of the night and was seen fighting by French aircraft at 09 : 00 that morning . C @-@ 47 transport aircraft returned to resume supply drops , however by 12 : 00 the Tricolor and the Laotian flag had been removed from Pi ’ s command bunker . 
 = = = Survivors = = = 
 On May 22 , four days after the fall of the Muong Khoua garrison , three of its soldiers — the garrison radio operator Novak and two Laotians — reached the only remaining French outpost in northern Laos , Phong Saly . Bernard Fall recorded in Street Without Joy : " he was only twenty @-@ five years old , but he looked fifty ; he kept on walking like an automaton to the centre of the post before he was stopped by some of the men staring at him as at a ghost . " Novak and the two other soldiers had spent the four days moving through the jungle of Laos following the defeat of their unit . Two days later , Sergeant Pierre Blondeau also arrived at the outpost . His account detailed 57 hours spent hiding from the Viet Minh before a three @-@ day march without food or navigational aids and then encountering native tribesmen who provided food and a pony , with which he reached the French forces . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The Vietnamese and French media had awarded considerable attention to the conflict , and newspapers worldwide had covered the battle . Bernard Fall made note of the significance of the battle as " epic " in both his 1961 Street Without Joy and 1967 Hell in a Very Small Place . The British newspaper The Times began covering the conflict on April 23 , reporting the retreat from Sop Nao to Muong Khoua . However , despite correctly identifying half of the Viet Minh attacking force , it rated the garrison at the mother strong point as numbering 1 @,@ 000 . The battle received scant attention before the garrison fell , however after that garrison was defeated the coverage remained positive at the thought of French survivors and speculative on the future of the French military presence and new commander , Henri Navarre . The French High Command released an assessment of the defeat at Muong Khoua in Communique No. 14 , stating " During the night of May 17 to 18 , the post of Muong Khoua , which had victoriously resisted since the beginning of the Viet Minh offensive , succumbed under the overwhelming mass of assailants . " 
 In January 1954 , Muong Khoua was re @-@ occupied by Laotian forces , which were subsequently overrun once more by the 316th Division of the Viet Minh . The Laotian commander , who lived in the village itself with his wife , was killed in his home before the attack . Battalions of the French Foreign Legion and Laotian forces suffered losses covering the retreat of garrison survivors . The area of Muong Khoua later became a critical supply route across Dien Bien Phu for the Viet Minh and by 1963 was the site of a construction project for the proposed Route 19 . 
 The French would use the lessons learned at Muong Khoua and those of the 1952 Battle of Na San in their defence plans at Điện Biên Phủ , while the Viet Minh in turn would employ similar tactics of encirclement and strangulation there . The importance of an air bridge to maintain supply lines , strong artillery support to stave off human @-@ wave Viet Minh attacks , and the need for isolated emplacements to mutually support each other , were also important tactics taken on board by the French from both conflicts . The disappearance of local <unk> populations previously friendly towards the French , which served as a precursor to Viet Minh attack , was also remembered by the Điện Biên Phủ troops . For the Viet Minh , their abilities to isolated and smother individual strongpoints while maintaining hidden artillery and support weapon emplacements out of the reach of French airstrikes and artillery were honed at both battles , as were their <unk> of using human @-@ wave attacks . 
 = On Your Mark = 
 Ghibli Experimental Theater On Your Mark ( <unk> On Your Mark , <unk> <unk> On <unk> <unk> ) is an animated music video created by Studio Ghibli for the song " On Your Mark " by the Japanese rock duo Chage & Aska . The song was released in 1994 as part of the single " Heart " . In 1995 , Hayao Miyazaki wrote and directed the short film for the song as a side @-@ project after having writer 's block with Princess Mononoke . The anime music video is non @-@ linear , providing multiple reiterations and alternate scenes to depict the events . The music video added sound effects to the audio track , but contains no dialogue . Miyazaki purposely misinterpreted the lyrics to present his vision of a world where the surface becomes inhospitable and humans live in an underground city . He made the video cryptic to evoke creative interpretations among viewers . 
 The music video follows two policemen who raid a religious cult and find an angelic being only to have her taken away and confined to a laboratory . Haunted by the fate of the " angel " , the two men formulate a plan and break into the laboratory . Fleeing in an armored truck the three plummet into an abyss after trying to force past a police aircraft along a narrow suspended roadway . After a montage of the previous scenes , the armored truck suddenly rockets into an apartment complex , allowing their escape . The three escape to the surface , ignoring the radiation and danger signs , emerging near an encased nuclear reactor . The two men set the " angel " free and she flies off into the sky . 
 The music video was well @-@ received and praised for its animation and attention to detail . It premiered as a short before Studio Ghibli 's Whisper of the Heart and has since been released on Laserdisc and DVD as part of All Things Ghibli Special Short Short . It has not been released outside Japan . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 The video begins with shots of a vacant village , overgrown with weeds , and the concrete sarcophagus of a covered @-@ over nuclear reactor in the background . As the music begins , the scene changes to a sci @-@ fi @-@ style nighttime military @-@ style police raid on a cult . Futuristic flying troop transports crash through the windows of a tower topped by gigantic neon @-@ lit eyes and occupied by armed defenders . The policemen exchange gunfire and grenades with cultists whose hoods depict an enormous eye . The victorious police begin to sort through the bodies of the cultists , two policemen find what appears to be a girl , lying unconscious , with large feathered wings on her back . 
 The scene changes again , now to bright daylight and blue sky . Two men are driving an old Alfa Romeo Giulietta Spider passo <unk> down an empty road . As one of the men helps the girl up , she spreads her wings and he holds her hands while she gains confidence . With a nudge she is airborne , but she seems hesitant and afraid as he lets go . 
 The scene changes back to the discovery of the girl in the tower and the identity of the two men are revealed to be the same from the previous sequence . The two men carefully carry her out and offer her something to drink , and are encouraged when she sips . A team of scientists wearing radiation suits arrive and quickly take the girl away after placing her into a container . 
 The two men are haunted by the fate the girl will suffer and formulate a plan to rescue her . They break into the laboratory and free her from confinement , but the lab 's alarms are triggered . The three escape in an armored truck and drive along a narrow suspended roadway over what appears to be a domed city built in a crater . Police hovercrafts are in pursuit , and one of them comes very low to the roadway to block the fugitives ' truck . The roadway collapses when the protagonists try to force their way through , sending the truck plummeting . The winged girl refuses to let go of the hands of her rescuers , and the three of them fall into the abyss . 
 A brief montage of previous shots follows : the discovery of the girl , the girl flying through a blue sky , the two men rescuing the girl from the laboratory and stealing the truck , the truck plummeting amidst the wreckage of the roadway . But this time , inexplicably , the truck fires stabilizing thrusters and makes a short flight into the side of an apartment building . After their escape , the three are seen in an old Alfa Romeo Giulietta Spider passo <unk> racing through a dark tunnel underneath signs which bear radiation symbols and read ( in kanji ) " Beware Of Sunlight " and " Survival Not Guaranteed " , then finally they emerge into daylight . They drive past nuclear cooling towers and a sign which reads " Extreme Danger " and continue down the road . 
 One of the men helps the girl up , she spreads her wings and gives them a grateful smile ; he kisses her hand , and the other winks in farewell . Soon , she is gone drifting upward into the sky . Briefly , a major urban cityscape is seen beyond the trees . From a bird 's @-@ eye view , we see the shape of the car veering off the road and slowing to a stop in the grass . 
 = = Production = = 
 The production of the music video began because Miyazaki was suffering from writer 's block on Princess Mononoke and needed another project to distract him . Miyazaki wrote and directed the music video for " On Your Mark " , although the song was previously released in 1994 as part of the single " Heart " . Despite the popularity of the work , Toshio Suzuki told Helen McCarthy , the British author of numerous anime reference books , that Studio Ghibli had not given " 100 percent " focus to the music video . 
 In the production of the music video , Miyazaki experimented with using computer animation to supplement traditional hand drawn cell @-@ animation . At the time Studio Ghibli did not have its own computer department and the work was outsourced to CG Production Company Links , under supervision of Hideki Nakano . Techniques learned in the experimentation for On Your Mark were later adopted for the creation of Princess Mononoke . Animation director was Masashi Andō . Long time Miyazaki collaborator <unk> Yasuda was in charge of colour selection . Backgrounds were created by Kazuo <unk> . Yōji Takeshige made his debut as Art Director . There is no dialogue in the music video and the two policemen are loosely modeled after Chage and Aska . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 The deliberately non @-@ linear , enigmatic and cryptic style of the music video was intended to stimulate the imaginations of its viewers and their interpretations of the music video . " Miyazaki offered an interpretation of the angel as " Hope " and to protect hope could paradoxically mean " to let it go where no @-@ one can touch it " . Dani Cavallaro , an author of books related to anime , reflected on this by proposing that hope retains its purity and authenticity when it is ephemeral , evanescent and elusive . Hope may cause exertion and possibly pain , but denying hope is to deny the feasibility or and vision it provides . Miyazaki said that in the music video 's setting , humans live in an underground city after the surface of the Earth has been contaminated with radiation , creating a sanctuary for nature . Miyazaki did not find this believable , though , as humanity would suffer on the surface instead . Miyazaki intentionally misinterpreted the lyrics to reflect upon the vision of a world filled with disease and radiation and people 's reactions to that world . <unk> , he implied the two policemen might not be able to return to their old life , but offered no reason as to why . 
 Cavallaro noted that the lyrics of the song include " <unk> no kaze " , which translates to " flu " and is also an idiom for " the flu of fashion . " The author further interpreted it as " I always feel the urge to make a fresh start " suggesting this could be the " bleak acceptance of the ideological and economic codes that mold our lives in accordance with the imperative of planned obsolescence , or as a hopeful embracing of the genuine prospects of renewal and change . " Cavallaro suggested that despite the feminine appearance of the " angel " , it could be of a " preternatural order " , making gender or sex distinctions irrelevant . Miyazaki referred to the angelic creature as " tori no hito " or " a bird 's person " which is the nickname of Nausicaä from his Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind manga and film . Cavallaro noted another visual correspondence to Only Yesterday with the oppressive urban environment and the freedom of open spaces . 
 During their April 1999 lecture series on manga , anime and the works of Miyazaki at the University of Dallas , Pamela <unk> , Professor of Arts and Humanities , and guest instructor Marc Hairston , research scientist in the William B. Hanson Center for Space Sciences , discussed On Your Mark in their lecture , " In the Coda On Your Mark and Nausicaa , and drew parallels to the Nausicaä story , its titular character and its conclusion . <unk> and Hairston interpreted the release of the winged girl at the end of the video as Miyazaki setting free his character in a manner reminiscent of William Shakespeare 's symbolic liberation of his characters , through Prospero 's release of his servant Ariel in his play The Tempest . The final volume of the Nausicaä manga was released in January 1995 . Miyazaki started creating On Your Mark that same month . 
 McCarthy highlighted similarities to different works and real life found throughout the film , remarking that the opening city sequence could be an homage to Akira or Blade Runner and the attack on the religious cult could be a reflection of the Aum Shinrikyo movement . <unk> stated the production occurred prior to the police raid following the Sarin gas attack on the Tokyo subway in March 1995 . McCarthy also noted that the film 's scientists ' decontamination gear look like the hero of Porco Rosso and the rescue scene is reminiscent of Princess Leia in Star Wars . The encased or " box " structure in the film is an homage to the Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant which was entombed in concrete following the Chernobyl disaster . 
 Miyazaki scholar Seiji Kanō observed that the urban settings have a China Town style and resemble the cityscapes of Mamoru Oshii 's Ghost in the Shell animated film adaptation , in production at the time . While Miyazaki has been non @-@ committal about the nature of his winged entity in On your Mark , Kanō noted that the manga Seraphim : 266 @,@ 613 @,@ 336 Wings , an unfinished collaborative effort by Oshii and Satoshi Kon , with its Angel Disease theme , was still serialized in Animage at the time Miyazaki was creating On Your Mark in 1995 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The music video was well received . Dr. Patrick Collins , a science writer called it , " the most perfect short science fantasy film I 've ever seen . " McCarter of EX Magazine praised the film 's attention to detail that brought the world to life . THEM anime praised the music video and went so far as to justify the purchase of Ghibli ga Ippai Special Short Short for this music video . 
 = = Releases = = 
 The music video was released theatrically with Whisper of the Heart on July 15 , 1995 . Chage & Aska also used the film in concerts . The first official screening took place at their fan club concert , held at the Makuhari Messe in Chiba , on June 29 , 1995 . Beginning July 5 , 1995 , the video was shown for the performance of the song during the Super Best 3 Mission Impossible tour . Featuring the same melody but different lyrics than On Your Mark , Castles in the Air was included on the English @-@ language album One Voice : The Songs of Chage & Aska . Because of popular demand , On Your Mark was re @-@ released separately in Japan on VHS and Laserdisc , on July 25 , 1997 . On November 15 , 2005 , the film was released on the All Things Ghibli Special Short Short DVD with the video set to play the original " On Your Mark " or " Castles in the Air " songs . After Aska ( Shigeaki Miyazaki ) of the musical duo Chage and Aska was arrested for drug possession , Walt Disney Studios Japan removed On Your Mark from the upcoming DVD / Blu @-@ ray box set containing Hayao Miyazaki 's works and ceased shipments of All Things Ghibli Special Short Short . On October 27 , 2014 , Studio Ghibli 's Toshio Suzuki announced on the company 's web page that they had re @-@ considered the situation and would be sending out Blu @-@ ray discs to purchasers of the Hayao Miyazaki box set , as long as they could provide proof of purchase . 
 = Amanita nothofagi = 
 Amanita nothofagi is a species of fungus in the Amanitaceae family . Endemic to New Zealand , the species was first described by mycologist Greta Stevenson in 1962 . The fruit bodies have dark brown caps that are up to 13 cm ( 5 @.@ 1 in ) in diameter and covered with patches of soft greyish @-@ brown scales or warts . The gills underneath the cap are crowded together , free from attachment to the stem , and white , becoming tinged with yellow in age . The stem of the mushroom is 4 – 14 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 – 5 @.@ 5 in ) long by 0 @.@ 5 – 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 2 – 1 @.@ 0 in ) thick , and has a ring . The spore print is white , and individual spores are spherical to ellipsoid , measuring 7 @.@ 5 – 9 by 7 @.@ 5 – 9 micrometres . The mushroom may be confused with another New Zealand species , A. australis , but can be distinguished by certain characteristics . Amanita nothofagi is a mycorrhizal species , and grows in association with native New Zealand trees such as Southern Beech . 
 = = Taxonomy and classification = = 
 The species was first described as new to science by New Zealand mycologist Greta Stevenson who collected specimens in the mid @-@ 1950s , in Nelson and Cape Farewell . She published a description of the mushroom in the Royal Botanic Garden 's journal Kew Bulletin in 1962 , the second part of a five @-@ part series of articles describing the mushroom flora of the country . The specific epithet nothofagi refers to Nothofagus , the genus of Southern beeches with which the species is often associated . Amanita authority Rodham Tulloss uses the common name " southern beech Amanita " , while Geoff Ridley suggests " charcoal <unk> " . 
 Stevenson classified Amanita nothofagi in the section Phalloideae of the genus Amanita , but Ridley considered it better placed in section <unk> because of its " subglobose basidiospores , a clavate or occasionally abruptly bulbous stipe base , with sparse bands or a rim of volva material . " 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap of A. nothofagi is initially convex , later becoming flattened with a central depression , with radial grooves on the margin , reaching diameters of 30 – 130 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 – 5 @.@ 1 in ) . The colour is variable , ranging from buff to dark grey to greyish @-@ sepia , with radial streaks of dusky brownish grey . The cap surface is sticky when young or wet , but dries out with age . The remnants of the volva form small to large , irregularly shaped , felted patches , that are dull greyish @-@ sepia to sepia , and sometimes scab @-@ like . The gills are crowded closely together , and free from attachment to the stem . They are white to cream @-@ coloured , 6 – 10 mm ( 0 @.@ 2 – 0 @.@ 4 in ) wide . The lamellulae ( short gills that do not extend fully from the cap edge to the stem ) have somewhat truncated ends . 
 The stem is 40 – 140 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 – 5 @.@ 5 in ) high , 5 – 25 mm ( 0 @.@ 2 – 1 @.@ 0 in ) thick , and tapers slightly at the top . It is hollow and has a bulbous base measuring 10 – 30 mm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 1 @.@ 2 in ) in diameter . The stem surface above the level of the ring is white , sparsely covered with woolly or fuzzy tufts , occasionally breaking into transverse bands ; below the ring the stem surface is smooth or occasionally breaks into bands or fibrillose scales . It is whitish , buff or greyish @-@ sepia streaked with grey . The stem base may or may not have a band or rim of buff to greyish @-@ sepia volval remnants . The ring is membranous , grooved , whitish , buff , and greyish @-@ sepia or lavender @-@ grey . It first hangs freely before later sticking to the stem , often tearing and adhering to the edge of the cap . The flesh of the cap is white or stained mouse @-@ grey under the central part , occasionally with a grey line above the gills ; the stem flesh is white to pale buff . 
 The spore print is white . The spores are typically 7 @.@ 5 – 9 by 7 @.@ 5 – 9 µm , spherical to broadly ellipsoid to ellipsoid , and thin @-@ walled . Under a microscope , the spores appear hyaline ( translucent ) , and are amyloid — meaning they will turn bluish @-@ black to black when stained with Melzer 's reagent . The basidia are 30 @.@ 5 – 57 by 8 – 16 µm , four @-@ spored , and not clamped at the base . The margin cells of the gills are plentiful , spherical , club @-@ shaped or swollen spherically at the tip , hyaline , and measure 13 – 58 by 8 – 33 µm . The cap cuticle consists of a 130 – 220 µm wide , strongly gelatinised suprapellis ( upper layer ) and a dense , non @-@ gelatinised subpellis ( lower layer ) . The volval remnants on the cap are made of abundant spherical , elliptic and club @-@ shaped cells that are 21 – 119 by 14 @.@ 5 – 115 µm , intermixed with hyphae 4 – 9 µm wide and pale umber in colour , and either arranged irregularly , or with a vertical orientation . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Amanita nothofagi mushrooms can be confused with A. australis if the warts have been washed off and the colour has been bleached . A reliable method to distinguish the two is to check for the presence of clamp connections at the bases of the basidia , which are present in A. australis and absent from A. nothofagi . Ridley notes that the type collection was made with a dark grey specimen , and later collectors who found browner specimens have had difficulty in correctly identifying the species . <unk> specimens resemble A. excelsa , which led some to incorrectly believe that the species occurs in New Zealand . Amanita <unk> is also similar in appearance , spore size , amyloid reaction , and lack of clamp connections in the basidia . It is distinguished from A. nothofagi largely on the basis of colour — it is a greyish @-@ brown to yellowish @-@ grey brown that fades to pinkish @-@ buff as it gets older . Tulloss suggests that the resemblance of a number of species from Australasia and Chile which lack brightly coloured fruit bodies and share similar greyish to brownish rings and <unk> may indicate that they share Gondwanan ancestors . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 The fruit bodies of Amanita nothofagi grow solitarily or in scattered groups . Like all Amanita mushrooms , it is mycorrhizal , and grows in close association with Southern Beech ( genus Nothofagus ) ( including New Zealand Red Beech , Silver beech , New Zealand Black Beech , and Hard Beech ) , Manuka , and <unk> . Found on both the North and South islands of New Zealand , it is the most common of the country 's endemic Amanita species . 
 = <unk> wobbegong = 
 The tasselled wobbegong ( Eucrossorhinus <unk> ) is a species of carpet shark in the family <unk> and the only member of its genus . It inhabits shallow coral reefs off northern Australia , New Guinea , and adjacent islands . Reaching 1 @.@ 8 m ( 5 @.@ 9 ft ) in length , this species has a broad and flattened body and head . Its most distinctive trait is a fringe of branching dermal flaps around its head , which extends onto its chin . The fringe , along with its complex color pattern of small blotches and reticulations , enable it to camouflage itself against the reef environment . 
 During the day , the solitary tasselled wobbegong can generally be found lying inside caves or under ledges with its tail curled . Individual sharks tend to remain within a local area and have favored resting spots . While resting , it opportunistically ambushes nearby fishes and invertebrates , and also lures in prey by waving its tail to mimic the appearance of a small fish . At night , it emerges and actively forages for food . This species is aplacental viviparous , though little is known of its life history . The tasselled wobbegong has been reported to bite humans unprovoked ; attacks may result from people accidentally disturbing the shark or being <unk> as prey . The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has listed this species as Near Threatened , as outside of Australia it is threatened by fisheries and habitat degradation . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogeny = = 
 Dutch ichthyologist Pieter Bleeker originally described the tasselled wobbegong in an 1867 volume of Archives <unk> des Sciences <unk> et Naturelles . His account was based on two Indonesian specimens , one caught off Waigeo and the other off Aru . He gave it the name <unk> , from the Greek <unk> ( " hairy " ) and <unk> ( " beard " ) , and assigned it to the genus <unk> ( a synonym of Orectolobus ) . In 1908 , Charles Tate Regan created the new genus Eucrossorhinus for this species , derived from the Greek eu ( " good " ) , <unk> ( " tassel " ) and rhinos ( " nose " ) . Regan subsequently reconsidered the main trait he used to separate Eucrossorhinus ( the spacing of the fourth and fifth gill slits ) and synonymized it with Orectolobus . Later authors have placed the tasselled wobbegong either in its own genus or in Orectolobus . Other common names for this species are bearded wobbegong and Ogilby 's wobbegong . 
 Morphological studies have been inconclusive about the evolutionary relationships of the tasselled wobbegong , but overall have gauged it to be among the more derived wobbegong ( <unk> ) species . A 2009 phylogenetic analysis based on mitochondrial and nuclear DNA found otherwise , that this species was in fact basal to all other wobbegongs except the northern wobbegong ( O. wardi ) . This result supports the synonymization of Eucrossorhinus with Orectolobus . Molecular clock estimation placed the speciation of the tasselled wobbegong at 11 – 6 Ma , coinciding with a period of significant geological rearrangement and the formation of coral reef habitats in the region . 
 = = Description = = 
 The tasselled wobbegong is a very broad , moderately flattened shark . The head is wider than long , with a distinctive fringe of branching dermal lobes running almost continuously from the snout tip to the origins of the pectoral fins , including a " beard " on the chin . The nostrils bear long , branching barbels , and have grooves surrounding them and connecting them to the mouth . There are tubercles above the eyes but not elsewhere , and behind the eyes are larger spiracles . The large mouth is positioned ahead of the eyes , almost at the end of the head . There are furrows on the lower jaw extending from the mouth corners and along the jaw median . There are 23 – 26 upper and 19 lower tooth rows ; each tooth has a single slender , pointed cusp . The three upper and two lower rows of symphysial ( central ) teeth are especially long and fang @-@ like . The five pairs of gill slits are short . 
 The pectoral and pelvic fins are large and rounded . The dorsal fins are short @-@ based and fairly tall ; the first is slightly larger than the second and originates over the latter quarter of the pelvic fin bases . Behind the pelvic fins , the body rapidly tapers to the short caudal peduncle . The anal fin originates behind the midpoint of the second dorsal fin and is no more than half its size . The caudal fin is short , with no lower lobe and an upper lobe bearing a strong ventral notch near the tip . This species has a mosaic @-@ like dorsal color pattern consisting of numerous small , dark blotches and lines on a <unk> or yellow @-@ brown background ; there may also be darker bands . The pattern extends to the underside of the tail and the ventral pectoral and pelvic fin margins . The ventral surface is otherwise white . The tasselled wobbegong is reliably known to reach a length of 1 @.@ 8 m ( 5 @.@ 9 ft ) . Most authors consider an older record of a 3 @.@ 7 m ( 12 ft ) long individual to be erroneous . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The range of the tasselled wobbegong encompasses the continental shelf of northern Australia from Ningaloo Reef in the west to Bundaberg in the east , as well as New Guinea , Waigeo , and the Aru Islands . Additional records from Malaysia are unconfirmed . This common bottom @-@ dweller inhabits coral reefs , perhaps exclusively , in both inshore and offshore waters from the intertidal zone to around 50 m ( 160 ft ) deep . It is most often encountered in reef channels and faces , or atop coral heads . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 Considered the most specialized member of its family , the tasselled wobbegong 's ornate coloration and complex dermal fringe grants it excellent camouflage , while it is probably a slower swimmer than related species . It is solitary and spends most of the day lying motionless inside caves or under ledges with its tail curled up . Individual sharks have a small home range , containing several preferred resting spots that are used repeatedly . This species becomes more active at night , swimming onto the reef to hunt . 
 The tasselled wobbegong feeds on bony and cartilaginous fishes , crustaceans , and cephalopods . Its capacious mouth allows sizeable prey to be swallowed , with one documented case of a 1 @.@ 3 m ( 4 @.@ 3 ft ) long individual consuming a 1 @.@ 0 m ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) long <unk> bamboo shark ( <unk> punctatum ) . During daytime , this species is an opportunistic ambush predator . It preys upon schooling nocturnal fishes such as <unk> , <unk> , and sweepers that often shelter in the same cave . Tiny fishes and crustaceans have been seen settling atop the resting wobbegong 's head , attracting larger fishes that are in turn attacked by the wobbegong . Observations in captivity have further revealed that this species seems to engage in active luring behavior . When it perceives food nearby , it begins to slowly wave its tail back and forth ; its caudal fin resembles a small fish , complete with a dark eyespot at the base . The shark typically rests with its head elevated , which places it within striking distance of any prey drawn by its tail . 
 The tapeworm <unk> <unk> is a known parasite of the tasselled wobbegong . This species has been observed being attended by cleaner shrimp ( Leander <unk> , <unk> hispidus ) and bluestreak cleaner wrasse ( Labroides dimidiatus ) . Reproduction is presumably aplacental viviparous like other wobbegongs , with the developing embryos sustained by yolk . There is a report of mating being observed inside a cave at night . Newborns measure approximately 20 cm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) long . Size at sexual maturity is uncertain ; one recorded male was found to be adult at 1 @.@ 2 m ( 3 @.@ 9 ft ) long . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 With several records of apparently unprovoked attacks on people , the tasselled wobbegong has a reputation beyond other wobbegongs for aggressive behavior . Gilbert Whitley even wrote in 1940 that it " attacks and generally kills the natives " of Papua New Guinea . Though Whitley 's claim is questionable , this species is certainly capable of inflicting severe wounds . Conversely , the tasselled wobbegong is also an ecotourism attraction and many divers have approached it without incident . Given this shark 's cryptic appearance and poor vision , humans should exercise caution to avoid accidentally harassing it or causing it to mistake a hand or foot for prey . This species adapts well to captivity and is occasionally found in the home aquarium trade . 
 The tasselled wobbegong has little economic value , though its attractive skin is occasionally used for leather . In Australian waters , it is not fished and faces minimal threats . However , elsewhere in its range it may be negatively affected by extensive fishery activity and habitat degradation from pollution , blast fishing , and coral removal . Because of these concerns , the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has assessed this species as Near Threatened . 
 = Sad Wings of Destiny = 
 Sad Wings of Destiny is the second album by the English heavy metal group Judas Priest , released in 1976 . It is considered the album on which Judas Priest consolidated their sound and image , and songs from it such as " Victim of Changes " and " The Ripper " have since become live standards . It is the only album to feature drummer Alan Moore . 
 Noted for its riff @-@ driven heavy metal sound and the wide range of Rob Halford 's vocals , the album displays a wide variety of styles , moods , and textures , inspired by an array of groups such as Queen , Deep Purple , and Black Sabbath . The centrepiece " Victim of Changes " is an eight @-@ minute track featuring heavy riffing trading off with high @-@ pitched vocals , extended guitar leads , and a slow , moody breakdown toward the end . " Tyrant " and " The Ripper " are short , dense , high @-@ powered rockers with many parts and changes . Riffs and solos dominate " Genocide " , " Island of Domination " , and " Deceiver " , and the band finds more laid @-@ back moments in the crooning piano @-@ backed " Epitaph " and the moody " Dreamer Deceiver " . 
 Sad Wings of Destiny had a positive reception but weak sales as it was released just as punk rock was dominating the spotlight in the UK . The band recorded their first two albums with the independent Gull label under tight budgets ; after living off a single meal per day while working side jobs to support themselves , the group grew frustrated with the financial situation and signed with CBS Records for their next album , Sin After Sin ( 1977 ) . Breaking their contract resulted in the rights to Sad Wings of Destiny and its demo recordings falling into Gull 's hands . 
 = = Background = = 
 Judas Priest formed in 1969 in industrial West Bromwich , Birmingham . Co @-@ founder Al Atkins chose the band 's name , wanting one similar to Black Sabbath 's . The bands were contemporaries and were both from Birmingham , though Judas Priest failed to find significant audience until Black Sabbath began to fade from the spotlight . The band 's guitarists Glenn Tipton and K. K. Downing have said the heavy riffing and complexity of the song arrangements were inspired by the factories of Birmingham . 
 By the time Judas Priest 's first album , Rocka Rolla , was released in 1974 , there had been so many lineup changes that no original member remained . The first album displayed a mix of styles from a wide variety of influences ; the band found the performance and production disappointing . The band gigged occasionally through 1975 , at times sharing the stage with bands such as Pink Fairies and UFO . Drummer John Hinch left the band for reasons that are disputed and was replaced with Alan Moore in October 1975 , who had drummed in an early incarnation of the band . 
 The band performed the " Dreamer Deceiver " – " Deceiver " pair on BBC Two 's The Old Grey Whistle Test the year before the songs appeared on Sad Wings of Destiny . The band had yet to develop the studs @-@ and @-@ leather image that was to become their trademark ; instead , they wore contemporary mid @-@ 1970s fashions , including high @-@ heeled boots and frilled shirts , and a long @-@ haired Halford donned a pink satin top which he later said he borrowed from his sister . By 1976 , the band 's singer Rob Halford joked that fans should burn their copies of Rocka Rolla . 
 Finances were tight : the record label Gull provided a recording budget of £ 2000 for each of the band 's first two albums . During the recording of Sad Wings of Destiny , band members restricted themselves to one meal a day , and several took on part @-@ time work : Tipton as a gardener , Downing in a factory , and Hill driving a delivery van . The group went into the studio with the intention of making an album that mixed straight @-@ ahead rock with a progressive edge . 
 = = Production = = 
 Recording took place over two weeks in November and December 1975 at Rockfield Studios in Wales with producers Jeffrey Calvert and <unk> " Max West " Hughes , and Chris Tsangarides as co @-@ engineer . Calvert and Hughes were the main members of the pop group Typically Tropical who topped the UK charts in 1975 with " Barbados " , Gull 's first hit . The band stayed sober during the recording sessions , which lasted from 3 : 00 pm until 3 : 00 am . Mixing took a week at Morgan Studios in London . 
 David Howells of Gull records commissioned Patrick Woodroffe to provide the cover art , a piece called Fallen Angel depicting a struggling , grounded angel surrounded by flames and wearing a devil 's three @-@ pronged cross , which was the band 's symbol . Halford posed Christ @-@ like on the reverse , and Gothic fonts adorned the front and back . 
 = = Songs = = 
 " Victim of Changes " 
 The nearly eight @-@ minute " Victim of Changes " displays a wide dynamic range in rhythm , texture , and mood , with heavy riffing , a melodic ballad section , and extended guitar leads . An almost classical @-@ sounding twin @-@ guitar introduction leads to the violent main riff . The lyrics tell of a woman whose hard @-@ drinking results in losing her man to another woman . Inspired by Led Zeppelin 's " Black Dog " , the heavy riff alternates with a cappella passages , Halford breaking into screaming falsettos during the slow break and dramatic conclusion of the song . 
 The track began as two songs : " Whiskey Woman " was an early Priest song by Downing and Atkins that the band chose not to include on the first album , though it had long been a crowd @-@ pleasing opener at live shows and featured on early demo recordings . To this the band wove in the slow " Red Light Lady " , a song Halford brought with him from his previous band , Hiroshima . 
 " The Ripper " 
 A busy , chugging , riff @-@ heavy rocker , " The Ripper " features arrangements inspired by Queen – particularly in the high @-@ pitched layered opening vocals and classical @-@ tinged twin guitars . The lyrics of the Tipton @-@ penned track are from the point of view of Victorian serial killer Jack the Ripper . 
 " Dreamer Deceiver " 
 A slow ballad with crooning vocals and screaming lead soloing , the song serves as introduction to the heavy " Deceiver " which follows it . Atkins originally received partial credit for both tracks , but disclaimed involvement in them ; later releases removed his credit . 
 " Deceiver " 
 A heavy song with a chugging riff presaging the technical style of speed metal , " Deceiver " features energetic soloing and a heavy , Black Sabbath @-@ like break with soaring , high @-@ pitched vocals , climaxing in a repetitive acoustic closing . 
 " Prelude " 
 " Prelude " is short baroque instrumental primarily in the E ♭ Aeolian mode , alternating between the tonic and dominant , and is arranged for keyboards , guitars , and tom @-@ tom drums . Despite the title , " Prelude " is musically unrelated to the following track , " Tyrant " . 
 " Tyrant " 
 A short track full of many parts and tempo changes , Halford has said " Tyrant " expresses his " aversion towards any form of control " . 
 " Genocide " 
 A forward @-@ looking , riff @-@ heavy rocker , bearing the influence of heavy rockers such as the Deep Purple tracks " Woman from Tokyo " and " Burn " . Halford expressed hope that the song 's " strong and graphic " lyrics would " be provocative and somewhat controversial and to stimulate people " . The phrase " sin after sin " from the lyrics to " Genocide " provided the title to the band 's next album . 
 " Epitaph " 
 A quiet track with piano backing and Queen @-@ like layered vocals , Halford said the lyrics to " Epitaph " express frustration at a lack of place for the young or old in modern cities . 
 " Island of Domination " 
 The side @-@ closing " Island of Domination " is a heavy rocker with a complex riff in a style reminiscent of Black Sabbath . Downing described the lyrics as personal to Halford , joking of their having " probably a few innuendoes " . 
 = = Release , reception and legacy = = 
 Sad Wings of Destiny was released 23 March 1976 , and the same month " The Ripper " appeared as a single backed with " Island of Domination " . The album was initially published and distributed by Janus Records in the United States . 
 The album had little commercial success at first and had difficulty getting noticed due to critical competition from the rise of punk rock . The band supported the album with a headlining tour of the UK from 6 April to 20 June 1976 . The album peaked at 48 in the UK , and was awarded a gold record in 1989 . In Rolling Stone Kris Nicholson gave the album a positive review , comparing it favourably to Deep Purple 's Machine Head of 1972 . Sad Wings of Destiny arrived as heavy metal began to reinvigorate itself — the same year saw the release of Rising from Ritchie Blackmore 's Rainbow and Virgin Killer from Scorpions . 
 The band had grown dissatisfied with Gull ; the tight finances led Moore to leave the band a second time — this time permanently . The album caught the attention of CBS Records , and with the help of new manager David Hemmings , the band signed with CBS and received a £ 60 @,@ 000 budget for their next record , Sin After Sin ( 1977 ) . Downing described the disappointed feelings the group had over Gull 's management influenced the dark themes that appeared on Sad Wings of Destiny . The signing required breaking their contract with Gull , resulting in the rights to the first two albums and all related recordings — including demos — becoming property of Gull . Gull periodically repackaged and re @-@ released the material from these albums , such as on the 1981 double album Hero , Hero . For the most part , the band was to abandon the progressive rock elements of their first two albums for a more straight @-@ ahead heavy rock sound ; the band revisited these prog elements in 2008 on the album Nostradamus . 
 Fans , critics , and the band have come to see Sad Wings of Destiny as the album on which Judas Priest consolidated their sound and image . Martin Popoff cites the album 's " reinvention " of the heavy metal genre . The technical dexterity and operatic vocals pointed toward trends in heavy metal that later in the decade New Wave of British Heavy Metal bands such as Iron Maiden were to follow , and the album 's dark themes reappeared in the 1980s American thrash metal , such as in the music of Slayer and Metallica . An early sign of the band 's influence was that Van Halen included " Victim of Changes " in their sets before achieving fame . Dave Mustaine of Megadeth relates that a brother @-@ in @-@ law punched him in the face for listening to Sad Wings of Destiny ; Mustaine called this a turning point , where he chose heavy metal as a career as " revenge " . 
 " Victim of Changes " , " The Ripper " , " Tyrant " , and " Genocide " — with an extended introduction — appear on the band 's first live album , Unleashed in the East ( 1979 ) . During the Sad Wings sessions , Howells encouraged the band to work on a heavy metal cover of " Diamonds & Rust " by folk singer Joan Baez , but it did not appear on the album . The band had a hit in the UK with a re @-@ recording of the cover version the following year , after they had moved to CBS Records . Gull released the version from the Sad Wings sessions in 1978 on the compilation album The Best of Judas Priest . 
 Judas Priest 's 1990 album Painkiller features a winged figure Halford has described as a futuristic version of the Fallen Angel from the Sad Wings of Destiny cover . The band 's 2005 album Angel of Retribution — with Halford again in the band — revives the Fallen Angel again : the cover concept has the angel rise and seek retribution , and the song " Judas Rising " has him cast off his gloom and rise in optimism . 
 After Halford left the group in the 1990s , Tim Owens was hired to replace him after auditioning " Victim of Changes " and " The Ripper " . Downing and Tipton thereafter nicknamed Owens " The Ripper " . Judas Priest 's original singer Al Atkins recorded a version of " Victim of Changes " for his album Victim of Changes of 1998 . Judas Priest frequently performed the song " Mother Sun " during the Sad Wings era , but never recorded it . The ballad , with its Queen @-@ like vocals , has survived only in poor @-@ quality bootleg recordings . In 2014 Swedish metal band Portrait released a cover version on a 2014 CD single . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 The Sad Wings of Destiny disc of the seventeen @-@ disc Complete Albums Collection in 2012 puts the Side B tracks before those from " Side A " . " Prelude " did not appear on some pressings . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = = Band = = = 
 The band and production staff of Sad Wings of Destiny were : 
 Rob Halford – vocals 
 K. K. Downing – guitar 
 Glenn Tipton – guitar , piano 
 Ian Hill – bass guitar 
 Alan Moore – drums 
 = = = Production = = = 
 Produced by Jeffrey Calvert , Max West , and Judas Priest 
 Engineered by Jeffrey Calvert , Max West , and Chris Tsangarides 
 Cover concept by Neil French ; painting by Patrick Woodroffe 
 Art direction by John <unk> 
 Band photographs by Lorentz <unk> and Alan Johnson 
 = Garland Rivers = 
 Garland A. Rivers ( born November 3 , 1964 ) is a former professional American football defensive back who was drafted in the 1987 NFL Draft by the Detroit Lions of the National Football League ( NFL ) . He played briefly for the Chicago Bears in the 1987 NFL season after having starred as an All @-@ American for the Michigan Wolverines football team for whom he set the single @-@ game tackles record as a sophomore . This record still stands . After returning to the University of Michigan to complete his bachelor 's degree , he returned to professional football for several seasons in the Arena Football League . However , before returning to professional football he became embroiled in a scandal involving sports agents engaging amateur athletes . 
 = = College career = = 
 After attending Canton McKinley High School , where they won the 1981 Ohio High School Athletic Association football championships , he went to the University of Michigan where he became the only freshman varsity letter winner on the football team in 1983 . Rivers , who wore # 13 as a Wolverine , started 32 consecutive games until a shoulder injury caused him to end the streak . He posted six interceptions in his Michigan career , including one for a touchdown . Another one during the same season was a game saving interception in the 1986 Fiesta Bowl in a 27 – 23 victory over the Nebraska Cornhuskers football team . Rivers started 12 of the 13 games his senior season for the Big Ten Conference champions and was one of three All @-@ Americans ( along with Jumbo Elliott & Jim Harbaugh ) that season as the team went 11 – 2 and was invited to the Rose Bowl . Rivers once had 17 tackles and an assist as a sophomore defensive back in a game against the 1984 National Champion Brigham Young Cougars football team in the 1984 Holiday Bowl . 17 tackles continues to stand alone as a school single game record . 
 His college athletic career was not without controversy . He was named by Michigan Football coach and Michigan Wolverines athletic director Bo Schembechler as one of two players ( the other being Robert Perryman ) who had transgressed National Collegiate Athletic Association rules in violation of their amateur status . According to Schembechler , both players had signed contracts and accepted loans from agents before their college eligibility expired . Schembechler testified in a Federal District Court case involving charges of mail fraud and racketeering against Norby Walters and Lloyd Bloom . According to Schembechler , Rivers had denied having entered into an agreement before the team 's 1986 NCAA Division I @-@ A football season had ended in a meeting with him , but confessed in a Federal Bureau of Investigation meeting . Because the investigation occurred late in the Spring academic term at Michigan , River 's athletic scholarship in the form tuition and room and board had already been fully paid by the University . However , when Rivers returned to Michigan in 1988 to complete his degree , the university did not provide a scholarship for which he would have otherwise been eligible . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 Rivers was drafted by the Detroit Lions of the National Football League with the eighth pick of the fourth round ( 92nd overall ) of the 1987 NFL Draft . He played briefly for the Chicago Bears under Mike Ditka in 1987 . The Bears went 11 – 4 that season and qualified for the 1987 @-@ 88 NFL playoffs that season . 
 Garland Rivers played for several years in the Arena Football League as a wide receiver and linebacker . He mostly played on defense . He played for the Albany Firebirds for 1990 and 1991 . The Firebirds qualified for the 4 @-@ team 1991 AFL playoffs as the # 4 seed and lost to the # 1 seed Detroit Drive in the first round . Then , he played for the Arizona Rattlers in 1992 and 1993 . The Rattlers qualified for 8 @-@ team the 1993 AFL playoffs as the # 4 seed and advanced to the second round before losing to the # 1 seed Detroit Drive . 
 Rivers has coached at Timken , McKinley and <unk> . As of 2012 , he worked for Indian River School . 
 = = Family = = 
 Rivers was inducted into the Stark High School Hall of Fame in 2012 . His son <unk> Snow , by Linda Snow , is a form McKinley Bulldogs ( class of 2010 ) football standout . Snow is the sister of Percy Snow and Eric Snow , who were also standout athletes for McKinley . <unk> went to college at West Virginia where he joined the football team . Rivers is the father of three sons and two daughters . 
 = TAM Airlines Flight 3054 = 
 TAM Airlines Flight 3054 ( <unk> / <unk> ) was an Airbus A320 @-@ 233 , registration PR @-@ MBK , on a scheduled domestic passenger flight from Porto Alegre to São Paulo , Brazil . On July 17 , 2007 , the Airbus A320 , overran runway 35L at São Paulo during heavy rain and crashed into a nearby TAM Express warehouse adjacent to a Shell filling station . All 187 passengers and crew aboard Airbus A320 died , along with 12 people on the ground . It surpassed Gol Transportes Aéreos Flight 1907 as the deadliest air disaster in Brazilian territory , and remains the deadliest aviation accident involving an Airbus A320 proper worldwide . It was also the deadliest accident involving an aircraft of the A320 family at the time , which was later surpassed by the bombing of <unk> Flight <unk> , an A321 @-@ 231 , which crashed in Egypt in October 2015 with 224 fatalities . 
 The accident was investigated by the Brazilian Air Force 's Aeronautical Accidents Investigation and Prevention Center ( Portuguese : Centro de Investigação e Prevenção de Acidentes Aeronáuticos ( CENIPA ) ) , with a final report issued in September 2009 . CENIPA concluded that the accident was caused by errors committed by the pilots on the flight to São Paulo . 
 = = Aircraft and crew = = 
 The aircraft serving Flight 3054 was an Airbus A320 @-@ 233 , serial number 789 , registration PR @-@ MBK , powered by two <unk> V2500 @-@ 533 engines . It was built in February 1998 and first entered service in March flying for TACA Peru as <unk> , later serving in the fleet of Pacific Airlines as VN @-@ <unk> . The aircraft was owned by Pegasus Aviation before entering service with TAM in January 2007 . As of April 20 , 2007 , the aircraft had flown almost 21 @,@ 000 hours over 10 @,@ 000 cycles . 
 The aircraft was dispatched with the thrust reverser ( a mechanical device to help slow the airplane down on landing ) on the number 2 ( right @-@ side ) engine deactivated , as it had jammed . TAM said in a statement that a fault in a reverser " does not jeopardize landings " , and that no mechanical problem had been recorded on July 16 , the day before the accident . It was reported that the aircraft had no difficulty braking on the same runway a day before the fatal accident . The deactivated thrust reverser on the number 2 engine was confirmed by Airbus on July 25 . 
 The flight was under the command of an experienced cockpit crew , consisting of Captain Henrique <unk> Di Sacco ( 53 ) and Co @-@ Pilot <unk> Lima ( 54 ) . Both pilots had been flying for over 30 years . The captain had accrued nearly 13 @,@ 700 flight hours throughout his career and the co @-@ pilot had almost 14 @,@ 800 hours of flying experience . 
 = = Flight chronology = = 
 The plane departed from Salgado Filho International Airport in Porto Alegre at 17 : 16 local time ( 20 : 16 UTC ) . At 18 : 50 local time ( 21 : 50 UTC ) , the flight made its landing at Congonhas @-@ São Paulo Airport . 
 = = Crash = = 
 Flight 3054 was cleared to land at Congonhas ' 35L runway . Reviews by government officials of the surveillance videos showed that despite the aircraft touching down at the normal touch @-@ down point on the runway , it did not slow down normally , crossing the far end of the runway at around 90 knots ( 170 km / h ) . The aircraft , bearing to the left , continued off the end of the runway . The runway is elevated above the surrounding area , and the aircraft 's momentum carried it over the traffic on the adjacent Avenida Washington Luís , a major thoroughfare . After clearing the road , the aircraft exploded on impact with a four @-@ story TAM Express facility , resulting in a large fire , and killing everybody on board instantly . The TAM Express building contained offices and a warehouse , and was located adjacent to a Shell gas station . 
 The runway had recently been resurfaced , but it did not yet have water @-@ channeling grooves cut into it to reduce the danger of hydroplaning . 
 Flight Data Recorder ( FDR ) information recovered after the crash and released by Brazilian authorities showed that immediately prior to touchdown , both thrust levers were in CL ( or " climb " ) position , with engine power being governed by the flight computer 's autothrottle system . Two seconds prior to touchdown , an aural warning , " retard , retard , " was issued by the flight 's computer system , advising the pilots to " retard " the thrust lever to the recommended idle or reverse thrust lever position . This would disengage the aircraft 's autothrottle system , with engine power then being governed directly by the thrust lever 's position . 
 At the moment of touchdown , the spoiler lever was in the " ARMED " position . According to the system logic of the A320 's flight controls , in order for the spoilers to automatically deploy upon touchdown not only must the spoiler lever be in the " ARMED " position , but both thrust levers must be at or close to the " idle " position . The FDR transcript shows that immediately after the warning , the flight computer recorded the left thrust lever being retarded to the rear @-@ most position , activating the thrust reverser on the left engine , while the right thrust lever ( controlling the engine with the disabled thrust reverser ) remained in the CL position . One theory put forth by CENIPA is that the pilots may not have noticed that the right engine remained at CL because the Airbus autothrottle system , unlike other aircraft manufacturers , does not automatically move the levers when the autothrust controller changes engine settings . Therefore , the pilots may have thought that the right engine was at idle power without realizing that Airbus autothrust logic dictates that , when one or more of the thrust levers is pulled to the idle position , the autothrust is automatically disengaged . Thus , when the pilot pulled the left engine thrust lever to idle , it disconnected the autothrust system and the computer did not retard the right engine power to idle . Since the right engine thrust lever was still in the " climb " detent at that time , the right engine accelerated to climb power while the left engine deployed its thrust reverser . The resulting asymmetric thrust condition resulted in a loss of control and a crash ensued . The A320 's spoilers did not deploy during the landing run , as the right thrust lever was above the " idle " setting required for automatic spoiler deployment . 
 = = Congonhas = = 
 Aviation safety in Brazil had been under increased scrutiny following the mid @-@ air collision in September 2006 over the Amazon of Gol Transportes Aéreos Flight 1907 and an Embraer Legacy 600 ( see Brazil 's 2006 @-@ 2007 aviation crisis ) . Congonhas was singled out for having safety issues relating to operations in wet weather due to its location and runway characteristics for the traffic it serves . 
 The 35L runway at Congonhas is 1 @,@ 940 metres ( 6 @,@ 360 ft ) long . Congonhas ' counterpart in Rio de Janeiro , the Santos Dumont Airport , has an even shorter runway , at 1 @,@ 323 m ( 4 @,@ 341 ft ) . Both airports receive the same type of traffic — ranging from small private planes to Boeing 737s and A320s . Many variables affect the landing distance of an aircraft , such as approach speed , weight and the presence of either a tailwind or a headwind . For an Airbus A320 , a speed of just 20 knots ( 37 km / h ) higher than normal can result in as much as a 25 % increase in the runway length needed to stop an aircraft . Wet weather can also significantly reduce the braking performance of aircraft , leading to an increase in the minimum runway length requirement . 
 Pilots have called Congonhas airport the " aircraft carrier , " because of the runway 's short length and because pilots are told to go @-@ around if they overshoot the first 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 300 m ) of runway . 
 In February 2007 , a Brazilian judge briefly banned flights using Fokker 100 , Boeing 737 @-@ 700 and Boeing 737 @-@ 800 aircraft in and out of the airport . The Airbus A320 was not among the aircraft banned , due to its manufacturer @-@ stated braking distance being shorter than those of the banned aircraft . Pilots had complained that water had been accumulating on the runway , reducing aircraft braking performance and occasionally causing planes to hydroplane . The judge claimed the runway needed to be 388 metres ( 1 @,@ 273 ft ) longer for these aircraft to operate safely . At the time , a spokeswoman from Brazil 's National Civil Aviation Agency claimed " The safety conditions of the runway and the airport as a whole are adequate . " TAM also objected to the decision , with a spokesman stating " If the injunction stands , it will cause total chaos , " claiming over 10 @,@ 000 passengers per day would be inconvenienced . The airport authorities appealed the decision , resulting in it being overturned the following day . An appeals court overruled the ban on the three types of planes , saying it was too harsh as it would have severe economic ramifications and that there were not enough safety concerns to prevent the planes from landing and taking off from the airport . " The runway was reopened because of popular pressure , " Gianfranco Beting , an aviation consultant , said in a TV interview . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 The airport reopened on July 19 , 2007 using an alternative runway . 
 Many flights , including all <unk> and BRA Transportes Aéreos , were transferred to <unk> International Airport , the major airport in São Paulo , due to the closure of the main runway at Congonhas and the ongoing investigation of the accident . 
 On July 20 , Presidency Chief of Staff Dilma Rousseff announced plans to significantly reduce the number of flights operating at Congonhas . The plan included banning , within 60 days , all connection , stopover , charter , and international flights and the reduction in the number of private jets . The airport would only operate direct flights to certain cities in Brazil . The plan also called for a study of the expansion of São Paulo 's two current airports and the construction of a third airport in the metropolitan area . 
 State crime scene investigators terminated the search for remains on July 28 , 2007 ; as of that date , 114 bodies recovered from the site had been identified by the São Paulo Medical Examiner 's Office as those of passengers . 
 = = Investigation = = 
 The investigation was carried out by Brazil 's Aeronautical Accidents Investigation and Prevention Center ( Centro de Investigação e Prevenção de Acidentes Aeronáuticos , CENIPA ) . Data from the flight data recorder and cockpit voice recorder ( CVR ) were downloaded by the National Transportation Safety Board in the United States commencing July 20 and 23 respectively . Based on preliminary data from the FDR , on July 25 Airbus cautioned A320 operators to ensure that both thrust levers are set to idle during flare . The transcript of the CVR was released on August 1 . It shows that the pilots were aware of the wet runway conditions and the deactivated thrust reverser . The pilots ' comments suggest that the spoilers did not deploy and that they were unable to slow the aircraft . Crew error has not been ruled out . 
 An investigation by the Brazilian Public Safety Ministry released in November 2008 concluded that the pilots mistakenly retarded only the left engine to idle , because the right one had no thrust reverser working when in fact it was necessary to retard both engines in order for the spoilers to work . They also said that the National Civil Aviation Agency should have closed the airport on the night the plane landed because of heavy rains ; that Congonhas airport authorities shared the blame because its runway had not been properly constructed with grooves to drain away excess rainwater , contributing to the crash ; that the plane 's manufacturer , Airbus , should have provided alarms warning the pilots that the braking system was failing ; and that TAM failed to properly train its pilots , who did not act correctly in the emergency . 
 = = = Final report = = = 
 In September 2009 , more than two years after the accident , CENIPA announced the results of official investigations . The report shows that one of the thrust levers , which control engines , was in position to accelerate when it should be in idle , but it was not proved if there was mechanical or human failure as the cause of the accident . 
 The report suggests two hypotheses for the accident . In the first , there was a flaw in the power control of the plane 's engines , which would have kept one of the thrust levers into acceleration , regardless of their actual position . In such circumstances , there was mechanical failure of the aircraft . In the second hypothesis , the pilot has performed a procedure different from that provided in the manual , and put the thrust lever in an irregular position , a configuration of human error for the accident . 
 In addition to the positions of the thrust levers , the report points to several factors that may have contributed to the accident , such as a high volume of rain on the day , with the formation of puddles on the runway , as well as the absence of grooving . The report does not blame the length of the runway for the accident . 
 = = Response = = 
 After the crash , President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva ordered three days of national mourning . 
 During the 2007 Pan American Games in Rio de Janeiro , the Brazilian athletes wore a black armband in remembrance of the victims . The flags of all participating countries were flown at half mast on July 18 . Matches involving a Brazilian athlete or team started with a minute of silence . 
 All matches of the Campeonato Brasileiro 2007 started with a minute of silence , while all players wore black armbands . Brazilian Formula One driver Felipe Massa had a black stripe on top of his helmet during the 2007 European Grand Prix , to commemorate the victims . Rubens Barrichello also had stripes on his helmet , and the two Red Bull Racing drivers David Coulthard and Mark Webber had small Brazilian flags on their helmets referring to the accident . 
 More than 5 @,@ 000 Brazilians marched to the crash site on July 29 , 2007 , blaming their government 's failure to invest in airport infrastructure for the crash . Many of the protesters also demanded the ousting of President Luiz <unk> Lula da Silva . 
 = = Legal action = = 
 On November 19 , 2008 , the police investigation was completed using 13 @,@ 600 pages , which took 16 months of research to be produced , during which 336 people were heard . For federal prosecutors , the former director of ANAC Denise Abreu and then flight safety officer of the company , Marco Aurelio dos Santos de Miranda , should be convicted of attempt on air transport security in willful mode . In March 2006 , Denise Abreu took over the management of air services of the newly established National Civil Aviation Agency ( ANAC ) . The investigation of the accident with the Airbus TAM , which killed 199 people in Congonhas , revealed that in February 2007 , the São Paulo federal judge Cecilia <unk> , who saw action restricting the landing planes in Congonhas on rainy days , received Denise Abreu one of ANAC document like a standard , but it was only a technical study . According to the complaint , the study presented as standard guarantee , in theory , security in landing operations at Congonhas airport in São Paulo . The study indicated that takeoffs and landings were forbidden in Congonhas case the track was with a water depth greater than 3 mm . After the accident with the plane of TAM in July 2007 it revealed that the study was not a standard and thus there was no obligation to follow it . According to the testimony of federal judge Cecilia <unk> to the Federal Public Ministry , the document was fundamental to the Federal Court to release the runway for takeoffs and landings of all equipment . 
 In 2011 , the Brazilian Federal Public Ministry ( Ministério Público Federal — <unk> ) laid criminal charges against Denise Abreu , the director of the Brazilian National Civil Aviation Agency ( ANAC ) at the time of the disaster , as well as two former TAM directors — Marco Aurélio dos Santos de Miranda , director of flight safety , and Alberto <unk> , vice president of operations . They were accused of neglecting air transport safety by allowing the aircraft to land in heavy rain on the notoriously short recently resurfaced runway before cutting of grooves to channel away excess rainwater . The trial began in São Paulo in 2013 . In 2014 , <unk> withdrew the charges against <unk> , for lack of evidence . A second charge against Abreu of " documentary falsehood " was dismissed in November , 2014 . As of March 2015 , no judgement had been handed down on the other charges . 
 In 2014 , TAM 's insurer <unk> Seguros , the company responsible for paying compensation for the tragedy , launched a lawsuit in Brazil against Airbus for R $ 350 million ( US $ 156 @.@ 2 million ) , according to Folha de S. Paulo . Attorneys representing Airbus responded in a Brazilian court filing that Airbus accepts no responsibility , laying the blame for the disaster with the cockpit crew , the airline and the poor state of the runway . 
 = = Notable passengers = = 
 Among the passengers were : 
 Júlio <unk> ( aged 51 ) , a Brazilian Social Democracy Party federal politician , member and leader of the opposition in the Chamber of Deputies of Brazil . 
 Paulo Rogério <unk> Souza ( aged 61 ) , former chairman of the football team Sport Club Internacional and attorney for Sport Club Corinthians Paulista . 
 = = Dramatization = = 
 Mayday ( Also known as Air Crash Investigation in the UK , Australia , New Zealand and Asia and Air Emergency or Air Disasters in the United States ) produced a one @-@ hour docudrama about the crash . The episode was entitled " Deadly Reputation " due to the poor reputation the airport ( and specifically the runway ) has among pilots . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Ian Johnson with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 = 
 Ian Johnson was a member of Donald Bradman 's famous Australian cricket team , which toured England in 1948 . Bradman ’ s men went undefeated in their 34 matches ; this unprecedented feat by a Test side touring England earned them the sobriquet The Invincibles . 
 An off spinner , Johnson was a member of Bradman ’ s first @-@ choice team , playing in four of the five Tests before being dropped for the final match . However , he was not prominent in the Tests , taking seven wickets at a bowling average of 61 @.@ 00 . Among the frontline bowlers who played in four or more Tests , Johnson had the worst average by a factor of almost two and took the least number of wickets . Johnson had little impact with the bat , scoring 51 runs at a batting average of 10 @.@ 20 , but took five catches in the slips . 
 Johnson had more success in the tour matches , taking 85 wickets at 18 @.@ 37 in all first @-@ class fixtures . This ranked him third among the Australians in the wicket @-@ taking and fifth in the averages . He bowled more overs than everyone but Bill Johnston , allowing Bradman to ease the workload on pace spearheads Ray Lindwall and Keith Miller , and conserve their energy for the Tests . Johnson 's most successful match with the ball was against Gloucestershire , in which he took match figures of 11 / 100 . He was also more prolific with the bat outside the Tests , scoring 543 runs at 30 @.@ 16 , with a top @-@ score of 113 not out against Somerset . He also made 80 against a Marylebone Cricket Club team that consisted almost entirely of Test players . Johnson was prominent in the field , taking 23 catches , the most by a non @-@ wicket @-@ keeper on tour . 
 = = Early tour = = 
 Australia traditionally fielded its first @-@ choice team in the opening match of the tour , which was usually against Worcestershire . Johnson had been a regular member of the Australian Test team since World War II , and was selected in Bradman 's full @-@ strength team . 
 Worcestershire elected to bat first , and Johnson took 3 / 52 from 23 overs , the most bowled by any Australian , cleaning up the lower order as Australia removed the hosts for 233 . When Australia batted , Johnson came in at No. 10 and made an unbeaten 12 as Australia declared their innings closed at 8 / 462 . Australia dismissed the hosts for 212 to complete victory by an innings and 17 runs . Johnson took the last three wickets to end with 3 / 75 from 13 @.@ 3 overs ; he was the most uneconomical bowler among those who sent down more than 18 deliveries . 
 Johnson played a major role in the next match against Leicestershire . He made six at No. 8 as Australia batted first and scored 448 . Johnson came on with the hosts at 3 / 74 and took two quick wickets in the space of five runs , beginning a collapse that led to Leicestershire being all out for 130 . He ended with 2 / 50 from 23 overs . Australia enforced the follow on , and Johnson broke through their top and middle order . The hosts reached 0 / 45 before Johnson took the first five wickets to reduce them to 5 / 88 . Leicestershire progressed to 5 / 113 before Johnson took two more wickets in the space of four balls . He ended with 7 / 42 from 21 overs , his best first @-@ class innings figures , as the home team were dismissed for 147 , handing Australia victory by an innings and 171 runs . 
 The Australians proceeded to play Yorkshire , on a damp pitch conducive to slower bowling . Johnson was rested as Australia came closest to losing a match for the whole tour . Australia were 6 / 31 in pursuit of 60 for victory , before scraping home by four wickets . 
 Johnson returned in the next match against Surrey at The Oval in London , where Australia won the toss and batted first . Batting at No. 6 , Johnson came in at 4 / 444 and put on 99 runs with vice @-@ captain and fellow South Melbournian Lindsay Hassett , before falling for 46 ; Australia were eventually bowled out for 632 . Johnson then took five wickets to help cut down Surrey 's first innings . The hosts reached 2 / 40 before Johnson claimed three middle order wickets to reduce them to 6 / 66 . He later removed the final batsmen to end with 5 / 53 from 18 @.@ 2 overs . Surrey were bowled out for 141 and forced to follow on and Johnson took 3 / 40 in the second innings as the home team made 195 to cede victory to Australia by an innings . Johnson removed captain Errol Holmes and Stuart Surridge in both innings . 
 Johnson was rested for the next match against Cambridge University , which Australia won by an innings . In the following match against Essex , Johnson returned as Australia won the toss and batted first and went on to score 721 , a world record for the most number of first @-@ class runs in one day ’ s play . He came in at 6 / 664 and was unable to join in the high scoring , making only nine as the lower order folded quickly , none of the four bowlers reaching double figures . Australia subsequently proceeded to victory by an innings and 451 runs , their biggest winning margin for the tour . Johnson was not required to bowl in the first innings as the pacemen dismissed the hosts for 83 in 36 @.@ 5 overs . In the second innings , Johnson was given an opportunity and took four of the first six wickets to fall , reducing Essex to 6 / 46 . The home side added 131 for the next wicket before Johnson removed their captain and top @-@ scorer Tom Pearce for 71 ; he added another wicket as Essex were out for 187 . Johnson finished with 6 / 37 from 21 overs . Johnson was rested for the next match against Oxford University , which resulted in another innings victory . 
 The eighth match of the season was against the Marylebone Cricket Club at Lord 's . The MCC fielded seven players who would represent England in the Tests , and were basically a full strength Test team , while Australia fielded their first @-@ choice team . Having been a regular member of the Test team since the end of World War II , and having taken 29 wickets at 12 @.@ 03 in his four games on tour , Johnson was selected along with fellow spinner Colin McCool , a leg spinner . This meant that Australia 's first @-@ choice team was the same as in the opening match against Worcestershire . Barring one change in the bowling department , the same team lined up for Australia in the First Test , with the top six batsmen in the same position . It was a chance for both sides to gain a psychological advantage over the players who would oppose them in the Tests . Australia won the toss and batted first and Johnson came in at 5 / 343 to join former South Melbourne and Victorian team @-@ mate and fellow Royal Australian Air Force fighter pilot Keith Miller . The pair put on 165 before Miller fell on the second morning , quickly followed by Johnson at 8 / 512 , trapped leg before wicket by off spinner Jim Laker for 80 , but not before Johnson had hit him for three sixes . Bradman 's men went on to amass 552 . Johnson was the least successful and most uneconomical Australian in the first innings , taking 0 / 43 from 12 overs as the hosts made 189 . Bradman enforced the follow on and Johnson had a better return on the second attempt . The hosts reached 3 / 128 when Johnson caused a middle @-@ order collapse . He had New Zealand Test batsman Martin Donnelly stumped by Don Tallon , before trapping English Test batsman Len Hutton leg before wicket five runs later . He then removed Ken Cranston to leave the MCC at 6 / 159 . Johnson ended with 3 / 37 and caught Denis Compton from the pace bowling of Ray Lindwall as Australia bowled out the home side for 205 to win by an innings , . 
 The MCC match was followed by Australia 's first non @-@ victory of the tour , which against Lancashire . Johnson had little to do in the match . After the first day was washed out , he was promoted to No. 4 and made only five in the first innings . He took 0 / 16 from eight overs in the first innings and neither batted nor bowled in the second innings as the match ended in a draw . 
 In the following match against Nottinghamshire , Johnson took 1 / 26 and made a duck in the first innings as the hosts batted first . He claimed 3 / 78 in the second innings as the match was drawn . In the next game against Hampshire , Australia had another scare . On a drying pitch , Johnson took 2 / 35 as Australia removed the hosts for 195 . He then made two as Australia were dismissed for 117 , the first time they had conceded a first innings lead on the tour . In the second innings , he took 0 / 13 in four overs as Hassett 's opening bowlers took all the wickets ; Hampshire were bowled out for 103 to leave Australia a target of 182 in 175 minutes . Johnson was promoted to No. 3 and came to the crease almost immediately when Sid Barnes fell before Australia had scored . Johnson hit out , striking three sixes and seven fours , making 74 in the partnership of 105 with Bill Brown . Johnson fell for 74 , but Hassett came in and guided Australia to an eight @-@ wicket win without further loss . The final match before the First Test was against Sussex . Johnson was neither required to bowl nor bat in the first innings . The pacemen dismissed the hosts for 86 in 46 @.@ 4 overs before Australia declared at 5 / 549 in reply . Johnson registered 0 / 37 from 11 overs as Sussex fell for 138 to seal another innings victory for Australia . 
 = = First Test = = 
 Although his four matches since the MCC fixture had yielded only six wickets at 34 @.@ 16 , Johnson was selected in the team for the First Test at Trent Bridge . McCool , the other spinner in the MCC and Worcestershire matches , had played in only one match since the MCC game , in which he was wicketless . McCool ’ s omission was the only change from those two matches . Bill Johnston , who bowled left arm pace and orthodox spin was included in the team at the last minute in the hope of exploiting a wet wicket , following the arrival of rain . Johnston had taken match figures of 10 / 40 and 11 / 117 against Yorkshire and Hampshire respectively , both on rain @-@ affected wickets . 
 English captain Norman Yardley won the toss and elected to bat . Pundits believed the pitch would be ideal for batting after giving some assistance to the fast bowlers in the first hour . Australia 's pacemen reduced England to 8 / 74 before finishing them off for 165 . Johnson was only given five overs and took 0 / 19 as the pacemen efficiently cut down the English batsmen in 79 overs . 
 During the innings , Bill Edrich was on four when he edged Ray Lindwall to Johnson at first slip . Johnson got both hands to the ball above his head , but dropped it . However , the dropped catch was not costly , as Edrich was dismissed for 18 . 
 On the third day , Australia reached 5 / 305 when Johnson came in to bat . He made 21 with three fours , including an edge over the slips cordon , before being bowled by Laker . Johnson hit the ball onto his foot , which deflected it back into his stumps . This left Australia at 6 / 338 but the lower order continued to contribute and pushed the total to 509 , giving the tourists a 344 @-@ run lead . 
 England began their second innings on the third afternoon . Late in the day , after scoring 13 in 43 minutes , Edrich was caught behind by Don Tallon after attempting a cut shot from Johnson ’ s bowling . Edrich did not read the arm ball , which went straight on and took the outside edge , leaving England at 2 / 39 . Denis Compton came in and he ran down the pitch before the first ball was bowled ; he had to quickly block the ball on the run . He then survived a confident lbw appeal from the bowling of Johnson when he was on eight . Compton appeared resigned to his fate and ready to walk , but umpire Frank Chester declined the appeal . During this passage of play , Johnson extracted a substantial amount of spin from the surface . England closed the day at 2 / 121 . 
 The light was again poor on the fourth day , but England did not appeal against it . Yardley wanted to bat now in poor visibility to erase the deficit and build a lead , to force Australia to chase a target on an erratic surface if a shower came later and turned the pitch into a sticky wicket . Bradman thought that rain might come , so he utilised Toshack and Johnson to bowl defensive leg theory so England would not be in the lead should a sticky wicket arise . As the umpires were obliged to not call off play unless the light was so poor as to endanger the batsman , the lack of pace of Johnson and Toshack forced play to continue as they posed no physical threat to the batsmen . 
 In his first over at the start of the day , Johnson extracted sharp turn from one delivery that pitched outside off stump ; not expecting much spin , Compton did not play a shot and was hit on the pads , but the umpire rejected the loud appeal for lbw . Otherwise , Len Hutton and Compton progressed steadily , although Johnson and Toshack were able to make the ball deviate regularly . 
 Soon after reaching his century during the afternoon , Compton edged to the slips from the bowling of Miller , but Johnson spilled the catch . Compton went on to make 184 and England were eventually out for 441 on the final day . Johnson sent down 42 overs for a return of 1 / 66 . He had the best economy rate of 1 @.@ 57 runs per over , ahead of Toshack 's 1 @.@ 81 ; Bradman used both in a defensive manner . This left Australia a target of 98 , which they reached with eight wickets to spare . 
 Between Tests , Johnson played in the match against Northamptonshire , which started the day after the First Test . He took three middle @-@ order wickets and ended with 3 / 13 from 13 overs , the most economical figures among the Australians in the first innings , as the hosts were out for 119 . He made only four in the bat and took 1 / 46 in the second innings as Australia cruised to an innings victory . After playing in seven consecutive matches comprising 21 days of cricket between 22 May and 18 June , Johnson was rested for the second match between Tests , which was a draw against Yorkshire . 
 = = Second Test = = 
 Australia opted to field an unchanged team for the Second Test at Lord 's and elected to bat first after winning the toss . Johnson came in at 5 / 216 on the first afternoon and struggled to score , making only four of the 30 runs added during his stay at the crease before falling at 7 / 246 , caught behind from the bowling of Bill Edrich . However , Australia 's lower order wagged and they eventually took the score to 350 on the second morning . 
 After lunch , Hutton rocked onto the front foot , played outside a Johnson off break and was bowled for 20 to leave England at 2 / 32 . The English opener had been uncertain against Johnson 's spin and played forward too early at a slower ball , which went between a gap between his bat and pad . Later in the afternoon , Denis Compton and captain Norman Yardley played Johnson cautiously but safely ; in particular , Yardley repeatedly driving a series of overpitched balls from Johnson for runs . Johnson took the last two wickets to fall on the second day , having Alec Coxon caught and bowled for 19 and Laker caught behind for 28 after the pair had put on 41 . England were out early on the third morning for 215 . Johnson ended with 3 / 72 , having sent down 35 overs , the most by any Australian . 
 The weather was fine as Australia started their second innings just after noon on the third day . Australia batted strongly and on the fourth day , Johnson came in at 6 / 445 , with Australia already ahead by 580 . He made nine before his partner Ray Lindwall was stumped , which prompted Bradman to declare at 7 / 460 . This left England a victory target of 596 , which would require a world record run chase . 
 Further showers forced a rain break immediately after England started their runchase and breathed extra life into the pitch . When the players returned , Lindwall and Johnston extracted steep bounce with the new ball , troubling the English batsmen . 
 Hutton and Washbrook took the score to 42 — England 's highest opening partnership of the series — before the former edged Lindwall to Johnson in the slips and was out for 13 . Soon after , Edrich edged to Johnson low down in the cordon and England were 2 / 52 . Edrich decided to stand his ground after the catch was taken , thinking he may have hit a bump ball into the ground , but the umpire thought otherwise and ruled him out . Johnson had little else to do as the pacemen made steady progress on a seaming pitch . He bowled only two overs for three runs as England fell for 186 , handing Australia victory by 409 runs and a 2 – 0 series lead . 
 The next match was against Surrey and started the day after the Test . Johnson was rested as Australia completed a ten @-@ wicket win . 
 Johnson returned for the following match against Gloucestershire before the Third Test . Australia batted first and reached 7 / 774 declared , its highest score of the tour , which underpinned a victory by an innings and 363 runs . Johnson made 27 , after coming in at 6 / 669 and playing a supporting role in a 105 @-@ run partnership with Sam Loxton , who made 159 not out . Acting captain Hassett declared without further addition to the score after Johnson fell at 7 / 774 . Johnson played a leading role with the ball , taking his only ten @-@ wicket match haul for the tour . After the hosts ’ openers had put on 74 , Johnson removed both in quick succession to leave Gloucestershire at 2 / 79 . He later took the last three wickets as Gloucestershire collapsed from 6 / 257 to be all out for 269 . Johnson had totalled 6 / 68 from 31 @.@ 4 overs . Hassett elected to enforce the follow on and the home side reached 2 / 72 before Johnson took five of the last eight wickets to help end the innings for 132 . Johnson ended with 5 / 32 from 17 @.@ 1 overs for a match total of 11 / 100 . Johnson took his 50th wicket for the tour during the fixture and was on 57 by the end of the game , the 18th of 31 first @-@ class matches on the tour . 
 = = Third Test = = 
 The teams reassembled at Old Trafford for the Third Test . Australia dropped Bill Brown , their reserve opener , who had batted out of position in the middle order and scored 73 runs at 24 @.@ 33 in three Test innings . Brown was replaced by the all rounder Sam Loxton ; the move had an unexpected impact on Johnson 's playing role during the Test . 
 Yardley won the toss and elected to bat . England consolidated their innings after falling to 2 / 28 . The hosts were content to score slowly and regroup , and Johnson ’ s first ten overs before lunch yielded only seven runs . However , when Johnson was bowling his second spell after lunch , Jack Crapp hit three driven boundaries in quick succession . Crapp was eager to use his feet to get to the pitch of Johnson ’ s deliveries , and subsequently dealt with the spin fairly comfortably , whereas many of his compatriots stood in their crease and found matters much more difficult . Crapp 's counter @-@ attack prompted Bradman to take the second new ball and remove Johnson with the score at 2 / 96 . England then lost three quick wickets to the pacemen to be 5 / 119 . Soon after , Yardley lofted Ernie Toshack — who was bowling leg theory — into the on @-@ side and Johnson caught him for 22 at forward square leg to leave England at 6 / 141 . Soon after , Compton , the last of the specialist batsmen , nearly departed when he leaned forward to a leg @-@ side delivery from Johnson . He overbalanced and stumbled forwards , and Tallon removed the bails . There were no television replays to assist the umpires in those days , and although the attempted stumping appeared close to the naked eye , the benefit of the doubt was given to the batsman and the appeal rejected . 
 On the second morning , English tail @-@ ender Dick Pollard came to the crease and pulled a ball from Johnson into the ribs of Australian opener Sid Barnes , who was standing at short leg . Barnes stood closer than most in this position — almost on the edge of the cut strip — and was unable to evade the ball . He " dropped like a fallen tree " , and had to be carried from the ground by four policemen and taken to hospital for an examination . England eventually reached 363 after Johnson had sent down 38 overs and conceded 77 runs without success . With Barnes injured and Brown dropped , Arthur Morris was the only opener available , so Johnson was deployed as his makeshift partner . He had never opened at Test level , but had once batted at No. 3 when used as a nightwatchman after the fall of the first wicket late on a day ’ s play . Journalist and former Australian Test leg spinner Bill O ’ Reilly criticised the use of Johnson as an opener , as vice @-@ captain Lindsay Hassett had transformed himself into a defensive batsman with little backlift and a guarded approach , traits that were typical of an opener . Johnson made only one , exposing Bradman to the new ball . Although Australia struggled , they eventually avoided the follow on and ended on 221 . 
 England came out for their second innings , and with Bradman predominantly reliant on his seamers , Johnson bowled only seven overs on the third afternoon as the hosts closed at 3 / 174 from 69 overs . Late in the day , Johnson dropped Washbrook in the slips cordon from the bowling of Toshack when the batsman was on 80 . Washbrook reached stumps unbeaten on 85 , and Johnson 's miss only cost five runs , as the fourth day was washed out and England declared without further batting after rain delayed the start on the final day . Johnson ended with 0 / 16 from seven overs . 
 Play began after the tea break , and Australia needed to score 317 in the last session if they wanted victory . The pitch played very slowly due to the excess moisture , which meant the ball slowed significantly upon hitting the ground surface . As Australia were not looking to chase the runs , there was no need for run @-@ saving fieldsmen , so Yardley often had seven men in close catching positions . In the first half hour , Australia showed little attacking intent and scored only six runs . Jack Young replaced Pollard and Johnson immediately swept him for four , before edging the next ball to Crapp and falling for six to leave Australia at 1 / 10 . Australia batted for another two hours without further loss , to reach 1 / 92 from 61 overs before the match was finally ended after a series of periodic rain interruptions . Johnson had an unhappy game , scoring only seven runs in two innings , dropping a catch and taking match figures of 0 / 93 . 
 After the Test , Johnson was rested for Australia ’ s victory over Middlesex by ten wickets ; it was their only county match between Tests . 
 = = Fourth Test = = 
 The teams headed to Headingley for the Fourth Test with Barnes still unfit . Australia made two changes for the Test . Middle @-@ order batsman Neil Harvey came in for Barnes , while Ron Saggers replaced Don Tallon — who had a finger injury — behind the stumps . Brown was not recalled to open with Morris ; instead , Hassett was promoted from the middle @-@ order to open with Morris , while the teenaged Harvey came into the middle @-@ order . Australia thus jettisoned the experiment of opening the batting with Johnson , who had managed only one and six in the previous Test . 
 England won the toss and elected to bat on an ideal batting pitch that was predicted to be unhelpful for fast bowling . Thirty minutes before tea , England brought up their 150 without loss , and continued unhindered after two brief interruptions due to rain . Up to this point , the Australian bowling had been loose and inaccurate . Bradman brought on Johnson , who had delivered only three overs so far , the rest of the proceedings having been through fast bowlers . Seeking to stem the flow of runs , Bradman gave Johnson a ring field with no slip . Johnson bowled two consecutive maidens , but Washbrook was scoring freely at the other end , so Bradman called for the new ball and brought back the fast bowlers . Johnson was still wicketless when England closed the day at 2 / 268 . Former Australian Test batsman Jack Fingleton accused Australia of going " progressively downhill " and regarded their performance as their worst day of bowling since World War II , citing the proliferation of full tosses . 
 The next morning , England progressed strongly . Nightwatchman Alec Bedser hit three consecutive fours from Toshack , prompting Bradman to replace him with Johnson . Bedser surveyed Johnson 's wares for one over before hitting him into the leg side three times in the next , yielding a six and two fours . Bradman responded by removing Johnson from the attack . When the off spinner came back , Edrich hit him for another six to reach 96 . However , Johnson soon had his revenge . England reached 2 / 423 when Bedser was out caught and bowled by Johnson , patting the ball back to the bowler when he could have hit it decisively . His on @-@ drive was intercepted by the bowler , who dived across the pitch to his right @-@ hand side to complete the catch . This ended a 155 @-@ run third @-@ wicket partnership . Edrich attempted to pull a Johnson long hop to the leg side , targeting the large gap between square leg and mid @-@ on , but only ballooned the ball to Morris , who completed the catch diving forwards at wide mid @-@ on . This came only three runs after Bedser 's dismissal and left the score at 4 / 426 . Johnson 's two wickets brought two new batsmen were to the crease and precipitated a collapse that saw England dismissed for 496 . Johnson ended with 2 / 89 from 33 overs and was the least economical of the frontline bowlers except Toshack , who broke down with a knee injury . 
 On the third afternoon , Johnson came to the crease at 5 / 294 in Australia 's first innings when Harvey departed for 112 , but he made only 10 before falling at 6 / 329 . Lindwall replaced him and made 77 as Australia 's tail pushed the score to 458 on the fourth morning , reducing the deficit to 38 . In the second innings , the English batsmen continued to attack Johnson . Given Johnson 's lack of economy in the first innings , Bradman declined to use him for the entirety of the first session of the fourth day . When Johnson was introduced after lunch , he was targeted , and Washbrook and Hutton both lofted him for sixes in quick succession , prompting Bradman to remove him from the attack . When Johnson returned , Hutton again hit him in the air , but this time Bradman took a running catch to dismiss the batsman for 57 , leaving England at 2 / 129 . Edrich and Compton came in and were initially pinned down , but after 45 minutes , Compton charged Johnson and heaved a delivery to the leg side for a boundary . Bradman promptly took the new ball as England reached 2 / 209 at tea . After the break , England continued to target Johnson . Edrich hit Johnson for three consecutive fours before lofting a fourth into the crowd for six . Compton took risks against Johnson , successfully cutting against the spin several times , and Bradman was forced to use a well @-@ spread field to cut down the fast scoring off Johnson . England reached 2 / 232 before collapsing to be 8 / 362 at the end of the day , but Johnson was not responsible for any of these wickets . 
 England batted on for five minutes on the final morning , adding three runs in two overs before Yardley declared at 8 / 365 . Johnson ended with 1 / 85 from 21 overs and was the most uneconomical of the Australian bowlers , conceding runs at a rate of 4 @.@ 04 per over while the others averaged 3 @.@ 26 . Batting into the final day allowed Yardley the right to ask the groundsman to use a heavy roller , which would help to break up the wicket , make it more likely to spin and therefore more difficult for Australia to bat on . 
 This left Australia a target of 404 runs for victory . At the time , this would have been the highest ever run @-@ chase to result in a Test victory for the batting side . Australia had only 345 minutes to reach the target , but they scored the runs with 15 minutes to spare and seven wickets in hand , sealing the series 3 – 0 . 
 After bowling 54 overs at Headingley , Johnson was rested as Australia defeated Derbyshire by an innings in a match that started the day after the Fourth Test . He bowled the most overs upon his return in the following match against Glamorgan , a rain @-@ affected draw that did not reach the second innings . Johnson sent down 28 @.@ 4 overs and took 3 / 58 as the hosts were bowled out for 197 ; Australia reached 3 / 215 when the weather ended the match . 
 Johnson was the most economical Australian in the first innings of the game against Warwickshire . He took 3 / 29 from 22 @.@ 3 overs as the hosts fell for 138 , before making an unbeaten 13 at No. 9 as Australia struggled to 254 in reply . He was given a solitary maiden over in the second innings before Australia won by nine wickets . Australia then faced and drew with Lancashire for the second time on the tour . Johnson came to the crease at 6 / 202 after Bradman ’ s men had suffered a middle @-@ order collapse of 3 / 8 . He made 48 as the Australian lower order wagged to push the score to 321 . Johnson was given a light bowling load in the first innings , sending down only five overs , but he removed three of the last four wickets to end with 3 / 5 as the hosts fell for 130 . He did not bat in the second innings and took 1 / 30 as the home side managed to hang on with seven wickets down . In the non @-@ first @-@ class match against Durham , a rain @-@ affected draw that did not reach the second innings , Johnson came in at 7 / 212 and made 44 to help Australia recover to 282 and took 1 / 2 from three overs as the hosts reached 5 / 73 when rain ended the match after the first day . 
 = = Fifth Test = = 
 Australia travelled to The Oval for the Fifth Test . After taking only seven wickets at 61 @.@ 00 in the four Tests , and being severely attacked in the previous match at Headingley , Johnson was dropped in favour of leg spinner Doug Ring . Yardley won the toss and elected to bat on a rain @-@ affected pitch . England were dismissed for 52 in 42 @.@ 1 overs on the first afternoon with Ring not required to bowl , as the pacemen made light work of the hosts . Ring was economical in the second innings , taking 1 / 44 from 28 overs as Australia sealed the series 4 – 0 with another innings victory . 
 = = Later tour matches = = 
 Seven matches remained on Bradman 's quest to go through a tour of England without defeat . Johnson returned and made 15 of 361 as Australia batted first against Kent . Johnson was not asked to bowl as the first four bowlers used cut down the hosts ' first innings for 51 in just 23 overs . It was a similar tale in the second innings after Australia enforced the follow on . The pacemen did the early damage and Johnson bowled only briefly , sending down 4 @.@ 5 overs and removing the last two batsmen to end with 2 / 15 as the hosts fell for 124 in 32 @.@ 5 overs to seal another Australian victory by an innings in two days . In the next match against the Gentlemen of England , Johnson did not bat before Australia declared at 5 / 610 against a team featuring eight Test players . When the tourists bowled , Johnson took three consecutive wickets to reduce the hosts from 1 / 76 to 4 / 121 . He ended with 4 / 60 from 23 overs as the Gentlemen made 245 . Johnson 's victims included Donnelly , future England opener Reg Simpson and former England captain Walter Robins . Bradman enforced the follow on , and Johnson took the last three wickets to end with 3 / 69 from 28 @.@ 5 overs , including the scalps of Robins and Test player Freddie Brown . This completed another innings victory for the tourists . Johnson broke through for his first century of the tour in the next match against Somerset . Australia batted first and Johnson came in at No. 6 with the score at 4 / 306 to join Ron Hamence , who was also looking for his first ton of the season . The pair put on 195 runs , before Hamence fell at the closest possible point to his century , stumped for 99 . Miller came out and helped Johnson add another 59 before Australia declared at 5 / 560 , with the latter undefeated on 113 . Following his innings , Johnson only bowled 10 overs in taking 1 / 19 for the match . The hosts were bowled out twice for a combined total of 186 from a sum of just 81 @.@ 3 overs as Australia enforced the follow on and won by an innings and 374 runs . Johnson was rested for the fixture against the South of England . Australia declared at 7 / 522 and bowled out the hosts for 298 when rain ended the match . 
 Australia 's biggest challenge in the post @-@ Test tour matches was against the Leveson @-@ Gower 's XI . During the last Australian tour in 1938 , this team was effectively a full @-@ strength England outfit , but this time Bradman insisted only six current Test players be allowed to play for the hosts . After his opponents complied with the demand , Bradman fielded a full @-@ strength team , the only difference from the Fifth Test team being Johnson ’ s return at the expense of Ring . The bowlers skittled the hosts for 177 and Johnson took 3 / 45 , his victims being Donnelly , Yardley and former Test batsman Laurie Fishlock . Johnson also caught Brown and Laker from the bowling of Lindwall . Johnson made 38 as Australia declared at 8 / 469 in reply . The hosts were 2 / 75 in their second innings when the match ended in a draw after multiple rain delays . Johnson took both wickets , — the batsman being Hutton and Fishlock — ending with 2 / 12 . 
 The tour ended with two non @-@ first @-@ class matches against Scotland . Johnson made a duck in Australia 's first innings of 236 in the first match . He then bowled a total of 17 overs and took 3 / 26 as Australia won by an innings . In the second match , Johnson took 3 / 26 from 20 @.@ 2 overs in the first innings as Scotland made 178 . He was promoted to No. 5 and came in at 3 / 96 to hit 95 as Australia reached 6 / 407 declared . In the second innings , Johnson was unable to add a wicket in his final opportunity for the tour , taking 0 / 6 from three overs . However , when it became clear Australia was in an unassailable position , Bradman allowed wicket @-@ keeper Don Tallon to bowl , and he took 2 / 15 . In the meantime , Johnson deputised with the gloves and he completed a stumping from the leg spin of Ring as Australia finished the tour with another innings victory . 
 = = Role = = 
 An off spinner , Johnson was a member of Bradman ’ s first @-@ choice team , playing in four of the five Tests before being dropped for the final rubber . He also played in the matches against Worcestershire , the MCC and Leveson @-@ Gower 's XI , where Australia selected their strongest possible team . However , Johnson was not prominent in the Test success , taking seven wickets at 61 @.@ 00 , his best result being 3 / 72 in the first innings of the Second Test . Among the five frontline bowlers used in four or more Tests , Lindwall , Miller , Toshack , Johnston and Johnson , the last had the worst average by a factor of almost two ; Toshack averaged 33 @.@ 09 and the others less than 23 @.@ 50 . Lindwall and Johnston took 27 wickets each , while Miller and Toshack took 13 and 11 respectively . Johnson ’ s economy rate was the second worst of the quintet and his strike rate of 156 @.@ 86 was more than twice as bad as the others , with the exception of Toshack ( 94 @.@ 46 ) . Johnson also had little impact with the bat , scoring 51 runs at 10 @.@ 20 , but he did take five catches in the slips . 
 Johnson had more success in the tour matches , taking 85 wickets at 18 @.@ 37 in all first @-@ class matches . This placed him third in the wicket @-@ taking and fifth in the averages among the Australians . In the first @-@ class matches excluding the Tests , Johnson was the leading wicket @-@ taker . He bowled more overs than anyone but Johnston , allowing Bradman to ease the workload on his pace spearheads Lindwall and Miller , allowing them to conserve energy ahead of the Tests . Johnson 's most successful game with the ball was against Gloucestershire , which yielded match figures of 11 / 100 . Like his bowling , Johnson ’ s batting was also more successful outside of the Tests , scoring 543 runs at 30 @.@ 16 in 22 innings , with a top @-@ score of 113 not out against Somerset and an 80 against a MCC team that consisted almost entirely of Test players . Johnson usually batted at No. 7 or No. 8 , although he was notably used as a makeshift opener in the Third Test and scored an aggressive 74 at No. 3 in the run @-@ chase against <unk> Johnson was prominent in the field , taking 23 catches , the most by a non @-@ wicket @-@ keeper on tour . He usually fielded in the slips . 
 Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack noted that while Johnson had started the tour well , he was not as effective in English conditions as on his home pitches in Australia . 
 [ Johnson ] was not so troublesome to batsmen in Tests as when at home , principally because of the difference in pace of the pitches and his inability to bowl round the wicket , an almost essential part in the make @-@ up of an off @-@ spinner in England . False expectation against Johnson in Australia usually cost a batsman his wicket , but on slower English pitches there was time to change a stroke and still keep the ball out of the stumps , even though beaten by flight . 
 = = = Statistical note = = = 
 = = = General notes = = = 
 = Decisions ( song ) = 
 " Decisions " is a song by Israeli record producer Borgore featuring American recording artist Miley Cyrus . It was independently released through online music stores on July 10 , 2012 with its accompanying remixes extended play ( EP ) ; it was released as a stand @-@ alone track on February 8 , 2013 . Cyrus ' inclusion on the song was initially not publicized , with the intention for of it making its own impact separate from her reputation , although Cyrus later confirmed the collaboration . " Decisions " is a dubstep track that lyrically discusses the general desire for wealth and success , frequently mentioned as " bitches love cake " during the track . 
 Upon its release , the track received generally favorable reviews from music critics , who appreciated Cyrus ' inclusion and its diversity from her earlier works , but were ambivalent towards its overall production . An accompanying music video for the song was filmed in Los Angeles , California and was released on November 1 , 2012 . The following month , Borgore and Cyrus performed the track at the Music Box in Los Angeles ; Cyrus ' provocative clothing and dancing with a stripper garnered media attention . The original version failed to chart on any national record charts , although the parody " Hunger Games " by <unk> peaked at number 38 on the U.S. Billboard Dance / Electronic Songs chart . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 In 2012 , Borgore stated that an extended play ( EP ) and studio album were under development , the latter of which he tentatively planned to release in 2013 . After the release of her third studio album Can 't Be Tamed ( 2010 ) , Cyrus originally announced plans to focus on her film career , effectively putting her musical endeavors on hiatus . She was also confirmed as a primary voice actress in the feature film Hotel Transylvania , but dropped out of the project to coordinate a musical comeback in 2012 . She had first hinted at developing a new sound after collaborating with hip hop recording artists Pharrell Williams and Tyler , the Creator . 
