 An intellectual who taught high school Latin during the off @-@ season , earning the nickname " Jephtha " for his southern drawl , Rixey was elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1963 but died a month after his election . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Rixey was born on May 3 , 1891 in Culpeper , Virginia , and at the age of ten , his father , a banker , moved his family to Charlottesville , Virginia . His uncles were John Franklin Rixey a former congressman and Presley Marion Rixey the former Surgeon General of the United States Navy . He attended the University of Virginia , where he played basketball and baseball ; he was a member of Delta Tau Delta International Fraternity . His brother Bill also played baseball for Virginia . During the off @-@ season , umpire Cy Rigler worked as an assistant coach for the University . He recognized Rixey 's talent and tried to sign him to the Philadelphia Phillies . Rixey originally declined , saying he wanted to be a chemist , but Rigler insisted , even offering a substantial portion of the bonus he received for signing a player . With his family in financial trouble , Rixey accepted the deal . The National League , upon hearing of the deal , created a rule that prohibits umpires from signing players . Neither Rixey nor Rigler received any signing bonus . 
 = = Baseball career = = 
 = = = Philadelphia Phillies = = = 
 Rixey joined the Phillies for the 1912 season without playing a single game of minor league baseball . His time with the Phillies was marked by inconsistency . He went 10 @-@ 10 in his first year , with a 2 @.@ 50 earned run average ( ERA ) and 10 complete games in 23 games pitched . He had a three hit shutout against the Chicago Cubs on July 18 . Rixey was on the losing end of a no @-@ hitter by Jeff Tesreau on September 6 . After the season , the Chicago Cubs , under new manager Johnny Evers , offered a " huge sum " to the Phillies for Rixey , but manager Red Dooin declined the offer . Prior to the 1913 season , Rixey notified the Phillies of his desire to finish his studies at the University of Virginia and graduate in June ; however , after some negotiation , he decided to sign a contract and re @-@ joined the team shortly after the season began . That season , he appeared in 35 games , started 19 of them , winning nine games , and had a 3 @.@ 12 earned run average . In 1914 , his record worsened to 2 – 11 , and his earned run average increased to 4 @.@ 37 . Rixey 's record improved to 11 – 12 in 1915 , and his earned run average was 2 @.@ 39 as the Phillies won the National League pennant and played the Boston Red Sox in the 1915 World Series . During Game 5 of the series , Rixey replaced starter Erskine Mayer for the final six innings of the game . He allowed three runs in the final two innings and lost 5 – 4 . 
 Rixey went 22 – 10 in 1916 with a 1 @.@ 85 ERA and a career high of 134 strikeouts . On June 29 , Rixey pitched a four @-@ hit shutout against the New York Giants , facing the minimum 27 batters , because of three double plays , and a player caught stealing . In 1917 , despite having a 2 @.@ 27 earned run average , Rixey led the league in pitching losses with 21 . He also handled 108 chances without a single error . Rixey hated losing and was known for destroying the team locker room , or disappearing for days at a time after a loss . He missed the 1918 season to serve in the Chemical Warfare Division of the United States army during the war effort . He struggled upon returning to baseball , going 6 – 12 with a 3 @.@ 97 earned run average in 1919 , and again leading the league in losses with 22 in 1920 . Prior to the 1920 season , rumours circulated that his former manager , Pat Moran , now with the Cincinnati Reds , was interested in trading for Rixey . The relationship between Rixey and manager <unk> Cravath was never good , and Cravath had made known his desire to trade him ; however , he stayed with the Phillies that season , working on his delivery with former pitcher Jesse Tannehill , who , Rixey admitted , helped with his pitching delivery . On November 22 , 1920 , Rixey was traded to the Cincinnati Reds in exchange for Jimmy Ring and Greasy Neale . His record during his eight seasons with the Phillies was 87 wins and 103 losses . 
 = = = Cincinnati Reds = = = 
 Rixey was traded to the Reds prior to the 1921 season for Jimmy Ring and Greasy Neale . In his first season with the Reds , he won 19 games , and set a Major League record by allowing just one home run in 301 innings pitched . In three of the next four seasons , he had 20 or more victories each season , with a league @-@ leading total of 25 in 1922 . He also led the league in innings pitched and hits allowed in 1922 and shutouts with four in 1924 . In 1926 he had 14 wins , followed by seasons of 12 , 19 and 10 wins . Rixey 's production began to decline in 1930 , when he went 9 – 13 with a 5 @.@ 10 ERA , and pitched fewer than 200 innings for the first time since 1919 . From 1931 through 1933 , Rixey pitched very little , and was used almost exclusively against the Pittsburgh Pirates . For the 1933 season , he was the only Reds pitcher with a winning record , at 6 @-@ 3 as the Reds finished last in the National League with a 58 @-@ 94 record . He retired prior to the 1934 season , stating " the manager wasn 't giving me enough work " . Rixey completed his career with 266 wins , 251 losses , and a 3 @.@ 15 ERA . He appeared in 692 games and completed 290 , and had 20 wins and 14 saves as a relief pitcher . 
 Bubbles Hargrave , former Cincinnati catcher , gave this testimonial : " Eppa was just great . He was great as a pitcher , fielder and competitor . I look on him as the most outstanding player I came in contact with in my entire career . " 
 Rixey 's approach to the game is exemplified by the following quote : " " How dumb can the hitters in this league get ? I 've been doing this for fifteen years . When they 're batting with the count two balls and no strikes , or three and one , they 're always looking for the fastball and they never get it . " – Eppa Rixey ( 1927 ) 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Originally Rixey had trouble controlling his speed , but eventually became one of the most feared pitchers in baseball according to reporters . Rixey was considered a pitcher with an " peculiar motion " , who rarely walked a batter . Throughout his long career , the 210 @-@ pound Rixey charmed teammates and fans with his dry wit and big Southern drawl . His nonsensical nickname " Jephtha " seemed to capture his roots and amiable personality . Some writers thought " Jephtha " was a part of Rixey 's real name , but it was likely invented by a Philadelphia sportswriter . Rob Neyer called Rixey the fourth best pitcher in Reds history behind Bucky Walters , Paul Derringer and teammate Dolf Luque . 
 His 266 career victories was the record for most wins by a left @-@ handed pitcher in the National League until Warren Spahn broke it in 1959 , however his 251 losses are an all @-@ time record for left @-@ handed pitchers . He also held the longevity record for most seasons pitched by a National League left @-@ hander until Steve Carlton broke it in 1986 . As time passed , support for Rixey to be inducted to the Baseball Hall of Fame grew . He was also inducted into the Cincinnati Reds Hall of Fame in 1958 . In 1960 , Rixey finished third in the balloting behind former teammate Edd Roush and Sam Rice ( who was later inducted the same year as Rixey ) . Upon his election to the Hall of Fame on January 27 , 1963 , he was quoted as saying " They 're really scraping the bottom of the barrel , aren 't they ? " 
 In 1969 , he was named by Reds fans as the greatest left @-@ handed pitcher in Reds history . The Reds Hall of Fame summed up his career : " He was the best left @-@ hander ever to pitch for the Reds with a 179 – 148 record , 180 complete games , 23 shutouts and a 3 @.@ 33 ERA in his 13 seasons . " 
 In 1972 he was inducted into the first class of the Virginia Sports Hall of Fame and Museum . 
 Rixey 's childhood home in Culpeper still stands ; it suffered some damage in the 2011 Virginia earthquake . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 He was married to Dorothy Meyers of Cincinnati and had two children , Eppa Rixey III and Ann Rixey Sikes and five grandchildren , James Rixey , Eppa Rixey IV , Steve Sikes , Paige Sikes , and David Sikes . After his retirement from baseball , worked for his father @-@ in @-@ law 's successful insurance company in Cincinnati , eventually becoming president of the company . He died of a heart attack on February 28 , 1963 , one month after his election to the Hall of Fame , becoming the first player to die between election and induction to the Hall of Fame . He is interred at Greenlawn Cemetery in Milford , Ohio . 
 When Rixey started playing , he was considered an " anomaly " . He came from a well @-@ off family and was college @-@ educated , something that was rare during his era . He wrote poetry , and took graduate school classes in chemistry , mathematics and Latin . During the off @-@ season , he was a Latin teacher at Episcopal High School in Alexandria , Virginia . He was also considered among the best golfers among athletes during the time period . He was the subject of hazing in his first few years in the Majors . Eventually he teamed up with other college graduates , Joe Oeschger and Stan Baumgartner and the hazing lessened to a degree . 
 = Willow ptarmigan = 
 The willow ptarmigan ( / <unk> <unk> <unk> / ) ( Lagopus lagopus ) is a bird in the grouse subfamily <unk> of the pheasant family Phasianidae . It is also known as the willow grouse and in Ireland and Britain , where it was previously believed to be a separate species , as the red grouse . It is a sedentary species , breeding in birch and other forests and moorlands in northern Europe , the tundra of Scandinavia , Siberia , Alaska and northern Canada , in particular in the province of Newfoundland and Labrador . It is the state bird of Alaska . In the summer the birds are largely brown , with dappled plumage , but in the winter they are white with some black feathers in their tails ( British populations do not adopt a winter plumage ) . The species has remained little changed from the bird that roamed the tundra during the Pleistocene . Nesting takes place in the spring when clutches of four to ten eggs are laid in a scrape on the ground . The chicks are precocial and soon leave the nest and while they are young , both parents play a part in caring for them . The chicks eat insects and young plant growth while the adults are completely herbivorous , eating leaves , flowers , buds , seeds and berries during the summer and largely subsisting on the buds and twigs of willow and other dwarf shrubs and trees during the winter . 
 = = Description = = 
 The willow ptarmigan is a medium to large ground @-@ dwelling bird and is the most numerous of the three species of ptarmigan . Males and females are about the same size , the adult length varying between 35 and 44 centimetres ( 14 and 17 in ) with a wingspan ranging from 60 and 65 centimetres ( 24 and 26 in ) . The weight is 430 to 810 grams ( 15 to 29 oz ) . It is deep @-@ chested and has a fairly long neck , a broad bill , short feathered legs and a moderately short rounded tail . In the summer , the male 's plumage is marbled brown , with a reddish hue to the neck and breast , a black tail and white wings and underparts . It has two inconspicuous wattles above the eyes , which become red and prominent in the breeding season . The female is similar in appearance but lacks the wattles and has brown feathers scattered among the white feathers on the belly . During winter , the plumage of both sexes becomes completely white , except for some black feathers in the tail . Immature birds resemble the adults . 
 The willow ptarmigan can be distinguished from the closely related rock ptarmigan ( Lagopus muta ) by its larger size and thicker bill and by the fact that it is not generally found above the tree line while the rock ptarmigan prefers more elevated , barren habitat . The summer plumage is browner and in the winter , the male willow ptarmigan lacks the rock ptarmigan 's black stripe between the eyes and bill . The white @-@ tailed ptarmigan ( Lagopus leucura ) in North America is smaller , has a white tail and finely @-@ barred greyer plumage and lives permanently above the tree line . The distinctive British Isles subspecies L. l. scoticus ( red grouse ) was once considered a separate true British species but is now classified as a sub @-@ species . This moorland bird is reddish brown all over , except for its white feet . 
 The voice is low @-@ pitched and guttural and includes chuckles , repeated clucking sounds , expostulations . When displaying , the male makes rattles and barking noises . 
 = = Taxonomy and systematics = = 
 The willow ptarmigan 's scientific name , Lagopus lagopus is derived from Ancient Greek lagos ( <unk> ) " hare " + pous ( πους ) " foot " , in reference to the bird 's feathered feet which allow it to negotiate frozen ground . 
 = = = Subspecies = = = 
 Nineteen subspecies have been recognised though some are believed not to be valid . Most differ little in appearance , though the red grouse ( L. l. scoticus ) is rather distinct . The taxonomy is confused , partly because of the complicated changes in plumage several times a year and the differing colour and pattern of the summer plumage : 
 <unk> ( Latham , 1787 ) - Ireland 
 scoticus ( Latham , 1787 ) - Britain 
 variegatus Salomonsen , 1936 - Trondheim , Norway 
 lagopus ( Linnaeus , 1758 ) - Scandinavia , Finland and North European Russia 
 <unk> <unk> , 1926 - Baltic countries and Central Russia 
 <unk> <unk> , 1926 - New Siberia 
 <unk> Thayer & Bangs , 1914 - Siberia 
 maior Lorenz , 1904 - Southeast Russia , North Kazakhstan and Southwest Siberia 
 brevirostris Hesse , 1912 - Altai Mountains and <unk> Mountains 
 <unk> <unk> , 1931 - West Mongolia 
 <unk> <unk> , 1933 - East Siberia 
 <unk> Momiyama , 1928 - Kamchatka and Kuril Islands 
 <unk> Momiyama , 1928 - Sakhalin Island 
 <unk> Gabrielson & Lincoln , 1959 - Aleutian Islands and Kodiak Island 
 <unk> Grinnell , 1909 - Alaska and British Columbia 
 alascensis <unk> , 1926 - Alaska 
 leucopterus Taverner , 1932 - Arctic islands of North Canada 
 albus ( Gmelin , 1789 ) - North Canada 
 <unk> Riley , 1911 - North Quebec and North Labrador 
 alleni Stejneger , 1884 - Newfoundland 
 The willow ptarmigan often hybridises with the black grouse ( Tetrao <unk> ) and the hazel grouse ( Tetrastes bonasia ) and occasionally with the western capercaillie ( Tetrao <unk> ) , the spruce grouse ( <unk> canadensis ) and the rock ptarmigan ( Lagopus muta ) . 
 During the Pleistocene , the willow ptarmigan widely occurred in continental Europe . Authors who recognize paleosubspecies have named the Pleistocene willow ptarmigan L. l. <unk> ( though the older name medius might be the correct one ) . These marginally different birds are said to have gradually changed from the earlier ( Pliocene ) Lagopus <unk> into the present @-@ day species L. lagopus . Pleistocene willow ptarmigan are recorded from diverse sites until the end of the <unk> glaciation about 10 @,@ 000 years ago , when the species , by then all but identical with the living birds , retreated northwards with its tundra habitat . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The willow ptarmigan has a circum @-@ boreal distribution . It is native to Canada and the United States , China , Mongolia , the Russian Federation , Kazakhstan , the Czech Republic , Finland , Norway , Sweden , Estonia , Latvia , Lithuania , Germany , the United Kingdom , Ireland and Spain . It primarily occupies subalpine and subarctic habitats such as sparse pine and birch forests , thickets with willow and alder trees , heather moors , tundra and mountain slopes . In the winter , females and sub @-@ adults may move to lower altitudes and seek shelter in valleys or in more densely vegetated areas , but adult males usually remain in the subalpine region . The red grouse is common on heather @-@ clad moorland across the north and west of Great Britain and in localised areas of Ireland . 
 = = Diet = = 
 The willow ptarmigan has a varied and seasonal diet . The bird is herbivorous for most of its life and subsists on various plant materials . As juveniles , they may feed on insects due to an inability to digest plant material caused by underdeveloped <unk> . In the summer , their diet is highly varied and may consist of berries , flowers , leaves , twigs and seeds . 
 In Alaska , the main dietary item of the adults at all times of year is willows such as the Alaska willow Salix <unk> , with leaves being eaten in summer and buds , twigs and catkins supplying the birds ' main nutritional needs in winter and early spring . In the early twenty @-@ first century , there has been an increase in shrub expansion in arctic Alaska that is thought to be greatly affecting the willow ptarmigan ’ s winter diet . Because of the way they browse , Ptarmigan help shape the landscape of the area . After heavy snowfalls , the birds cannot access the shorter shrubs as they are blanketed with snow , so they will eat the taller species that poke through . In one study it was found that 90 % of the buds of the Alaska willow within their reach had been browsed . This will stunt the willows and create a feedback cycle extending through the entire ecosystem . However , in winters with below average snowfall , the browsing of <unk> will not have such a drastic effect as their feeding will be spread out across a range of lower plant species . It is also believed that the greening of parts of the Arctic is affecting Willow Ptarmigan populations by altering the shape and size of the shrubs they are able to feed on . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 Male willow ptarmigans are territorial birds . Males arrive in the breeding areas and set up territories in April and May , aggressively defending them against male interlopers . When the females arrive a few weeks later , the male performs courtship displays such as aerial manoeuvres , strutting and tail @-@ fanning . When she has chosen a mate and a nesting site , the female lays a clutch of six to ten eggs in a shallow depression on the ground . The nest site is usually in a hidden location at the edge of a clearing . 
 A small minority of male willow ptarmigan are polygynous but most are monogamous . They are assiduous at guarding both nest and mate , particularly early in the incubation period and when the eggs are nearly ready to hatch . During this time , the greatest danger may be from conspecifics . Although adult willow ptarmigans are herbivores , the newly hatched young also feed on insects . In most other species of grouse , only the female takes care of the young , but the male willow ptarmigan also helps with feeding the brood and protecting them . He may take over completely if the female dies . In particular , the male defends the young from predators and both he and his mate can dive @-@ bomb intruders or lure attackers away by pretending to have a broken wing . Nevertheless , the chicks face many dangers which range from attacks by foxes or birds of prey , getting separated from the rest of the brood , bad weather and <unk> . Fewer than 35 % of chicks survive to eleven months and only a minority of these reach maturity . Despite this , in favourable seasons , many juveniles may survive and the population of willow ptarmigan is prone to wide fluctuations in size . By September , families begin to form flocks . The females and young migrate to lower altitudes and may overwinter 100 miles ( 160 km ) from their breeding grounds in wooded valleys and hilly country . The males also congregate in small groups but do not usually travel as far as the females . 
 = = State bird = = 
 The willow ptarmigan is the state bird of Alaska . 
 = = Status = = 
 Widespread and not uncommon in its remote habitat , the willow ptarmigan is classified as a species of " Least Concern " by the IUCN . This is because , even if , as is suspected , numbers are declining slightly , it has a very wide range with a total population estimated at forty million individuals . 
 = Spanish coup of July 1936 = 
 The Spanish coup of July 1936 fractured the Spanish Republican Armed Forces and marked the beginning of the Spanish Civil War . Following a period of troubles in the Second Spanish Republic , a group of officers attempted to overthrow the left @-@ wing Popular Front government , elected five months previously , in a military coup . Planning started in early 1936 , and the coup was launched on 17 and 18 July . The coup failed to take complete control of the country and civil war ensued . 
 The rising was intended to be swift , but the government retained control of most of the country including Málaga , Jaén and Almería . Cadiz was taken for the rebels and General Queipo de Llano managed to secure Seville . In Madrid , the rebels were hemmed into the Montaña barracks , which fell with much bloodshed . On 19 July the cabinet headed by the newly appointed prime minister José Giral ordered the distribution of weapons to the unions , helping to defeat the rebels in Madrid , Barcelona , and Valencia , which led to anarchists taking control of large parts of Aragon and Catalonia . Rebel General Goded surrendered in Barcelona and was later condemned to death . The rebels had secured the support of around half of Spain 's Peninsular army , which allowing for large numbers on extended leave totaled about 66 @,@ 000 men , and all of the 30 @,@ 000 @-@ strong Army of Africa . The Army of Africa was Spain 's most professional and effective military force . The government retained less than half the supply of rifles , heavy and light machine guns and artillery pieces . Both sides had few tanks and outdated aircraft , and naval capacity was fairly even . Officers ' defections weakened Republican units of all types . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following the elections of November 1933 , Spain entered a period called the " black two years " ( Spanish : <unk> negro ) . Both Carlists and <unk> monarchists continued to prepare , receiving the backing of Italian Prime Minister Benito Mussolini . José @-@ María Gil @-@ Robles struggled to control the CEDA 's youth wing , which copied Germany 's and Italy 's youth movements . Monarchists , however , turned their attention to the Fascist Falange Española , under the leadership of José Antonio Primo de Rivera . Open violence occurred in the streets of Spanish cities . Gil @-@ Robles ' CEDA continued to mimic the German Nazi Party , staging a rally in March 1934 . Gil Robles used an anti @-@ strike law to successfully provoke and break up unions one at a time . Efforts to remove local councils from socialist control prompted a general strike , which was brutally put down , with the arrest of four deputies and other significant breaches of articles 55 and 56 of the constitution . 
 On 26 September , the CEDA announced it would no longer support the Radical Republican Party 's minority government ; it was replaced by an RRP cabinet that included three members of the CEDA . A UGT general strike was unsuccessful in most of Spain . General Francisco Franco was put in informal command of the military effort against the Asturian miners ' revolt of 1934 , the only place it had succeeded . Around 30 @,@ 000 workers had been called to arms in ten days . Franco 's men , some brought in from Spain 's Army of Africa , acted horrifically , killing men , women and children , and carrying out summary executions when the main cities of Asturias had been retaken . About 1 @,@ 000 workers were killed , and about 250 government soldiers . This marked the effective end of the republic . Months of retaliation and repression by both sides followed ; torture was used on political prisoners . Bombings , shootings , political and religious killings were usual on the streets . Political parties created their own armed militias . Gil @-@ Robles once again prompted a cabinet collapse , and five members of Lerroux 's new government were conceded to CEDA . The military was purged of <unk> members and reformed ; those loyal to Gil @-@ Robles were promoted – Franco was made Chief of Staff . 
 Elections in 1936 were won by a grouping of left @-@ wing parties united as the Popular Front . The right began to conspire as to how to best overthrow the republic , rather than taking control of it . The government was weak , and Azaña led a minority government . Pacification and reconciliation would have been a huge task . Acts of violence and reprisals spiralled . In April , parliament replaced Zamora with Azaña as president . However , Azaña was increasingly isolated from everyday politics ; his replacement , Casares Quiroga , was weak . This was a watershed event which inspired conservatives to give up on parliamentary politics . CEDA turned its campaign chest over to army plotter Emilio Mola . Monarchist José Calvo Sotelo replaced CEDA 's Gil @-@ Robles as the right 's leading spokesman in Parliament . Prieto did his best to avoid revolution , promoting a series of public works and civil order reforms , including parts of the military and civil guard . Communists quickly took over the ranks of socialist organisations , scaring the middle classes . Several generals decided that the government had to be replaced if the dissolution of Spain was to be prevented . They held a contempt for professional politicians . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 The republican government had been attempting to remove suspect generals from their posts , and so Franco was relieved as chief of staff and transferred to command of the Canary islands . Goded was replaced as Inspector General and made general of the Balearic islands ; Emilio Mola was moved from head of the Army of Africa to be military commander of Pamplona in Navarre . However , this allowed Mola to direct the mainland uprising , although the relationship between him and Carlist leaders was problematic . General José Sanjurjo became the figurehead of the operation , and helped to come to an agreement with the Carlists . Mola was chief planner and second in command . José Antonio Primo de Rivera was put in prison in mid @-@ March in order to restrict the Falange . However , government actions were not as thorough as they might have been : warnings by the Director of Security and other figures were not acted upon . 
 On 12 June , Prime Minister Casares Quiroga met General Juan Yagüe , who was rightly accused of masterminding the growing conspiracy in North Africa , but Yagüe managed to convince Casares of his loyalty to the republic . Mola held a meeting between garrison commanders in the north of Spain on 15 June , and local authorities , on hearing of the meeting , surrounded it with Civil Guards . However , Casares ordered their removal , saying he trusted Mola . Mola began serious planning in the spring , but General Francisco Franco hesitated until early July , inspiring other plotters to refer to him as " Miss Canary Islands 1936 " . Franco was a key player because of his prestige as a former director of the military academy and as the man who suppressed the Socialist uprising of 1934 . He was well respected in the Spanish Moroccan Army , Spain 's strongest military force . He wrote a cryptic letter to Casares on 23 June , suggesting that the military was disloyal , but could be restrained if he were put in charge . Casares did nothing , failing to arrest or buy off Franco , even if placing him in overall command was impossible . Franco was to be assigned control of Morocco in the new regime , and largely sidelined . On July 5 , an aircraft was chartered to take Franco from the Canary Islands to Morocco . It arrived on July 14 . 
 = = Murder of Calvo Sotelo = = 
 On 12 July 1936 , in Madrid , a member of the Falange named Jorge <unk> murdered Lieutenant José Castillo of the Assault Guards police force . Castillo was a member of the Socialist party . The next day , members of the Assault Guards arrested José Calvo Sotelo , a leading Spanish monarchist and a prominent parliamentary conservative ; the original target was Gil Robles but he could not be found . Calvo Sotelo had protested against agricultural reforms , expropriations , and restrictions on the authority of the Catholic Church , which he considered Bolshevist and anarchist . He instead advocated the creation of a corporative state . Calvo Sotelo was shot by the Guards without trial . 
 The killing of Sotelo , a prominent member of Parliament , with involvement of the police , aroused suspicions and strong reactions among the government 's opponents on the right . Massive reprisals followed . Although the conservative Nationalist generals were already in advanced stages of a planned uprising , the event provided a catalyst and convenient public justification for their coup , and in particular that Spain would have to be saved from anarchy by military rather than democratic means . The Socialists and Communists ( led by Prieto ) demanded that arms be distributed to the people before the military took over . The Prime Minister was hesitant . 
 Franco 's plane landed in Gran Canaria on July 14 , but , based in Tenerife , he would have been unable to make the plane without the death of General Amado Balmes , military commander in Gran Canaria , who was killed in a shooting accident on July 16 . Whether his death was an accident , suicide , or murder is unknown . 
 = = Beginning of the coup = = 
 The uprising 's timing was fixed at 17 July , at 5 : 00 p.m. ; this was agreed to by the leader of the Carlists , Manuel Fal Condé . However , the timing was changed : the men in Spanish Morocco were to rise up at 5 : 00 a.m. and those in Spain itself starting exactly a day later , so control of Spanish Morocco could be achieved and forces sent to Iberia from Morocco to coincide with the risings there . The rising was intended to be a swift coup d 'état , but the government retained control of most of the country . 
 Rebel control in Spanish Morocco was all but certain . The 30 @,@ 000 strong Army of Africa comprised the professional elite of the Spanish Army . Many of the soldiers acted as mercenaries and the vast majority of officers backed the rebel cause . The <unk> ( troops recruited from the local populace ) were predominantly Muslim and were told that the Republic wished to abolish Allah . The plan was discovered in Morocco during 17 July , which prompted it to be enacted immediately . By the scheduled time , Spanish Morocco had already been secured as legionnaires moved into working @-@ class areas and shot unionists . The army commander in eastern Morocco , General Manuel <unk> , and other senior officers loyal to the Republic were executed . Little resistance was encountered ; in total , 189 people were shot by the rebels . Goded and Franco immediately took control of the islands to which they were assigned . Warned that a coup was imminent , leftists barricaded the roads on 17 July , but Franco avoided capture by taking a tugboat to the airport . 
 On 18 July , Casares Quiroga refused an offer of help from the CNT and UGT , proclaiming that nowhere outside Spanish Morocco had joined the rebels and that the populace should trust legal methods to deal with the uprising . Handing out weapons would be illegal . The CNT and UGT proclaimed a general strike , in effect mobilising . They opened weapons caches , some buried since the 1934 risings . The paramilitary forces , better trained than the army , often waited to see the outcome of militia action before either joining or suppressing the rebellion . Quick action by either the rebels or anarchist militias was often enough to decide the fate of a town . General Queipo de Llano managed to secure Seville for the rebels , arresting a number of other officers . 
 = = Outcome = = 
 Despite the ruthlessness and determination of the supporters of the coup , the rebels failed to take any major cities with the critical exception of Seville which provided a landing point for Franco ’ s African troops . The primarily conservative and Catholic areas of Old Castile and León fell quickly , and in Pamplona they celebrated the uprising as if it were a festival . The government retained control of Málaga , Jaén and Almería . Cadiz was taken for the rebels with the help of the first troops from the Army of Africa . In Madrid they were hemmed into the Montaña barracks . The barracks fell the next day , with much bloodshed . Republican leader Santiago Casares Quiroga was replaced by José Giral who ordered the distribution of weapons among the civilian population . This facilitated the defeat of the army insurrection in the main industrial centres , including Madrid , Barcelona , Valencia and other main cities in the Mediterranean area , but it allowed the anarchists to arm themselves and take control of Barcelona and large swathes of Aragon and Catalonia . In Barcelona , the official government lost control of security , essential services and welfare . However , the anarchists held back from demanding too much political power , which could have had even more serious consequences . General Goded surrendered in Barcelona and was later condemned to death , despite broadcasting a message explaining his captivity over the radio at the request of the authorities . 
 Meanwhile , the Army of Africa crossed the Gibraltar Strait , using Junkers Ju 52 transport planes provided by Nazi Germany , without any loyalist Air Force interference owing to the confusion and lack of decision of the Spanish Republican side . The massive airlift of troops from Spanish Morocco was the world 's first long @-@ range combat airlift and it allowed Franco 's troops to join General Queipo de Llano 's forces in Seville . Their quick movement allowed them to meet General Mola 's Northern Army and secure most of northern and northwestern Spain , as well as central and western Andalusia . The Republican Government ended up with controlling almost all of the Eastern Spanish coast and central area around Madrid , as well as Asturias , Cantabria and part of the Basque Country in the north . Mola was keen to create a sense of fear within Nationalist @-@ controlled areas . There was a massive purge of freemasons , and a wide part of the left , including some moderate socialists . 
 The result of the coup was a polarization of Spain . Following General Mola 's orders of instilling fear in potential pro @-@ republican ranks by means of systematic executions in captured cities , a spontaneous revenge in the form of random murders of perceived fascists , conservatives and coup @-@ sympathizers by exalted mobs flared up in loyalist areas . 
 The Nationalist area of control contained roughly 11 million of Spain 's population of 25 million . The rebels also had secured the support of around half of Spain 's territorial army , some 60 @,@ 000 men . In Republican units , however , as much as 90 % of officers either rebelled , defected or merely disappeared and their loyalty to the republic was put in doubt , therefore some would later turn up in Nationalist ranks . This considerably reduced the units ' effectiveness as a new command structure had to be fashioned . No such problem occurred in Nationalist units . The Army of Africa , however , was entirely under Nationalist control , and numbered 30 @,@ 000 men considered Spain 's top fighting force . The rebels were also joined by 30 @,@ 000 members of Spain 's militarized police forces , the Assault Guards , the Civil Guards , and the Carabineers . 50 @,@ 000 members of the latter stayed loyal to the government . Of 500 @,@ 000 rifles , around 200 @,@ 000 were retained by the government . 65 @,@ 000 were issued to the Madrid populace in the days following the uprising – of these , only 7 @,@ 000 were usable . 70 @,@ 000 or so were lost following early Nationalist advances in the war . Republicans controlled about a third of both heavy and light machine guns ; of 1 @,@ 007 artillery pieces , 387 were in Republican hands . The Spanish Army had , before the coup , just 18 tanks of a sufficiently modern design , and the Republicans retained 10 . In terms of numbers , the Nationalists had seized control of 17 warships , leaving the Republicans with 27 . However , the two most modern ( both cruisers of the Canarias class ) were in Nationalist hands ; although not ready for service when the war broke out , when launched they compensated for the lack in numbers . The Spanish Republican Navy suffered from the same problems as the army : many officers had defected or had been killed after trying to do so . Due to the concerns of a Republican officer that such a coup was imminent , two @-@ thirds of air capability were retained by the government – however , the whole of the air service was very outdated and vulnerable both during flight and to mechanical problems . 
 = U.S. Route 67 in Iowa = 
 U.S. Highway 67 ( US 67 ) is a U.S. Highway in extreme eastern Iowa . The route begins in Davenport at the Rock Island Centennial Bridge where it crosses the Mississippi River and ends at an intersection with US 52 and Iowa Highway 64 ( Iowa 64 ) west of Sabula . It passes through Bettendorf , Le Claire , and Clinton . Except for <unk> , every community which US 67 enters sits along the Mississippi River . As such , the entire route is part of the Great River Road , an All @-@ American Road . 
 US 67 was created in late 1934 , when it replaced US 55 from Davenport to Dubuque . The route ended then at the foot of the Julien Dubuque Bridge , which carries US 20 . The northern half of the route , from Sabula to Dubuque , was overlapped by US 52 until 1967 . Most of the state highways that intersect US 67 do so within sight of their Mississippi River bridge crossing . 
 = = Route description = = 
 US 67 crosses the Mississippi River into Davenport on the Rock Island Centennial Bridge . Adjacent to the bridge is Modern Woodmen Park , home of the Midwest League 's Quad City River Bandits . Vehicles can continue to the north on Gaines Street , but US 67 traffic is forced to make a U @-@ turn to the south to connect to River Drive . Prior to 2010 , River Drive carried U.S. Route 61 ( US 61 ) , but the street now carries its business route . River Drive is prone to seasonal flooding from the Mississippi , as was the case in 1993 , 1997 , 2001 , 2008 , and 2011 . 
 In downtown Davenport , US 61 Bus. intersects US 67 at two one @-@ way streets , Harrison Street southbound and Brady Street northbound . Continuing east along the river , River Drive passes under the Government Bridge . It enters Bettendorf and becomes two one @-@ way streets , Grant Street southbound and State Street northbound . The two streets intersect Interstate 74 ( I @-@ 74 ) and US 6 at the foot of the I @-@ 74 Bridges near downtown Bettendorf . 
 Through Bettendorf and Riverdale , where the route turns to the northeast , US 67 is separated from the Mississippi riverfront by industry . Alcoa , which employs over 2000 workers at its Davenport works , is the largest plant along US 67 . 
 Just south of Le Claire is the I @-@ 80 interchange , where US 67 passes underneath the Fred Schwengel Memorial Bridge . In Le Claire the Mississippi River bends sharply and the highway follows . It heads through the picturesque downtown area , where many shops and even the street on which US 67 uses , Cody Road , pay homage to the Le Claire area 's most famous son , Buffalo Bill Cody . 
 Between Le Claire and Princeton , US 67 continues to closely parallel the river . This stretch of the road allows for good opportunities for bird watching . Where there are open views of the river , you can see water fowl on the water amongst lily pads . This area is near the southern end of the Upper Mississippi River National Wildlife and Fish Refuge . 
 North of Princeton , US 67 turns inland to cross the Wapsipinicon River into Clinton County . At <unk> , the road takes a 90 @-@ degree turn back to the east towards Camanche . It then runs parallel to the river , which is obscured by trees surrounding its backwaters . At Camanche , it passes around the city to the west and north . At Washington Boulevard , which is the former alignment of the route through Camanche , it turns to the north onto a four @-@ lane , undivided highway , which passes an industrial area and over Union Pacific 's Overland Route . As it enters Clinton , it joins with US 30 . 
 US 30 / US 67 head east along Lincoln Way through an industrial and retail area . As they continue east , the two routes split into one @-@ way streets , northbound Liberty Avenue and southbound Camanche Avenue . The one @-@ way street alignment ends at 11th Avenue South , but quickly begins again as US 30 / US 67 turn to the north onto northbound S. Third Street and southbound South 4th Street . At 8th Avenue South , US 30 splits away from US 67 and onto the Gateway Bridge and crosses into Illinois . 
 A block north , the one @-@ way couplets rejoin and head a block east to South 2nd Street . US 67 stays on 2nd Street for the next 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) . It passes through the heart of downtown Clinton , past the historic Van Allen Building designed by Louis Sullivan , Ashford University Field , home of the Clinton <unk> , also of the Midwest League , and passes the location of the failed Flav 's Fried Chicken restaurant . On the north end of Clinton , US 67 intercepts Iowa 136 at the foot of the Mark Morris Memorial Bridge to Fulton , Illinois . The two routes are overlapped for 3 ⁄ 4 mile ( 1 @.@ 2 km ) on 2nd Street and on Main Avenue . US 67 turns off of Main Avenue , away from Iowa 136 onto North 3rd Street and continues north out of town . 
 North of Clinton , US 67 travels through rural areas for the remainder of its route . Surrounded by acres ( hectares ) of farmland , houses occasionally dot the route . Near the Clinton – Jackson county line , the terrain begins to get hillier . The highway is entering the extreme southern end of the Driftless Area , a region of the Midwest that avoided glaciation during the last Ice Age . West of Sabula , US 67 meets Iowa 64 . The US Highway merges onto the state highway , and the two routes head east together for 2 ⁄ 5 mile ( 0 @.@ 64 km ) until they meet US 52 . Iowa 64 continues eastward with US 52 , but US 67 ends its journey from Texas here . 
 = = History = = 
 U.S. Highway 67 was extended into Iowa in late 1934 , when it replaced the southernmost portion of US 55 . It crossed the Mississippi River over the Government Bridge with US 32 ( now US 6 ) . The highway followed roughly the same route it does today through the then @-@ Tri Cities , along the river to Clinton to its present end near Sabula . Instead of ending at US 52 , the two routes continued north together along the river through Bellevue . Near Dubuque , the two highways converged with two others : US 61 and US 151 . Closer to downtown Dubuque , US 67 ended where US 61 and US 151 diverged from US 52 . 
 In 1940 , US 67 's entrance into Iowa was moved onto the new Rock Island Centennial Bridge . The Centennial Bridge was a toll bridge from its opening on July 12 , 1940 , until May 3 , 2003 . Tolls were originally 10 cents ( equivalent to $ 1 @.@ 69 in 2016 ) for drivers and 5 cents ( $ 0 @.@ 84 ) for pedestrians . The pedestrian toll was ended in 1960 . Tolls were 50 cents ( $ 0 @.@ 64 ) when they were removed in 2003 . 
 When the Julien Dubuque Bridge was completed in 1943 , US 67 's northern end was moved to the intersection of Dodge Street , which carried US 20 , and Locust Street , which carried US 67 , US 52 , US 61 , and US 151 . Iowa 3 's eastern end was moved to the same intersection , but on the opposite side of the street from US 67 's end . The intersection of Dodge and Locust was located at the foot of the Julien Dubuque Bridge . 
 When it was designated US 67 , only the first 45 miles ( 72 km ) , from Davenport to <unk> , a ghost town in eastern Clinton County , were paved . Within ten years , paving had extended north to Iowa 64 . In addition , a short section north of Bellevue had been paved . By 1955 , all 95 miles ( 153 km ) were paved . In 1967 , US 67 was truncated at the intersection of US 52 and Iowa 64 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Senghenydd colliery disaster = 
 The Senghenydd colliery disaster , also known as the Senghenydd explosion ( Welsh : <unk> Senghennydd ) , occurred at the Universal Colliery in Senghenydd , near Caerphilly , Glamorgan , Wales , on 14 October 1913 . The explosion , which killed 439 miners and a rescuer , is still the worst mining accident in the United Kingdom . Universal Colliery , located on the South Wales Coalfield , produced steam coal which was much in demand . Some of the region 's coal seams contained high quantities of firedamp , a highly explosive gas consisting of methane and hydrogen , and were prone to explosions . 
 In an earlier disaster in May 1901 , three underground explosions at the colliery killed 81 miners . The inquest established that the colliery had high levels of airborne coal dust , which would have exacerbated the explosion and carried it further into the mine workings . The cause of the 1913 explosion is unknown , but the subsequent inquiry thought the most likely cause was a spark from underground signalling equipment that could have ignited any firedamp present . The miners in the east side of the workings were evacuated , but the men in the western section bore the brunt of the explosion , fire and afterdamp — a poisonous mixture of carbon dioxide , carbon monoxide and nitrogen left after an explosion . 
 Fires in the workings hampered rescue efforts , and it took several days before they were under control . It took six weeks for most of the bodies to be recovered and the fire to be extinguished . The subsequent enquiry pointed to errors made by the company and its management leading to charges of negligence against Edward Shaw , the colliery manager , and the owners . Shaw was fined £ 24 while the company was fined £ 10 ; newspapers calculated the cost of each miner lost was just 51 ⁄ 2 pence . 
 In 1981 a memorial to the men who died in the disaster was unveiled by the National Coal Board , followed by a second in 2006 , to honour the dead of both the 1901 and 1913 explosions . In October 2013 , on the centenary of the tragedy , a Welsh national memorial to those killed in all Wales 's mining disasters was unveiled at the former pithead , depicting a rescue worker coming to the aid of one of the survivors of the explosion . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Welsh coal industry = = = 
 The Welsh coal industry employed 1 @,@ 500 workers in 1800 ; and as the industry expanded , the workforce rose to 30 @,@ 000 by 1864 , and to 250 @,@ 000 by 1913 . As employment became available , many people moved to the area of the South Wales Coalfield ; between 1851 and 1911 the population increased by 320 @,@ 000 . By 1913 the Welsh collieries were extracting 56 @.@ 8 million long tons of coal ( 63 @.@ 6 million short tons ) a year , up from 8 @.@ 5 million long tons ( 9 @.@ 5 million short tons ) in 1854 ; collieries in the region mined a fifth of all coal produced in the UK , and employed a fifth of its miners in the mid @-@ nineteenth century . In 1913 Britain was responsible for 25 per cent of world coal production and 55 percent of all world coal exports . 
 The South Wales Coalfield produced the sought @-@ after anthracite , bituminous and steam coals — the latter a grade between the two comprising a hard coal without the coking elements . Some of the region 's coal seams contained high quantities of firedamp , a highly explosive gas consisting of methane and hydrogen , and were therefore prone to explosions ; firedamp rises into the higher points of workings , including cavities or , as at Senghenydd , when the seams were being mined in an upward gradient . An additional danger of firedamp is afterdamp , a poisonous mixture of gases left after an explosion , primarily constituted of carbon dioxide , carbon monoxide and nitrogen . They combine with haemoglobin in the bloodstream to stop cells carrying oxygen , which can result in suffocation by lack of oxygen or anoxia . If survivors from an explosion are not rescued quickly , they face the possibility of being killed by the gas . The presence of firedamp contributed to a higher @-@ than @-@ average proportion of accidents : between 1880 and 1900 South Wales accounted for 18 % of Britain 's miners , but 48 per cent of all UK mining deaths occurred in the region . As coal output from British collieries reached its peak in 1913 there was a correspondingly large number of accidents around this time . 
 = = = Senghenydd and the Universal Colliery = = = 
 Senghenydd — Senghennydd in Welsh — is situated at the northern end of the Aber Valley , approximately four miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) north @-@ west of Caerphilly and eleven miles ( 18 km ) north @-@ west of Cardiff . When geological surveys for coal began in 1890 it was a farming hamlet of around 100 people . Coal was found , and sinking of the first mineshaft for Universal Colliery — which was owned and developed by William Lewis — began in 1891 ; the first coal was extracted in 1896 . The colliery 's two shafts were both 1 @,@ 950 feet ( 590 m ) deep , the downcast Lancaster and the upcast York . Development of the pit coincided with the Boer War , and sectors of the underground workings were named after key places in the war , such as Pretoria , or the lifting of the sieges at Ladysmith , Mafeking and Kimberley . 
 South Wales miners , including those at Universal , were paid on a rate determined by the Sliding Scale Committee , which fixed wages on the price coal fetched at market . When the price of coal slumped in the late 1890s , low wages led to industrial unrest and , in 1898 , a strike that the men at Universal joined at the end of April . The Monmouthshire and South Wales Coal Owners ' Association refused to replace the scale , and the strike ended on 1 September with some small concessions granted by the owners . The colliery resumed production and in 1899 was producing 3 @,@ 000 long tons ( 3 @,@ 400 short tons ) of coal a week . 
 The industrial historians Helen and Baron <unk> consider Universal Colliery to have been " an unlucky mine " . At approximately 5 : 00 am on 24 May 1901 three underground explosions occurred as the night shift was exiting the pit . Because the explosion damaged the pit winding gear , it took time to clear the debris from the pithead to allow rescuers to begin work . They descended at 11 : 00 am and rescued one man , an ostler , found alongside the corpse of the horse he was tending . There were no other survivors and 81 men died . Although the funerals for the victims started four days later , the rescue and recovery operations lasted for six weeks . 
 The Mines Inspectorate began an enquiry , chaired by the mining engineer Professor William Galloway . The report was published on 15 July . It stated that the mine was hot with high levels of coal dust present . The method used to load coal onto underground trucks created quantities of dust , which had aggravated a small explosion and created a chain reaction of related explosions throughout the workings . An inquest held in the October concluded that various safety precautions had not been followed , and that the mine had been insufficiently watered — which would have reduced the coal dust held in the air . The colliery had further problems in October 1910 when a heavy roof fall in the Mafeking return released trapped firedamp , which caused the mine to be temporarily evacuated . 
 In 1906 a major explosion at a colliery in <unk> , northern France , caused the deaths of more than 1 @,@ 000 miners . The subsequent report blamed the accidental ignition of firedamp , exacerbated by coal dust in the air . Concerned that a similar disaster might happen in British collieries , the Royal Commission was formed , reporting back in 1907 , 1909 and 1911 . The reports led to the Coal Mines Act 1911 , which came force into December that year . Among other changes to the health and safety culture , the Act required that ventilation fans in all collieries be capable of reversing the air current underground ; this measure was to be implemented by 1 January 1913 . 
 In 1913 the colliery was producing 1 @,@ 800 long tons ( 2 @,@ 000 short tons ) of coal a day , and Senghenydd 's population had grown to just under 6 @,@ 000 . No work was undertaken at Senghenydd to implement the requirement , and the Mines Inspectorate gave the management an extended deadline of September 1913 to complete the work , but this was missed . 
 = = 14 October 1913 = = 
 At 3 : 00 am on 14 October 1913 , the day firemen descended the pit to conduct the daily checks for gas ; they had three hours to complete their investigations . The firemen for the Mafeking return had to travel more than two miles from the shaft bottom to the <unk> . It left insufficient time in which to make a thorough check of the workings — which involved placing a naked flame into cavities to see if the flame lengthened — although the historian Michael Lieven states that " the company considered any other form of inspection to be too time @-@ consuming " . Between 5 : 10 and 6 : 00 am 950 men descended the shaft for a shift that was due to last until 2 : 00 pm . 
 Just after 8 : 00 am an explosion occurred in the west side of the underground workings . It is possible there were two explosions as survivors stated a smaller explosion preceded the main one , although the official report referred only to one . The cause was probably a build @-@ up of firedamp that was ignited by an electric spark from equipment such as electric bell signalling gear . The initial explosion ignited airborne coal dust , and a shock wave ahead of the explosion raised yet more coal dust , which also combusted . Many victims who were not killed immediately by the explosion and fire died from the effects of afterdamp . The explosive wave travelled up the Lancaster shaft to the surface , destroying the headframe ; it killed the winder — the man in charge — and badly wounded his deputy . 
 Edward Shaw , the colliery manager , was on the surface and the remaining shift foremen were still underground and unable to give assistance . He took charge and descended the York shaft , accompanied by overman D R Thomas . The descent was slow , and they had to clear several girders and obstructions before they reached the bottom . They found that the men from the east side of the workings ( approximately 450 workers ) were unharmed , and their evacuation was ordered . Shaw and Thomas moved to the western side , where they found other men , alive but injured , and arranged for them to travel to the surface . Thomas later reported that the view into the western workings " was exactly like looking into a furnace " . 
 Shaw explored what he could of the western workings , before he and some of the survivors began tackling the fire . The water pipes from the surface in the Lancaster shaft were all fractured , and hand @-@ extinguishers were used . Shaw returned to the surface at 9 : 30 am to arrange for rescue and fire @-@ fighting teams from neighbouring collieries . From 11 : 00 am the specialist mines rescue teams began arriving at the colliery from the Rhymney and Rhondda Valleys , as did Red Cross workers and local ambulance services ; a police detachment was sent from Cardiff in a special train . Members of the Inspectorate of Mines were quickly on the scene , and an inspector descended to view the mine the same morning . 
 Lieven recounts how the rescue parties " in their desperation , ... were reckless with their lives " in their attempts to find survivors ; many were injured in small roof collapses , or suffered the effects of carbon monoxide poisoning . Their endeavours saved lives throughout the remainder of the day and into the night , including a group of 18 men found at around 1 : 00 am . They were the last survivors found . A total of 432 miners had died that day — although some bodies were not found until later — and 7 others died later in hospital or at home . A journalist from The Times wrote : " The numbers are truly awful . We talk in awed terms of the decimation of a regiment in a bloody battle , but here a great community engaged in the pursuit of a peaceful vocation is threatened with the loss of at least a quarter of its able bodied manhood " . On the surface the townsfolk waited for news ; a reporter for The Dundee Courier thought : " the scene at Senghenydd last night was depressing in the extreme . The streets were full of silent throngs of people who moved aimlessly about or stood stolidly at the street corners . " 
 = = Rescue , fire @-@ fighting and recovery : 15 October to 30 November = = 
 Work continued throughout the night of 15 October and into the following day . It focused on finding survivors and fighting the fire that blocked the entry into some workings of the western returns . The fire caused the roof supports to become unstable , and falls triggered outbursts of methane . Several rescuers were injured by the falls , one fatally . Before descending the mine many of the firefighters wrote what they thought might be their last letters home , and some made their wills . As the water pipe in the shaft was out of operation , fire @-@ fighting continued with hand extinguishers and work was only possible in 20 @-@ minute shifts . Despite wearing respirators , several rescuers were overcome by the effects of firedamp . During the course of the day , 56 bodies were raised to the surface and , that evening , a new water supply , connected by three @-@ quarters of a mile ( 1 @.@ 2 km ) of pipes to a nearby reservoir , was installed in the Lancaster shaft . 
 Reginald McKenna , the Home Secretary , visited the colliery on 15 October representing King George V , who was attending the marriage of Prince Arthur of Connaught and Princess Alexandra , 2nd Duchess of Fife . The king sent a £ 500 donation to a disaster relief fund , while the royal couple displayed their wedding presents at St James 's Palace and charged a shilling for entrance , raising £ 1 @,@ 200 for the fund . The fund was started by the Lord Mayor of Cardiff , while another collection , the Mansion House Fund set up by the Lord Mayor of London , raised more than £ 3 @,@ 000 on its first day . 
 William Brace , the local MP speaking on behalf of the South Wales Miners ' Federation , announced on 16 October that the priority would be given to putting out the fire and that no more search parties would be looking for survivors . Brace observed that the fire was blocking the western workings and consuming the oxygen in the air , making it unlikely that anyone was left alive . Progress in tackling the fire over the previous days had been slow , and it had only been extinguished in the first 30 yards of the roadway — still two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) from the coal face . Two coroner 's inquests were opened : one in Senghenydd for the men who died in the colliery , and one in Cardiff for those who had died in hospital ; both were adjourned the same day . The first funerals took place the following day , Friday 17 October . An estimated 150 @,@ 000 mourners gathered for the 11 men buried on the Saturday and 8 on the Sunday . 
 The firefighters built <unk> , walls of sandbags , turf and sand , approximately 18 feet ( 5 @.@ 5 metres ) deep and 17 feet ( 5 @.@ 2 metres ) up to the tunnel 's roof to prevent smoke filling the rest of the workings and allow men to explore areas previously cut off . Within two days the temperatures dropped and the volume of smoke was reduced . Although the fire was contained , miners still faced several obstacles , including roof collapses and large pockets of trapped firedamp . The first collapse consisted of more than 100 tons of debris , while another fall was more than 300 feet ( 91 @.@ 5 metres ) long and 30 to 40 feet ( 10 – 12 metres ) high . Clearing the falls and finding bodies was slow , and it took until 8 November for the first of the 4 working districts to be explored and cleared of bodies . Many victims were unidentifiable — either the explosion , fire or subsequent decomposition had taken its toll — and many had to be identified by their personal effects , although some bodies remained unidentified . 
 By 17 November the Mafeking and Pretoria districts had been fully explored , with more than 200 bodies raised to the surface in the preceding two days . On 20 November an official announcement reported that 439 miners had died , of whom 33 were still unaccounted for . Toward the end of the month , the men voted to return to work , even though the western workings were still out of action and 11 bodies were still missing . 
 A photographer , W Benton , took a series of photographs as the disaster unfolded , and later published them as a set of postcards . Their publication is described by the National Library of Wales as " an excellent example of early photo @-@ journalism " . The photographs came with a caption , shown below : 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The Senghenydd explosion remains the worst mining disaster in Britain . The deaths of 440 men on a small community had a devastating effect ; 60 victims were younger than 20 , of whom 8 were 14 years old ; 542 children had lost their fathers and 205 women were widowed . The impact on individual households was great : 12 homes lost both a father and son , 10 homes lost two sons each , while the death of one father and son left an 18 @-@ year @-@ old daughter to raise her 6 siblings alone ; another woman lost her husband , 2 sons , a brother and her lodger . 
 The inquiry into the disaster opened on 2 January 1914 with R A S Redmayne , the Chief Inspector of Mines , as the commissioner ; he was assisted by two assessors , Evan Williams , the chairman of the South Wales and Monmouthshire Coal Owners Association , and Robert Smillie , the president of the Miners ' Federation of Great Britain . The inquiry ran for three days before being adjourned to allow for the coroner 's inquest to run at Senghenydd . It reopened on 27 January and ran until 21 February . Over the 13 days it heard evidence , 21 @,@ 837 questions were put to 50 witnesses . The coroner 's inquest chaired by David Rees lasted for 5 days from 5 January 1914 . A total of 9 @,@ 000 questions were put to 50 witnesses , and the jury returned verdicts of accidental death . 
 The inquiry report failed to identify a definite cause , although it was considered that the most likely cause was a spark from the signalling gear . It would have ignited the firedamp , exacerbated and fuelled by coal dust in the air . The report was critical of many aspects of the management 's practices , and considered it had breached the mining regulations in respect of measuring and maintaining the air quality in the workings , and in the removal of coal dust from the tracks and walkways . The report pointed out that because the management had not implemented the changes needed to the ventilation fans as demanded by the Coal Mines Act 1911 , the fans were unable to reverse the direction of the airflow , which would have blown the smoke out through the Lancaster shaft , although Redmayne and his colleagues held differing opinions on the advisability of reversing or stopping the airflow . The historian John H Brown , in his examination of the disaster , states that had the airflow been reversed , firedamp or afterdamp could have been extracted from some sectors into the blaze , causing another explosion . 
 Further criticism was directed toward the emergency procedures . The lack of respirators at the mine was deemed to have cost lives . The lack of an adequate water supply for fire fighting was criticised , and Redmayne wrote : " I should have thought , in view of the fact that the colliery was such a gassy one , and it had already been devastated by an explosion , that the management would have made arrangements for a supply of water adequate to meet an emergency of the kind that actually occurred . " 
 Shaw 's actions were described by Lieven as those that " gained him a degree of respect from the local mining community which remained over the years ; they probably also cost the lives of scores of miners . " The Duckhams describe Shaw 's inaction in fixing the ventilation fan before the explosion , as well as his delay in sending for assistance from rescue teams until he exited the mine an hour and a half after the explosion . The official report considered there had been a " disquieting laxity in the management of the mine " , although Shaw was described by the Duckhams as " undoubtedly a highly capable manager " . The report led to Shaw being charged with 17 breaches of the Mines Act 1911 , and four charges were made against the company . Shaw was found guilty of failing to keep adequate environmental records and failing to replace a broken lamp locker ; he was fined £ 24 . The company was convicted of failing to provide a ventilation system that could reverse the airflow and was fined £ 10 with £ 5 5 shillings costs . One newspaper , Pioneer , calculated " Miners ' Lives at 1 / 11 ⁄ 4 each " ( 1 shilling 11 ⁄ 4d or 51 ⁄ 2p each ) . 
 After it reopened the colliery never reached the same levels of employment as before the explosion . William Lewis died in August 1914 ; Shaw continued as manager of the mine until November 1928 , when it closed . 
 A stage play based on the disaster , by the journalist and broadcaster Margaret Coles , was first performed at the Sherman Cymru , Cardiff in 1991 . The disaster at Senghenydd has provided the backdrop to two printed works of historical fiction : Alexander Cordell 's This Sweet and Bitter Earth ( 1977 ) and <unk> <unk> y Cwm ( 2013 ) by Gareth F Williams . 
 In 1981 a memorial to those lost in the disaster was unveiled by the National Coal Board . Based outside Nant @-@ y @-@ parc Primary School , which is built on the site of the former colliery , the monument is a 20 feet ( 6 m ) high replica of the colliery 's winding gear . A second monument was unveiled in 2006 to the dead from both the 1901 and 1913 explosions . 
 On 14 October 2013 , the centenary of the disaster , a Welsh national memorial to all mining disasters was unveiled at the former pithead . Funded by the Aber Valley Heritage Group and their patron Roy Noble , with matched funding from the Welsh Government , a bronze statue by Les Johnson depicting a rescue worker coming to the aid of one of the survivors of the explosion , was unveiled by Carwyn Jones , the First Minister of Wales . Jones said : " Mining is central to the story of Wales . It has shaped our history and communities and its social and physical legacy is still with us to this day . ... It is only right that we have a permanent memorial . " 
 = Hans @-@ Ulrich Rudel = 
 Hans @-@ Ulrich Rudel ( 2 July 1916 – 18 December 1982 ) was a Luftwaffe military aviator during World War II , a ground @-@ attack pilot credited with the destruction of 519 tanks , as well as a number of ships . He also claimed 9 aerial victories , and the destruction of more than 800 vehicles of all types , over 150 artillery , anti @-@ tank and anti @-@ aircraft positions , 4 armored trains , and numerous bridges and supply lines . He flew 2 @,@ 530 ground @-@ attack missions exclusively on the Eastern Front , usually flying the Junkers Ju 87 " Stuka " dive bomber , and 430 missions flying the Focke @-@ Wulf Fw 190 . 
 Born in the Province of Silesia , Rudel volunteered for military service in the Luftwaffe in 1936 . Following flight training , he served in an aerial reconnaissance unit at the outbreak of World War II in Europe . He transferred to the dive bomber force , and was posted to France . Rudel flew his first combat missions as a dive bomber pilot at the beginning of Operation Barbarossa in June 1941 . On 23 September 1941 , he was credited with severely damaging the Soviet battleship Marat , which effectively put her out of action for several months . He was posted to the Luftwaffe main testing ground at Rechlin , and experimented with the Bordkanone BK 3 @,@ 7 equipped Ju 87 G in the anti @-@ tank role . Back on the Eastern Front , Rudel flew a Ju 87 G in combat over the Kuban bridgehead , destroying numerous landing craft . He destroyed his 100th tank on 30 October 1943 and on 22 February 1944 was appointed Gruppenkommandeur ( group commander ) of III . Gruppe of Schlachtgeschwader 2 " Immelmann " ( SG 2 — 2nd Ground Support Wing ) . 
 By 29 March 1944 , Rudel was credited with over 200 tanks destroyed , and more than 1 @,@ 800 combat missions logged . He was placed in command of SG 2 " Immelmann " in October 1944 . Rudel flew his <unk> combat mission on 22 December 1944 , and on the following day destroyed his 463rd tank . For these achievements , he was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Golden Oak Leaves , Swords , and Diamonds , presented to him by Adolf Hitler on 1 January 1945 . Rudel was severely injured in combat on 8 February 1945 , requiring the amputation of his right lower leg , and time in the hospital . On 25 March 1945 , Rudel began flying again , before surrendering to US forces at the Kitzingen Airfield on 8 May 1945 . 
 After his release from captivity in April 1946 , Rudel owned and operated a haulage company in Coesfeld . In 1948 , he emigrated to Argentina and founded the " Kameradenwerk " , a relief organization for Nazi war criminals that helped fugitive Nazis escape to Latin America or the Middle East . Together with Willem Sassen , he helped conceal and protect Josef Mengele , a former SS doctor in the Auschwitz concentration camp , responsible for the selection of victims to be killed in the gas chambers . He also worked in the arms industry and as a military advisor . Through Juan Perón , the President of Argentina , he secured financially lucrative government military contracts . He was also active as a military adviser and arms dealer for the regime in Bolivia , for Augusto Pinochet in Chile , and for Alfredo Stroessner in Paraguay . Due to these activities , he was placed under observation by the US Central Intelligence Agency . 
 In the West German federal election of 1953 , Rudel , who had returned to West Germany , was the top candidate for the far @-@ right Deutsche <unk> ( German Reich Party ) , but was not elected to the Bundestag . Following the Revolución Libertadora in 1955 , the uprising that ended the second presidential term of Perón , Rudel was forced to move to Paraguay , where he frequently acted as a foreign representative for several German companies doing business in South America . In 1977 , he became a spokesman for the Deutsche Volksunion ( German People 's Union ) , a nationalist political party founded by Gerhard Frey . Rudel died in Rosenheim in 1982 , and was buried in Dornhausen . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Rudel was born on 2 July 1916 in <unk> , Silesia , a province in the Kingdom of Prussia ( present @-@ day <unk> ) in the administrative district of Gmina Czarny Bór , within <unk> County , Lower Silesian Voivodeship , in Poland . He was the third child of Lutheran minister Johannes Rudel and his wife Martha , née <unk> . He had two older sisters , Ingeborg and Johanna . The children were raised in a number of different parishes , which included Schweidnitz ( present @-@ day Świdnica ) , Sagan ( present @-@ day <unk> ) , Niesky , Görlitz and <unk> ( present @-@ day <unk> ) . As a boy , Rudel was a poor scholar , but a very keen sportsman . From 1922 to 1936 , he attended the Volksschule , a primary school , and the humanities oriented Gymnasium , a secondary school , in <unk> , and graduated with his Abitur ( university @-@ preparatory high school diploma ) . In late 1936 , he attended the compulsory Reichsarbeitsdienst ( Reich Labor Service ) at <unk> , working on the banks of the Lusatian Neisse . 
 On 4 December 1936 , Rudel joined the Luftwaffe as a Fahnenjunker ( officer cadet ) . Following basic training , his flight training began in June 1937 at the Luftkriegsschule 3 ( 3rd Air Warfare School ) at <unk> @-@ Werder near Berlin . In June 1938 , now an Oberfähnrich ( officer candidate ) , he joined I. Gruppe ( 1st group ) of Sturzkampfgeschwader 168 ( StG 168 — 168th Dive Bomber Wing ) at Graz @-@ Thalerhof , present @-@ day Graz Airport . There , he was assigned to the 1 . Staffel ( 1st squadron ) for dive bombing training . Rudel , as a teetotaler and non @-@ smoker , was not well accepted among his peers . He also had difficulties learning the new techniques , and was considered unsuitable for combat flying , so on 1 December 1938 , he was transferred to the <unk> ( Reconnaissance Flying School ) at Hildesheim for air observer training in operational aerial reconnaissance . He was promoted to Leutnant ( second lieutenant ) on 1 January 1939 . In June 1939 , he was posted to the 2 . Staffel ( 2nd squadron ) of <unk> 121 ( 121st Long @-@ Range Reconnaissance Group ) at Prenzlau . 
 = = World War II = = 
 On Friday 1 September 1939 , German forces invaded Poland starting World War II in Europe . Shortly before the invasion , Aufklärungsgruppe 121 was moved to Schneidemühl , present @-@ day Piła , at the time close to the Polish Corridor . As an air observer , Rudel flew on long @-@ range reconnaissance missions over Poland . He flew several missions over the Brest @-@ Litovsk – <unk> – Lutsk railway line , and earned the Iron Cross 2nd Class ( Eisernes Kreuz zweiter Klasse ) on 10 November 1939 . Following the invasion , Rudel submitted several requests for transfer back to the dive bomber force . On 2 March 1940 , he was posted to <unk> @-@ Regiment 43 ( 43rd Aviators Training Regiment ) , based at Vienna @-@ <unk> and later at <unk> . There he served as a regimental adjutant . During his time with <unk> @-@ Regiment 43 , Rudel participated in various sporting events , including a cross Vienna relay race , and on 6 October 1940 , he took third place in the Silesian decathlon championship . In late June 1940 , he was transferred to I. Gruppe of Sturzkampfgeschwader 3 ( StG 3 — 3rd Dive Bomber Wing ) , formerly his old unit I. Gruppe of StG 168 , which had been renamed , and was based at Caen , France . 
 Rudel did not fly operationally during the Battle of Britain , since he was still regarded a poor pilot . Serving in a non @-@ combatant role , he was promoted to Oberleutnant ( first lieutenant ) on 1 September 1940 . In early 1941 , he was transferred to the Stuka @-@ Ergänzungsstaffel ( Supplementary Dive Bomber Squadron ) at Graz @-@ Thalerhof , a specialized training unit for new dive bomber pilots . There , according to his own account , he finally learned to master the Junkers Ju 87 two @-@ man dive bomber . In mid @-@ April 1941 , he was assigned to I. Gruppe of Sturzkampfgeschwader 2 " Immelmann " ( StG 2 — 2nd Dive Bomber Wing ) , named after the World War I fighter ace Max Immelmann , and based at Molaoi , Greece . His poor reputation as a pilot preceded him , and he spent the Battle of Crete in a non @-@ combat role . At the time , the Geschwader was commanded by Geschwaderkommodore ( wing commander ) Major Oskar <unk> , and Rudel 's I. Gruppe was headed by Gruppenkommandeur ( group commander ) Hauptmann ( captain ) Hubertus <unk> . 
 = = = War against the Soviet Union = = = 
 In June 1941 , StG 2 " Immelmann " was moved to <unk> in preparation for Operation Barbarossa , the invasion of the Soviet Union . Initially for this campaign , the Geschwaderstab ( headquarters unit ) , I. and III . Gruppe of StG 2 " Immelmann " had been placed under the control of VIII . Fliegerkorps ( 8th Air Corps ) , led by General der Flieger ( General of the Aviators ) Wolfram Freiherr von Richthofen , subordinated to Luftflotte 2 ( 2nd Air Fleet ) under the command of Generalfeldmarschall ( Field Marshal ) Albert Kesselring , and supported the northern or left flank of Army Group Center . The main objective of this army group , under the command of Feldmarschall Fedor von Bock , was to capture the capital of the Soviet Union , Moscow . 
 Rudel , who had been ordered to shuttle a Ju 87 to the production facility at Cottbus for a maintenance overhaul of the aircraft , heard over the radio news of the invasion of the Soviet Union on 22 June 1941 . That day , he flew another aircraft to Insterburg , present @-@ day <unk> , and then southeast to <unk> . There , he was assigned to 1 . Staffel commanded by Oberleutnant Ewald Janssen . As Janssen 's wingman , Rudel flew his first four combat missions as a dive bomber pilot against Soviet tank and troop deployments in the vicinity of Grodno and <unk> on 23 June 1941 . During the first two weeks of the campaign , StG 2 " Immelmann " flew ground support missions for armored units of Panzergruppe 3 ( 3rd Panzer Group ) advancing towards Smolensk . He was then transferred to the III . Gruppe of StG 2 " Immelmann " , under command of Hauptmann Heinrich <unk> , and appointed Technischer <unk> ( TO — Technical Officer ) , a role in which he was responsible for the supervision of all technical aspects , such as routine maintenance , servicing , and modifications of the Gruppe . On 18 July 1941 , he was awarded the Iron Cross 1st Class ( Eisernes Kreuz erster Klasse ) and the Front Flying Clasp of the Luftwaffe for Ground Attack Fighters in Gold ( Frontflugspange für Schlachtflieger in Gold ) . 
 By August 1941 , Adolf Hitler had shifted VIII . Fliegerkorps northwards in support of Army Group North , under command of Feldmarschall Wilhelm Ritter von <unk> , in its attempt to capture Leningrad , present @-@ day Saint Petersburg . As a consequence of this decision , on 29 August 1941 , III . Gruppe was ordered to an airfield south of Luga . There , Rudel flew numerous combat missions in support of the 16th Army and 18th Army advancing northwards . The Soviet Navy Baltic Fleet , with its capital ships Marat and Oktyabrskaya Revolutsiya , supported by the heavy cruisers Kirov and Maxim Gorky , bombarded German forces on their advance towards Leningrad . Subsequently , Richthofen ordered StG 2 " Immelmann " to attack this Soviet naval task force . On 21 September 1941 , Rudel flew his first mission against this task force , claiming a hit on the Marat with a 500 kg ( 1 @,@ 100 lb ) bomb . On 23 September , StG 2 " Immelmann " , now armed with 1 @,@ 000 kg ( 2 @,@ 200 lb ) armor @-@ piercing bombs , again attacked the Soviet ships based at Kronstadt harbor . Oberleutnant Lothar Lau scored a hit on Marat , causing a fire . Rudel also hit Marat , causing an enormous explosion that put her out of action for several months . That day , III . Gruppe flew a second mission against the Soviet fleet at Kronstadt . Rudel did not participate in this mission . An accident while taxiing had rendered the aircraft of III . Gruppe commander , Hauptmann Ernst @-@ Siegfried Steen , unserviceable , and Steen ordered Rudel to hand over his Ju 87 to him . Steen , with Unteroffizier Alfred <unk> , Rudel 's regular air gunner , led the Gruppe in this attack . Flying into intense anti @-@ aircraft fire over Kronstadt , Steen and <unk> took a direct hit while attacking Kirov , and both were killed in action . In October 1941 , Erwin Hentschel joined Rudel as his new radio operator and air gunner . 
 Army Group Center opened Operation Taifun , the Battle of Moscow , on 30 September 1941 and VIII . Fliegerkorps was again placed under the command of Luftflotte 2 . On 20 October 1941 , Rudel was awarded the Honor Goblet of the Luftwaffe ( Ehrenpokal der Luftwaffe ) , and on 2 December 1941 , the German Cross in Gold ( Deutsches Kreuz in Gold ) , the first pilot of III . Gruppe to receive this distinction . By the end of December , he had flown his 400th mission , and on 6 January 1942 received the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes ) . The presentation was made by Richthofen on 15 January . Rudel had been nominated for the Knight 's Cross for severely damaging the battleships Marat and Oktyabrskaya Revolutsiya , sinking one heavy cruiser , and rendering another one unserviceable . In actions against land targets , he was credited with damaging or destroying 15 bridges , 23 artillery positions , 4 armored trains , and 17 tanks or assault guns . In the winter of 1941 – 42 , Rudel fought in the combat zones of the Volga – <unk> – Dnieper rivers near the <unk> Hills , in the vicinity of the <unk> and Demyansk Pockets , both pockets resulting from the German retreat following their defeat during the Battle of Moscow , in the area west of Rzhev , and over the railway line at <unk> . 
 In early 1942 , Rudel was granted home leave . During his vacation , he stayed with his parents in Alt @-@ <unk> , present @-@ day Stary <unk> , and got married . He and his wife then took a skiing vacation in Tirol , Austria . From March to August 1942 , Rudel was appointed leader of the Ergänzungsstaffel at Graz @-@ Thalerhof , and transferred with this Staffel to <unk> , present @-@ day <unk> , located 10 kilometers ( 6 @.@ 2 miles ) north of Simferopol on the Crimean peninsula . Beginning on 15 August 1942 , flying with the Stuka @-@ Ergänzungsstaffel and as Staffelkapitän ( squadron leader ) of 9 . Staffel ( 9th squadron ) of StG 2 " Immelmann " , Rudel flew missions in the Caucasus and over the Black Sea . On 23 September 1942 , he damaged a 4 @,@ 000 gross register tons ( GRT ) merchant ship in the harbor of Tuapse , and flew his 500th combat mission the following day . In early November 1942 , Rudel was briefly hospitalized in Rostov @-@ on @-@ Don and treated for hepatitis . On 17 November 1942 , Rudel was appointed Staffelkapitän of the 1 . Staffel ( 1st squadron ) of StG 2 " Immelmann " , and flew with this unit in the Battle of Stalingrad . Besides StG 2 " Immelmann " , Richthofen had ordered the Stukas of II . Gruppe of Sturzkampfgeschwader 1 ( StG 1 — 1st Dive Bomber Wing ) and elements of Sturzkampfgeschwader 77 ( StG 77 — 77th Dive Bomber Wing ) to break Soviet opposition from the air . On 25 November 1942 , I. Gruppe of StG 2 " Immelmann " defended an airfield occupied by StG 1 at <unk> against attacks from an Soviet cavalry division . That day , Rudel flew 17 combat missions in its defense . Following his 750th combat mission , he was nominated for — but not awarded — the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes mit Eichenlaub ) on 14 December 1942 . 
 = = = Anti @-@ tank operations = = = 
 On 10 February 1943 , Rudel flew his 1,000th combat mission from <unk> against forces of the 57th Army in the vicinity of Izium . He was then sent on fourteen days home leave , which he spent at St. Anton , skiing on the <unk> . 
 Following this vacation , he was ordered to the Luftwaffe main testing ground at Rechlin . There , under the command of Hauptmann Hans @-@ Karl Stepp , the Luftwaffe was experimenting with using the Ju 87 G in the anti @-@ tank role , armed with two 37 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ) Bordkanone BK 3 @,@ 7 under @-@ wing autocannons . On 1 April 1943 , he was promoted to Hauptmann with a rank age backdated to 1 April 1942 . The anti @-@ tank unit <unk> zur <unk> was later located at Bryansk @-@ Desna , and then at an airfield at Kerch on the Kerch Peninsula . The airfield was also used by StG 2 " Immelmann " , which at the time was flying missions against the Kuban bridgehead near <unk> . There , flying along with StG 2 " Immelmann " , Rudel was credited with the destruction of 70 Soviet landing crafts , flying the cannon equipped Ju 87 . Some of these attacks were filmed by an onboard gun camera and shown in Die Deutsche Wochenschau , a newsreel released in German cinemas , its production supervised and censored by the Ministry of Public Enlightenment and Propaganda under Joseph Goebbels . Der Adler , a biweekly Nazi propaganda magazine published by the Luftwaffe , also reported his actions in volume 12 of 1943 . On 14 April 1943 , Rudel was awarded the Oak Leaves to his Knight 's Cross for his achievements in over 1 @,@ 000 combat missions . He was the 229th member of the German armed forces to be so honored . Rudel received the Oak Leaves from Hitler personally at his office in the New Reich Chancellery in Berlin . 
 On 5 July 1943 , the first day of the Battle of Kursk , Rudel flew his first combat missions with the cannon equipped Ju 87 G against Soviet tanks in the area of Belgorod , destroying four T @-@ 34s on the first mission . In total , he was credited with twelve tanks destroyed that day . The same day , Rudel and his squadron flew in support of 2nd SS Panzer Division Das Reich and its advance towards <unk> . At 10 : 30 , a group of about 30 T @-@ 34s from the 5th Guards Tank Corps , possibly belonging to the 22nd Guards Tank Brigade , attacked SS @-@ Obersturmbannführer Hans Albin Freiherr von <unk> 's Panzers . In two days , 5th Guards Tank Corps lost approximately 100 of its 200 tanks to Rudel 's Stukas and SS Panzers . On 17 July 1943 , Hauptmann Walter <unk> , Gruppenkommandeur of III . Gruppe , was killed in action near Oryol . Two days later , Rudel was appointed leader of III . Gruppe . On the morning of 12 August 1943 , Rudel and Hentschel respectively completed their 1,300th and 1,000th combat mission . Hentschel was the first air gunner to achieve this mark . 
 On the morning of 9 October 1943 , Rudel and Hentschel respectively completed their 1,500th and <unk> combat mission . Rudel was the first pilot to achieve this mark . The event was celebrated at an airfield at <unk> , south of <unk> <unk> , and was attended by General der Flieger Kurt Pflugbeil , commanding general of the IV . Fliegerkorps ( 4th Air Corps ) . StG 2 " Immelmann " was redesignated to Schlachtgeschwader 2 " Immelmann " ( SG 2 — 2nd Ground Support Wing ) on 18 October 1943 . On 30 October 1943 , Rudel , flying the Ju 87 G near Kirovohrad , was credited with the destruction of his 100th tank . He flew his <unk> mission in November 1943 , and was credited with seven tanks destroyed on 23 November 1943 . For this achievement , on 25 November , he was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves and Swords ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes mit Eichenlaub und Schwertern ) , the 42nd member of the German armed forces to be so honored . On that day , Hentschel was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross . The presentation to Rudel and Hentschel was made by Hitler at the Führer Headquarter Wolfsschanze ( Wolf 's Lair ) in Rastenburg , now Kętrzyn in Poland . At Rastenburg that day , Oberstleutnant ( Lieutenant Colonel ) Dietrich Hrabak , Geschwaderkommodore of Jagdgeschwader 52 ( JG 52 — 52nd Fighter Wing ) , was also present at the award ceremony , and received the Oak Leaves to his Knight 's Cross . 
 = = = Defeat on the Eastern Front = = = 
 In January 1944 , Rudel led III . Gruppe in defensive support of the 8th Army . During the Kirovohrad Offensive ( 1 – 16 January 1944 ) , the 2nd Ukrainian Front , under command of Ivan Konev , attacked the German 8th Army . The Soviet operation was successful and led to German forces being encircled in the Battle of the Korsun – Cherkassy Pocket ( 24 January – 16 February 1944 ) . From 7 to 10 January 1944 , Rudel was credited with the destruction of 17 Soviet tanks in these battles ; he claimed his 150th tank victory on 11 January 1944 , and flew his 1 @,@ 700 mission on 16 January 1944 . He was officially appointed Gruppenkommandeur of III . Gruppe on 22 February 1944 , and promoted to Major on 1 March 1944 , with his seniority back dated to 1 October 1942 . On 20 March , Rudel landed behind Soviet lines to save a downed crew from captivity . This was his eighth mission of the day ; the target area had been a bridge spanning the Dniester near <unk> . Unable to take off as the wheels of his aircraft had sunk into the soft ground , the four headed back to German held territory on foot . Pursued by Soviet troops , the men attempted to swim across the Dniester River . Rudel and two of the others made it across , while the fourth , Hentschel , drowned in the attempt . Soon afterwards , the three were captured . Rudel was wounded by small arms fire in the shoulder as he made his escape and returned to German held territory the following day . Upon his return , Ernst Gadermann , previously the troop doctor of III . Gruppe , joined Rudel as his new radio operator and air gunner . 
 Rudel completed his 1 @,@ 800 combat mission on 25 March 1944 . The next day he flew several more sorties during the prelude of the First Jassy – Kishinev Offensive ( 8 April – 6 June 1944 ) , and was credited with the destruction of 17 tanks at <unk> , 40 kilometers ( 25 mi ) north of Iași . This achievement was mentioned in the Wehrmachtbericht , a propaganda radio report , the first of five such mentions , on 27 March 1944 . The next day , Rudel was again mentioned in the Wehrmachtbericht , which reported his 202nd tank kill . For this he was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves , Swords and Diamonds ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes mit Eichenlaub , Schwertern und Brillanten ) on 29 March 1944 . Rudel was the tenth member of the Wehrmacht , and the seventh pilot , who had received this award . The presentation was made at the Berghof , Hitler 's home in the Obersalzberg of the Bavarian Alps near Berchtesgaden . Following the presentation , Rudel went on vacation , and stayed with his wife and son at Alt @-@ <unk> . He then returned to the Eastern Front , flying to join his Gruppe , which was based at Huși , southeast of Iași . Rudel flew his 2,000th combat mission on 1 June 1944 , destroying his 301st tank that day , 78 of which had been destroyed with bombs and 223 with the 37 mm cannon . This event earned him his third mention in the Wehrmachtbericht , which was broadcast on 3 June 1944 . The Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Luftwaffe , Reichsmarschall ( Marshal of the Reich ) Hermann Göring , presented Rudel with the Combined Pilots @-@ Observation Badge in Gold with Diamonds ( <unk> und <unk> in Gold mit Brillanten ) , and the Golden Front Flying Clasp of the Luftwaffe for Ground Attack Fighters with Pennant " 2 @,@ 000 " ( Frontflugspange für Schlachtflieger in Gold mit <unk> " 2 @,@ 000 " ) . 
 On 13 July 1944 , III . Gruppe was transferred from Huși , Romania to the central sector of the Eastern Front , where the Red Army was attacking towards the Vistula in Operation Bagration . Flying from an airfield at Chełm , the Gruppe targeted Rava @-@ Ruska and other targets in the Ukraine and Belarus area . On 22 July , the Gruppe moved to <unk> in the Vistula @-@ San triangle ; from <unk> missions against armored columns at Jarosław , Rzeszów , and the <unk> were flown . On 5 August 1944 , Rudel claimed 11 tanks destroyed , earning him his fourth mention in the Wehrmachtbericht . Rudel 's number of tank kills had now reached 378 , including 300 destroyed with the 37 mm cannon . Fighting on the Courland front , he was credited with 8 tank kills on 14 August 1944 , taking the total to 320 tank kills with the 37 mm cannon . On 19 August , Rudel 's aircraft was hit by anti @-@ aircraft fire in the vicinity of <unk> , Latvia . In the resulting forced landing , both he and Gadermann were injured , Rudel in the leg , and Gadermann suffering several broken ribs . Rudel 's unit was then ordered to transfer back to Romania , and then to Hungary . From 28 August onwards , Rudel operated from airfields at Buzău , 70 kilometers ( 43 mi ) northeast of the vital oil refineries at Ploiești , namely Tășnad near <unk> , Miskolc , <unk> northeast of Lake Balaton , <unk> near Szolnok , <unk> near Budapest , and <unk> near Székesfehérvár . 
 = = = Wing Commander = = = 
 Rudel was promoted to Oberstleutnant on 1 September 1944 , and appointed leader of SG 2 " Immelmann " , replacing Stepp , on 1 October 1944 . He handed over command of his III . Gruppe to Hauptmann Kurt Lau . On 17 November 1944 , he was wounded in the thigh , and had to make an emergency landing at a fighter airfield near Budapest . Following his release from the hospital , he flew subsequent missions with his leg in a plaster cast . 
 On 22 December 1944 , Rudel completed his <unk> combat mission , and the next day , he reported his 463rd tank destroyed . On 29 December 1944 , Rudel was promoted to Oberst ( colonel ) , and was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Golden Oak Leaves , Swords , and Diamonds ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes mit <unk> Eichenlaub , Schwertern und Brillanten ) , the first and only person to receive this distinction . This award was presented to him by Hitler at the <unk> , Hitler 's headquarters in the Taunus mountains during the Battle of the Bulge , on 1 January 1945 . On 14 January 1945 , Rudel received the Hungarian Golden Medal for Bravery ( <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , which was presented to him by Hungary 's Head of State Ferenc <unk> at Sopron , Hungary . 
 On 8 February 1945 , Rudel was credited with the destruction of 13 tanks near <unk> on the Oder River , earning him his fifth mention in the Wehrmachtbericht on 10 February 1945 . During the attack on the 13th tank , a 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) shell hit his aircraft . He was badly wounded in the right foot , and crash landed inside German lines . His observer / gunner Gadermann stemmed the bleeding . Rudel was taken to a field hospital of the Waffen @-@ SS at Seelow , where his leg had to be amputated below the knee . He was then hospitalized in the Zoo flak tower in Berlin , and was flying operationally again with a modified rudder pedal on 25 March 1945 . He claimed 26 more tanks destroyed by the end of the war . On 19 April 1945 , the day before Hitler 's final birthday , Rudel spent the evening talking to Hitler in the Führerbunker , an air @-@ raid shelter located near the Reich Chancellery in Berlin . According to John Toland , author of the book Adolf Hitler , who based his statement on Rudel 's book Stuka Pilot and personal interviews with Rudel , Hitler had ordered him to take charge of all jet fighter aircraft . Rudel refused , as he preferred flying to a desk job . By the time Rudel left , it was after midnight . 
 On 8 May 1945 , determined not to fall into Soviet hands , he left his ground personnel behind and led three Ju 87s and four Fw 190s westward from an airfield at <unk> , north of Prague , landing at Kitzingen airfield , which was held by the United States Army Air Forces <unk> Fighter Group . Rudel had his men lock the brakes and collapse the landing gear to render the aircraft useless ; all but one obeyed his order and wiped off their undercarriage . There he surrendered to US forces , and was taken prisoner of war . Over the next eleven months , he was held captive in Erlangen and Wiesbaden , then in prison camps in England and France , before he was taken to Fürth in Bavaria . 
 = = Later life = = 
 In April 1946 , Rudel was released from captivity at Fürth . While Rudel was interned , his family fleeing from the advancing Red Army had found refuge with Gadermann 's parents in Wuppertal . There , Gadermann helped Rudel look for work . He was offered an office job , but he did not accept the position . He then owned and operated a haulage company in Coesfeld . In 1948 , he emigrated to Argentina via the ratlines , travelling via the Austrian <unk> to Italy . In Rome , with the help of South Tyrolean smugglers , and aided by the Austrian titular bishop Alois Hudal , he bought himself a fake Red Cross passport with the cover name " Emilio Meier " , and took a flight from Rome to Buenos Aires , where he arrived on 8 June 1948 . 
 = = = In South America = = = 
 After Rudel moved to Argentina , he became a close friend and confidant of the President of Argentina Juan Perón , and Paraguay 's dictator and Nazi Germany admirer Alfredo Stroessner . In Argentina , he founded the " Kameradenwerk " ( lit . " comrades work " or " comrades act " ) , a relief organization for Nazi war criminals . Prominent members of the " Kameradenwerk " included SS officer Ludwig <unk> , whose extradition from Sweden had been demanded by the Soviet Union on war crime charges , Kurt <unk> , a member of the Gestapo sentenced to 10 years for war crimes committed at Krasnodar , Austrian war criminal Fridolin Guth , and the German spy in Chile , August <unk> . The group maintained close contact with other internationally wanted fascists , such as Ante Pavelić , Carlo <unk> , Vittorio Mussolini , the son of Benito Mussolini , and Konstantin von Neurath . In addition to these war criminals that fled to Argentina , the " Kameradenwerk " also assisted Nazi criminals imprisoned in Europe , including Rudolf Hess and Karl Dönitz , with food parcels from Argentina and sometimes by paying their legal fees . In Argentina , Rudel became acquainted with notorious Nazi concentration camp doctor and war criminal Josef Mengele . Rudel , together with Willem Sassen , a former member of the Waffen @-@ SS and a Wehrmacht propaganda and war correspondent unit , who initially worked as Rudel 's driver and later for the Dürer @-@ Verlag , helped to relocate Mengele to Brazil by introducing him to Nazi supporter Wolfgang Gerhard . In 1957 , Rudel and Mengele together travelled to Chile to meet with Walter Rauff , the inventor of the mobile gas chamber . 
 In Argentina , Rudel lived in Villa Carlos Paz , roughly 36 kilometers ( 22 mi ) from the populous Córdoba City , where he rented a house and operated a brickworks . There , Rudel wrote his wartime memoirs <unk> ( [ Nevertheless ] or [ In Spite of Everything ] ) . The book was published in November 1949 by the Dürer @-@ Verlag in Buenos Aires . Discussion ensued in Germany on Rudel being allowed to publish the book , because he was a known Nazi . In the book , he supported Nazi policies . This book was later re @-@ edited and published in the United States , as the Cold War intensified , under the title , Stuka Pilot , which supported the German invasion of the Soviet Union . Pierre <unk> , a French fighter pilot , had befriended Rudel and wrote the foreword to the French edition of his book Stuka Pilot . In 1951 , he published a pamphlet <unk> oder <unk> ? ( [ <unk> or Legend ? ] or [ <unk> or Legend ? ] ) , in which he claimed that " Germany 's war against Bolshevism was a defensive war " , moreover , " a crusade for the whole world " . In the 1950s , Rudel became friends with Savitri Devi , a writer and proponent of Hinduism and Nazism and introduced her to a number of Nazi fugitives in Spain and the Middle East . 
 With the help of Perón , Rudel secured financially lucrative governmental military contracts . He was also active as a military adviser and arms dealer for the regime and " Cocaine Generals " in Bolivia , for Augusto Pinochet in Chile and Stroessner in Paraguay . In addition , he was in contact with Werner Naumann , formerly a State Secretary in Goebbels ' Ministry of Public Enlightenment and Propaganda in Nazi Germany . Following the Revolución Libertadora in 1955 , a military and civilian uprising that ended the second presidential term of Perón , Rudel was forced to leave Argentina and move to Paraguay . During the following years in South America , Rudel frequently acted as a foreign representative for several German companies , including Salzgitter AG , Dornier Flugzeugwerke , Focke @-@ Wulf , Messerschmitt , Siemens and Lahmeyer International , a German consulting engineering firm . Rudel 's input was used during the development of the A @-@ 10 Thunderbolt II , a United States Air Force aircraft designed solely for close air support , including attacking tanks , armored vehicles and other ground targets . 
 According to the historian Peter Hammerschmidt , based on files of the German <unk> ( BND — Federal Intelligence Service ) and the US Central Intelligence Agency ( CIA ) , his research revealed that the BND , via the cover @-@ up company " Merex " , was in close contact with former members of the SS and the Nazi Party . In 1966 , Merex , represented by Walter <unk> , formerly a Generalmajor in the Wehrmacht and then an agent of the BND and under observation of the CIA , via contacts established by Rudel and Sassen , sold discarded equipment of the Bundeswehr ( Federal Defence ) to various dictators in Latin America . According to Hammerschmidt , Rudel assisted in establishing contact between Merex and Friedrich Schwend , a former member of the Reichssicherheitshauptamt ( Reich Main Security Office ) and involved in Operation Bernhard . Schwend , according to Hammerschmidt , had close links with the military services of Peru and Bolivia . In the early sixties , Rudel , Schwend and Klaus Barbie , founded a company called " La Estrella " , the star . This company employed a number of former SS officers , who , after the war , had found refuge in Latin America . Rudel , through his involvement in La Estrella , was also in contact with Otto Skorzeny , who had his own network of former SS and Wehrmacht officers . 
 = = = Sport and political ambitions = = = 
 Although missing one leg , he remained an active sportsman , playing tennis , skiing , and mountain climbing . In 1949 , he competed in an international skiing competition held at Bariloche . In this competition , Rudel took fourth place in the men 's slalom , first place went to Stein Eriksen . In 1951 , he climbed the highest peak in the Americas , Aconcagua , at 6 @,@ 960 @.@ 8 meters ( 22 @,@ 837 ft ) , and by extension the highest point in both the Western Hemisphere and the Southern Hemisphere . Due to deteriorating weather conditions , Rudel had to turn back short of the summit on 31 December 1951 . In 1953 , Rudel ascended the <unk> @-@ <unk> in the Argentine Andes , at 6 @,@ 739 meters ( 22 @,@ 110 feet ) the fifth highest volcano , three times . On his second expedition , the team photographer Erwin <unk> was killed in a fall . His body was recovered and buried on the third expedition . Rudel suffered a stroke on 26 April 1970 . 
 Rudel returned to West Germany in 1953 and became a leading member of the Neo @-@ Nazi nationalist political party , the German Reich Party ( <unk> — Deutsche <unk> ) . In the West German federal election of 1953 , Rudel was the top candidate for the <unk> , but was not elected to the Bundestag . According to Josef Müller @-@ <unk> , journalist and editor @-@ in @-@ chief of Die Zeit , Rudel had an egocentric character . In his political speeches , Rudel made generalizing statements , claiming that he was speaking on behalf of most , if not all , former German soldiers of World War II . Rudel heavily criticized the Western Allies during World War II for not having supported Germany in its war against the Soviet Union . Rudel 's political demeanor subsequently alienated him from his formers comrades , foremost Gadermann . Müller @-@ <unk> concluded his article with the statement : " Rudel no longer has a Geschwader ! " In 1977 , he became a spokesman for the Deutsche Volksunion ( German People 's Union ) , a nationalist political party founded by Gerhard Frey . In 2004 , Frey and <unk> Herrmann published an abstract of Rudel 's biography in the book Helden der Wehrmacht – <unk> deutsche Soldaten [ Heroes of the Wehrmacht – Immortal German soldiers ] . This publication was classified as a far @-@ right wing publication by the German scholars Claudia Fröhlich and Horst @-@ Alfred Heinrich . 
 = = = Public scandals = = = 
 In October 1976 , Rudel inadvertently triggered a chain of events , which were later dubbed the Rudel @-@ <unk> ( Rudel Scandal ) . <unk> 51 ( 51st Reconnaissance Wing ) the latest unit to hold the name " Immelmann " , held a reunion for members of the unit including those from World War II . The Secretary of State in the Federal Ministry of Defence , Hermann Schmidt authorized the event . Fearing that Rudel would spread Nazi propaganda on the German Air Force airbase in Bremgarten near Freiburg , Schmidt ordered that the meeting could not be held at the airbase . News of this decision reached Generalleutnant Walter Krupinski , at the time commanding general of NATO 's Second Allied Tactical Air Force , and a former World War II fighter pilot . Krupinski reached out to Gerhard <unk> , Inspector of the Air Force , requesting that the meeting be allowed to be held at the airbase . <unk> later confirmed Krupinski 's request , and the meeting was held on Bundeswehr premises , a decision which Schmidt still did not agree to . Rudel attended the meeting , where besides signing his book and a few autographs , he refrained from making any political statements . 
 During a routine press event , journalists , who had been briefed by Schmidt , questioned Krupinski and his deputy Karl Heinz Franke about Rudel . In this interview , the generals compared Rudel 's past as a Nazi and Neo @-@ Nazi supporter to the career of prominent Social Democrat leader Herbert Wehner , who had been a member of the German Communist Party in the 1930s , and who had lived in Moscow during World War II , where he was allegedly involved in NKVD operations . Calling Wehner an extremist , they described Rudel as an honorable man , who " hadn 't stolen the family silver or anything else " . When these remarks became public , the Federal Minister of Defense Georg Leber , complying with § 50 of the <unk> ( military law ) , ordered the generals into early retirement as of 1 November 1976 . Leber , however , a member of the Social Democratic Party of Germany ( SPD ) , was heavily criticized for his actions by the Christian Democratic Union ( CDU ) opposition , and the scandal contributed to the minister 's retirement in early 1978 . On 3 February 1977 , the German Bundestag debated the scandal and its consequences . The Rudel Scandal subsequently triggered a military @-@ tradition discussion , which the Federal Minister of Defense Hans Apel ended with the introduction of " Guidelines for Understanding and Cultivating Tradition " on 20 September 1982 . 
 During the 1978 FIFA World Cup , held in Argentina , Rudel visited the German national football team in their training camp in <unk> . The German media criticized the German Football Association ( DFB — Deutscher Fußball @-@ Bund ) , and viewed Rudel 's visit as being sympathetic to the military dictatorship that ruled Argentina following the 1976 Argentine coup d 'état . The president of the DFB , Hermann Neuberger , justified the visit , and stated that criticizing Rudel 's visit was " an insult to all German soldiers " ( " <unk> einer <unk> aller deutschen Soldaten gleich " ) . The German team captain , Berti Vogts , further fostered the criticism by stating after the World Cup : " Argentina is a country governed by law and order . I have not seen a single political prisoner . " ( " Land , in dem <unk> <unk> . Ich habe <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> " ) Rudel had already visited a German team at a World Cup before . He was a spectator of the 1954 FIFA World Cup Final in Switzerland , and during the 1958 FIFA World Cup in Sweden , he visited the German team at Malmö following its 3 : 1 victory over Argentina on 8 June 1958 . There he was welcomed by team manager Sepp Herberger . 
 = = = Personal life = = = 
 Rudel was married three times . His 1942 marriage to Ursula , nicknamed " Hanne " , produced two sons , Hans @-@ Ulrich and Siegfried . They divorced in 1950 . According to the news magazine Der Spiegel , one reason for the divorce was that his wife had sold some of his decorations , including the Oak Leaves with Diamonds , to an American collector , but she also refused to move to Argentina . On 27 March 1951 , Der Spiegel published Ursula Rudel 's denial of selling his decorations , and further stated she had no intention of doing so . Rudel married his second wife , Ursula née <unk> in 1965 . The marriage produced his third son , Christoph , born in 1969 . Following his divorce in 1977 , he married Ursula née <unk> . 
 = = = Death and funeral = = = 
 Rudel died after suffering another stroke in Rosenheim on 18 December 1982 , and was buried in Dornhausen on 22 December 1982 . During Rudel 's burial ceremony , two Bundeswehr F @-@ 4 Phantoms appeared to make a low altitude flypast over his grave . Although Dornhausen was situated in the middle of a flightpath regularly flown by military aircraft , Bundeswehr officers denied deliberately flying aircraft over the funeral . Four mourners were photographed giving Nazi salutes at the funeral , and were investigated under a law banning the display of Nazi symbols . The Federal Minister of Defense Manfred Wörner declared that the flight of the aircraft had been a normal training exercise . 
 = = Summary of military career = = 
 Rudel flew 2 @,@ 530 combat missions on the Eastern Front of World War II . The majority of these were undertaken while flying the Junkers Ju 87 , although 430 were flown in the ground @-@ attack variant of the Focke @-@ Wulf Fw 190 . He was credited with the destruction of 519 tanks , severely damaging the battleship Marat , as well as sinking a cruiser , a destroyer and 70 landing craft . Rudel also claimed to have destroyed more than 800 vehicles of all types , over 150 artillery , anti @-@ tank or anti @-@ aircraft positions , 4 armored trains , as well as numerous bridges and supply lines . Rudel was also credited with 9 aerial victories , 7 of which were fighter aircraft and 2 Ilyushin Il @-@ 2s . He was shot down or forced to land 30 times due to anti @-@ aircraft artillery , was wounded five times and rescued six stranded aircrew from enemy held territory . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Honor Goblet of the Luftwaffe ( Ehrenpokal der Luftwaffe ) as Oberleutnant in a Sturzkampfgeschwader ( 20 October 1941 ) 
 Wound Badge in Gold 
 Pilot / Observer Badge in Gold with Diamonds 
 German Cross in Gold on 2 December 1941 as Oberleutnant in the III . / Sturzkampfgeschwader 2 
 Iron Cross ( 1939 ) 
 2nd Class ( 10 November 1939 ) 
 1st Class ( 18 July 1941 ) 
 Front Flying Clasp of the Luftwaffe in Gold and Diamonds with Pennant " 2000 " 
 in Gold ( 18 July 1941 ) 
 in Gold and Diamonds with Pennant " 2000 " 
 Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Golden Oak Leaves , Swords , and Diamonds 
 Knight 's Cross on 6 January 1942 as Oberleutnant and Staffelkapitän of the 9 . / Sturzkampfgeschwader 2 " Immelmann " 
 229th Oak Leaves on 14 April 1943 as Oberleutnant and Staffelkapitän of the 1 . / Sturzkampfgeschwader 2 " Immelmann " 
 42nd Swords on 25 November 1943 as Hauptmann and Gruppenkommandeur of the III . / Sturzkampfgeschwader 2 " Immelmann " 
 10th Diamonds on 29 March 1944 as Major and Gruppenkommandeur of the III . / Schlachtgeschwader 2 " Immelmann " 
 1st Golden Oak Leaves on 29 December 1944 as Oberstleutnant and Geschwaderkommodore of Schlachtgeschwader 2 " Immelmann " 
 8th ( 1st and only foreign ) Hungarian Gold Medal of Bravery ( 14 January 1945 ) 
 Italian Silver Medal of Military Valor 
 Mentioned five times in the Wehrmachtbericht ( 27 March 1944 , 28 March 1944 , 3 June 1944 , 6 August 1944 , 10 February 1945 ) 
 = = = Wehrmachtbericht references = = = 
 = = = Promotions = = = 
 = = Publications = = 
 = Paul Shuey = 
 Paul Kenneth Shuey ( born September 16 , 1970 ) is an American former professional baseball player . Primarily a relief pitcher , Shuey pitched in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) for the Cleveland Indians ( 1994 – 2002 ) , Los Angeles Dodgers ( 2002 – 2003 ) and Baltimore Orioles ( 2007 ) . 
 Shuey was honored as an All @-@ American as a college baseball pitcher for the North Carolina Tar Heels baseball team . The Indians selected Shuey with the second overall selection of the 1992 MLB draft . <unk> as a comparable pitcher to Cincinnati Reds closer Rob Dibble , Shuey had more success as a setup reliever than closer . 
 Injuries sidelined Shuey throughout his career , preventing him from becoming a closer . When healthy , he enjoyed success with the Indians as a setup pitcher . He was traded to the Dodgers in 2002 to be their set up man while contending for a playoff spot . He pitched well until a hip injury initially suffered in 1999 forced Shuey to retire in 2004 . After an experimental medical procedure , Shuey returned to baseball briefly in 2007 with the Orioles . He retired after that season , and took up a professional career in bass fishing , competing in what he considers " Double @-@ A " -level tournaments . 
 = = Early life = = 
 A native of Lima , Ohio , Shuey 's family moved to North Carolina when he was ten years old . Shuey 's father taught him how to pitch . He played American Legion and Babe Ruth League baseball with Everett Lindsay . 
 Shuey attended Millbrook High School in Raleigh , North Carolina . With Millbrook , Shuey was a starting pitcher and right fielder . While pitching for the baseball team at Millbrook , Shuey threw a no @-@ hitter against Garner High School . He was named to North Carolina 's All @-@ Triangle and All @-@ State teams . 
 = = College career = = 
 Shuey enrolled at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill ( UNC ) , where he played college baseball for the North Carolina Tar Heels baseball team in the Atlantic Coast Conference ( ACC ) of NCAA Division I. He served as the team 's closer . At UNC , Shuey was named a freshman All @-@ American and All @-@ ACC pitcher for the Tar Heels in 1990 , as he had an 8 @-@ 1 win – loss record and eight saves . He led the team with 31 appearances , and the Tar Heels were the ACC regular season and tournament championships . 
 Though he suffered a patellar tendon rupture in 1991 , Shuey led the Tar Heels with a 1 @.@ 70 earned run average ( ERA ) that season . That summer , Shuey pitched for the United States national baseball team in the Pan American Games . He led the team with a 3 @.@ 13 ERA and 87 strikeouts in the 1992 season , in 69 innings pitched . Shuey and Chad Holbrook won the team 's S.H. <unk> Award as the team 's most valuable players . Through 2001 , Shuey 's career winning percentage ( <unk> ) ranked fourth all time in UNC history . He was a letterman in all three seasons at UNC . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Cleveland Indians = = = 
 The Indians selected Shuey with their first round draft pick , the second overall selection , in the 1992 Major League Baseball draft . The Indians envisioned that Shuey could develop into a closer similar to Rob Dibble of the Cincinnati Reds . Shuey made his professional debut with the Columbus Red <unk> of the Class @-@ A South Atlantic League in 1992 . 
 Heading into the 1993 season , Baseball America ranked Shuey as the 81st best prospect in baseball . He pitched for the Kinston Indians of the Class @-@ A Carolina League in 1993 , going 1 – 0 with a 4 @.@ 84 ERA in 15 appearances , and was promoted to the Canton – Akron Indians of the Class @-@ AA Eastern League that season . He opened the 1994 season with Kinston , where he went 1 – 0 with a 3 @.@ 75 ERA and eight saves in 13 appearances . 
 The deaths of Indians ' relief pitchers Steve Olin and Tim Crews in a boating accident heightened the Indians ' need to develop Shuey . Shuey was promoted from Kinston to the major leagues during the 1994 season , becoming the first player promoted from Class @-@ A to the majors since Greg Swindell during the 1986 season . He made his MLB debut on May 8 , 1994 . On May 14 , Shuey became the tenth American League pitcher to strike out four batters in an inning . He also pitched for the Charlotte Knights of the Class @-@ AAA International League that season . Baseball America ranked Shuey as the 67th best prospect in baseball heading into the 1995 season . 
 Shuey struggled with the Indians , with an 0 – 3 win – loss record , five saves , and 7 @.@ 00 ERA in 21 appearances in 1994 and 1995 . He also pitched for the Buffalo Bisons of the International League in 1995 , and spent time on the disabled list with an injured hamstring . He also pitched for the <unk> de San Juan of the Puerto Rico Baseball League that winter to gain more experience . 
 After starting the 1996 season with Buffalo , Shuey was promoted to the Indians , where he pitched to a 5 – 2 record with a 2 @.@ 85 ERA . He pitched in the postseason for the Indians , appearing in three games in the 1996 American League Division Series , which the Indians lost to the Baltimore Orioles . Shuey received a three @-@ year contract from the Indians at the start of the 1997 season , worth $ 3 @,@ 203 @,@ 000 guaranteed . An option year and performance bonuses made the maximum value of the contract $ 11 @,@ 603 @,@ 000 over four seasons . 
 With José Mesa and Mike Jackson serving as closers for the Indians , Shuey pitched in middle relief . He spent time on the disabled list in the 1997 season on three separate occasions . In 1998 , he led all American League relief pitchers with a <unk> ( 7 – for – 53 ) batting average against when the opposition had baserunners in scoring position . His strong performances while healthy gave the Indians hope that Shuey could become their closer in due time . Shuey appeared in four postseasons for the Indians , including in 1998 , when he pitched 6 1 ⁄ 3 scoreless innings for the Indians in the 1998 American League Championship Series . 
 In 1999 , while pitching on a wet mound in Cleveland , Shuey injured his right hip . Over the next several seasons , he had multiple surgeries on his hip , including repairing a torn labrum and removing bone spurs . He finished the 1999 season with an 8 – 5 record , a 3 @.@ 53 ERA , and six saves . His eight wins tied for the most among Cleveland 's relief pitchers . In 2000 , new Indians ' manager Charlie Manuel indicated the Indians would attempt to shift Shuey into the closer role . When Shuey spent time on the disabled list , Steve <unk> served as the Indians ' closer . He again spent time on the disabled list in 2001 with a strained elbow ligament . 
 = = = Los Angeles Dodgers = = = 
 As the 2002 trade deadline approached , teams interested in acquiring Shuey began to inquire on his availability . On July 28 , 2002 , before the trade deadline , Shuey was traded to the Los Angeles Dodgers for Terry Mulholland and minor leaguers Ricardo Rodríguez and Francisco <unk> . With the Dodgers in the playoff chase that season , they hoped to pair him with closer Éric Gagné to form a strong bullpen for the later portions of games . 
 Though Shuey struggled upon joining the Dodgers , recording a 9 @.@ 35 ERA in his first eleven appearances after the trade , he altered his approach and began to obtain better results , allowing no runs in his next five appearances . Shuey played for the Dodgers through the end of the 2003 season . During spring training prior to the 2004 season , he tore a ligament in his thumb and reinjured his hip while fielding a bunt during his rehabilitation . Shuey spent the entire season on the disabled list . The Dodgers sued the Hartford Life Insurance Company , who insured Shuey 's contract , over Shuey 's $ 3 @.@ 25 million salary for the 2004 season , saying the insurance company did not honor their claim . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 A free agent after the 2004 season , Shuey signed a minor league contract with the Indians to attempt a comeback in the 2005 season . After pitching two innings for the Class @-@ AA Akron Aeros , he retired due to pain in his right hip . 
 Shuey sat out the whole 2006 season , as he received a hip replacement . The procedure , which involved installing a metal hip , was performed in Montreal , as it was not approved in the United States . On February 2 , 2007 , he signed a minor league contract with the Orioles that included an invitation to spring training . He suffered an injury and did not make the cut , and was sent to the minor leagues . He made one appearance for the Class @-@ AA Bowie Baysox , and then joined the Norfolk Tides , the Orioles ' Class @-@ AAA affiliate . His contract was then purchased on June 19 , 2007 , and he appeared in that night 's game against the San Diego Padres . 
 Though his fastball was able to reach 95 miles per hour ( 153 km / h ) earlier in his career , Shuey 's fastball had difficulty reaching 90 miles per hour ( 140 km / h ) due to his metal hip . On July 1 , 2007 , he recorded his first save since 2002 , in a game against the Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim . He finished the 2002 season with a 9 @.@ 82 ERA in 22 games . In his penultimate appearance , in the first game of an August 22 doubleheader , he surrendered the last nine runs in a 30 – 3 defeat to the Texas Rangers , an American League record for most runs scored by a single team . As his fastball increased in velocity , Shuey injured his back . The Orioles gave Shuey his outright release on September 5 . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Shuey was inducted into the Kinston Professional Baseball Hall of Fame in 2011 and the Millbrook High School Hall of Fame in 2012 . 
 Shuey lives with his family , including his wife Julie and three daughters ; Morgan ( born 1997 ) , Casey ( born 1998 ) , and Kate ( born 2006 ) . in Wake Forest , North Carolina . He spends his time as a father , pitching coach , and bass fishing . He overcame posttraumatic stress disorder , which resulted from a car accident in 1996 . 
 Shuey competes in local bass fishing tournaments . He is hoping to compete in the <unk> Elite Series of the Bass Anglers Sportsman Society . Now Shuey is a successful coach of Barton College 's women soccer team alongside Head Coach Chris Shaw . 
 = First Macedonian War = 
 The First Macedonian War ( 214 – 205 BC ) was fought by Rome , allied ( after 211 BC ) with the Aetolian League and Attalus I of Pergamon , against Philip V of Macedon , contemporaneously with the Second Punic War ( 218 – 201 BC ) against Carthage . There were no decisive engagements , and the war ended in a stalemate . 
 During the war , Macedon attempted to gain control over parts of Illyria and Greece , but without success . It is commonly thought that these skirmishes in the east prevented Macedon from aiding the Carthaginian general Hannibal in the war with Rome . The " Peace of Phoenice " , a treaty drawn up at Phoenice , in 205 BC , formally ended the war . 
 = = Demetrius urges war against Rome = = 
 Rome 's preoccupation with its war against Carthage provided an opportunity for Philip V of Macedon to attempt to extend his power westward . According to the ancient Greek historian Polybius , an important factor in Philip 's decision to take advantage of this opportunity was the influence of Demetrius of Pharos . 
 Demetrius had been , after the First Illyrian War in 229 BC , ruler of most of coastal Illyria . However , in 219 BC , during the Second Illyrian War he was defeated by the Romans and fled to the court of Philip . 
 Involved in a war with the Aetolians , Philip learned by messenger of the victory of Hannibal over the Romans , at Lake Trasimene in June 217 BC . Philip at first showed the letter only to Demetrius . Perhaps seeing a chance to recover his kingdom , Demetrius immediately advised the young king to make peace with the Aetolians , and turn his attentions toward Illyria and Italy . Polybius quotes Demetrius as saying : 
 For Greece is already entirely obedient to you , and will remain so : the Achaeans from genuine affection ; the Aetolians from the terror which their disasters in the present war have inspired them . Italy , and your crossing into it , is the first step in the <unk> of universal empire , to which no one has a better claim than yourself . And now is the moment to act when the Romans have suffered a reverse . 
 Philip was easily persuaded . 
 = = Philip makes peace with Aetolia = = 
 Philip , at once began negotiations with the Aetolians . At a conference on the coast near Naupactus , Philip met the Aetolian leaders , and a peace treaty was concluded . Polybius quotes the Aetolian <unk> of Naupactus as having given the following speech in favor of peace : 
 The best thing of all is that the Greeks should not go to war with each other at all , but give the gods hearty thanks if by all speaking with one voice , and joining hands like people crossing a stream , they may be able to repel the attacks of barbarians and save themselves and their cities . But if this is altogether impossible , in the present juncture at least we ought to be unanimous and on our guard , when we see the bloated armaments and the vast proportions assumed by the war in the west . For even now it is evident to any one who pays even a moderate attention to public affairs , that whether the Carthaginians conquer the Romans , or the Romans the Carthaginians , it is in every way improbable that the victors will remain contented with the empire of Sicily and Italy . They will move forward : and will extend their forces and their designs farther than we could wish . Wherefore , I beseech you all to be on your guard against the danger of the crisis , and above all you , O King . You will do this , if you abandon the policy of weakening the Greeks , and thus rendering them an easy prey to the invader ; and consult on the contrary for their good as you would for your own person , and have a care for all parts of Greece alike , as part and parcel of your own domains . If you act in this spirit , the Greeks will be your warm friends and faithful <unk> in all your undertakings ; while foreigners will be less ready to form designs against you , seeing with dismay the firm loyalty of the Greeks . If you are eager for action , turn your eyes to the west , and let your thoughts dwell upon the wars in Italy . Wait with coolness the turn of events there , and seize the opportunity to strike for universal dominion . Nor is the present crisis unfavourable for such a hope . But I <unk> of you to postpone your controversies and wars with the Greeks to a time of greater tranquillity ; and make it your supreme aim to retain the power of making peace or war with them at your own will . For if once you allow the clouds now gathering in the west to settle upon Greece , I fear exceedingly that the power of making peace or war , and in a word all these games which we are now playing against each other , will be so completely knocked out of the hands of us all , that we shall be praying heaven to grant us only this power of making war or peace with each other at our own will and pleasure , and of settling our own disputes . 
 = = Philip builds a fleet = = 
 Philip spent the winter of 217 – 216 BC building a fleet of 100 warships and training men to row them , and according to Polybius , it was a practice that " hardly any Macedonian king had ever done before " . Macedon probably lacked the resources to build and maintain the kind of fleet necessary to match the Romans . Polybius says that Philip had no " hope of fighting the Romans at sea " , perhaps referring to a lack of experience and training . 
 At any rate , Philip chose to build <unk> . These were the small fast galleys used by the Illyrians . They had a single bank of oars and were able to carry 50 soldiers in addition to the rowers . With these , Philip could hope to avoid or evade the Roman fleet , preoccupied as he hoped it would be with Hannibal , and based , as it was , at Lilybaeum in western Sicily . 
 Philip had in the meantime expanded his territories west along the <unk> and <unk> river valleys , right up to the borders of Illyria . Philip 's plan was it seems , to first take the Illyrian coasts , conquer the area between the coasts and Macedon , and use the new land link to provide a rapid route for reinforcements across the narrow straits to Italy . 
 At the beginning of summer , Philip and his fleet left Macedon , sailed through the <unk> Strait , between the island of Euboea and Boeotia on the Greek mainland , and then rounded Cape Malea , before dropping anchor off the Islands of <unk> and Leucas , to await word of the location of the Roman fleet . Informed that it was still at Lilybaeum , he sailed north to Apollonia in Illyria . 
 However , as the Macedonian fleet neared the island of Sazan , Philip heard a report that some Roman quinqueremes had been seen headed for Apollonia . Convinced that the entire Roman fleet was sailing to apprehend him , Philip ordered an immediate return to <unk> . Polybius speaks of " panic " and " disorder " to describe the fleet 's hasty retreat , and says that in fact the Romans had sent only a squadron of ten ships , and that because of " inconsiderate alarm " , Philip had missed his best chance to achieve his aims in Illyria , returning to Macedon , " without loss indeed , but with considerable dishonour " . 
 = = Philip allies with Carthage = = 
 After hearing of Rome 's disastrous defeat at the hands of Hannibal at Cannae in 216 BC , Philip sent ambassadors to Hannibal 's camp in Italy to negotiate an alliance . There they concluded in the summer of 215 BC a treaty , the text of which is given by Polybius . In it they pledge in general terms , mutual support and defense and to be enemies to each other 's enemies ( excepting current allies ) . Specifically they promise support against Rome , and that Hannibal shall have the right to make peace with Rome , but that any peace would include Philip and that Rome would be forced to give up control of Corcyra , Apollonia , <unk> , Pharos , Dimale , Parthini , and Atintania and " to restore to Demetrius of Pharos all those of his friends now in the dominion of Rome . " 
 The treaty as set down by Polybius , makes no mention of an invasion of Italy by Philip , the débâcle at Sazan perhaps having soured Philip on such a venture — something which in any case Hannibal may not have desired . 
 On their way back to Macedon , Philip 's emissaries along with emissaries from Hannibal were captured by Publius Valerius Flaccus , commander of the Roman fleet patrolling the southern Apulian coast . A letter from Hannibal to Philip , and the terms of their agreement were discovered . 
 Philip 's alliance with Carthage caused immediate dismay in Rome , hard @-@ pressed as they already were . An additional twenty @-@ five warships were at once outfitted and sent to join Flaccus ' fleet of twenty @-@ five warships already at Tarentum , with orders to guard the Italian Adriatic coast , and to try to determine Philip 's intent and if necessary cross over to Macedonia , keeping Philip confined there . 
 = = War breaks out in Illyria = = 
 In the late summer of 214 BC , Philip again attempted an Illyrian invasion by sea , with a fleet of 120 <unk> . He captured Oricum which was lightly defended , and sailing up the Aous ( modern <unk> ) river he besieged Apollonia . 
 Meanwhile , the Romans had moved the fleet from Tarentum to Brundisium to continue the watch on the movements of Philip and a legion had been sent in support , all under the command of the Roman <unk> Marcus Valerius Laevinus . Upon receiving word from Oricum of events in Illyria , Laevinus crossed over with his fleet and army . Landing at Oricum , Laevinus was able to retake the town with little fighting . 
 In the account given by Livy , Laevinus , hearing that Apollonia was under siege , sent 2000 men under the command of Quintus Naevius Crista , to the mouth of the river . Avoiding Philip 's army , Crista was able to enter the city by night unobserved . The following night , catching Philip 's forces by surprise , he attacked and routed their camp . Philip , escaping to his ships in the river , made his way over the mountains and back to Macedonia , having burned his fleet and left many thousands of his men that had died or been taken prisoner , along with all of his armies ' possessions , behind . Laevinus and his fleet wintered at Oricum . 
 Twice thwarted in attempts at invasion of Illyria by sea , and now constrained by Laevinus ' fleet in the Adriatic , Philip spent the next two years 213 – 212 BC making advances in Illyria by land . Keeping clear of the coast , he took the inland towns of Atintania , and Dimale , and subdued the Greek tribe of the <unk> and the Illyrian Parthini and at least the southern <unk> . 
 He was finally able to gain access to the Adriatic by capturing <unk> and its seemingly impregnable citadel , after which the surrounding territories surrendered . Perhaps the capture of <unk> rekindled in Philip hopes of an Italian invasion . However the loss of his fleet meant that Philip would be dependent on Carthage for passage to and from Italy , making the prospect of invasion considerably less appealing . 
 = = Rome seeks allies in Greece = = 
 Desiring to prevent Philip from aiding Carthage in Italy and elsewhere , Rome sought out land allies in Greece . 
 Laevinus had begun exploring the possibility of an alliance with the Aetolian League , as early as 212 BC . The Aetolians , war weary , had made peace with Philip at Naupactus in 217 BC . However five years later the pendulum had swung in the other direction , the war faction was on the ascendency , and the Aetolians were once again ready to consider taking up arms against their traditional enemy of Macedon . 
 In 211 BC an Aetolian assembly was convened for discussions with Rome . Laevinus pointed out the recent capture of Syracuse and Capua in the war against Carthage as evidence of Rome 's rising fortunes , and offered to ally with them against the Macedonians . A treaty was signed . The Aetolians would conduct operations on land , the Romans at sea . Rome would keep any slaves and other booty taken and Aetolia would receive control of any territory acquired . Another provision of the treaty allowed for the inclusion of certain allies of the League : Elis , Sparta , Messenia and Attalus I of Pergamon , as well as two Roman clients , the Illyrians <unk> and <unk> . 
 = = Campaign in Greece = = 
 Later that summer Laevinus seized the main town of <unk> , except for its citadel , and the Acarnanian town of <unk> and the island of <unk> which he handed over to the Aetolians . He then withdrew his fleet to Corcyra for the winter . 
 Upon hearing of the Roman alliance with Aetolia , Philip 's first action was to secure his northern borders . He conducted raids in Illyria at Oricum and Apollonia and seized the frontier town of <unk> in Dardania or perhaps <unk> . He marched rapidly south through Pelagonia , <unk> and <unk> and on to Tempe which he garrisoned with 4000 men . He turned north again into Thrace , attacking the <unk> and their chief city <unk> before returning to Macedon . 
 No sooner had Philip arrived there , when he received an urgent plea for help from his ally the Acarnanians . <unk> the Aetolian strategos ( general ) , had mobilized the Aetolian army and was preparing to invade Acarnania . Desperate and overmatched , but determined to resist , the Acarnanians sent their women , children and old men to seek refuge in Epirus , and the rest marched to the frontier , having sworn an oath to fight to the death , " invoking a terrible curse " upon any who were forsworn . Hearing of the Acarnanians ' grim determination , the Aetolians hesitated . Then learning of Philip 's approach they finally abandoned their invasion . After which Philip retired to Pella for the winter . 
 In the spring of 210 BC , Laevinus again sailed from Corcyra with his fleet , and with the Aetolians , captured Phocian <unk> . Rome enslaved the inhabitants and Aetolia took possession of the town . 
 Although there was some fear of Rome and concern with her methods , the coalition arrayed against Philip continued to grow . As allowed for by the treaty , Pergamon , Elis and Messenia , followed by Sparta , all agreed to join the alliance against Macedon . The Roman fleet together with the Pergamon fleet controlled the sea , and Macedon and her allies were threatened on land by the rest of the coalition . The Roman strategy of encumbering Philip with a war among Greeks in Greece was succeeding , so much so that when Laevinus went to Rome to take up his consulship , he was able to report that the legion deployed against Philip could be safely withdrawn . 
 However the <unk> , Messenians and Spartans remained passive throughout 210 BC , and Philip continued to make advances . He invested and took <unk> , using extensive <unk> , having beaten back an attempt to relieve the town by the Aetolian strategos <unk> and the Roman fleet , now commanded by the proconsul Publius Sulpicius Galba . Moving west Philip probably also took <unk> the port city of Lamia , in the <unk> Gulf . Sulpicius and <unk> took Aegina , an island in the Saronic Gulf , which the Aetolians sold to Attalus , the Pergamene king , for thirty talents , and which he was to use as his base of operations against Macedon in the Aegean Sea . 
 In the spring of 209 BC , Philip received requests for help from his ally the Achaean League in the Peloponnesus who were being attacked by Sparta and the Aetolians . He also heard that Attalus had been elected one of the two supreme commanders of the Aetolian League , and rumors that he intended to crossover the Aegean from Asia Minor . Philip marched south into Greece . At Lamia he was met by an Aetolian force , supported by Roman and Pergamene auxiliaries , under the command of Attalus ' colleague as strategos , the Aetolian Pyrrhias . Philip won two battles at Lamia , inflicting heavy casualties on Pyrrhias ' troops . The Aetolians and their allies were forced to retreat inside the city walls , where they remained , unwilling to give battle . 
 = = Attempt at peace fails = = 
 From Lamia , Philip went to <unk> . There he met representatives from the neutral states of Egypt , Rhodes , Athens and Chios who were trying to end the war — they were trading states and the war was probably hurting trade . Livy says that they were concerned " not so much for the Aetolians , who were more warlike than the rest of the Greeks , as for the liberty of Greece , which would be seriously endangered if Philip and his kingdom took an active part in Greek politics . " With them was <unk> of <unk> , representing the Aetolians . A truce of thirty days and a peace conference at Achaea were arranged . 
 Philip marched to Chalcis in Euboea , which he garrisoned to block Attalus ' landing there , then continued on to Aegium for the conference . The conference was interrupted by a report that Attalus had arrived at Aegina , and the Roman fleet was at Naupactus . The Aetolian representatives , emboldened by these events , at once demanded that Philip return Pylos to the Messenians , Atintania to Rome and the <unk> to <unk> and <unk> . " Indignant " , Philip quit the negotiations telling the assembly that they " might bear him witness that whilst he was seeking a basis for peace , the other side were determined to find a pretext for war " . 
 = = Hostilities resume = = 
 From Naupactus , Sulpicius sailed east to Corinth and Sicyon , conducting raids there . Philip , with his cavalry caught the Romans ashore and was able to drive them back to their ships , with the Romans returning to Naupactus . 
 Philip then joined <unk> the Achaean general , near Dyme for a joint attack on the city of Elis , the main Aetolian base of operations against Achaea . However , Sulpicius had sailed into Cyllene and reinforced Elis with 4000 Romans . Leading a charge , Philip was thrown from his horse . Fighting on foot Philip became the object of a fierce battle , finally escaping on another horse . The next day Philip captured the stronghold of <unk> , taking 4000 prisoners and 20 @,@ 000 animals . Hearing news of Illyrian incursions in the north Philip abandoned Aetolia and returned to Demetrias in Thessaly . 
 Meanwhile , Sulpicius sailed round into the Aegean and joined Attalus on Aegina for the winter . In 208 BC the combined fleet of thirty @-@ five Pergamene and twenty @-@ five Roman ships failed to take Lemnos , but occupied and plundered the countryside of the island of <unk> ( Skopelos ) , both Macedonian possessions . 
 Attalus and Sulpicius then attended a meeting in Heraclea <unk> of the Council of the Aetolians which included representatives from Egypt and Rhodes , who were continuing to try to arrange a peace . Learning of the conference and the presence of Attalus , Philip marched rapidly south in an attempt to break up the conference and catch the enemy leaders , but arrived too late . 
 Surrounded by foes , Philip was forced to adopt a defensive policy . He distributed his commanders and forces and set up a system of beacon fires at various high places to communicate instantly any enemy movements . 
 After leaving Heraclea , Attalus and Sulpicius sacked both Oreus , on the northern coast of Euboea and Opus , the chief city of eastern Locris . The spoils from Oreus had been reserved for Sulpicius , who returned there , while Attalus stayed to collect the spoils from Opus . However , with their forces divided , Philip , alerted by signal fire , attacked and took Opus . Attalus caught by surprise was barely able to escape to his ships . 
 = = The war ends = = 
 Although Philip considered Attalus ' escape a bitter defeat , it proved to be the turning @-@ point of the war . Attalus was forced to return to Pergamon , when he learned at Opus that , perhaps at the urging of Philip , Prusias I , king of Bithynia and related to Philip by marriage , was moving against Pergamon . Sulpicius returned to Aegina . Free from the pressure of the combined Roman and Pergamon fleets , Philip was able to resume the offensive against the Aetolians . He captured <unk> , followed by the towns <unk> and <unk> north of the <unk> , controlling all of <unk> Locris , and took back control of Oreus . 
 The neutral trading powers were still trying to arrange a peace . At Elateia , Philip had met with the same would be peacemakers from Egypt and Rhodes , who had been at the meeting in Heraclea , and again in the spring of 207 BC , but to no avail . Representatives of Egypt , Rhodes , Byzantium , Chios , Mytilene and perhaps Athens also met again with the Aetolians that spring . The war was going Philip 's way , but the Aetolians , although now abandoned by both Pergamon and Rome , were not yet ready to make peace on Philip 's terms . However , after another season 's fighting , they finally relented . In 206 BC , the Aetolians , without Rome 's consent , sued for a separate peace on conditions imposed by Philip . 
 The following spring the Romans sent the censor Publius Sempronius <unk> with 35 ships and 11 @,@ 000 men to Dyrrachium in <unk> , where he incited the Parthini to revolt and laid siege to Dimale . However , when Philip arrived Sempronius broke off the siege and withdrew inside the walls of Apollonia . Sempronius tried unsuccessfully to entice the Aetolians to break their peace with Philip . With no more allies in Greece , but having achieved their objective of preventing Philip from aiding Hannibal , the Romans were ready to make peace . A treaty was drawn up at Phoenice in 205 BC , the so @-@ called " Peace of Phoenice " formally ended the First Macedonian War . 
 = Ronnie O 'Sullivan = 
 Ronald Antonio O 'Sullivan , OBE ( born 5 December 1975 ) is an English professional snooker and pool player . He is widely regarded as the greatest player in the sport 's modern era . He is noted for his rapid playing style , mercurial temperament and his ambivalent relationship with the sport , from which he has taken prolonged sabbaticals and repeatedly threatened to retire . 
 A childhood snooker prodigy , O 'Sullivan made his first century break at age 10 and his first maximum break at age 15 . He turned professional in 1992 , at the age of 16 , and soon earned the nickname " The Rocket " because of his rapid playing style . He achieved his first major professional success when he won the 1993 UK Championship at the age of 17 years and 358 days , making him the youngest player ever to win a ranking title , a record he still holds . He is also the youngest player to have won the Masters , having captured his first title in 1995 at the age of 19 years and 69 days . 
 His record in Triple Crown events now stands at five World Championship , six Masters , and five UK Championship titles . His career total of 28 ranking titles puts him in joint second place ( with Steve Davis and John Higgins ) behind Stephen Hendry , who has 36 , and his career earnings of over £ 8 million put him on second place after Hendry on snooker 's all @-@ time prize @-@ money list . O 'Sullivan has held the world number one ranking on multiple occasions , most recently during the 2009 / 2010 season . His other achievements include ten Premier League titles and winning the Nations Cup with England in 2000 . 
 Known as a prolific break @-@ builder , O 'Sullivan holds the record for the most competitive century breaks , with 824 . He also holds the record for the most ratified maximum breaks in professional competition ( 13 ) and for the three fastest competitive maximum breaks , the quickest in 5 minutes and 20 seconds . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 O 'Sullivan 's achievements in snooker began at an early age . He made his first century break ( 117 ) at the age of 10 , completed his first total clearance ( 142 ) at age 12 , and became British Under @-@ 16 Champion at age 13 . He made his television debut in The Thames Snooker Classic when he was 14 , with Steve Davis commentating on the match . He compiled his first maximum break in the final of the 1991 British Amateur Championships at age 15 , and won the <unk> World Under @-@ 21 Championship in the same year . He turned professional in 1992 , aged 16 . 
 O 'Sullivan began the 1992 / 1993 season by winning 74 of his first 76 professional matches , including a winning streak of 38 successive victories , a record that still stands . At the qualifying stage of the Grand Prix he defeated Jason Curtis 5 – 0 in a time of 43 minutes 36 seconds , setting the current record for the fastest best @-@ of @-@ 9 @-@ frame match . After this Alan Hughes gave him the nickname " The Rocket " . In September 1992 , at the age of 16 , he became the youngest player ever to qualify for the World Championship . He made his Crucible debut on 18 April 1993 at the age of 17 years and 134 days , and he is still the third @-@ youngest player ever to compete at the venue behind Luca Brecel and Stephen Hendry . He lost 7 – 10 to Alan McManus in the first round . O 'Sullivan was named the WPBSA 's Young Player of the Year for 1993 . 
 In the 1993 / 1994 season O 'Sullivan defeated Hendry 10 – 6 in the final of the UK Championship to win his first ranking title . At the age of 17 years and 358 days he became the youngest ever winner of a professional ranking tournament . He faced Hendry again in the final of the European Open , but lost 5 – 9 . He won his second ranking title at the British Open by defeating James Wattana 9 – 4 in the final . He reached the second round of the World Championship but lost 3 – 13 against John Parrott . Having started the season ranked number 57 in the world , he ended it ranked number 9 , and was named the WPBSA 's Player of the Year for 1994 . 
 = = = 1994 / 1995 – 1997 / 1998 = = = 
 O 'Sullivan did not win any ranking titles during the 1994 / 1995 season , but turned in consistently strong performances , reaching the quarter @-@ finals of the Grand Prix , the UK Championship , and the Welsh Open ; the semi @-@ finals of the Dubai Classic , and the European Open ; and the finals of the Thailand Open , and the British Open . He captured his first Masters title by defeating John Higgins 9 – 3 in the final , becoming the youngest player ever to win the tournament at the age of 19 years and 69 days . He also reached his first World Championship quarter @-@ final , but lost 8 – 13 to Hendry . By the end of his third season as a professional O 'Sullivan was ranked number 3 in the world behind Hendry and Davis . 
 In the 1995 / 1996 season O 'Sullivan reached the quarter @-@ finals of the UK Championship but lost 7 – 9 to Andy Hicks . He reached the final of the Masters but lost 5 – 10 to Hendry . He reached his first World Championship semi @-@ final but lost 14 – 16 to Peter Ebdon . Snooker 's governing body found O 'Sullivan guilty of physically assaulting Mike Ganley , a media official , during the event . For this he received a two @-@ year suspended ban , a £ 20 @,@ 000 fine , and was advised to donate £ 10 @,@ 000 to charity . 
 In the 1996 / 1997 season O 'Sullivan won two ranking titles , the Asian Classic by defeating Brian Morgan 9 – 8 in the final , and the German Open by defeating Alain Robidoux 9 – 7 in the final . In February 1997 , he reached his third consecutive Masters final , where he faced Davis . After O 'Sullivan took the first two frames with back @-@ to @-@ back century breaks of 116 and 113 , the third frame was disrupted by snooker 's first ever <unk> , Lianne Crofts . Davis later stated that the streaking incident affected O 'Sullivan 's concentration and momentum , allowing him back into the match . The afternoon session ended all @-@ square at 4 – 4 . O 'Sullivan began the evening session by winning four frames in 49 minutes to take an 8 – 4 lead , but Davis fought back to win the next six frames and clinch the title with a 10 – 8 victory . On 21 April 1997 , while playing Mick Price in the first round of the World Championship , O 'Sullivan made the fastest ever competitive maximum break in 5 minutes and 20 seconds , an average of one shot every 8 @.@ 8 seconds . This was also O 'Sullivan 's first maximum break in professional competition . He exited the World Championship in the second round , losing 12 – 13 against Darren Morgan . 
 In the 1997 / 1998 season O 'Sullivan won his second UK Championship title by defeating Hendry 10 – 6 in the final . In February he reached the quarter @-@ final of the Masters , but lost 3 – 6 to Davis . Later that month he won the Scottish Open by defeating John Higgins 9 – 5 in the final . The following month he defeated Ken Doherty in the final of the Irish Masters , but was disqualified after a post @-@ match drug test found cannabis in his system . The title was subsequently awarded to Doherty . O 'Sullivan reached a second World Championship semi @-@ final , but lost 9 – 17 against Higgins . 
 = = = 1998 / 1999 – 2000 / 2001 = = = 
 In the 1998 / 1999 season O 'Sullivan did not defend his UK Championship title . He withdrew from the tournament shortly before his scheduled first @-@ round match , with his manager stating that he was suffering from physical and nervous exhaustion and that doctors had ordered him to rest . Other reports stated that O 'Sullivan was suffering from depression . He reached the quarter @-@ finals of the Masters , but lost 2 – 6 to Doherty . At the World Championship , he reached his third semi @-@ final in four years , but was again denied a place in the final when he lost 13 – 17 to Hendry . During the match , the players made a total of eight century breaks , four from Hendry and four from O 'Sullivan . When Hendry made back @-@ to @-@ back centuries of 101 and 108 in the 21st and 22nd frames , O 'Sullivan responded with 134 in the 23rd frame , narrowly missing out on a maximum break when he missed the pink into the middle pocket . O 'Sullivan went on to make a 110 break in the 24th frame , the fourth consecutive frame won with a century . 
 In the 1999 / 2000 season O 'Sullivan won two ranking tournaments , the China Open , where he defeated Stephen Lee 9 – 2 in the final , and the Scottish Open , where he defeated Mark Williams 9 – 1 in the final . For the third year in succession he was eliminated from the Masters at the quarter @-@ final stage , losing 3 – 6 to Parrott . At the World Championship O 'Sullivan was eliminated in the first round , losing 9 – 10 to David Gray , despite becoming the first player to compile five century breaks in a best @-@ of @-@ 19 @-@ frame match . 
 During the 2000 / 2001 season O 'Sullivan won six tournaments , and reached the final of one further event . He won the Champions Cup by defeating Mark Williams 7 – 5 in the final , and reached the final of the Grand Prix , but lost the final 5 – 9 against Williams . He successfully defended his China Open title by defeating Williams 9 – 3 in the final . He won the Irish Masters defeating Stephen Hendry 9 – 8 in the final , and went on to claim his first World Championship title with an 18 – 14 victory over John Higgins . O 'Sullivan dedicated this win to his father . He ended the season by winning the Premier League . After finishing second in the league stage , he defeated Higgins 6 – 3 in the semi @-@ finals , and Hendry 9 – 7 in the final . 
 = = = 2001 / 2002 – 2003 / 2004 = = = 
 In the 2001 / 2002 season , O 'Sullivan won his third UK title , with a 10 – 1 victory over Doherty . At the 2002 World Championship , before meeting Hendry in the semi @-@ finals , O 'Sullivan said during a pre @-@ match interview : " I know if I do get beat and he comes up and does a <unk> in front of me and goes ' Ne ne ne ' , I 'll just look at him and say ' well done ' and say ' go back to your sad little life ' . " , referring to a previous match against Hendry in 1999 . In the match , O 'Sullivan opened up an 8 – 5 overnight lead , but Hendry rallied on the second day to level at 12 – 12 before the final session . Hendry subsequently outplayed O 'Sullivan , and won by 17 frames to 13 . After the match , O 'Sullivan accused Hendry of poor sportsmanship , referring to his conduct over a " miss " shot at an unnamed prior tournament . Hendry did not comment on his opponent 's outbursts , but O 'Sullivan did receive criticism for his remarks from Steve Davis , Dennis Taylor and Clive Everton , and he later apologised to Hendry for his comments . O 'Sullivan ended the season by defending his Premier League title . Having finished first after the league stage , O 'Sullivan defeated Jimmy White 6 – 2 in the semi @-@ final , and John Higgins 9 – 4 in the final . He began the 2002 / 2003 season ranked number 1 . 
 O 'Sullivan had another successful season in 2002 / 2003 , reaching the last 16 in seven ranking tournaments . He began the season by winning the invitational Scottish Masters , defeating John Higgins 9 – 4 in the final . He reached the quarter @-@ finals of the LG Cup , losing against eventual champion Chris Small ; the last 16 of the British Open , losing against Paul Hunter , the quarter @-@ finals of the UK Championship , losing against Drew Henry ; and the quarter @-@ finals of the Welsh Open , losing against Marco Fu . After this O 'Sullivan won back @-@ to @-@ back ranking titles , defeating Hendry in the final of the European Open , and Higgins in the final of the Irish Masters . He reached the last 16 of the Scottish Open , before losing against Ken Doherty . His only first @-@ round ranking event defeat of the season came at the World Championship , when he lost 6 – 10 in the first round against the unseeded Marco Fu , despite making a maximum break in the match . This defeat saw him drop to number 3 in the rankings . He participated at the Premier League , but despite topping the table after the league stage , he lost 4 – 6 in the semi @-@ final against Fu . 
 In the 2003 / 2004 season , O 'Sullivan reached three ranking @-@ event finals . He reached the final of the British Open , but lost 6 – 9 against Stephen Hendry . He won the Welsh Open by defeating Steve Davis 9 – 8 . He reached the final of the Masters , but lost 9 – 10 against Paul Hunter , despite having led 6 – 1 and then 9 – 7 . In 2004 , O 'Sullivan 's father telephoned six @-@ time World Champion Ray Reardon , and asked if he could give O 'Sullivan some advice . With Reardon 's help O 'Sullivan recovered his form , and won the 2004 World Championship . He defeated Hendry 17 – 4 in the semi – finals , the most one @-@ sided defeat ever in a World Championship semi – final . He then defeated Graeme Dott 18 – 8 in the final , despite losing the first five frames . O 'Sullivan blamed his poor start on " mind games " by Dott 's coach Derek Hill , who visited O 'Sullivan 's dressing room just before the match . O 'Sullivan was ranked number one for the next two seasons . 
 = = = 2004 / 2005 = = = 
 O 'Sullivan began the 2004 / 2005 season by winning the Grand Prix , defeating Ian McCulloch 9 – 5 in the final . He then reached the semi @-@ finals of the British Open , losing 1 – 6 to Stephen Maguire , and the last 32 of the UK Championship , losing 6 – 9 , once again against Maguire . In 2005 , O 'Sullivan defended his Welsh Open title , by defeating Stephen Hendry 9 – 8 . During the tournament , O 'Sullivan compiled ten century breaks , including a break of 146 , the highest of the tournament . After this , he won his second Masters title , by defeating John Higgins 10 – 3 . After the final , Higgins described O 'Sullivan as a " total genius " . 
 O 'Sullivan then won his third Irish Masters title , by defeating Matthew Stevens 10 – 8 . He then missed the China Open on medical grounds ; for which he was criticised by Anthony Hamilton , who said that O 'Sullivan has a duty to promote the sport overseas . In the World Championship , O 'Sullivan lost to Peter Ebdon in the quarter @-@ final . From 2 – 8 down , Ebdon began a comeback and eventually won 13 – 11 , by playing in an exceptionally determined and dogged style , with many observers accusing him of deliberate slow play to disrupt O 'Sullivan 's fast game . After the match , O 'Sullivan indicated to the press that he was unlikely to compete in the following season , and would perhaps even retire from the sport altogether . O 'Sullivan participated in the Premier League . After finishing third in the table after the league stage , O 'Sullivan defeated Hendry 5 – 0 in the semi @-@ finals , and Williams 6 – 0 in the final . In September 2005 , he announced that he would play a truncated 2005 / 2006 season , spending some time playing eight @-@ ball pool in the United States , having been chosen to compete on the elite International Pool Tour . 
 = = = 2005 / 2006 = = = 
 O 'Sullivan began the 2005 / 2006 season at the Grand Prix , and reached the final , but lost 2 – 9 against John Higgins . In his last 32 match with Mark King at the UK Championship , O 'Sullivan sat with a wet towel draped over his head for most of the contest , and lost 8 – 9 . He then successfully defended his Premier League title . Having finished first in the league stage , he defeated Steve Davis 5 – 3 in the semi @-@ finals , and Stephen Hendry 6 – 0 in the final . O 'Sullivan then reached the final of the Masters , but lost 9 – 10 against Higgins . O 'Sullivan skipped the Malta Cup , and then lost his opening matches at the next two ranking events , as he lost 1 – 5 against Ian McCulloch at the Welsh Open and 0 – 5 against James Wattana at the China Open . 
 The 2006 World Championship began with O 'Sullivan defeating Dave Harold 10 – 4 , followed by a struggle through to a 13 – 10 win in his second @-@ round match against Welshman Ryan Day . A similar quarter @-@ final match ensued against Mark Williams . O 'Sullivan led 10 – 6 going into the final session . A fightback from Williams saw him take the lead by winning the next five frames ; but O 'Sullivan held his nerve to take the match 13 – 11 , and faced Graeme Dott in the semi – finals . Dott took an early lead before O 'Sullivan drew level at 8 – 8 at the end of the second session . Cue @-@ tip problems , which had dogged O 'Sullivan throughout the event , recurred , including an incident in which television footage appeared to show O 'Sullivan deliberately removing the tip of his cue . This secured him a 15 @-@ minute break to re @-@ tip the cue , before he returned and made a 124 break . Tournament Director Mike Ganley accepted the player 's assurance that the tip had simply fallen off , and no censure was made . The incident drew criticism from his opponent , and from Steve Davis and John Parrott . Dott then took all eight frames of the third session , leaving himself one frame away from his second final in three years . The final session saw O 'Sullivan stage a minor fightback , taking three frames in a row , before a mistake let Dott back in for an eventual clearance on the black . After Dott 's win , O 'Sullivan gave his cue and case to a boy in the crowd . BBC claims he had used as many as 21 different tips during the fortnight ; O 'Sullivan later stated that he had used seven tips before arriving in Sheffield , and a further eight during the week , and that he would return next season with a new cue . O 'Sullivan 's decision not to enter the Malta Cup cost him the number @-@ one rank for the following season . 
 = = = 2006 / 2007 = = = 
 On his way to the final of the Northern Ireland Trophy , which he lost 6 – 9 to Ding Junhui , he defeated semi – final opponent Dominic Dale 6 – 0 , in only 53 minutes – a record for a best of 11 frame match . O 'Sullivan then reached the quarter @-@ finals of the Grand Prix , but lost 1 – 5 against eventual champion Neil Robertson . In December 2006 , in his quarter @-@ final match of the UK Championship against Hendry , O 'Sullivan conceded in dramatic fashion part @-@ way into the sixth frame of the best of 17 match . He had gone 0 – 4 down after a strong start from Hendry , before finally taking a frame back . At the beginning of the sixth frame , O 'Sullivan opened with a break of 24 , before leaving himself a difficult shot from black to red . After missing the red , he calmly shook the hand of both Hendry ( saying to him that he " had enough of it , mate " ) and the match referee , Jan Verhaas , and walked out of the arena , stunning everyone present . The incident caused minor disruption to the other quarter @-@ final match , between Graeme Dott and Steve Davis , being played simultaneously in the same arena . Dott later said that he initially thought that O 'Sullivan and Hendry were having a fight when he heard an audience member shout " Get a grip , Ronnie . " It was later officially confirmed that O 'Sullivan had forfeited the match , which was awarded 9 – 1 to Hendry . O ’ Sullivan issued a statement later that day , apologising and saying that he would be " back on his feet fighting stronger and harder than ever very soon . " On 31 May 2007 , World Snooker fined him a total of £ 20 @,@ 800 over this incident , and docked him 900 ranking points . 
 O 'Sullivan returned to action at the Masters , to a mixed response from the audience ( being both booed and clapped ) . He won his first round match 6 – 1 on 16 January 2007 , against Ali Carter , making two century breaks in the process . However , he then created more controversy by failing to attend a post @-@ match press conference . He did record a short interview with Steve Davis for the BBC , stating that he was much happier than at the UK Championship , and that he was playing well once again . Sir Rodney Walker later issued a statement declaring that O 'Sullivan had been excused from dealing with the media because of the exceptional circumstances affecting him . This decision was criticised by Shaun Murphy , and Ken Doherty . O 'Sullivan went on to win the tournament against Ding Junhui , on 21 January 2007 . In the match , he was noted for his good sportsmanship by Steve Davis , specifically for comforting Ding after the twelfth frame , during which Ding had become visibly upset by an overly partisan member of the crowd , who was later ejected . O 'Sullivan was leading 9 – 3 at the time , and won the next frame for a 10 – 3 victory . 
 O 'Sullivan went out of the Malta Cup with a 3 – 5 loss to Michael Holt in the first round . He reached the quarter @-@ finals of the Welsh Open , but lost 4 – 5 against Neil Robertson . In his quarter @-@ final match against Joe Swail at the Irish Masters , O 'Sullivan compiled a maximum break on his way to a narrow 5 – 4 victory , the second 147 in any professional competition in Ireland . The initial maximum break prize of a Citroën Coupe , worth € 20 @,@ 000 , was later withdrawn by the organisers . He then defeated John Higgins 6 – 5 in the semi @-@ finals and won the title by defeating Barry Hawkins 9 – 1 in the final . O 'Sullivan then reached the semi @-@ finals of the China Open , but lost 2 – 6 against eventual champion Graeme Dott . Just before the World Championship , in which he was to play a first @-@ round match with Ding Junhui again , O 'Sullivan claimed that the draw was fixed . This was subsequently denied by World Snooker , and O 'Sullivan later retracted his accusation . In the end O 'Sullivan won the tie easily by 10 frames to 2 . He also won his second @-@ round match against Robertson 13 – 10 ( despite losing six frames in a row at one point ) , before losing his quarter @-@ final match 9 – 13 against eventual champion John Higgins . 
 = = = 2007 / 2008 = = = 
 O 'Sullivan withdrew from the first ranking event of the season , the Shanghai Masters , citing back problems for which doctors had advised him not to travel . He also chose not to enter the invitational Pot Black tournament . He made the final of the Grand Prix , but lost 6 – 9 against Marco Fu . During the Northern Ireland Trophy , he set a new record , by compiling five centuries in a 5 – 2 win over Ali Carter . This also included his seventh official competitive 147 maximum break . O 'Sullivan went out of the tournament in the next round , having lost against Fergal O 'Brien . On 2 December 2007 , he won a fourth consecutive , and record seventh total , Premier League Snooker title , by beating John Higgins in the final by a score of 7 – 4 . On 15 December 2007 , O 'Sullivan compiled his eighth maximum break in competition , in the deciding frame of his UK Championship semi – final against Mark Selby at Telford , equalling Hendry 's record . In doing so , he also became only the third person in professional competition to compile a maximum to win a match . Hendry had made the first against O 'Sullivan in the 1997 Charity Challenge final , and Mark Williams had made the second , at the Crucible in the first round of the 2005 World Championship . O 'Sullivan is also the second player after John Higgins to make 147 breaks in two consecutive ranking tournaments ( 2007 Northern Ireland Trophy and 2007 Maplin UK Championship ) . He then went on to win the tournament , beating Stephen Maguire 10 – 2 in the final ( from 8 – 0 up ) , thereby receiving a £ 100 @,@ 000 cheque for winning his first ranking tournament in almost three years . 
 At the Masters on 12 January , Stephen Maguire edged out O 'Sullivan in a final frame , to win their first @-@ round match at Wembley . In the battle of the top two players in the provisional world rankings , O 'Sullivan fought back from 1 – 4 down to level at 5 – 5 and take the match into a deciding eleventh frame . O 'Sullivan missed the final blue with the rest , when poised to win the match , allowing Maguire to reach the quarter @-@ finals . After withdrawing from the invitational Malta Cup , O 'Sullivan returned at the Welsh Open in February . Playing a good tournament , he reached the final . Although he led 8 – 5 , Selby won the last four frames to beat him 9 – 8 . O 'Sullivan was present at the China Open , in Beijing , where he lost 4 – 5 to Marco Fu in the first round . However , at the press conference , which followed the match , O 'Sullivan was heard making some lewd remarks inviting a member of the press to perform fellatio on him , then laughing with the World Snooker media spokesman . O 'Sullivan also joked about the size and girth of his penis , before simulating a sexual act on his microphone . In June 2008 , the World Professional Billiards and Snooker Association punished him for his behaviour by docking the appearance @-@ money and world @-@ ranking points that he had earned from the event . 
 At the 2008 World Championships , O 'Sullivan compiled a record @-@ breaking ninth competitive maximum break against Mark Williams . It was his third of the season , and also his third maximum at the Crucible . It was the fourth maximum to be compiled in a winning frame of a match ( following those of Hendry , Williams , and O 'Sullivan himself ) . Interviewed by Steve Davis just after beating Williams 13 – 7 , he said " I can finally buy a Bentley Continental GT " . Soon after potting the final black , snooker legend and commentator Dennis Taylor labelled O 'Sullivan as a " total genius . " However , O 'Sullivan 's 147 was equalled by Ali Carter in the same tournament , thus halving the prize @-@ money . O 'Sullivan defeated Liu Chuang , Mark Williams , Liang Wenbo and Stephen Hendry en route to the final of the tournament . After the match Hendry described O 'Sullivan as " the best in the world by a country mile . " He then beat Carter 18 – 8 for the title on 5 May . In an interview after his third world @-@ title win , he hinted again that he may not play in the 2008 / 2009 season , but also stated that he might go on to pursue many more world titles . At the end of the season , O 'Sullivan left management company <unk> to join the Romford @-@ based Grove Leisure . 
 = = = 2008 / 2009 = = = 
 O 'Sullivan began the 2008 / 2009 season by winning the Northern Ireland Trophy , defeating Dave Harold 9 – 3 in the final . O 'Sullivan is the only player to win back @-@ to @-@ back ranking events in the last four years . He then reached the final of the Shanghai Masters , having defeated Stephen Maguire in the semi – finals with two the top breaks of 141 and 145 . However , in the final , he was defeated by qualifier Ricky Walden , 10 – 8 . O 'Sullivan was leading , but Walden pulled back four frames in a row to win the match . In the Premier League , he secured a 7 – 2 win over Mark Selby , which meant that he had won the event eight times in total , and five times consecutively . However , O 'Sullivan failed to defend his UK Championship title , losing to Joe Perry 5 – 9 in the second round . O 'Sullivan had conceded the twelfth game of the match to go 5 – 7 down , although Perry held a lead of only 23 points to zero . Commenting afterwards , O 'Sullivan said " It might have looked like I lost my head or whatever , but I 'm sure I 'll bounce back . " For this he was later fined £ 300 , and was ordered to pay £ 1 @,@ 000 in costs . 
 In the Masters , O 'Sullivan reached the final by beating Joe Perry , Ali Carter and Stephen Maguire . In a tense final against defending champion Mark Selby , neither player was able to obtain a sizeable lead , with frames littered with both big breaks and close finishes . After leading 3 – 1 , O 'Sullivan ended the afternoon session at 4 – 4 , and took the first frame of the evening session . Selby , however , then won the next 3 frames to lead 7 – 5 . O 'Sullivan responded by taking three frames in succession himself , to lead 8 – 7 . The following two frames were shared , and at 9 – 8 , after both players had wasted chances , O 'Sullivan constructed a break of 55 , beating Mark Selby 10 – 8 and thereby claiming the title for the fourth time . In doing this , he became only the second player , after Stephen Hendry , to win the trophy more than three times . In his post @-@ match interview , O 'Sullivan proclaimed his victory , composed with a cue that he had obtained only the previous Saturday , as his greatest achievement in snooker . During an exhibition in Ireland in January 2009 , O 'Sullivan and Jimmy White made maximum breaks in consecutive frames . In the first round of 2009 World Championship O 'Sullivan compiled three centuries in his 10 – 5 win against Stuart Bingham . O 'Sullivan compiled a 140 break in the second , a 104 in the eighth , and a 103 in the 14th . He was defeated in the second round 11 – 13 , by Mark Allen , after having led 9 – 7 . 
 = = = 2009 / 2010 = = = 
 He began the season by winning the Shanghai Masters , defeating Liang Wenbo 10 – 5 in the final . On the way to reaching the final , he lost only 6 frames . He beat Graeme Dott 5 – 0 in the first round , Marco Fu 5 – 2 in the second round , Ding Junhui 5 – 3 in the quarter @-@ finals , and John Higgins 6 – 1 in the semi – finals . After his Shanghai Masters victory , he joined the newly founded Snooker Players Association . In the second ranking event , the Grand Prix , he beat Jamie Burnett 5 – 3 in the first round , but then lost narrowly against John Higgins in the second round , by 4 – 5 . On 29 November 2009 , O 'Sullivan did not retain his Premier League Snooker title , with Shaun Murphy defeating him 7 – 3 in the final . Following his 9 – 3 victory over Matthew Stevens in the first round of the UK Championship on 7 December 2009 , O 'Sullivan caused controversy in his post @-@ match press conference . He described the outgoing regime at the World Professional Billiards and Snooker Association ( headed by Sir Rodney Walker ) as " a cancer running through the game " and also said , " Leukaemia has set in " . He went on to endorse the new era of snooker , headed by Barry Hearn . He then won his next two matches , 9 – 3 against Peter Ebdon in the last 16 , and Mark Selby in the quarter @-@ finals , before losing the semi – final 8 – 9 to John Higgins , despite having come back from 2 – 8 to 8 – 8 . 
 O 'Sullivan began the defence of his Masters title by defeating Australian Neil Robertson 6 – 4 in the first round , after having trailed 0 – 3 . After this , he defeated Peter Ebdon 6 – 3 in the quarter @-@ final . In the semi @-@ final , he beat Mark Williams 6 – 5 , to reach his 6th Masters final in 7 years . O 'Sullivan met Mark Selby in the final for the second consecutive year , and lost 9 – 10 despite having led 9 – 6 . In the Welsh Open , he reached the semi – finals by beating Stuart Bingham 5 – 1 in the first round , Jamie Cope 5 – 0 in the second round , and Mark Allen 5 – 2 in the quarter @-@ finals , but lost 4 – 6 against John Higgins in the semi – finals . O 'Sullivan lost 3 – 5 in the first round of the China Open , against 22 @-@ year @-@ old wild card Tian Pengfei . In the eighth frame , O 'Sullivan made a mistake on the final black , and the ball finished over the pocket . He immediately conceded frame and match . With this , he also lost his chance to defend his official World No. 1 spot . At the World Championship , he defeated Liang Wenbo 10 – 7 in the first round and Mark Williams 13 – 10 in the second round , before losing 11 – 13 to Mark Selby in the quarter @-@ finals . 
 = = = 2010 / 2011 = = = 
 O 'Sullivan began the 2010 / 2011 season at Event 1 of the Players Tour Championship , where he lost in the quarter @-@ finals against Jamie Cope , 0 – 4 . O 'Sullivan next competed at Event 4 , where reached the final , but he lost 3 – 4 against Barry Pinches . At the World Open O 'Sullivan made his record 10th maximum break in the last frame of his match against Mark King , which he won 3 – 0 . However , he had to be persuaded by referee Jan Verhaas to play the final black , as he had become aware that there was no distinct prize money for a maximum break in the tournament , but only a prize of £ 4 @,@ 000 for the highest break . Even then , he played the final black in a nonchalant fashion . O 'Sullivan then defeated Jimmy White ( 3 – 1 ) , Stephen Hendry ( 3 – 1 ) , Stephen Maguire ( 3 – 1 ) and Peter Ebdon ( 3 – 1 ) to reach the final , where he lost 1 – 5 against Neil Robertson . O 'Sullivan participated at the Premier League Snooker , and qualified for the finals unbeaten . He then defeated Neil Robertson 5 – 1 in the semi @-@ finals , and Shaun Murphy 7 – 1 in the final , to claim his ninth Premier League Snooker title in 14 years . In the UK Championship in December , O 'Sullivan suffered an early exit , losing 6 – 9 against Stuart Bingham in the first round . 
 At the Masters in January , O 'Sullivan went out 4 – 6 in the first round against Mark Allen . O 'Sullivan reached the semi @-@ finals in the Snooker Shoot @-@ Out in January 2011 , before losing against Robert Milkins . He made the two highest breaks of the tournament , 112 and 123 . He then lost in the first round of the next two ranking tournaments , both times against Ryan Day . He lost 2 – 4 at the Welsh Open , and 2 – 5 at the China Open . He reached the quarter @-@ finals of the World Championship by defeating Dominic Dale 10 – 2 in the first round and Shaun Murphy 13 – 10 in the second round , but lost 10 – 13 against John Higgins . 
 = = = 2011 / 2012 = = = 
 O 'Sullivan began the 2011 / 2012 season at Event 1 of the Players Tour Championship , where he won 4 – 0 in the final against Joe Perry . At the Paul Hunter Classic , he made the 11th official maximum break of his career , and set a new record of career maximum breaks . He reached the semi @-@ finals , but lost 3 – 4 against Mark Selby . His next tournament was the Shanghai Masters , where he reached the second round , but lost 3 – 5 against Anthony Hamilton . In October 2011 he won the Kay Suzanne Memorial Trophy , by defeating Matthew Stevens 4 – 2 in the final . In November 2011 he reached the final of the Antwerp Open , but lost 3 – 4 against Judd Trump . After 12 of 12 events , O 'Sullivan was ranked number two on the Order of Merit , and qualified for the Finals , but withdrew due to medical reasons . 
 O 'Sullivan won the 10th Premier League title of his career . After topping the table in the league stage , he defeated Mark Williams to reach the final , where he defeated Ding Junhui 7 – 1 . His next tournament was the UK Championship , where he lost in the second round 5 – 6 against eventual champion Judd Trump . At the Masters , he again lost against Trump , this time 2 – 6 in the quarter @-@ finals . At the German Masters , he reached his first ranking final since the 2010 World Open , and won 9 – 7 against Stephen Maguire , despite having trailed 0 – 4 against Andrew Higginson in the first round . He then reached the semi @-@ finals of the Welsh Open , and the quarter @-@ finals of the China Open , but lost 2 – 6 against Mark Selby and 4 – 5 against Maguire . 
 At the World Championship O 'Sullivan saw off former world champions in each of his first three matches . He beat Peter Ebdon 10 – 4 in the first round , Mark Williams 13 – 6 in the second , and Neil Robertson 13 – 10 in the quarter @-@ finals . He beat two @-@ time runner @-@ up Matthew Stevens 17 – 10 in the semi @-@ finals , and defeated Ali Carter 18 – 11 in the final , to win his fourth world title . Aged 36 , and just 40 days older than Dennis Taylor was when he won the title in 1985 , O 'Sullivan became the oldest world champion since 45 @-@ year @-@ old Ray Reardon in 1978 . In the eighth frame of the final , O 'Sullivan made a break of 141 , the highest break ever recorded in a Crucible final . He was ranked world number nine at the end of the season . On 10 May 2012 , O 'Sullivan was named as the World Snooker Player of the Year and the Snooker Writers Player of the Year . He was also inducted into the Hall of Fame , along with Walter Donaldson , Mark Williams and John Higgins . 
 = = = 2012 / 2013 = = = 
 On 6 June the World Professional Billiards and Snooker Association released a statement announcing that O 'Sullivan had not signed the official players ' contract and would therefore not be eligible to play in any 2012 / 2013 World Snooker event until he did so . On the same day O 'Sullivan said that he found the contract " too onerous " and that he was in a stage of his career where he did not wish to make the commitment . On 7 August it was announced that he had now signed the contract and would be playing in October 's International Championship and December 's UK Championship . O 'Sullivan returned to action at the third UK event of the Players Tour Championship in September , where he lost 3 – 4 to Simon Bedford after leading 3 – 2 . After the Shanghai Masters he dropped out of the top sixteen for the first time since entering it in the 1994 / 1995 season , as he was ranked world number 17 . O 'Sullivan 's return to snooker was short @-@ lived , as he withdrew from the inaugural International Championship due to advice from his doctor not to travel . On 6 November O 'Sullivan announced that he had withdrawn from every event he had entered and that he would not play for the remainder of the season . However , on 26 February O 'Sullivan announced during a press conference that he would return to the game and defend his World Championship title . 
 At the Crucible O 'Sullivan defeated Marcus Campbell in the last 32 , Ali Carter in the last 16 , Stuart Bingham in the quarter @-@ finals , and Judd Trump in the semi @-@ finals . He reached the final without falling behind even once , and defeated Barry Hawkins 18 – 12 to win his fifth world title . O 'Sullivan 's break of 103 in the 15th frame was his 128th century break at the Crucible Theatre , breaking Stephen Hendry 's record of 127 Crucible centuries . During the final he extended the record to 131 century breaks . O 'Sullivan became the only player to score six century breaks in a World Championship final . He also became only the third player to retain his title at the Crucible after Steve Davis and Stephen Hendry . 
 On 1 May 2013 , O 'Sullivan announced that his return to the Crucible would be short @-@ lived , and that he would not compete in future World Championships . However , after his title win , O 'Sullivan refused definitively to rule out a title defence in 2014 , saying in a post @-@ match interview that " I just love playing , so I will definitely be playing in some smaller events , and we will just see what goes on . " 
 = = = 2013 / 2014 = = = 
 O 'Sullivan started the 2013 / 2014 season ranked number 19 . For personal reasons , he pulled out of the first ranking tournament of the season , the Wuxi Classic , shortly before he was due to face Michael <unk> in the qualifying round . In June 2013 he competed in the Bulgarian Open , his first tournament appearance outside England in 15 months , but lost 2 – 4 against John Higgins in the semi @-@ finals . In August 2013 he announced that his tournament schedule for the remainder of the season would include the UK Championship , the German Masters , the Masters , and the Welsh Open , as well as returning to the Crucible in 2014 to defend his World Championship title . In the same month he suffered a surprise 1 – 4 defeat against Peter Lines in the last 32 of the Bluebell Wood Open , but went on to win the Paul Hunter Classic by defeating Gerard Greene 4 – 0 in the final . O 'Sullivan then qualified for the International Championship by defeating Joel Walker 6 – 1 in the qualifying round , and defeated Anthony McGill 6 – 2 at the venue , before losing 4 – 6 against Liang Wenbo in the last 32 . After that O 'Sullivan reached the final of the Antwerp Open , but lost 3 – 4 against Mark Selby , despite leading 3 – 1 . In the Champion of Champions he defeated Ding Junhui and Neil Robertson in final frame <unk> and went on to win the title by defeating Stuart Bingham 10 – 8 in the final . He reached the quarter @-@ finals of the UK Championship , but lost 4 – 6 against Bingham , despite making breaks of 135 and 127 in the match . 
 At the Masters , O 'Sullivan defeated Robert Milkins 6 – 1 in the first round , before he whitewashed Ricky Walden 6 – 0 in the quarter @-@ finals , a match that lasted just 57 minutes and 48 seconds . During the match he scored 556 points without reply , a new record in a professional event , beating the previous record of 495 points set by Ding Junhui at the 2007 Premier League Snooker . He defeated Stephen Maguire 6 – 2 in the semi @-@ finals to reach a record tenth Masters final , surpassing the nine appearances by Stephen Hendry . Facing defending champion Mark Selby in the final , he took a 7 – 1 lead in the first session , before going on to a 10 – 4 victory for his fifth Masters title . On 22 January 2014 , the Disciplinary Committee of the WPBSA issued a statement that O 'Sullivan had been found in breach of the association 's Members Rules . It fined him £ 6 @,@ 000 and ordered him to pay £ 1 @,@ 000 in costs over three posts on his personal Twitter account , made in September and October 2013 , that it deemed damaging to the image of the sport . The first post related to match @-@ fixing allegations , the second to a suggestion that he had used performance @-@ enhancing drugs , and the third to a tweet that was described as " offensive " . The committee fined him an additional £ 1 @,@ 000 for making " abusive , insulting and disrespectful " comments to referee Jan Verhaas during the December 2013 qualifying round for the German Masters . The incident arose after Verhaas asked O 'Sullivan to tuck his shirt in during the match . O 'Sullivan apologised for his conduct with the referee , stating that he felt unwell on the day and that the venue was overly warm . 
 At the Welsh Open , O 'Sullivan defeated Ricky Walden 4 – 1 in the last 16 , John Higgins 5 – 1 in the quarter @-@ finals , and Barry Hawkins 6 – 2 in the semi @-@ finals . He defeated Ding Junhui 9 – 3 in the final to win his third Welsh Open title , and the 26th ranking title of his career . In the last frame of the final , he compiled a record 12th maximum break in professional competition , breaking the previous record of 11 maximum breaks that he had held jointly with Stephen Hendry . During the season O 'Sullivan competed at the Players Tour Championship , and finished second on the European Tour Order of Merit , to qualify for the Players Championship Grand Final . There he defeated Scott Donaldson 4 – 0 in the last 32 , but lost 3 – 4 against Yu <unk> in the last 16 , despite making a 140 , the highest break of the tournament . 
 At the World Championship , O 'Sullivan began his title defence by beating Robin Hull 10 – 4 in the first round . Playing Joe Perry in the second round , O 'Sullivan was behind for the first two sessions , but recovered to win the match 13 – 11 . Up against Shaun Murphy in the 16th World Championship quarter @-@ final of his career , O 'Sullivan took 13 of the last 14 frames to win the match 13 – 3 , with a session to spare . He defeated Barry Hawkins 17 – 7 in the semi @-@ finals , also with a session to spare , to reach his sixth World Championship final . Facing Mark Selby in the final , O 'Sullivan began strongly , taking a 10 – 5 lead , but lost 10 of the next 12 frames to trail 12 – 15 . He went on to lose 14 – 18 , his first ever defeat in a World Championship final . At around 1 : 30 a.m. , on their way home from the final , O 'Sullivan and his six @-@ year @-@ old son were involved in a car crash on the M1 motorway near Leicester , after the sports car O 'Sullivan was driving hit a patch of standing water and collided with the central reservation . Neither O 'Sullivan nor his son were injured . After the World Championship , a new ranking system took effect , based on a two @-@ year rolling prize money list rather than ranking points . This meant that O 'Sullivan ended the season ranked number 4 . 
 = = = 2014 / 2015 = = = 
 O 'Sullivan started the 2014 / 2015 season at the Paul Hunter Classic , but lost 2 – 4 against Tian Pengfei in the last 16 . His first ranking event was the Shanghai Masters , where he lost 3 – 5 against Alan McManus . Ronnie O 'Sullivan then competed in the International Championship , cited as the biggest event in Asia , in Chengdu after beating James Cahill to qualify . Having battled to beat Ben <unk> 6 – 4 , in his opening match of the tournament , Ronnie sailed past his next two opponents , McGill and Li Hang , 6 – 1 . This set up a meeting with Mark Williams , a man who had not beat O 'Sullivan for 12 years , in the quarters ; however , after falling 3 – 0 behind , Williams won the next 5 frames and eventually the match , 6 – 5 . O 'Sullivan next competed in the Champion of Champions where he was defending champion . O 'Sullivan begun his defence with a 4 – 2 defeat of Stuart Bingham . He then went on to whitewash Marco Fu 6 – 0 to reach the semi @-@ final . In the semi @-@ final , O 'Sullivan defeated Ding Junhui 6 – 4 and then went on to defeat Judd Trump in a high @-@ scoring final , 10 – 7 , making four century breaks and eleven breaks over fifty during the match . On 4 December 2014 , O 'Sullivan completed his 13th career maximum break in the fourth round of the UK Championship , against Matthew <unk> . Three days later he won his fifth UK Championship , coming through 10 – 9 against Judd Trump in the final . After trailing 1 – 5 and 4 – 9 , Trump won five frames in succession , before O 'Sullivan prevailed in the deciding frame despite playing with a broken ankle , having broken it the previous week whilst running . 
 In the opening frame of his quarter @-@ final match with Marco Fu at the Masters , O 'Sullivan compiled the 776th century break of his career to overtake Stephen Hendry as the player with the most tons in the history of the sport . He received a standing ovation from the audience and went on to beat Fu 6 – 1 . However , in the semi @-@ finals he was defeated 6 – 1 by Neil Robertson , which meant O 'Sullivan lost at that stage for the first time in his Masters ' career after 10 prior victories and also ended a winning streak in all competitions which stood at 15 matches . 
 In the World Championship , O 'Sullivan defeated Craig Steadman 10 – 3 in the first round and Matthew Stevens 13 – 5 in the second round , but suffered a surprise 9 – 13 defeat to Stuart Bingham in the quarter @-@ finals . O 'Sullivan was involved in a number of incidents during the tournament . While playing Steadman , he breached snooker 's dress code when he removed a pair of uncomfortable shoes and played briefly in his socks , before borrowing shoes from tournament director Mike Ganley . In his match with Stevens , frustrated at missing a shot , he almost snapped his cue in half by hitting it against the table . In his quarter @-@ final match , O 'Sullivan placed his chalk on the table and used it to line up a shot . Controversially , referee Terry <unk> did not penalise him for the incident , even though many commentators , including former world champion Ken Doherty and former tour referee Michaela Tabb , argued that under the rules of snooker the referee should have called a 7 @-@ point foul . These incidents led Stephen Hendry to say that O 'Sullivan was not fully focused . " Personally I think it is a sign he has got other things on his mind , " said Hendry . " He is not focused properly on winning the World Championship . " 
 = = = 2015 / 2016 = = = 
 O 'Sullivan won the pro – am Pink Ribbon tournament in July 2015 , defeating Darryn Walker 4 – 2 in the final , but took a hiatus from the professional tour for almost eight months . He declined to defend his Champion of Champions and UK Championship titles , stating that he was suffering from debilitating insomnia , but he made his debut providing in @-@ studio expert analysis during the UK Championship , alongside Jimmy White . He returned to professional competition in the qualifying rounds for the German Masters in December 2015 , defeating Hamza Akbar 5 – 1 in the first round , but losing 3 – 5 to Stuart Carrington in the second round . 
 In the 2016 New Year Honours , he was appointed Officer of the Order of the British Empire ( OBE ) for his services to snooker . 
 In group one of the Championship League , he made the 800th competitive century break of his career in his match against Barry Hawkins , and went on to defeat Ricky Walden 3 – 0 in the semi @-@ finals and Robert Milkins 3 – 0 in the final , earning a ticket to the winners ' group . At the Masters , he defeated Mark Williams 6 – 5 in the first round , Mark Selby 6 – 3 in the quarter @-@ finals , and Stuart Bingham 6 – 3 in the semi @-@ finals to reach the eleventh Masters final of his career . He defeated Barry Hawkins 10 – 1 in the final to win his sixth Masters title and equal Stephen Hendry 's record for the most Masters wins . 
 At the Welsh Open , O 'Sullivan defeated Barry Pinches 4 – 1 in the first round . In the fifth frame of the match , he declined the opportunity to make a maximum break , potting the pink off the penultimate red and completing a break of 146 . He stated afterward that the prize money of £ 10 @,@ 000 was not worthy of a 147 . World Snooker chairman Barry Hearn called the decision " unacceptable " and " disrespectful . " In the second round , he defeated Tian Pengfei 4 – 0 in just 39 minutes , with breaks of 110 , 90 , 112 and 102 in the four frames played . Tian scored only 37 points in the match . In the third round , he defeated Jimmy Robertson 4 – 0 in 55 minutes , a performance that included breaks of 94 and 131 as part of a run of 300 points without reply . He defeated Yu <unk> 4 – 1 in the last 16 , and then defeated world number one Mark Selby 5 – 1 in the quarterfinals , finishing with a break of 132 . A 6 – 3 victory over Joe Perry in the semi @-@ final secured a place in the final against Neil Robertson . Despite trailing 3 – 5 after the afternoon session , O 'Sullivan won all six frames played in the evening session , finishing with a break of 141 to defeat Robertson 9 – 5 and equal John Higgins 's record of four Welsh Open titles . It was his 28th ranking title , which put him in joint second place with Higgins and Steve Davis for the number of career ranking titles . Over the tournament as a whole , O 'Sullivan won 36 of the 47 frames he played , and compiled ten century breaks . 
 At the Championship League , O 'Sullivan lost 3 – 2 in the final against Judd Trump . During the tournament , O 'Sullivan 's 24 @-@ match winning streak came to an end following a 3 – 0 defeat from Mark Williams . O 'Sullivan faced Michael Holt in the first round of the World Grand Prix and lost 4 – 3 . 
 In the World Championship , O 'Sullivan beat David Gilbert 10 – 7 in the first round . After the match , he refused to attend a mandatory press conference , and also refused to talk to the tournament broadcasters , the BBC . He received a formal warning from World Snooker , and was advised that further breaches of contract would lead to fines . In the second round , he lost 12 – 13 to Barry Hawkins , his first loss against Hawkins in 14 years and only the second time in 13 years that he had failed to reach the World Championship quarterfinals . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 O 'Sullivan plays in a fast and attacking manner . He is a prolific <unk> and solid tactical player . He has stated his disdain for long , drawn @-@ out games , saying that it harms the game of snooker . He is regarded by many other professionals as an excellent front @-@ runner . In previous years , he could become demoralized by being behind and not playing well , and was liable to lose several consecutive frames . He is right @-@ handed but can play to a very high standard with his left hand and routinely alternates where needed . While not quite possessing the same power in his left arm , being ambidextrous enables him to attempt shots with his left hand that would otherwise require awkward cueing with a rest or spider . 
 When he first displayed this left @-@ handed ability in the 1996 World Championship against Alain Robidoux , the Canadian accused him of disrespect . O 'Sullivan responded that he played better with his left hand than Robidoux could with his right . He was summoned to a disciplinary hearing in response to Robidoux 's formal complaint , where he had to prove that he could play to a high level with his left hand . He played three frames of snooker against former world championship runner @-@ up Rex Williams , winning all three . The charge of bringing the game into disrepute was subsequently dropped . 
 Unlike most players on the professional tour , O 'Sullivan does not request the cue ball to be cleaned whenever a kick or heavy contact occurs and plays on normally as if it had not happened . He has stated that stopping to have the cue ball cleaned affects his rhythm and that it is easier just to continue playing . 
 = = Status = = 
 He is considered by many to be the most naturally talented player in the history of the sport , with some labelling him a ' genius ' . Several of his peers regard him as the greatest player ever , although a temperamental streak sometimes leads to a lack of confidence or interest , and he has performed inconsistently throughout his controversial career thus far , with observers noting the ' two Ronnies ' aspect of his character . According to Stephen Hendry after his defeat at the 2008 World Championship , " O 'Sullivan is the best player in the world by a country mile " . O 'Sullivan has compiled the highest number of competitive century breaks in the sport 's history , surpassing Hendry 's previous record of 775 . O 'Sullivan has targeted reaching 1 @,@ 000 century breaks before he retires . 
 O 'Sullivan is one of the most popular players on the circuit , noted for being a ' showman ' , and has helped improve the image of snooker to the general public . O 'Sullivan himself has stated his desire for entertaining the watching public , and has said that slow , gritty games put viewers off . He has often been compared to Alex Higgins and Jimmy White , because of both his natural talent and popularity . O 'Sullivan has two verified social network accounts , on Twitter and Sina Weibo , with over 300 @,@ 000 and over 160 @,@ 000 followers respectively . He updates his Weibo account with the help of two assistants understanding Chinese . 
 = = Broadcaster = = 
 O 'Sullivan started broadcasting regularly on Brentwood radio station Phoenix FM in May 2015 , co @-@ hosting the Midweek <unk> show with Chris Hood . O 'Sullivan has previously broadcast a number of hour @-@ long specials for the station . 
 In March 2014 , Eurosport announced that it had signed an exclusive deal with O 'Sullivan to make him its global ambassador for snooker , with the goal of driving the sport 's international appeal . As part of the deal , O 'Sullivan creates an exclusive snooker series for the network called The Ronnie O 'Sullivan Show , which includes his insights into the game , interviews with other professional players , and playing tips . He also wrote for Eurosport @-@ Yahoo ! websites and mobile apps during the World Championship . O 'Sullivan works for Eurosport with Jimmy White and Neal Foulds doing analysis for events that he does not take part in or qualify for like the 2015 UK Championship and the 2016 German Masters . 
 = = Other <unk> = = 
 O 'Sullivan has also written a crime novel , entitled Framed , which will be published in 2016 . The novel is not autobiographical but is somewhat inspired by his early experiences and family life . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 O 'Sullivan was born in <unk> in the West Midlands . He grew up , and still lives , in the Manor Road area of Chigwell , Essex , an affluent suburb of London . He attended Wanstead High School . His parents Ronald John O 'Sullivan and Maria O 'Sullivan ( née <unk> ) ran a string of sex shops in Soho . His mother is Sicilian , and his paternal grandfather hails from Cork , Ireland . He is the cousin of female snooker player Maria Catalano , who has been ranked number one in the women 's game . His father was jailed in 1992 for murder and released 18 years later . O 'Sullivan has three children : Taylor @-@ Ann Magnus ( born 1996 ) from a two @-@ year relationship with Sally Magnus ; and Lily ( born 2006 ) and Ronnie ( born 2007 ) from a relationship with Jo Langley , whom he met at Narcotics Anonymous . In February 2013 , he became engaged to actress and former Strictly Come Dancing contestant Laila Rouass , with whom he had been in a relationship since early 2012 . 
 He has been labelled a perfectionist , and highly self @-@ critical , even in victory . He suffered from clinical depression , and has had drug @-@ related problems , but works with the sports psychologist Steve Peters , who has helped him overcome his mood swings . Noted for repeatedly declaring his intention to leave the sport , O 'Sullivan worked during the 2012 / 2013 season on a pig farm . 
 In 2003 , media sources carried reports that O 'Sullivan had converted to Islam , but despite his self @-@ professed interest in the faith , these reports were proven to be false . O 'Sullivan also espouses an interest in Buddhism , having spent many lunchtimes at the London Buddhist Centre in Bethnal Green . However , he denies having a firm commitment to any religion . 
 O 'Sullivan is a keen football fan and is a supporter of Arsenal . Another of his hobbies is motor racing . In 2004 , he appeared on Top Gear as the " Star in a Reasonably Priced Car " , and finished with a time of 1 : 47 @.@ 3 around the test track in a Suzuki Liana . He also succeeded in clearing a snooker table of four reds plus all the colours faster than the Stig was able to drive O 'Sullivan 's own Mercedes SL 500 , with its " 147 " number plate , around the track . Over the weekend of 15 – 16 August 2009 , in the Volkswagen Racing Cup at Silverstone using a Volkswagen Jetta with the car number " 147 " , he drove two 20 @-@ minute rounds . In the first round , he spun off into a gravel trap , but fared better in the second , in which he finished 14th . O 'Sullivan is also a keen runner , and runs for Woodford Green with Essex Ladies . He has a personal best of 34 minutes 54 seconds for 10 km races , which ranked him in the top 1500 of 10k runners in the United Kingdom in 2008 . O 'Sullivan also enjoys cooking , and has said that if he were to go back to school he would study cooking . This was reinforced by his appearance on BBC 's Saturday Kitchen , in December 2014 . 
 O 'Sullivan publicly endorsed Labour 's Ed Miliband in the 2015 general election and played a game of pool against the Labour leader , who had previously expressed his admiration for O 'Sullivan . 
 = = Performance and rankings timeline = = 
 = = Career finals = = 
 = = = Ranking event finals : 40 ( 28 titles , 12 runners @-@ up ) = = = 
 = = = Minor @-@ ranking event finals : 6 ( 3 titles , 3 runners @-@ up ) = = = 
 = = = Non @-@ ranking event finals : 42 ( 29 titles , 13 runners @-@ up ) = = = 
 = = = Variant event finals : 2 ( 1 title , 1 runner @-@ up ) = = = 
 = Hippocampus = 
 The hippocampus ( named after its resemblance to the seahorse , from the Greek <unk> , " seahorse " from ἵππος hippos , " horse " and <unk> <unk> , " sea monster " ) is a major component of the brains of humans and other vertebrates . Humans and other mammals have two hippocampi , one in each side of the brain . It belongs to the limbic system and plays important roles in the consolidation of information from short @-@ term memory to long @-@ term memory and spatial navigation . The hippocampus is located under the cerebral cortex ; and in primates it is located in the medial temporal lobe , underneath the cortical surface . It contains two main interlocking parts : the hippocampus proper ( also called Ammon 's horn ) and the dentate gyrus . 
 In Alzheimer 's disease , the hippocampus is one of the first regions of the brain to suffer damage ; memory loss and disorientation are included among the early symptoms . Damage to the hippocampus can also result from oxygen starvation ( hypoxia ) , encephalitis , or medial temporal lobe epilepsy . People with extensive , bilateral hippocampal damage may experience anterograde amnesia — the inability to form and retain new memories . 
 In rodents , the hippocampus has been studied extensively as part of a brain system responsible for spatial memory and navigation . Many neurons in the rat and mouse hippocampus respond as place cells : that is , they fire bursts of action potentials when the animal passes through a specific part of its environment . Hippocampal place cells interact extensively with head direction cells , whose activity acts as an inertial compass , and <unk> with grid cells in the neighboring entorhinal cortex . 
 Since different neuronal cell types are neatly organized into layers in the hippocampus , it has frequently been used as a model system for studying neurophysiology . The form of neural plasticity known as long @-@ term potentiation ( LTP ) was first discovered to occur in the hippocampus and has often been studied in this structure . LTP is widely believed to be one of the main neural mechanisms by which memory is stored in the brain . 
 = = Name = = 
 The earliest description of the ridge running along the floor of the temporal horn of the lateral ventricle comes from the Venetian anatomist Julius Caesar <unk> ( 1587 ) , who likened it first to a silkworm and then to a seahorse ( Latin : hippocampus from Greek : ἵππος , " horse " and <unk> , " sea monster " ) . The German anatomist Duvernoy ( 1729 ) , the first to illustrate the structure , also wavered between " seahorse " and " silkworm . " " Ram 's horn " was proposed by the Danish anatomist Jacob <unk> in 1732 ; and a decade later his fellow Parisian , the surgeon de <unk> , used " cornu Ammonis " – horn of ( the ancient Egyptian god ) Amun . 
 Another mythological reference appeared with the term pes hippocampi , which may date back to <unk> in 1672 , introducing a comparison with the shape of the folded back forelimbs and webbed feet of the Classical hippocampus ( Greek : <unk> ) , a sea monster with a horse 's forequarters and a fish 's tail . The hippocampus was then described as pes hippocampi major , with an adjacent bulge in the occipital horn , the calcar avis , being named pes hippocampi minor . The renaming of the hippocampus as hippocampus major , and the calcar avis as hippocampus minor , has been attributed to Félix <unk> @-@ d <unk> systematising nomenclature of parts of the brain in 1786 . Mayer mistakenly used the term hippopotamus in 1779 , and was followed by some other authors until Karl Friedrich Burdach resolved this error in 1829 . In 1861 the hippocampus minor became the centre of a dispute over human evolution between Thomas Henry Huxley and Richard Owen , satirised as the Great Hippocampus Question . The term hippocampus minor fell from use in anatomy textbooks , and was officially removed in the Nomina <unk> of 1895 . 
 Today , the structure is called the hippocampus rather than hippocampus major , with pes hippocampi often being regarded as synonymous with De <unk> 's " cornu Ammonis " , a term that survives in the names of the four main histological divisions of the hippocampus : CA1 , <unk> , CA3 , and CA4 . 
 = = Anatomy = = 
 In terms of anatomy , the hippocampus is an elaboration of the edge of the cerebral cortex . The structures that line the edge of the cortex make up the so @-@ called limbic system ( Latin <unk> = border ) : These include the hippocampus , cingulate cortex , olfactory cortex , and amygdala . Paul MacLean once suggested , as part of his triune brain theory , that the limbic structures comprise the neural basis of emotion . Some neuroscientists no longer believe that the concept of a unified " limbic system " is valid , however . Yet , the hippocampus is anatomically connected to parts of the brain that are involved with emotional behavior — the septum , the hypothalamic mammillary body , and the anterior nuclear complex in the thalamus — therefore its role as a limbic structure cannot be completely dismissed . 
 The hippocampus as a whole has the shape of a curved tube , which has been variously compared to a seahorse , a ram 's horn ( Cornu Ammonis , hence the subdivisions CA1 through CA4 ) , or a banana . It can be distinguished as a zone where the cortex narrows into a single layer of densely packed pyramidal neurons 3 to 6 cells deep in rats , which curl into a tight U shape ; one edge of the " U , " field CA4 , is embedded into a backward @-@ facing , strongly flexed , V @-@ shaped cortex , the dentate gyrus . It consists of ventral and dorsal portions , both of which are of similar composition but are parts of different neural circuits . This general layout holds across the full range of mammalian species , from hedgehog to human , although the details vary . In the rat , the two hippocampi resemble a pair of bananas , joined at the stems by the hippocampal commissure that crosses the midline under the anterior corpus callosum . In human or monkey brains , the portion of the hippocampus down at the bottom , near the base of the temporal lobe , is much broader than the part at the top . One of the consequences of this complex geometry is that cross @-@ sections through the hippocampus can show a variety of shapes , depending on the angle and location of the cut . 
 The entorhinal cortex ( EC ) , located in the <unk> gyrus , is considered to be part of the hippocampal region because of its anatomical connections . The EC is strongly and reciprocally connected with many other parts of the cerebral cortex . In addition , the medial septal nucleus , the anterior nuclear complex and nucleus reuniens of the thalamus and the <unk> nucleus of the hypothalamus , as well as the <unk> nuclei and locus coeruleus in the brainstem send axons to the EC . The main output pathway ( perforant path , first described by Ramon y Cajal ) of EC axons comes from the large pyramidal cells in layer II that " perforate " the subiculum and project densely to the granule cells in the dentate gyrus , apical dendrites of CA3 get a less dense projection , and the apical dendrites of CA1 get a sparse projection . Thus , the perforant path establishes the EC as the main " interface " between the hippocampus and other parts of the cerebral cortex . The dentate granule cell axons ( called mossy fibers ) pass on the information from the EC on thorny spines that exit from the proximal apical <unk> of CA3 pyramidal cells . Then , CA3 axons exit from the deep part of the cell body and loop up into the region where the apical dendrites are located , then extend all the way back into the deep layers of the entorhinal cortex — the Schaffer collaterals completing the reciprocal circuit ; field CA1 also sends axons back to the EC , but these are more sparse than the CA3 projection . Within the hippocampus , the flow of information from the EC is largely unidirectional , with signals propagating through a series of tightly packed cell layers , first to the dentate gyrus , then to the CA3 layer , then to the CA1 layer , then to the subiculum , then out of the hippocampus to the EC , mainly due to <unk> of the CA3 axons . Each of these layers also contains complex intrinsic circuitry and extensive longitudinal connections . 
 Several other connections play important roles in hippocampal function . Beyond the output to the EC , additional output pathways go to other cortical areas including the prefrontal cortex . A very important large output goes to the lateral septal area and to the mammillary body of the hypothalamus . The hippocampus receives modulatory input from the serotonin , norepinephrine , and dopamine systems , and from nucleus reuniens of the thalamus to field CA1 . A very important projection comes from the medial septal area , which sends cholinergic and GABAergic fibers to all parts of the hippocampus . The inputs from the septal area play a key role in controlling the physiological state of the hippocampus ; destruction of the septal area abolishes the hippocampal theta rhythm and severely impairs certain types of memory . 
 The cortical region adjacent to the hippocampus is known collectively as the <unk> gyrus ( or <unk> ) . It includes the EC and also the <unk> cortex , which derives its name from the fact that it lies next to the <unk> sulcus . The <unk> cortex plays an important role in visual recognition of complex objects . There is also substantial evidence that it makes a contribution to memory , which can be distinguished from the contribution of the hippocampus . It is apparent that complete amnesia occurs only when both the hippocampus and the <unk> are damaged . 
 = = Functions = = 
 Historically , the earliest widely held hypothesis was that the hippocampus is involved in olfaction . This idea was cast into doubt by a series of anatomical studies that did not find any direct projections to the hippocampus from the olfactory bulb . However , later work did confirm that the olfactory bulb does project into the ventral part of the lateral entorhinal cortex , and field CA1 in the ventral hippocampus sends axons to the main olfactory bulb , the anterior olfactory nucleus , and to the primary olfactory cortex . There continues to be some interest in hippocampal olfactory responses , in particular the role of the hippocampus in memory for odors , but few specialists today believe that olfaction is its primary function . 
 Over the years , three main ideas of hippocampal function have dominated the literature : inhibition , memory , and space . The behavioral inhibition theory ( caricatured by O 'Keefe and Nadel as " slam on the brakes ! " ) was very popular up to the 1960s . It derived much of its justification from two observations : first , that animals with hippocampal damage tend to be hyperactive ; second , that animals with hippocampal damage often have difficulty learning to inhibit responses that they have previously been taught , especially if the response requires remaining quiet as in a passive avoidance test . Jeffrey Gray developed this line of thought into a full @-@ fledged theory of the role of the hippocampus in anxiety . The inhibition theory is currently the least popular of the three . 
 The second major line of thought relates the hippocampus to memory . Although it had historical precursors , this idea derived its main impetus from a famous report by William Beecher <unk> and Brenda Milner describing the results of surgical destruction of the hippocampi ( in an attempt to relieve epileptic seizures ) , in Henry Molaison , known until his death in 2008 as " Patient H.M. " The unexpected outcome of the surgery was severe anterograde and partial retrograde amnesia ; Molaison was unable to form new episodic memories after his surgery and could not remember any events that occurred just before his surgery , but he did retain memories of events that occurred many years earlier extending back into his childhood . This case attracted such widespread professional interest that Molaison became the most intensively studied subject in medical history . In the ensuing years , other patients with similar levels of hippocampal damage and amnesia ( caused by accident or disease ) have also been studied , and thousands of experiments have studied the physiology of activity @-@ driven changes in synaptic connections in the hippocampus . There is now universal agreement that the hippocampi play some sort of important role in memory ; however , the precise nature of this role remains widely debated . 
 The third important theory of hippocampal function relates the hippocampus to space . The spatial theory was originally championed by O 'Keefe and Nadel , who were influenced by E.C. Tolman 's theories about " cognitive maps " in humans and animals . O 'Keefe and his student <unk> in 1971 discovered neurons in the rat hippocampus that appeared to them to show activity related to the rat 's location within its environment . Despite skepticism from other investigators , O 'Keefe and his co @-@ workers , especially Lynn Nadel , continued to investigate this question , in a line of work that eventually led to their very influential 1978 book The Hippocampus as a Cognitive Map . There is now almost universal agreement that hippocampal function plays an important role in spatial coding , but the details are widely debated . 
 = = = Role in memory = = = 
 Psychologists and neuroscientists generally agree that the hippocampus plays an important role in the formation of new memories about experienced events ( episodic or autobiographical memory ) . Part of this function is hippocampal involvement in the detection of novel events , places and stimuli . Some researchers regard the hippocampus as part of a larger medial temporal lobe memory system responsible for general declarative memory ( memories that can be explicitly <unk> — these would include , for example , memory for facts in addition to episodic memory ) . 
 Due to bilateral symmetry the brain has a hippocampus in each cerebral hemisphere , so every normal brain has two of them . If damage to the hippocampus occurs in only one hemisphere , leaving the structure intact in the other hemisphere , the brain can retain near @-@ normal memory functioning . Severe damage to the hippocampi in both hemispheres results in profound difficulties in forming new memories ( anterograde amnesia ) and often also affects memories formed before the damage occurred ( retrograde amnesia ) . Although the retrograde effect normally extends many years back before the brain damage , in some cases older memories remain . This retention of older memories leads to the idea that consolidation over time involves the transfer of memories out of the hippocampus to other parts of the brain . 
 Damage to the hippocampus does not affect some types of memory , such as the ability to learn new skills ( playing a musical instrument or solving certain types of puzzles , for example ) . This fact suggests that such abilities depend on different types of memory ( procedural memory ) and different brain regions . Furthermore , amnesic patients frequently show " implicit " memory for experiences even in the absence of conscious knowledge . For example , patients asked to guess which of two faces they have seen most recently may give the correct answer most of the time in spite of stating that they have never seen either of the faces before . Some researchers distinguish between conscious recollection , which depends on the hippocampus , and familiarity , which depends on portions of the medial temporal cortex . 
 = = = Role in spatial memory and navigation = = = 
 Studies conducted on freely moving rats and mice have shown that many hippocampal neurons have " place fields " , that is , they fire bursts of action potentials when a rat passes through a particular part of the environment . Evidence for place cells in primates is limited , perhaps in part because it is difficult to record brain activity from freely moving monkeys . Place @-@ related hippocampal neural activity has been reported in monkeys moving around inside a room while seated in a restraint chair ; on the other hand , Edmund Rolls and his colleagues instead described hippocampal cells that fire in relation to the place a monkey is looking at , rather than the place where its body is located . In humans , cells with location @-@ specific firing patterns have been reported in a study of patients with drug @-@ resistant epilepsy who were undergoing an invasive procedure to localize the source of their seizures , with a view to surgical resection . The patients had diagnostic electrodes implanted in their hippocampus and then used a computer to move around in a virtual reality town . 
 Place responses in rats and mice have been studied in hundreds of experiments over four decades , yielding a large quantity of information . Place cell responses are shown by pyramidal cells in the hippocampus proper , and granule cells in the dentate gyrus . These constitute the great majority of neurons in the densely packed hippocampal layers . Inhibitory interneurons , which make up most of the remaining cell population , frequently show significant place @-@ related variations in firing rate that are much weaker than those displayed by pyramidal or granule cells . There is little if any spatial topography in the representation ; in general , cells lying next to each other in the hippocampus have uncorrelated spatial firing patterns . Place cells are typically almost silent when a rat is moving around outside the place field but reach sustained rates as high as 40 Hertz when the rat is near the center . Neural activity sampled from 30 to 40 randomly chosen place cells carries enough information to allow a rat 's location to be reconstructed with high confidence . The size of place fields varies in a gradient along the length of the hippocampus , with cells at the dorsal end showing the smallest fields , cells near the center showing larger fields , and cells at the ventral tip fields that cover the entire environment . In some cases , the firing rate of rat hippocampal cells depends not only on place but also on the direction a rat is moving , the destination toward which it is traveling , or other task @-@ related variables . 
 The discovery of place cells in the 1970s led to a theory that the hippocampus might act as a cognitive map — a neural representation of the layout of the environment . Several lines of evidence support the hypothesis . It is a frequent observation that without a fully functional hippocampus , humans may not remember where they have been and how to get where they are going : Getting lost is one of the most common symptoms of amnesia . Studies with animals have shown that an intact hippocampus is required for initial learning and long @-@ term retention of some spatial memory tasks , in particular ones that require finding the way to a hidden goal . The " cognitive map hypothesis " has been further advanced by recent discoveries of head direction cells , grid cells , and border cells in several parts of the rodent brain that are strongly connected to the hippocampus . 
 Brain imaging shows that people have more active hippocampi when correctly navigating , as tested in a computer @-@ simulated " virtual " navigation task . Also , there is evidence that the hippocampus plays a role in finding shortcuts and new routes between familiar places . For example , London 's taxi drivers must learn a large number of places and the most direct routes between them ( they have to pass a strict test , The Knowledge , before being licensed to drive the famous black cabs ) . A study at University College London by Maguire , et al .. ( 2000 ) showed that part of the hippocampus is larger in taxi drivers than in the general public , and that more experienced drivers have bigger hippocampi . Whether having a bigger hippocampus helps an individual to become a better cab driver , or if finding shortcuts for a living makes an individual 's hippocampus grow is yet to be elucidated . However , in that study , Maguire et al. examined the correlation between size of the grey matter and length of time that had been spent as a taxi driver , and found a positive correlation between the length of time an individual had spent as a taxi driver and the volume of the right hippocampus . It was found that the total volume of the hippocampus remained constant , from the control group vs. taxi drivers . That is to say that the posterior portion of a taxi driver 's hippocampus is indeed increased , but at the expense of the anterior portion . There have been no known detrimental effects reported from this disparity in hippocampal proportions . 
 = = = Hippocampal formation = = = 
 Various sections of the hippocampal formation are shown to be functionally and anatomically distinct . The dorsal ( DH ) , ventral ( VH ) and intermediate regions of the hippocampal formation serve different functions , project with differing pathways , and have varying degrees of place field neurons . The dorsal region of the hippocampal formation serves for spatial memory , verbal memory , and learning of conceptual information . Using the radial arm maze , <unk> et al . ( 2004 ) found lesions in the DH to cause spatial memory impairment while VH lesions did not . Its projecting pathways include the medial septal complex and <unk> nucleus . The dorsal hippocampal formation also has more place field neurons than both the ventral and intermediate hippocampal formations . 
 The intermediate hippocampus has overlapping characteristics with both the ventral and dorsal hippocampus . Using <unk> anterograde tracing methods , <unk> and Swanson ( 2007 ) located the moderate projections to two primary olfactory cortical areas and <unk> areas of the <unk> . This region has the smallest number of place field neurons . The ventral hippocampus functions in fear conditioning and affective processes . <unk> et al . ( 2002 ) showed that alterations to the ventral hippocampus reduced the amount of information sent to the amygdala by the dorsal and ventral hippocampus , consequently altering fear conditioning in rats . 
 = = Physiology = = 
 The hippocampus shows two major " modes " of activity , each associated with a distinct pattern of neural population activity and waves of electrical activity as measured by an electroencephalogram ( EEG ) . These modes are named after the EEG patterns associated with them : theta and large irregular activity ( LIA ) . The main characteristics described below are for the rat , which is the animal most extensively studied . 
 The theta mode appears during states of active , alert behavior ( especially locomotion ) , and also during REM ( dreaming ) sleep . In the theta mode , the EEG is dominated by large regular waves with a frequency range of 6 to 9 Hertz , and the main groups of hippocampal neurons ( pyramidal cells and granule cells ) show sparse population activity , which means that in any short time interval , the great majority of cells are silent , while the small remaining fraction fire at relatively high rates , up to 50 spikes in one second for the most active of them . An active cell typically stays active for half a second to a few seconds . As the rat behaves , the active cells fall silent and new cells become active , but the overall percentage of active cells remains more or less constant . In many situations , cell activity is determined largely by the spatial location of the animal , but other behavioral variables also clearly influence it . 
 The LIA mode appears during slow @-@ wave ( non @-@ dreaming ) sleep , and also during states of waking immobility such as resting or eating . In the LIA mode , the EEG is dominated by sharp waves that are randomly timed large deflections of the EEG signal lasting for 25 – 50 milliseconds . Sharp waves are frequently generated in sets , with sets containing up to 5 or more individual sharp waves and lasting up to 500 ms . The spiking activity of neurons within the hippocampus is highly correlated with sharp wave activity . Most neurons decrease their firing rate between sharp waves ; however , during a sharp wave , there is a dramatic increase of firing rate in up to 10 % of the hippocampal population 
 These two hippocampal activity modes can be seen in primates as well as rats , with the exception that it has been difficult to see robust theta rhythmicity in the primate hippocampus . There are , however , qualitatively similar sharp waves and similar state @-@ dependent changes in neural population activity . 
 = = = Theta rhythm = = = 
 Because of its densely packed neural layers , the hippocampus generates some of the largest EEG signals of any brain structure . In some situations the EEG is dominated by regular waves at 3 to 10 Hertz , often continuing for many seconds . These reflect <unk> membrane potentials and strongly modulate the spiking of hippocampal neurons and synchronise across the hippocampus in a travelling wave pattern . This EEG pattern is known as a theta rhythm . Theta rhythmicity is very obvious in rabbits and rodents and also clearly present in cats and dogs . Whether theta can be seen in primates is a vexing question . In rats ( the animals that have been the most extensively studied ) , theta is seen mainly in two conditions : first , when an animal is walking or in some other way actively interacting with its surroundings ; second , during REM sleep . The function of theta has not yet been convincingly explained although numerous theories have been proposed . The most popular hypothesis has been to relate it to learning and memory . An example would be the phase with which theta rhythms , at the time of stimulation of a neuron , shape the effect of that stimulation upon its synapses . What is meant here is that theta rhythms may affect those aspects of learning and memory that are dependent upon synaptic plasticity . It is well established that lesions of the medial septum — the central node of the theta system — cause severe disruptions of memory . However , the medial septum is more than just the controller of theta ; it is also the main source of cholinergic projections to the hippocampus . It has not been established that septal lesions exert their effects specifically by eliminating the theta rhythm . 
 = = = Sharp waves = = = 
 During sleep or during waking states when an animal is resting or otherwise not engaged with its surroundings , the hippocampal EEG shows a pattern of irregular slow waves , somewhat larger in amplitude than theta waves . This pattern is occasionally interrupted by large surges called sharp waves . These events are associated with bursts of spike activity lasting 50 to 100 milliseconds in pyramidal cells of CA3 and CA1 . They are also associated with short @-@ lived high @-@ frequency EEG oscillations called " ripples " , with frequencies in the range 150 to 200 Hertz in rats . Sharp waves are most frequent during sleep when they occur at an average rate of around 1 per second ( in rats ) but in a very irregular temporal pattern . Sharp waves are less frequent during inactive waking states and are usually smaller . Sharp waves have also been observed in humans and monkeys . In macaques , sharp waves are robust but do not occur as frequently as in rats . 
 One of the most interesting aspects of sharp waves is that they appear to be associated with memory . Wilson and McNaughton 1994 , and numerous later studies , reported that when hippocampal place cells have overlapping spatial firing fields ( and therefore often fire in near @-@ simultaneity ) , they tend to show correlated activity during sleep following the behavioral session . This enhancement of correlation , commonly known as reactivation , has been found to occur mainly during sharp waves . It has been proposed that sharp waves are , in fact , <unk> of neural activity patterns that were memorized during behavior , driven by strengthening of synaptic connections within the hippocampus . This idea forms a key component of the " two @-@ stage memory " theory , advocated by <unk> and others , which proposes that memories are stored within the hippocampus during behavior and then later transferred to the neocortex during sleep . Sharp waves are suggested to drive Hebbian synaptic changes in the neocortical targets of hippocampal output pathways . 
 = = = Long @-@ term potentiation = = = 
 Since at least the time of Ramon y Cajal , psychologists have speculated that the brain stores memory by altering the strength of connections between neurons that are simultaneously active . This idea was formalized by Donald Hebb in 1948 , but for many years thereafter , attempts to find a brain mechanism for such changes failed . In 1973 , Tim Bliss and Terje Lømo described a phenomenon in the rabbit hippocampus that appeared to meet Hebb 's specifications : a change in synaptic responsiveness induced by brief strong activation and lasting for hours or days or longer . This phenomenon was soon referred to as long @-@ term potentiation , abbreviated LTP . As a candidate mechanism for memory , LTP has since been studied intensively , and a great deal has been learned about it . 
 The hippocampus is a particularly favorable site for studying LTP because of its densely packed and sharply defined layers of neurons , but similar types of activity @-@ dependent synaptic change have now been observed in many other brain areas . The best @-@ studied form of LTP occurs at synapses that terminate on dendritic spines and use the transmitter glutamate . Several of the major pathways within the hippocampus fit this description and exhibit LTP . The synaptic changes depend on a special type of glutamate receptor , the NMDA receptor , which has the special property of allowing calcium to enter the postsynaptic spine only when presynaptic activation and postsynaptic depolarization occur at the same time . Drugs that interfere with NMDA receptors block LTP and have major effects on some types of memory , especially spatial memory . Transgenic mice , genetically modified in ways that disable the LTP mechanism , also generally show severe memory deficits . 
 = = Pathology = = 
 = = = Aging = = = 
 Age @-@ related conditions such as Alzheimer 's disease ( for which hippocampal disruption is one of the earliest signs ) have a severe impact on many types of cognition , but even normal aging is associated with a gradual decline in some types of memory , including episodic memory and working memory ( or short @-@ term memory ) . Because the hippocampus is thought to play a central role in memory , there has been considerable interest in the possibility that age @-@ related declines could be caused by hippocampal deterioration . Some early studies reported substantial loss of neurons in the hippocampus of elderly people , but later studies using more precise techniques found only minimal differences . Similarly , some MRI studies have reported shrinkage of the hippocampus in elderly people , but other studies have failed to reproduce this finding . There is , however , a reliable relationship between the size of the hippocampus and memory performance — meaning that not all elderly people show hippocampal shrinkage , but those who do tend to perform less well on some memory tasks . There are also reports that memory tasks tend to produce less hippocampal activation in elderly than in young subjects . Furthermore , a randomized @-@ control study published in 2011 found that aerobic exercise could increase the size of the hippocampus in adults aged 55 to 80 and also improve spatial memory . 
 = = = Stress = = = 
 The hippocampus contains high levels of glucocorticoid receptors , which make it more vulnerable to long @-@ term stress than most other brain areas . Stress @-@ related steroids affect the hippocampus in at least three ways : first , by reducing the excitability of some hippocampal neurons ; second , by inhibiting the genesis of new neurons in the dentate gyrus ; third , by causing atrophy of dendrites in pyramidal cells of the CA3 region . There is evidence that humans having experienced severe , long @-@ lasting traumatic stress show atrophy of the hippocampus more than of other parts of the brain . These effects show up in post @-@ traumatic stress disorder , and they may contribute to the hippocampal atrophy reported in schizophrenia and severe depression . A recent study has also revealed atrophy as a result of depression , but this can be stopped with anti @-@ depressants even if they are not effective in relieving other symptoms . Hippocampal atrophy is also frequently seen in Cushing 's syndrome , a disorder caused by high levels of cortisol in the bloodstream . At least some of these effects appear to be reversible if the stress is discontinued . There is , however , evidence derived mainly from studies using rats that stress occurring shortly after birth can affect hippocampal function in ways that persist throughout life . 
 Sex @-@ specific responses to stress have also been demonstrated to have an effect on the hippocampus . During situations in which adult male and female rats were exposed to chronic stress the females were shown to be better able to cope . 
 = = = Epilepsy = = = 
 The hippocampus is often the focus of epileptic seizures : hippocampal sclerosis is the most commonly visible type of tissue damage in temporal lobe epilepsy . It is not yet clear , however , whether the epilepsy is usually caused by hippocampal abnormalities or whether the hippocampus is damaged by cumulative effects of seizures . In experimental settings where repetitive seizures are artificially induced in animals , hippocampal damage is a frequent result . This may be a consequence of the hippocampus 's being one of the most electrically excitable parts of the brain . It may also have something to do with the fact that the hippocampus is one of very few brain regions where new neurons continue to be created throughout life . 
 = = = Schizophrenia = = = 
 The causes of schizophrenia are not at all well understood , but numerous abnormalities of brain structure have been reported . The most thoroughly investigated alterations involve the cerebral cortex , but effects on the hippocampus have also been described . Many reports have found reductions in the size of the hippocampus in schizophrenic subjects . The changes probably result from altered development rather than tissue damage and show up even in subjects never having been medicated . Several lines of evidence implicate changes in synaptic organization and connectivity . It is unclear whether hippocampal alterations play any role in causing the psychotic symptoms that are the most important feature of schizophrenia . Anthony Grace and his co @-@ workers have suggested , on the basis of experimental work using animals , that hippocampal dysfunction might produce an alteration of dopamine release in the basal ganglia , thereby indirectly affecting the integration of information in the prefrontal cortex . Others have suggested that hippocampal dysfunction might account for disturbances in long @-@ term memory frequently observed in people with schizophrenia . 
 = = = Transient global amnesia = = = 
 A current hypothesis as to one cause of transient global amnesia — a dramatic , sudden , temporary , near @-@ total loss of short @-@ term memory — is that it may be due to venous congestion of the brain , leading to ischemia of structures such as the hippocampus that are involved in memory . 
 = = Evolution = = 
 The hippocampus has a generally similar appearance across the range of mammal species , from monotremes such as the echidna to primates such as humans . The hippocampal @-@ size @-@ to @-@ body @-@ size ratio broadly increases , being about twice as large for primates as for the echidna . It does not , however , increase at anywhere close to the rate of the neocortex @-@ to @-@ body @-@ size ratio . Therefore , the hippocampus takes up a much larger fraction of the cortical mantle in rodents than in primates . In adult humans the volume of the hippocampus on each side of the brain is about 3 @.@ 0 to 3 @.@ 5 cm3 as compared to 320 to 420 cm3 for the volume of the neocortex . 
 There is also a general relationship between the size of the hippocampus and spatial memory . When comparisons are made between similar species , those that have a greater capacity for spatial memory tend to have larger hippocampal volumes . This relationship also extends to sex differences ; in species where males and females show strong differences in spatial memory ability they also tend to show corresponding differences in hippocampal volume . 
 Non @-@ mammalian species do not have a brain structure that looks like the mammalian hippocampus , but they have one that is considered homologous to it . The hippocampus , as pointed out above , is in essence the medial edge of the cortex . Only mammals have a fully developed cortex , but the structure it evolved from , called the pallium , is present in all vertebrates , even the most primitive ones such as the lamprey or hagfish . The pallium is usually divided into three zones : medial , lateral and dorsal . The medial pallium forms the precursor of the hippocampus . It does not resemble the hippocampus visually because the layers are not warped into an S shape or enfolded by the dentate gyrus , but the homology is indicated by strong chemical and functional affinities . There is now evidence that these hippocampal @-@ like structures are involved in spatial cognition in birds , reptiles , and fish . 
 In birds , the correspondence is sufficiently well established that most anatomists refer to the medial pallial zone as the " avian hippocampus " . Numerous species of birds have strong spatial skills , in particular those that cache food . There is evidence that food @-@ caching birds have a larger hippocampus than other types of birds and that damage to the hippocampus causes impairments in spatial memory . 
 The story for fish is more complex . In teleost fish ( which make up the great majority of existing species ) , the forebrain is distorted in comparison to other types of vertebrates : Most <unk> believe that the teleost forebrain is in essence everted , like a sock turned inside @-@ out , so that structures that lie in the interior , next to the ventricles , for most vertebrates , are found on the outside in teleost fish , and vice versa . One of the consequences of this is that the medial pallium ( " hippocampal " zone ) of a typical vertebrate is thought to correspond to the lateral pallium of a typical fish . Several types of fish ( particularly goldfish ) have been shown experimentally to have strong spatial memory abilities , even forming " cognitive maps " of the areas they inhabit . There is evidence that damage to the lateral pallium impairs spatial memory . 
 Thus , the role of the hippocampal region in navigation appears to begin far back in vertebrate evolution , predating splits that occurred hundreds of millions of years ago . It is not yet known whether the medial pallium plays a similar role in even more primitive vertebrates , such as sharks and rays , or even lampreys and hagfish . Some types of insects , and molluscs such as the octopus , also have strong spatial learning and navigation abilities , but these appear to work differently from the mammalian spatial system , so there is as yet no good reason to think that they have a common evolutionary origin ; nor is there sufficient similarity in brain structure to enable anything resembling a " hippocampus " to be identified in these species . Some have proposed , however , that the insect 's mushroom bodies may have a function similar to that of the hippocampus . 
 = = = Journals = = = 
 Hippocampus ( Wiley ) 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Per Andersen ; Richard Morris ; David Amaral ; Tim Bliss ; John O 'Keefe , eds . ( 2007 ) . The Hippocampus Book . Oxford University Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 Dori <unk> ; James J. <unk> , eds . ( 2014 ) . Space , Time and Memory in the Hippocampal Formation . Springer . ISBN 978 @-@ 3 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1292 @-@ 2 . 
 Henri M. Duvernoy ; F. <unk> ( 2005 ) . The Human Hippocampus : Functional Anatomy , <unk> , and Serial Sections with MRI . Springer . ISBN 978 @-@ 3 @-@ 540 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . 
 Howard <unk> ( 2002 ) . The Cognitive Neuroscience of Memory . Oxford University Press US . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 
 edited by Patricia E. Sharp . ( 2002 ) . Patricia E. Sharp , ed . The Neural Basis of Navigation : Evidence from Single Cell Recording . Springer . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 7923 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 Philippe Taupin ( 2007 ) . The Hippocampus : <unk> and Plasticity in the Nervous System . Nova Publishers . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 914 @-@ 6 . 
 John H Byrne , ed . ( 2008 ) . Learning and Memory : A comprehensive reference . Elsevier . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 12 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 = Cousin Bette = 
 La Cousine Bette ( French pronunciation : ​ [ la <unk> <unk> ] , Cousin Bette ) is an 1846 novel by French author Honoré de Balzac . Set in mid @-@ 19th century Paris , it tells the story of an unmarried middle @-@ aged woman who plots the destruction of her extended family . Bette works with Valérie Marneffe , an unhappily married young lady , to seduce and torment a series of men . One of these is Baron Hector Hulot , husband to Bette 's cousin Adeline . He sacrifices his family 's fortune and good name to please Valérie , who leaves him for a tradesman named Crevel . The book is part of the Scènes de la vie parisienne section of Balzac 's novel sequence La Comédie humaine ( " The Human Comedy " ) . 
 In the 1840s , a serial format known as the roman @-@ feuilleton was highly popular in France , and the most acclaimed expression of it was the socialist writing of Eugène Sue . Balzac wanted to challenge Sue 's supremacy , and prove himself the most capable feuilleton author in France . Writing quickly and with intense focus , Balzac produced La Cousine Bette , one of his longest novels , in two months . It was published in Le Constitutionnel at the end of 1846 , then collected with a companion work , Le Cousin Pons , the following year . 
 The novel 's characters represent polarities of contrasting morality . The vengeful Bette and disingenuous Valérie stand on one side , with the merciful Adeline and her patient daughter Hortense on the other . The patriarch of the Hulot family , meanwhile , is consumed by his own sexual desire . Hortense 's husband , the Polish exile Wenceslas Steinbock , represents artistic genius , though he succumbs to uncertainty and lack of motivation . Balzac based the character of Bette in part on his mother and the poet Marceline Desbordes @-@ Valmore . At least one scene involving Baron Hulot was likely based on an event in the life of Balzac 's friend , the novelist Victor Hugo . 
 La Cousine Bette is considered Balzac 's last great work . His trademark use of realist detail combines with a panorama of characters returning from earlier novels . Several critics have hailed it as a turning point in the author 's career , and others have called it a prototypical naturalist text . It has been compared to William Shakespeare 's Othello as well as Leo Tolstoy 's War and Peace . The novel explores themes of vice and virtue , as well as the influence of money on French society . Bette 's relationship with Valérie is also seen as an important exploration of homoerotic themes . A number of film versions of the story have been produced , including a 1971 BBC mini @-@ series starring Margaret Tyzack and Helen Mirren , and a 1998 feature film with Jessica Lange in the title role . 
 = = Background = = 
 By 1846 Honoré de Balzac had achieved tremendous fame as a writer , but his finances and health were deteriorating rapidly . After writing a series of potboiler novels in the 1820s , he published his first book under his own name , Les Chouans ( " The Chouans " ) , in 1829 . He followed this with dozens of well @-@ received novels and stories , including La Peau de chagrin ( " The Magic Skin " ) , in 1831 , Le Père Goriot ( " Father Goriot " ) in 1835 , and the two @-@ volume Illusions perdues ( " Lost Illusions " ) , in 1837 and 1839 . Because of his lavish lifestyle and penchant for financial speculation , however , he spent most of his life trying to repay a variety of debts . He wrote tirelessly , driven as much by economic necessity as by the muse and black coffee . This regimen of constant work exhausted his body and brought reprimands from his doctor . 
 As his work gained recognition , Balzac began corresponding with a Polish baroness named Ewelina Hańska , who first contacted him through an anonymous 1832 letter signed " L 'Étrangère " ( " The Stranger " ) . They developed an affectionate friendship in letters , and when she became a widow in 1841 , Balzac sought her hand in marriage . He visited her often in Poland and Germany , but various complications prohibited their union . One of these was an affair Balzac had with his housekeeper , Louise Breugniot . As she became aware of his affection for Mme. Hanska , Breugniot stole a collection of their letters and used them to extort money from Balzac . Even after this episode , however , he grew closer to Mme. Hanska with each visit and by 1846 he had begun preparing a home to share with her . He grew hopeful that they could marry when she became pregnant , but she fell ill in December and suffered a miscarriage . 
 The mid @-@ 19th century was a time of profound transformation in French government and society . The reign of King Charles X ended in 1830 when a wave of agitation and dissent forced him to abdicate . He was replaced by Louis @-@ Philippe , who named himself " King of the French " , rather than the standard " King of France " – an indication that he answered more to the nascent bourgeoisie than the aristocratic Ancien Régime . The change in government took place while the economy in France was moving from mercantilism to industrial development . This opened new opportunities for individuals hoping to acquire wealth , and led to significant changes in social norms . Members of the aristocracy , for example , were forced to relate socially to the nouveau riche , usually with tense results . The democratic spirit of the French Revolution also affected social interactions , with a shift in popular allegiance away from the church and the monarchy . 
 In the mid @-@ 19th century , a new style of novel became popular in France . The serial format known as the roman @-@ feuilleton presented stories in short regular installments , often accompanied by melodramatic plots and stock characters . Although Balzac 's La <unk> Fille ( The Old Maid ) , 1836 , was the first such work published in France , the roman @-@ feuilleton gained prominence thanks mostly to his friends Eugène Sue and Alexandre Dumas , père . Balzac disliked their serial writing , however , especially Sue 's socialist depiction of lower @-@ class suffering . Balzac wanted to dethrone what he called " les faux dieux de cette littérature <unk> " ( " the false gods of this bastard literature " ) . He also wanted to show the world that , despite his poor health and tumultuous career , he was " plus jeune , plus <unk> , et plus grand que jamais " ( " younger , fresher , and greater than ever " ) . His first efforts to render a quality feuilleton were unsuccessful . Even though <unk> et <unk> des <unk> ( " A Harlot High and Low " ) , published in segments from 1838 to 1847 , was celebrated by critics , Balzac complained to Mme. Hanska that he was " doing pure Sue " . He tried again in 1844 with Modeste Mignon , but public reactions were mixed . Two years later Balzac began a new project , determined to create something from his " own old pen again " . 
 = = Writing and publication = = 
 After resting for a week in June 1846 at the Château de Saché in Tours , Balzac returned to Paris and began working on a short story called " Le Parasite " , which he eventually developed into the novel Le Cousin Pons . He intended from the start to pair it with another novel , collecting them under the title Les Parents <unk> ( " The Poor Relations " ) . He based the second book on a story his sister Laure <unk> had written called " La Cousine Rosalie " and published in 1844 in Le Journal des enfants . Writing intensively , he produced the entire novel , named La Cousine Bette after the main character , in two months . This was a significant accomplishment owing to his bad health , but its length made Balzac 's writing speed especially remarkable . One critic calls the writing of Les Parents <unk> Balzac 's " last explosion of creative energy " . Another suggests that this effort was " almost the last straw which broke down Balzac 's gigantic strength " . 
 Balzac 's usual mode of revision involved vast , complicated edits made to galley proofs he received from the printer . When creating La Cousine Bette , however , he submitted the work to his editor piece by piece , without viewing a single proof . The book was serialized in Le Constitutionnel from 8 October to 3 December , and Balzac rushed to keep up with the newspaper 's rapid printing schedule . He produced an average of eight pages each day , but was struck by the unexpected enormity of the story as it evolved . Balzac was paid 12 @,@ 836 francs for the series , which was later published with Le Cousin Pons as a twelve @-@ volume book by <unk> and Pétion . The first collected edition of La Cousine Bette was organized into 132 chapters , but these divisions were removed when Balzac added it to his massive collection La Comédie humaine in 1848 . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 The first third of the novel provides a lengthy exploration of the characters ' histories . Balzac makes this clear after 150 pages : " Ici se <unk> , en <unk> sorte , l 'introduction de cette histoire . " ( " Here ends what is , in a way , the introduction to this story . " ) At the start of the novel , Adeline Hulot – wife of the successful Baron Hector Hulot – is being pressured into an affair by a wealthy perfumer named Célestin Crevel . His desire stems in part from an earlier contest in which the adulterous Baron Hulot had won the hand of the singer Josépha <unk> , also favored by Crevel . The <unk> ' daughter , Hortense , has begun searching for a husband ; their son Victorin is married to Crevel 's daughter Celestine . Mme. Hulot resists Crevel 's advances , and he turns his attention elsewhere . 
 Mme. Hulot 's cousin , Bette ( also called Lisbeth ) , harbors a deep but hidden resentment of her relatives ' success . A peasant woman with none of the physical beauty of her cousin , Bette has rejected a series of marriage proposals from middle @-@ class suitors , and remains unmarried at the age of 42 . One day she comes upon a young unsuccessful Polish sculptor named Wenceslas Steinbock , attempting suicide in the tiny apartment upstairs from her own . As she nourishes him back to health , she develops a maternal fondness for him . She also befriends Valérie , the wife of a War Department clerk named Marneffe ; the two women form a bond of mutual affection and protection . 
 Baron Hulot , meanwhile , is rejected by Josépha , who explains bluntly that she has chosen another man because of his larger fortune . Hulot 's despair is quickly alleviated when he meets and falls in love with Valérie Marneffe . He showers her with gifts , and soon establishes a luxurious house for her and M. Marneffe , with whom he works at the War Department . These debts , compounded by the money he borrowed to lavish on Josépha , threaten the Hulot family 's financial security . Panicked , he convinces his uncle Johann Fischer to quietly embezzle funds from a War Department outpost in Algiers . Hulot 's woes are momentarily abated and Bette 's happiness is shattered , when – at the end of the " introduction " – Hortense Hulot marries Wenceslas Steinbock . 
 Crushed at having lost Steinbock 's company , Bette swears vengeance on the Hulot family . She works behind the scenes with Valérie to extract more money from Baron Hulot . Valérie also seduces Crevel and watches with delight as they vie for her attention . With Bette 's help , Valérie turns to Steinbock and draws him into her bedroom . When Hortense learns of his infidelity , she leaves Steinbock and returns with their son to live with her mother Adeline . Valérie also proclaims her love to a Brazilian Baron named Henri Montès de <unk> , and swears devotion constantly to each of the five men . 
 Baron Hulot 's brother , known as " le maréchal " ( " the Marshal " ) , hires Bette as his housekeeper , and they develop a mild affection . He learns of his brother 's infidelities ( and the difficulties they have caused Adeline , who refuses to leave her husband ) , and promises to marry Bette if she will provide details . She agrees eagerly , delighted at the prospect of finally securing an enviable marriage . While investigating his brother 's behavior , however , the Marshal discovers Baron Hulot 's scheme in Algiers . He is overwhelmed by the disgrace , and his health deteriorates . Bette 's last hope for a brighter future dies with him . 
 When Valérie becomes pregnant , she tells each of her lovers ( and her husband ) that he is the father . She gives birth to a stillborn child , however , and her husband dies soon thereafter . Hulot and Crevel are ecstatic when they hear this news , each believing that he will become her only love once the official mourning period has passed . Valérie chooses Crevel for his comfortable fortune , and they quickly wed . This news outrages Baron Montès , and he devises a plot to poison the newlyweds . Crevel and Valérie die slowly , their bodies devoured by an exotic Brazilian toxin . 
 Victorin Hulot is later visited by the Prince of Wissembourg , who delivers news of economic good fortune . The Marshal , prior to his death , had made arrangements for repayment of the Baron 's debts , as well as employment for Adeline in a Catholic charity . Baron Hulot has disappeared , and Adeline spends her free time searching for him in houses of ill repute . She eventually finds him living with a fifteen @-@ year @-@ old courtesan , and begs him to return to the family . He agrees , but as he climbs into the carriage , Hulot asks : " mais <unk> @-@ je <unk> la petite ? " ( " But can I take the girl ? " ) The Hulot home is reunited for a time , and Bette 's fury at their apparent happiness hastens her death . One evening after the funeral , Adeline overhears Hulot seducing a kitchen maid named Agathe . On her deathbed , Adeline delivers her first rebuke to her husband : " [ D ] ans un moment , tu <unk> libre , et tu <unk> faire une <unk> Hulot . " ( " In a moment , you will be free , and you can make another Baroness Hulot . " ) Soon after burying his wife , Hulot marries Agathe . 
 = = Characters and inspirations = = 
 Balzac had written more than seventy novels when he began La Cousine Bette , and populated them with recurring characters . Many of the characters in the novel , therefore , appear with extensive back @-@ stories and biographical depth . For example , Célestin Crevel first appeared in Balzac 's 1837 novel César <unk> , working for the title character . Having accumulated a considerable fortune in that book , Crevel spends his time in La Cousine Bette enjoying the spoils of his labor . Another important recurring character is Marshal Hulot , who first appeared as a colonel in Les Chouans . In the years between that story and La Cousine Bette , he became the Count of <unk> ; in a letter to the Constitutionnel , Balzac described how Marshal Hulot gained this title . The presence of Crevel and Marshal Hulot – among others – in La Cousine Bette allows a continuation of each character 's life story , adding emphasis or complexity to earlier events . 
 Other recurring characters appear only briefly in La Cousine Bette ; previous appearances , however , give deep significance to the characters ' presence . This is the case with Vautrin , the criminal mastermind who tutors young Eugene de Rastignac in Balzac 's 1835 novel Le Père Goriot . When he resurfaces in La Cousine Bette , he has joined the police and introduces the Hulot family to his aunt , Mme. Nourrison , who offers a morally questionable remedy for their woes . Although Vautrin 's presence in La Cousine Bette is brief , his earlier adventures in Le Père Goriot provide instant recognition and emotional texture . Elsewhere , Balzac presents an entire world of experience by including characters from a particular sphere of society . For example , several scenes feature artists like Jean @-@ Jacques <unk> , who first appeared in 1837 's Les <unk> and in many other books thereafter . The world of Parisian nightlife is quickly brought to mind with the inclusion of several characters from Les <unk> sans le savoir ( 1846 ) , and Bianchon appears – as always – when a doctor is needed . 
 Balzac 's use of recurring characters has been identified as a unique component of his fiction . It enables a depth of characterization that goes beyond simple narration or dialogue . " When the characters reappear " , notes the critic Samuel Rogers , " they do not step out of nowhere ; they emerge from the privacy of their own lives which , for an interval , we have not been allowed to see . " Some readers , however , are intimidated by the depth created by these interdependent stories , and feel deprived of important context for the characters . Detective novelist Arthur Conan Doyle said that he never tried to read Balzac , because he " did not know where to begin " . The characterization in La Cousine Bette is considered especially skillful . Anthony Pugh , in his book Balzac 's Recurring Characters , says that the technique is employed " for the most part without that feeling of self @-@ indulgence that mars some of Balzac 's later work . Almost every example arises quite naturally out of the situation . " Biographer Noel Gerson calls the characters in La Cousine Bette " among the most memorable Balzac ever sketched " . 
 = = = Bette Fischer = = = 
 Descriptions of Bette are often connected to savagery and animal imagery . Her name , for example , is a homophone in French for " bête " ( " beast " ) . One passage explains that " elle <unk> aux singes <unk> en femmes " ( " she sometimes looked like one of those monkeys in petticoats " ) ; elsewhere her voice is described as having " une <unk> de tigre " ( " tiger @-@ like jealousy " ) . Her beastly rage comes to the surface with ferocity when she learns of Steinbock 's engagement to Hortense : 
 La <unk> de la Lorraine était <unk> terrible . Ses yeux noirs et <unk> <unk> la <unk> de ceux des <unk> . Sa figure <unk> à <unk> que nous <unk> aux <unk> , elle <unk> les dents pour les <unk> de <unk> , et une <unk> convulsion <unk> trembler ses <unk> . Elle avait <unk> sa main <unk> entre son bonnet et ses cheveux pour les <unk> et <unk> sa tête , <unk> trop <unk> ; elle <unk> ! La <unk> de l <unk> qui la <unk> <unk> passer par ses rides comme par <unk> de crevasses <unk> par une <unk> <unk> . 
 The peasant @-@ woman 's face was terrible ; her piercing black eyes had the glare of the tiger 's ; her face was like that we ascribe to a <unk> ; she set her teeth to keep them from chattering , and her whole frame quivered convulsively . She had pushed her clenched fingers under her cap to clutch her hair and support her head , which felt too heavy ; she was on fire . The smoke of the flame that scorched her seemed to emanate from her wrinkles as from the crevasses rent by a volcanic eruption . 
 When she learns that her cousin Adeline has been welcoming Steinbock into the Hulot home , Bette swears revenge : " Adeline ! se dit Lisbeth , ô Adeline , tu me le <unk> , je te <unk> plus laide que moi ! " ( " ' Adeline ! ' muttered Lisbeth . ' Oh , Adeline , you shall pay for this ! I will make you uglier than I am . ' " ) Her cruelty and lust for revenge lead critics to call her " demonic " and " one of Balzac 's most terrifying creations " . Because of her willingness to manipulate the people around her , Bette has been compared to Iago in William Shakespeare 's play Othello . Her fierce persona is attributed partly to her peasant background , and partly to her virginity , which provides ( according to Balzac ) " une force <unk> ou la <unk> noire de la <unk> " ( " diabolical strength , or the black magic of the Will " ) . 
 In a letter to Mme. Hanska , Balzac indicated that he based the character of Bette on three women from his life : his mother , Mme. Hanska 's aunt Rosalie Rzewuska , and the poet Marceline Desbordes @-@ Valmore . Balzac had a tumultuous relationship with his mother for most of his life , and he incorporated some of her personality ( particularly her " obstinate persistence in living " , as one critic calls it ) into Bette . Rosalie Rzewuska disapproved of Mme. Hanska 's relationship with Balzac ; biographers agree that her cold determination was part of the author 's recipe for Bette . Elements taken from Marceline Desbordes @-@ Valmore are more complex ; she faced many setbacks in life and she and Balzac became friends after she left the theatre to take up poetry . 
 = = = Valérie Marneffe = = = 
 Bette 's co @-@ conspirator in the destruction of the Hulot family is beautiful and greedy Valérie Marneffe , the unsatisfied wife of a War Department clerk . They develop a deep friendship , which many critics consider an example of lesbian affection . Because of their relationship and similar goals , the critic Frederic Jameson says that " Valérie serves as a kind of emanation of Bette " . 
 Valérie is repulsed by her ugly husband and has gone five years without kissing him . She explains bluntly that her position as a married woman provides subtleties and options unavailable to the common prostitute who has one set price ; after Marneffe dies , Valérie jockeys for position between Hulot and <unk> ( while also sleeping with Steinbock ) , then discards them all to marry Crevel , who offers the most wealth . She amuses herself by mocking her lovers ' devotion , and this wickedness – not to mention her gruesome demise – has led some critics to speculate that she is actually the focus of Balzac 's morality tale . 
 In one important scene , Valérie models for Steinbock as Delilah , standing victorious over the ruined Samson . With obvious parallels to her own activities , she describes her vision for the piece : " Il s <unk> d <unk> la puissance de la femme . Samson n 'est rien , là . C 'est le cadavre de la force . Dalila , c 'est la passion qui ruine tout . " ( " What you have to show is the power of woman . Samson is a secondary consideration . He is the corpse of dead strength . It is Delilah — passion — that ruins everything . " ) 
 Although Balzac did not draw specifically from the women in his life to create Valérie , parallels have been observed in some areas . The tumultuous end of his affair with Louise Breugniot and the advantage she gains from his devotion to Mme. Hanska is similar in some ways to Valérie 's manipulation of Steinbock . Critics also connect the pride and anguish felt by Balzac during Mme. Hanska 's pregnancy and miscarriage to the same emotions felt by Baron Hulot when Valérie conceives and loses her child . Although he never ascribed to Mme. Hanska any of the traits in Valérie 's treacherous character , he felt a devotion similar to that of Hulot . He once wrote to her : " je <unk> pour mon Eve toute les <unk> qu 'un Hulot fait pour une Marneffe , je te <unk> mon sang , mon honneur , ma vie " ( " I commit for [ you ] all the follies that a Hulot commits for Madame Marneffe ; I give you my blood , my honor , my life " ) . 
 = = = Hector and Adeline Hulot = = = 
 Baron Hector Hulot is a living manifestation of male sexual desire , unrestrained and unconcerned with its consequences for the man or his family . As the novel progresses , he becomes consumed by his libido , even in a physical sense . When Valérie tells him to stop dyeing his hair , he does so to please her . His financial woes and public disgrace lead him to flee his own home ; by the end of the book he is an elderly , decrepit shell of a man . Baron Hulot is so overcome by his taste for female flesh that he even asks his wife – without irony – if he can bring home his fifteen @-@ year @-@ old mistress . 
 Adeline Hulot , on the other hand , is mercy personified . Like her cousin Bette , she comes from a peasant background , but has internalized the ideals of 19th @-@ century womanhood , including devotion , grace , and deference . She reveals in the first scene that she has known for years about her husband 's infidelities , but refuses to condemn him . Adeline 's forgiving nature is often considered a significant character flaw . Some suggest that she is partly to blame for Hulot 's wandering affection . C.A. Prendergast , for example , calls her forgiveness " an inadequate and even positively disastrous response " to her situation . He further suggests that Adeline , by choosing the role of quiet and dutiful wife , has excised from herself the erotic power to which the Baron is drawn . " [ O ] ne could at the very least offer the tentative speculation that Hulot 's obsessional debauchery is in part the result of a certain poverty in Adeline , that the terrible logic of Hulot 's excess is partially shaped by a crucial deficiency in his wife . " Others are less accusatory ; Adeline 's nearly infinite mercy , they say , is evidence of foolishness . Critic Herbert J. Hunt declares that she shows " more imbecility than Christian patience " , and David Bellos points out that , like her husband , she is driven by passion – albeit of a different kind : " Adeline 's desire ( for good , for the family , for Hector , for God ) is so radically different from the motivating desires of the other characters that she seems in their context to be without desire ... " 
 Balzac 's inspiration for the characters of Hector and Adeline remain unclear , but several critics have been eager to speculate . Three officers named Hulot were recognized for their valor in the Napoleonic Wars , and some suggest that Balzac borrowed the name of Comte Hector d <unk> . None of these men , however , were known for the sort of philandering or thievery exhibited by Baron Hulot in the novel . Instead , Balzac may have used himself as the model ; his many affairs with women across the social spectrum lead some to suggest that the author " found much of Hulot in himself " . Balzac 's friend Victor Hugo , meanwhile , was famously discovered in bed with his mistress in July 1845 . The similarity of his name to Hector Hulot ( and that of his wife 's maiden name , Adèle <unk> , to Adeline Fischer ) has been posited as a possible indication of the characters ' origins . 
 = = = Wenceslas Steinbock = = = 
 The Polish sculptor Wenceslas Steinbock is important primarily because of Bette 's attachment to him . He offers Bette a source of pride , a way for her to prove herself worthy of her family 's respect . When Hortense marries Steinbock , Bette feels as though she has been robbed . Prendergast insists that the incident " must literally be described as an act of theft " . 
 Steinbock 's relevance also lies in his background and profession , illustrating Balzac 's conception of the Polish people , as well as himself . Having spent more than a decade befriending Mme. Hanska and visiting her family in Poland , Balzac believed he had insight into the national character ( as he felt about most groups he observed ) . Thus , descriptions of Steinbock are often laced with commentary about the Polish people : " Soyez mon amie , dit @-@ il avec une de ces <unk> <unk> si <unk> aux Polonais , et qui les font accuser <unk> <unk> de <unk> . " ( " ' Be my sweetheart , ' he added , with one of the caressing gestures familiar to the Poles , for which they are unjustly accused of servility . " ) 
 Critics also consider Steinbock important because of his artistic genius . Like Louis Lambert and Lucien <unk> in Illusions perdues , he is a brilliant man – just as Balzac considered himself to be . Before he is nurtured and directed by Bette , however , Steinbock 's genius languishes under his own inertia and he attempts suicide . Later , when he leaves Bette 's circle of influence , he fails again . Thus he demonstrates Balzac 's conviction that genius alone is useless without determination . Bellos organizes Steinbock and Bette into a duality of weakness and strength ; whereas the Polish artist is unable to direct his energies into productive work , Bette draws strength from her virginity and thus becomes powerful by denying the lust to which Steinbock falls prey . Steinbock 's drive is further eroded by the praise he receives for his art , which gives him an inflated sense of accomplishment . One critic refers to the artist 's downfall as " vanity ... spoiled by premature renown " . 
 = = Style = = 
 If Balzac 's goal was ( as he claimed ) to write a realist novel from his " own old pen " rather than mimic the style of Eugène Sue , history and literary criticism have declared him successful . William Stowe calls La Cousine Bette " a masterpiece of classical realism " and Bellos refers to it as " one of the great achievements of nineteenth @-@ century realism " , comparing it to War and Peace . Some sections of the book are criticized for being melodramatic , and Balzac biographer V. S. Pritchett even refers to a representative excerpt as " bad writing " . Most critics , however , consider the moralistic elements of the novel deceptively complex , and some point out that the roman @-@ feuilleton format required a certain level of titillation to keep readers engaged . Others indicate that Balzac 's interest in the theatre was an important reason for the inclusion of melodramatic elements . 
 Balzac 's trademark realism begins on the first page of the novel , wherein Crevel is described wearing a National Guard uniform , complete with the Légion d 'honneur . Details from the 1830s also appear in the novel 's geographic locations . The Hulot family home , for example , is found in the aristocratic area of Paris known as the Faubourg Saint @-@ Germain . Bette 's residence is on the opposite end of the social spectrum , in the impoverished residential area which surrounded the Louvre : " Les ténèbres , le silence , l 'air glacial , la <unk> <unk> du sol <unk> à faire de ces <unk> des espèces de <unk> , des <unk> vivants . " ( " Darkness , silence , an icy chill , and the cavernous depth of the soil combine to make these houses a kind of crypt , tombs of the living . " ) Descriptions of her meager quarters are – as usual in Balzac 's work – an acute reflection of her personality . The same is true of the Marneffe home at the outset : it contains " les <unk> <unk> de ce faux luxe " ( " the illusory appearance of sham luxury " ) , from the shabby chairs in the drawing @-@ room to the dust @-@ coated bedroom . 
 Precise detail is not spared in descriptions of decay and disease , two vivid elements in the novel . Marneffe , for example , represents <unk> . His decrepit body is a symbol of society 's weakness at the time , worn away from years of indulgence . The poison which kills Valérie and Crevel is also described in ghastly detail . The doctor Bianchon explains : " Ses dents et ses cheveux <unk> , elle a l <unk> des <unk> , elle se fait <unk> à elle @-@ même ; ses mains , <unk> à voir , sont <unk> et <unk> de pustules <unk> ; les <unk> <unk> <unk> dans les plaies qu 'elle <unk> ; <unk> , <unk> les <unk> se <unk> dans la <unk> qui les <unk> . " ( " She is losing her hair and teeth , her skin is like a leper 's , she is a horror to herself ; her hands are horrible , covered with greenish pustules , her nails are loose , and the flesh is eaten away by the poisoned humors . " ) 
 La Cousine Bette is unapologetic in its bleak outlook , and makes blunt connections between characters ' origins and behavior . For these reasons , it is considered a key antecedent to naturalist literature . Novelist Émile Zola called it an important " roman <unk> " ( " experimental novel " ) , and praised its acute exploration of the characters ' motivations . Some critics note that La Cousine Bette showed an evolution in Balzac 's style – one which he had little time to develop . Pointing to the nuance of plot and comprehensive narration style , Stowe suggests that the novel " might in happier circumstances have marked the beginning of a new , mature ' late Balzac ' " . 
 = = Themes = = 
 = = = Passion , vice , and virtue = = = 
 Valérie 's line about Delilah being " la passion qui ruine tout " ( " passion which ruins everything " ) is symbolic , coming as it does from a woman whose passion accelerates the ruin of most people around her – including herself . Baron Hulot , meanwhile , is desire incarnate ; his wandering libido bypasses concern for his wife , brother , children , finances , and even his own health . Bette is living vengeance , and Adeline desperately yearns for the happy home she imagined in the early years of marriage . Each character is driven by a fiery passion , which in most cases consumes the individual . As Balzac puts it : " La passion est un <unk> . " ( " Passion is martyrdom . " ) 
 The intensity of passion , and the consequences of its manifestation , result in a stark contrast of vice and virtue . Bette and Valérie are pure wickedness , and even celebrate the ruin of their targets . As one critic says , " life 's truths are viewed in their most atrocious form " . Mocking the use of the guillotine during the French Revolution while acknowledging her own malicious intent , Valérie says with regard to Delilah : " La <unk> coupe la tête , le Vice ne vous coupe que les cheveux . " ( " Virtue cuts off your head ; vice only cuts off your hair . " ) Hulot is not intentionally cruel , but his actions are no less devastating to the people around him . 
 On the other side of the moral divide , Adeline and her children stand as shining examples of virtue and nobility – or so it would seem . Hortense ridicules her aunt when Bette mentions her protégé Wenceslas Steinbock , providing a psychological catalyst for the ensuing conflict . Victorin repeatedly expresses outrage at his father 's philandering , yet crosses a significant moral boundary when he agrees to fund Mme. Nourrison 's plan to eradicate Valérie . As one critic puts it , Victorin 's decision marks a point in the novel where " the scheme of right versus wrong immediately dissolves into a purely amoral conflict of different interests and passions , regulated less by a transcendent moral law than by the relative capacity of the different parties for cunning and ruthlessness . " The cruelties of the Hulot children are brief but significant , owing as much to their obliviousness ( intentional in the case of Victorin , who asks not to learn the details of Mme. Nourrison 's scheme ) as to malicious forethought . 
 The question of Adeline 's virtue is similarly complicated . Although she is forgiving to the point of absurdity , she is often considered more of a dupe than a martyr . Some have compared her to Balzac 's title character in Le Père Goriot , who sacrifices himself for his daughters . As Bellos puts it : " Adeline 's complicity with Hector certainly makes her more interesting as a literary character , but it undermines her role as the symbol of virtue in the novel . " This complicity reaches an apex when she unsuccessfully attempts to sell her affections to Crevel ( who has since lost interest ) in order to repay her husband 's debts . Her flirtation with prostitution is sometimes considered more egregious than Valérie 's overt extortion , since Adeline is soiling her own dignity in the service of Baron Hulot 's infidelity . For the remainder of the novel , Adeline trembles uncontrollably , a sign of her weakness . Later , when she visits the singer Josépha ( on whom her husband once doted ) , Adeline is struck by the splendor earned by a life of materialistic seduction . She wonders aloud if she is capable of providing the carnal pleasures Hulot seeks outside of their home . 
 Ultimately , both vice and virtue fail . Valérie is devoured by <unk> ' poison , a consequence of her blithe attitude toward his emotion . Bette is unsuccessful in her effort to crush her cousin 's family , and dies ( as one critic puts it ) " in the margins " . Adeline 's Catholic mercy , on the other hand , fails to redeem her husband , and her children are similarly powerless – as Victorin finally admits on the novel 's last page . Like Raphael de Valentin in Balzac 's 1831 novel La Peau de chagrin , Hulot is left with nothing but " <unk> " : desire , a force which is both essential for human existence and eventually apocalyptic . 
 = = = Gender and homoeroticism = = = 
 Gender roles , especially the figure of the ideal woman , are central to La Cousine Bette . The four leading female characters ( Bette , Valérie , Adeline , and Hortense ) embody stereotypically feminine traits . Each pair of women revolves around a man , and they compete for his attention : Valérie and Adeline for Baron Hulot ; Bette and Hortense for Wenceslas Steinbock . Balzac 's study of masculinity is limited to the insatiable lust of Hulot and the weak @-@ willed inconstancy of Steinbock , with the occasional appearance of Victorin as a sturdy patriarch in his father 's absence . 
 Critics pay special attention to Bette 's lack of traditional femininity , and her unconventional relationships with two characters . She is described from the outset as having " des <unk> d 'homme " ( " certain manly qualities " ) , with similar descriptions elsewhere . Her relationship and attitude toward Steinbock , moreover , hint at her masculinity . She commands him into submission , and even binds him with economic constraints by lending him the money to develop his sculpture . Her domination is tempered by maternal compassion , but the couple 's relationship is compared to an abusive marriage : " Il fut comme une femme qui <unk> les <unk> <unk> d 'une <unk> à cause des caresses d 'un <unk> <unk> . " ( " He was like a woman who forgives a week of ill @-@ usage for the sake of a kiss and a brief reconciliation . " ) 
 Bette 's relationship with Valérie is layered with overtones of lesbianism . Early in the book Bette is " <unk> " ( " bewitched " ) by Valérie , and quickly declares to her : " Je vous <unk> , je vous <unk> , je suis à vous ! " ( " I love you , I esteem you , I am wholly yours ! " ) This affection may have been platonic , but neighbors of the <unk> – along with many readers – suspect that their bond transcends friendship . As with Steinbock , Bette and Valérie assume butch and femme roles ; the narration even mentions " Le <unk> de la <unk> et <unk> nature de la Lorraine avec la jolie nature <unk> de Valérie " ( " The contrast between Lisbeth 's dry masculine nature and Valerie 's creole prettiness " ) . The homoeroticism evolves through the novel , as Bette feeds on Valérie 's power to seduce and control the Hulot men . As one critic says : " Valérie 's body becomes , at least symbolically , the locus of Bette 's only erotic pleasure . " 
 = = = Wealth and society = = = 
 As with many of his novels , Balzac analyzes the influence of history and social status in La Cousine Bette . The book takes places between 1838 and 1846 , when the reign of Louis @-@ Philippe reflected and directed significant changes in the social structure . Balzac was a legitimist favoring the House of Bourbon , and idolized Napoleon Bonaparte as a paragon of effective absolutist power . Balzac felt that French society under the House of Orléans lacked strong leadership , and was fragmented by the demands of parliament . He also believed that Catholicism provided guidance for the nation , and that its absence heralded moral decay . 
 Balzac demonstrated these beliefs through the characters ' lives in La Cousine Bette . The conflict between Baron Hulot and the perfumer Crevel mirrors the animosity between the aristocracy of the Ancien Régime and the newly developed bourgeoisie of traders and industrial entrepreneurs . Although he despised the socialist politics of Eugène Sue , Balzac worried that bourgeois desperation for financial gain drove people from life 's important virtues . The characters – especially Bette , Valérie , and Crevel – are fixated on their need for money , and do whatever they must to obtain it . As Crevel explains to Adeline : " Vous vous <unk> , <unk> <unk> , si vous <unk> que c 'est le roi Louis @-@ Philippe qui <unk> ... au @-@ <unk> de la <unk> il y a la sainte , la <unk> , la <unk> , l <unk> , la <unk> , la belle , la noble , la jeune , la toute @-@ <unk> pièce de cent sous ! " ( " You are quite mistaken , my angel , if you suppose that King Louis @-@ Philippe rules us ... supreme above the Charter reigns the holy , venerated , substantial , delightful , obliging , beautiful , noble , ever @-@ youthful , and all @-@ powerful five @-@ franc piece ! " ) 
 Themes of corruption and salvation are brought to the fore as Valérie and Crevel lie dying from the mysterious poison . When his daughter urges him to meet with a priest , Crevel angrily refuses , mocking the church and indicating that his social stature will be his salvation : " la mort regarde à deux fois avant de <unk> un <unk> de Paris ! " ( " Death thinks twice of it before carrying off a Mayor of Paris . " ) Valérie , meanwhile , makes a deathbed conversion and urges Bette to abandon her quest for revenge . Ever the courtesan , Valérie describes her new Christianity in terms of seduction : " je ne <unk> <unk> <unk> qu 'à Dieu ! je <unk> <unk> de me <unk> avec lui , ce sera ma dernière <unk> ! " ( " I can please no one now but God . I will try to be reconciled to Him , and that will be my last flirtation ... ! " ) 
 = = Reception and adaptations = = 
 The critical reaction to La Cousine Bette was immediate and positive , which Balzac did not expect . Whether due to the intensity of its creation or the tumult of his personal life , the author was surprised by the praise he received . He wrote : " I did not realize how good La Cousine Bette is ... There is an immense reaction in my favour . I have won ! " The collected edition sold consistently well , and was reprinted nineteen times before the turn of the 20th century . 20th @-@ century critics remain enthusiastic in their praise for the novel ; Saintsbury insists it is " beyond all question one of the very greatest of [ Balzac 's ] works " . Biographer Graham Robb calls La Cousine Bette " the masterpiece of his premature old age " . 
 Some 19th @-@ century critics attacked the book , on the grounds that it normalized vice and corrupt living . Chief among these were disciples of the utopian theorist Charles Fourier ; they disapproved of the " immorality " inherent in the novel 's bleak resolution . Critics like Alfred <unk> and Eugène Marron declared that Balzac 's sympathy lay with Baron Hulot and Valérie Marneffe . They lambasted him for not commenting more on the characters ' degenerate behavior – the same stylistic choice later celebrated by naturalist writers Émile Zola and Hippolyte Taine . 
 Balzac 's novel has been adapted several times for the screen . The first was in 1927 , when French filmmaker Max <unk> directed Alice Tissot in the title role . Margaret Tyzack played the role of Bette in the five part serial Cousin Bette made in 1971 by the BBC , which also starred Helen Mirren as Valérie Marneffe . The film Cousin Bette was released in 1998 , directed by Des McAnuff . Jessica Lange starred in the title role , joined by Bob Hoskins as Crevel , and Elisabeth Shue as the singer Jenny <unk> . Screenwriters Lynn <unk> and Susan Tarr changed the story significantly , and eliminated Valérie . The 1998 film was panned by critics for its generally poor acting and awkward dialogue . Stephen Holden of the New York Times commented that the movie " treats the novel as a thoroughly modern social comedy peopled with raging narcissists , opportunists and flat @-@ out fools " . The 1998 film changed the novel quite drastically , retaining the basic idea of Bette avenging herself on her enemies , and not only eliminating Valerie , but letting Bette survive at the end . 
 La Cousine Bette was adapted for the stage by Jeffrey Hatcher , best known for his screenplay Stage Beauty ( based on his stage play Compleat Female Stage Beauty ) . The Antaeus Company in North Hollywood produced a workshop in 2008 and presented the world premiere of Cousin Bette in early 2010 in North Hollywood , California . The adaptation retains many of the main characters but places Bette as the story 's narrator . 
 = = Additional reading = = 
 Dargan , E. Preston and Bernard Weinberg . The Evolution of Balzac 's Comédie humaine . Chicago : The University of Chicago Press , 1942 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Kanes , Martin . Balzac 's Comedy of Words . Princeton : Princeton University Press , 1975 . ISBN 0 @-@ 691 @-@ <unk> @-@ X. 
 Marceau , <unk> . Balzac and His World . Trans . Derek Coltman . New York : The Orion Press , 1966 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Pasco , Allan H. <unk> Montage : <unk> La Comédie humaine . Toronto : University of Toronto Press , 1991 . ISBN 0 @-@ 8020 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 = Washington State Route 542 = 
 State Route 542 ( SR 542 ) is a 57 @.@ 24 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 92 @.@ 12 km ) state highway in the U.S. state of Washington , serving Mount Baker in Whatcom County . SR 542 travels east as the Mount Baker Highway from an interchange with Interstate 5 ( I @-@ 5 ) in Bellingham through the Nooksack River valley to the Mt . Baker Ski Area at Austin Pass . It serves as the main highway to Mount Baker and the communities of Deming , Kendall , and Maple Falls along the Nooksack River . The highway was constructed in 1893 by Whatcom County as a wagon road between Bellingham and Maple Falls and was added to the state highway system as a branch of State Road 1 in 1925 . The branch was transferred to Primary State Highway 1 ( PSH 1 ) during its creation in 1937 and became SR 542 during the 1964 highway renumbering . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR 542 begins as Sunset Drive and the Mount Baker Highway at a partial cloverleaf interchange with I @-@ 5 to the northeast of downtown Bellingham . The highway travels northeast through suburban neighborhoods along <unk> Creek and passes <unk> High School as it leaves the city of Bellingham . SR 542 continues northeast through rural Whatcom County , crossing the Nooksack River and intersecting SR 9 at a roundabout . The concurrent SR 9 and SR 542 travel southeast through the community of Deming along a BNSF rail line and passes Mount Baker Senior High School . SR 542 leaves SR 9 east of Deming and turns north along the North Fork of the Nooksack River and the eastern slope of Sumas Mountain to Kendall , where it serves as the southern terminus of SR 547 . The Mount Baker Highway turns east and continues along the Nooksack River North Fork into the Mount Baker @-@ Snoqualmie National Forest at Glacier in the foothills of Mount Baker . SR 542 turns south and serves the Mt . Baker Ski Area on the northeast side of the mountain before splitting into a one @-@ way pair around Picture Lake . The Mount Baker Highway continues through Austin Pass and ends at Artist Point , located at 5 @,@ 210 feet ( 1 @,@ 588 @.@ 01 m ) above sea level on Kulshan Ridge . 
 Every year , the Washington State Department of Transportation ( WSDOT ) conducts a series of surveys on its highways in the state to measure traffic volume . This is expressed in terms of average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) , which is a measure of traffic volume for any average day of the year . In 2011 , WSDOT calculated that the busiest section of SR 542 was the I @-@ 5 interchange in Bellingham , serving 38 @,@ 000 vehicles , while the least busy section of SR 542 was the one @-@ way pair around Picture Lake in Mount Baker @-@ Snoqualmie National Forest , <unk> 230 vehicles . The Mount Baker Highway is designated as a National Forest Scenic Byway and serves as the eastern section of the Ski to Sea Race between Mount Baker and Maple Falls , a 90 @-@ mile ( 140 km ) Memorial Day race with seven legs hosting seven events . The eastern terminus of SR 542 , at Artist Point on Kulshan Ridge , is closed annually by WSDOT between October and July due to extreme weather conditions . 
 = = History = = 
 The Mount Baker Highway was constructed by Whatcom County in 1893 as a wagon road traveling northeast from Bellingham along the Nooksack River through Deming and Kendall to Maple Falls . The wagon road was extended from Maple Falls through Glacier to the Mt . Baker Ski Area at Heather Meadows began 1921 and ended in 1926 . The Mount Baker Highway was added to the state highway system in 1925 as the Austin Pass branch of State Road 1 and was extended to its current terminus at Artist Point in 1931 . The highway was closed seasonally between Glacier and Artist Point until the filming of The Call of the Wild in 1934 and 1935 prompted interest in the Mount Baker area . The Department of Highways began clearing the highway of snow during the winter of 1934 for the film and continued annually between Glacier and Heather Meadows ; however , the highway was not cleared during World War II due to gasoline shortages . The highway was designated as the Austin Pass branch of PSH 1 during the creation of the primary and secondary state highways in 1937 and renumbered to SR 542 in 1964 . The entire route , between Bellingham and Austin Pass , was designated as part of the Washington State Scenic and Recreational Highways program in 1987 and a National Forest Scenic Byway on November 1 , 1988 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is in Whatcom County . 
 = Antonio Paoli = 
 Antonio Paoli ( April 14 , 1871 – August 24 , 1946 ) was a Puerto Rican tenor . He was known at the height of his fame as " The King of Tenors and The Tenor of Kings . " He is considered to be the first Puerto Rican to reach international fame in the musical arts . Paoli has been recognized as " one of the most outstanding opera singers of all time , " and as one who had " one of the most lyric and powerful voices ... superior even to his contemporary rival , Enrico Caruso . " 
 After spending his childhood in his birth town of Ponce , Paoli moved to Spain where , with the assistance of his well @-@ connected sister Amalia , he obtained a Royal scholarship to take singing lessons in Italy . After singing to standing ovation crowds in both Spain and Italy , Paoli made his grand debut in Paris , France , where he was encouraged to perform on the highest levels of the world stage . Before the end of the 19th century and while Paoli was still in his twenties , he went on a tour of Europe that earned him both popular acclaim , and imperial honors from princes , kings , and emperors . 
 Between 1900 and 1914 his career skyrocketed , with performances not only in Europe but also in the Americas , the Caribbean , Africa , and Asia . 
 When World War I forced the closure of all European opera houses , Paoli made his living as a professional boxer . Unfortunately , he also lost his singing voice during this period . After the War ended , following medical advice and performing vocal exercises , Paoli regained his voice and returned to the international stage , in all the glory of days past . He performed in Europe , North and South America , and finally settled with his sister Amalia in San Juan , Puerto Rico , where she had opened a singing school . 
 Paoli spent the last 20 years of his life teaching voice and singing in San Juan , while also working for the establishment of a music conservatory in that city . He would not see this last dream come true , because he developed cancer and died at age 75 . He was buried in San Juan , but his remains were later transferred to a mausoleum in his birth town of Ponce . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Paoli ( birth name : Antonio Emilio Paoli y Marcano ) was born in Ponce , Puerto Rico . He was the son of Amalia Marcano <unk> , of Spanish ancestry , who was born on the island of Margarita , Venezuela , and of Domingo Paoli <unk> , from Corsica . Antonio Paoli 's parents met in Caracas , and immediately fell in love , however Amalia 's father , a rich landlord , was opposed to the relationship because of class differences , therefore the young couple escaped to the Dominican Republic without getting married and later returned to Puerto Rico . The couple established themselves in the city of Yauco , but later moved into a house , given to them by Amalia 's aunt , Teresa <unk> , located at one of the main arteries in the city of Ponce 's urban core , Calle Mayor ( Mayor Street ) , House # 14 . Ponce at the time was the financial and cultural capital of the island , thereby the ideal place for the initial cultural development of Paoli . 
 When Paoli was young , his parents would often take him to operas at Ponce 's La Perla Theater located a block away from Paoli 's residence . There , on one occasion he saw a performance of Giuseppe Verdi 's Il Trovatore by Italian tenor , Pietro <unk> , and at that moment knew what he wanted to do as an adult . His parents were very supportive of his ambition and guided him on this route during his youth , enrolling him in a school of " voice " directed by Ramon Marin . His sister Amalia was a soprano who performed at La Perla in Emilio Arrieta 's opera , Marina . In 1883 , when Paoli was only 12 years old , both his parents died and he went to live in Spain with his sister Amalia . 
 = = Debut = = 
 Amalia , who at that time was under the protective wing of Isabel de <unk> , Princess of Asturias , and sister of the King of Spain , Alfonso XII , was taking singing classes under Napoleon Verger . In 1884 , Amalia helped Paoli to obtain two scholarships from her Majesty Queen María Cristina , Queen Regent of Spain . Paoli started his studies at the Royal Monastery of El Escorial . Paoli entered Toledo 's Military Academy and in 1892 graduated with honors . He was assigned to the Queen 's escort and named personal custodian and guard of the child King Alfonso XIII . Paoli desired to continue singing and in 1897 went to study at the Academia de Canto La Scala in Milan , Italy . On April 26 , 1899 , he made his debut in Gioacchino Rossini 's opera William Tell in Paris , France . Paris newspapers commented on Paoli 's success and stated " We should declare Paoli the Tenor of France . " 
 = = World tours = = 
 Between 1900 and 1914 , Paoli performed in Europe , America , Africa , and Asia . He performed in Italy , Luxembourg and in the United Kingdom , with performances in London , Scotland , Edinburgh , and Brighton , closing the year with concerts in Corsica ( his father 's homeland ) and Turkey . In 1900 , he married Josephine <unk> , an Austrian , in Vienna . From 1901 to 1902 , Paoli performed in the following countries : Argentina , Brazil , Canada , Chile , Colombia , Cuba , Haiti , Puerto Rico , Venezuela and the United States . Paoli purchased a villa in Porto <unk> , Lugano , Italy , where his son Antonio Arnaldo was born . After singing for King Alfonso XII and the Royal family in Spain , he returned to the United States and sang in various cities , among them New York , Boston , Philadelphia , Albany , Providence , Grand Rapids , New London , Detroit , Cleveland , Indianapolis , Buffalo , Pittsburg , Syracuse and Chicago . 
 In 1905 , Paoli performed at the Grand Theatre du Conservatoire in St. Petersburg , Russia . The Czar of Russia Nicholas II was present during one of the performances and after inviting Paoli to perform at the royal Winter Palace , awarded Paoli The Cross of St. Mauricio medal and bestowed upon him the title <unk> Sanger ( Chamber Singer ) . 
 On September 5 , 1907 , Paoli held a private recital for Pope Pius X at the Sistine Chapel in the Vatican . That same year he was named as a " Singer of the Royal Court " by William II of Germany . Paoli was also the first operatic artist to record an entire opera when he participated in a performance of Pagliacci by Ruggiero Leoncavallo in Milan , Italy . He was selected in 1907 , as the First Tenor in the main character by a team of engineers and musicians which included Leoncavallo . The recording was arranged in the following manner ; the musicians were placed at the end of the recording room and the back up singers in a semi @-@ arc in front of the gramophone while Paoli stood alone 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) away from the gramophone . 
 Paoli continued to perform around the world with performances in Greece , Palestine , Poland , Egypt , Spain and Italy , where he established his permanent residence . In 1910 , the singer was signed as the First Tenor by La Scala , Milan , the most prestigious opera company in the world at the time . Paoli received a contract to inaugurate Teatro Colón , in Buenos Aires , Argentina , where he sang Otello and Di <unk> <unk> . He also performed in Russia , Poland , Egypt , Hungary , Belgium , Cuba , Chile , Haiti , Colombia , Venezuela , Brazil , Canada , and the United States . 
 = = Boxing career = = 
 By 1914 , just before the start of World War I , Paoli lost his voice and all of the major opera houses in Europe were shut down . Paoli moved to Spain , a neutral country in the conflict , leaving all his properties unattended in Italy . By 1915 , Paoli found himself without economic means as a result of his bad investments . 
 In order to make a living , Paoli became a professional boxer and after a period of training in Spain , he moved to England to start his new " career . " He was undefeated in his first five fights . He broke his right wrist on his sixth challenge , which ended his boxing career . 
 Paoli sold his properties in Italy and acquired a small country house in Spain . He stayed for a few months with his brother Carlos in the Philippines . Paoli was medically treating his vocal cords , and it was commented that his career was over , but he continued his singing exercises with his sister Amalia , who moved into his house in Spain . 
 = = Comeback = = 
 In January 1917 , Paoli returned to the stage and performed the opera Samson and Delilah at the Constanzi Theater in Rome . Elvira de Hidalgo , who later became the singing coach of Maria Callas , remembered that : 
 " No one suspected that Paoli was coming back to the stage ; we all knew that he had lost his voice . People were there to see him fail ; I saw some guys with tomatoes and rotten eggs , ready to throw them as soon as Paoli made his first mistake . But when he came out singing his initial aria , the public went crazy and stood up in a standing ovation . Paoli 's voice sounded like one of those trumpets that you expect to hear in the day of the final judgment . His debut was tremendous . He had to repeat twice every single aria that he performed that night , because the public furiously demanded it . He performed for seven consecutive nights with the theater at its maximum capacity . I attended every single function . Every night he sang better than the night before . I always dreamed to sing with Paoli , but I don 't think my voice was good or strong enough to sing with him . I think he was the greatest tenor ever . " 
 Paoli kept busy performing in Italy , South America and the United States . He returned to Puerto Rico in 1923 . At the time , Amalia Paoli was residing in San Juan ( in the ward of Santurce ) where she was running a singing school ( Academia Paoli ) . Antonio conducted a few performances around the island and then departed to sing at the Brooklyn Academy of Music , the Manhattan Opera House and the Metropolitan Opera House in Philadelphia . He had wanted to sing in the Metropolitan Opera House in New York , but apparently his competitor Enrico Caruso opposed this . Some attribute this to the fact that Caruso was a shareholder of the renowned opera house . From the U.S. , the tenor would visit Curaçao , Cuba , Colombia , Haiti and Ecuador . 
 = = Last years = = 
 Even with this busy agenda , Paoli 's financial situation remained strained . After living in New York City for almost the entire year of 1927 , Paoli decided to come back to Puerto Rico to live and work with his sister Amalia , giving voice lessons at the Academia Paoli . Paoli also helped produce Othello at the Municipal Theater in San Juan . For the next two decades Paoli 's main concern would be teaching at the Paoli Academy with Amalia . In 1928 , the tenor performed Verdi 's Otello entirely for the last time in San Juan , Puerto Rico . This was his last performance on stage . It took place at the San Juan Municipal Theater , known today as the Tapia Theater . In 1935 , the government of Puerto Rico named the San Juan Municipal Theater in his honor , changing its name to Teatro Paoli . In 1929 , his wife Josephine died and a year later he married <unk> Bonini , from Rimini , Italy , and whom he affectionately called " Adina " . He gave his last singing performance in 1942 , while commemorating the one @-@ year anniversary of the death of his sister , Amalia Paoli . The service was conducted at the Chapel of the University of the Sacred Heart ( Santurce ) . 
 Paoli died of prostate cancer in San Juan on August 24 , 1946 , and was buried in the Puerto Rico Memorial Cemetery in Carolina , Puerto Rico . On April 13 , 2005 , Paoli 's remains , and those of his ( second ) wife Adina Bonini ( who had died in May , 1978 ) were exhumed and transferred to Ponce 's Román Baldorioty de Castro National Pantheon and buried by the base of his statue . 
 = = Honors , accolades , and legacy = = 
 In Antonio Paoli , Puerto Rico had the first Puerto Rican to reach international recognition in the performing arts . He gave 1 @,@ 725 performances between 1888 and 1942 and interpreted Verdi 's Otello 575 times . To his credit , Paoli was also the first opera singer in the world to record an entire opera when he participated in a performance of Pagliacci by Ruggiero Leoncavallo in Italy in 1907 . 
 As early as 1904 , Paoli was awarded The Cross of St. Mauricio medal by the Czar of Russia Nicholas II , and María Cristina de <unk> , Queen of Spain , declared Paoli Cantante de Cámara de la Corte ( Chamber Singer of the Court ) and gave him La Gran Cruz de Isabel la Católica ( The Cross of Isabella the Catholic ) , while Carlos de Braganza , Prince of Portugal , named him Caballero <unk> del Cristo de Portugal y Cantante de Cámara . Just two years later , in 1906 , the same title of <unk> Sanger ( Chamber Singer of the Court ) was given to Paoli by Franz Joseph , Emperor of Austria , and in 1907 he was decorated by Carlos I of Braganza . 
 In 1909 , Paoli received La Cruz de Alfonso II from Alfonso XIII , King of Spain , and was declared ’ ’ Honor Singer of the Vatican ’ ’ by Pope Pius X. In 1910 , he was honored with the title of Hijo <unk> de España ( Favorite Son of Spain ) , while in 1911 , Wilhelm II , Kaiser of Germany , declared Paoli ’ ’ Kammer Sanger of the Empire ’ ’ , and in 1912 , Paoli received a protocol @-@ breaking standing ovation from the Austro @-@ Hungarian Emperor Franz Joseph when Paoli sang Lohengrin in Vienna . In 1920 , the tenor was knighted by Vittorio Emmanuelle III , King of Italy , making him Cavaliere De La Corona Italiana and Commendatore Dell Popolo Romano ( Knight of the Italian Crown and Commandant of the Roman People ) . 
 Though he did not see it happen during his lifetime , Puerto Rico also built the Music Conservatory , something for which Paoli had worked so hard to establish . This dream was finally realized shortly after his death . In San Juan 's " Centro de Bellas Artes " there is also a 1 @,@ 883 @-@ seat " Antonio Paoli Festival Hall . " San Juan 's Municipal Theater was also renamed Teatro Paoli in his honor in 1935 . In recognition of his fame and talent , the government of Puerto Rico also awarded Paoli a pension in 1934 . 
 In 1983 , the non @-@ profit " Paoli Award " was created . This award honors the effort , work , and success of outstanding professionals in the various arts and media , including music and recording , television , radio , written communication , fashion , and beauty . Originally designated to recognize the outstanding achievements of Puerto Ricans , the Paoli Award has branched out internationally , and since 1992 it also includes Hispanics and Latin Americans from around the world . 
 On October 9 , 2009 , the Government of the United States listed Casa Paoli in Antonio Paoli 's hometown of Ponce , Puerto Rico , in the U.S. National Register of Historic Places . The house , Antonio 's childhood house in Puerto Rico , is Paoli 's only remaining <unk> structure in Puerto Rico . 
 Among other honors bestowed on Paoli after his death are a music school named in his honor ( " Escuela Libre de Música Antonio Paoli " ) , in the city of Caguas , Puerto Rico , and in his hometown of Ponce , there is a theater at the Interamerican University of Puerto Rico , Ponce named in his memory , Teatro Paoli . 
 Paoli has also been the subject of many books written about his life and influence . Included is the work by Emilio J. <unk> titled " Orígenes y <unk> de la afición <unk> en Puerto Rico " ( Origins and development of the theatrical pursuit in Puerto Rico ) where he describes the life of Paoli in detail . 
 = = Discography = = 
 The following are part of Antonio Paoli 's discography : 
 Antonio Paoli . ( 2000 ) 
 Great Voices . ( 1999 ) 
 Antonio Paoli in arias from Otello . ( 1998 ) 
 Leoncavallo : Pagliacci . ( 1996 ) 
 Serie Artistas <unk> No. 1 : Edición del Centenario del Tenor Antonio Paoli . Instituto de Cultura Puertorriqueña ( 1971 ) 
 = Street Fighter X Mega Man = 
 Street Fighter X Mega Man , also known as Street Fighter X Rockman ( ストリートファイター X ロックマン , Sutorīto Faitā Kurosu Rokkuman ) in Japan , is a crossover platform game created by Singaporean fan developer Seow Zong Hui . Initially developed as a fan game , Street Fighter X Mega Man later received support from Capcom , who assisted in the production of the game . Street Fighter X Mega Man was released as a free download from Capcom Unity on December 17 , 2012 . It celebrates the 25th anniversary of both Capcom 's Mega Man and Street Fighter franchises . Gameplay mimicks the design of classic Mega Man games with Street Fighter characters substituting as important enemies encountered in the game . The game received mixed to positive reviews by critics , with some common complaints relating to lack of a save feature and other bugs . In response to the complaints , an update was released on January 28 , 2013 titled Street Fighter X Mega Man V2 , which added a password save feature and other fixes . 
 = = Premise and gameplay = = 
 Street Fighter X Mega Man mimics the appearance and gameplay style of Mega Man games released on the Nintendo Entertainment System . The game 's premise and plot center around its status as a crossover video game and the respective anniversaries of both franchises . Having fought countless Robot Masters over the years , Mega Man is ready to lie back , relax and enjoy his 25th anniversary . Getting wind of this , Ryu and his fellow Street Fighters want one last battle before they let their own anniversary finish . In terms of gameplay , Mega Man uses the same set of moves ( the slide and the charge shot ) featured in Mega Man 4 . Instead of using stages based on Mega Man and using Robot Masters as level bosses , the stages share influences from the Street Fighter franchise stages and characters such as Blanka , Chun @-@ Li , and Ryu take the place of the Robot Masters as the end of level bosses . The Street Fighter characters use their signature moves as attacks ; in addition , they have their own Super Meters that build up when they take damage during the boss fights and allow them to launch a powerful attack at Mega Man once filled . Like other Mega Man games , defeating each boss earns Mega Man a new weapon based on the characters ' attacks , such as Ryu 's Hadouken and Chun @-@ Li 's <unk> <unk> . After clearing the eight main levels , the player then moves on to face the final set of bosses . Clearing certain conditions unveils two secret hidden bosses at the end of the game . 
 = = Development = = 
 The game began as the private development of Seow Zong Hui who presented an early build to Christian Svensson , Capcom 's Senior VP of consumer software , at EVO 2012 . Svensson showed the build to several staff members in the Capcom office ( including senior community manager Brett Elston ) , and Capcom later decided to assist in the development of the game . While Zong Hui continued to develop the game based on his original design , Capcom took over tasks such as funding , marketing , and quality assurance . Capcom decided to distribute the game on PC instead of gaming consoles because Zong Hui did not have a license for console development . Svensson has noted that Capcom will consider console releases in the future , but chose to initially distribute the game on PC to keep the game free for fans and meet its December 17 target release date . 
 Zong Hui noted several concepts that were scrapped during development . Yang was originally planned as a boss character but was ultimately replaced by Chun @-@ Li . His special weapon is still included in the game via cheat codes . Zong Hui also wanted to include alternate costumes for boss characters and a second playable character from the Street Fighter franchise . 
 Following release , there were several complaints about the game crashing , having a vague user interface , and lacking any save system . In response to these complaints , Svensson noted that a patch was being discussed with the development team to address these issues in a future update . The update boasts an improved user interface , better controller compatibility , bug fixes , a password save system reminiscent of the original Mega Man games on the Nintendo Entertainment System , and an additional boss character . The updated version was released on January 1 , 2013 under the name , Street Fighter X Mega Man V2 . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 <unk> artist Luke Esquivel ( " A _ Rival " ) composed the music for the game . Esquivel became involved when he approached Zong Hui via YouTube and requested to being full @-@ time musician for the game in 2009 / 2010 after comparing his music with Zong Hui 's previous musician . When composing the music for Street Fighter X Mega Man , Esquivel combined Mega Man themes with Street Fighter themes on certain songs . In other songs , he would use elements from various Mega Man songs in order not to break the cohesion of the original soundtrack . Esquivel based most of the sounds on the first two Mega Man games , but had also used sounds from Mega Man 3 , 4 , and 5 . Esquivel also added original compositions within several songs including two completely original compositions : " Willy Map Theme " and the beginning of the " Ending " theme . The soundtrack blends popular themes from both franchises together ( such as mixing Snake Man 's theme from Mega Man 3 with <unk> 's theme from Street Fighter II ) . The official soundtrack titled Street Fighter X Mega Man OST was released for free on Esquivel 's website on December 18 , 2012 . An EP with a total of four tracks titled Street Fighter X Mega Man X @-@ tended Vol . 1 was released on February 8 , 2013 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Two days after release , Capcom Senior VP Christian Svensson commented on the official Capcom website , Capcom @-@ Unity , that the game has exceeded his personal expectations in terms of downloads , but no exact numbers have been released . Capcom 's Senior Community Manager , Brett Elston , noted that the amount of downloads during release was enough to cause significant strain on their servers . By March 3 , 2013 , the game had been downloaded one million times . 
 Street Fighter X Mega Man has been met with mostly mixed to positive reviews . Cheat Code Central gave the game a 4 @.@ 1 out of 5 , praising the nostalgic feel the game has , but criticized the lack of a save feature . Game Informer gave the game an 8 out of 10 , summarizing that " Street Fighter X Mega Man pales in comparison to the rest of the classic entries , but it ’ s still a wonderful test of the waters for newcomers and a charming experiment for lifelong fans . " Inside Gaming Daily gave the game an 8 out of 10 , stating , " Though it ’ s short and strays away a bit from traditional Mega Man games , Street Fighter X Mega Man is a great play that you honestly have little reason not to experience . " IGN gave the game a 7 out of 10 , noting that " The end result is a fine game that Mega Man fans will enjoy once or twice , but one without that special something that would allow it to rise to the greatness Mega Man so regularly reached in its heyday . " Destructoid echoed similar opinions stating , " Street Fighter X Mega Man is not the best or most polished Mega Man game around , but it 's a solid effort by a very dedicated fan . " Game Industry News gave it a 3 @.@ 5 out of 5 with mixed review stating , " It combines two of Capcom 's greatest games in history into one nostalgic mash up that is sure to take fans on a trip down memory lane while still feeling fresh . Unfortunately though , the lack of challenge or the ability to continue progress after shutting down the game only hinders Street Fighter X Mega Man from being the perfect jewel it could have been . " Edge however gave the game a 5 out of 10 , noting " inconsistent level design and limited functionality " as the game 's biggest flaws . 
 = SMS Hertha = 
 SMS Hertha was a protected cruiser of the Victoria Louise class , built for the German Imperial Navy ( Kaiserliche Marine ) in the 1890s . Hertha was laid down at the AG Vulcan shipyard in 1895 , launched in April 1897 , and commissioned into the Navy in July 1898 . The ship was armed with a battery of two 21 cm guns and eight 15 cm guns and had a top speed of 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) . 
 Hertha served abroad in the German East Asia Squadron for the first six years of her career ; she served briefly as the Squadron flagship in 1900 . She contributed a landing party to the force that captured the Taku Forts during the Boxer Rebellion in 1900 . After returning to Germany in 1905 , she was modernized and used as a training ship in 1908 , following the completion of the refit . She conducted a series of training cruises , and several notable officers served aboard the ship as cadets , including Karl Dönitz and Ernst Lindemann . At the outbreak of World War I , Hertha was mobilized into the 5th Scouting Group , but served in front @-@ line duty only briefly . She was used as a barracks ship after 1915 , and ultimately sold for scrapping in 1920 . 
 = = Design = = 
 Hertha was ordered under the contract name " K " and was laid down at the AG Vulcan shipyard in Stettin in 1895 . She was launched on 14 April 1897 , after which fitting @-@ out work commenced . She was commissioned into the German navy on 23 July 1898 . The ship was 110 @.@ 6 meters ( 363 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 17 @.@ 4 m ( 57 ft ) and a draft of 6 @.@ 58 m ( 21 @.@ 6 ft ) forward . She displaced 6 @,@ 491 t ( 6 @,@ 388 long tons ; 7 @,@ 155 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of three vertical 4 @-@ cylinder triple expansion engines powered by twelve coal @-@ fired Belleville boilers . Her engines provided a top speed of 19 kn ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) and a range of approximately 3 @,@ 412 nautical miles ( 6 @,@ 319 km ; 3 @,@ 926 mi ) at 12 kn ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . She had a crew of 31 officers and 446 enlisted men . 
 The ship was armed with two 21 cm SK L / 40 guns in single turrets , one forward and one aft . The guns were supplied with 58 rounds of ammunition each . They had a range of 16 @,@ 300 m ( 53 @,@ 500 ft ) . Hertha also carried eight 15 cm SK L / 40 guns . Four were mounted in turrets amidships and the other four were placed in casemates . These guns had a range of 13 @,@ 700 m ( 44 @,@ 900 ft ) . She also carried ten 8 @.@ 8 cm SK L / 35 guns . The gun armament was rounded out by machine guns . She was also equipped with three 45 cm ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes with eight torpedoes , two launchers were mounted on the broadside and the third was in the bow , all below the waterline . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Hertha served as a colonial cruiser after she was completed , starting in 1899 . After arriving on the East Asia station , she temporarily served as the flagship of Vice Admiral Felix von Bendemann , the commander of the East Asia Squadron , which included the cruisers Hansa , Gefion , Irene , and Kaiserin Augusta . After the new armored cruiser Fürst Bismarck reached the Asia station , she relieved Hertha as the Squadron flagship . 
 As part of the East Asia Squadron during the Boxer Rebellion , the ship made a noteworthy contribution in the Battle of the Taku Forts . In June 1900 , Hertha , along with Hansa , Gefion , and Irene landed detachments of <unk> ( marines ) to seize the Taku Forts . The marines joined detachments sent from warships of several other countries . A total of around 450 German troops were contributed to the multi @-@ national force , which totaled around 2 @,@ 200 officers and men . During the attack on the forts , Hertha 's commanding officer was shot and killed . In September , Hertha carried Alfred von Waldersee to Shanghai , arriving on the 21st , where he took command of the international forces suppressing the rebellion . 
 Hertha was detached from the East Asia Squadron and returned to Germany in 1905 . In 1906 , she went to dry dock at the Imperial Dockyard in Danzig for a refit , during which she was re @-@ boilered . Hertha originally had three stacks , and during the modernization they were trunked into two funnels . The refit was finished by 1908 , at which point Hertha became a cadet training ship ; several prominent naval officers trained aboard the ship during this period . In September – October 1909 , Hertha , Victoria Louise , Dresden , and Bremen traveled to the United States to represent Germany during the Hudson @-@ Fulton Celebration . 
 In 1910 , Karl Dönitz , the future commander of the Kriegsmarine during World War II , served as a cadet on Hertha for a year . The ship cruised in the western Mediterranean in the autumn of 1912 , along with her sister Vineta . The old cruiser Geier was also in the region . The future commander of the battleship Bismarck , Ernst Lindemann , served aboard the ship as a cadet in 1913 . The ship conducted a training cruise in the Baltic and North Seas in late May to early July , stopping in a number of foreign ports , including Stockholm , Visby , and Bergen . The ship then embarked on a seven month training cruise into the Atlantic Ocean ; during the voyage , Hertha called on numerous ports , including Vera Cruz , Mexico , Port @-@ au @-@ Prince , Haiti , Kingston , Jamaica , and Halifax , Canada . The cruise lasted from mid @-@ August 1913 to mid @-@ March 1914 . 
 Hertha had a short career during World War I. At the outbreak of hostilities , she was briefly mobilized into the 5th Scouting Group , which was tasked with training cadets in the Baltic Sea . By the end of 1914 , however , the ships were again removed from service . She was then put into service as a coastal defense ship . After 1915 , she was withdrawn from front @-@ line duty again and employed as a barracks ship for the seaplane base in Flensburg . She was stricken from the naval register on 6 December 1919 and sold to ship @-@ breakers in Audorf @-@ Rendsburg . She was scrapped the following year . 
 = Tom Hiddleston = 
 Thomas William Hiddleston ( born 9 February 1981 ) is an English actor . At the beginning of his career , he appeared in West End theatre productions of Cymbeline ( 2007 ) and Ivanov ( 2008 ) . He won the Laurence Olivier Award for Best Newcomer in a Play for his role in Cymbeline and was also nominated for the same award for his role as Cassio in Othello . 
 He came to wider public attention when cast as Loki in the Marvel Cinematic Universe , appearing in Thor ( 2011 ) , The Avengers ( 2012 ) , and Thor : The Dark World ( 2013 ) . In 2011 , he won the Empire Award for Best Male Newcomer and was nominated for the BAFTA Rising Star Award . Hiddleston has also appeared in Steven Spielberg 's War Horse ( 2011 ) , The Deep Blue Sea ( 2011 ) , Woody Allen 's romantic comedy Midnight in Paris ( 2011 ) , the 2012 BBC series Henry IV and Henry V , and the romantic vampire film Only Lovers Left Alive ( 2013 ) . 
 In late 2013 and early 2014 , Hiddleston starred as the title character in the Donmar Warehouse production of Coriolanus , winning the Evening Standard Theatre Award for Best Actor . In 2015 , he starred in Guillermo del Toro 's Crimson Peak , Ben Wheatley 's High Rise , and played the troubled country music singer Hank Williams in the biopic I Saw The Light . In 2016 , he starred in the limited series The Night Manager , for which he is nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Limited Series or Movie . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Hiddleston was born in Westminster , London . He is the son of Diana Patricia ( née Servaes ) Hiddleston , an arts administrator and former stage manager , and James Norman Hiddleston , a physical chemist . His father is from Greenock , Scotland and his mother is from Suffolk , England . His younger sister , Emma , is also an actress , whilst his older sister , Sarah , is a journalist in India . Through his mother , he is a great @-@ grandson of Vice Admiral Reginald Servaes , and a great @-@ great @-@ grandson of food producer Sir Edmund <unk> . 
 He was raised in Wimbledon in his early years , and later moved to a Cotswold village near Oxford . He attended the Dragon School preparatory school in Oxford , and his parents divorced when he was 12 . When discussing his parents ' divorce in an interview with The Daily Telegraph , he stated : " I like to think it made me more compassionate in my understanding of human frailty " . 
 At the age of 13 , Hiddleston began boarding at Eton College . He continued on to Pembroke College at the University of Cambridge , where he earned a double first in Classics . During his second term at Cambridge , he was seen in a production of A Streetcar Named Desire by talent agent Lorraine Hamilton , of Hamilton <unk> . He proceeded to study acting at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art , from which he graduated in 2005 . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = 2001 @-@ 2010 : Early work = = = 
 While still doing student plays , Hiddleston began doing television , landing parts in Stephen Whittaker 's adaptation of Nicholas Nickleby ( 2001 ) for ITV , the BBC / HBO co @-@ production Conspiracy ( 2001 ) , and as Randolph Churchill , the son of Winston Churchill , in the BBC / HBO drama The Gathering Storm ( 2002 ) . 
 Upon graduating from RADA , Hiddleston was cast in his first film role , playing Oakley in Joanna Hogg 's first feature , Unrelated ( 2006 ) . His sister Emma also appeared in the film as Badge . Casting director , Lucy Bevan , who cast him in the film said " there was just a fantastic confidence about him " . Hiddleston had leading roles in Declan Donnellan 's company Cheek by <unk> 's productions The Changeling ( 2006 ) , and Cymbeline ( 2007 ) . For the latter he won the Laurence Olivier Award for Best Newcomer in a Play . His Donmar Warehouse credits include Cassio in Michael Grandage 's production of Shakespeare 's Othello ( 2008 ) alongside Chiwetel Ejiofor and Ewan McGregor and later Lvov in their West End revival of Chekhov 's Ivanov ( 2008 ) with Kenneth Branagh . 
 Hiddleston was the voiceover for BBC 's documentary on the Galapagos Island in 2006 . He also narrated the audiobook The Red Necklace by Sally Gardner in 2007 @,@ 
 Hiddleston also appeared in the leading role of Edward in Hogg 's second feature , Archipelago ( 2010 ) . His TV credits include Magnus <unk> in the BBC detective drama Wallander ( 2008 ) , Bill Hazledine in Suburban Shootout ( 2006 ) , John Plumptre in the BBC costume drama TV film Miss Austen Regrets ( 2008 ) and William Buxton in the BBC drama series Return to Cranford ( 2009 ) . In 2007 , he joined a list of British actors , including Kate Winslet and Orlando Bloom , to have guest starred in the long @-@ running medical drama Casualty . 
 = = = 2011 @-@ 2014 : Career breakthrough = = = 
 Hiddleston is well known for his portrayal of Loki in the 2011 Marvel Studios film , Thor . He was invited to audition by Kenneth Branagh , the film 's director , after having previously worked with Branagh on Ivanov and Wallander . Hiddleston said of Branagh , " Ken has had a life @-@ changing effect . He was able to say to the executives , ' Trust me on this , you can cast Tom and he will deliver ' . It was massive and it 's completely changed the course of what is available to me to do . Ken gave me my break . " In the beginning , he originally auditioned for the part of Thor . " I initially auditioned to play Thor . That was what I was being considered for , because I 'm tall and blonde and classically trained , and that seemed to be the mold for what Thor was , he was to be a classical character . And it was in my auditions . I owe this entirely to Marvel and their open @-@ mindedness , they saw something that they thought was interesting . They saw some temperament that they liked . " The casting director gave Hiddleston six weeks to bulk up , so he went on a strict diet and gained twenty pounds of muscle . In the end , Branagh decided he was more suitable as the antagonist and cast him as Loki . To prepare for his role as Loki , Hiddleston trained in the Brazilian martial art of capoeira . 
 Hiddleston appeared with Benedict Cumberbatch , Gemma Arterton , Eddie Redmayne and Rose Byrne among others in Danny Boyle 's one time production of The Children 's Monologues in November 2010 where he played Prudence , a young girl upset with her mother for her father leaving and excited for her birthday . The play was a one time event of adapted stories of children 's first @-@ hand experiences in South Africa being re @-@ interpreted by and performed by various actors . 
 Also in 2011 Hiddleston portrayed novelist F. Scott Fitzgerald in writer @-@ director Woody Allen 's Midnight in Paris , the noble Captain Nicholls in War Horse , a film based on the 1982 novel by Michael Morpurgo , directed by Steven Spielberg , and Freddie Page , a RAF pilot in the drama The Deep Blue Sea , alongside Rachel Weisz . In 2012 , he reprised his role as the supervillain Loki in The Avengers . While filming a scene with Chris Hemsworth , who plays Thor , the film 's director , Joss Whedon told the fighting duo that the scene did not look real enough , so Hiddleston told Hemsworth to really hit him for the fight scene . " I said to Chris , ' Dude , just hit me . Just hit me because I 'm protected here and it 's fine . ' He 's like , ' Are you sure ? ' I was like , ' Yeah , it will look great . Just go for it . ' " 
 Hiddleston provided the voiceover the Ancient Egyptian Book of the Dead in 2011 and poetry for iF Poems and The Love Book on iTunes in 2012 . 
 On television in 2012 Hiddleston appeared in the BBC Two series The Hollow Crown , portraying Prince Hal opposite Jeremy Irons as Henry IV in the adaptation of Shakespeare 's Henry IV , Part I and Part II . He later as appeared as King Henry V in the television film Henry V. In 2013 , Hiddleston played Loki again in Thor : The Dark World , following which he played a vampire , Adam , in Jim Jarmusch 's film Only Lovers Left Alive with Tilda Swinton as Eve and Mia Wasikowska . 
 From December 2013 to February 2014 , Hiddleston played the title character in William Shakespeare 's Coriolanus at the Donmar Warehouse in Covent Garden directed by Josie Rourke . It was also aired live internationally on 30 January 2014 . David Benedict of Variety praised a " scorching " <unk> had a cameo in the 2014 film Muppets Most Wanted , as the Great <unk> . 
 = = = 2015 @-@ present : Varied roles = = = 
 Hiddleston replaced Benedict Cumberbatch in the gothic horror film Crimson Peak , directed by Guillermo del Toro . The film started filming in Toronto in February 2014 , and was released in October 2015 . Upcoming roles include Robert Laing in the film adaptation of J. G. Ballard 's novel High Rise , directed by Ben Wheatley . The film started shooting in Northern Ireland in July 2014 . 
 In January 2014 , Hiddleston became a spokesperson for Jaguar Cars in their " Good to be Bad " ad campaign featuring British actors in villain @-@ themed commercials to promote Jaguars new models . The first commercial of the campaign , titled " Rendezvous " , first aired during the 2014 Super Bowl and featured Hiddleston along with Mark Strong and Ben Kingsley . 
 In April 2014 , Hiddleston starred in another commercial in the campaign , titled " The Art of Villainy " . It was released on YouTube , promoting the F @-@ Type coupe . However , the Advertising Standards Authority received complaints about the video " encouraging irresponsible driving " . Jaguar Land Rover said that in the ad , when the car did leave the car park , it " accelerated briefly " and that police were present at filming to confirm the speed limit was not breached but the ASA ruled against it and banned the commercial . 
 It was announced in June 2014 that Hiddleston will play country music singer Hank Williams in the upcoming biopic I Saw the Light , based on the 1994 biography . It will be directed by Marc Abraham and is set to start shooting in Louisiana in October 2014 . Legendary Pictures announced in September 2014 that Hiddleston would star in the upcoming King Kong film Kong : Skull Island . It is set to be released on 10 March 2017 and will be directed by Jordan Vogt @-@ Roberts . He is also set to reprise his role as Loki in Thor : Ragnarok , scheduled for release on 3 November 2017 , as well as Avengers : Infinity War – Part 1 ( 2018 ) and Part 2 ( 2019 ) . 
 Hiddleston was one of the narrators in the 2015 documentary Unity directed by Shaun Monson . 
 Hiddleston appears as Jonathan Pine in the television mini @-@ series The Night Manager based on the espionage and detective novel of the same name by John le Carré . The series started filming in Spring 2015 and is currently airing on AMC with Hugh Laurie also starring . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Hiddleston was one of the celebrities , including Benedict Cumberbatch , Jo Brand , E. L. James and Rachel Riley , to design and sign his own card for the UK @-@ based charity Thomas Coram Foundation for Children . The campaign was launched by crafting company Stampin ' Up ! UK and the cards were auctioned off on eBay during May 2014 . He is also a supporter of the humanitarian and developmental assistance fund group UNICEF . He travelled to Guinea in early 2013 to help women and children and raise awareness about hunger and malnutrition . Hiddleston is a self @-@ described feminist . 
 In July 2016 , Hiddleston confirmed he is in a relationship with American singer Taylor Swift . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
