 = = = Television = = = 
 = = = Theatre = = = 
 = = = Video game = = = 
 = = = Radio = = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = Grey 's raid = 
 In September 1778 , as part of British operations in the American Revolutionary War , Major General Charles Grey raided the Massachusetts communities of New Bedford , Fairhaven and Martha 's Vineyard . The raid was one of the first in a series between 1778 and 1781 executed by the British against American coastal communities . 
 Originally intended as a relief force for the British garrison that was briefly besieged at Newport , Rhode Island , Grey 's force of 4 @,@ 000 arrived after the Americans had already retreated , and was diverted for raiding by General Sir Henry Clinton . On September 5 and 6 Grey raided New Bedford and Fairhaven , only encountering significant resistance in Fairhaven . His troops destroyed storehouses , shipping , and supplies in New Bedford , where they met with light resistance from the local militia , and did less damage at Fairhaven , where militia resistance had time to organize . He then sailed for Martha 's Vineyard , which was undefended . Between September 10 and 15 its residents surrendered 10 @,@ 000 head of sheep and 300 oxen , as well as most of the island 's weapons . 
 = = Background = = 
 In December 1776 British forces occupied Newport , Rhode Island . American forces in New England were not strong enough to dislodge the garrison there , which was also supported by Royal Navy vessels that used Newport as a base . This situation changed in 1778 , following the entry of France into the war , when the French and Americans agreed to embark on joint operations against the British . The French sent a fleet under the command of the comte d 'Estaing to provide troops and naval support that arrived off New York City in July 1778 . Finding the port well defended and believing its bar to be too shallow for his largest ships to cross , d 'Estaing sailed instead for Newport , where he and General John Sullivan prepared to besiege the British garrison . 
 In response to the threat to Newport , General Sir Henry Clinton ordered 4 @,@ 000 men under General Charles Grey to prepare for transport to Rhode Island while Admiral Lord Richard Howe sailed from New York to oppose d 'Estaing . D 'Estaing sailed out of Newport harbor on August 10 , preparing to do battle with Howe . As the fleets maneuvered for position , a storm arose that scattered and damaged both fleets . D 'Estaing decided then to abandon Newport , and sailed for Boston to make repairs . General Sullivan had by then already begun siege operations against Newport without French assistance , which prompted Clinton to order Grey 's force to sail for Newport on August 26 . Clinton accompanied the force , which made slow progress due to contrary winds . By the time they arrived at Newport on September 1 , the Americans had not only been put on the defensive , but had retreated from the island after the inconclusive August 29 Battle of Rhode Island . 
 Rather than disembark Grey 's troops at Newport , Clinton decided to pursue other objectives . His orders , issued in March 1778 , included instructions to raid coastal communities , destroying shipbuilding facilities and supplies . Acting on this idea , he ordered the fleet to sail to New London , Connecticut , a potential raiding site . Finding too few ships there to bother with a landing , Clinton ordered Grey to " proceed without loss of time to the eastward " to raid New Bedford and Fairhaven on the Massachusetts mainland , and the island of Martha 's Vineyard . 
 = = New Bedford and Fairhaven = = 
 Early on September 4 , Grey 's fleet , led by the Royal Navy frigate Carysfort under Captain Robert Fanshawe , sailed for Buzzard 's Bay . En route they encountered Lord Howe 's fleet ; the earl agreed to remain near Block Island until the raids were completed . Arriving in Buzzard 's Bay that afternoon , the Carysfort had the misfortune to twice strike rocks ; fortunately , neither incident was serious , and the fleet proceeded up the Acushnet River toward New Bedford and Fairhaven . That evening , Grey landed his troops at Clark 's Point on the west bank of the river . They spent the night and the next morning destroying vessels , warehouses , and wharves " in the whole Extent of the <unk> River " . Many of the ships destroyed were prizes captured by privateers operating out of the two towns . The conflagration caused by the fires they lit also destroyed homes and houses of worship , and was bright enough that it was seen in Newport , some 20 miles ( 32 km ) away . During the evening the 38 @-@ man artillery garrison , manning a small fort on the Fairhaven side of the river ( today known as Fort Phoenix ) , fired on the British ships , then spiked the fort 's guns and abandoned it , leaving their colors flying . The British briefly returned fire , and then destroyed the fort 's guns . 
 Grey 's troops marched around the head of the Acushnet River to the eastern banks and camped . The next day they reembarked on their boats , but General Grey decided that Fairhaven should also be raided . In the meantime , militia were beginning to arrive to defend Fairhaven , with Major Israel Fearing taking command from an elderly colonel who was reluctant to pursue an active defense . When the British approached Fairhaven on the morning of September 6 , Fearing arrayed about 150 men between the village and their landing point . After setting fire to a few nearby buildings the British headed for the village . At this point Fearing 's men unleashed a withering volley of musket fire , and the British precipitately retreated to their boats . 
 = = Martha 's Vineyard = = 
 <unk> his aide , Captain John André , to New York to request transports for livestock , Grey then set sail for Martha 's Vineyard . Contrary winds slowed the fleet 's progress , and it did not reach the harbor at Holmes Hole ( present @-@ day Vineyard Haven ) until September 10 . Because of the bad winds , Grey abandoned the idea of raiding Nantucket , and focused on acquiring livestock on Martha 's Vineyard . 
 A deputation of three citizens came to the Carysfort to see what the British wanted , and Grey made his demands : he wanted the militia 's weapons , any public funds , 300 oxen , and 10 @,@ 000 sheep . He threatened to land his troops and seize these items if they were not delivered up by the defenseless islanders . After two days , the islanders had driven 6 @,@ 000 sheep and 130 oxen to the fleet . Not satisfied with this progress , Grey landed small contingents of troops on September 12 to accelerate the process and to destroy vessels found in the area . By the 14th he had received all 10 @,@ 000 sheep and 300 oxen , as well as local militia arms and £ 950 intended as a tax payment for the Second Continental Congress . Grey sailed from Martha 's Vineyard on September 15 , and reached New York City two days later . 
 An glimpse into Grey 's Raid on Martha 's Vineyard is provided in the below section from " The History of Martha 's Vineyard , " by Henry Franklin Norton : 
 September 10 , 1778 , General Grey in command of a transport of eighty @-@ two sails and ten thousand British troops made a raid upon the Vineyard , carrying off all the sheep , swine , cattle and oxen that could be found . To oppose this wholesale spoliation the " Islanders " had no power so they submitted in sullen and despairing silence , at times even assisting to drive away the captured flocks , hoping thereby to prevent still greater waste and outrage . A very good idea of this period is given in the diary of Colonel Beriah Norton , which reads as follows : 
 " September 10th . -- Gen. Grey commanding a detachment of his Majesty 's army arrived at Martha 's Vineyard , when I waited on him on shipboard . Agreed to deliver him 10 @,@ 000 sheep , 300 head of cattle ; the General informed me that payment would be made for the same if they were not resisted . The General then required the stock to be brought to the landing the next day , which was punctually complied with . 
 " September 11th . - This day the troops landed under the command of Col. Sterling . Said Sterling then informed me that Gen. Grey had directed him to assure me that the whole stock would be paid for if they came down according to the conversation of the evening before . Sterling then informed me that a person must be appointed to appraise the stock before they would take any on shipboard . To which I agreed and we jointly agreed to . I did appoint proper persons to do that business ; who were sworn by me to do their duty faithfully by the request of Col. Sterling . The stock was by this time coming down to the landing and was taken on board to the amount of 10 @,@ 000 sheep and 312 head of cattle . 
 " September 14th . - Col. Sterling then informed me and other inhabitants of the island that he had a message to deliver to the people . Then he recommended them to meet in a field for there was not room for them in doors , accordingly they met to the amount of several hundred . He informed us that we were to apply to New York for payment for the stock that they had received . I asked the Colonel if we best send a man in the fleet at this time for the payment to which the Colonel replied , we might if we chose but he recommended us to wait a little time before application was made . 
 " September 15th . -- The fleet sailed for New York . " 
 It must seem to the reader that this Colonel Beriah Norton was a traitor to his own people , but what could he do but give in to Grey 's command ! Grey had the force and the power and could have destroyed the towns on the island in half a day , and would have done so if they had resisted in any way . In the diary , September 12th and 13th are omitted . Those were the days when the British troops were ravaging the island from Edgartown to Gay Head . 
 A man was sent to New York to receive payment for the stock , but Grey had forgotten that he had ever stopped at Martha 's Vineyard . Colonel Beriah Norton made two special trips to London for the same purpose , and at one time he was given a hearing in Parliament . Very little was accomplished in these two trips to England . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Grey 's report on the expedition lists one man killed , four wounded , and sixteen missing . He reported that the defenders had four men killed ; he also took sixteen prisoners in New Bedford to exchange for his missing . The raid was followed others ( not led by Grey ) : one against Little Egg Harbor , New Jersey in October 1778 , and two in 1779 against communities on Chesapeake Bay and the Connecticut shore . In 1781 a raiding expedition led by turncoat General Benedict Arnold began the decisive Yorktown campaign in Virginia ; Arnold also led another raid in September 1781 against New London and Groton , Connecticut ( not far from where he grew up ) that was notorious for its severity . 
 In New Bedford eleven houses , 21 shops , 34 ships of various size , and one ropewalk were destroyed , along with goods and naval stores . Estimates of the damage done there and at Fairhaven ranged from £ 20 @,@ 000 to nearly £ 100 @,@ 000 , most coming in damage to ships and goods . The residents of Martha 's Vineyard petitioned for compensation in excess of £ 10 @,@ 000 due to the losses incurred in the raid . General Clinton 's successor , Sir Guy Carleton made payment of £ 3 @,@ 000 against these claims . 
 The fort at the mouth of the Acushnet River was rebuilt and named Fort Phoenix . It was manned in the War of 1812 , and is now listed on the National Register of Historic Places . 
 = Global Climate Coalition = 
 The Global Climate Coalition ( GCC ) ( 1989 – 2001 ) was an international lobbyist group of businesses that opposed action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and challenged the science behind global warming . The GCC was the largest industry group active in climate policy and the most prominent industry advocate in international climate negotiations . The GCC was involved in opposition to the Kyoto Protocol , and played a role in blocking ratification by the United States . The coalition promoted the views of climate skeptics . The GCC dissolved in 2001 after membership declined in the face of improved understanding of the role of greenhouse gases in climate change and of public criticism . 
 = = Founding = = 
 The Global Climate Coalition ( GCC ) was formed in 1989 as a project under the auspices of the National Association of Manufacturers . The GCC was formed to represent the interests of the major producers and users of fossil fuels , to oppose regulation to mitigate global warming , and to challenge the science behind global warming . Context for the founding of the GCC from 1988 included the establishment of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change ( IPCC ) and NASA climatologist James Hansen 's congressional testimony that climate change was occurring . The government affairs ' offices of five or six corporations recognized that they had been inadequately organized for the Montreal Protocol , the international treaty that phased out ozone depleting chlorofluorocarbons , and the Clean Air Act in the United States , and recognized that fossil fuels would be targeted for regulation . 
 According to GCC 's mission statement on the home page of its website , GCC was established : " to coordinate business participation in the international policy debate on the issue of global climate change and global warming , " and GCC 's executive director in a 1993 press release said GCC was organized " as the leading voice for industry on the global climate change issue . " 
 GCC reorganized independently in 1992 , with the first chairman of the board of directors being the director of government relations for the Phillips Petroleum Company . Exxon was a founding member , and a founding member of the GCC 's board of directors . Exxon , and later ExxonMobil , had a leadership role in coalition . The American Petroleum Institute ( API ) was a leading member of the coalition . API 's executive vice president was a chairman of the coalition 's board of directors . Other GCC founding members included the National Coal Association , United States Chamber of Commerce , American Forest & Paper Association , and Edison Electric Institute . GCC 's executive director John <unk> was previously the director of government relations at the Edison Electric Institute . GCC was run by <unk> Finn , a public relations firm . 
 GCC was the largest industry group active in climate policy . About 40 companies and industry associations were GCC members . Considering member corporations , member trade associations , and business represented by member trade associations , GCC represented over 230 @,@ 000 businesses . Industry sectors represented included : aluminium , paper , transportation , power generation , petroleum , chemical , and small businesses . All the major oil companies were members . GCC members were from industries that would have been adversely effected by limitations on fossil fuel consumption . GCC was funded by membership dues . 
 = = Advocacy activities = = 
 GCC was one of the most powerful lobbyist groups against action to mitigate global warming . It was the most prominent industry advocate in international climate negotiations , and led a campaign opposed to policies to reduce greenhouse gas emissions . The GCC was one of the most powerful non @-@ governmental organizations representing business interests in climate policy , according to Kal <unk> , professor at the UCLA School of Law . 
 GCC 's advocacy activities included lobbying government officials , grassroots lobbying through press releases and advertising , participation in international climate conferences , criticism of the processes of international climate organizations , critiques of climate models , and personal attacks on scientists and environmentalists . Policy positions advocated by the coalition included denial of anthropogenic climate change , emphasizing the uncertainty in climatology , advocating for additional research , highlighting the benefits and downplaying the risks of climate change , stressing the priority of economic development , defending national sovereignty , and opposition to the regulation of greenhouse gas emissions . 
 GCC sent delegations to all of the major international climate conventions . Only nations and non @-@ profits may send official delegates to the United Nations Climate Change conferences . GCC registered with the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change as a non @-@ governmental organization , and executives from GCC members attended official UN conferences as GCC delegates . 
 In 1990 , after U. S. President George H. W. Bush addressed the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change ( IPCC ) urging caution in responding to global warming , and offering no new proposals , GCC said Bush 's speech was " very strong " and concurred with the priorities of economic development and additional research . GCC sent 30 attendees to the 1992 Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro , where it lobbied to keep targets and timetables out of the Framework Convention on Climate Change . In December , 1992 GCC 's executive director wrote in a letter to The New York Times : " ... there is considerable debate on whether or not man @-@ made greenhouse gases ( produced primarily by burning fossil fuels ) are triggering a dangerous ' global warming ' trend . " In 1992 GCC distributed a half @-@ hour video entitled The Greening of Planet Earth , to hundreds of journalists , the White House , and several Middle Eastern oil @-@ producing countries , which suggested that increasing atmospheric carbon dioxide could boost crop yields and solve world hunger . 
 In 1993 , after U. S. President Bill Clinton pledged " to reducing our emissions of greenhouse gases to their 1990 levels by the year 2000 , " GCC 's executive director said it " could jeopardize the economic health of the nation . " GCC 's lobbying was key to the defeat in the United States Senate of Clinton 's 1993 BTU tax proposal . In 1994 , after United States Secretary of Energy Hazel R. O 'Leary said the 1992 United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change needed to be strengthened , and that voluntary carbon dioxide reductions may not be enough , GCC said it was : " disturbed by the implication that the President 's voluntary climate action plan , which is just getting under way , will be inadequate and that more stringent measures may be needed domestically . " 
 GCC did not fund original scientific research and its climate claims relied largely on the World Climate Review and its successor the World Climate Report edited by Patrick Michaels and funded by the Western Fuels Association . GCC promoted the views of climate skeptics such as Michaels , Fred Singer , and Richard Lindzen . In 1996 , GCC published a report entitled Global warming and extreme weather : fact vs. fiction written by Robert E. Davis . 
 GCC members questioned the efficacy of climate change denial and shifted their message to highlighting the economic costs of proposed greenhouse gas emission regulations and the limited effectiveness of proposals exempting developing nations . In 1995 , after the United Nations Climate Change conference in Berlin agreed to negotiate greenhouse gas emission limits , GCC 's executive director said the agreement gave " developing countries like China , India and Mexico a free ride " and would " change the relations between sovereign countries and the United Nations . This could have very significant implications . It could be a way of capping our economy . " At a Washington , D.C. press conference on the eve of the second United Nations Climate Change conference in Geneva , GCC 's executive director said , " The time for decision is not yet now . " At the conference in Geneva , GCC issued a statement that said it was too early to determine the causes of global warming . GCC representatives lobbied scientists at the September , 1996 IPCC conference in Mexico City . 
 After actor Leonardo DiCaprio , chairman of Earth Day 2000 , interviewed Clinton for ABC News , GCC sent out an e @-@ mail that said that DiCaprio 's first car was a Jeep Grand Cherokee and that his current car was a Chevrolet Tahoe . 
 = = = Predicting Future Climate Change : A Primer = = = 
 In 1995 , GCC assembled an advisory committee of scientific and technical experts to compile an internal @-@ only , 17 @-@ page report on climate science entitled Predicting Future Climate Change : A Primer , which said : “ The scientific basis for the Greenhouse Effect and the potential impact of human emissions of greenhouse gases such as CO2 on climate is well established and cannot be denied . ” In early 1996 , GCC 's operating committee asked the advisory committee to redact the sections that rebutted contrarian arguments , and accepted the report and distributed it to members . The draft document was disclosed in a 2007 lawsuit filed by the auto industry against California ’ s efforts to regulate automotive greenhouse gas emissions . 
 According to The New York Times , the primer demonstrated that " even as the coalition worked to sway opinion , its own scientific and technical experts were advising that the science backing the role of greenhouse gases in global warming could not be refuted . " According to the Union of Concerned Scientists in 2015 , the primer was : " remarkable for indisputably showing that , while some fossil fuel companies ’ deception about climate science has continued to the present day , at least two decades ago the companies ’ own scientific experts were internally alerting them about the realities and implications of climate change . " 
 = = = IPCC Second Assessment Report = = = 
 GCC was an industry participant in the review process of the IPCC Second Assessment Report . In 1996 , prior to the publication of the Second Assessment Report , GCC distributed a report entitled The IPCC : Institutionalized Scientific Cleansing to reporters , US Congressmen , and scientists . The coalition report said that Benjamin D. Santer , the lead author of Chapter 8 in the assessment , entitled " Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes , " had altered the text , after acceptance by the Working Group , and without approval of the authors , to strike content characterizing the uncertainty of the science . Frederick Seitz repeated GCC 's charges in a letter to the Wall Street Journal published June 12 , 1996 . The coalition ran newspaper advertisements that said : " unless the management of the IPCC promptly undertakes to republish the printed versions ... the IPCC 's credibility will have been lost . " 
 Santer and his co @-@ authors said the edits were integrations of comments from peer review as per agreed IPCC processes . 
 = = = Opposition to Kyoto Protocol = = = 
 GCC was the main industry group in the United States opposed to the Kyoto Protocol , which committed signatories to reduce greenhouse gas emissions . The coalition " was the leading industry group working in opposition to the Kyoto Protocol , " according to Greenpeace , and led opposition to the Kyoto Protocol , according to the Los Angeles Times . 
 Prior to 1997 , GCC spent about $ 1 million annually lobbying against limits on CO2 emissions ; before Kyoto , GCC annual revenue peaked around $ 1 @.@ 5 million ; GCC spent $ 13 million on advertising in opposition to the Kyoto treaty . The coalition funded the Global Climate Information Project and hired the advertising firm that produced the 1993 @-@ 1994 Harry and Louise advertising campaign which opposed Clinton 's health care initiative . The advertisements said , “ the UN Climate Treaty isn ’ t Global ... and it won ’ t work ” and " Americans will pay the price ... 50 cents more for every gallon of gasoline . " 
 GCC opposed the signing of the Kyoto Protocol by Clinton . GCC was influential in the withdrawal from the Kyoto Protocol by the administration of President George W. Bush . According to briefing notes prepared by the United States Department of State for the under @-@ secretary of state , Bush 's rejection of the Kyoto Protocol was " in part based on input from " GCC . GCC lobbying was key to the July , 1997 unanimous passage in the United States Senate of the Byrd @-@ Hagel Resolution , which reflected the coalition 's position that restrictions on greenhouse gas emissions must include developing countries . GCC 's chairman told a US congressional committee that mandatory greenhouse gas emissions limits were : " an unjustified rush to judgement . " The coalition sent 50 delegates to the third Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Climate Change Conference in Kyoto . On December 11 , 1997 , the day the Kyoto delegates reached agreement on legally binding limits on greenhouse gas emissions , GCC 's chairman said the agreement would be defeated by the US Senate . In 2001 , GCC 's executive director compared the Kyoto Protocol to the RMS Titanic . 
 = = Membership decline and dissolution = = 
 GCC 's challenge to science prompted a backlash from environmental groups . Environmentalists described GCC as a " club for polluters " and called for members to withdraw their support . " Abandonment of the Global Climate Coalition by leading companies is partly in response to the mounting evidence that the world is indeed getting warmer , " according to environmentalist Lester R. Brown . In 1998 , Green Party delegates to the European Parliament introduced an unsuccessful proposal that the World Meteorological Organization name hurricanes after GCC members . Defections weakened the coalition . In 1996 , British Petroleum resigned and later announced support for the Kyoto Protocol and commitment to greenhouse gas emission reductions . In 1997 , Royal Dutch Shell withdrew after criticism from European environmental groups . In 1999 , Ford Motor Company was the first US company to withdraw ; the New York Times described the departure as " the latest sign of divisions within heavy industry over how to respond to global warming . " DuPont left the coalition in 1997 and Shell Oil ( US ) left in 1998 . In 2000 , GCC corporate members were the targets of a national student @-@ run university divestiture campaign . Between December , 1999 and early March , 2000 , Texaco , the Southern Company , General Motors and Daimler @-@ Chrysler withdrew . Some former coalition members joined the Business Environmental Leadership Council within the Pew Center on Global Climate Change which represented diverse stakeholders , including business interests , with a commitment to peer @-@ reviewed scientific research and accepted the need for emissions restrictions to address climate change . 
 In 2000 , GCC restructured as an association of trade associations ; membership was limited to trade associations , and individual corporations were represented through their trade association . Brown called it : " a thinly veiled effort to conceal the real issue - the loss of so many key corporate members . " 
 In 2001 , after US President George W. Bush withdrew the US from the Kyoto process , GCC disbanded . Absent the participation of the US , the effectiveness of the Kyoto process was limited . GCC said on its website that its mission had been successfully achieved , writing " At this point , both Congress and the Administration agree that the U.S. should not accept the mandatory cuts in emissions required by the protocol . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 In 2015 , the Union of Concerned Scientists compared GCC 's role in the public policy debate on climate change to the roles in the public policy debate on tobacco safety of the Tobacco Institute , the tobacco industry 's lobbyist group , and the Council for Tobacco Research , which promoted misleading science . Environmentalist Bill McKibben said that , by promoting doubt about the science , " throughout the 1990s , even as other nations took action , the fossil fuel industry 's Global Climate Coalition managed to make American journalists treat the accelerating warming as a he @-@ said @-@ she @-@ said story . " According to the Los Angeles Times , GCC members integrated projections from climate models into their operational planning while publicly criticising the models . 
 = = Members = = 
 = = = Membership notes = = = 
 = St Mary 's Church , Llanfair Mathafarn Eithaf = 
 St Mary 's Church , Llanfair Mathafarn Eithaf is a small medieval church in Anglesey , north Wales . The earliest parts of the building , including the nave and the north doorway , date from the 14th century . Other parts , including the chancel and the east window , date from the 15th century . It is associated with the Welsh poet and clergyman Goronwy Owen , who was born nearby and served as curate here . He later travelled to America to teach at The College of William & Mary , Virginia . 
 The church is still in use for worship , as part of the Church in Wales , as one of three churches in the combined parish of Llanfair Mathafarn Eithaf with Llanbedrgoch with Pentraeth . It is a Grade II * listed building , a national designation given to " particularly important buildings of more than special interest " , because it is a " good rural church retaining substantial medieval fabric . " 
 = = History and location = = 
 St Mary 's Church is situated near the east coast of Anglesey , north Wales . It is by the side of a country road near the village of <unk> . The parish includes the coastal resort of <unk> . The parish takes its name in part from the church : the Welsh word llan originally meant " enclosure " and then " church " , and " <unk> " is a modified form of Mary ( Mair in Welsh ) . " Mathafarn Eithaf " translates as " area ( or field ) of the tavern " . 
 It is a medieval church , and the oldest part of the building is the nave , which dates from the 14th century . The chancel and the arch between nave and chancel were added in the following century . The architect of the Diocese of Bangor , Henry Kennedy , carried out work on the church in 1847 . He added a vestry on the north side and a porch to the south , as well as making some other alterations and additions , such as the re @-@ roofing of the chancel . 
 The church is still in use for worship , as part of the Church in Wales . It is one of three churches in the combined benefice of Llanfair Mathafarn Eithaf with Llanbedrgoch with Pentraeth . It is within the deanery of Tindaethwy and Menai , the archdeaconry of Bangor and the Diocese of Bangor . As of 2012 , the position of rector is held by the Venerable R P Davies , Archdeacon of Bangor . Services are held on a Sunday morning , alternating between Holy Communion and Morning Prayer . 
 The Welsh priest and poet Goronwy Owen , who was born in the parish on 1 January 1723 , served for three weeks as curate of St Mary 's . He later travelled to America to teach at The College of William & Mary , Virginia , and remained in Virginia until his death . 
 = = Architecture and fittings = = 
 St Mary 's is built from rubble masonry , with buttresses at the eastern ends of the nave and chancel , and it has a slate roof . The timbers of the roof can be seen from inside the church . There is a bellcote at the west end of the roof , containing one bell dated 1849 . The church has a gallery at the west end , reached by climbing a spiral staircase . The nave is longer and higher than the chancel , with one step and a simple 15th @-@ century chancel arch between them . The nave measures about 52 feet 6 inches by 16 feet 3 inches ( about 16 by 5 m ) , and the chancel measures about 18 feet 6 inches by 13 feet 6 inches ( about 5 @.@ 6 by 4 @.@ 1 m ) . 
 Entrance is through the porch in the middle of the south wall of the nave , which houses a round @-@ headed doorway from the 15th or 16th century . There is a trefoil @-@ headed single window on the south wall of the nave to the left of the porch , and two windows , each with three trefoil @-@ headed lights ( sections of window , separated by mullions ) , to the right of the porch . The south wall of the chancel has a similar window , with only two lights , which was inserted in 1847 ; it adjoins a blocked window from the 17th century . The north wall of the church , which was rebuilt in 1847 , has a 14th @-@ century doorway with a pointed arch , and windows on each side similar to those on the south side . The east window , which dates from the 15th century , has three lights headed with cinquefoils set within a pointed arch . There is a hood mould on the outside . 
 A 1937 survey by the Royal Commission on Ancient and Historical Monuments in Wales and Monmouthshire noted a wooden communion table , dated 1667 , and some interior memorials dated 1724 and 1731 . It also recorded that the churchyard contained an 11th @-@ century churchyard cross , which had at one point held a sundial . Most of the fittings inside the church date from the mid @-@ 19th century . The pulpit has two carved panels , one depicting Christ and the other a Madonna and Child . It was installed in 1969 , marking the <unk> of Goronwy Owen 's death . The reredos behind the altar is in memory of those who died during World War I. 
 = = Assessment = = 
 The church has national recognition and statutory protection from alteration as it has been designated as a Grade II * listed building – the second @-@ highest of the three grades of listing , designating " particularly important buildings of more than special interest " . It was given this status on 12 May 1970 . Cadw ( the Welsh Assembly Government body responsible for the built heritage of Wales and the inclusion of Welsh buildings on the statutory lists ) states that St Mary 's has been listed because it is " a good rural church retaining substantial medieval fabric " . 
 Writing in 1847 , the clergyman and antiquarian Harry Longueville Jones said that St Mary 's , which he called " a rather long and low building " , was situated " in an uneven , rocky , and exposed locality " within a parish that had a " peculiarly bleak and desolate appearance " . He also thought that the roof of the church was " remarkable for the quantity of good , but light , timber used in its construction . " 
 = Action of 31 May 1809 = 
 The Action of 31 May 1809 was a naval skirmish in the Bay of Bengal during the Napoleonic Wars . During the action , an Honourable East India Company convoy carrying goods worth over £ 500 @,@ 000 was attacked and partially captured by the French frigate Caroline . The three East Indiamen that made up the convoy fought against their opponent with their own batteries of cannon but ultimately were less powerful , less manoeuvrable and less trained than their opponent and were defeated one by one ; only the smallest of the three escaped . The action was the first in a string of attacks on important convoys in the Indian Ocean by French cruisers operating from Île de France and Île Bonaparte during a concerted campaign against British shipping in the region . 
 = = Background = = 
 In November 1808 , a squadron of powerful French frigates sailed for Île de France under Commodore Jacques Hamelin . This squadron was under orders to attack and capture or destroy British shipping in the Indian Ocean , particularly the heavily armed convoys of East Indiamen that carried millions of pounds worth of trade goods from British India and the Far East to Britain . These convoys were operated by the Honourable East India Company ( HEIC ) , which ran British India and maintained a private army and navy to secure the colony and its trade routes . During the late Napoleonic Wars , French naval strategy focused on the disruption of this trade with the use of fast and well @-@ armed frigates to operate independently along British trade routes and capture British merchant ships . This affected the British economy , which was already severely stretched by the war , and forced the Royal Navy to divert resources to distant parts of the world to protect British trade . 
 During the late spring of 1809 , following the end of the Indian Ocean hurricane season , Hamelin ordered his ships to operate in the Bay of Bengal . One of these frigates was the 40 @-@ gun Caroline , which was built in Antwerp in 1806 and weighed 1 @,@ 078 tons . Caroline was commanded by Jean @-@ Baptiste @-@ Henri Féretier , newly promoted following the sudden death of her previous captain . Féretier was the first of Hamelin 's captains to find a British convoy , spotting three sails on the horizon on 31 May . These belonged to a Britain @-@ bound convoy of East Indiamen , which had departed the Hooghly River on 2 May . Laden with over £ 500 @,@ 000 worth of silk and other trade goods , these ships were an important asset to the HEIC and had originally been part of a larger convoy , guarded by the sloop HMS Victor and consisting of five Indiamen and several smaller vessels . On 24 May a storm divided the convoy ; Victor , the small ships and two of the Indiamen Monarch and Earl Spencer were separated from the remainder , the Streatham , Europe and Lord Keith after Monarch sprang a leak . 
 The Indiamen were not unprotected : each one was large and powerfully built and carried a number of cannon . Streatham and Europe weighed over 800 tons each and carried 30 cannon , whereas the smaller Lord Keith was 600 tons and carried 12 guns . Four years earlier , a convoy of East Indiamen had driven off a French ship of the line and attached frigates under Admiral Linois in similar waters by forming a battle line and firing on their opponents as they closed . The crews of these East Indiamen were not of Royal Navy standard , however , with insufficient training and large numbers of Chinese and lascar seamen , who proved unreliable in combat . 
 = = Battle = = 
 One of the smaller ships from the convoy , an American merchant ship named Silenus , had separated from the main body in the storm and arrived at the Nicobar Islands . There she had encountered Caroline and the American captain had reported the location and value of the convoy to Féretier . Setting all sail , Féretier took Caroline to the north @-@ west , and sighted the convoy at 05 : 30 , only a few days after leaving the Nicobar Islands . The British ships , under the loose command of John Dale in Streatham , originally mistook the French frigate for the missing Victor and it was not until another half @-@ hour had passed that Dale realised the danger his ships were in . Ordering the Indiamen to form a line of battle , Dale placed his ship in the centre , with the small Lord Keith ahead and Europe behind . However , the lack of naval experience on the British ships resulted in the Indiamen sailing too far from one another in line , thus leaving them unable to provide effective mutual support . 
 Able to attack the HEIC ships individually , Caroline pulled alongside Europe at 06 : 30 and began a heavy fire into the merchant ship , which intermittently replied with her available guns . Within 30 minutes , Europe 's rigging was tattered , many of her guns dismounted and a number of her crew wounded or killed . Moving past his now disabled opponent , Féretier next attacked Streatham , which had slowed in an unsuccessful attempt to support Europe . Now alone against the frigate , Streatham came under heavy fire at 07 : 00 and by 08 : 00 was badly damaged , with casualties in her crew , her guns all dismounted and her lascars hiding below decks . With further resistance hopeless , Dale hauled down the company flag and surrendered . 
 During the engagement between Streatham and Caroline , Lord Keith and Europe had fired sporadically at the French ship with little effect . Pulling away from his surrendered opponent , Féretier then fired on Lord Keith , whose captain , Peter Campbell , realised that his ship stood no chance against the frigate and turned eastward , running before the wind to escape despite suffering severe damage to Lord Keith ' rigging as he did so . William <unk> , captain of Europe , also attempted to flee , but his battered ship was in no condition to outrun the virtually untouched frigate , and he surrendered at 10 : 00 . Lord Keith eventually arrived safely at Penang on 9 June . Casualties on the British ships were six killed and at least four wounded , while the French lost one killed and three wounded . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Féretier repaired his captures at sea and returned to Île de France , arriving two months later on 22 July . Discovering the presence of a British frigate squadron under Josias Rowley off Port Louis , Féretier diverted to Saint Paul on Île Bonaparte . Among the goods removed from the ships were the £ 500 @,@ 000 worth of silk , which was stored in warehouses near the docks . In the British raid on Saint Paul on 21 September 1809 , these warehouses and their contents were burnt and Caroline , Streatham and Europe all captured by the raiding force . Despite these subsequent losses , Féretier was highly commended for his leadership in the action and received a promotion from Governor Charles Decaen . He also received letters from the captains of Streatham and Europe , thanking him for his attention and courtesy to their crews and passengers during their period of captivity . 
 = German destroyer Z16 Friedrich Eckoldt = 
 Z16 Friedrich Eckoldt was a Type 1934A @-@ class destroyer built for Nazi Germany 's Kriegsmarine in the late 1930s . It was named after Kapitänleutnant Friedrich Eckoldt ( 1887 @-@ 1916 ) , the commander of torpedo boat V 48 , who was killed when his boat was sunk during the Battle of Jutland on 31 May 1916 . 
 At the beginning of World War II , the ship was initially deployed to blockade the Polish coast , but she was quickly transferred to the German Bight to lay minefields in German waters . In late 1939 and 1940 the ship made multiple successful minelaying sorties off the English coast that claimed 21 merchant ships . Eckoldt participated in the early stages of the Norwegian Campaign by transporting troops to the Trondheim area in early April 1940 . The ship was transferred to France later in the year . Eckoldt returned to Germany in late 1940 for a refit and was transferred to Norway in June 1941 as part of the preparations for Operation Barbarossa , the German invasion of the Soviet Union . The ship spent some time at the beginning of the campaign conducting anti @-@ shipping patrols in Soviet waters , but these were generally fruitless . She escorted a number of German convoys in the Arctic later in the year . Eckoldt escorted several German heavy cruisers at the beginning and end of their anti @-@ shipping raids in 1942 . She was part of a German surface fleet which attacked Convoy JW 51B on 31 December near the North Cape , Norway . After sinking the minesweeper HMS Bramble , Eckoldt mistook the British light cruiser HMS Sheffield for the German heavy cruiser Admiral Hipper and was taken completely by surprise when the cruiser opened fire . The ship sank with all hands without returning fire . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Friedrich Eckoldt had an overall length of 119 meters ( 390 ft 5 in ) and was 114 meters ( 374 ft 0 in ) long at the waterline . The ship had a beam of 11 @.@ 30 meters ( 37 ft 1 in ) , and a maximum draft of 4 @.@ 23 meters ( 13 ft 11 in ) . She displaced 2 @,@ 171 metric tons ( 2 @,@ 137 long tons ) at standard and 3 @,@ 190 metric tons ( 3 @,@ 140 long tons ) at deep load . The Wagner geared steam turbines were designed to produce 70 @,@ 000 metric horsepower ( 51 @,@ 000 kW ; 69 @,@ 000 shp ) which would propel the ship at 36 knots ( 67 km / h ; 41 mph ) . Steam was provided to the turbines by six high @-@ pressure Benson boilers with superheaters . Friedrich Eckoldt carried a maximum of 752 metric tons ( 740 long tons ) of fuel oil which was intended to give a range of 4 @,@ 400 nautical miles ( 8 @,@ 100 km ; 5 @,@ 100 mi ) at 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) , but the ship proved top @-@ heavy in service and 30 % of the fuel had to be retained as ballast low in the ship . The effective range proved to be only 1 @,@ 530 nmi ( 2 @,@ 830 km ; 1 @,@ 760 mi ) at 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) . The ship 's crew consisted of 10 officers and 315 sailors . 
 Friedrich Eckoldt carried five 12 @.@ 7 cm SK C / 34 guns in single mounts with gun shields , two each superimposed , fore and aft . The fifth gun was carried on top of the rear deckhouse . Her anti @-@ aircraft armament consisted of four 3 @.@ 7 cm SK C / 30 guns in two twin mounts abreast the rear funnel and six 2 cm C / 30 guns in single mounts . The ship carried eight above @-@ water 53 @.@ 3 @-@ centimeter ( 21 @.@ 0 in ) torpedo tubes in two power @-@ operated mounts . A pair of reload torpedoes were provided for each mount . Four depth charge throwers were mounted on the sides of the rear deckhouse and they were supplemented by six racks for individual depth charges on the sides of the stern . Sufficient depth charges were carried for either two or four patterns of sixteen charges each . Mine rails could be fitted on the rear deck that had a maximum capacity of sixty mines . ' GHG ' ( Gruppenhorchgerät ) passive hydrophones were fitted to detect submarines and an active sonar system was installed by the end of 1939 . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 The ship was ordered on 19 January 1935 and laid down at Blohm & Voss , Hamburg on 4 November 1935 as yard number <unk> . She was launched on 21 March 1937 and completed on 28 July 1938 . The ship participated in the August 1938 Fleet Review as part of the 3rd Destroyer Division . On 23 – 24 March 1939 , Friedrich Eckoldt was one of the destroyers escorting Adolf Hitler aboard the pocket battleship Deutschland to occupy Memel . She participated in the Spring fleet exercise in the western Mediterranean and made several visits to Spanish and Moroccan ports in April and May . 
 When World War II began , Friedrich Eckoldt was initially deployed in the Baltic to operate against the Polish Navy and to enforce a blockade of Poland , but she was soon transferred to the German Bight where she joined her sisters in laying defensive minefields . She also patrolled the Skagerrak to inspect neutral shipping for contraband goods in October . On the night of 17 / 18 October , Rear Admiral ( Konteradmiral ) Günther Lütjens , aboard his flagship Wilhelm Heidkamp , led Eckoldt , Hermann Künne , Diether von Roeder , Hans Lüdemann , and Karl Galster as they laid a minefield off the mouth of the River Humber . The British were unaware of the minefield 's existence and lost seven ships totaling 25 @,@ 825 Friedrich Eckoldt ( GRT ) . On the night of 18 / 19 November , Eckoldt and Hans Lody , led by Commander ( Fregattenkapitän ) Erich Bey in his flagship Erich Steinbrinck , laid another minefield off the Humber Estuary that claimed another seven ships of 38 @,@ 710 GRT , including the Polish ocean liner M / S Piłsudski of 14 @,@ 294 GRT . 
 Another minefield of 170 magnetic mines was laid by Eckoldt , Ihn and Steinbrinck on the night of 6 / 7 January 1940 off the Thames Estuary . The destroyer HMS Grenville and six merchant ships totalling 21 @,@ 617 GRT were lost to this minefield as well and another ship was damaged as well . Commodore Friedrich Bonte led a minelaying sortie to the Newcastle area with Heidkamp , Eckoldt , Anton Schmitt , Richard Beitzen , Galster , and Ihn . The latter ship suffered tube failures in her boilers that reduced her maximum speed to 27 knots ( 50 km / h ; 31 mph ) and she had to be escorted back to Germany by Beitzen . This minefield only claimed one fishing trawler of 251 tons . Eckoldt , Beitzen and Max Schultz laid 110 magnetic mines in the Shipwash area , off Harwich , on 9 / 10 February that sank six ships of 28 @,@ 496 GRT and damaged another . Eckoldt was the flagship during Operation Wikinger , an attempt to capture British fishing trawlers operating off the Dogger Bank on 22 February , when two destroyers sank with heavy loss of life – one hit newly @-@ laid British mines in a supposedly mine @-@ free channel and the other was bombed in error by the Luftwaffe . 
 Friedrich Eckoldt was allocated to Group 2 for the Norwegian portion of Operation Weserübung . The group 's task was to transport the 138th Mountain Infantry Regiment ( 138 . Gebirgsjäger Regiment ) to seize Trondheim together with Admiral Hipper . The ships began loading troops on 6 April and set sail the next day . Eckoldt 's port propeller shaft began to overheat shortly after passing the mouth of the Elbe River and she had to slow down . The ship managed to repair the problem and joined the main body later in the day . The ship escorted Admiral Hipper as they entered the <unk> and both ships disembarked their troops once they reached Trondheim harbor . All of the German ships proved to be very low on fuel after their journey and fuel oil was transferred to Eckoldt from Theodor Riedel and Heinemann . Admiral Hipper and Eckoldt attempted to leave on the night of 10 April , but the smaller ship proved to be unable to match Admiral Hipper 's speed in the heavy seas encountered and was forced to turn back . After some fuel was discovered in Trondheim on 12 April , the ship and Heinemann sailed for Germany two days later . 
 After completing her refit in early September ( the ship may have been fitted with a FuMO 21 or FuMO 24 radar set above the bridge at this time ) , Eckoldt was transferred to France with four of the surviving destroyers on 9 September . The ship covered five other destroyers laying mines in Falmouth Bay during the night of 28 / 29 September . Five ships totalling only 2026 GRT were sunk by this minefield . Eckoldt was attacked by Fairey Swordfish of No. 812 Squadron of the Fleet Air Arm during the night of 9 / 10 October and lightly damaged by bomb splinters . One man was killed and three were wounded . The ship was transferred back to Hamburg on 5 November where she was refitted until the end of December . Eckoldt was training in the Baltic until she escorted the battleship Bismarck and the heavy cruiser Prinz Eugen from Cape Arkona to Trondheim on 19 – 22 May as they sortied into the North Atlantic . The following month , she escorted the pocket battleship Lützow from Kiel to Norway as the latter ship attempted to break through the British blockade . Several Bristol Beaufort aircraft spotted Lützow and her escorts and one managed to surprise the ships and torpedo the pocket battleship early on the morning of 13 June . Eckoldt took Lützow under tow until the latter managed to restart her starboard engine and proceed under her own power . 
 On 20 June , Eckoldt sailed for Bergen , Norway , with Galster and <unk> where they waited until 4 July for the latter 's main feed pump to be repaired and for Beitzen and Lody to arrive . All five destroyers arrived at Kirkenes on 10 July . They mounted their first anti @-@ shipping patrol on 12 July , but did not spot anything until the following night . A small Soviet convoy was spotted and two of its ships were sunk after expending four @-@ fifths of their ammunition . As the German ships were returning to port , they were attacked by several aircraft , of which Eckoldt claimed to have shot down one . A second patrol was made on 22 July , but only a single Soviet ship was sunk while the German ships were not damaged by several aerial attacks . When the British aircraft carriers Victorious and Furious attacked Petsamo and Kirkenes on 29 July , the destroyers were far to the east and could not catch the British ships before they left the area . The German destroyers made one final sortie into the Kola Inlet where they sank one small Soviet patrol vessel . Eckoldt was damaged by a single aircraft 's bombs that straddled the ship and damaged her steering and starboard engine . This damage was temporarily repaired , but Eckoldt was ordered to Narvik for more thorough repairs . After they were completed , the ship remained in the Arctic for convoy escort duties . She was accidentally rammed by a Norwegian freighter in Tromsø on 12 October and was given temporary repairs in the floating dock at Trondheim on 22 October before she was sent to Kiel for more permanent repairs where she arrived on 9 November . 
 Eckoldt finished her repairs and overhaul on 15 April 1942 and was training until she attempted to sail for Norway on 11 June . She developed more engine problems en route and had to turn back for repairs . The ship reached Trondheim on 9 July , escorting the light cruiser Köln ; both ships laid mines at the entrance to the Skagerrak en route . Eckoldt continued onwards and reached Narvik on 18 July . During Operation Wunderland in August , Eckoldt , Beitzen and Steinbrinck escorted the pocket battleship Admiral Scheer at the beginning and end of its mission to attack Soviet shipping in the Kara Sea . They also escorted the minelayer Ulm as it departed to lay a minefield off Cape Zhelaniya in mid @-@ August . On 13 – 15 October , Eckoldt , Beitzen , and the destroyers Z27 and Z30 laid a minefield off the Kanin Peninsula at the mouth of the White Sea that sank the Soviet icebreaker Mikoyan . Three weeks later , the same four destroyers escorted Admiral Hipper as she attempted to intercept Allied merchant ships proceeding independently to Soviet ports in early November . 
 = = = Battle of the Barents Sea = = = 
 During Operation Regenbogen , the attempt to intercept Convoy JW 51B sailing from the UK to the Soviet Union in late December , Eckoldt , Beitzen , and Z29 escorted Admiral Hipper as she attempted to occupy the attention of the convoy 's escort while Lutzow and three other destroyers attacked the convoy . The three destroyers separated from Hipper to search for the convoy and were successful on the morning of 31 December . The destroyer HMS Obdurate spotted them in turn and closed to investigate when the German ships opened fire at a range of 8 @,@ 000 meters ( 8 @,@ 700 yd ) . Obdurate turned away to rejoin the convoy without sustaining any damage and the German ships did not pursue as they had been ordered to rejoin Hipper . The Germans found the minesweeper HMS Bramble , which had been detached earlier from the convoy to search for stragglers , as they maneuvered to close with the convoy and the destroyers were ordered to sink her while Hipper engaged the convoy 's escorting destroyers . This took some time in the poor visibility and Hipper was surprised in the meantime by the British covering force of the light cruisers Sheffield and Jamaica . After sinking Bramble , the German destroyers attempted to rejoin Hipper , but had no idea that British cruisers were in the area . They confused Sheffield with Hipper when they spotted each other at 4 @,@ 000 meters ( 4 @,@ 400 yd ) range and were totally surprised when Sheffield opened fire on Eckoldt with every gun she possessed . The latter was dead in the water and on fire when Sheffield turned away ; Eckoldt sank some unknown amount of time later at 77 ° 19 ′ N 30 ° 47 ′ E. There were no survivors ; all 341 men aboard died . 
 = New York State Route 135 = 
 New York State Route 135 ( NY 135 ) is a 10 @.@ 66 @-@ mile ( 17 @.@ 16 km ) state highway in eastern Nassau County , New York , in the United States . The route is a limited @-@ access highway that connects Seaford with Syosset . The highway runs from Merrick Road ( unsigned County Route 27 or CR 27 ) in Seaford to NY 25 in Syosset . In between , NY 135 passes through Bethpage and Plainview and serves Bethpage State Park . The highway is ceremoniously designated as the Ralph J. Marino Expressway ; however , it is more commonly known as the Seaford – Oyster Bay Expressway . 
 The origins of the expressway date back to 1954 when engineering pioneer Robert Moses proposed that a highway be built between Wantagh and Oyster Bay . Although communities along the proposed path of the highway opposed its construction , Moses eventually won the grant . Right @-@ of @-@ way was taken in 1958 , and construction began in 1959 . In 1967 , the name of the expressway was renamed from the Wantagh – Oyster Bay Expressway to its current name . The expressway was completed to its current length in 1969 ; however , a stub exists at each end of the highway . The freeway was designated as NY 135 by 1964 . 
 Around 1970 , Robert Moses returned his focus to the expressway , proposing that the highway be extended north from Syosset . This extension would include a long bridge to Rye in Westchester County across the Long Island Sound . The plan received support until it was brought to the federal government , at which point towns began opposing his plans . Governor Nelson Rockefeller canceled the proposed extension in 1973 . In 2007 , a developer proposed building a 16 @-@ mile ( 26 km ) tunnel to Rye instead . There have also been plans for a southern extension to Jones Beach , but none have been acted on . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The Seaford – Oyster Bay Expressway northbound lanes begins at the onramp from Merrick Road ( unsigned CR 27 ) near the outer limits of downtown Seaford in southeastern Nassau County . There is an aging sign at the southern terminus , depicting the highway as " NY 135 " and showing the nearest control city as Oyster Bay . The offramp begins at a commercial building and turns to the northeast , heading through some trees . After a short distance , the onramp merges into the northbound lanes of the expressway . 
 The expressway progresses northward from the onramp , crossing over Waverly Avenue and passing the first guide sign for exit 2 ( NY 27 ) , about 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) ahead from this point . The highway widens to three lanes in each direction as it comes upon the interchange with NY 27 . The highway progresses its way northward through the interchange and passes by the first NY 135 northbound shield in the middle of the exit . Trees mainly separate the expressway from the nearby highways and communities . After a short distance , the onramp from NY 27 merges into the northbound lanes , and the highway continues northward . 
 On the southbound side , across from the onramp , the southbound lanes split for exit 2E , set specifically for the eastbound alignment of NY 27 . Shortly afterward the expressway crosses under both directions of NY 27 on separate bridges . After that , Seamans Neck Road becomes the service road to the expressway , running parallel to the east . There is a bridge over Clark Street in the nearby community of Massapequa , where West Seamans Neck Road , the southbound service road , ends . After a short distance , Seamans Neck Road ends at exit 3 for NY 105 . 
 After a while , the expressway passes the North Wantagh Park , and connects to the Southern State Parkway at exit 4 . There , the expressway makes a curve to the northeast , crossing over <unk> Lane on an overpass . The direction of the expressway begins to straighten , until exit 5 , where it encounters NY 107 . Soon after , the expressway comes upon exit 6 , which is for Boundary Avenue , a connector to the nearby Bethpage State Parkway . From there , the expressway turns to the north and begins to parallel the Bethpage Parkway as it meets NY 24 ( Hempstead Turnpike ) . 
 North of NY 24 in Bethpage , NY 135 has an exit leading to Powell Avenue and Plainview Road , the latter serving as a local continuation of the Bethpage Parkway . At this point , the median of the expressway widens as the route heads northward . The wide median was originally constructed to allow the Bethpage Parkway to be extended north to the Caumsett State Parkway and Caumsett State Park . The wide median ends just before exit 9 as the lanes of NY 135 come back together for the exit with Cherry Avenue and Broadway . After interchange 9 , the expressway enters Plainview as it crosses over <unk> Road . 
 As the expressway passes through Plainview it passes beneath Old Country Road at exit 10 . Seven interchanges north of the Southern State Parkway , NY 135 comes upon the Northern State Parkway at exit 12 . Just after , there is a partial cloverleaf interchange ( exit 13 ) with the Long Island Expressway ( I @-@ 495 ) in Locust Grove . The expressway continues north of I @-@ 495 , heading through Locust Grove to interchanges 14E and 14W . Here , NY 135 ends and merges into NY 25 ( the Jericho Turnpike ) . A stub built for the possible extension of the expressway sits nearby . All traffic merges onto NY 25 west from there . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Planning and construction = = = 
 In 1954 , the New York State Department of Public Works ( <unk> ) unveiled plans for a six @-@ lane expressway that would go from the Wantagh State Parkway in Wantagh to NY 106 in Oyster Bay . Unlike the Western Nassau Expressway , a highway proposed two years earlier that would go through densely populated areas in western Nassau County , this roadway would go through lightly populated areas , meaning that acquiring the necessary right @-@ of @-@ way would be easier . Under Robert Moses ' original plans for the highway , the northern terminus of the expressway would be placed near brand new local ferry terminals in Oyster Bay . From there , commuters could connect to the city of Stamford , Connecticut , 12 miles ( 19 km ) to the north by way of ferries across Long Island Sound . The proposed highway was added to the New York State Highway Law as follows , with annotations in brackets : 
 ... Seaford – Oyster Bay expressway , beginning at a point on the Wantagh parkway in the vicinity of the hamlet of Wantagh , thence running generally through or near the hamlets of Seaford , Bethpage and Plainview to a point on state highway nine thousand twenty @-@ one [ NY 106 ] south of the village of Oyster Bay ; ... 
 One of the major problems with the proposed alignment of the expressway was that it divided each community that it passed through . This was met by protests from all of the communities . To remedy the concerns , Lewis Waters , the Oyster Bay Town Supervisor , proposed a new alignment for the expressway . Under his plan , it would now begin at the Ocean Parkway in <unk> Beach , cross Great South Bay and enter West Amityville at Clocks Boulevard . From West Amityville , the expressway was to turn to the northeast near the current @-@ day Sunrise Mall , and progress its way through Massapequa and Farmingdale into Bethpage State Park . The highway was to cross through Bethpage State Park using the old right @-@ of @-@ way for the Bethpage State Parkway through the communities of Old Bethpage and Plainview . From there , it would veer to the northwest , approaching and intersecting with the Jericho Turnpike ( NY 25 ) about 0 @.@ 75 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 21 km ) from its current northern terminus . At the Long Island Rail Road 's Port Jefferson Branch , it would follow the originally planned alignment , but would end at NY 25A instead of NY 106 . 
 This plan , supported by the residents of Oyster Bay , would require the acquisition of 185 residential homes . In comparison , the alignment planned by Moses would result in the elimination of 450 homes . However , Moses ' plan won out , to much of their dismay . 
 In 1958 , <unk> acquired the right @-@ of @-@ way for the highway . From Seaford north to the Southern State Parkway near <unk> , the right @-@ of @-@ way followed the alignment of Seamans Neck Road , then an uninterrupted local road extending from Merrick Road in Seaford north to NY 107 and Union Avenue in Levittown . Also in 1958 , the Nassau County Department of Public Works signed over 100 county highways around the county . According to the 1959 Master Plan for the county by the public works department , Seamans Neck Road was initially designated as CR 191 , but only from Merrick Road to the proposed interchange between the expressway and NY 105 , where Seamans Neck Road would meet the new highway . The CR 191 designation was eventually eliminated . 
 Construction commenced on the expressway a year later , with the section from Old Country Road ( exit 10 ) to Jericho Turnpike ( exits 14E and 14W ) opening in June 1962 . Construction continued rapidly , with the section from Old Country Road down to the Southern State Parkway ( exit 4 ) being completed only a year later . The incomplete expressway was designated as NY 135 by 1964 . 
 From there , the construction slowed , with the final piece from Merrick Road ( CR 27 ) to the Southern State Parkway opening to traffic in late 1969 . The resulting highway extended for 10 @.@ 66 miles ( 17 @.@ 16 km ) from Seaford to Syosset , but not to Oyster Bay as its name implied . 
 = = = Extension proposals = = = 
 = = = = Bridge to Rye = = = = 
 In 1957 , a plan for a bridge to Westchester County across Long Island Sound was first proposed by Charles H. Sells , a former commissioner for the New York State Department of Public Works . His proposal for the Oyster Bay – Rye Bridge , along with the eastern Orient Point – Watch Hill Bridge were two proposed bridge routes off Long Island . Sells , however , suggested that the bridges not be constructed until Long Island 's traffic and commuting began to increase . 
 In seven years , Long Island underwent the transformation that Sells had expected , and the east – west arterials between Long Island and New York City , such as the Northern State Parkway and the Long Island Expressway , were congested with commuters . Motorists bound for New England or upstate regions of New York had to take either the Throgs Neck Bridge or the Bronx – <unk> Bridge , and both bridges were already reaching their designed capacities . Robert Moses , chairman of the Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority , worked with the Department of Public Works to commission a $ 150 @,@ 000 ( 1964 USD ) study by the firm Madigan @-@ Hyland to study the feasibility of a bridge across the sound . 
 Moses revealed the results of the study to the Nassau and Suffolk Regional Planning Board in February 1966 . The Oyster Bay – Rye Bridge ( originally the Bayville – Rye Bridge ) was proposed to complete the Interstate 287 ( I @-@ 287 ) beltway around the New York Metropolitan Area . This was to be done by constructing a 6 @.@ 1 @-@ mile ( 9 @.@ 8 km ) long cable @-@ stayed suspension bridge from the Cross @-@ Westchester Expressway ( I @-@ 287 ) in Rye to the Seaford – Oyster Bay Expressway ( NY 135 ) in Nassau County . The proposed bridge was to cost $ 150 million ( 1966 USD ) and had the support of Governor Nelson Rockefeller and many officials on Long Island . 
 However , Moses ran into a problem once the proposal was brought to the Federal Highway Administration . At this point , opposition to the bridge began to form on both sides of Long Island Sound . In addition , plans to turn the Oyster Bay area into a bird sanctuary and a protected park made working on the highway harder as building on such protected places is forbidden by law . Faced with growing opposition , Governor Rockefeller canceled the plans for the bridge on June 20 , 1973 , nine years after the first proposal by Moses . 
 Nine ideas were discussed in the 1950s , 1960s , and 1970s , but all were canceled . Some were reconsidered during the 1990s , but the New York State Department of Transportation ( NYSDOT ) backed away from the idea in belief that it would not relieve congestion . 
 = = = = Highway extensions = = = = 
 Since the demise of the proposed bridge across Long Island Sound , several proposed northward extensions of NY 135 have arisen , none of which have been acted on . In 1973 , the Tri @-@ State Transportation Commission proposed <unk> the idea of extending the expressway northward back to its originally @-@ planned northern terminus , the hamlet of Oyster Bay , even though the bridge project was shelved . The commission stated , " With the abandonment of the Oyster Bay – Rye Bridge proposal , the need to extend the Seaford – Oyster Bay Expressway northward to NY 25A or NY 106 should be restudied . " They added that the study would be probable , even with the abandonment of working on the NY 135 corridor . 
 In 1990 , the Long Island Regional Planning Board came up with a proposed multibillion @-@ dollar plan to expand the capacities of state and county highways and to improve all major roads to " satisfactory " levels by 2010 . The proposal also revisited the idea of extending the Seaford – Oyster Bay Expressway to NY 25A in Oyster Bay via the right @-@ of @-@ way bought in the 1960s . NYSDOT reconsidered the idea a decade later in 2000 , saying it would relieve congestion in the area . They indicated that the extension may be built as either a " full @-@ build " expressway or a four @-@ lane arterial boulevard to NY 25A . However , there are no plans to do either at this time . 
 In 2007 , a developer proposed the idea of crossing Long Island Sound by way of a tunnel instead of a bridge . The tunnel would be 17 miles ( 27 km ) long and run from Bayville to Rye , just as the original bridge would have . To prevent the noticeable tunnel , the developer proposed building a park atop the entrance with ball fields , tennis courts , and several other amenities . 
 Part of the proposed northern right @-@ of @-@ way is now slated to be used for an extension of a multi @-@ use bicycle path from Bethpage State Park to the Long Island Rail Road station in Syosset . The path would be extended north to I @-@ 495 , where it would progress to the northern right @-@ of @-@ way that was once meant for use of the NY 135 extension and continue from there to the Syosset station . There would also be improvements to the hiking and biking trails , pedestrian improvements at crosswalks , the replacing of eroded areas and better parking and signage . Development of the project began in late 1993 and early 1994 ; however , construction has still not yet begun . Work on the project is expected to start in late 2009 and early 2010 and finish in late 2011 . The projected cost for the project is $ 8 @.@ 7 million , which will be paid for through state and federal funds . 
 When the first proposals for a southern extension of NY 135 came out in 1967 , around 25 families were relocated to clear a 7 @.@ 3 acres ( 30 @,@ 000 m2 ) right @-@ of @-@ way for the highway . By 1975 , the Tri @-@ State Transportation Commission proposed a plan to extend the highway south to the Wantagh State Parkway , which was NY 135 's originally @-@ planned southern terminus . This would have provided another connection to Jones Beach via the Wantagh Parkway . However , the idea was not acted upon and was shelved by NYSDOT in 1980 . The right @-@ of @-@ way for the extension was held onto by the state until 2004 when they sold it to Nassau County . Nassau County plans to build a county recreational trail along that right @-@ of @-@ way . 
 = = = Recent history and proposals = = = 
 There are a number of projects either in progress or in development for NY 135 . The one with active construction , however , is work by NYSDOT to repair segments of NY 135 , along with many other highways in Nassau and nearby Suffolk counties , that have concrete beginning to wear out . The project was projected to end in mid @-@ 2008 , but the department has not updated of their project site with the construction . In late 2006 , development began on a project to construct a 100 parking space Park & Ride at the interchange of NY 135 and NY 25 . Work on the project is to expected to begin in mid @-@ 2015 and end in the middle of the following year . Funds would come from the federal government and the state of New York . 
 Another planned NYSDOT project is the replacement of the steel barrier for the median of NY 135 from Merrick Road to NY 24 . The department will replace it with a normal concrete barrier and will also resurface the entire stretch of highway . The project is to cost $ 41 @.@ 6 million of state and federal funding and begin in late 2010 and early 2011 . It is expected to be completed by early 2012 . 
 At 9 : 30 a.m. on May 24 , 1988 , a tanker truck loaded with as much as 3 @,@ 000 imperial gallons ( 14 @,@ 000 l ) of propane fuel overturned and exploded into flames along the expressway . This caused major traffic delays and congestion as police had to shut down three of the major transportation routes in the area . Nassau County police ordered the evacuation of 1 @,@ 000 residents in the immediate area , along with nearby commuter routes , the Sunrise Highway and Long Island Rail Road 's Montauk Branch . With the possibility of an explosion , emergency personnel could not approach the tanker . Since the fire was close to the LIRR station in Seaford , a spokesman said that they had shut all service down from Wantagh to Massapequa . The Long Island Rail Road attempted using buses , but with the congestion becoming worse , they routed the buses to <unk> , where the passengers would take a diesel train to Bethpage and nearby Babylon to continue progress eastward . The Seaford – Oyster Bay Expressway was shut down from Merrick Road to the Southern State Parkway . Police reported that the tanker broke a rear axle , and skidded , causing it to overturn . The tank ruptured , starting the blaze . The driver , a middle @-@ aged man from Westbury , escaped with few injuries . 
 When the Seaford – Oyster Bay Expressway was first built , the highway was known as the Wantagh – Oyster Bay Expressway . The route was changed to its current name in 1967 . The change was made to both avoid confusion with the Wantagh Parkway and to accommodate a request from the community of Seaford to popularize their town . There have also been attempts to rename the expressway with dedications to various Presidents of the United States such as Theodore Roosevelt and Ronald Reagan . However , in March 2002 , the New York State Legislature officially dedicated the expressway after Ralph J. Marino , a New York State Senator from Long Island . At the time , the designation was a tribute to Marino ; however , he died just two weeks later . 
 Between the Powell Avenue and Broadway / Plainview Road interchanges along the expressway , the highway is divided with a large median . The lane alignment was set up so that the proposed extension of the Bethpage State Parkway would have run within the median of NY 135 . The parkway would have followed the highway for a short distance before turning to the southeast and away from NY 135 . By making this possible , the Bethpage Parkway would likely have to have been upgraded from its current super @-@ two configuration into a four @-@ lane highway . 
 NYSDOT had created a project page for the Bethpage Parkway extension , which was viewed by the department as a long @-@ term project . As part of the project , the parkway would have been extended north from the traffic circle with Plainview Road to NY 135 . The project was tentatively scheduled to start in mid @-@ 2025 and wrap up in early 2027 and cost $ 27 @.@ 9 million . The page was taken down by November 2010 . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 The entire route is in Nassau County . 
 = Charles Lydiard = 
 Charles Lydiard ( fl . 13 May 1780 – 29 December 1807 ) was an officer of the Royal Navy who served during the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars . 
 Lydiard 's origins are obscure , but he joined the navy in 1780 and rose through the ranks after distinguished service in the early years of the French Revolutionary Wars , particularly during the Siege of Toulon . He saw action in several engagements in the Mediterranean , and had a part in the defeat of a French frigate in 1795 . The chance for promotion passed him by however when the French ship escaped . He again demonstrated his qualities on a cutting @-@ out expedition under the guns of a French shore battery , and this time was successful in escaping with his prize . He was promoted and appointed to the command of his prize , and went on to be captain of several small vessels before a period of unemployment caused by his promotion to post @-@ captain . He returned to active service in 1805 with command of the razee HMS Anson , in which ship he distinguished himself in a number of incidents in the West Indies , capturing a Spanish frigate , attacking a French ship of the line , and helping to capture the island of Curaçao . He returned to Britain after these exploits , but his ship was caught in a gale , and despite his best efforts , was driven ashore and wrecked . Lydiard did his utmost to save as many of his men as he could , before being swept away and drowned . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Lydiard 's origins are largely unknown , but his entry to the navy is recorded as being on 13 May 1780 , when he joined the 100 @-@ gun HMS Britannia as a captain 's servant . The Britannia was at this time the flagship of Vice @-@ Admiral George Darby , commander of the Channel Fleet . Lydiard was appointed an able seaman on 25 July 1781 , and on 27 May 1782 was transferred to the 44 @-@ gun HMS Resistance , at first as an able seaman , but receiving a promotion to midshipman on 12 October that year . He went on to serve aboard the 74 @-@ gun HMS Bombay Castle and HMS Edgar , and passed his lieutenant 's examination on 27 May 1791 . He was serving with Lord Hood 's fleet during the occupation of Toulon in the early months of the French Revolutionary Wars . Lydiard distinguished himself with his actions during the hard @-@ fought defence of Fort Mulgrave , and received his commission on 25 November 1793 . 
 = = Lieutenancy = = 
 He then became first lieutenant of HMS Sincere , one of the prizes from Toulon , under the command of Commander William Shield . Shield and Lydiard served along the French Mediterranean coast until October 1794 , and were engaged in cutting @-@ out enemy ships from French harbours . Sincere was then paid off and Lydiard transferred to the 74 @-@ gun HMS Captain , where he saw action at the Battle of Genoa on 14 March and the Battle of Hyères Islands on 13 July 1795 . His former commander , William Shield , had received command of the 32 @-@ gun HMS Southampton by July 1795 , and Lydiard transferred that month to serve as his first lieutenant . Lydiard remained with Southampton after Shield 's replacement by Captain James Macnamara and in September 1795 they spent 15 days blockading a French grain convoy in the port of Genoa . 
 = = = Southampton and the French = = = 
 The convoy was protected by two frigates , the Vestale and the Brun . The French finally came out on the evening of the fifteenth day , and were engaged by Southampton , despite the French possessing considerably more firepower . After a sustained engagement Southampton forced Vestale to strike her colours while the Brun escaped with the convoy , leaving Vestale to her fate . But as Southampton prepared to lower her boats to take possession of the French ship , her fore @-@ mast , which had been damaged during the engagement , went by the board . Taking advantage of this , Vestale raised her colours and escaped from the scene . Victory over the Vestale should have brought promotions for Southampton 's officers , including Lydiard , but her escape deprived them of this . Lydiard now had to secure another triumph to ensure his promotion . 
 = = = Capture of Utile = = = 
 Lydiard 's next opportunity to distinguish himself came in June 1796 . On 9 June a French corvette was sighted entering Hyères bay , and Vice @-@ Admiral Sir John Jervis , commander of the Mediterranean Fleet , summoned Macnamara to his flagship , HMS Victory . He asked Macnamara to bring out the French ship if he could . Recognising the difficulty and risk that would be involved , he did not make it a formal written order , instead instructing Macnamara ' bring out the enemy 's ship if you can ; I 'll give you no written order ; but I direct you to take care of the king 's ship under your command . ' Macnamara promptly took his ship in under the guns of the batteries , and apparently having been mistaken for a French or neutral frigate , closed to within pistol shot of the French ship , and demanded her captain surrender . The captain replied with a broadside , and Macnamara brought Southampton alongside and sent Lydiard over in command of the boarders . After subduing fierce resistance Lydiard took possession of the French ship and together he and Macnamara escaped out to sea under heavy fire from the French shore batteries . Macnamara wrote in a letter to Jervis 
 At this period , being very near the heavy battery of Fort <unk> , I laid him instantly onboard , and Lieutenant Lydiard , at the head of the boarders , with an intrepidity that no words can describe entered and carried her in about ten minutes , although he met with a spirited resistance from the captain ( who fell ) and a hundred men under arms to receive him . In this short conflict , the behaviour of all the officers and ship 's company of the Southampton had my full approbation , and I do not mean to take from their merit by stating to you , that the conduct of Lieutenant Lydiard was above all praise . 
 The prize , a 24 @-@ gun corvette named Utile , was taken into service with the Royal Navy as HMS Utile and Lydiard was promoted and given command of her , a commission confirmed on 22 July 1796 . 
 = = Command = = 
 Lydiard spent some time in the Adriatic before returning to Britain in 1797 as a convoy escort , after which Utile was paid off . He was appointed to command the bomb vessel HMS Fury in May 1798 , followed by the sloop HMS Kite in November that year . He served aboard Kite in the North Sea until his promotion to post @-@ captain on 1 January 1801 , at which point he was superseded in the command of the Kite . No further commands could be found for him , and the Peace of Amiens further lengthened his enforced retirement from active service . He went ashore during this time , and took the opportunity to marry . The couple had three sons together . 
 Lydiard finally returned to active service in December 1805 , with an appointment to command the 38 @-@ gun HMS Anson . Anson had originally been a 64 @-@ gun third rate , but had been <unk> in 1794 . He sailed Anson to the West Indies in early 1806 and in August was sailing in company with Captain Charles Brisbane 's HMS Arethusa when on 23 August they came across the 38 @-@ gun Spanish frigate Pomona off Havana , guarded by a shore battery and twelve gunboats . The Pomona was trying to enter the harbour , whereupon Lydiard and Brisbane bore up and engaged her . The gunboats came out to defend her , whereupon the two British frigates anchored between the shore battery and gunboats on one side , and the Pomona on the other . A hard fought action began , which lasted for 35 minutes until the Pomona struck her colours . Three of the gunboats were blown up , six were sunk , and the remaining three were badly damaged . The shore battery was obliged to stop firing after an explosion in one part of it . There were no casualties aboard Anson , but Arethusa lost two killed and 32 wounded , with Brisbane among the latter . The captured Pomona was subsequently taken into the Navy as HMS Cuba . 
 = = = Anson and Foudroyant = = = 
 Lydiard remained cruising off Havana , and on 15 September sighted the French 84 @-@ gun Foudroyant . The Foudroyant , carrying the flag of Vice @-@ Admiral Jean @-@ Baptiste Willaumez , had been dismasted in a storm and was carrying a jury @-@ rig . Despite the superiority of his opponent and the nearness of the shore Lydiard attempted to close on the French vessel and opened fire . Anson came under fire from the fortifications at Morro Castle , while several Spanish ships , including the 74 @-@ gun San Lorenzo , came out of Havana to assist the French . After being unable to manoeuvre into a favourable position and coming under heavy fire , Lydiard hauled away and made his escape . Anson had two killed and 13 wounded during the engagement , while the rigging was badly cut . Foudroyant meanwhile had 27 killed or wounded . 
 = = = Capture of Curaçao = = = 
 Anson was then assigned to Charles Brisbane 's squadron and joined Brisbane 's Arethusa and James Athol Wood 's HMS Latona . The ships were despatched in November 1806 by Vice @-@ Admiral James Richard Dacres to reconnoitre Curaçao . They were joined in December by HMS Fisgard and Brisbane decided to launch an attack on 1 January 1807 . The British ships approached early in the morning of 1 January and anchored in the harbour . They were attacked by the Dutch , at which Brisbane boarded and captured the 36 @-@ gun frigate <unk> , while Lydiard attacked and secured the 20 @-@ gun corvette Suriname . Both Lydiard and Brisbane then led their forces on shore , and stormed Fort Amsterdam , which was defended by 270 Dutch troops . The fort was carried after ten minutes of fighting , after which two smaller forts , a citadel and the entire town were also taken . More troops were landed while the ships sailed round the harbour to attack Fort République . By 10 am the fort had surrendered , and by noon the entire island had capitulated . Lydiard was sent back to Britain carrying the despatches and captured colours . The dramatic success of the small British force carrying the heavily defended island was rewarded handsomely . Brisbane was knighted , and the captains received swords , medals and vases . 
 = = Wreck of Anson = = 
 Anson was sent back to Britain shortly afterwards , and Lydiard rejoined his ship at Plymouth . After a period refitting Anson was assigned to the Channel Fleet and ordered to support the blockade of Brest by patrolling off Black Rocks . She sailed from Falmouth on 24 December , and reached Ile de Bas on 28 December . With a gale blowing up from the south west , Lydiard decided to return to port . He made for the Lizard , but in the poor weather , came up on the wrong side and became trapped on a lee shore , with breakers ahead . Anson rolled heavily in rough seas , having retained the spars from her days as a 64 @-@ gun ship after she had been <unk> . Lydiard 's only option was to anchor , but early on the morning of 29 December the rising storm caused the anchor cables to part and she was driven onto the shore . Lydiard ordered the ship to be run onto a beach in the hope of saving as many lives as possible , and resolved to remain aboard to oversee the evacuation . The pounding surf prevented boats from being launched from the ship or the shore , and a number of the crew were swept away . Some managed to clamber along the fallen main @-@ mast to the shore , while Lydiard clung to the wheel to encourage them on . Eyewitnesses recorded that Lydiard had exhausted himself with the effort of organising the evacuation and clinging to the wreck in the violence of the storm . He attempted to leave the ship , but became distracted by trying to help a boy . In doing so Lydiard was washed away and drowned . The Naval Chronicle 's account of the wreck recorded that 
 It was the captain 's great wish to save the lives of the ship 's company , and he was employed in directing them the whole of the time . He had placed himself by the wheel , holding the spokes , where he was exposed to the violence of the sea , which broke tremendously over him , and from continuing in this situation too long , wishing to see the people out of the ship , he became so weak , that , upon attempting to leave the ship himself , and being impeded by a boy who was in his way , and whom he endeavoured to assist , he was washed away and drowned . 
 A total of sixty of Anson 's crew were lost , including her captain and her first @-@ lieutenant . Lydiard 's body was recovered and a funeral service was held at Falmouth , attended by Admiral Sir Charles Cotton and large numbers of army and navy officers , as well as the local dignitaries . The body was later interred in the family vault at Haslemere , Surrey . 
 = Marion Motley = 
 Marion Motley ( June 5 , 1920 – June 27 , 1999 ) was an American Football fullback and linebacker who played for the Cleveland Browns in the All @-@ America Football Conference ( AAFC ) and National Football League ( NFL ) . He was a leading pass @-@ blocker and rusher in the late 1940s and early 1950s , and ended his career with an average of 5 @.@ 7 yards per carry , a record for a fullback that still stands . A versatile player who possessed both quickness and size , Motley was a force on both offense and defense . Fellow Hall of Fame running back Joe Perry once called Motley " the greatest all @-@ around football player there ever was " . Motley was also one of the first African @-@ Americans to play the professional game in the modern era . 
 Motley grew up in Canton , Ohio . He played football through high school and college in the 1930s before enlisting in the military during World War II . While training in the U.S. Navy in 1944 , he played for a service team coached by Paul Brown . Following the war , he went back to work in Canton before Brown invited him to try out for the Cleveland Browns , a team he was coaching in the newly formed AAFC . Motley made the team in 1946 and became a cornerstone of Cleveland 's success in the late 1940s . The team won four AAFC championships before the league dissolved and the Browns were absorbed by the more established NFL . Motley was the AAFC 's leading rusher in 1948 and the NFL leader in 1950 , when the Browns won another championship . 
 Motley and fellow black teammate Bill Willis contended with racism throughout their careers . Although the color barrier was broken in all major American sports by 1950 , the men endured shouted insults on the field and racial discrimination off of it . " They found out that while they were calling us niggers and alligator bait , I was running for touchdowns and Willis was knocking the shit out of them , " Motley once said . " So they stopped calling us names and started trying to catch up with us . " Focused exclusively on winning , Brown did not tolerate racism within the team . 
 Slowed by knee injuries , Motley left the Browns after the 1953 season . He attempted a comeback in 1955 as a linebacker for the Pittsburgh Steelers but was released before the end of the year . He then pursued a coaching career , but was turned away by the Browns and other teams he approached . He attributed his trouble finding a job in football to racial discrimination , questioning whether teams were ready to hire a black coach . Motley was elected to the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 1968 . 
 = = Early years and college career = = 
 Motley was born in Leesburg , Georgia and raised in Canton , Ohio , where his family moved when he was three years old . After going to elementary and junior high schools in Canton , Motley attended Canton McKinley High School , where he played on the football and basketball teams . He was especially good as a football fullback , and the McKinley Bulldogs posted a win @-@ loss record of 25 – 3 during his tenure there . The team 's three losses all came against Canton 's chief rivals , a Massillon Washington High School team led by coach Paul Brown . 
 After he graduated , Motley enrolled in 1939 at South Carolina State College , a historically black school in Orangeburg , South Carolina . He transferred before his sophomore year to the University of Nevada , Reno , where he was a star on the football team between 1941 and 1943 . As a punishing fullback for the Wolf Pack , Motley played against powerful West Coast teams including USF , Santa Clara , and St. Mary 's . He suffered a knee injury in 1943 and returned to Canton to work after dropping out of school . 
 = = Military and professional career = = 
 As America 's involvement in World War II intensified , Motley joined the U.S. Navy in 1944 and was sent to the Great Lakes Naval Training Station . There he played for the Great Lakes Blue Jackets , a military team coached by Paul Brown , who was serving in the Navy during an extended leave from his job as head coach of Ohio State University 's football team . Motley played fullback and linebacker at Great Lakes , and was an important component of the team 's offense and defense . The highlight of his time at Great Lakes was a 39 – 7 victory over Notre Dame in 1945 . Motley was eligible for discharge before the game – it was the final match of the season and the last military game of World War II – but he stayed on to play . Motley put up an impressive performance , thanks in part to Brown 's experimentation with a new play : a delayed handoff later called the draw play . 
 After the war , Motley went back to Canton and began working at a steel mill , planning to return to Reno in 1946 to finish his degree . That summer , however , Paul Brown was coaching a team in the new All @-@ America Football Conference ( AAFC ) called the Cleveland Browns . Motley wrote to Brown asking for a tryout , but Brown declined , saying he already had all the fullbacks he needed . At the beginning of August , however , Brown invited Bill Willis , another African @-@ American star , to try out for the team at its training camp in Bowling Green , Ohio . Ten days later , Brown invited Motley to come , too . " I think they felt [ Willis ] needed a roommate , " Motley later said . " I don 't think they felt I 'd make the team . I 'm glad I was able to fool them . " 
 Both Motley and Willis made the team and became two of the first African @-@ Americans to play professional football in the modern era . The Los Angeles Rams of the National Football League had signed the only other black players in pro football earlier that year : Kenny Washington and Woody Strode . The four men broke football 's color barrier a full year before Jackie Robinson was promoted from the Class AAA Montreal Royals to join the Brooklyn Dodgers in 1947 . Motley felt the Browns would likely be his only opportunity to make a career of football . " I knew this was the one big chance in my life to rise above the steel mill existence , and I really wanted to take it , " he said . 
 Motley was signed to a contract worth $ 4 @,@ 500 a year ( $ 54 @,@ 607 in 2016 dollars ) . With the Browns , he joined a potent offense led by quarterback Otto Graham , tackle and placekicker Lou Groza and receivers Dante Lavelli and Mac Speedie . He was a force to be reckoned with in the AAFC , and helped the team win every championship in the league 's four years of existence between 1946 and 1949 . He had a combination of quickness and power – he was listed at 238 pounds – that helped him plow through tacklers . He was also an able pass blocker and played on defense as a linebacker . Motley rushed for an average of 8 @.@ 2 yards per carry in his first season . His forte was the trap play , a scheme where a defensive lineman was allowed to come across the line of scrimmage unblocked , opening up space for Motley to run . He led the league in rushing in 1948 as the Browns posted a perfect 15 – 0 record . He was the AAFC 's all @-@ time rushing leader when the league folded after the 1949 season and the Browns were absorbed into the more established National Football League ( NFL ) . The Browns had a 47 – 4 – 3 overall regular @-@ season win @-@ loss @-@ tie record during the AAFC years as Motley rushed for a total of 3 @,@ 024 yards . 
 Like other black players in the 1940s and 1950s , Motley faced racist attitudes both on and off the field . Paul Brown would not tolerate discrimination within the team ; he wanted to win and would not let anything get in his way . Motley and Willis , however , were sometimes stepped on and called names during games . " Sometimes I wanted to just kill some of those guys , and the officials would just stand right there , " Motley said many years later . " They 'd see those guys stepping on us and heard them saying things and just turn their backs . That kind of crap went on for two or three years until they found out what kind of players we were . " Motley and Willis did not travel to one game against the Miami Seahawks in the Browns ' early years after they received threatening letters . Another time in Miami , Motley and Willis were told they were not welcome at the hotel where the team was staying . Brown threatened to relocate the entire team , and the hotel 's management backed down . 
 Attitudes toward race in America began to change after the war , which had caused social and political upheaval and prompted people to think about the future with more ambition and confidence . Although progress was slow and racially motivated hostility continued for many years , the color barrier was broken in all major sports by 1950 . Many of Motley and Willis 's teammates on the Browns were used to playing with black players in college , where teams were integrated across most of the country . The presence of Motley and Willis , meanwhile , contributed to strong attendance at many of the Browns ' early games as large black audiences came to watch them . By one estimate , 10 @,@ 000 black fans saw the Browns play their first game . 
 Aided by Motley 's swiftness and size , the Browns won the NFL championship in 1950 , their first season in the league . In October 1950 , Motley set an NFL record that stood for more than 52 years when he averaged over 17 yards per rush against the Pittsburgh Steelers , with 188 yards on 11 carries . In December 2002 , quarterback Michael Vick of the Atlanta Falcons rushed for 173 yards on 10 carries against the Minnesota Vikings , eclipsing Motley 's average . Motley also had a 69 @-@ yard rushing and 33 @-@ yard receiving touchdowns in the game . While Motley did not factor in the Browns ' championship game win against the Los Angeles Rams , he led the league in rushing with 810 yards in 1950 despite averaging fewer than 12 carries per game . He was a unanimous first @-@ team All @-@ Pro selection . 
 By the 1951 season , Motley started to feel the physical effects of his hard @-@ hitting , up @-@ the @-@ middle running style . He suffered a knee injury in training camp , and he was getting older ; by the time the season was in full swing , he was 31 . Motley only ran for 273 yards and one touchdown that year , an uncharacteristically low total . Despite Motley 's troubles , the Browns made the championship game again after winning the American Conference with an 11 – 1 record . Cleveland , however , lost the title game to the Rams , 24 – 17 . Motley had just five carries and 23 yards . 
 Motley 's knees continued to bother him in 1952 . While he showed occasional signs of his old form that season , it became clear to the Browns ' coaching staff that he was no longer in his prime . Motley finished the year with 444 yards of rushing and 4 @.@ 3 yards per carry , a career low . The Browns finished with an 8 – 4 record but still captured the conference title and secured another spot in the NFL championship game . Motley performed well in that matchup against the Detroit Lions , rushing for 95 yards . The Browns , however , lost 17 – 7 . 
 The 1953 season was no better for Motley , whose effectiveness was again limited by injury . Cleveland finished with an 11 – 1 record and faced Detroit in the championship for the second year in a row . As Motley 's production declined , the Browns relied on Otto Graham 's passing to Lavelli and receiver Ray Renfro , who also lined up as a running back . Motley did not participate in the championship game that year , another loss to the Lions . 
 Motley thought he could come back and play a ninth season in 1954 , and showed up to training camp to prove it . Paul Brown , however , thought otherwise . <unk> by injuries and 34 years old , Motley quit before the season began , after Brown said he would otherwise be cut from the team . " Marion realized that his knee was weak and did not feel that it was coming around , " Brown said at the time . " He was one of the truly fine fullbacks in his prime , the type that comes along once in a lifetime . I certainly never will forget some of his runs and I imagine Cleveland football fans feel the same . " 
 Motley took the 1954 season off and attempted a comeback in 1955 after the Browns , who still had rights to Motley under his contract , traded him to the Pittsburgh Steelers for Ed Modzelewski . In Pittsburgh he played seven games as a linebacker , but the Steelers released him before the end of the season . In his eight years in the AAFC and NFL , Motley had rushed for 4 @,@ 712 yards and averaged 5 @.@ 7 yards per carry . His career rushing average is still an all @-@ time record for running backs . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 After ending his playing career for good , Motley asked Brown about a coaching job with the team . Brown , however , rejected his overtures , saying Motley should instead look for work at a steel mill – the very career football was his ticket out of . Unable to find coaching opportunities in the NFL , he worked as a whisky salesman in the early 1960s . He got occasional scouting assignments from the Browns , but as the Civil Rights movement began to coalesce in 1965 , he issued a statement saying he had been refused a permanent coaching position by the team numerous times . He applied for a coaching job in 1964 , he wrote , and was told that there were no vacancies . The Browns then hired Bob Nussbaumer as an assistant . " When I heard of the hiring of a new assistant , I began to wonder if the full reason is whether or not the time is ripe to hire a Negro coach in Cleveland on the professional level , " he wrote . Art Modell , the Browns ' owner , responded by saying the team filled its coaching positions based on ability and experience , not race . " We are represented by scouts at every major Negro school . And we now have 12 Negroes signed for the 1965 season , " he said . 
 Motley asked Otto Graham for a job with the Washington Redskins when Graham was head coach there in the late 1960s , but he was again turned away . Motley also signed on to coach an all @-@ girl professional football team called the Cleveland Dare Devils in 1967 . By 1969 , the team had only played a few exhibition games as Cleveland theatrical agent Syd Freedman struggled to drum up interest in a women 's league . Later in life , Motley worked for the U.S. postal service in Cleveland , HM Miller Construction Suffield , Ohio , the Ohio Lottery and for the Ohio Department of Youth Services in Akron . He died in 1999 of prostate cancer . 
 = = Honors and legacy = = 
 In 1968 , Motley became the second black player voted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame , located in his hometown of Canton . Having played successfully as a fullback and pass blocker on offense and as a linebacker on defense , he is seen as one of the best all @-@ around players in football history . Blanton Collier , an assistant who took over as the team 's head coach after Paul Brown 's firing in 1963 , said Motley " had no equal as a blocker . He could run with anybody for 30 yards or so . And this man was a great , great linebacker . " 
 Most of Motley 's runs were trap plays up the middle , but he had the speed to run outside . " There 's no telling how much yardage I might have made if I ran as much as some backs do now , " he once said . Running back Jim Brown surpassed Motley 's rushing records in the early 1960s , but many of Motley 's coaches and fellow players regarded Motley as the better player , in part because of his strength as a blocker . " There is no comparison between Jim Brown and Marion Motley , " Graham said at a luncheon in Canton in 1964 . " Motley was the greatest all @-@ around fullback . " 
 In his books The Thinking Man 's Guide to Pro Football and The New Thinking Man 's Guide To Pro Football , football writer Paul Zimmerman of Sports Illustrated called Motley the best player in the history of the sport . He was named to the NFL 's 75th Anniversary All @-@ Time Team in 1994 . 
 = 2003 All @-@ Ireland Senior Football Championship Final = 
 The 2003 All @-@ Ireland Senior Football Championship Final was the 116th final of the All @-@ Ireland Senior Football Championship , a Gaelic football tournament . It was held on 28 September 2003 at Croke Park , Dublin and featured defending champions Armagh against Tyrone . The counties are both in the province of Ulster and share a boundary – this was the first All @-@ Ireland Football Final between sides from the same province . Tyrone won their first title after the match finished 0 – 12 – 0 – 09 in their favour . Many commentators were critical of the game 's entertainment value . 
 = = Competition structure = = 
 Each of the 32 traditional counties of Ireland is represented by a county side . Apart from Kilkenny , they all participated in the 2003 All @-@ Ireland Senior Football Championship . The " overseas counties " of London and New York also participated . Every county in Ireland is located in a province ; London and New York were in Connacht for the purpose of the championship . It began with four provincial championships – knock @-@ out competitions between sides in the same province . The four winners progressed to the All @-@ Ireland quarter @-@ finals . The remaining sides , apart from New York , entered the All @-@ Ireland qualifiers to determine the other four teams to contest the quarter @-@ finals . These were followed by the semi @-@ finals and the All @-@ Ireland final . 
 = = Background = = 
 This was the first final between two counties from the same province ; in this case , Ulster . This was only possible because of the qualifying system introduced in the 2001 championship . Previously , the All @-@ Ireland Championship was only contested by the four winners of the provincial championships , so a final between two counties from the same province was impossible . 
 Tyrone had contested the final in 1986 and 1995 but lost on both occasions , against Kerry and Dublin respectively . Armagh were the defending champions , having won their first title the year previously . They had lost the final in 1953 and 1977 . No side had won consecutive titles since Cork in 1989 and 1990 , while no side from Ulster had done so since Down , who won in 1960 and 1961 . 
 Tyrone had already won the 2003 National Football League and the year 's Ulster Championship , in what was manager Mickey Harte 's first year in charge . 
 = = Routes to the final = = 
 Tyrone progressed directly to the All @-@ Ireland quarter finals as they won the 2003 Ulster Senior Football Championship , through victories against Derry , Antrim and Down . Armagh lost to Monaghan in the preliminary round of the Ulster Championship and therefore entered the All @-@ Ireland qualifiers at the first round . They defeated Waterford , Antrim , Dublin and Limerick to join Tyrone at the quarter @-@ final stage ; the ties were played whilst Tyrone were competing in the latter stages of the Ulster Championship . 
 Sides that had played each other in the provincial championships could not be drawn together in the quarter @-@ finals but none of these restrictions affected Armagh or Tyrone . Tyrone were drawn against Fermanagh , who had unexpectedly defeated Meath and Mayo in the qualifiers , while Armagh were drawn against Leinster championship winners Laois . Tyrone won their game by 1 – 21 ( 24 points ) to 0 – 05 . Armagh defeated Laois by 0 – 15 to 0 – 13 , although the sides were level on points on nine occasions . Even before Donegal 's win over Galway , which meant three of the four semi @-@ finalists were from Ulster , there was intense media speculation about the possibility of an all @-@ Ulster final . 
 Tyrone 's semi @-@ final was against Kerry . Despite their captain Peter Canavan suffering an injury early on , Tyrone won by 0 – 13 to 0 – 06 . Much of the match analysis focused on the manner in which it was played . It was characterised by persistent fouling ( 73 frees were awarded in total ) and Tyrone 's defensive tactics . While many commentators expressed frustration about the quality of the game , some appreciated the skill with which Tyrone employed their tactics . Mickey Harte countered the criticism by saying : " There 's no use in us playing flamboyantly and losing . " 
 Donegal were Armagh 's opposition in an all @-@ Ulster semi @-@ final . Armagh were behind at half time but took advantage of Raymond Sweeney 's dismissal just after the interval to finish with a 2 – 10 ( 16 points ) – 1 – 09 ( 12 points ) victory . Armagh may have had a larger winning margin had they not amassed 21 wides . A death threat was allegedly made against referee Michael Monahan in the closing minutes . 
 = = Pre @-@ match = = 
 Brian White , who had previously refereed two All @-@ Ireland finals , was announced as the match referee in early September . He had once previously refereed a game between Armagh and Tyrone – an Ulster Championship quarter @-@ final replay in 2002 . 
 The final was highly anticipated , particularly as Armagh and Tyrone are neighbouring counties . Police Service of Northern Ireland Deputy Chief Constable Paul Leighton estimated that 40 @,@ 000 fans would travel from Northern Ireland to Dublin , despite each competing county only being allocated approximately 10 @,@ 000 match tickets . Declan Martin , policy director for Dublin Chamber of Commerce , expected the revenue generated in the city as a result of the final to double because two sides from Ulster were involved . 
 Road signs in the Pomeroy area were painted in Tyrone colours leading up to the match . This was condemned by the Roads Service , who said the signs would cost thousands of pounds to replace . In Strabane , a sculpture was covered in Tyrone kit . Ulster Unionist Party councillor for the town , Derek Hussey , responded by saying : " I know it is a unique sporting occasion , an all @-@ British All @-@ Ireland final , but the hysteria that has developed around the whole event is intimidatory to some people . " 
 John Boyle , a native of Armagh and owner of Boylesports , expressed an interest in placing a £ 250 @,@ 000 bet with nine other businessmen , each of whom would contribute £ 25 @,@ 000 , on Armagh winning the championship . The winnings and the stake would have been given to the Armagh squad . GAA president Seán Kelly denounced the idea : " Playing is a voluntary activity and should have nothing to do with gambling . Such bets put too much pressure on the players and are somewhat obscene . " The GAA was also critical of tickets for the final being sold in newspaper columns and on online auction sites . 
 = = Match = = 
 Martin McGuinness of Sinn Féin and Ian Pearson of the Northern Ireland Office were at the match , as were eight family members of victims of the Omagh bombing , who sat in the Hogan Stand as guests of the GAA . Donegal singer Mickey Joe Harte sang Ireland 's national anthem , Amhrán na <unk> , before the match . In the All @-@ Ireland Minor Football Championship Final , held just before the senior game , Laois and Dublin drew , each side scoring 1 – 11 ( 14 points ) . 
 The starting line @-@ ups for the senior game were released several days before the match ; both sides chose to start with the same fifteen players that had started their respective semi @-@ final wins . Peter Canavan had recovered sufficiently from the ankle injury he sustained during Tyrone 's semi @-@ final to captain them . He was the only player in their starting line @-@ up who had played in the county 's last All @-@ Ireland final . Ciaran Gourley , who was also an injury concern for Tyrone , was deemed fit enough to play . Brian McGuigan was suffering from the flu but started . Armagh had no injury concerns and twelve of their starting fifteen had played in the final the previous year – only Paul Hearty , Andy Mallon and Phillip Loughran were debutants , 
 = = = Match report = = = 
 Both sides played defensively which led many commentators to bemoan the poor quality of the match . There were frequent pauses for injuries and accusations of diving . However , some analysts commented on the genuine desire to win both teams displayed . Numerous goal opportunities were missed , most notably by Tyrone , although only a block from Conor Gormley prevented Steven McDonnell from equalising for Armagh in the 68th minute . Tyrone led 0 – 08 – 0 – 04 at half @-@ time ; five of their points were scored by Peter Canavan from frees . He was replaced during the interval due to a relapse of his ankle injury during training , although he did return to the pitch for the final few minutes . Diarmuid Marsden was controversially sent off in the second half following an off @-@ the @-@ ball incident , leaving Armagh with only fourteen players . Marsden had been arguing with Conor Gormley when he was approached by Philip Jordan . Marsden raised his arm and made contact with Jordan , who fell to the ground . Some commentators claimed Jordan was feigning injury to get his opponent sent off . Armagh managed to stay within two points of Tyrone at times but were ultimately unable to catch Tyrone . At the final whistle , Tyrone fans invaded the pitch and remained there for an hour . In his speech after lifting the trophy , Peter Canavan dedicated the victory to every Tyrone team he had played on , the 1986 team ( beaten in the final by Kerry ) and every player who had played on teams without success . He also spoke of his father , who had died over the summer , and of Paul McGirr , who had played alongside many of the Tyrone team before he died in a freak accident aged 18 . 
 = = = Match details = = = 
 References : 
 = = Post @-@ match = = 
 Northern Ireland Secretary of State Paul Murphy congratulated Tyrone on their victory . The Ulster Council of the GAA congratulated both sets of fans , in particular the Tyrone fans who formed a guard of honour for the Armagh players as they returned to their team bus . Joe Kernan , manager of Armagh , also praised the opposition fans : " ... when the final whistle went and all the Tyrone supporters came running past me there wasn 't one bad word said . To me that was great . " 
 Crowds gathered across Tyrone the following day to celebrate the arrival of the Sam Maguire Cup . The players ' homecoming began at <unk> before moving on to Ballygawley and Omagh , where upwards of 40 @,@ 000 fans gathered . Despite their defeat , Armagh were greeted by hundreds of fans on the Louth – Armagh border on their return . 
 Armagh manager Joe Kernan claimed he would have resigned had his side won but defeat encouraged him to continue . He lauded his players for their effort nonetheless , saying : " .. we 've won an All @-@ Ireland , and got back to the final . I think that 's a phenomenal achievement . " He added that he was confident Armagh would win another title in the future . Of the match itself , Kernan said : " I think if Steven McDonnell had got that goal towards the end , even with the man down I think we would have won the game . Big matches hinge on certain things and that was one of them . " McDonnell applauded Conor Gormley 's tackle which prevented him from scoring : " ... I 'd say it was one of the best tackles ever . " 
 The match received extensive media coverage in Northern Ireland , especially from the predominantly nationalist Irish News . The Belfast Telegraph dedicated several pages to the match the following day , including the front and back covers , whereas The News Letter , a largely unionist publication , had sparse coverage , highlighting traditional attitudes to Gaelic games in Northern Ireland . 
 About a week after the final , a family in Coleraine were targeted in an allegedly sectarian attack , thought to be because they were flying a Tyrone GAA flag from their home . 
 Two years later , Peter Canavan 's return from injury as a substitute in the final ten minutes finished 14th in RTÉ 's 2005 series Top 20 GAA Moments . 
 = = = Match controversies = = = 
 Joe Kernan was adamant that Diarmuid Marsden did not deserve to be sent off and criticised players for pretending to be injured during the game . The player himself also disagreed with the decision : " The umpire said I struck him but I just saw the man coming towards me and it was more a case of getting myself out of the way or protecting myself . " He added : " I 'd never been sent off for Armagh before and to be sent off in an All @-@ Ireland final is hard to take . Hopefully I won 't be remembered for that . And I wouldn 't like to end the career on that note . " Kernan and Marsden contested the decision and subsequent ban , but the GAA 's Games Administration Committee upheld the penalty . However , after taking their case to the Central Council , the ban was overturned . 
 = Anne Frank = 
 Annelies Marie Frank ( German pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ] ; Dutch pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ] ; 12 June 1929 – February or March 1945 ) was a German @-@ born diarist and writer . She is one of the most discussed Jewish victims of the Holocaust . Her diary , The Diary of a Young Girl , which documents her life in hiding during the German occupation of the Netherlands in World War II , is one of the world 's most widely known books and has been the basis for several plays and films . 
 Born in the city of Frankfurt , Germany , she lived most of her life in or near Amsterdam , the Netherlands . Born a German national , Frank lost her citizenship in 1941 and thus became stateless . The Frank family moved from Germany to Amsterdam in the early 1930s when the Nazis gained control over Germany . By May 1940 , they were trapped in Amsterdam by the German occupation of the Netherlands . As persecutions of the Jewish population increased in July 1942 , the family went into hiding in some concealed rooms behind a bookcase in the building where Anne 's father worked . In August 1944 , the group was betrayed and transported to concentration camps . Anne and her sister , Margot , were eventually transferred to Bergen @-@ Belsen concentration camp , where they died ( probably of typhus ) in February or March 1945 , just weeks before the camp was liberated in April . 
 Otto Frank , the only survivor of the family , returned to Amsterdam after the war to find that Anne 's diary had been saved by one of the helpers , Miep Gies , and his efforts led to its publication in 1947 . It was translated from its original Dutch version and first published in English in 1952 as The Diary of a Young Girl , and has since been translated into over 60 languages . The diary , which was given to Anne on her thirteenth birthday , chronicles her life from 12 June 1942 until 1 August 1944 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Frank was born Annelies or Anneliese Marie Frank on 12 June 1929 in Frankfurt , Germany , to Otto Frank ( 1889 – 1980 ) and Edith Frank @-@ Holländer ( 1900 – 45 ) . She had an older sister , Margot ( 1926 – 45 ) . The Franks were liberal Jews , and did not observe all of the customs and traditions of Judaism , and lived in an assimilated community of Jewish and non @-@ Jewish citizens of various religions . Edith Frank was the more devout parent , while Otto Frank was interested in scholarly pursuits and had an extensive library ; both parents encouraged the children to read . 
 On 13 March 1933 , elections were held in Frankfurt for the municipal council , and Adolf Hitler 's Nazi Party won . Antisemitic demonstrations occurred almost immediately , and the Franks began to fear what would happen to them if they remained in Germany . Later that year , Edith and the children went to Aachen , where they stayed with Edith 's mother , Rosa Holländer . Otto Frank remained in Frankfurt , but after receiving an offer to start a company in Amsterdam , he moved there to organize the business and to arrange accommodations for his family . The Franks were among 300 @,@ 000 Jews who fled Germany between 1933 and 1939 . 
 Otto Frank began working at the Opekta Works , a company that sold fruit extract pectin , and found an apartment on the <unk> ( <unk> Square ) in the <unk> neighborhood of Amsterdam . By February 1934 , Edith and the children had arrived in Amsterdam , and the two girls were enrolled in school — Margot in public school and Anne in a Montessori school . Margot demonstrated ability in arithmetic , and Anne showed aptitude for reading and writing . Her friend <unk> Goslar later recalled that from early childhood , Frank frequently wrote , although she shielded her work with her hands and refused to discuss the content of her writing . The Frank sisters had highly distinct personalities , Margot being well @-@ mannered , reserved , and studious , while Anne was outspoken , energetic , and extroverted . 
 In 1938 , Otto Frank started a second company , Pectacon , which was a wholesaler of herbs , pickling salts , and mixed spices , used in the production of sausages . Hermann van Pels was employed by Pectacon as an advisor about spices . A Jewish butcher , he had fled Osnabrück in Germany with his family . In 1939 , Edith 's mother came to live with the Franks , and remained with them until her death in January 1942 . 
 In May 1940 , Germany invaded the Netherlands , and the occupation government began to persecute Jews by the implementation of restrictive and discriminatory laws ; mandatory registration and segregation soon followed . Otto Frank tried to arrange for the family to emigrate to the United States – the only destination that seemed to him to be viable – but this possibility was blocked from June 1941 , as the US government was concerned that people with close relatives still in Germany could be blackmailed into becoming Nazi spies . The Frank sisters were excelling in their studies and had many friends , but with the introduction of a decree that Jews could attend only Jewish schools , they were enrolled at the Jewish Lyceum . Anne became a friend of Jacqueline van <unk> in the Lyceum . In April 1941 , Otto Frank took action to prevent Pectacon from being confiscated as a Jewish @-@ owned business . He transferred his shares in Pectacon to Johannes Kleiman and resigned as director . The company was liquidated and all assets transferred to Gies and Company , headed by Jan Gies . In December 1941 , Frank followed a similar process to save Opekta . The businesses continued with little obvious change and their survival allowed Frank to earn a minimal income , but sufficient to provide for his family . 
 = = Time period chronicled in the diary = = 
 = = = Before going into hiding = = = 
 For her thirteenth birthday on 12 June 1942 , Anne Frank received a book she had shown her father in a shop window a few days earlier . Although it was an autograph book , bound with red @-@ and @-@ white checkered cloth and with a small lock on the front , Frank decided she would use it as a diary , and she began writing in it almost immediately . While many of her early entries relate the mundane aspects of her life , she also discusses some of the changes that had taken place in the Netherlands since the German occupation . In her entry dated 20 June 1942 , she lists many of the restrictions that had been placed upon the lives of the Dutch Jewish population , and also notes her sorrow at the death of her grandmother earlier in the year . Frank dreamed about becoming an actress . She loved watching movies , but the Dutch Jews were forbidden access to movie theaters from 8 January 1941 onwards . 
 In July 1942 , Margot Frank received a call @-@ up notice from the <unk> für <unk> <unk> ( Central Office for Jewish Emigration ) ordering her to report for relocation to a work camp . Otto Frank told his family that they would go into hiding in rooms above and behind Opekta 's premises on the <unk> , a street along one of Amsterdam 's canals , where some of his most trusted employees would help them . The call @-@ up notice forced them to relocate several weeks earlier than had been anticipated . 
 Shortly before going into hiding , Anne gave her friend and neighbor , <unk> <unk> , a book , a tea set , a tin of marbles , and the family cat for safekeeping . As the Associated Press reports : " ' I 'm worried about my marbles , because I 'm scared they might fall into the wrong hands , ' <unk> said Anne told her . ' Could you keep them for me for a little while ? ' " 
 = = = Life in the Achterhuis = = = 
 On the morning of Monday , 6 July 1942 , the family moved into their hiding place , a secret annex . Their apartment was left in a state of disarray to create the impression that they had left suddenly , and Otto Frank left a note that hinted they were going to Switzerland . The need for secrecy forced them to leave behind Anne 's cat , <unk> . As Jews were not allowed to use public transport , they walked several kilometers from their home , with each of them wearing several layers of clothing as they did not dare be seen carrying luggage . The Achterhuis ( a Dutch word denoting the rear part of a house , translated as the " Secret Annexe " in English editions of the diary ) was a three @-@ story space entered from a landing above the Opekta offices . Two small rooms , with an adjoining bathroom and toilet , were on the first level , and above that a larger open room , with a small room beside it . From this smaller room , a ladder led to the attic . The door to the Achterhuis was later covered by a bookcase to ensure it remained undiscovered . The main building , situated a block from the <unk> , was nondescript , old , and typical of buildings in the western quarters of Amsterdam . 
 Victor Kugler , Johannes Kleiman , Miep Gies , and Bep Voskuijl were the only employees who knew of the people in hiding . Along with Gies ' husband Jan Gies and Voskuijl 's father Johannes Hendrik Voskuijl , they were the " helpers " for the duration of their confinement . The only connection between the outside world and the occupants of the house , they kept the occupants informed of war news and political developments . They catered to all of their needs , ensured their safety , and supplied them with food , a task that grew more difficult with the passage of time . Frank wrote of their dedication and of their efforts to boost morale within the household during the most dangerous of times . All were aware that , if caught , they could face the death penalty for sheltering Jews . 
 On 13 July 1942 , the Franks were joined by the van Pels family : Hermann , Auguste , and 16 @-@ year @-@ old Peter , and then in November by Fritz Pfeffer , a dentist and friend of the family . Frank wrote of her pleasure at having new people to talk to , but tensions quickly developed within the group forced to live in such confined conditions . After sharing her room with Pfeffer , she found him to be insufferable and resented his intrusion , and she clashed with Auguste van Pels , whom she regarded as foolish . She regarded Hermann van Pels and Fritz Pfeffer as selfish , particularly in regard to the amount of food they consumed . Some time later , after first dismissing the shy and awkward Peter van Pels , she recognised a kinship with him and the two entered a romance . She received her first kiss from him , but her infatuation with him began to wane as she questioned whether her feelings for him were genuine , or resulted from their shared confinement . Anne Frank formed a close bond with each of the helpers , and Otto Frank later recalled that she had anticipated their daily visits with impatient enthusiasm . He observed that Anne 's closest friendship was with Bep Voskuijl , " the young typist ... the two of them often stood whispering in the corner . " 
 = = = The young diarist = = = 
 In her writing , Frank examined her relationships with the members of her family , and the strong differences in each of their personalities . She considered herself to be closest emotionally to her father , who later commented , " I got on better with Anne than with Margot , who was more attached to her mother . The reason for that may have been that Margot rarely showed her feelings and didn 't need as much support because she didn 't suffer from mood swings as much as Anne did . " The Frank sisters formed a closer relationship than had existed before they went into hiding , although Anne sometimes expressed jealousy towards Margot , particularly when members of the household criticised Anne for lacking Margot 's gentle and placid nature . As Anne began to mature , the sisters were able to confide in each other . In her entry of 12 January 1944 , Frank wrote , " Margot 's much nicer ... She 's not nearly so catty these days and is becoming a real friend . She no longer thinks of me as a little baby who doesn 't count . " 
 Frank frequently wrote of her difficult relationship with her mother , and of her ambivalence towards her . On 7 November 1942 she described her " contempt " for her mother and her inability to " confront her with her carelessness , her sarcasm and her hard @-@ heartedness , " before concluding , " She 's not a mother to me . " Later , as she revised her diary , Frank felt ashamed of her harsh attitude , writing : " Anne , is it really you who mentioned hate , oh Anne , how could you ? " She came to understand that their differences resulted from misunderstandings that were as much her fault as her mother 's , and saw that she had added unnecessarily to her mother 's suffering . With this realization , Frank began to treat her mother with a degree of tolerance and respect . 
 The Frank sisters each hoped to return to school as soon as they were able , and continued with their studies while in hiding . Margot took a shorthand course by correspondence in Bep Voskuijl 's name and received high marks . Most of Anne 's time was spent reading and studying , and she regularly wrote and edited her diary entries . In addition to providing a narrative of events as they occurred , she wrote about her feelings , beliefs , and ambitions , subjects she felt she could not discuss with anyone . As her confidence in her writing grew , and as she began to mature , she wrote of more abstract subjects such as her belief in God , and how she defined human nature . 
 Frank aspired to become a journalist , writing in her diary on Wednesday , 5 April 1944 : 
 I finally realized that I must do my schoolwork to keep from being ignorant , to get on in life , to become a journalist , because that 's what I want ! I know I can write ... , but it remains to be seen whether I really have talent ... 
 And if I don 't have the talent to write books or newspaper articles , I can always write for myself . But I want to achieve more than that . I can 't imagine living like Mother , Mrs. van Daan and all the women who go about their work and are then forgotten . I need to have something besides a husband and children to devote myself to ! ... 
 I want to be useful or bring enjoyment to all people , even those I 've never met . I want to go on living even after my death ! And that 's why I 'm so grateful to God for having given me this gift , which I can use to develop myself and to express all that 's inside me ! 
 When I write I can shake off all my cares . My sorrow disappears , my spirits are revived ! But , and that 's a big question , will I ever be able to write something great , will I ever become a journalist or a writer ? 
 She continued writing regularly until her last entry of 1 August 1944 . 
 = = Arrest = = 
 On the morning of 4 August 1944 , following a tip from an informer who has never been identified , the Achterhuis was stormed by a group of German uniformed police ( <unk> Polizei ) led by SS @-@ Oberscharführer Karl Silberbauer of the Sicherheitsdienst . The Franks , van <unk> , and Pfeffer were taken to RSHA headquarters , where they were interrogated and held overnight . On 5 August they were transferred to the Huis van <unk> ( House of Detention ) , an overcrowded prison on the <unk> . Two days later they were transported to the Westerbork transit camp , through which by that time more than 100 @,@ 000 Jews , mostly Dutch and German , had passed . Having been arrested in hiding , they were considered criminals and sent to the Punishment Barracks for hard labor . 
 Victor Kugler and Johannes Kleiman were arrested and jailed at the penal camp for enemies of the regime at <unk> . Kleiman was released after seven weeks , but Kugler was held in various work camps until the war 's end . Miep Gies and Bep Voskuijl were questioned and threatened by the Security Police but not detained . They returned to the Achterhuis the following day , and found Anne 's papers strewn on the floor . They collected them , as well as several family photograph albums , and Gies resolved to return them to Anne after the war . On 7 August 1944 , Gies attempted to facilitate the release of the prisoners by confronting Silberbauer and offering him money to intervene , but he refused . 
 Although there has been persistent speculation , the source of the information that led the authorities to raid the Achterhuis has never been identified . Signs of the building being occupied after office hours , such as open curtains and accidental noises , may have been noticed and discussed by people on the outside . Reports of such events may have eventually come to the attention of the authorities without there being a specific or intentional informant . Night watchman Martin <unk> and an unidentified police officer investigated a burglary at the premises in April 1944 and came across the bookcase concealing the secret door . <unk> Ahlers , a member of the National Socialist Movement in the Netherlands ( NSB ) , was suspected of being the informant by Carol Ann Lee , biographer of Otto Frank . Another suspect is stockroom manager Willem van <unk> . The Annex occupants did not trust him , as he seemed inquisitive regarding people entering the stockroom after hours . He once unexpectedly asked the employees whether there had previously been a Mr. Frank at the office . Lena Hartog was suspected of being the informant by Anne Frank 's biographer Melissa Müller . Several of these suspects knew one another and might have worked in collaboration . While virtually everyone connected with the betrayal was interrogated after the war , no one was definitively identified as being the informant . 
 In 2015 , Flemish journalist Jeroen de Bruyn and Joop van Wijk , Bep Voskuijl ’ s youngest son , wrote a biography , Bep Voskuijl , het <unk> <unk> : een <unk> van de <unk> helper van het Achterhuis ( Bep Voskuijl , the Silence is Over : A Biography of the Youngest Helper of the Secret Annex ) , in which they alleged that Bep 's younger sister Nelly ( 1923 – 2001 ) could have betrayed the Frank family . According to the book , Bep 's sister <unk> and her fiance <unk> <unk> recollected Nelly telephoning the Gestapo on the morning of 4 August 1944 . Nelly had been critical of Bep and their father , Johannes Voskuijl , helping the Jews . ( Johannes was the one who constructed the bookcase covering the entrance to the hiding place . ) Nelly was a Nazi collaborator between 1942 and 1946 . Karl Silberbauer , the SS officer who received the phone call and made the arrest , was documented to say that the informer had " the voice of a young woman " . 
 = = Deportation and death = = 
 On 3 September 1944 , the group was deported on what would be the last transport from Westerbork to the Auschwitz concentration camp and arrived after a three @-@ day journey . On the same train was Bloeme Evers @-@ Emden , an Amsterdam native who had befriended Margot and Anne in the Jewish Lyceum in 1941 . Bloeme saw Anne , Margot , and their mother regularly in Auschwitz , and was interviewed for her remembrances of the Frank women in Auschwitz in the television documentary The Last Seven Months of Anne Frank ( 1988 ) by Dutch filmmaker Willy <unk> and the BBC documentary Anne Frank Remembered ( 1995 ) . 
 Upon arrival at Auschwitz , the SS forcibly separated the men from the women and children , and Otto Frank was wrenched from his family . Those deemed able to work were admitted into the camp , and those deemed unfit for labor were immediately killed . Of the 1 @,@ 019 passengers , 549 — including all children younger than 15 — were sent directly to the gas chambers . Anne Frank , who had turned 15 three months earlier , was one of the youngest people to be spared from her transport . She was soon made aware that most people were gassed upon arrival and never learned that the entire group from the Achterhuis had survived this selection . She reasoned that her father , in his mid @-@ fifties and not particularly robust , had been killed immediately after they were separated . 
 With the other females not selected for immediate death , Frank was forced to strip naked to be disinfected , had her head shaved , and was tattooed with an identifying number on her arm . By day , the women were used as slave labour and Frank was forced to haul rocks and dig rolls of sod ; by night , they were crammed into overcrowded barracks . Some witnesses later testified Frank became withdrawn and tearful when she saw children being led to the gas chambers ; others reported that more often she displayed strength and courage . Her gregarious and confident nature allowed her to obtain extra bread rations for her mother , sister , and herself . Disease was rampant ; before long , Frank 's skin became badly infected by scabies . The Frank sisters were moved into an infirmary , which was in a state of constant darkness and infested with rats and mice . Edith Frank stopped eating , saving every morsel of food for her daughters and passing her rations to them through a hole she made at the bottom of the infirmary wall . 
 In October 1944 , the Frank women were slated to join a transport to the Liebau labour camp in Upper Silesia . Bloeme Evers @-@ Emden was slated to be on this transport , but Anne was prohibited from going because she had developed scabies , and her mother and sister opted to stay with her . Bloeme went on without them . 
 On 28 October , selections began for women to be relocated to Bergen @-@ Belsen . More than 8 @,@ 000 women , including Anne and Margot Frank , and Auguste van Pels , were transported . Edith Frank was left behind and later died from starvation . Tents were erected at Bergen @-@ Belsen to accommodate the influx of prisoners , and as the population rose , the death toll due to disease increased rapidly . Frank was briefly reunited with two friends , <unk> Goslar and Nanette Blitz , who were confined in another section of the camp . Goslar and Blitz survived the war , and later discussed the brief conversations they had conducted with Frank through a fence . Blitz described Anne as bald , emaciated , and shivering . Goslar noted Auguste van Pels was with Anne and Margot Frank , and was caring for Margot , who was severely ill . Neither of them saw Margot , as she was too weak to leave her bunk . Anne told Blitz and Goslar she believed her parents were dead , and for that reason she did not wish to live any longer . Goslar later estimated their meetings had taken place in late January or early February 1945 . 
 In early 1945 , a typhus epidemic spread through the camp , killing 17 @,@ 000 prisoners . Other diseases , including typhoid fever , were rampant . Due to these chaotic conditions , it is not possible to say what ultimately caused Anne 's death . Witnesses later testified Margot fell from her bunk in her weakened state and was killed by the shock . Anne died a few days after Margot . The exact dates of Margot and Anne 's deaths were not recorded . It was long thought that their deaths occurred only a few weeks before British soldiers liberated the camp on 15 April 1945 , but new research in 2015 indicated that they may have died as early as February of that year . Among other evidence , witnesses recalled that the Franks displayed typhus symptoms by 7 February , and Dutch health authorities reported that most untreated typhus victims died within 12 days of their first symptoms . After liberation , the camp was burned in an effort to prevent further spread of disease ; the sisters were buried in a mass grave at an unknown location . 
 After the war , it was estimated that only 5 @,@ 000 of the 107 @,@ 000 Jews deported from the Netherlands between 1942 and 1944 survived . An estimated 30 @,@ 000 Jews remained in the Netherlands , with many people aided by the Dutch underground . Approximately two @-@ thirds of this group survived the war . 
 Otto Frank survived his internment in Auschwitz . After the war ended , he returned to Amsterdam , where he was sheltered by Jan and Miep Gies as he attempted to locate his family . He learned of the death of his wife , Edith , in Auschwitz , but remained hopeful that his daughters had survived . After several weeks , he discovered Margot and Anne had also died . He attempted to determine the fates of his daughters ' friends and learned many had been murdered . Susanne ' ' Sanne ' ' <unk> , often mentioned in Anne 's diary , had been gassed along with her parents ; her sister , Barbara , a close friend of Margot 's , had survived . Several of the Frank sisters ' school friends had survived , as had the extended families of Otto and Edith Frank , as they had fled Germany during the mid @-@ 1930s , with individual family members settling in Switzerland , the United Kingdom , and the United States . 
 = = The Diary of a Young Girl = = 
 = = = Publication = = = 
 In July 1945 , after the Red Cross confirmed the deaths of the Frank sisters , Miep Gies gave Otto Frank the diary and a bundle of loose notes that she had saved in the hope of returning them to Anne . Otto Frank later commented that he had not realized Anne had kept such an accurate and well @-@ written record of their time in hiding . In his memoir , he described the painful process of reading the diary , recognizing the events described and recalling that he had already heard some of the more amusing episodes read aloud by his daughter . He saw for the first time the more private side of his daughter and those sections of the diary she had not discussed with anyone , noting , " For me it was a revelation ... I had no idea of the depth of her thoughts and feelings ... She had kept all these feelings to herself " . Moved by her repeated wish to be an author , he began to consider having it published . 
 Frank 's diary began as a private expression of her thoughts ; she wrote several times that she would never allow anyone to read it . She candidly described her life , her family and companions , and their situation , while beginning to recognise her ambition to write fiction for publication . In March 1944 , she heard a radio broadcast by Gerrit Bolkestein — a member of the Dutch government in exile , based in London — who said that when the war ended , he would create a public record of the Dutch people 's oppression under German occupation . He mentioned the publication of letters and diaries , and Frank decided to submit her work when the time came . She began editing her writing , removing some sections and rewriting others , with a view to publication . Her original notebook was supplemented by additional notebooks and loose @-@ leaf sheets of paper . She created pseudonyms for the members of the household and the helpers . The van Pels family became Hermann , Petronella , and Peter van Daan , and Fritz Pfeffer became Albert <unk> . In this edited version , she addressed each entry to " Kitty , " a fictional character in Cissy van <unk> 's Joop ter <unk> novels that Anne enjoyed reading . Otto Frank used her original diary , known as " version A " , and her edited version , known as " version B " , to produce the first version for publication . He removed certain passages , most notably those in which Anne is critical of her parents ( especially her mother ) , and sections that discussed Frank 's growing sexuality . Although he restored the true identities of his own family , he retained all of the other pseudonyms . 
 Otto Frank gave the diary to the historian Annie Romein @-@ <unk> , who tried unsuccessfully to have it published . She then gave it to her husband Jan Romein , who wrote an article about it , titled " <unk> " ( " A Child 's Voice " ) , which was published in the newspaper Het <unk> on 3 April 1946 . He wrote that the diary " stammered out in a child 's voice , embodies all the hideousness of fascism , more so than all the evidence at Nuremberg put together . " His article attracted attention from publishers , and the diary was published in the Netherlands as Het Achterhuis ( The Annex ) in 1947 , followed by five more printings by 1950 . 
 It was first published in Germany and France in 1950 , and after being rejected by several publishers , was first published in the United Kingdom in 1952 . The first American edition , published in 1952 under the title Anne Frank : The Diary of a Young Girl , was positively reviewed . The book was successful in France , Germany , and the United States , but in the United Kingdom it failed to attract an audience and by 1953 was out of print . Its most noteworthy success was in Japan , where it received critical acclaim and sold more than 100 @,@ 000 copies in its first edition . In Japan , Anne Frank quickly was identified as an important cultural figure who represented the destruction of youth during the war . 
 A play by Frances Goodrich and Albert Hackett based upon the diary premiered in New York City on 5 October 1955 , and later won a Pulitzer Prize for Drama . It was followed by the 1959 movie The Diary of Anne Frank , which was a critical and commercial success . Biographer Melissa Müller later wrote that the dramatization had " contributed greatly to the romanticizing , sentimentalizing and universalizing of Anne 's story . " Over the years the popularity of the diary grew , and in many schools , particularly in the United States , it was included as part of the curriculum , introducing Anne Frank to new generations of readers . 
 In 1986 the Dutch Institute for War Documentation published the " Critical Edition " of the diary . It includes comparisons from all known versions , both edited and unedited . It includes discussion asserting the diary 's authentication , as well as additional historical information relating to the family and the diary itself . 
 Cornelis Suijk — a former director of the Anne Frank Foundation and president of the U.S. Center for Holocaust Education Foundation — announced in 1999 that he was in the possession of five pages that had been removed by Otto Frank from the diary prior to publication ; Suijk claimed that Otto Frank gave these pages to him shortly before his death in 1980 . The missing diary entries contain critical remarks by Anne Frank about her parents ' strained marriage and discuss Frank 's lack of affection for her mother . Some controversy ensued when Suijk claimed publishing rights over the five pages ; he intended to sell them to raise money for his foundation . The Netherlands Institute for War Documentation , the formal owner of the manuscript , demanded the pages be handed over . In 2000 the Dutch Ministry of Education , Culture and Science agreed to donate US $ 300 @,@ 000 to Suijk 's Foundation , and the pages were returned in 2001 . Since then , they have been included in new editions of the diary . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The diary has been praised for its literary merits . Commenting on Anne Frank 's writing style , the dramatist Meyer Levin commended Frank for " sustaining the tension of a well @-@ constructed novel " , and was so impressed by the quality of her work that he collaborated with Otto Frank on a dramatization of the diary shortly after its publication . Meyer became obsessed with Anne Frank , which he wrote about in his autobiography The Obsession . The poet John Berryman called the book a unique depiction , not merely of adolescence but of the " conversion of a child into a person as it is happening in a precise , confident , economical style stunning in its honesty " . 
 In her introduction to the diary 's first American edition , Eleanor Roosevelt described it as " one of the wisest and most moving commentaries on war and its impact on human beings that I have ever read . " John F. Kennedy discussed Anne Frank in a 1961 speech , and said , " Of all the multitudes who throughout history have spoken for human dignity in times of great suffering and loss , no voice is more compelling than that of Anne Frank . " In the same year , the Soviet writer Ilya Ehrenburg wrote of her : " one voice speaks for six million — the voice not of a sage or a poet but of an ordinary little girl . " 
 As Anne Frank 's stature as both a writer and humanist has grown , she has been discussed specifically as a symbol of the Holocaust and more broadly as a representative of persecution . Hillary Rodham Clinton , in her acceptance speech for an Elie Wiesel Humanitarian Award in 1994 , read from Anne Frank 's diary and spoke of her " awakening us to the folly of indifference and the terrible toll it takes on our young , " which Clinton related to contemporary events in Sarajevo , Somalia and Rwanda . After receiving a humanitarian award from the Anne Frank Foundation in 1994 , Nelson Mandela addressed a crowd in Johannesburg , saying he had read Anne Frank 's diary while in prison and " derived much encouragement from it . " He likened her struggle against Nazism to his struggle against apartheid , drawing a parallel between the two philosophies : " Because these beliefs are patently false , and because they were , and will always be , challenged by the likes of Anne Frank , they are bound to fail . " Also in 1994 , Václav Havel said " Anne Frank 's legacy is very much alive and it can address us fully " in relation to the political and social changes occurring at the time in former Eastern Bloc countries . 
 Primo Levi suggested Anne Frank is frequently identified as a single representative of the millions of people who suffered and died as she did because " One single Anne Frank moves us more than the countless others who suffered just as she did but whose faces have remained in the shadows . Perhaps it is better that way ; if we were capable of taking in all the suffering of all those people , we would not be able to live . " In her closing message in Müller 's biography of Anne Frank , Miep Gies expressed a similar thought , though she attempted to dispel what she felt was a growing misconception that " Anne symbolises the six million victims of the Holocaust " , writing : " Anne 's life and death were her own individual fate , an individual fate that happened six million times over . Anne cannot , and should not , stand for the many individuals whom the Nazis robbed of their lives ... But her fate helps us grasp the immense loss the world suffered because of the Holocaust . " 
 Otto Frank spent the remainder of his life as custodian of his daughter 's legacy , saying , " It 's a strange role . In the normal family relationship , it is the child of the famous parent who has the honor and the burden of continuing the task . In my case the role is reversed . " He recalled his publisher 's explaining why he thought the diary has been so widely read , with the comment , " he said that the diary encompasses so many areas of life that each reader can find something that moves him personally " . Simon Wiesenthal expressed a similar sentiment when he said that the diary had raised more widespread awareness of the Holocaust than had been achieved during the Nuremberg Trials , because " people identified with this child . This was the impact of the Holocaust , this was a family like my family , like your family and so you could understand this . " 
 In June 1999 Time magazine published a special edition titled " Time 100 : The Most Important People of the Century " . Anne Frank was selected as one of the " Heroes & Icons " , and the writer , Roger Rosenblatt , described her legacy with the comment , " The passions the book ignites suggest that everyone owns Anne Frank , that she has risen above the Holocaust , Judaism , girlhood and even goodness and become a totemic figure of the modern world — the moral individual mind beset by the machinery of destruction , insisting on the right to live and question and hope for the future of human beings . " He notes that while her courage and pragmatism are admired , her ability to analyze herself and the quality of her writing are the key components of her appeal . He writes , " The reason for her immortality was basically literary . She was an extraordinarily good writer , for any age , and the quality of her work seemed a direct result of a ruthlessly honest disposition . " 
 = = = Denials of authenticity and legal action = = = 
 After the diary became widely known in the late 1950s , various allegations against the veracity of the diary and / or its contents appeared , with the earliest published criticisms occurring in Sweden and Norway . 
 In 1957 , Fria <unk> ( " Free Words " ) , the magazine of the Swedish <unk> organisation National League of Sweden published an article by Danish author and critic Harald Nielsen , who had previously written antisemitic articles about the Danish @-@ Jewish author Georg Brandes . Among other things , the article claimed that the diary had been written by Meyer Levin . 
 In 1958 , at a performance of The Diary of Anne Frank in Vienna , Simon Wiesenthal was challenged by a group of protesters who asserted that Anne Frank had never existed , and who challenged Wiesenthal to prove her existence by finding the man who had arrested her . Wiesenthal indeed began searching for Karl Silberbauer and found him in 1963 . When interviewed , Silberbauer admitted his role , and identified Anne Frank from a photograph as one of the people arrested . Silberbauer provided a full account of events , even recalling emptying a briefcase full of papers onto the floor . His statement corroborated the version of events that had previously been presented by witnesses such as Otto Frank . 
 Opponents of the diary continued to express the view that it was not written by a teen , but was a hoax , with Otto Frank being accused of fraud . 
 In 1959 , Otto Frank took legal action in Lübeck against Lothar Stielau , a school teacher and former Hitler Youth member who published a school paper that described the diary as " a forgery . " The complaint was extended to include Heinrich <unk> , who wrote a letter in support of Stielau , which was published in a Lübeck newspaper . The court examined the diary in 1960 and authenticated the handwriting as matching that in letters known to have been written by Anne Frank . They declared the diary to be genuine . Stielau recanted his earlier statement , and Otto Frank did not pursue the case any further . 
 In 1976 , Otto Frank took action against Heinz Roth of Frankfurt , who published pamphlets stating that the diary was " a forgery . " The judge ruled that if Roth was to publish any further statements he would be subjected to a fine of 500 @,@ 000 German marks and a six @-@ month jail sentence . Roth appealed against the court 's decision . He died in 1978 , and after a year his appeal was rejected . 
 Otto Frank mounted a lawsuit in 1976 against Ernst Römer , who distributed a pamphlet titled " The Diary of Anne Frank , Bestseller , A Lie " . When a man named Edgar Geiss distributed the same pamphlet in the courtroom , he too was prosecuted . Römer was fined 1 @,@ 500 <unk> , and Geiss was sentenced to six months imprisonment . The sentence of Geiss was reduced on appeal , and the case was eventually dropped following a subsequent appeal because the statutory limitation for libel had expired . 
 With Otto Frank 's death in 1980 , the original diary , including letters and loose sheets , were willed to the Dutch Institute for War Documentation , who commissioned a forensic study of the diary through the Netherlands Ministry of Justice in 1986 . They examined the handwriting against known examples and found that they matched . They determined that the paper , glue , and ink were readily available during the time the diary was said to have been written . They concluded that the diary is authentic , and their findings were published in what has become known as the " Critical Edition " of the diary . On 23 March 1990 , the Hamburg Regional Court confirmed the diary 's authenticity . 
 In 1991 , Holocaust deniers Robert Faurisson and Siegfried Verbeke produced a booklet titled The Diary of Anne Frank : A Critical Approach , in which they revived the allegation that Otto Frank wrote the diary . <unk> evidence , as before , included several contradictions in the diary , that the prose style and handwriting were not those of a teenager , and that hiding in the Achterhuis would have been impossible . In December 1993 the Anne Frank House in Amsterdam and the Anne Frank Funds in Basel filed a civil lawsuit to prohibit further distribution of Faurisson and Verbeke 's booklet in the Netherlands . On 9 December 1998 the Amsterdam District Court ruled in favour of the claimants , forbade any further denial of the authenticity of the diary and unsolicited distribution of publications to that effect , and imposed a penalty of 25 @,@ 000 guilders per infringement . 
 = = = Complaints regarding unabridged version = = = 
 An unabridged edition of Anne Frank 's work was published in 1995 . This version included Anne 's description of her exploration of her own genitalia and her puzzlement regarding sex and childbirth , a passage that had previously been edited out by Otto Frank . When Gail <unk> of Northville , Michigan , learned in March 2013 that her daughter 's seventh @-@ grade class was using this edition of the diary in class , she filed a complaint with the school district asking that an edited version be used instead . <unk> , who described the passage as pornographic , said the school should have obtained prior approval from parents before assigning the book . In 2010 , school officials in Culpeper County , Virginia , stopped assigning the unabridged version after similar complaints were lodged . 
 Emer O 'Toole of The Guardian noted that " we live in a society in which young women are taught to be ashamed of the changes that their bodies undergo at puberty – to be secretive about them , and even to pretend that they don 't exist . " Clem Bastow of Daily Life found the complaint " infuriating " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 On 3 May 1957 , a group of citizens , including Otto Frank , established the Anne Frank Stichting in an effort to rescue the <unk> building from demolition and to make it accessible to the public . The Anne Frank House opened on 3 May 1960 . It consists of the Opekta warehouse and offices and the Achterhuis , all unfurnished so that visitors can walk freely through the rooms . Some personal relics of the former occupants remain , such as movie star photographs glued by Anne to a wall , a section of wallpaper on which Otto Frank marked the height of his growing daughters , and a map on the wall where he recorded the advance of the Allied Forces , all now protected behind Perspex sheets . From the small room which was once home to Peter van Pels , a walkway connects the building to its neighbours , also purchased by the Foundation . These other buildings are used to house the diary , as well as rotating exhibits that chronicle aspects of the Holocaust and more contemporary examinations of racial intolerance around the world . One of Amsterdam 's main tourist attractions , it received a record 965 @,@ 000 visitors in 2005 . The House provides information via the internet and offers exhibitions that in 2005 travelled to 32 countries in Europe , Asia , North America , and South America . 
 In 1963 , Otto Frank and his second wife , Elfriede <unk> @-@ <unk> , set up the Anne Frank Fonds as a charitable foundation , based in Basel , Switzerland . The Fonds raises money to donate to causes " as it sees fit " . Upon his death , Otto willed the diary 's copyright to the Fonds , on the provision that the first 80 @,@ 000 Swiss francs in income each year was to be distributed to his heirs . Any income above this figure is to be retained by the Fonds for use on whatever projects its administrators considered worthy . It provides funding for the medical treatment of the Righteous among the Nations on a yearly basis . The Fonds aims to educate young people against racism , and loaned some of Anne Frank 's papers to the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington for an exhibition in 2003 . Its annual report that year outlined its efforts to contribute on a global level , with support for projects in Germany , Israel , India , Switzerland , the United Kingdom , and the United States . 
 In 1997 , the Anne Frank Educational Centre ( <unk> Anne Frank ) was opened in the <unk> neighborhood of Frankfurt , where Frank lived with her family until 1934 . The Centre is " a place where both young people and adults can learn about the history of National Socialism and discuss its relevance to today . " 
 The <unk> apartment , where the Frank family lived from 1933 until 1942 , remained privately owned until the 2000s . After becoming the focus of a television documentary , the building — in a serious state of disrepair — was purchased by a Dutch housing corporation . Aided by photographs taken by the Frank family and descriptions in letters written by Anne Frank , it was restored to its 1930s appearance . <unk> da Silva of the Anne Frank House and Frank 's cousin , Bernhard " Buddy " Elias , contributed to the restoration project . It opened in 2005 . Each year , a writer who is unable to write freely in his or her own country is selected for a year @-@ long tenancy , during which they reside and write in the apartment . The first writer selected was the Algerian novelist and poet El @-@ Mahdi <unk> . 
 In June 2007 , " Buddy " Elias donated some 25 @,@ 000 family documents to the Anne Frank House . Among the artifacts are Frank family photographs taken in Germany and the Netherlands and the letter Otto Frank sent his mother in 1945 , informing her that his wife and daughters had perished in Nazi concentration camps . 
 In November 2007 , the Anne Frank tree — by then infected with a fungal disease affecting the tree trunk — was scheduled to be cut down to prevent it from falling on the surrounding buildings . Dutch economist Arnold <unk> said about the tree : " This is not just any tree . The Anne Frank tree is bound up with the persecution of the Jews . " The Tree Foundation , a group of tree conservationists , started a civil case to stop the felling of the horse chestnut , which received international media attention . A Dutch court ordered city officials and conservationists to explore alternatives and come to a solution . The parties built a steel construction that was expected to prolong the life of the tree up to 15 years . However , it was only three years later , on 23 August 2010 , that gale @-@ force winds blew down the tree . Eleven saplings from the tree were distributed to museums , schools , parks and Holocaust remembrance centers through a project led by the Anne Frank Center USA . The first sapling was planted in April 2013 at The Children 's Museum of Indianapolis . Saplings were also sent to a school in Little Rock , Arkansas that was the scene of a desegregation battle , Liberty Park ( Manhattan ) , which honors victims of the September 11 attacks , and other sites in the United States . 
 Over the years , several films about Anne Frank appeared . Her life and writings have inspired a diverse group of artists and social commentators to make reference to her in literature , popular music , television , and other media . These include The Anne Frank Ballet by Adam Darius , first performed in 1959 , and the choral work Annelies , first performed in 2005 . The only known footage of the real Anne Frank comes from a 1941 silent film recorded for her newlywed next @-@ door neighbor . She is seen leaning out of a second @-@ floor window in an attempt to better view the bride and groom . The couple , who survived the war , gave the film to the Anne Frank House . 
 In 1999 , Time named Anne Frank among the heroes and icons of the 20th century on their list The Most Important People of the Century , stating : " With a diary kept in a secret attic , she braved the Nazis and lent a searing voice to the fight for human dignity " . Philip Roth called her the " lost little daughter " of Franz Kafka . Madame Tussauds wax museum unveiled an exhibit featuring a likeness of Anne Frank in 2012 . Asteroid <unk> <unk> was named in her honor in 1995 , after having been discovered in 1942 . 
 = Live Forever = 
 " Live Forever " is a song by the English rock band Oasis . Written by Noel Gallagher , the song was released as the third single from their debut album Definitely Maybe ( 1994 ) on 8 August 1994 , just prior to that album 's release . 
 Gallagher wrote the song in 1991 , before he joined Oasis . Inspired by the Rolling Stones ' " Shine a Light " , " Live Forever " features a basic song structure and lyrics with an optimistic outlook that contrasted with the attitude of the grunge bands popular at the time . The song was the first Oasis single to enter the top ten in the United Kingdom , and garnered critical acclaim . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 Noel Gallagher began working on " Live Forever " in 1991 , while working for a building company in his hometown of Manchester . After his foot was crushed by a pipe in an accident , he was given a less @-@ strenuous job working in the storeroom , allowing him more time to write songs . One night , he was listening to the Rolling Stones ' album Exile on Main St ; while playing one of his own chord progressions , Gallagher noted that it sounded good against one of the vocal melodies from the album : " It was the bit from " Shine a Light " that goes [ sings ] , " May the good Lord shine a light on you " " , Gallagher recalled . Gallagher incorporated the melody , changing the line to " Maybe I don 't really want to know " . For a period afterwards , that was the only part of the song Gallagher had completed . 
 Noel Gallagher presented a fully composed " Live Forever " to the band for the first time in early 1993 during rehearsals . According to drummer Tony McCarroll , the band were admittedly awed by it . The song was later instrumental in helping the band secure their record deal with Creation Records . Reflecting on when he first heard the song , Creation boss Alan McGee recalled , " It was probably the single greatest moment I 've ever experienced with them " . 
 The demo version of " Live Forever " begins with an acoustic guitar intro . While recording the album version , the record 's producer Owen Morris cut out this intro and replaced it with a drumbeat played by McCarroll . Morris further cut a second section in Gallagher 's guitar solo . Although Gallagher was upset , Morris felt the part had sounded " a bit like fucking Slash from Guns N ' Roses " . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Live Forever " is in the key of G major ( <unk> up by less than half a semitone during mixing ) and is based on a G – D – Am7 – C – D chord progression , with the G chord becoming an Em during the pre @-@ chorus , though the key changes to A minor following the last chorus . The song has no proper distinction between the verses or chorus section ( with only a falsetto refrain of " You and I are gonna live forever " marking off sections ) , and the vocal melody only consists of a few notes . The simplistic arrangement of the song " meant the song never resolved " . Guitarist Paul Arthurs said , " for me that song could keep going . " 
 The song begins with a voice whistling briefly and saying " Oh yeah " , followed by a drum beat that plays unaccompanied for a few measures . An intermingling of the main guitar line , piano notes , and Liam Gallagher 's vocals then enter . Each verse begins with Liam singing the phrase " Maybe / I don 't really wanna know / How your garden grows / ' Cause I just wanna fly " , and each verse ends with the falsetto refrain . A guitar solo appears after the second refrain of " You and I are gonna live forever " . After the third verse and refrain section , Liam Gallagher repeats the line " Gonna live forever ! " four times with ' ache in his voice ' , followed by one final guitar solo . 
 The song is interpreted to be an ode to Noel and Liam Gallagher 's mother Peggy . In general the lyrics of the song stress an optimistic outlook . Noel Gallagher explained that " At the time . . . it was written in the middle of grunge and all that , and I remember Nirvana had a tune called ' I Hate Myself and Want to Die ' , and I was like . . . ' Well , I 'm not fucking having that . ' As much as I fucking like him [ Nirvana frontman Kurt Cobain ] and all that shit , I 'm not having that . I can 't have people like that coming over here , on smack , fucking saying that they hate themselves and they wanna die . That 's fucking rubbish . Kids don 't need to be hearing that nonsense . " While Gallagher has stated he did not intend " Live Forever " as a direct retort to Nirvana or their music ( being a professed fan of the band ) , he contrasted the lives of Cobain and his band at that point , saying , " Seems to me that here was a guy who had everything , and was miserable about it . And we had fuck @-@ all , and I still thought that getting up in the morning was the greatest fuckin ' thing ever , ' cause you didn 't know where you 'd end up at night . And we didn 't have a pot to piss in , but it was fucking great , man " . Gallagher considers the line " We see things they 'll never see " the most important line of the song , explaining that old friends tend to laugh at jokes and stories that " no one else gets " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Live Forever " was released on 8 August 1994 as the band 's third single , a month before the release of their debut album Definitely Maybe . The song had been part of the band 's set for longer than a year at that point , and had amassed so many mentions in reviews of the group that " its release [ as a single ] had long seemed inevitable . " In its review of the single , NME found " Live Forever " to be an improvement over Oasis ' previous singles , concluding , " Basically , what thus far looked like obnoxious <unk> arrogance suddenly looks like sheer effortlessness . A terrific record . " 
 While Oasis ' first two singles , " Supersonic " and " Shakermaker " , were modestly received , it was " Live Forever " that " got the world 's attention " . " Live Forever " became Oasis ' first top ten hit , reaching number ten on the British singles charts in 1994 . In 1995 , the song became the band 's first chart success in the United States , reaching number two and ten on Billboard 's Modern Rock Tracks and Mainstream Rock Tracks charts , respectively . Noel Gallagher commented on the praise given to the song : " People said to me after ' Live Forever ' , ' Where are you gonna go after that ? ' And I was like , I don 't think it 's that good . I think it 's a fucking good song , but I think I can do better . " 
 " Live Forever " has garnered additional acclaim years after its release . In 2006 , " Live Forever " was named the greatest song of all @-@ time in a poll released by Q ; the song had ranked ninth in a similar Q poll three years prior . In 2007 , " Live Forever " placed number one in the NME and XFM poll of the 50 " Greatest Indie Anthems Ever " . Pitchfork labeled the song as Oasis ' best ever track and said of the song ; " It 's an honest , aspirational sentiment just as the photo of John Lennon 's childhood home on the single 's sleeve is an honest , tasteful exhibition of fandom . " The music site went on to praise the song for its ' fearless optimism ' . 
 = = Music videos = = 
 Two music videos were made for " Live Forever " for British and American airplay . The original video , shot on 8 May 1994 , was directed by Carlos Grasso and features unusual imagery such as Liam Gallagher sitting on a chair affixed to a wall , and a number of scenes are devoted to the band burying drummer Tony McCarroll alive . Some of the UK version of the promotional video was filmed at the Strawberry Fields memorial , the area of New York City 's Central Park dedicated to John Lennon — the single cover features 251 Menlove Avenue , the childhood home of Lennon . The American video , directed by Nick Egan features the band playing in an office with pictures of Sid Vicious , Kurt Cobain , Jim Morrison , John Lennon , Brian Jones , Jimi Hendrix , Marc Bolan , and Bobby Moore on the wall . Both videos are included on the 2004 Definitely Maybe DVD . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 " Live Forever " is a crowd favorite to play at concerts . In some concerts , most notably Manchester in 1996 , a slideshow of famous deceased musicians Oasis admired - such as Elvis Presley , Bob Marley , and Sid Vicious - would be displayed behind the band , with a picture of John Lennon always at the end of the slideshow . During the early years , Liam Gallagher would personally sing the falsetto part , " You and I , we 're gonna live forever . " Noel Gallagher eventually picked up the role of singing the falsetto , as " Liam thought it was a bit gay . " 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = = UK track listing = = = 
 CD <unk> 185 
 " Live Forever " – 4 : 38 
 " Up in the Sky " ( acoustic ) – 3 : 32 
 " Cloudburst " – 5 : 21 
 " Supersonic " ( live ) – 5 : 12 
 7 " CRE 185 
 " Live Forever " – 4 : 38 
 " Up in the Sky " ( acoustic ) – 3 : 32 
 12 " CRE <unk> 
 " Live Forever " – 4 : 38 
 " Up in the Sky " ( acoustic ) – 3 : 32 
 " Cloudburst " – 5 : 21 
 Cassette <unk> 185 
 " Live Forever " – 4 : 38 
 " Up in the Sky " ( Acoustic ) – 3 : 32 
 = = = European track listing = = = 
 CD HES <unk> 2 
 " Live Forever " ( radio edit ) – 3 : 43 
 " Live Forever " – 4 : 37 
 " Up in the Sky " ( acoustic ) – 3 : 32 
 " Cloudburst " – 5 : 21 
 " Supersonic " ( live ) – 5 : 10 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = Everard Digby = 
 Sir Everard Digby ( c . 1578 – 30 January 1606 ) was a member of the group of provincial English Catholics who planned the failed Gunpowder Plot of 1605 . Although he was raised in a Protestant household , and married a Protestant , Digby and his wife were converted to Catholicism by the Jesuit priest John Gerard . In the autumn of 1605 he was part of a Catholic pilgrimage to the shrine of St Winefride 's Well in Holywell . About this time he met Robert Catesby , a religious fanatic who planned to blow up the House of Lords with gunpowder , killing James I. Catesby then planned to incite a popular revolt , during which a Catholic monarch would be restored to the English throne . 
 The full extent of Digby 's knowledge of and involvement in the plot is unknown , but on Catesby 's behest Digby rented Coughton Court and prepared a " hunting party " , ready for the planned uprising . The plot failed however , and Digby joined the conspirators as they took flight through the Midlands , failing to garner support along their way . Digby left the other fugitives at Holbeche House in Staffordshire , and was soon captured and taken to the Tower of London . 
 Digby was tried on 27 January 1606 . Despite an eloquent defence , he was found guilty of high treason , and three days later was hanged , drawn and quartered . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Everard Digby was the son of Everard Digby , and Maria Digby ( née Neale ) , daughter of Francis Neale of <unk> in Leicestershire . He was also a cousin of Anne Vaux , who for years placed herself at considerable risk by sheltering Jesuit priests such as Henry Garnet . According to author Roy Digby Thomas , the Digby family may have been founded during the Norman conquest of England , when William the Conqueror was accompanied by Almar , who settled at Tilton in Rutland . Sir John Digby ( d . 1269 ) served on two crusades , and by 1418 Sir Everard " Greenleaf " Digby was Lord of Tilton and owner of the manor at <unk> , and Rutland 's member of Parliament . Sir Everard lost his life ( and his family much of their fortune ) fighting in 1461 for Henry VI against Edward IV . The family had a reversal of fortune in 1485 when Sir Everard 's sons fought for the victorious Henry VII at the Battle of Bosworth Field . Digby may have been related to the 16th @-@ century scholar , Everard Digby . 
 In 1596 , while still a teenager , he married Mary <unk> , a young heiress who brought with her Gayhurst House in Buckinghamshire . By all accounts their marriage was a happy one , and they had two sons ; Kenelm was born in 1603 at Gayhurst , and John in 1605 . Unlike other English Catholics , Digby had little first @-@ hand experience of England 's recusancy laws . Following the death of his father he had been made a ward of Chancery and was raised in a Protestant household . His wife Mary was converted to Catholicism by the Jesuit priest John Gerard . When Digby fell seriously ill , Gerard used the occasion to convert him also , and the two subsequently became close friends , " calling <unk> [ sic ] ' brother ' when we wrote and spoke " . Gerard was godfather to Digby 's eldest son , Kenelm , and the <unk> also built a hidden chapel and sacristy at Gayhurst . 
 Digby frequented the court of Elizabeth I , and became informally associated with the Elizabethan gentlemen pensioners . His marriage had significantly expanded his holdings , however , and possibly for this reason he left court to manage his estates . He was apparently an unforgiving landlord , as his tenants in Tilton petitioned the Crown for redress when he failed to honour the expensive leases granted them by his father . He added to his property in Buckinghamshire by buying land in Great Missenden , and a month after the queen 's death his social station was elevated when on 24 April 1603 he was knighted by James I at Belvoir Castle . Four days later he was present for Elizabeth 's funeral in London . 
 = = Robert Catesby = = 
 In late August or early September 1605 , Digby , his wife and their secret Jesuit chaplain Edward Oldcorne joined a pilgrimage organised by , amongst others , Henry Garnet and Anne Vaux . The party had set out from White Webbs at Enfield Chase , heading for the shrine of St Winefride 's Well at Holywell , and had occasionally stopped along the way to collect more followers . As the thirty or so pilgrims returned from Holywell in mid @-@ September , they stopped at Rushton Hall where Sir Thomas Tresham had recently died , and then continued on to Digby 's seat at Gayhurst . 
 On 21 October Digby , his wife , Garnet and Vaux were at Harrowden celebrating a delayed Feast of St Luke . While there he met Robert Catesby , who at some point asked him to swear an oath of secrecy before introducing him to what later became known as the Gunpowder Plot . English Catholics had hoped that the years of persecution they suffered during Elizabeth 's reign would end when James I came to the throne , as his attitude appeared moderate , even tolerant towards Catholics . In Catesby 's view however , James had reneged on his promises , and he had quickly lost patience with the new dynasty . He therefore planned to kill James by blowing up the House of Lords with gunpowder , and then inciting a popular revolt during which a Catholic monarch would be restored to the throne . Catesby had enlisted the aid of other Catholics , but had borne much of the scheme 's financial cost and was running out of money . The group had therefore agreed to expand their numbers . To this end Catesby had recruited Ambrose Rookwood — a young and wealthy Catholic with a stable of fine horses — and a wealthy cousin , Francis Tresham . 
 The extent of Digby 's knowledge of the plot is unknown , but in the opinion of author Alan Haynes , Digby was shocked by what he heard , and asked what would become of some of their Catholic friends . Catesby replied " <unk> your selfe that such of the <unk> as are worth the saving shalbe preserved and yet <unk> not of the matter . " None of their friends would be caught in the explosion . He asked if Catesby had spoken of the matter with Garnet , or any other Jesuits ; although Catesby was in no doubt that the Jesuits disapproved of any such action , he lied and said that he would not act without their approbation . Catesby then named the other conspirators , and promised Digby that as soon as they reached Gayhurst he would demonstrate that their religion allowed such acts of regicide , thus dissuading the young lord from confessing to Garnet and discovering the Jesuit 's opinion of the matter . Catesby told him to rent Coughton Court from the head of the Throckmorton family , so that he would " the better to be able to do good to the cause [ kidnap Princess Elizabeth ] " . From there , he was to organise a hunting party ( in reality a group of armed men on horseback ) and be ready for some kind of military manoeuvre . Digby also provided monetary assistance ; he promised £ 1 @,@ 500 after fellow plotter Thomas Percy failed to pay the rent due for several properties in Westminster . 
 = = Hunting party = = 
 On 2 November at Gayhurst , while making preparations for his hunting party , Digby was visited by Gerard . Having noticed that the house was almost completely empty , the Jesuit asked him if there was " any matter in hand " and if Garnet knew of it . Keen not to implicate Gerard , despite being told less than two weeks earlier that the plot had Jesuit approval , Digby told him that there was nothing he knew of " or could tell him of " . Although Gerard later used this conversation to defend himself against those who accused him of involvement in the plot , he lived to regret not being given the opportunity to dissuade Digby from his course . 
 Two days later Digby and his servants were ensconced at the Red Lion inn , in Dunchurch , where his hunt was to take place . He took with him several items of clothing , including " a white satin doublet cut with purple " . Also present , but uninvolved , were his uncle , Sir Robert Digby , Humphrey Littleton and his nephew Stephen Littleton . They ate supper , before being joined by fellow conspirator John Grant and a friend . Also invited was the stepbrother of plotters Robert and Thomas Wintour , John Wintour . They attended a mass the next morning , conducted by a Father Hammond , before the party moved on . 
 Around midnight on 4 November , Guy Fawkes was discovered guarding the gunpowder the plotters had placed beneath the House of Lords , and arrested . Those conspirators still in London soon took flight for the Midlands , finding along the way those who had already left to prepare for the planned uprising . They met Digby and his party at Dunchurch . Catesby told Digby that the king and Salisbury were dead , and " if true Catholics would now stir , he doubted not that they might procure to themselves good conditions " . Digby was won over , but many of his party were less than impressed at being so badly deceived , and worse , being associated with treason . One of his servants asked Digby what would happen to them ; Digby told him that although he was aware of their ignorance , " but now there is no remedy " . 
 = = Flight = = 
 On 6 November the fugitives raided Warwick Castle and managed to secure more horses , before moving on to Norbrook to collect stored weapons . From there they continued their journey toward Huddington . Catesby ordered his servant ( and fellow plotter ) Thomas Bates to deliver a letter to Father Garnet at Coughton Court . Catesby and Digby asked Garnet to excuse their recklessness , before asking for his help in raising an army in Wales . Garnet 's reply begged them to stop their " wicked actions " , and to listen to the Pope 's teachings . When the priest tried to comfort Mary Digby , also at Coughton Court , she burst into tears . 
 With their ever @-@ decreasing band of supporters , the remaining fugitives arrived at Huddington at about 2 : 00 pm . Any expectation they had of support began to vanish ; almost everyone they met showed concern only for their own safety , fearful of being involved with traitors . The next morning they rode through the rain , stopping briefly to help themselves to supplies from the home of the absent Lord Windsor at Hewell Grange . Still the locals refused to have anything to do with them ; Digby later admitted that " not one man " joined them . They arrived that night at Holbeche House on the border of Staffordshire , and tired and desperate , spread out some of the now @-@ soaked gunpowder in front of the fire , to dry out . A spark from the fire landed on the powder and the resultant flames engulfed Catesby , Rookwood , Grant , and another man . 
 = = Surrender = = 
 Catesby and fellow conspirators Thomas Percy , John Wright and his brother Christopher were killed by the Sheriff of Worcester 's men early on 8 November , but Digby had already left to give himself up ( the only conspirator to do so ) . With two servants , possibly Bates and his son , he took several horses and hid in nearby woods . Their tracks were soon found however , and with some hesitation ( Digby had intended to surrender himself to someone more worthy ) , early that morning he presented himself to the most senior @-@ looking of his adversaries . While Digby was taken to the Tower of London , Gayhurst was ransacked ; the servants ' belongings were stolen , the livestock was sold cheaply , and Mary Digby was left destitute . The sheriff later remarked " All goods are carried away , even to the very floor of the great parlour . " At the Tower , Digby 's two trunks of clothing were searched , and found to contain £ 100 in gold , and £ 50 in white money . William Waad , Lieutenant of the Tower , asked if he could take £ 50 to pay for Digby 's food and bedding . 
 Digby unsuccessfully sought an audience with James to try and explain himself , in Fraser 's opinion suggesting either that the extent of his involvement was limited , or that he was " astonishingly naive and trusting of his sovereign 's forgiveness . " While imprisoned he busied himself with writing secret letters , smuggled from the Tower and not rediscovered until Kenelm Digby 's death in 1675 . Although he was fortunate not to suffer the fate of Guy Fawkes , who was tortured on several occasions , one of these letters hints that it had been " in a fashion , offered " . He described his refusal to cooperate with his interrogators , boasted of his deceit , and how there was nothing he could do to make the plot appear less abhorrent to fellow Catholics . Digby also carved an inscription on the wall of his cell , extant as of 1996 . 
 = = Trial and execution = = 
 Digby was tried on the same day as seven of his surviving co @-@ conspirators , in Westminster Hall , on Monday 27 January 1606 . As the king and his family watched in secret , the charges against the plotters were read aloud . Alone amongst them Digby pleaded " Guilty " , and was tried on a separate indictment . Dressed in a black satin suit and " tuff <unk> gown " , he gave a short and moving speech , defending his actions by explaining his affection for Catesby , and the cause of his religion . He accused King James of reneging on his promises of toleration for Catholics , and told of his fears of harsher laws against recusancy . He also pleaded on behalf of his family , that they should not pay for his actions , before making a final request to be beheaded . His words fell on mostly deaf ears . The prosecution poured scorn on James 's supposed perfidy , and ridiculed Digby for asking for leniency where he would have given none . Along with the other plotters , he was found guilty . As they were led from the hall , Digby exclaimed : " If I may but hear any of your lordships say , you forgive me , I shall go more cheerfully to the gallows . " The reply came back , " God forgive you , and we do . " 
 He spent his last few days in the Tower writing letters to his wife and his sons , urging the two brothers to avoid the examples set by figures such as Cain and Abel . He also wrote poetry : 
 Who 's that which knocks ? Oh stay , my Lord , I come : 
 I know that call , since first it made me know 
 Myself , which makes me now with joy to run 
 Lest he be gone that can my duty show . 
 Jesu , my Lord , I know thee by the Cross 
 Thou offer 'st me , but not unto my loss . 
 Digby was hanged , drawn and quartered early on Thursday 30 January . <unk> of spectators lined the streets as he was strapped to a wattled hurdle , and alongside Robert Wintour and John Grant was dragged by horse to the western end of Old St Paul 's Cathedral churchyard . Thomas Bates was delivered in a similar fashion , but from the Gatehouse Prison . Armed guards interspersed along the route were there to defend against any possible rescue , but did not keep the miscreants ' families from witnessing the fate of the four men . Cold and grubby , Digby was the first of the four to face the executioner . He mounted the scaffold and addressed the audience , telling them that he knew he had broken the law , but that morally , and in the eyes of his religion , he had committed no offence . He asked for God 's forgiveness , and the country 's , and protested the Jesuits ' and Father Gerard 's innocence . He refused the attentions of a Protestant clergyman , speaking to himself in Latin , before saying goodbye to his friends . 
 Digby was then stripped of his clothing , except for his shirt . <unk> " O Jesus , Jesus , save me and keep me " , he climbed the ladder and was hanged for a short period . The executioner cut the rope , and Digby fell back to the scaffold , wounding his forehead . Fully conscious , he was taken to the block and castrated , disembowelled , and quartered . Wintour , Grant and Bates followed . The remaining four conspirators suffered similar fates the following day , at the Old Palace Yard in Westminster . 
 = Battle of Pell 's Point = 
 The Battle of Pell 's Point ( October 18 , 1776 ) , also known as the Battle of Pelham , was a skirmish fought between British and American troops during the New York and New Jersey campaign of the American Revolutionary War . The conflict took place in what is now part of Pelham Bay Park in the Bronx , New York City . 
 On October 12 , British forces landed at Throgs Neck in order to execute a flanking maneuver that would trap Gen. George Washington , commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the American revolutionary forces , and the main body of the Continental Army on the island of Manhattan . The Americans thwarted the landing , and Gen. Sir William Howe , commander @-@ in @-@ chief of British forces in North America , looked for another location along Long Island Sound to disembark his troops . On October 18 , he landed 4 @,@ 000 men at Pelham , 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) north of Throgs Neck . Inland were 750 men of a brigade under the command of the American Col. John Glover . Glover positioned his troops behind a series of stone walls and attacked the British advance units . As the British overran each position , the American troops fell back and reorganized behind the next wall . After several such attacks , the British broke off , and the Americans retreated . 
 The battle delayed British movements long enough for Washington to move the main army to White Plains and avoid being surrounded on Manhattan . After losing to the British in a battle at White Plains , and losing Fort Washington , Washington retreated across New Jersey to Pennsylvania . 
 = = Background = = 
 After a victory at the Battle of Long Island in late August , the commander @-@ in @-@ chief of British forces in North America , Gen. Sir William Howe landed his troops at Kip 's Bay , on the eastern shore of present @-@ day Manhattan , on September 15 . George Washington and his army retreated to Harlem Heights , a plateau situated on the north end of Manhattan Island . Washington was in a good defensive position , with his rear guarded on two sides by rocky heights and the Hudson and Harlem Rivers , and with more rocky heights to the south between his forces and the British . The next day , the British attacked the Americans and were defeated at the Battle of Harlem Heights . There was very little action for the next month , while the two forces remained in their fortified positions , each unable to decide upon their next move . The Americans believed Howe would either attack Fort Washington or attempt to flank the Americans with a landing at some point on Long Island Sound . A council @-@ of @-@ war decided to guard against both possibilities ; Washington kept 10 @,@ 000 men to defend Harlem Heights and Fort Washington , while Maj. Gen. William Heath took 10 @,@ 000 troops to defend Kingsbridge , and Maj. Gen. Nathanael Greene was given 5 @,@ 000 troops to defend the other side of the Hudson River , near Fort Constitution . 
 After 26 days of contemplation , Howe decided against a frontal attack on Harlem Heights and Fort Washington , and chose instead to attempt a flanking maneuver . On October 12 , leaving behind three brigades under the command of Lord Hugh Percy on Manhattan Island , Howe embarked his main army in 80 vessels and proceeded up the East River , through Hell Gate , and landed at Throgs Neck . Throgs Neck — originally known as Throckmorton 's , and also known as Throck 's , Frog 's Neck , and Frog 's Point — is a narrow spit of land that sits between the East River and Long Island Sound . Conveniently for Howe , there was a road running from Throgs Neck to Kingsbridge , directly behind the American forces . Howe hoped to use this road to flank the Americans and pin them against the Hudson River . 
 Under the cover of fog , an advance force of 4 @,@ 000 men under the command of General Henry Clinton was landed on Throgs Neck . To their dismay , they found they were not on a peninsula , but on an island , separated from the mainland by a creek and a marsh . There were two ways to get to the mainland : a causeway and bridge at the lower end , and a ford at the other . The Americans were guarding both . Col. Edward Hand and a detachment of 25 men from the 1st Pennsylvania Regiment positioned themselves behind a length of <unk> along the causeway , after having removed the planks of wood from the bridge . They surprised the British troops , who fell back and made an attempt to cross at the ford , which was guarded by another detachment . The Americans guarding both positions were quickly reinforced , and the defenders soon numbered over 1 @,@ 800 men . Howe decided it would be better to retreat and land somewhere else . He made camp on Throgs Neck and remained there for six days while supplies and reinforcements , including 7 @,@ 000 Hessian soldiers under the command of Gen. Wilhelm von Knyphausen , were brought up from New York . Just after midnight on October 18 , Howe embarked his army again and decided to land at Pell 's Point near the town of Pelham , a few miles to the north . 
 After hearing of the landing on Throgs Neck , Washington knew he risked entrapment on Manhattan . He made the decision to move his army to White Plains , where he believed they would be safe . By October 17 , the Continental Army was on its way to White Plains , leaving behind 2 @,@ 000 men to garrison Fort Washington . 
 = = Battle = = 
 At dawn , the British began to land on the shore , Clinton 's advance guard of 4 @,@ 000 British light infantry and Hessian jägers landing first . Inland , opposing them , was a brigade of some 750 men under the command of John Glover . Glover was atop a hill with a telescope when he noticed the British ships . Glover sent an officer , Major William Lee , to report to Charles Lee , Washington 's second in command , and ask for orders . However , Lee did not give any orders , and in the absence of orders Glover chose to attack . Glover turned out his brigade , which consisted of the 14th , 13th , 3rd and the 26th Continental Regiments . Glover left the 150 men of the 14th Continentals behind in reserve . Glover had not closed half the distance when he ran into approximately 30 skirmishers . Glover ordered a Captain and his 40 @-@ man company forward as an advance guard to hold the British in check , while Glover organized the rest of the force . 
 Glover prepared an ambush by placing the main body in staggered positions behind the stone walls that lined either side of the laneway leading from the beachhead to the interior . Glover instructed each of the regiments to hold their position as long as they could and then to fall back to a position in the rear , while the next unit took up the fighting . Glover then rode up to take command of the advance guard . The advance guard and the British began to engage each other , both sides taking casualties . After a little while the British were reinforced , and Glover ordered a retreat , which was done without confusion . The British troops began to advance at the retreating Americans . However , the 200 troops of the 13th Continentals that Glover had stationed behind the stone wall stood up and fired at the British when there were only 30 yards away . The ambush worked , and the column of British troops took heavy losses and fell back to the main body of the invading army . 
 The British waited half an hour before attacking again . This time when they attacked , they attacked with all 4 @,@ 000 men and seven cannon . The British bombarded the American position behind the stone wall as their infantry advanced . The cannon fire was ineffective , and when the British were 50 yards away the Americans fired a volley which stopped the British infantry . The British returned fire , and musket and rifle fire ensued for 20 minutes , the British supported by cannon , at which point the lead American regiment fell back under cover of the next reserve regiment . The 3rd Continental Regiment was stationed behind the stone wall on the opposite side of the road . 
 The British attacked the position of the 3rd Continentals , and an engagement ensued . Both sides kept up constant fire , the Americans breaking the British lines several times . However , after 17 volleys , the British numbers began to overwhelm the Americans , and Glover ordered a withdrawal to another stone wall on the crest of a hill while the next regiment in line , the 26th Continentals , engaged the British . 
 A reconnaissance party of 30 men was sent out from behind the third stone wall to see if the British would try and flank the American position . The party ran into the British , who had continued to advance , and they fell back to the stone wall . The Americans behind the wall fired one volley before Glover gave the order to retreat . The Americans retreated across a bridge over the Hutchinson stream , their retreat covered by the 150 men of the 14th Continentals who engaged in an artillery duel with the British . Howe camped on a hill on the opposite side of the stream but made no attempt to cross the stream . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The next day , Glover and his force retreated to the town of Yonkers . American casualties were 8 killed and 13 wounded . British and Hessian casualties are not known . Howe 's official dispatch listed British casualties as 3 killed and 20 wounded , although the report did not include Hessian casualties . As the Hessians made up the majority of the landing force , it is reasonable to expect they made up the majority of the casualties . Over the next few days , from knowledge collected from British deserters , the Americans estimated that the British lost between 800 and 1 @,@ 000 killed or wounded , likely an exaggeration . Colonel <unk> Baldwin , who was present at the battle , estimated that the Americans had killed 200 British and Hessians , but historian David McCullough says this was " undoubtedly an exaggeration . " Historian George Athan Billias argues in support of Baldwin 's estimates , due in part to the corroborating admission of another British deserter . Regardless , the combined British and Hessian casualties were almost certainly larger than those of the Americans . 
 With the British advance delayed , the main American army under Washington was able to safely evacuate from Harlem ( on the island of Manhattan ) to White Plains . Howe slowly moved his army through New Rochelle and Scarsdale . On October 28 , he sent 13 @,@ 000 men to attack the Americans , resulting in a minor victory over Washington at the Battle of White Plains . Fort Washington , the last American stronghold on Manhattan , fell on November 16 . With these defeats , Washington and his army retreated across New Jersey and into Pennsylvania , paving the way for the Battles of Trenton and Princeton . 
 = The Transformation = 
 " The Transformation " is the thirteenth episode of the first season of the American science fiction drama television series Fringe . Its storyline centers on the circumstances surrounding a deceased scientist ( Neal Huff ) , who was doped with a " designer virus " and transformed into a dangerous monster , causing his plane to crash . Fringe agent Olivia Dunham ( Anna Torv ) and FBI consultants Peter ( Joshua Jackson ) and Walter Bishop ( John Noble ) connect the event to an impending arms deal . Olivia must explore her mind for remaining memories of her former partner and lover , John Scott ( Mark Valley ) , in order to prevent the sale of the virus . 
 The episode was co @-@ written by Zack Whedon and supervising producer J. R. Orci , while producer Brad Anderson served as the director . The creation of the monster took the crew approximately eleven days – they took molds of guest actor Huff 's head and back and created eight sets of dentures in order to create the special effect of transformation . To create the plane crash set , the crew spent over a week strategically placing around 15 @,@ 000 pounds worth of plane parts . 
 It was first screened at PaleyFest in November 2008 . On February 3 , 2009 , the episode was broadcast in the United States on Fox to an estimated 12 @.@ 78 million viewers . The episode earned a 5 / 6 @.@ 5 ratings share among adults aged 18 to 49 , finishing in eighth place for the week . It received generally positive reviews . Commentators have noted allusions to the pilot and a fourth season episode , in addition to the television series Lost and H.G. Wells ' novel The Island of Doctor Moreau . 
 = = Plot = = 
 On an airplane in flight , scientist Marshall Bowman ( Neal Huff ) gets a nosebleed , and he tries to warn the crew to give him sedatives or use force against him . He transforms into a beast in the bathroom , and bursts out , causing the plane to crash in Scarsdale , New York . The Fringe team arrives on the scene and discover the beast 's body . Dr. Walter Bishop ( John Noble ) concludes that it started out as a human . Agent Olivia Dunham ( Anna Torv ) recognizes Bowman 's picture from John Scott 's ( Mark Valley ) memories , realizing that Bowman was flying to meet another man in the memories named Daniel Hicks ( Felix Solis ) . Back at the lab at Harvard , Walter finds a small crystalline disc implanted in the beast 's hand similar to one seen inside the woman killed in " The Ghost Network " , and thinks Marshall was dosed with a " designer virus " . 
 Hicks is brought in for questioning . After beginning to transform into a beast , he admits that " Conrad " dosed them before Peter Bishop ( Joshua Jackson ) pauses the process by administering a sedative and placing him in an induced coma . Walter develops an antidote , while Olivia finds another small disc in Hicks ' hand . Her demand to see Scott 's body leads her and Phillip Broyles ( Lance Reddick ) to Massive Dynamic , where Nina Sharp ( Blair Brown ) tells her that the information gleaned from Scott 's body implicates him in a bioterrorist cell with the other two . 
 French intelligence states that weapons manufacturer Conrad is involved in a sale , leading to Olivia returning to the sensory deprivation tank in order to find out more from Scott 's memories . In a motel room they used to share , Scott talks to Olivia , scaring her into shooting him . Olivia next appears in an alleyway , where she follows Scott into a memory of him almost killing Conrad . He reveals that he , Hicks , and Marshall are all undercover government agents for the NSA , and tells Olivia to ask Hicks where the meeting is going to happen . They awake Hicks , who tells them more about the weapons sale . 
 Being given details from a secret radio by Hicks , Olivia pretends to be the weapons buyer , and is accompanied by Peter . They successfully make contact , but the sellers become suspicious after Hicks ' transformation restarts , depriving Olivia of the necessary information . Conrad makes his appearance and realizes Olivia and Peter are lying ; just before he orders them killed , the FBI moves in and arrests the sellers . 
 The episode ends with Walter telling Olivia her brain waves are going back to normal , and that Scott 's memories are fading from her mind . Olivia requests to enter the tank regardless , and she makes a last encounter with Scott , where he tells her he loved her and was going to marry her . She bids farewell to his consciousness , which has finally left her own . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Transformation " was co @-@ written by Zack Whedon and supervising producer J.R. Orci . Whedon had last co @-@ written the season 's ninth episode , " The Dreamscape " , while Orci helped write " The Equation " , the season 's eighth episode . Producer Brad Anderson served as director , his latest Fringe work since directing " In Which We Meet Mr. Jones " six episodes earlier . The episode resolved the John Scott storyline and featured the last appearance of actor Mark Valley . Media outlets speculated that because Valley and Torv married over the holiday break , his departure " would eliminate any chances of the marriage conflicting with the show . " Co @-@ creator Roberto Orci called Scott 's final scene a " truly satisfactory conclusion to his story . " 
 The creation of the monster took the series special effects crew approximately eleven days to implement . They created molds of guest actor Neal Huff 's head and back , giving him " creature eye " contact lenses and covering the back foam mold with " <unk> " . Eight different dentures were made of Huff 's mouth to depict the character gradually losing his teeth , " anything from simple teeth that match his own ... , to wiggling teeth that he can start to loosen up , to ones where he 's already started to lose a tooth , " explained Special Effects Makeup crewman Stephen Kelley . Each denture appliance took about a day to create . The final version of the creature , Kelley noted , was " very exaggerated ... He 's got the big giant quills coming off it like a porcupine . And it 's also got six nipples on it , which is part of us trying to investigate what this creature actually it is . " 
 Andrew Orloff , the Creative Director and Visual Effects Supervisor of Zoic Studios , considered the creature one of the most challenging effects his company helped make for the season . He explained that this and other designed monsters are " really super fantastical , they ’ re really out there , the anatomy and the biology of them is so wild and crazy , that it really takes a lot to make it look real in the scene and make it a part of the actors are reacting to these things – to get the audience to believe in it is kind of the biggest challenge we ’ ve faced on the show so far . " During filming , the cast and crew referred to the monster as a " were @-@ <unk> " or " <unk> " . Lance Reddick commented on set , " When I first got here tonight , I was expecting zombies to come up out of the ground . And the actual creature looks so bizarre , I mean it really looks like something I wouldn 't want to be caught in the woods with . " The crew spent over a week collecting and placing the plane wreckage together . According to Set Dresser Russ Griffin , the set included approximately 15 @,@ 000 pounds worth of plane parts . 
 Though the episode first aired in February 2009 , " The Transformation " had an early screening at the November 2008 PaleyFest , where Fringe 's producers answered questions from the audience . When asked in an interview if the " giant germ " from " Bound " was the grossest thing of the season , executive producer Jeff Pinkner replied that " the huge porcupine man on the airplane [ from " The Transformation " ] was more shocking . It was so unexpected . " At the time " The Transformation " aired , Joshua Jackson considered it the series ' best episode . John Noble called it " grotesque " and " possibly one of the more gruesome ones we 've done . " 
 = = Analysis and legacy = = 
 In her 2011 book Into the Looking Glass : Exploring the Worlds of Fringe , author Sarah Clarke Stuart observed that two unrelated Fringe characters , Conrad Moreau of " The Transformation " and Moreau ( Brad Dourif ) of " The Day We Died " , are allusions to H.G. Wells ' 1896 novel The Island of Doctor Moreau . Both are " scientifically inspired men with questionable integrity , " while Wells ' Doctor Moreau is an " unethical researcher " who fell " under the overmastering spell of research , " in a vein similar to Walter . 
 Like the pilot episode , " The Transformation " begins on the passenger section of an airplane in flight . Actor Mark Valley was asked how the episode differed from the pilot , leading him to joke that " it 's a completely different airline this time . " His character , John Scott , was first seen in an episode about a plane disaster ; accordingly , IGN expressed , it made sense thematically to have his last appearance be in an episode about a similar type of disaster . The Los Angeles Times viewed the flight number of 718 and its subsequent crash as a nod to co @-@ creator J.J. Abrams ' other series , Lost . 
 The episode also had an influence on the series ' fourth season , which featured parallel stories to those that occurred in earlier episodes . The season 's sixteenth episode , " Nothing As It Seems " , centers around the " designer virus " that had caused Marshall Bowman to transform , but this time he does so in the airport after his plane has safely landed . Peter recognizes the case from his own timeline , as seen in the events of " The Transformation " , and helps the Fringe team locate Daniel Hicks . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " The Transformation " first aired on February 3 , 2009 in the United States , and was watched by an estimated 12 @.@ 78 million viewers . The episode earned a 5 / 6 @.@ 5 ratings share among viewers aged 18 – 49 , meaning that it was seen by 5 @.@ 0 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 6 @.@ 5 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of broadcast . This rating meant it ranked eighth for the week among all the major networks . Sarah Stegall of SFScope attributed this ratings success to its lead @-@ in show , the highly @-@ rated American Idol , and observed that " with episodes like this one , mixing action , horror , and a few tender moments , it looks like Fringe is hitting its stride with viewers . " 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " The Transformation " received generally positive reviews . Andrew Hanson from the Los Angeles Times gave the episode a positive review , opining that it " hit the perfect tone for Fringe [ and had ] the right mixture of science fiction , dark comedy , crime story and melodrama " . Hanson was however disappointed with the closure of the Olivia – John Scott storyline , as he hoped that " she doesn 't carry this torch too long " because he preferred the " flirty " Olivia . Ramsey Isler of IGN gave the episode 9 @.@ 0 / 10 , an indication of an " amazing " installment . He was pleased with the absence of Sanford Harris and enjoyed the " brilliantly written and directed " undercover sting operation , particularly because Peter was properly utilized as Olivia 's " wingman . " Isler also criticized the monster 's special effects and believed there were still unanswered questions concerning Scott 's storyline . 
 Writing for The A.V. Club , Noel Murray thought it was the best " freak @-@ meet " of the series thus far , as well as one of its best episodes , which he would " eagerly show to Fringe @-@ doubters as evidence that the series has found its legs . " He consequently graded the episode an A − , further attributing the success of the episode to " top @-@ tier " writers Orci and Whedon and " skilled " director Brad Anderson . Murray wrote , " I wouldn 't say that ' The Transformation ' broke any new ground . If anything , it recapitulated pretty much every previous Fringe element — bio @-@ weapons sales , telepathic communication , Massive Dynamics , [ sic ] airplane crashes , etc . — but did so in a way that was energetic , tense , and even a little emotional . " SFScope columnist Sarah Stegall had difficulty " suspend [ ing her ] disbelief " with the science behind Bowman 's rapid transformation . Though she thought it was " sweet " that Scott 's proposal " echo [ ed ] the real @-@ life recent marriage between Anna Torv and Mark Valley , " Stegall was pleased that the series could now move onto another storyline . 
 = Norman Cob = 
 The Norman Cob or Cob Normand is a breed of light draft horse that originated in the province of Normandy in northern France . It is a mid @-@ sized horse , with a range of heights and weights , due to selective breeding for a wide range of uses . Its conformation is similar to a robust Thoroughbred , and it more closely resembles a Thoroughbred cross than other French draft breeds . The breed is known for its lively , long @-@ striding trot . Colors accepted by the breed registry include chestnut , bay and seal brown . There are three general subsets within the breed : horses used under saddle , those used in harness , and those destined for meat production . They are popular for recreational and competitive driving , representing France internationally in the latter , and are also used for several riding disciplines . 
 The Normandy region of France is well known for its horse breeding , having also produced the Percheron and French Trotter . Small horses called bidets were the original horses in the area , and these , crossed with other types , eventually produced the Carrossier Normand , the immediate ancestor of the Norman Cob . Although known as one of the best carriage horse breeds available in the early 20th century , the Carrossier Normand became extinct after the advent of the automobile , having been used to develop the French Trotter , Anglo @-@ Norman and Norman Cob . In its homeland , the Norman Cob was used widely for agriculture , even more so than the internationally known Percheron , and in 1950 , the first studbook was created for the breed . 
 The advent of mechanization threatened all French draft breeds , and while many draft breeders turned their production towards the meat market , Norman Cob breeders instead crossed their horses with Thoroughbreds to contribute to the fledgling Selle Francais breed , now France 's national saddle horse . This allowed the Norman Cob to remain relatively the same through the decades , while other draft breeds were growing heavier and slower due to selection for meat . Between the 1970s and 1990s , the studbook went through several changes , and in the 1980s , genetic studies were performed that showed the breed suffered from inbreeding and genetic drift . Breed enthusiasts worked to develop new selection criteria for breeding stock , and population numbers are now relatively stable . Today , Norman Cobs are mainly found in the departments of Manche , Calvados and Orne . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 The Norman Cob is a mid @-@ sized horse , standing between 15 @.@ 2 1 ⁄ 4 hands ( 62 @.@ 25 inches , 158 cm ) and 16 @.@ 3 1 ⁄ 2 hands ( 67 @.@ 5 inches , 171 cm ) and weighing 550 to 900 kilograms ( 1 @,@ 210 to 1 @,@ 980 lb ) . The large variations in height and weight are explained by selection for a variety of uses within the breed . The Norman Cob is elegant and closer in type to a Thoroughbred @-@ cross than other French draft breeds . Its conformation is similar to a robust Thoroughbred , with a square overall profile and short back . Selective breeding has been used to develop a lively trot , with long strides . 
 The head is well @-@ proportioned and similar to that of the Selle Francais , with wide nostrils , small ears and a straight or convex facial profile . The neck is thick , muscular and arched . The mane is sometimes <unk> . The shoulders are broad and angled , the chest deep and the withers pronounced . The body is compact and stocky , with a short , strong back . The hindquarters are powerful , although not so much as in heavy draft breeds , and the croup muscular and sloping . The legs are short , muscular and strong , with thick bone , but less massive than most draft breeds . The feet are round , wide and solid . 
 Colors accepted by the breed registry include chestnut , bay and seal brown ( the latter called black pangaré by the breed registry , although these horses are genetically brown , not black with pangaré markings ) . Bays with white markings are the most popular . Norman Cobs are known as calm , willing horses with strong personalities . The breed 's Thoroughbred ancestry gives them energy and athleticism , and makes them mature faster than other draft breeds . They show great endurance when ridden , and are relatively hardy , accepting outdoor living and changes in climate . Traditionally the Norman Cob had its tail docked , a practice that continued until January 1996 , when the practice became illegal in France . 
 There are three general subsets within the breed : horses used under saddle , those used in harness , and those destined for meat production . Horses may be automatically registered if at least 87 @.@ 5 percent of their ancestors ( seven out of eight ) were registered Norman Cobs . Purebred stallions may not be bred more than 70 times per year . Foals produced through artificial insemination and embryo transfer may be registered , but cloned horses may not . In general , breeders look to produce horses with good gaits and an aptitude for driving , while keeping the conformation that makes the Norman Cob one of nine French draft breeds . 
 = = History = = 
 The Norman Cob comes from the Normandy region of France , an area known for its horse breeding . Normandy is also the home of two other breeds , the Percheron and the French Trotter . Both of these breeds are better @-@ known than the Norman Cob , although the latter is popular in its home region . The name " cob " comes from the English and Welsh cobs that it resembles , with the addition of " Norman " to refer to the area in which it originated . Although generally considered a member of the draft horse group , the Norman Cob is special among French draft breeds . It has been used almost exclusively for the production of sport horses , and has not been extensively used for the production of meat , unlike many other French draft breeds . This means that its conformation has remained relatively unchanged , as opposed to being bred for heavier weights for butchering . 
 The original horses in Normandy and Brittany were small horses called bidets , introduced by the Celts . The Romans crossed these horses with larger mares , and beginning in the 10th century , these " Norman horses " were desired throughout Europe . During the 16th century , Norman horses were known to be heavy and strong , able to pull long distances , and used to pull artillery and diligences . Barb and Arabian blood was added during the reign of Louis XIV . The Norman Cob is descended from this Norman horse , called the Carrossier Normand . It was also influenced by crossing with other breeds including the <unk> , the Gelderland horse and Danish horses . By 1840 , the Carrossier Normand had become more refined , due to crosses with imported British Norfolk Trotters , as well as gaining better gaits , energy , elegance , and conformation . 
 The Haras National de Saint @-@ Lô ( National Stud of Saint @-@ Lo ) was founded in 1806 by Napoleon . This stud and the Haras du Pin ( Stud of Pin ) became the main production centers for the Carrossier Normand . The Norman horse @-@ Thoroughbred crossbreds produced at these studs were divided into two groups . The first were lighter cavalry horses , and the second were heavier horses , called " cobs " , used for draft work in the region . At this time , there was no breed registry or studbook ; instead , selective breeding was practiced by the two studs , and farmers tested the capabilities of young horses to select breeding stock . 
 = = = Early 20th century = = = 
 At the very beginning of the 20th century , the Carrossier Normand was considered the best carriage horses available . The arrival of automobiles , and corresponding decline in demand for carriage horses , coincided with a split in the breed . A distinction was made between the lighter , faster horses in the breed , used for sport , and larger horses , used for agricultural work . The lighter horses eventually became the French Trotter ( for driving ) and Anglo @-@ Norman ( for riding and cavalry ) , while the heavier horses became the Norman Cob . In 1912 , when French horse populations were at their highest , there were 422 stallions at the Saint @-@ Lo stud , mainly cobs and trotters . When the original Carrossier Normand became extinct in the 1920s , breeding focused on the two remaining types , with the Norman Cob continuing to be used for farming and the Anglo @-@ Norman being used to create the Selle Francais , the national French sport horse . 
 In the regions of Saint @-@ Lo and Cotentin , the Norman Cob was widespread in agricultural uses until 1950 , and the population continued to increase in the first half of the 20th century , even through the occupation during World War II . Even the Percheron , which was internationally recognized as the Norman draft horse , was not as popular in the homeland of the Norman Cob breed . In 1945 , Norman Cob stallions accounted for 40 % of the conscripted horses , and in 1950 a studbook was created for the breed . 
 Like all French draft breeds , the Norman Cob was threatened by the advent of mechanization in farming . The only option left to many breeders was to redirect their production to the meat markets . However , the Norman Cob avoided this , through the efforts of Laurens St. Martin , the head of the Saint @-@ Lo stud in 1944 and the developer of the Selle Francais . He began crossing Thoroughbred stallions with Norman Cob mares to produce Selle Francais horses , and the success of this program allowed a reorientation of the Cob breeding programs . Although population numbers continued to decline until 1995 , the physical characteristics of the breed remained much the same , not growing heavier and slower as many of the French draft breeds did due to breeding for the production of meat . Even today , some Selle Francais from Norman bloodlines are similar to the Norman Cob in appearance . 
 = = = 1950 to 2000 = = = 
 The modern Norman Cob is slightly heavier than it was in the early 20th century , due to lighter horses of the breed being absorbed into the Selle Francais breed . In 1976 , the National Stud at Saint @-@ Lo had 186 stallions , including 60 Norman Cobs . In the same year , the breed registry was reorganized , and the Norman Cob placed in the draft horse category . The reorganization of the breed registry helped to reinvigorate Norman Cob breeding , and to bring attention to the risk of extinction of the breed . In 1980 , the Institut national de la recherche agronomique and Institut national agronomique performed demographic and genetic analysis of threatened breeds of horses within France . In 1982 , researchers concluded that the Norman Cob has been inbred and suffered genetic drift from its original population . The increasing average age of Norman Cob breeders also made the breed 's situation precarious . 
 Enthusiasts worked to reorient the breed towards driving and recreation pursuits , and since 1982 have again reorganized the breed association . In 1992 , a new studbook was created for the breed , with new selection criteria designed to preserve the quality of the breed , particularly its gaits . The latest editions of the breed registry and studbook are controlled by the Syndicat national des <unk> et <unk> de chevaux Cob <unk> ( <unk> , National Union of Farmers and Users of Normandy Cob Horses ) , based in <unk> @-@ sur @-@ Vire . The association works to preserve and promote the breed throughout France , focusing especially on Normandy , Vendee and Anjou . In 1994 , Normandy contained 2000 Percheron and Norman Cob horses , and annually bred around 600 foals of these two breeds . This included approximately half of the Norman Cobs bred in France . 
 = = = 2000 to today = = = 
 Today , Norman Cobs are mainly found in the departments of Manche , Calvados and Orne , which form the area where the breed was originally developed . The region of Saint @-@ Lo , which ranks first in the production of Norman Cobs , represents 35 percent of new births . The Norman Cob is also present around the Haras de la Vendee ( Stud at Vendee ) , which represents 25 percent of births , the Haras du Pin and in central Massif . In 2004 , there were just over 600 French breeders of the Norman Cob , and in 2005 , 914 Norman Cob mares were bred , with 65 stallions recorded as active in France . In recent years , the number of Norman Cobs has remained relatively stable . In 2011 , there were 319 Norman Cob births in France , and numbers of annual births between 1992 and 2010 ranged between 385 and 585 . 
 Members of the breed are shown annually at the Paris International Agricultural Show . There are fairs held for the breed at <unk> and <unk> , in Manche . The National Stud at Saint @-@ Lo remains involved in the maintenance and development of the breed , and organizes the annual national competition for the breed . The stud also organizes events at which to present the breed to the public , including the Normandy Horse Show . The Norman Cob is beginning to be exported to other countries , especially Belgium . In that country , some are bred pure , while others are crossed on the Ardennes to improve the latter 's gaits . Approximately 15 horses are exported annually , traveling to Belgium , Germany , Switzerland and Italy for leisure , logging and agricultural uses . 
 = = Uses = = 
 A multi @-@ purpose breed , the Norman Cob was formerly used wherever there was a need . It was utilized in a variety of agricultural and other work by farmers , and was used by the army for pulling artillery . The postal service used it to pull mail carriages , which it was capable of doing at a fast trot over bad roads for long distances . Postal workers appreciated the breed for its willingness to remain calm , stationary and tethered for long periods of time . Due to the modernization of agriculture and transport , it is now used very little in these areas . 
 The breed is popular for recreational and competitive driving , to which it is well suited in temperament . In 1997 , the rules of driving events in France were modified to take into account the speed of execution of the course , which made lighter , faster horses more competitive . The Norman Cob and the lighter type of Boulonnais were particularly affected . The Norman Cob 's gaits , calm temperament and willingness to master technical movements make it an excellent competitor , and in 2011 , more than a third of the horses represented in the French driving championships were Norman Cobs . Many Norman Cobs represent France in driving events at the international level . 
 The Norman Cob is also used for riding , and may be used for most equestrian disciplines . It is particularly well suited for vaulting . Elderly and nervous riders often appreciate the breed 's calm temperament . Lighter Cobs can be used for mounted hunts . Crosses between the Norman Cob and Thoroughbred continue to be made to create saddle horses , generally with 25 to 50 percent Cob blood . Some Norman Cobs are bred for the meat market . The breed is sometimes preferred by butchers because of the lighter carcass weight and increased profitability over the Thoroughbred , while at the same time retaining meat similar in flavor and appearance to that of the Thoroughbred . 
 = Billy ( pygmy hippo ) = 
 Billy , or William Johnson Hippopotamus , ( 1920s – October 11 , 1955 ) was a Pygmy Hippopotamus given as a pet to U.S. President Calvin Coolidge . Captured in Liberia , he was given to Coolidge by Harvey Samuel Firestone in 1927 . Billy spent most of his life in the National Zoo in Washington D.C .. In addition to his fame as an exotic presidential pet — which afforded him a trip to the 1939 New York World 's Fair — Billy is also notable as the common ancestor to most pygmy hippos in American zoos . By the time of his death in 1955 , Billy had sired 23 calves , 13 of whom survived at least a year . 
 = = Early years = = 
 In 1927 , Harvey Samuel Firestone , the founder of the Firestone Tire and Rubber Company , acquired Billy in Liberia , where he was captured on one of Firestone Tires ' large plantations . Calvin Coolidge , who was the U.S. President at the time , was known for his collection of animals , including many dogs , birds , a wallaby , lion cubs , a raccoon and other unusual animals . At the time , pygmy hippos were virtually unknown in the United States . On May 26 , 1927 , Coolidge was informed that he would receive the rare hippo , already adult @-@ sized at 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) long and around 600 pounds ( 270 kg ) , as a gift . 
 In Coolidge 's autobiography he wrote about the unusual menagerie he collected and stated that he donated many of these animals , including Billy , to the National Zoo . Though Coolidge had a deep fascination with animals , he was overshadowed by Theodore Roosevelt , who was more widely known for and associated with his interest in animals . By August 1927 , Coolidge had sent the second largest collection of animals of any president after Roosevelt to the zoo , and paid them frequent visits . Upon his arrival , Billy was one of the most @-@ valuable animals the zoo had ever received , and was only the eighth pygmy hippopotamus to be brought to the United States . Billy was a popular animal ; several months after his arrival , The New York Times wrote Billy was " as frisky as a dog . Even the antics of the monkeys go unobserved when the keeper opens the tiny hippo 's cage and cuts up with him . " 
 = = Parenting troubles = = 
 Today , pygmy hippos breed well in captivity : since Billy 's arrival , 58 pygmy hippos have been born at the National Zoo alone . As one of the earliest pygmy hippos in captivity in the U.S. zoo system , Billy went on to become the direct ancestor of nearly all pygmy hippos in American zoos . When Billy first came to the zoo , however , keepers did not know much about pygmy hippopotamus husbandry . A mate for Billy , a female named Hannah , was acquired by the zoo on September 4 , 1929 . Billy 's and Hannah 's first calf was born on August 26 , 1931 , but did not survive the week . " Inability to survive the neglect of an errant mother was the cause given for baby Hippo 's demise " , eulogized The Washington Post . Over the next two years , two more calves would follow , both of which died in infancy . Billy 's third calf was killed when Hannah rolled on top of the baby and crushed it . " She 's just a bad mother " , said the zoo 's long @-@ time director Dr. William M. Mann to The Washington Post , upon the death of the third infant . 
 As Hannah 's fourth pregnancy progressed , zookeepers noticed she seemed to be less agitated than previous pregnancies and attributed this to their new quarters : during her previous three pregnancies , Hannah had lived in the zoo 's lion house , a stressful environment for a pregnant hippo . On Mother 's Day of 1938 , Hannah gave birth to a healthy baby . 
 = = Life as a stud = = 
 Such was Billy 's popularity in the 1930s that at the end of the decade he traveled to Queens , New York , for the 1939 New York World 's Fair , where he appeared in the Firestone exhibit . Billy and Hannah successfully had more calves , and because of Billy 's worth as a breeding stud , in 1940 , Mann traveled to Liberia as part of the Smithsonian @-@ Firestone animal expedition , and acquired a second mate for Billy , another female who came to be known as Matilda . 
 Between 1931 and 1954 , Hannah gave birth to 15 of Billy 's calves , 7 of whom were reared or lived at least one year . Between 1943 and 1956 , Matilda gave birth to 8 of Billy 's calves , 6 of which were reared . At some point during the 1940s , the press started to refer to Billy as William Johnson Hippopotamus . The zoo developed the tradition of naming all his calves Gumdrop , using Roman numerals to distinguish them . By the birth of Gumdrop XVI , the zoo had noticed something curious : of all Billy 's calves , only one was male . Research would later confirm that pygmy hippos in captivity are far more likely to give birth to females , though not by such an extreme ratio as Billy . Twenty @-@ three years after Coolidge 's death ( January 5 , 1933 ) Billy himself died on October 11 , 1955 , five months before the birth of Gumdrop XVIII . " He carried his work on to the end " , said a zoo official . Hannah followed Billy in death on March 6 , 1958 . 
 = = A legacy continued = = 
 After a year or two at the National Zoo , Billy 's offspring were typically sent to other locations . Among the places to which his progeny were transferred : the Cole Bros. Circus , Philadelphia Zoological Gardens , Catskill Game Farm , the Miller Bros. Circus , the Fort Worth Zoo , as well as international destinations such as Sydney and London . In 1960 , after learning that the zoo 's female pygmy hippos remained without male companionship after Billy 's death , Liberian President William Tubman dispatched a search party to find a new male pygmy hippopotamus to ship to Washington . The pygmy hippopotamus , named <unk> , arrived in Brooklyn , New York , on February 4 , 1960 , and traveled via station wagon to Washington the next day , where he would continue Billy 's breeding legacy with the zoo 's female pygmy hippos , two of which were Billy 's daughters . 
 = Cryptoprocta spelea = 
 Cryptoprocta spelea , also known as the giant fossa , is an extinct species of carnivore from Madagascar in the family Eupleridae , which is most closely related to the mongooses and includes all Malagasy carnivorans . It was first described in 1902 , and in 1935 was recognized as a separate species from its closest relative , the living fossa ( Cryptoprocta ferox ) . C. spelea is larger than the fossa , but otherwise similar . The two have not always been accepted as distinct species . When and how the larger form became extinct is unknown ; there is some anecdotal evidence , including reports of very large fossas , that there is more than one surviving species . 
 The species is known from subfossil bones found in a variety of caves in northern , western , southern , and central Madagascar . In some sites , it occurs with remains of C. ferox , but there is no evidence that the two lived at the same time . Living species of comparably sized , related carnivores in other regions manage to coexist , suggesting that the same may have happened with both C. spelea and C. ferox . C. spelea would have been able to prey on larger animals than its smaller relative could have , including the recently extinct giant lemurs . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 In 1902 , Guillaume Grandidier described subfossil carnivoran remains from two caves on Madagascar as a larger " variety " of the living fossa ( Cryptoprocta ferox ) , C. ferox var. spelea . G. Petit , writing in 1935 , considered spelea to represent a distinct species . Charles Lamberton reviewed subfossil and living Cryptoprocta in 1939 and agreed with Petit in recognizing two species , naming this species from a specimen found at Ankazoabo Cave near <unk> . The specific name spelea means " cave " and was given because of the location of its discovery . However , Lamberton apparently had at most three skeletons of the living fossa , not nearly enough to capture the range of variation in that species , and some later authors did not separate C. spelea and C. ferox as species . Steven Goodman and colleagues , using larger samples , compiled another set of Cryptoprocta measurements that was published in a 2004 article . They found that some subfossil Cryptoprocta fell outside the range of variation of living C. ferox , and identified those as representing C. spelea . Grandidier had not designated a type specimen for the species , and to maintain C. spelea as the name for the larger form of the fossa , Goodman and colleagues designated a specimen to serve as the type specimen ( specifically , a neotype ) . 
 Lamberton recognized a third species , Cryptoprocta antamba , on the basis of a mandible ( lower jaw ) with abnormally broad spacing between the condyloid processes at the back . He also referred two femora ( upper leg bones ) and a tibia ( lower leg bone ) intermediate in size between C. spelea and C. ferox to this species . The specific name refers to the " antamba " , an animal allegedly from southern Madagascar described by Étienne de Flacourt in 1658 as a large , rare , leopard @-@ like carnivore that eats men and calves and lives in remote mountainous areas ; it may have been the giant fossa . Goodman and colleagues could not locate Lamberton 's material of Cryptoprocta antamba , but suggested that it was based on an abnormal C. spelea . Together , the fossa and C. spelea form the genus Cryptoprocta within the family Eupleridae , which also includes the other Malagasy carnivorans — the falanouc , the <unk> , and the <unk> . DNA sequence studies suggest that the Eupleridae form a single natural ( monophyletic ) group and are most closely related to the mongooses of Eurasia and mainland Africa . 
 = = Description = = 
 Although some morphological differences between the two fossa species have been described , these may be allometric ( growth @-@ related ) , and in their 1986 Mammalian Species account of the fossa , Michael <unk> and Klaus Leonhardt wrote that the two were morphologically identical . However , remains of C. spelea are larger than any living C. ferox . Goodman and colleagues found that skull measurements in specimens they identified as C. spelea were 1 @.@ 07 to 1 @.@ 32 times as large as in adult C. ferox , and postcranial measurements were 1 @.@ 19 to 1 @.@ 37 times as large . The only specimen of C. spelea in which condylobasal length ( a measure of total skull length ) could be ascertained measured 153 @.@ 4 mm ( 6 @.@ 04 in ) , compared to a range of 114 @.@ 5 to 133 @.@ 3 mm ( 4 @.@ 51 to 5 @.@ 25 in ) in adult C. ferox . <unk> ( upper arm bone ) length in twelve C. spelea is 122 @.@ 7 to 146 @.@ 8 mm ( 4 @.@ 83 to 5 @.@ 78 in ) , averaging 137 @.@ 9 mm ( 5 @.@ 43 in ) , compared to 108 @.@ 5 to 127 @.@ 5 mm ( 4 @.@ 27 to 5 @.@ 02 in ) , averaging 116 @.@ 1 mm ( 4 @.@ 57 in ) , in the extant fossa . Body mass estimates for C. spelea range from 17 kg ( 37 lb ) to 20 kg ( 44 lb ) , and it was among the largest carnivores of the island . By comparison , adult C. ferox range from 5 kg ( 11 lb ) to 10 kg ( 22 lb ) . 
 = = Distribution , ecology , and extinction = = 
 Cryptoprocta spelea is the only extinct member of the order Carnivora known from Madagascar ; recently extinct Madagascan animals also include at least 17 species of lemurs , most of which are larger than the living forms , as well as elephant birds and Malagasy hippopotamuses , among others . Subfossil remains of the giant fossa have been found in Holocene cave sites from the northern end of Madagascar along the west coast to the far south , and in the central highlands . Some sites have yielded both C. spelea and smaller remains referable to the living species , C. ferox ; however , lack of robust stratigraphic knowledge and no available radiocarbon dating on subfossil Cryptoprocta bones makes it uncertain whether the two species lived in the same region at the same time . The size ratio between the two species is within the range of ratios seen between similar @-@ sized living cats and mongooses found in the same areas , suggesting that the two species may have been able to occur together . 
 With its large size and massive jaws and teeth , C. spelea was a formidable , " puma @-@ like " predator , and in addition to smaller lemurids , it may have eaten some of the big , now extinct subfossil lemurs that would have been too large for C. ferox . No subfossil evidence has been found to definitively show that lemurs were its prey ; this assumption is based on the diet of the smaller , extant species of fossa . Other possible prey include tenrecs , smaller <unk> , and even young Malagasy hippopotamuses . Its extinction may have changed predation dynamics on Madagascar . 
 The IUCN Red List currently lists C. spelea as an extinct species ; why and when it became extinct remains unknown . However , local people on Madagascar often recognize two forms of fossa , a larger fosa mainty ( or " black Cryptoprocta " ) and a smaller fosa <unk> ( or " reddish Cryptoprocta " ) . There are also some anecdotal records of very large living fossas , such as a 2 @-@ m ( 7 ft ) , 30 @-@ kg ( 70 lb ) fossa at Morondava . Goodman and colleagues suggested that further research may demonstrate that there is more than one species of fossa yet alive . 
 = Glitter ( soundtrack ) = 
 Glitter is the soundtrack album from the film of the same name , and the eighth studio album by American singer Mariah Carey . It was released on September 11 , 2001 , by Virgin Records America . The album was a complete musical departure from any of Carey 's previous releases , focusing heavily on recreating a 1980s disco era to accompany the film , set in 1983 . By covering or heavily sampling several older tunes and songs , Carey created Glitter as an album that would help viewers connect with the film , as well as incorporating newly written ballads . The singer collaborated with Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis and DJ Clue , who co @-@ produced the album . 
 Musically , Glitter was structured to be a retro @-@ influenced album and have more of a dance @-@ oriented element . On several songs , critics noted Carey to be more sexually suggestive lyrically than before , in part due to the inclusion of several guest hip hop musicians . Glitter featured several other musical acts such as Eric Benét , Ludacris , Busta Rhymes , Fabolous , and Ja Rule . Both the album and its accompanying film were met with generally negative reviews from music critics who felt the album failed in trying to capture a genuine 1980s theme , and there were too many guest appearances . Universally , Glitter was viewed as a commercial and critical failure , leading to Virgin Records cancelling Carey 's $ 100 million five @-@ album contract and dropping her from the label . While it debuted at number seven on the US Billboard 200 , it was Carey 's lowest @-@ first week sales of any album she had ever released . Internationally , it peaked outside the top @-@ ten in many countries , but topped the charts in Japan . Glitter remains one of Carey 's lowest selling albums . 
 Several singles were released but attained weak charting positions . " Loverboy " served as the first single from the album and quickly became Carey 's lowest charting lead single globally . As the song stalled on the American charts , Virgin dropped the price to 0 @.@ 99 cents to spur sales . The reduction helped the single peak at number two on the US Billboard Hot 100 . Internationally , the song failed to garner much traction . " Never Too Far " , the album 's second single , became a minor American hit , reaching number 81 on the US Hot 100 . Subsequent singles failed to make much of an impact on prominent global charts , some not charting at all . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 Following the release of Carey 's album Butterfly in 1997 , she began working on a film and soundtrack project titled at that time as All That Glitters . However , Columbia Records and Carey were also working on a greatest hits album to be released in time for Thanksgiving season in November 1998 . Carey put All That Glitters on hold and her greatest hits album # 1 's was released in November 1998 . Another studio album , Rainbow , was released in 1999 . After the album ran its course , Carey wanted to finish the film and soundtrack project . But by this time , Carey and her now ex @-@ husband Tommy Mottola , head of her record company Columbia , did not have a good working or personal relationship . Mottola wanted Carey off the label and Carey wanted to leave ; however , she still owed Columbia one more album to fulfill her contract . Virgin Records stepped in and offered to pay Columbia $ 20 million to let Carey out of her contract early so that they could sign her for an $ 100 million deal . 
 Carey signed with Virgin and aimed to complete the film and soundtrack project . As part of her contract on her $ 100 million five @-@ album record deal with Virgin Records , Carey was given full creative control . She opted to record an album partly mixed with 1980s influenced disco and other similar genres , in order to go with the film 's setting . As the release date grew nearer , the film and album title were changed from All That Glitters to Glitter . In early 2001 , Carey 's relationship with Latin singer Luis Miguel ended , while she was busy filming Glitter and recording the soundtrack . Due to the pressure of losing her relationship , being on a new record label , filming a movie , and recording an album , Carey began to have nervous breakdown . She began posting a series of disturbing messages on her official website , and displayed erratic behavior while on several promotional outings . 
 = = Controversy = = 
 = = = TRL incident = = = 
 Following commencement for Glitter and the release of the soundtrack 's lead single " Loverboy " , Carey embarked on a short promotional campaign for the song and its parent album . On July 19 , 2001 , Carey made a surprise appearance on the MTV program Total Request Live ( TRL ) . As the show 's host Carson Daly began taping following a commercial break , Carey began singing " Loverboy " a capella from behind a curtain . As he questioned the audience , she came out onto the filming stage , pushing an ice cream cart while wearing a large men 's shirt . Seemingly anxious and exhilarated , Carey began giving out individual bars of ice cream to fans and guests on the program , while waving to the crowd down below on Times Square , while diverging into a rambling monologue regarding therapy . Carey then walked to Daly 's platform and began a striptease , in which she shed her shirt to reveal a tight yellow and green ensemble , leading him to exclaim " Mariah Carey has lost her mind ! " While she later revealed that Daly was aware of her presence in the building prior to her appearance , she admitted that he was meant to act surprised in order to provide a more dramatic effect for the program . Carey 's appearance on TRL garnered strong media attention , with many critics and newspapers citing her behavior as " troubled " and " erratic " . 
 = = = Hospitalization = = = 
 In the days following her appearance on TRL , Carey began displaying what was described as " erratic behavior " . On July 20 , Carey held a record signing for the " Loverboy " single at Roosevelt Field shopping mall in Long Island before fans and the media . As a camera crew covered the event , she began rambling on several subjects before finally discussing radio @-@ host Howard Stern and how his jokes about herself on his program bothered her greatly and how everything in life should be positive . At that point , Carey 's publicist Cindi Berger grabbed the microphone from her hand , and asked the news crew to stop filming . Berger said later , " She was not speaking clearly and not talking about what she had come to talk about : her record . " Only days later , Carey began posting irregular voice notes and messages on her official website : 
 I 'm trying to understand things in life right now and so I really don 't feel that I should be doing music right now . What I 'd like to do is just a take a little break or at least get one night of sleep without someone popping up about a video . All I really want is [ to ] just be me and that 's what I should have done in the first place ... I don 't say this much but guess what , I don 't take care of myself . 
 Following the quick removal of the messages , Berger commented that Carey had been " obviously exhausted and not thinking clearly " when she posted the letters . Two days later on July 26 , she was hospitalized , citing " extreme exhaustion " and a " physical and emotional breakdown " . News websites and programs began reporting how Carey threatened to commit suicide by slitting her wrists the night before , and how Patricia , Carey 's mother , hastily called for help . When questioned regarding Carey 's suicidal rumor , Berger claimed Carey had broken dishes out of desperation , and as a result , accidentally cut her hands and feet . Following her induction at an un @-@ disclosed hospital in Connecticut , Carey remained hospitalized and under doctor 's care for two weeks , followed by an extended absence from the public . 
 = = = Project delay = = = 
 Following the heavy media coverage surrounding Carey 's publicized breakdown and hospitalization , Virgin Records and 20th Century Fox delayed the release of both Glitter , as well as its soundtrack of the same name . The announcement was made on August 9 , 2001 , that both the soundtrack and the film would be postponed three weeks , respectively from August 21 to September 11 , and from August 31 to September 21 . When asked regarding the motives behind the delay , Nancy Berry , vice chairman of Virgin Music Group Worldwide , addressed Carey 's personal and physical condition : 
 Mariah is looking forward to being able to participate in both her album and movie projects and we are hopeful that this new soundtrack release date will allow her to do so . She has been making great recovery progress , and continues to grow stronger every day . Virgin Music Worldwide continues to give its absolute commitment and support to Mariah on every level . 
 When discussing the project 's weak commercial reaction , Carey blamed the terrorist attacks of September 11 . Carey made specific remarks regarding the album 's commercial failure stating , " I released it on September 11 , 2001 . The talk shows needed something to distract from 9 / 11 . I became a punching bag . I was so successful that they tore me down because my album was at number 2 instead of number 1 . The media was laughing at me and attacked me . " 
 = = = Departure from Virgin = = = 
 Glitter performed poorly at the box @-@ office . And following the poor sales of the album as well , Virgin invoked a clause in its contract with Carey that allowed Virgin get out of the $ 100 million deal for approximately $ 28 million . Subsequently , Virgin dropped Carey from the label roster . These decisions were brought on due to the low sales of the album , as well as the negative publicity surrounding her breakdown . While the two sides were laying out the terms for Carey 's exit from Virgin , Carey 's team requested that the two parties just use the word " canceled " when asked by the media regarding the failed venture . Less than 24 hours after the settlement was made , Virgin released a statement that they had " terminated " the contract with Carey , and paid her $ 28 million to do so . Carey 's lawyers threatened to sue , with her attorney Marshall Grossman calling their behavior in the matter " deplorable " . Virgin replied that in terms of Carey 's payout , they only listed the money they gave her for departing , not including the $ 23 @.@ 5 million they already had paid while under contract for the first and only album they released by her . Additionally , Virgin stated they would counter @-@ sue Carey for " defamation " following Carey 's press release . The matter was resolved outside of court , with Carey and Virgin opting not to take the matter to the judicial system . Soon after , Carey flew to Italy for a period of five months . After several months , Carey signed a new $ 20 million deal with Island Records , which also included Carey 's own vanity label , MonarC Entertainment . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 Musically , Glitter was notably different from anything Carey had ever written or recorded , drawing influence from the 1980s . Due to the parent film taking place in 1983 , the soundtrack harbored on recreating an older sound , while incorporating the usual ballads for which Carey was known . While some critics favored the album 's retro style , and inclusion of several sampled melodies , many felt that Glitter lacked originality , and its excess of guest artists overpowered Carey 's artistry . In an interview with MTV News , Carey described the album 's content , as well as its influences : 
 There are songs that are definitely going to take people back and make them go , ' Oh , man , this song from the ' 80s — I loved it growing up ' . Or people who never heard the songs before might be like , ' This is cool . ' When you see the movie , you 're gonna see the uptempo songs and the songs that are remakes in there as they would have sounded in the ' 80s , but the album is the way that I would make the record now , and the ballads can stand on their own as songs from a Mariah Carey album . 
 Serving as the project 's lead single , " Loverboy " features a sample from " Candy " by American band Cameo , which interpolates the melody into the chorus and instrumental introduction . Additionally , aside from sampling " Candy " as the musical bed for the song , Cameo serves as a featured artist on the song . Sarah Rodman from the Boston Herald compared it to Carey 's previous lead singles , and described its production as " another in an increasingly long line of glitzy , candy @-@ coated , creatively stunted Carey songs " . The song 's lyrics and vocals were described as " super @-@ sexed " by Sal Cinquemani from Slant magazine when put into comparison with Carey 's previous work . The official remix for " Loverboy " also earned a place on Glitter , adding rap verses from both Ludacris and Da Brat to the original version . The album 's second release , " Never Too Far " , was written and produced by Carey and Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis . Described as an " adult @-@ contemporary , slow @-@ jam love song " , the song 's lyrics read " Too painful to talk about it , so I hold it in / So my heart can mend and be brave enough to love again " , speaking of emotions felt by the protagonist in the film . " Never Too Far " features " a bed of synthesized strings , gentle drums and Spanish @-@ style guitar " as its primary instrumentation , and incorporates violin and keyboard notes prior to the first verse . The third single from Glitter , " Don 't Stop ( Funkin ' 4 Jamaica ) " , was composed by Carey and DJ Clue , and interpolates " Funkin ' for Jamaica ( N.Y. ) " by Tom Browne . Featuring guest verses from Mystikal , with the former declaring " Ain 't nothin ' you could do with the man / Except for shake your ass and clap your hands " , while Carey responds " Don 't stop bay @-@ <unk> , its ex @-@ ta @-@ see / Turn me up a little . " Serving as the fourth and final single from Glitter , " Reflections ( Care Enough ) " was written by Carey and Philippe Pierre , and released as a single towards the end of 2001 . Lyrically , the song 'a protagonist " laments the end of a relationship " , while confronting her mother regarding her early abandonment . Additionally , during its bridge , Carey " eerily " refers to abortion , " You could have had the decency / To give me up / Before you gave me life " , as an option over abandoning the child . Cinquemani felt the song was reminiscent of Carey 's ballads during the earlier lengths of her career , and described the song as a " simple beauty " . In a review for the album in The Free Lance – Star , a writer outed the song 's first verse " A displeased little girl / Wept years in silence / And whispers wishes you 'd materialize / She pressed on night and day / To keep on living / And tried so many ways / To keep her soul alive " as his favorite lyric from Glitter , and described it as an " emotional and heart @-@ wrenching ballad " . Conceptualized in 1997 , " Lead the Way " was an unused track from Butterfly ( 1997 ) , written and produced by Carey and Walter Afanasieff . The ballad was the last song composed by the pair , as they halted work with one another shortly after its completion , due to their growing creative differences . Though written , the song was recorded during 2000 , as Carey began producing Glitter . Beginning with a classic and simple piano introduction , Carey starts the song with soft and breathy vocals , eventually leading to a vocal climax , in which she belts an 18 @-@ second note , the longest from any of her recordings . He described it as one of her " best vocal performances " , as well as one of her " favorite songs . " In an interview with MTV News , Carey addressed Glitter as well as " Lead the Way " : 
 To me , ' Glitter ' is one of my best albums . A lot of people got confused , not knowing whether it was a soundtrack or an album or what . There 's a song called ' Lead the Way ' which I did on Ally McBeal , and it 's coming out in January . I sang the song on [ the show ] . It 's one of those ballads that basically everybody that 's been following my career says reminds them of a ' Vision of Love ' -type record , and that 's one of my favorite songs from the record . The cool thing for me is to be able to tie in ' Never Too Far ' and ' Hero ' . Having the Greatest Hits coming out , to be able to tie in both those records is almost like a circle . 
 Carey 's cover of the 1982 <unk> song " Last Night a D.J. Saved My Life " was one of the album 's more club @-@ themed songs . It features rappers Fabolous and Busta Rhymes , and was composed and produced by Carey and DJ Clue . Michael Paoletta from Billboard called it a " painful low " on Glitter , and commented how Carey seemed detached and over @-@ powered on the song , due to the inclusion of several male guests . " Twister " , another one of the album 's ballads , drew strong comparisons to Carey 's older work , in light of the very different remainder of the album . Paoletta called it " quietly heartbreaking " , in reference to the song 's lyrics , which relate to the suicide of Carey 's friend and hairstylist , <unk> Twist . According to Carey , Twist took her own life in the spring of 2000 , and was known for her joy of life and her ability to put people at ease . She was " child like and effervescent " , but behind her mask of happiness was " a well " of lifelong and deep @-@ rooted pain . In " Twister " , Carey described the hidden inner @-@ struggle of her friend , and tried to find " closure " ; her " way of saying goodbye " . Chris Chuck from Daily News described its lyrics as " an airy requiem for a friend lost to suicide " and felt it was " the only memorable song on the album . " With lyrics reading " Feelin ' kinda fragile and I 've got a lot to handle / But I guess this is my way of saying goodbye " , David Browne from Entertainment Weekly felt that Carey was possibly referring to her own suicide rather than her friends , especially in light of the events that were taking place during the album 's release . " Didn 't Mean to Turn You On " is a cover of the 1984 <unk> song of the same title . Aside from the heavy sampling of the hook and lyrics , Carey , who produced the song alongside Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis , added keyboard notes and synthesizers to enhance the songs club appeal . In the song , Carey sings " I was only trying to be nice / Only trying to be nice / <unk> , I didn 't mean to turn you on " , indicating a woman who is weakly apologetic over fooling a man over intimacy . On the track " Want You " , American singer Eric Benét duets with Carey , while lyrically implying and suggesting the " exploration of bedroom fantasies . " 
 = = = " Loverboy " sample controversy = = = 
 Throughout 2000 , Carey had already been writing and recording material for Glitter and during this period , she developed the concept for " Loverboy " . Originally , Carey had sampled the melody and hook from the 1978 Yellow Magic Orchestra song " Firecracker " , using an interpolation of it throughout the chorus and introduction . In early theatrical trailers for Glitter , the original version of " Loverboy " was still featured . As Carey had ended her contract with Columbia Records , Jennifer Lopez was signed by Tommy Mottola , and had begun recording material for her album , J.Lo ( 2001 ) . According to record producer Irv Gotti , Mottola knew of Carey 's usage of the " Firecracker " sample , and attempted to have Lopez use the same sample before her . At the time , Carey had become increasingly paranoid over outside executives being informed about Glitter , especially following news of Lopez 's " theft " of the song . When the music publishers for " Firecracker " were questioned , they admitted Carey had licensed usage of the sample first , and Lopez had signed for it over one month later , under Mottola 's arrangement . Ultimately Carey was not able to use the original sample , as Lopez 's album was to be released far earlier than Glitter . She subsequently changed the composition of " Loverboy " , and incorporated a new sample , " Candy " by Cameo . The " Firecracker " sample was eventually used by Lopez on her song " I 'm Real " and according to Gotti , Mottola contacted him with instructions to create the Murder Remix of " I 'm Real " to sound exactly like another Glitter track he produced , titled " If We " featuring rappers Ja Rule and Nate Dogg . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 On the website Metacritic , which averages professional reviews into a numerical score , the album received a 59 / 100 , indicating " generally mixed or average reviews . " Allmusic critic Stephen Thomas Erlewine gave the album one and a half out of five stars , calling it an " utter meltdown -- the pop equivalent of Chernobyl " and wrote " It 's an embarrassment , one that might have been easier to gawk at if its creator wasn 't so close to emotional destruction at the time of release . " Michael Paoletta from Billboard was less critical , citing it as a " minor misstep in a stellar career that has earned the singer a few free passes . Editor Sarah Rodman from The Boston Herald gave Glitter a mixed review , praising Carey 's song @-@ writing and voice , although panning the excess of secondary musical guests . While criticizing the album 's roster of appearances , Rodman wrote " the artists contribute mostly distracting , self @-@ promoting <unk> <unk> all over what could have been Carey 's best , most emotionally mature record to date . " Daily News editor Chuck <unk> rated the album two and a half out of five stars , writing " Maybe this was the best Mariah Carey could muster under the circumstances , but ' Glitter ' needed more work . " David Browne from Entertainment Weekly gave Glitter a mixed review , criticizing the abundance of rappers and describing Carey 's vocals as " barely there " on several tracks . Concluding his review on a poor note , Browne wrote " ' Glitter ' is a mess , but its shameless genre hopping ( and Carey 's crash ) makes it an unintentional concept album about the toll of relentless careerism . " 
 Heather Vaughn from The Free @-@ Lance Star gave Glitter a positive review , complimenting both the dance @-@ oriented tracks , as well as the ballads . In reference to their weight on the album as a whole , Vaughn wrote " Sounds like Mariah 's other albums , but with more of an 80s twist . The ballads really let you hear how stunning her voice actually is . " Los Angeles Times critic and writer Natalie Nichols gave Glitter two out of a possible four stars , writing how Carey let the album " reflect the synth @-@ driven robo @-@ funk of that wretched decade . " Nichols called the album 's covers " tepid and pointless " , while agreeing that Carey was overwhelmed by the many guest rappers , calling her voice " semi @-@ disguised " . Rob Sheffield from Rolling Stone gave the album three out of five stars , criticizing the ballads as " big and goopy , with zero melodic or emotional punch . " Aside from the ballads , Sheffield felt Glitter failed to deliver the success or quality that Carey needed on her debut film and soundtrack . He concluded his review of the album with a comparison to Whitney Houston 's massive The Bodyguard ( 1992 ) , " Mariah still hasn 't found her theme song , the one people will remember her voice by . Glitter is good enough to make you hope she finds it . " Slant Magazine magazine editor Sal Cinquemani awarded Glitter three out of five stars , writing " Carey 's edgier tracks are inundated with so many guest artists that her sound ultimately becomes muddled ; her pop tunes are so formulaic that it 's difficult to distinguish one from the next . " USA Today 's Edna Gunderson rated the album one and a half out of four stars , criticizing Carey 's overall image for the project , as well as the many guest artists on the record . She described Carey as " cheapening her image " and wrote " The whiff of desperation grows more pungent on ' Glitter ' in Carey 's gratuitous coloratura and transparent enlistment of street @-@ cred boosters such as rappers Ja Rule and Mystikal . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Glitter became Carey 's least commercially successful album to that point . It debuted at number seven on the Billboard 200 with first @-@ week sales of 116 @,@ 000 copies , but far from the first @-@ week sales of 323 @,@ 000 with her previous release , Rainbow in 1999 . Glitter became Carey 's lowest peaking album in the United States , with her second album Emotions ( 1991 ) , coming in at number four . It remained in the album 's chart for only eight weeks , and was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , denoting shipments of 500 @,@ 000 units ; and as it fell from the charts , received platinum certification , denoting shipments of 1 million in the US . Large quantities of the album remained unsold in record stores and , as such , record stores have the ability to return unsold product back to the record label <unk> had no effect on the certification already given , however . As of April 2013 , Nielsen SoundScan estimates sales of the Glitter album at 652 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . In Canada , the album peaked at number four on the Canadian Albums Chart . Glitter entered the Australian Albums Chart at its peak position of number thirteen , during the week dated September 9 , 2001 . Remaining in the chart for only three weeks , the album made its exit at number forty on September 23 . Similarly in Austria , Glitter peaked at number fourteen , remaining on the albums chart for only four weeks . 
 In both the Flemish and Wallonian territories in Belgium , Glitter peaked at numbers ten and eleven , respectively , while charting for a total of four weeks . In France , Glitter peaked at number five on the albums chart , during the week dated September 15 , 2001 . Following seventeen weeks fluctuating in the chart , the album was certified Gold by the Syndicat National de l 'Édition Phonographique ( SNEP ) , denoting shipments of 150 @,@ 000 units . French sales of the album are estimated at 121 @,@ 100 copies . On the Dutch Albums Chart , Glitter debuted at number twenty @-@ six , during the week dated September 22 , 2001 . Reaching its peak position of number twelve the following week , the album remained a total of six weeks in the albums chart . In both New Zealand and Norway , Glitter peaked at number eleven , staying within the chart for four and one weeks , respectively . In Switzerland , the album peaked at number seven , and stayed within the chart for ten weeks . The International Federation of the Phonographic Industry ( IFPI ) certified Glitter Gold in Switzerland , for shipments of 20 @,@ 000 copies . On the UK Albums Chart dated September 22 , 2001 , the album made its debut at number ten . The following week , Glitter fell to number twenty @-@ seven , staying in the chart for one more additional week . British sales of the album are at 55 @,@ 080 units as of July 2014 . In Japan , Glitter saw particular commercial success , debuting atop the albums chart and selling 450 @,@ 000 units within a month of release . 
 = = Singles = = 
 " Loverboy " was released as the first single from Glitter on July 16 , 2001 . The song received mixed reviews from music critics , with many both criticizing and praising the inclusion of the " Candy " sample . It became one of Carey 's weakest charting lead singles to date , reaching number two on the Billboard Hot 100 . Following Carey 's publicized hospitalization and breakdown , as well as Virgin 's price reduction on the single , " Loverboy " managed to attain a new peak of number two on the chart . Although being propelled by high sales , radio airplay was still weak , due to many radio DJs feeling tepid towards its 1980s retro sound . Accompanied by little promotion from Carey , due to her hospitalization , " Loverboy " quickly descended the Hot 100 . Outside the United States , the song attained weak charting , peaking inside the top ten in Australia and Canada , and within the top twenty in Italy and the United Kingdom . The music video for " Loverboy " features Carey dressed in a variation of revealing outfits , while patrolling a large race track as her ' loverboy ' wins the race . The video was notable for portraying Carey in a more sexually oriented manner than before . 
 " Never Too Far " , the album 's second release , was released on October 23 , 2001 . It failed to impact the main Billboard chart , and achieved weak international charting . Carey was unable to film a music video for the single , as she was still recovering from her collapse . Instead , a video was created using a scene taken directly from the film Glitter , where Billie Frank ( played by Carey ) sings the song at Madison Square Garden during her first sold @-@ out concert . Frank 's performance of the song in the film omits its entire second verse , and the song 's development runs in parallel with the film 's love story . The album 's third single , " Don 't Stop ( Funkin ' 4 Jamaica ) " , released on December 10 , 2001 , mirrored the same weak charting as " Never Too Far " , although receiving more rotation on MTV due to its video . Directed by Sanaa Hamri , it features the theme of southern bayous and lifestyles , and presents Carey and Mystikal in " southern style " clothing and hairstyles . Some shots feature three versions of Carey singing into a microphone on the screen at one time . The final single released from Glitter was " Reflections ( Care Enough ) " , which received a limited release in Japan on December 15 , 2001 . Following its limited promotional push from Virgin , and the absence of a music video , the song failed to make much of an impact . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 " Loverboy " and " Loverboy ( Remix ) " both contain a sample of " Candy " by Cameo . 
 " Didn 't Mean to Turn You On " is a cover of <unk> 's " I Didn 't Mean to Turn You On " . The cover is produced by Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis , who produced <unk> 's original song . Mariah sang over the original instrumental as well . 
 " Don 't Stop ( Funkin ' 4 Jamaica ) " contains interpolates of " Funkin ' for Jamaica ( N.Y. ) " by Tom Browne . 
 " Last Night A DJ Saved My Life " contains a sample of " Put Your Hands Where My Eyes Could See " by Busta Rhymes and is a cover of " Last Night a D.J. Saved My Life " by <unk> . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits for Glitter adapted from AllMusic . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = M @-@ 152 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 152 is a state trunkline highway in the US state of Michigan in Cass and Van Buren counties . The highway runs through the Sister Lakes area providing access to the lake cabins and adjoining farmlands . The highway has existed mostly unchanged since the designation was commissioned in the 1930s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 152 begins at an intersection with South County Line Road on the border between Van Buren and Berrien counties just west of Round Lake . Known as 92nd Avenue , M @-@ 152 travels due east past the Sister Lakes area before turning south on 66th Street . From there , the road passes between Dewey and Magician Lakes before returning to its easterly course where it assumes the name Dewey Lake Street . Between the western terminus and Dewey Lake Street , the highway passes provides access to the cabins around the lakes . The route continues eastward for nearly three and a half miles through farmland before terminating at a junction with M @-@ 51 . M @-@ 152 is not on the National Highway System , a system of regionally important highways . In a traffic survey by the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) in 2009 , the department measured the average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) , a computation of the average traffic levels for a segment of roadway on any given day of the year . This was calculated at 3 @,@ 318 vehicles over the entire length of M @-@ 152 . The commercial AADT in the same survey was 73 vehicles . 
 = = History = = 
 M @-@ 152 was assumed into the state trunkline system in 1933 . Aside from completing the pavement surfacing of the road in 1945 , the route has remain unchanged since its inception . The highway has been considered a potential candidate for transfer to local control . MDOT marked it as a " proposed transfer " in its Control Section Atlas in 1978 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = It 's All Over Now , Baby Blue = 
 " It 's All Over Now , Baby Blue " is a song written and performed by Bob Dylan and featured on his Bringing It All Back Home album , released on March 22 , 1965 by Columbia Records ( see 1965 in music ) . The song was recorded on January 15 , 1965 with Dylan 's acoustic guitar and harmonica and William E. Lee 's bass guitar the only instrumentation . The lyrics were heavily influenced by Symbolist poetry and bid farewell to the titular " Baby Blue . " There has been much speculation about the real life identity of " Baby Blue " , with suspects including Joan Baez , David Blue , Paul Clayton , Dylan 's folk music audience , and even Dylan himself . 
 " It 's All Over Now , Baby Blue " has been covered many times by a variety of artists , including Baez , Bryan Ferry , The Seldom Scene , Them , The Byrds , The Animals , The Chocolate Watchband , Graham Bonnet , Judy Collins , Joni Mitchell , Marianne Faithfull , Falco , The 13th Floor Elevators , the Grateful Dead , Link Wray , Hugh Masekela , Echo and the Bunnymen and Bad Religion . Them 's version , released in 1966 influenced garage bands during the mid @-@ 60 's and Beck later sampled it for his 1996 single " Jack @-@ Ass " . The Byrds recorded the song twice in 1965 as a possible follow up single to " Mr. Tambourine Man " and " All I Really Want to Do " , but neither recording was released in that form . The Byrds did release a 1969 recording of the song on their Ballad of Easy Rider album ( see 1969 in music ) . 
 = = Bob Dylan 's version = = 
 = = = Composition and recording = = = 
 Bob Dylan most likely wrote " It 's All Over Now , Baby Blue " in January 1965 . The master take of the song was recorded during the sessions for the Bringing It All Back Home album on January 15 , 1965 and was produced by Tom Wilson . The track was recorded on the same day Dylan recorded the other three songs on side 2 of the album : " Mr. Tambourine Man " , " Gates of Eden " and " It 's Alright Ma ( I 'm Only Bleeding ) " . However , Dylan had been playing those other songs live for some time , allowing them to evolve before recording of the album commenced . For " It 's All Over Now , Baby Blue " , Dylan wanted to record the song before he became too familiar with it . There were at least two studio recordings prior to the one that was released on the album . Dylan recorded a solo acoustic version on January 13 , 1965 ( released in 2005 on The Bootleg Series Vol . 7 : No Direction Home ) and a semi @-@ electric version on January 14 . 
 The version of the song on the album is sparsely arranged with Dylan accompanying himself on acoustic guitar and harmonica , with William E. Lee playing bass guitar . Author Clinton Heylin states that the song is another of Dylan 's " ' go out in the real world ' songs , like " To Ramona " , though less conciliatory – the tone is crueler and more demanding . " As well as being the final track on Bringing It All Back Home , " It 's All Over Now , Baby Blue " was also the final song to be recorded for the album . 
 Bill Janovitz of Allmusic describes the music as beautiful , with folk guitar chord changes and a somber melody , while the chorus , with its line " and it 's all over now , Baby Blue " has a heartbreaking quality to it . Like other Dylan songs of the period , such as " Chimes of Freedom " and " Mr. Tambourine Man " , the lyrics of " It 's All Over Now , Baby Blue " bear the strong influence of Symbolist poets such as Arthur Rimbaud . Lines such as " take what you have gathered from coincidence " reflect the I Ching philosophy that coincidence represents more than mere chance . The song was described by Q magazine as , " The most toxic of strummed kiss @-@ offs , with not a snowball 's chance in hell of reconciliation . " Dylan , later describing the song , said that " I had carried that song around in my head for a long time and I remember that when I was writing it , I 'd remembered a Gene Vincent song . It had always been one of my favorites , Baby Blue ... ' When first I met my baby / she said how do you do / she looked into my eyes and said / my name is Baby Blue . ' It was one of the songs I used to sing back in high school . Of course , I was singing about a different Baby Blue . " 
 = = = Identity of " Baby Blue " = = = 
 Dylan 's two previous albums , The Times They Are A @-@ Changin ' and Another Side of Bob Dylan both ended with a farewell song , " Restless Farewell " and " It Ain 't Me , Babe " respectively . " It 's All Over Now , Baby Blue " concludes Bringing It All Back Home in consistent fashion . Much speculation has surrounded who or what the " Baby Blue " to whom Dylan is singing farewell is . Although Dylan himself has remained mute on the subject , Dylan scholars believe that it is probably an amalgam of personalities within Dylan 's social orbit . One person who has been regarded as the subject of the song is folk singer Joan Baez . Dylan and Baez were still in a relationship and were planning to tour together , but Dylan had been growing as an artist and as a person and may have already been planning to leave the relationship . Another possibility is a singer @-@ songwriter named David Blue . A friend or acquaintance of Dylan 's from his days in New York 's Greenwich Village , Blue is pictured on the cover of Dylan and the Band 's The Basement Tapes album wearing a trench coat . Yet another possibility is Dylan 's one @-@ time friend , folk singer Paul Clayton . Although Clayton had been Dylan 's friend throughout 1964 , and had accompanied Dylan on the road trip across the United States on which " Chimes of Freedom " and " Mr. Tambourine Man " were written , by 1965 he may have become more devoted to Dylan than Dylan was comfortable with , and Clayton 's use of amphetamines may have made him difficult to be around . However , author Paul Williams , in his book Performing Artist : Book One 1960 – 1973 , counters that " Dylan may have been thinking of a particular person as he wrote it , but not necessarily " , adding that the song has such a natural , flowing structure to it , that it could " easily have finished writing itself before Dylan got around to thinking about who ' Baby Blue ' was . " 
 Another interpretation of the song is that it is directed at Dylan 's folk music audience . The song was written at a time when he was moving away from the folk protest movement musically and , as such , can be seen as a farewell to his days as an acoustic guitar @-@ playing protest singer . Dylan 's choice of performing " It 's All Over Now , Baby Blue " as his last acoustic song at the infamous Newport Folk Festival of 1965 , after having had his electric set met with boos , is often used as evidence to support this theory . That particular performance of the song is included in Murray Lerner 's film The Other Side of the Mirror . 
 Yet another interpretation is that Dylan is directing the farewell to himself , particularly his acoustic performer self . The opening line " You must leave now " can be a command , similar to the line " Go away from my window " that opens " It Ain 't Me , Babe " . But it can also be an imperative , meaning just that it is necessary that you leave . And the song is as much about new beginnings as it is about endings . The song not only notes the requirement that Baby Blue leave , but also includes the hope that Baby Blue will move forward , in lines such as " Strike another match , go start anew " . If Dylan is singing the song to himself , then he himself would be the " vagabond who 's rapping at your door / standing in the clothes that you once wore " . That is , the new , electric , surrealist Dylan would be the vagabond , not yet having removed the " clothes " of the old protest singer . Alternatively , the vagabond and " stepping stones " referenced in the song have been interpreted as Dylan 's folk audience whom he needs to leave behind . He would also be telling himself to " Forget the dead you 've left , they will not follow you . " Others to whom he may be saying farewell in the song are any of the women he had known , the political left or to the illusions of his youth . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 In addition to appearing on the Bringing It All Back Home album , " It 's All Over Now , Baby Blue " is also included on the compilation albums Bob Dylan 's Greatest Hits Vol . II , The Essential Bob Dylan , Dylan and the UK version of Bob Dylan 's Greatest Hits . Dylan played the song for Donovan in his hotel room during his May 1965 tour of England in a scene shown in the D. A. Pennebaker documentary Dont Look Back . A version of the song is included on the soundtrack to Martin Scorsese 's documentary No Direction Home . A live version from Dylan 's famous May 17 , 1966 concert in Manchester , England ( popularly but mistakenly known as the Royal Albert Hall concert ) was released in 1985 on Dylan 's box set Biograph and subsequently included on The Bootleg Series Vol . 4 : Bob Dylan Live 1966 , The " Royal Albert Hall " Concert . Another live version , recorded during the Rolling Thunder Revue tour of 1975 , is contained on The Bootleg Series Vol . 5 : Bob Dylan Live 1975 , The Rolling Thunder Revue . As of 2009 , Dylan continued to perform the song in concert . 
 In a 2005 readers ' poll reported in Mojo , " It 's All Over Now , Baby Blue " was listed as the # 10 all @-@ time best Bob Dylan song , and a similar poll of artists ranked the song # 7 . In 2002 , Uncut listed it as the # 11 all @-@ time best Bob Dylan song . 
 = = Covers = = 
 = = = Them 's version = = = 
 The Belfast band Them ( featuring Van Morrison ) recorded a cover of " It 's All Over Now , Baby Blue " that was first released on their album , Them Again , in January 1966 in the UK and April 1966 in the U.S. The song was subsequently issued as a single ( b / w " I 'm Gonna Dress in Black " ) in the Netherlands during October 1966 but failed to reach the Dutch Singles Chart . It was later re @-@ released in Germany in December 1973 with " Bad or Good " on the B @-@ side , following its appearance in the 1972 German television movie , Die Rocker ( aka Rocker ) . The single became a hit in Germany , first entering the charts in February 1974 and peaking at # 13 , during a chart stay of 14 weeks . 
 Morrison recalled his first encounter with Dylan 's music in an interview in 2000 : " I think I heard [ The Freewheelin ' Bob Dylan ] in a record shop in Smith Street . And I just thought it was just incredible that this guy 's not singing about ' moon in June ' and he 's getting away with it ... The subject matter wasn 't pop songs , ya know , and I thought this kind of opens the whole thing up . " Morrison 's record producer at the time , Bert Berns , encouraged him to find models for his songs , so he bought Dylan 's Bringing It All Back Home album in March 1965 . One of the songs on the album held a unique fascination for Morrison and he soon started performing " It 's All Over Now , Baby Blue " in small clubs and pubs as a solo artist ( without Them ) . 
 Producer Tommy Scott was conscious of the importance of Dylan 's music on the current pop scene and was eager for Morrison to cover " It 's All Over Now , Baby Blue " during the 1965 sessions for Them 's second LP . After a failed , preliminary attempt to record the track with session pianist Phil Coulter at Regent Sound studios in London , Scott reconsidered his approach to the song . Scott recalled in interview that " The number wasn 't going down , Van wasn 't sure . Then the guys said he didn 't fancy it and thought it was cheap because I 'd tried to go after the " Here Comes the Night " tempo . " The band returned to the song during a later session at Decca 's recording studios . Scott decided to rearrange the song 's musical backing , incorporating a distinctive recurring blues riff and piano work from Them 's keyboard player , Peter Bardens , resulting in a finished recording that the band were satisfied with . The song featured one of Morrison 's most expressive vocals and included subtle changes to Dylan 's lyrics ; instead of singing " Forget the dead you 've left " Morrison alters the line to " Forget the debts you 've left " . 
 Greil Marcus stated in a 1969 Rolling Stone review that " Only on Dylan 's ' It 's All Over Now , Baby Blue ' does Van truly shatter all the limits on his special powers ... Each note stands out as a special creation – ' the centuries of emotion that go into a musician ’ s choice from one note to the next ' is a phrase that describes the startling depth of this recording . Played very fast , Van 's voice virtually fighting for control over the band , ' Baby Blue ' emerges as music that is both dramatic and terrifying . " In recent years , author Clinton Heylin has noted that Them 's 1966 recording of the song is " that genuine rarity , a Dylan cover to match the original . " After Van Morrison left the band in 1966 , Them spinoff group , The Belfast Gypsies , recorded a cover of the song on their 1967 album , Them Belfast Gypsies . 
 Them 's interpretation of the song , with Morrison as vocalist , became influential during the years 1966 and 1967 , with several garage rock bands , including The Chocolate Watchband and The West Coast Pop Art Experimental Band , recording versions of the song that were indebted to Them 's cover version . Beck used a sample of Them 's 1966 recording of " It 's All Over Now , Baby Blue " as the basis for his single " Jack @-@ Ass " , which appeared on his 1996 album , Odelay ( see 1996 in music ) . Insane Clown Posse later sampled Beck 's song as the basis for " Another Love Song " , which appeared on their 1999 album , The Amazing Jeckel Brothers . Hole 's cover of the song also uses Them 's recording as a blueprint . Them 's original 1966 version of the song has appeared in movies , such as the 1996 film Basquiat , the 1972 German film Rocker by Klaus Lemke and the 2000 film Girl , Interrupted . 
 In 1993 , Van Morrison included Them 's cover of the song on his compilation album The Best of Van Morrison Volume Two . In addition to recording " It 's All Over Now , Baby Blue " with Them , Morrison has covered the song frequently in concert throughout his solo career , beginning in 1974 , but has never released a studio or live recording of it as a solo artist . In 1984 , Morrison made a guest appearance at one of Bob Dylan 's concerts in London and the two musicians performed a duet of " It 's All Over Now , Baby Blue " . Morrison and Dylan also sang a duet of " It 's All Over Now , Baby Blue " at the final concert of Dylan 's 1984 tour on July 8 , 1984 at Slane Castle , Ireland . 
 In a 2009 Paste magazine readers , writers and editors poll of the 50 Best Bob Dylan Covers of All Time , Them 's version of " It 's All Over Now , Baby Blue " was ranked at # 28 . 
 = = = The Byrds ' version = = = 
 The Byrds ' recording of " It 's All Over Now , Baby Blue " first saw release on October 29 , 1969 as part of the band 's Ballad of Easy Rider album . The song also appeared on the B @-@ side of the band 's December 1969 single , " Jesus Is Just Alright " , which reached # 97 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart . The Byrds had previously attempted to record the song on two separate occasions , some four years earlier , during studio sessions for their second album , Turn ! Turn ! Turn ! 
 The Byrds initially planned to release " It 's All Over Now , Baby Blue " in 1965 , as a follow @-@ up to their previous hit Bob Dylan covers , " Mr. Tambourine Man " and " All I Really Want to Do " . The band 's first attempt at recording the song was on June 28 , 1965 : resulting in an irreverent , garage rock style take on the song . This version was deemed unsatisfactory and remained unreleased for 22 years , until its inclusion on the Never Before album in 1987 . The June 28 , 1965 recording can also be heard on the 1996 expanded reissue of Turn ! Turn ! Turn ! as well as on The Byrds and There Is a Season box sets . 
 The band attempted a second recording of the song during August 1965 . A program director from KRLA , who was present at the recording sessions , was impressed enough to play an acetate disc of the track on air , plugging it as The Byrds ' new single . However , The Byrds soon abandoned the idea of releasing " It 's All Over Now , Baby Blue " as their third single and instead issued the song " Turn ! Turn ! Turn ! " . The Byrds ' August 1965 version of " It 's All Over Now , Baby Blue " has never been released . 
 Guitarist and band leader , Roger McGuinn , returned to the composition during a July 22 , 1969 recording session for the band 's Ballad of Easy Rider album . McGuinn decided to slow down the tempo and radically alter the song 's arrangement to fashion a more somber and serious version than those recorded in 1965 . In tandem with the slower tempo , the band dragged the syllables of each word out in order to emphasize the world @-@ weariness of the song 's lyric . Ultimately , McGuinn was dissatisfied with the recording of the song included on Ballad of Easy Rider , feeling that it tended to drag within the context of the album . In addition to appearing on Ballad of Easy Rider , The Byrds ' 1969 recording of " It 's All Over Now , Baby Blue " can also be found on the compilation albums The Byrds Play Dylan and The Very Best of The Byrds . 
 = = = Other covers = = = 
 Many other artists have covered the song . Joan Baez , who has sometimes been speculated to be the subject of the song , covered it on her 1965 album Farewell , Angelina . It is one of four Dylan covers on that album , the others being the title track , " Mama , You Been on My Mind " ( recorded as " Daddy , You Been on My Mind " ) , and " A Hard Rain 's a @-@ Gonna Fall " . Baez sings " It 's All Over Now , Baby Blue " in a falsetto voice , but retains the power of Dylan 's version . Baez has continued to perform the song at live concerts well into the modern era . 
 Others who have covered the song include Columbia Records contemporary Dion DiMucci ( who recorded the song one half year prior to Them 's version ) , The Country Gentlemen , Judy Collins , Joni Mitchell , Marianne Faithfull , Bryan Ferry , Manfred Mann 's Earth Band , Energy Orchard . , Turley Richards , Echo & the Bunnymen , Falco , Milltown Brothers , The Seldom Scene , Jon Fratelli , the Grateful Dead , The West Coast Pop Art Experimental Band , The Chocolate Watchband , Richie Havens , Steve Howe , The 13th Floor Elevators , Hole , Graham Bonnet , The Last Drive and Chris Farlowe . Gal Costa performed a version of the song in Portuguese under the title of " Negro Amor " on her 1977 album Caras e Bocas . Link Wray also covered the song on his album Bullshot . 
 George Harrison , who performed with Dylan in the Traveling Wilburys and also co @-@ wrote the song " I 'd Have You Anytime " with Dylan in November 1968 , did not cover the song , but did reference the title in his 1987 single , " When We Was Fab " . One of the lyrics in the song reads " But it 's all over now , baby blue " , which is a nod from Harrison to his friend Dylan . 
 The Chocolate Watchband version of " It 's All Over Now , Baby Blue " is featured in the documentary <unk> . 
 The Animals recorded a version of the song on their 1977 album Before We Were So <unk> Interrupted . 
 The song was a source of inspiration for Joyce Carol Oates ' short story " Where Are You Going , Where Have You Been ? " , prompting her to dedicate the story to Dylan . A portion of the first verse of the song was used as the title for Barry Hannah 's 1995 novel Yonder Stands Your Orphan . Graham Bonnet 's version of the song appears on the soundtrack of the 2009 Peter Jackson film The Lovely Bones .. Philadelphia pop punk band The Wonder Years 's 2009 Distances split EP opens with a track entitled " An Elegy for Baby Blue , " which references Dylan 's song by directly quoting him in its chorus . 
 While not actually a cover , the rock band Nine Days included a sample of Dylan singing two lines from " It 's All Over Now , Baby Blue " in their song " Bob Dylan " from the album The Madding Crowd . 
 In 2011 Bad Religion recorded a punk rock cover version for the 2012 charity compilation album Chimes of Freedom : Songs of Bob Dylan Honoring 50 Years of Amnesty International . 
 = Fun Run = 
 " Fun Run " is the first and second episode of the fourth season of the American comedy television series The Office , and the show 's fifty @-@ fourth and fifty @-@ fifth episode overall . Written and directed by executive producer and showrunner Greg Daniels , the episode first aired on NBC in the United States on September 27 , 2007 . 
 In the episode , Michael Scott believes the office is cursed after he accidentally hits Meredith Palmer with his car . After being taken to the hospital , Meredith is found to have rabies . In an attempt to make amends with Meredith , Michael sponsors a fun run for rabies . Meanwhile , it is revealed that Jim Halpert and Pam Beesly are dating , while Angela Martin is mad at Dwight Schrute for killing her cat Sprinkles . 
 The episode received mixed reviews from the varying critics , while most praised the episode for Jim and Pam 's relationship . However , critics had differing opinions when it came to how Michael behaved throughout the episode . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Over the summer , Jan Levinson ( Melora Hardin ) moved in with Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) , Ryan Howard ( B.J. Novak ) started his new job at Corporate and Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) broke up with Karen Filippelli ( Rashida Jones ) , who left Dunder Mifflin Scranton . Jim and Pam Beesly ( Jenna Fischer ) claim that they see each other socially but only as friends . The documentary crew catches Pam picking up Jim in her car . They kiss and drive away . When faced with the footage of them kissing , Jim and Pam admit to the documentary crew that they are secretly dating . 
 As he arrives at work , Michael accidentally hits Meredith Palmer ( Kate Flannery ) with his car , sending her to the hospital for a fractured pelvis . Forced to join a group visit to Meredith in the hospital , Angela Martin ( Angela Kinsey ) leaves Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) with complicated instructions on the care of her ailing cat Sprinkles . During the hospital visit , Michael fails to obtain forgiveness from Meredith . When Angela returns to the office , Dwight informs her that her cat is dead . Dwight explains to Angela that he killed her cat because it was suffering , and that this is normal on the farm . Angela is furious , because being euthanized prevents Sprinkles from being in " cat heaven . " 
 The combination of Meredith 's accident , Sprinkles ' death , and a virus on Pam 's computer ( which is cleaned by the company 's tech support employee , Sadiq , portrayed by Omi Vaidya ) convinces Michael that the office is cursed . He insists that he is not superstitious , but rather " a little @-@ <unk> " . Dwight discovers that Meredith has had a precautionary rabies shot due to several animal bites . Michael immediately takes credit for saving Meredith 's life by sending her to the hospital and declares the curse over . But , still feeling guilty about hurting Meredith , Michael organizes a charity five @-@ kilometer fun run to raise awareness of the dangers of rabies . Over half of the money raised is spent on the check presentation ceremony . Few take the race seriously ( Creed , Oscar and Stanley sneak off to a bar while Jim and Pam visit a garage sale ) and while Toby Flenderson ( Paul Lieberstein ) finishes first and Michael becomes ill , having " carbo @-@ loaded " ( he ate <unk> <unk> before the race ) and abstained from water . In the hospital for dehydration , Michael is visited by Meredith . In recognition of his efforts , she forgives him . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Fun Run " was the eighth episode of the series written by Greg Daniels and ninth episode directed by him . The episode was the second of the series in which Daniels was both the writer and director . Daniels also wrote and directed the first season episode " Basketball . " 
 After initially reading the script , Kate Flannery asked producer Kent Zbornak if Meredith was going to live , to which he replied " This isn 't All My Children . " Flannery was nervous about doing her own stunt , so Zbornak did it first to show her that she would be fine . Flannery recalls " [ I ] kind of got competitive with him , and I thought , ' I can do that . I can do that better than he can . ' " At first , Flannery would flinch before hitting the glass , until director Greg Daniels was able to get her to not think about it . Flannery 's arms were bruised , due to having to film the scene multiple times . During the hospital scenes , Flannery and Steve Carell improvised a few times . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Pam and Jim finally getting together went over well with most critics . Zap2It 's Rick Porter thought " the show handled the PB & J ( Pam Beesly and Jim ) stuff as well as it always has , underplaying the romance as much as the NBC marketing folks overplay it . " Although , Christine Fenno from Entertainment Weekly was happy about Pam and Jim finally dating , she was critical of them being secret about it , reasoning " I mean , nobody 's cheating . Can 't the Pam and Jim plotline have a bigger obstacle than self @-@ imposed , weakly enforced secrecy ? " TV Guide 's Jack Rodgers was glad " the writers aren ’ t jerking us around anymore , and the pair are finally busted when Jim hops a ride home with Pam after work . " 
 Reviews for Michael in this episode were a little bit more mixed . Rick Porter said that " there was a little too much Bad Michael in the hour for my taste . " Travis Fickett , of IGN , disagreed , saying that " the best stuff in the episode comes from Steve Carell . There 's his reaction to hitting Meredith , how he breaks it to the office , and his fear that the office is cursed . " Will Leitch , a writer for New York Magazine , said that Michael hitting Meredith with his car was " one of the most shocking moments in the show ’ s history " and " nothing that came afterwards could quite top what happened in the first 25 seconds . " 
 = The Chronic = 
 The Chronic is the debut studio album by American hip hop recording artist Dr. Dre . It was released on December 15 , 1992 , by his own record label Death Row Records and distributed by Priority Records . Recording sessions for the album took place in June 1992 at Death Row Studios in Los Angeles and at Bernie Grundman Mastering in Hollywood . The album is named after a slang term for high @-@ grade cannabis , and its cover is a homage to Zig @-@ Zag rolling papers . It was Dr. Dre 's first solo album after he had departed from hip hop group N.W.A and its label Ruthless Records over a financial dispute . On The Chronic , he included both subtle and direct insults at Ruthless and its owner , former N.W.A member Eazy @-@ E. Although a solo album , it features many appearances by Snoop Dogg , who used the album as a launch pad for his own solo career . 
 Upon its release , The Chronic received acclaim from music critics and earned considerable commercial success . The album peaked at number three on the Billboard 200 and had been certified triple platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America with sales of 5 @.@ 7 million copies in the United States , which led to Dr. Dre becoming one of the top ten best @-@ selling American performing artists of 1993 . Dr. Dre 's production has been noted for popularizing the G @-@ funk subgenre within gangsta rap . The Chronic has been widely regarded as one of the most important and influential albums of the 1990s and regarded by many fans and peers to be one of the most well @-@ produced hip hop albums of all time . 
 = = Music = = 
 = = = Production = = = 
 The production on The Chronic was seen as innovative and ground @-@ breaking , and received universal acclaim from critics . AllMusic commented on Dr. Dre 's efforts , " Here , Dre established his patented G @-@ funk sound : fat , blunted Parliament @-@ Funkadelic beats , soulful backing vocals , and live instruments in the rolling basslines and whiny synths " and that " For the next four years , it was virtually impossible to hear mainstream hip @-@ hop that wasn 't affected in some way by Dre and his patented G @-@ funk . " Unlike other hip hop acts ( such as The Bomb Squad ) that sampled heavily , Dr. Dre only utilized one or few samples per song . In Rolling Stone 's The Immortals – The Greatest Artists of All Time , where Dr. Dre was listed at number 56 , Kanye West wrote on the album 's production quality : " The Chronic is still the hip @-@ hop equivalent to Stevie Wonder 's Songs in the Key of Life . It 's the benchmark you measure your album against if you 're serious . " 
 Jon Pareles of The New York Times described the production , writing " The bottom register is swampy synthesizer bass lines that openly emulate Parliament @-@ Funkadelic ; the upper end is often a lone keyboard line , whistling or blipping incessantly . In between are wide @-@ open spaces that hold just a rhythm guitar , sparse keyboard chords . " Pareles observed that the songs " were smoother and simpler than East Coast rap , and [ Dr. Dre and Snoop Dogg ] decisively expanded the hip @-@ hop audience into the suburbs . " Until this point , mainstream hip hop had been primarily party music ( for example , Beastie Boys ) or angry and politically charged ( for example , Public Enemy or X @-@ Clan ) , and had consisted almost entirely of samples and breakbeats . Dr. Dre ushered in a new musical style and lyrics for hip hop . The beats were slower and mellower , samples from late 1970s and early 1980s funk music . By mixing these early influences with original live instrumentation , a distinctive genre known as G @-@ funk was created . 
 = = = Lyrics = = = 
 The album 's lyrics caused some controversy , as the subject matter included homophobia and violent representations . It was noted that the album was a " frightening amalgam of inner @-@ city street gangs that includes misogynist sexual politics and violent revenge scenarios " . All the N.W.A members were addressed on the album ; Eazy @-@ E and Ice Cube were dissed on the second single " Fuck Wit Dre Day " , while MC Ren however was shouted out on the album 's intro . Dr. Dre 's dissing of former band @-@ mate , Eazy @-@ E , resulted in vicious lyrics , which were mainly aimed at offending his enemy with homosexual implications , although it was noted to have " a spirited cleverness in the phrasing and rhymes ; in other words , the song is offensive , but it 's creatively offensive " . 
 Rapper Snoop Dogg , who had a significant role on the album , was praised for his lyrics and flow , and it was mentioned that " Coupled with his inventive rhymes , Snoop 's distinctive style made him a superstar before he 'd even released a recording of his own " and that his involvement was as important to the album 's success as its production . Touré of The New York Times remarks that " While Snoop delivers rhymes delicately , the content is anything but . Growing up poor , often surrounded by violence , and having served six months in the Wayside County jail outside of Los Angeles ( for cocaine possession ) gave Snoop Dogg experiences upon which he draws . " Snoop Dogg later commented on the " reality " of his lyrics , stating " My raps are incidents where either I saw it happen to one of my close homies or I know about it from just being in the ghetto . I can 't rap about something I don 't know . You 'll never hear me rapping about no bachelor 's degree . It 's only what I know and that 's that street life . It 's all everyday life , reality . " 
 = = Singles = = 
 Three singles were released from the album : " Nuthin ' but a ' G ' Thang " , " Fuck wit Dre Day " and " Let Me Ride " . " Nuthin ' but a ' G ' Thang " was released as the first single on January 19 , 1993 . It peaked at number two on the Billboard Hot 100 and number one on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Singles & Tracks and Hot Rap Singles . It sold over a million copies and the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) certified it Platinum on March 24 , 1993 . The song was nominated for Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group at the 1994 Grammy Awards , but lost to Digable Planets ' " Rebirth of Slick ( Cool Like Dat ) " . Steve Huey of AllMusic named it " the archetypal G @-@ funk single " and added " The sound , style , and performances of " Nuthin ' but a ' G ' Thang " were like nothing else on the early- ' 90s hip @-@ hop scene . " He praised Snoop Dogg 's performance , stating " [ Snoop Dogg 's ] flow was laconic and relaxed , massively confident and capable of rapid @-@ fire tongue @-@ twisters , but coolly laid @-@ back and almost effortless at the same time " . Today it is one of the most critically and commercially lauded hip @-@ hop / rap songs of all time . It is rated the 134th best song of all time by <unk> , and the sixth best hip @-@ hop / rap song , and voted in a VH1 poll as the 13th best song of the 1990s . 
 " Fuck wit Dre Day ( and Everybody 's Celebratin ' ) " was released as the second single on May 20 , 1993 and like the previous single , it was a hit on multiple charts . It reached number eight on the Billboard Hot 100 and number six on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Singles & Tracks . It sold over 500 @,@ 000 units and the RIAA certified it Gold on October 8 , 1993 . Allmusic writer Steve Huey stated that the song was " a classic hip @-@ hop single " , citing Dr. Dre 's production as " impeccable as ever , uniting his signature whiny synth melodies with a halting , descending bass line , a booming snare , and soulful female vocals in the background " and alluded to Snoop Dogg , stating " Attitude was something Snoop had by the boatload , his drawling , laid @-@ back delivery projecting unassailable control – it sounded lazy even though it wasn 't , and that helped establish Snoop 's don 't @-@ give @-@ a @-@ damn persona . " The track contains direct insults to rappers East coast rapper Tim Dog , 2 Live Crew member Luke , and Dre 's former accomplices Eazy @-@ E & Ice Cube . 
 " Let Me Ride " was released as a cassette single on September 13 , 1993 . It experienced moderate success on the charts , reaching number 34 on the Billboard Hot 100 and number three on the Hot Rap Singles . The song won Dr. Dre Best Rap Solo Performance at the 1994 Grammy Awards . On this song and " Nuthin but a " G " Thang " , Time magazine noted that Dr. Dre 's verses were delivered with a " hypnotically intimidating ease " and made the songs feel like " dusk on a wide @-@ open L.A. boulevard , full of possibility and menace " . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 As of 2015 , the album has sold 5 @.@ 7 million copies in the United States , and was certified three times Platinum by RIAA on November 3 , 1993 . It is Dr. Dre 's second @-@ bestselling album , as his follow @-@ up album , 2001 , was certified sextuple Platinum . The album first appeared on music charts in 1993 , peaking on the Billboard 200 at number three , and peaking on Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums at number one . The Chronic spent eight months in the Billboard Top 10 . The album 's three singles became top ten Billboard singles . " Nuthin ' but a " G " Thang " peaked at number two on the Billboard Hot 100 and at number one on both the Hot Rap Singles and Hot R & B Singles charts . " Fuck Wit Dre Day ( And Everybody 's Celebratin ' ) " became a top ten single on four different charts , including the Hot R & B Singles ( number 6 ) and the Hot 100 ( number 8 ) . 
 The Chronic didn 't chart on the UK Albums Chart until 2000 , eight years after its original release , and peaked at number 43 in July 2004 . It has sold 260 @,@ 814 copies there . The Chronic re @-@ entered the charts in 2003 , peaking on the Ireland Albums Top 75 at number 48 , and on the UK Albums Top 75 in 2004 at number 43 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The Chronic received universal widespread critical acclaim from contemporary music critics . Rolling Stone 's Havelock Nelson wrote that the album " drops raw realism and pays tribute to hip @-@ hop virtuosity . " Entertainment Weekly said that it " storms with rage , strolls with confidence , and reverberates with a social realism that 's often ugly and horrifying " . The Source claimed that Snoop Dogg 's " Slick Rick @-@ esque style " produces " new ground for West Coast MCs " and that the album is " an innovative and progressive hip @-@ hop package that must not be missed . " USA Today found " Dre 's prowess as beat @-@ master and street preacher " to be " undeniable " . Jonathan Gold of the Los Angeles Times wrote that , although the rappers lack " quick wit " and " rhythmic virtuosity " , Dre 's artistry is " on a par with Phil Spector 's or Brian Wilson 's . " Gold argued that , because Dre recreates rather than samples beats and instrumental work , the finished album 's fidelity is not inflected by that of " scratchy R & B records that have been played a million times " , unlike productions from East Coast hip hop . 
 In a mixed review , Greg Kot of the Chicago Tribune viewed the album as superficial , unrefined entertainment and felt that " Dre combines street potency with thuggish stupidity in equal measure . " Robert Christgau , writing in The Village Voice , dismissed it as " sociopathic easy @-@ listening " and " bad pop music " whose innovation — Dre 's departure from sampling — is not inspired by contemporary P @-@ Funk , but rather blaxploitation soundtracks , which led him to combine trite bass lines with imitations of " Bernie Worrell 's high <unk> sustain , a basically irritating sound that in context always signified fantasy , not reality — stoned self @-@ loss or , at a best Dre never approaches , grandiose jive . " He felt that the brutal lyrical threats were vague and lacked detail , although he found Snoop Dogg 's rhymes " <unk> " and not dull , unlike Dr. Dre . Select gave the album a two out of five rating , finding that the album was not as strong as releases from other gangster rap artists such as Ice Cube and Da <unk> Mob stating that The Chronic was neither as " musically sharp , nor as lyrically smart as the latter . " The review concluded that the album sounded like " all the pedestrian bits from The Predator " but that it was still better than any release Eazy @-@ E had released . 
 Retrospective reviews of the album were also positive . Jon Pareles of The New York Times said that The Chronic and Snoop Dogg 's Doggystyle " made the gangsta life sound like a party occasionally interrupted by gunplay " . AllMusic 's Steve Huey compared Dr. Dre to his inspiration , George Clinton , stating " Dre 's just as effortlessly funky , and he has a better feel for a hook , a knack that improbably landed gangsta rap on the pop charts " . Rhapsody writer Brolin Winning named the album as " an untouchable masterpiece of California Gangsta Rap " and that it had " track after track of G @-@ Funk gems " . On Rolling Stone 's 500 Greatest Albums of All Time , it was noted that " Dre funked up the rhymes with a smooth bass @-@ heavy production style and the laid @-@ back delivery of then @-@ unknown rapper Snoop Doggy Dogg . " Time magazine 's Josh Tyrangiel states that Dr. Dre created " a sound that defined early 90 's urban L.A. in the same way that Motown defined 60 's Detroit " . Laura Sinagra , writing in The Rolling Stone Album Guide ( 2004 ) , said that The Chronic " features system @-@ busting Funkadelic beats designed to rumble your woofer while the matter @-@ of @-@ fact violence of the lyrics blows your smoke @-@ filled mind " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 In 1994 , " Nuthin ' but a " G " Thang " and " Let Me Ride " were nominated at the 36th Grammy Awards , with the latter winning Best Rap Solo Performance for Dr. Dre . That year , readers of Hip Hop Connection voted it the fourth best album of all time , leading the magazine to speculate , " In a few years ' time , it could even be remembered as the best rap album of all time . " 
 The Chronic was included in Vibe magazine 's " 100 Essential Albums of the 20th Century " and it was ranked at number six in their " Top 10 Rap Albums of All Time " . Rolling Stone ranked it at number 138 on their list of the 500 Greatest Albums of All Time . The record ranked at number eight in Spin magazine 's " 90 Greatest Albums of the ' 90s " and in 2005 , it was ranked at number thirty @-@ five in their " 100 Greatest Albums , 1985 – 2005 " . The Source magazine originally gave the album four and a half mics out of five and it was added to The Source 's 100 Best Rap Albums . It was later revealed that while everybody at the magazine knew it was an instant classic , the music editor at that time had a strict policy of staying away from a perfect rating . In 2005 , MTV Networks listed The Chronic as the third greatest hip hop album in history . In 2006 , Time magazine ranked it as one of the 100 greatest albums of all time and it was listed in the book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die . In a retrospective issue , XXL magazine awarded The Chronic a perfect " XXL " rating . 
 = = Influence = = 
 Having split from N.W.A , Dr. Dre 's first solo album established him as one of the biggest hip hop stars of his era . Yahoo ! Music writer S.L. Duff wrote of the album 's impact on his status in hip hop at the time , stating " Dre 's considerable reputation is based on this release , alongside his production technique on Snoop 's Doggystyle " and his early work with N.W.A. Whatever one thinks of the over @-@ the @-@ top bravado rapping , the tracks and beats Dre assembled are beyond reproach " . The Chronic brought G @-@ funk to the mainstream – a genre defined by slow bass beats and melodic synthesizers , topped by P @-@ Funk samples , female vocals , and a laconic , laid @-@ back lyrical delivery referred to as a " lazy drawl " . The album takes its name from a slang term for premium grade cannabis , chronic . The album cover is an homage to Zig @-@ Zag rolling papers . Robert Christgau said that , although he " can 't stand " it , he respects The Chronic " for its influence and iconicity " . 
 The album launched the careers of West Coast hip hop artists , including Snoop Doggy Dogg , Daz Dillinger , Kurupt , Nate Dogg , and Warren G , Dr. Dre 's stepbrother – all of whom pursued successful commercial careers . The Chronic is widely regarded as the album that re @-@ defined West Coast hip hop , demonstrated gangsta rap 's commercial potential as a multi @-@ platinum commodity , and established G @-@ funk as the most popular sound in hip hop music for several years after its release , with Dr. Dre producing major albums that drew heavily on his production style . The album 's success established Death Row Records as a dominant force in 1990s hip hop . It has been re @-@ released 3 times , first as a remastered CD , then as a remastered DualDisc with enhanced stereo and four videos , and in 2009 as " The Chronic Re @-@ Lit " with a bonus DVD containing a 30 minute interview and 7 unreleased tracks . The singles " Fuck wit Dre Day " and " Nuthin ' but a " G " Thang " are in best @-@ selling video game Grand Theft Auto : San Andreas on the fictional radio station Radio Los Santos . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs produced by Dr. Dre . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Heart of Glory = 
 " Heart of Glory " is the 20th episode of the first season of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : The Next Generation , first broadcast March 21 , 1988 . The story was created by Herbert Wright and D. C. Fontana , and was made into a script in two days by executive producer Maurice Hurley . The episode was directed by Rob Bowman . 
 Set in the 24th century , the series follows the adventures of the crew of the Starfleet starship Enterprise @-@ D. In this episode , the crew rescue three Klingons from a damaged freighter in the neutral zone . Once aboard they befriend Lt. Worf ( Michael Dorn ) and attempt to hijack the Enterprise so they can live as true Klingons , forcing Worf to choose between them or Starfleet . 
 The episode explained the backstory to the character of Lt. Worf , and Michael Dorn was pleased with the outcome . Rob Bowman thought that the episode worked well . He included an overhead shot on the engineering set which had not been done before on the show and tweaked the ending . Shots of the Klingon starship were reused from Star Trek : The Motion Picture , while the freighter model would be reused as various freighters throughout the various Star Trek television series . Guest stars included Vaughn Armstrong as Korris in his first role in the franchise and only appearance in The Next Generation . He appeared in a further eleven roles in the franchise , including the part of Admiral Maxwell Forrest in Star Trek : Enterprise . The episode was watched by 10 @.@ 7 million viewers during the initial broadcast , and reviews by critics were mixed . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Enterprise enters the neutral zone , to investigate the distress call of a <unk> freighter . The freighter is badly damaged , and three life forms are detected aboard . An away team beams over and finds three Klingons : Korris ( Vaughn Armstrong ) ; Konmel ( Charles Hyman ) ; and Kunivas ( Robert Bauer ) , who is wounded . The away team returns with them to the Enterprise before the freighter explodes . Kunivas is taken to sickbay and Korris meets with Captain Jean @-@ Luc Picard ( Patrick Stewart ) . The Klingon explains that they were passengers when the freighter was attacked by a Ferengi ship ; the Klingons took over the freighter to fend off and destroy the Ferengi ship , but the damage sustained left the freighter adrift and faltering . As Korris and Konmel are shown to quarters , they are surprised to hear about a fellow Klingon , Lt. Worf ( Michael Dorn ) , who is serving within Starfleet . 
 Kunivas ' condition worsens , and Korris , Konmel , and Worf are present when he dies , and the three let out a fierce roar as per Klingon custom . As they return to the Klingons ' quarters , Konmel is disappointed that Kunivas did not die in battle , leading Worf to question the nature of the attack on the freighter ; Korris and Konmel quickly change the subject . Worf forces Korris to reveal the truth : the three had commandeered the freighter , in order to seek out a place they could live as true Klingons , and the damage to the freighter was a result of battle with a Klingon ship . When the two are seen near the ship 's battle bridge , hoping to steal the drive section and escape the crew on the saucer , they are placed in the brig . 
 The Enterprise is soon met by a Klingon battlecruiser , captained by Commander K 'Nera ( David Froman ) , who demands the return of the fugitive Klingons . Knowing that Korris and Konmel will be tried and executed if they are returned , Worf argues instead for their exile to a hostile planet , but K 'Nera refuses . Korris and Konmel use parts secreted on their uniforms to assemble a disruptor pistol and escape from the brig ; Konmel is killed as Korris takes over the Engineering deck . Picard and Worf race to Engineering , and Worf tries to reason with Korris who is threatening to destroy the warp core and take the Enterprise with him . Korris attempts to persuade Worf to come with him and conquer the galaxy as a true Klingon , and then accuses Worf of being weak when he refuses . Worf fires on Korris , killing him . K 'Nera is told of the deaths of the fugitives , and Worf declares that they " died well " when asked of their manner of death . Worf accepts an offer to serve aboard the Klingon battlecruiser after his service aboard the Enterprise is complete , but when communications with K 'Nera are broken off , assures the bridge crew he was just being polite . 
 = = Production = = 
 Writer and executive producer Maurice Hurley thought that " Heart of Glory " was the closest experience he had on the show to directly placing his own personal philosophy into a script . He later credited fellow executive producer Rick Berman with helping to write the script for " Heart of Glory " , saying " When I had a problem , I could go in and we could sit there , close the door , yell and scream . I 'd pace , he 'd make suggestions . The two of us made stories work in that room that had to be shot within a couple of days . We were under enormous time pressure , and we were working hand in glove . We had a wonderful time , on that show , especially . " Hurley wrote the screenplay in two days from a story created by Herbert Wright and D. C. Fontana . Because of the delays , the Klingon language portions of the script didn 't make any actual sense in translation and were simply Klingon sounding words created by Hurley . 
 The story explained Lt. Worf 's background for the first time in the series , including the story of Romulan betrayal at Khitomer which saw the death of his parents . While his foster parents were first mentioned in this episode , they were not seen until the fourth season episode " Family " and his stepbrother didn 't appear on the show until the seventh season episode " Homeward " . Michael Dorn was pleased with the outcome of this episode as he felt it showed the producers that the fans were just as interested in his character as the others in the main cast . He felt that it could have been taken further and wanted there to be an epic battle at the end of the episode . The Klingon battlecruiser seen in " Heart of Glory " was footage re @-@ used from Star Trek : The Motion Picture , while the freighter was a general model which would come to be reused throughout The Next Generation and other Star Trek television series . 
 Director Rob Bowman made bold decisions in designing the confrontation sequence . The scripted version showed the fight between Worf and Korris taking place entirely on the first deck of the engineering section . Instead , Bowman had them fight on the upper deck and , using camera angles never before seen the show , filmed vertical sequences in that part of the set . He also altered the script so that Konmel needed to be hit by three phaser blasts . Bowman used a steadicam to film the scenes on the freighter in order to give a rough effect to the footage . He was pleased with the outcome , describing it as the easiest of all of the Next Generation episodes he directed . He said that it was a show where " every hand we had was a 21 . It just worked . " 
