 Guest stars in this episode included Robert Bauer as Kunivas , who had previously been in a band with Michael Dorn . Stuntman Dennis Madalone made his second appearance in The Next Generation with this episode , having previously appeared earlier in the season in " Where No One Has Gone Before " . He would continue to appear as various crewmen through the rest of the series . " Heart of Glory " was the only appearance in The Next Generation for actor Vaughn Armstrong . He would , however , go on to play a further eleven different roles in the Star Trek franchise , including as the recurring character of Admiral Maxwell Forrest in Star Trek : Enterprise . 
 = = Reception and home media release = = 
 " Heart of Glory " was first broadcast in the United States on March 21 , 1988 , in broadcast syndication . The episode received Nielsen ratings of 10 @.@ 7 million on the first broadcast , which was an increase over the 10 @.@ 1 million received by the previous episode , " Coming of Age " . Only the episode " Symbiosis " received a higher rating by the end of the season . 
 Several reviewers re @-@ watched the episode after the end of the series . Keith DeCandido reviewed the episode for Tor.com in July 2011 . DeCandido is a <unk> and has produced works based in the Star Trek universe , and describes himself as " the Klingon guy " as far as Star Trek <unk> are concerned . However , he was not overly pleased with the episode , describing the plot as being slow and said that Michael Dorn 's acting skills at this point were " mediocre " but would get " much much better " later in the series . He praised David Froman as K 'Nera , describing him as having " tremendous presence " and thought that although Vaughn Armstrong was excellent as Admiral Forrest in Enterprise , in this early episode he was " overly histrionic " . He described the overhead shot of Worf after the death of Korris as " just silly " , and thought that the episode overall was a " forgettable mess " . He gave it a rating of four out of ten . Zack Handlen , writing for The A.V. Club in May 2010 , thought that the first act of " Heart of Glory " was slow , but it improved after that and said that " while it 's not exactly a tear jerker , it allows Worf the dignity the character needs to work . " He had mixed feelings about the Klingon death ritual , but felt that it was justified at the end of the episode as the complex nature of the character of Korris made the sense of loss feel earned . He gave the episode a grade of B + . 
 Michelle Erica Green watched the episode for TrekNation in August 2007 , and described it as one of her favourite episodes from the first season . She thought it laid the groundwork for later episodes in The Next Generation , Deep Space Nine , and Voyager regarding the Klingon culture . However , she felt that the drama seemed artificial and that the writers forced a situation where Worf had to kill one of the Klingons as if " justifying the brutality as necessary for the good of Starfleet " . Jamahl Epsicokhan at his website " Jammer 's Reviews " also thought that the drama with Worf deciding whether or not to join the Klingons was problematic . He thought it was hard to believe that the crew seemed to know Worf as little as they did at this point in the series , but praised it for being the starting point for all future Klingon @-@ based stories in the franchise . He gave it a score of three out of four . 
 The first home media release of " Heart of Glory " was on VHS cassette , appearing on November 11 , 1992 in the United States and Canada . The episode was later included on the Star Trek : The Next Generation season one DVD box set , released in March 2002 . The most recent release was as part of the season one Blu @-@ ray set on July 24 , 2012 . 
 = 1998 FA Charity Shield = 
 The 1998 Football Association Charity Shield ( also known as the AXA FA Charity Shield for sponsorship reasons ) was the 76th FA Charity Shield , an annual English football match organised by The Football Association and played between the winners of the previous season 's Premier League and FA Cup competitions . It was contested on 9 August 1998 by Arsenal – who won a league and FA Cup double the previous season – and Manchester United – who finished runners @-@ up in the league . Watched by a crowd of 67 @,@ 342 at Wembley Stadium , Arsenal won the match 3 – 0 . 
 This was Manchester United 's 18th Charity Shield appearance to Arsenal 's 14th . Manchester United began the game more strongly , but Arsenal took the lead when Marc Overmars scored 11 minutes before half @-@ time . They extended their lead in the second half , as Overmars and Nicolas Anelka found Christopher Wreh , who put the ball into an empty net at the second attempt . In the 72nd minute , Arsenal scored a third goal , when Anelka got around Jaap Stam in the penalty box and shot the ball past goalkeeper Peter Schmeichel . 
 Arsenal 's victory marked Manchester United 's first Shield defeat in 13 years . The teams later faced each other in the FA Cup semi @-@ final , which was won by Manchester United in a replay . Manchester United finished the league season one point ahead of Arsenal and went on to win the FA Cup and UEFA Champions League , thereby completing a treble of trophies in the 1998 – 99 season . 
 = = Background = = 
 Founded in 1908 as a successor to the Sheriff of London Charity Shield , the FA Charity Shield began as a contest between the respective champions of the Football League and Southern League , although in 1913 it was played between an Amateurs XI and a Professionals XI . In 1921 , it was played by the league champions of the top division and FA Cup winners for the first time . The match was played at Wembley Stadium , which first hosted the Shield in 1974 . 
 Arsenal qualified for the 1998 FA Charity Shield as winners of the 1997 – 98 FA Premier League . Although they were 12 points behind league leaders Manchester United by the end of February 1998 , a nine @-@ match winning streak , culminating in a 4 – 0 win over Everton on 3 May 1998 , ensured Arsenal won the title . Arsenal beat Newcastle United 2 – 0 in the 1998 FA Cup Final to complete the domestic double . Given they won both honours , the other Charity Shield place went to league runners @-@ up Manchester United . 
 The most recent meeting between the two teams was in the Premier League on 14 March 1998 , when a second @-@ half goal by Marc Overmars gave Arsenal a 1 – 0 win at Old Trafford . Arsenal were the only team in the 1997 – 98 league to beat United home and away , with the corresponding home fixture ending 3 – 2 . Arsenal manager Arsène Wenger acknowledged the Shield game was the " only opportunity to play our first @-@ team men together against top @-@ class opposition " before their league campaign commenced the following week . Manchester United manager Alex Ferguson was preoccupied with the team 's match against ŁKS Łódź in the second qualifying round of the UEFA Champions League three days later . He felt the contest with Arsenal would get his " players ' sharpness up and provide plenty of benefit " for their upcoming matches . 
 The match was officially referred to as " The AXA FA Charity Shield " as part of a sponsorship deal between The Football Association and French insurance group AXA , agreed in July 1998 . The deal also saw the FA Cup referred to as " The AXA Sponsored FA Cup " for its four @-@ year duration . 
 = = Match = = 
 = = = Team selection = = = 
 Manchester United winger Jesper Blomqvist was ruled out with an ankle injury , but Roy Keane was fit enough to start his first competitive match since damaging his ligaments eleven months previously . Defender Jaap Stam , who signed for United in May 1998 , made his competitive debut for the club , partnering centre @-@ back Ronny Johnsen . For Arsenal , new signing Nelson Vivas began the match on the substitutes ' bench , in spite of being expected to make his full debut , while Dennis Bergkamp started alongside Nicolas Anelka up front . 
 Arsenal employed a traditional 4 – 4 – 2 formation : a four @-@ man defence ( comprising two centre @-@ backs and left and right full @-@ backs ) , four midfielders ( two in the centre , and one on each wing ) and two centre @-@ forwards . Manchester United organised themselves slightly differently , with Paul Scholes playing ahead of the midfield in a supporting role behind the main striker , Andy Cole . The team lined up in a 4 – 4 – 1 – 1 formation . 
 = = = Summary = = = 
 In pitch @-@ side temperatures of 30 ° C ( 86 ° F ) , Manchester United enjoyed their best spell of the match early on , while Arsenal 's pair Patrick Vieira and Emmanuel Petit adjusted themselves . United fashioned their first chance through David Beckham , who was booed throughout the match on account of many fans blaming him for England 's elimination from the 1998 FIFA World Cup . His pass eventually met Scholes , whose attempt forced Arsenal goalkeeper David Seaman to clear . In spite of United 's promising start , it was Arsenal who scored the opening goal . Vieira played the ball down the right side of the penalty area in the direction of Bergkamp and Anelka . Bergkamp got there first and back @-@ heeled the ball to Anelka , but the Frenchman was unable to take control ; however , he was able to put pressure on Johnsen in the Manchester United defence and blocked the Norwegian 's attempted clearance . The ball ran across the edge of the penalty area to Overmars , who lashed it right @-@ footed past Manchester United goalkeeper Peter Schmeichel into the net . A shot by Keane from 25 yards ( 23 m ) prompted a save from Seaman in the 42nd minute . 
 Arsenal began dominating in the second half , and increased their lead after 57 minutes . From the left wing , Overmars used his pace to get the better of Gary Neville and passed the ball to Anelka , who turned and passed to an unmarked Christopher Wreh . Schmeichel blocked the Liberian 's initial shot with his feet , but he was unable to stop the second attempt or Wreh 's acrobatic celebration . Despite the setback , United continued to press Arsenal ; defender Martin Keown almost put the ball into his own goal from Ryan Giggs 's corner . Both teams made mass substitutions in the final third of the game , notably Teddy Sheringham and Luís Boa Morte coming on for Cole – who rarely threatened – and Petit , respectively . Arsenal scored their third in the 72nd minute – Parlour 's pass found Anelka , who got around Stam and shot the ball past Schmeichel from a narrow angle , inside the goalkeeper 's near post . Near the end , Sheringham wasted a goal @-@ scoring opportunity , shooting wide . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 Source : 
 = = = Statistics = = = 
 = = Post @-@ match = = 
 The result marked Manchester United 's first Shield defeat in 13 years , and was the ninth time Arsenal had won the Charity Shield . Arsenal became the first southern club since Tottenham Hotspur in 1962 to win the Shield outright . Wenger described the scoreline as " unexpected " and cited the first goal as crucial in the match , given the weather conditions . He was content with how his international players , who had been in the World Cup , coped with the game 's physicality . Wenger believed the result gave Arsenal a psychological boost for the Champions League campaign , as the club planned to stage their home matches at Wembley Stadium . Bergkamp felt the result showed that Arsenal had what it took to retain the Premier League title : " We 've still got the same mentality and that will be the basis for this year 's challenge . This is a good start . It is harder to retain the trophy . " 
 Ferguson admitted his team had been beaten by the better side and agreed with Wenger that the first goal was important . He was pleased that Keane got through the match after 11 months out of action and was confident his team would fare better against ŁKS Łódź , the following Wednesday . Schmeichel felt the upcoming Champions League qualifier was more important than the Charity Shield game , which he considered as a pre @-@ season match . Ferguson anticipated another challenge from Arsenal in the league : " I think you could make a strong case for four teams to challenge for the Premiership but I think Arsenal pose the biggest threat . " 
 Three days after the Charity Shield match , United beat ŁKS Łódź 2 – 0 and qualified for the Champions League group stage following a goalless match a fortnight later . Arsenal had the upper hand in their two league meetings with United during the season , winning 3 – 0 at Highbury in September 1998 , before a 1 – 1 draw at Old Trafford in February 1999 . The two teams went into the final day of the 1998 – 99 FA Premier League vying for the title , but United 's 2 – 1 win against Tottenham meant they finished one point above Arsenal . The two sides met twice more that season in the FA Cup semi @-@ final , which was settled in a replay after the original match finished goalless . Manchester United won in extra time – the winning goal scored by Giggs . United then went on to defeat Newcastle United 2 – 0 in the 1999 FA Cup Final . Whereas Arsenal failed to progress past the group stage of the Champions League , Manchester United went on to reach the final , where they beat Bayern Munich to win the competition for the second time . Ferguson 's team therefore completed a treble of trophies in one season . 
 = Raëlism = 
 Raëlism ( also known as Raëlianism or the Raëlian movement ) is a UFO religion that was founded in 1974 by Claude Vorilhon ( b . 1946 ) , now known as Raël . The Raëlian Movement teaches that life on Earth was scientifically created by a species of extraterrestrials , which they call the Elohim . Members of this species appeared human when having personal contacts with the descendants of the humans that they made . They purposefully misinformed early humanity that they were angels , cherubim , or gods . Raëlians believe that messengers , or prophets , of the Elohim include Buddha , Jesus , and others who informed humans of each era . The founder of Raëlism , members claim , received the final message of the Elohim and that its purpose is to inform the world about Elohim and that if humans become aware and peaceful enough , they wish to be welcomed by them . 
 The Raëlian Church has a quasi @-@ clerical structure of seven levels . Joining the movement requires an official apostasy from other religions . Raëlian ethics include striving for world peace , sharing , democracy and nonviolence . Sexuality is also an important part of the Raëlian doctrine and its liberal views of sexuality have attracted some of its priests and bishops from other religions . 
 Raël founded Clonaid ( originally Valiant Venture Ltd Corporation ) in 1997 , but then handed it over to a Raëlian bishop , Brigitte Boisselier in 2000 . In 2002 the company claimed that an American woman underwent a standard cloning procedure that led to the birth of a daughter , Eve ( b . 26 December 2002 ) . Although few believe the claim , it nonetheless attracted national authorities and the mainstream media to look further into the Raëlians ' cult status . 
 The Raëlians frequently use the swastika as a symbol of peace , which halted Raëlian requests for territory in Israel , and later Lebanon , for establishing an embassy for extraterrestrials . The religion also uses the swastika embedded on the Star of David . Starting around 1991 , this symbol was often replaced by a variant star and swirl symbol as a public relations move , particularly toward Israel . 
 = = History = = 
 The beginnings of Raëlism are rooted in the claims of a French former automobile journalist and race car driver Claude Vorilhon . In his books The Book Which Tells the Truth ( 1974 ) and Extraterrestrials Took Me to their Planet ( 1975 ) , Vorilhon alleges that he had alien encounters with beings who gave him knowledge of the origins of all major religions . 
 The movement traces its beginnings to a conference in Paris , France of two thousand people in 1974 . From there , the MADECH organization was born . The name MADECH is a double acronym in the French language ; it stands both for " Movement for the Welcoming of the Elohim , Creators of Humanity " ( Mouvement pour l ‘ <unk> des Elohim , <unk> de l <unk> ) and for " Moses Preceded Elijah and the Christ " ( Moise a <unk> Élie et le Christ ) . By 1976 , Claude Vorilhon ( called Raël ) transformed MADECH into the International Raelian Movement . 
 From 1980 to 1992 Raël and his movement became increasingly global . In 1980 Claude Raël 's fifth Raëlian book Sensual Meditation was published and formal publication of the Raëlian Messages in the Japanese language began as part of the Raëlian mission to Japan . Two years later , Africa became another target area in the mission to spread the Raëlian messages . 
 On 26 December 2002 , Brigitte Boisselier , a Raëlian Bishop and CEO of a biotechnology company called Clonaid announced the birth of baby Eve , supposedly the first @-@ ever human clone . The announcement ignited much media attention , ethical debate , doubt , criticism , and claims of a hoax . <unk> for the movement , including Claude Vorilhon , have suggested that this is one of the first steps in achieving a more important agenda . They claim that through cloning they can combine an accelerated growth process with some form of mind transfer , and in such , may achieve eternal life . 
 = = Member hierarchy = = 
 The structure of the Raëlian Church is hierarchical , with seven levels ascending from level 0 to level 6 . The top four levels consist of " Guides " . The level 6 guide , known as the " Guide of Guides " , has the final say on who becomes a level 5 " Bishop Guide " or a level 4 " Priest Guide " . Bishops and priests promote lower @-@ level members one level at a time during annual seminars . Each bishop or priest can propose a new guide as long as the candidate is from a level below his or her own . Guides can assist " Regional Guides " — level 3 and above — in their assigning of non @-@ guide members to levels 3 ( " Assistant Priests " ) , 2 ( " Organizers " ) and 1 ( " Assistant Organizers " ) . 
 Members of the Raëlian structure begin as level 0 " trainees " during annual seminars . The Raelian structure claimed in 2007 to have about 2 @,@ 300 members , 170 " Raëlian guides " , and 41 bishops . Claude Vorilhon has held the highest position for three seven @-@ year terms . 
 = = = Women @-@ only groups = = = 
 Women make up only a third of the membership in the Raëlian Church , though two anecdotes in the Raëlian Contact newsletter report female majorities joining the movement 's Asian Mongolian chapter . Women such as Brigitte Boisselier , the Chief Executive Officer of Clonaid , play a powerful role in the Raëlian Church . There are two major groups of women in the Raëlian Church . 
 The Order of Angels , founded in the 1990s , consists of over a hundred Raëlian women who call for femininity and refinement for all of humanity . The initiation rites include declaring an oath or making a contract in which one agrees to become defender of the Raëlian ideology and its founder Raël . The Order of Angels has its own hierarchy of " rose angels " and " white angels " which , as of 2003 , are six and 160 women , respectively . After the Clonaid human cloning claim made the headlines , the Daily Telegraph wrote that members of the order not only provided sexual pleasure for Raël , but also helped donate eggs for efforts towards human cloning . A few days later , Time magazine wrote that French chemist Brigitte Boisselier was an Order of Angels member . Around this time , cult specialist Mike <unk> called the Order of Angels " one of the most transparent movements " he had witnessed , though he was alarmed by the women 's promise to defend Raël 's life with their own bodies . 
 Raël has instructed some women members to play a pro @-@ sex feminist role in the Raëlian Church . " Rael 's Girls " is another group of women in the movement which are against the suppression of feminine acts of pleasure , including sexual intercourse with men or women . Rael 's Girls solely consists of women who work in the sex industry . The women of Rael 's Girls say there is no reason to repent for performing striptease or being a prostitute . This organization was set up " to support the choice of the women who are working in the sex industry " . Rael 's Girls and its founder Raël were featured in a pictorial in the October 2004 issue of Playboy . 
 = = Rites and practices = = 
 = = = Initiation = = = 
 = = = = Ceremony = = = = 
 The major initiation rite in the Raëlian Church is the " baptism " or " transmission of the cellular plan " and is performed by upper @-@ level members in the Raëlian clergy known as guides . In 1979 , Raël introduced the " Act of Apostasy " as an obligation for those preparing for their Raëlian baptism . 
 The Raëlian baptism is known as transmission of the cellular plan where " cellular " refers to the organic cells of the body and the " plan " refers to the genetic makeup of the individual . This Raëlian baptism involves a guide member laying water onto the forehead of the new member . The practice began on " the first Sunday in April " of 1976 when Raël baptised 40 Raëlians . Raëlians believe that their genetic information is recorded by a remote computer and would become recognized during their final hour when they will be judged by the extraterrestrial Elohim . 
 = = = = Ceremonial dates = = = = 
 <unk> can only be performed on four special days in the year . The dates mark anniversaries in the Raëlian calendar . 
 The dates are 6 August , which marks the anniversary of the atomic bombing of Hiroshima in 1945 , 13 December , marking the day that Raël in 1973 says he had his first personal encounter with one of the extraterrestrial Elohim , 7 October in which the Elohim , Raël says , took him up in a spacecraft in 1975 and the following day had meals with Jesus , Buddha , and other past religious figures and the first Sunday in April , which Raëlians believe is the date when dark @-@ skinned extraterrestrials created Adam and Eve . 
 = = = Sensual Meditation = = = 
 Sensual Meditation is the set of exercises made public by Claude Vorilhon in his book La <unk> <unk> . It is practiced by members of International Raelian Movement ( IRM ) . The first of these exercises is usually taught in Raëlian Seminars . 
 = = Other activities , outreach and advocacy = = 
 Throughout the history of Raëlism , members of the Raëlian Church have toured public settings advocating masturbation , condoms and birth control . Raëlians hope that genetically modified food and nanotechnology will allow humankind to eliminate the obligation to work , in a world that embraces science and technology . 
 Raëlians have founded Clonaid , a company that envisions that someday human beings can be scientifically recreated though a process of human cloning , and Clitoraid , an organization whose mission is to oppose female genital mutilation . 
 = = = UFO exhibits = = = 
 Raëlian structure members have set up exhibitions about their beliefs of extraterrestrial intelligent designers sending crop circles , UFOs , and spaceships for their arrival at an embassy . While there have been smaller meetings of Raëlians and non @-@ Raëlians , annual Raëlian seminars have been typically larger . 
 = = = Seminars = = = 
 Raëlian structure members who run the seminars have organized group exercises involving meditation with the senses . James R. Lewis , an authority on fringe religious movements , spoke of Raëlians who practiced a Raëlian exercise called Sensual Meditation and discovered " playing fields " where " radical self @-@ reconstruction , " " new forms of authority , " and " new modes of self @-@ relating " were encouraged . 
 Music has been a feature of large gatherings , where at night , Raëlians have had multiethnic cabaret performances . <unk> have used colored bracelets to indicate whether they wanted to be alone , be in a couple , or simply meet people . 
 On a yearly basis , Raëlian members organize seminars that are often attractive to the sexually adventurous . News KNBC called the annual Raëlian seminars " a cross between a nudist camp and new @-@ age retreat . " A Spanish television agency reported Raëlian men and women in cross @-@ dressing plays . Activities such as observations of one 's own genitals and masturbation with them disturbed Brigitte McCann , a Calgary Sun reporter who entered one of the Raëlian seminars . Susan J. Palmer said a French journalist went to a Raëlian Seminar in 1991 and taped couples having sexual intercourse in tents . These tapes gained widespread negative publicity — with news stories that described these practices as perverted and a form of brainwashing . The tents were actually put up for the privacy of attendees who were sharing dormitories , and the person was ejected by the Raëlians for misrepresentation of their so @-@ called research for the sake of sensationalism . So @-@ called infiltration is encouraged by the Raëlians to clear up myths perpetrated by the media and rogue researchers . 
 = = = Activism = = = 
 Raëlians routinely advocate sex @-@ positive feminism and genetically modified food . They also have protested against wars and the Catholic Church . 
 Pro @-@ GMO : On 6 August 2003 , the first day of Raëlian year 58 AH , a tech article on the USA Today newspaper mentions an " unlikely ally " of the Monsanto Company , the Raëlian Movement of Brazil . The movement gave vocal support in response to the company 's support for genetically modified organisms particularly in their country . Brazilian farmers have been using Monsanto 's genetically engineered soy plant as well as the Roundup herbicide to which it was artificially adapted . The Raëlians spoke against the Brazilian government 's ban on GMOs . 
 Anti @-@ war : In 2006 , About 30 Raëlians , some topless , took part in an anti @-@ war demonstration in Seoul , Korea . In 2003 , Raëlians in white alien costumes bore signs bearing the message " NO WAR ... ET wants Peace , too ! " to protest the 2003 Invasion of Iraq . 
 Anti @-@ Catholic : In 1992 Catholic schools in Montreal , Canada objected to a proposed condom vending machine as contrary to their mission . In response , Raëlian guides , in an event dubbed " Operation Condom " , gave the Catholic students ten thousand condoms . The Commissioner of Catholic schools for Montreal said they could do nothing to stop them . 
 In July 2001 , Raëlians on the streets attracted Italians and Swiss people as they gave leaflets protesting the existence of over a hundred child molesters among Roman Catholic clergy in France . They recommended that parents should not send their children to Catholic confession . The Episcopal vicar of Geneva sued the Raëlian Church for libel but did not win . The judge did not accept the charges for the reason that the Raëlians were not attacking the whole of the Catholic Church . In October 2002 , Raëlians in a Canadian anti @-@ clerical parade handed out Christian crosses to high school students . The students were invited to burn the crosses in a park not far from Montreal 's Mount Royal and to sign letters of apostasy from the Roman Catholic Church . The Quebec Association of Bishops called this " incitement to hatred " , and several school boards attempted to prevent their students from meeting Raëlians . 
 = = = Converts from other religions = = = 
 Raëlians do not believe in a god ( or other deity ) , but in extraterrestrials . Former clergy of mainstream religions have joined the Raëlian Church , especially in Quebec . The structure of the movement had promoted some of them to the level of Priest or Bishop due to " extensive Bible training and teaching skills " . 
 Two ex @-@ Roman Catholic Priests , Victor Legendre and Charles @-@ Yvan Giroux converted to Raëlianism . A former bishop of the The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints ( LDS Church ) joined the Raelian Movement so he could be openly gay . The Raëlian , Mark Woodgate , stated that 8 % of Raëlians worldwide are former Latter @-@ day Saints . Religiously mixed couples are common , especially with spouses who are Christians or Buddhists . 
 = = = Intentional controversy = = = 
 Susan J. Palmer , a sociologist from Canada , has studied the movement since 1987 and says the movement intentionally stirs a moderate level of controversy to maintain membership . For example , Rael and the group attempt to tie their views with topical matters , ranging from Tiger Woods ' promiscuity to strained relations in the Middle East , in regular online postings and press releases . This view is shared by Mike <unk> — the executive director of an anti @-@ cult organization with the name Info @-@ Cult — who says the controversy leads to criticism by both religious and non @-@ religious people . 
 Raëlian organizers made deliberate attempts to " shock , titillate , and capture the media 's imagination " . The book Yes to Human Cloning ( 2001 ) attracted media attention after its release , including segments on 20 / 20 and 60 Minutes . <unk> Gregory Stock described the Raëlian Clonaid project as " sufficiently quirky to command instant media attention . " It has been estimated that the group received free publicity worth US $ 500 million as a result of the Clonaid claim . Mark Hunt , a lawyer and politician who wished to clone his dead son with the help of the Clonaid services , was overwhelmed by the volume of media attention and in an interview said that Clonaid 's chief executive had become a " press hog " . 
 = = Beliefs = = 
 Theologian of new religious movements George D. Chryssides described the Raëlian Church as being in an " early developmental stage " and that their beliefs distance it from a " dominant intellectual climate " . Raëlism claims that all life on Earth , humans included , was created scientifically by Elohim , members of an extraterrestrial race who appeared similar to small humans and so were often depicted as angels , cherubs , or gods . Raëlians , who are not <unk> , believe the correct historical meaning of the word Elohim is the plural sense , " those who came from the sky " . Belief in extraterrestrial Elohim play a central part in Clonaid 's claim of offering cloning services for homosexual and infertile couples who want a child cloned from a partner 's DNA . 
 Chryssides states that Raëlism is discernible from other UFO religions for its heavy support for physicalism and repudiation of supernaturalism . Susan J. Palmer , a social scholar who had long contacts with Raëlians , associated epiphenomenalism with the belief in Raëlism that mind transfer coupled with human cloning can implant mind and personality into a new and disease free body . Raëlians publicly deny the existence of the ethereal soul and a supernatural god , but they believe that humanity for many generations past will be resurrected , albeit in a scientific way . 
 Raëlians believe that throughout the ages , members of the Elohim civilization sent different prophets , including Moses , Jesus , Buddha and many others whose role was to guide humanity and to prepare humans for the future , all of whom were created as a result of a sexual union between a human woman and one of the Elohim . To Raëlians , this was possible because the Elohim had advanced DNA synthesis and genetic engineering . The Elohim later reduced the frequent visits so that humans were largely left to progress on their own , until the time of the Apocalypse / Revelation when they would send their final messenger and disclose themselves at an extraterrestrial embassy , establishing political and economic ties . 
 Raëlians believe that sex is a normal , natural and healthy part of life and encourage people to be true to their natural sexuality . They promote healing from damaging messages from strict puritanical belief systems and social stigmas that stifle one 's natural sexuality . Acceptance of masturbation , homosexuality , bisexuality , <unk> , naturism and any legal , safe and consensual adult activity is promoted as part of a healthy and long life , and this is used to attract young converts to the religion . Raelians believe that sexuality is a gift of pleasure to mankind from the Elohim . The Raëlian book Let 's Welcome our Fathers From Space says that new advanced extraterrestrial civilizations will ultimately practice a final religion or " religion of the infinite " that involves ubiquitous practice of Sensual Meditation . 
 According to Giancarlo Genta and Jason <unk> , writers who have influenced Raëlian beliefs include Zechariah Sitchin and Erich von Däniken . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Raëlians are encouraged to do as they feel right , whether that matches the rules of the culture in which they live or not . According to Susan J. Palmer , a majority of loosely affiliated Raëlian Movement members have often strayed from following rules concerning " diet , drugs , and sexual activity " as described in the Raëlian books . Sometimes , they will not attend monthly meetings or pay a tithe in proportion to their income . Only the more committed members who do follow such rules can remain in the movement 's structure . 
 According to Michel <unk> , the former director of a Raëlian @-@ built museum called <unk> , the only pressure exerted on members is to attend annual Raëlian seminars , which allows members convinced of Raël 's enthusiasm to voluntarily tithe . Palmer cited Raël , who claimed that more than 60 % of the Raëlian Movement 's members do not tithe . Dawson College students conducted a survey of the membership in Canada 1991 which found that only one @-@ third of respondents tithed . 
 = = = Human cloning = = = 
 As opposed to the scientific definition of reproductive cloning which is simply the creation of a genetically identical living thing , Raëlians seek to both genetically clone individuals , rapidly accelerate growth of the clone to adulthood through a process like guided self @-@ assembly of rapidly expanded cells or even nanotechnology and then transfer the mind and personality of the donor into the clone . Raëlians believe humanity can attain eternal life through the science of cloning . 
 Claude Vorilhon told lawmakers that banning the development of human cloning was comparable to outlawing medical advances such " antibiotics , blood transfusions , and vaccines . " 
 = = = = Clonaid = = = = 
 Raël founded Valiant Venture Ltd Corporation in 1997 , to research human cloning . The company name was later changed to Clonaid and handed over to Raëlian bishop Brigitte Boisselier in 2000 . In 2002 , Boisselier , as chief executive of Clonaid , claimed that a human baby was conceived through cloning technology . Around this time , Clonaid 's subsidiary <unk> Tech claimed to have in possession a cell fusion device that assisted the cloning of human embryos . The Vatican said that experimenters expressed " brutal mentality " for attempting to clone human beings . Pope John Paul II criticized the experiment which he believes threatens the dignity of human life . In response , the leader of the Raëlian Church dismissed the Pope 's ethical concerns , calling them an " accumulation of religious prejudices . " 
 In response to Raël 's association with Clonaid , South Korean immigration authorities at the airport denied him entry into their country in 2003 . This decision led to the quick cancellation of the planned Raëlian seminar which seven hundred registered for . Raëlians of South Korea were instructed by Raël to protest near the Ministry of Health and Welfare that ordered him to leave . Officials detained Raël for nine hours at Incheon International Airport before he and his wife Sophie de <unk> left for Tokyo from where they took another plane on their way back to Canada . Raël responded by saying that Korean officials treated him like a " North Korean " and that he would wait for an apology before coming back to Korea . 
 = = = Ethics = = = 
 = = = = LGBT issues = = = = 
 The Raelian movement defends the rights and freedoms of gays and lesbians , recognises gay marriage and ordains gay clergy . Some Raelian leaders have performed licensed same @-@ sex marriages . 
 = = = = Sensuality and pleasure = = = = 
 According to the book Maitreya by Claude Vorilhon , love involves experiencing different varieties and possibilities that allow one to break habits in order to make life more pleasant and interesting and that it is the only thing which can stop war and injustice that persists in today 's world . Raëlians believe in the right to form new religions or new political parties as long as they do not promote violence . As individualists , Raëlians believe that the one who gives the order to harm others is less at fault than the one who executes it . 
 Raëlians say they encourage adult homosexual , bisexual , and heterosexual relationships and that society should recognize them legally . Some Swiss government authorities responded to Raëlians ' views about Sensual Meditation with a fear that Raëlians are a threat to public morals for supporting liberalized sex education for children . They express the view that such liberalized sex education teaches youngsters how to obtain sexual gratification which would encourage sexual abuse of underage children . 
 = = = = Views on pedophilia = = = = 
 Sexual predators and guides who force missionary ideas against members are excommunicated by the Raëlian Church for a minimum of seven years — the amount of time Raëlians believe it takes for all of a person 's biological cells to be regenerated . In 2006 Raëlians in Los Angeles , California condemned acts of pedophilia which Raelians consider a disease , particularly those associated with celibate Catholic priests , saying that minors and adults should not be mixed in the act of sex . Authorities of the Swiss canton of Valais claimed that Raëlians support a doctrine of " complete sexual liberty " , and they denied an application by Raël to live in their area . The website <unk> denied that sexual freedom between consenting adults in any way implies pedophilia . 
 = = = Structure of the Universe = = = 
 Raëlian cosmology as proposed in 1973 by Raël states that the observable universe has no creator and is infinite in time and finite in size and surrounded by infinite space . 
 In Raëlian cosmology , our observable universe is an " atom " of a much larger level of matter ( and possibly organism ) and subatomic particles in our bodies also possess universes like our own , but on a much smaller scale . This pattern , atom within universe within atom , is believed to be infinitely repetitive , from the infinitely small , to the infinitely large . The Raëlian Messages by Raël state that humanoid extraterrestrials , who were originally called under the name Elohim ( singular : <unk> ) , verified this cosmology scientifically . 
 Because of the difference of mass , the activity of life inside in a living thing 's atoms would undergo many millennia before enough time passes for that living thing to take a single step . Raëlians believe the universe is infinite in time and space and lacks a center . Because of this , one could not imagine where an ethereal soul would go . 
 The Raëlian cosmology is meditated upon during the fourth activity in the rite of Sensual Meditation . 
 = = = Intelligent Design = = = 
 = = = = Creation of life on Earth by extraterrestrials = = = = 
 In his book The Message Given to me by Extraterrestrials ( now republished as Intelligent Design : Message from the Designers 2006 ISBN 2 @-@ <unk> @-@ 20 @-@ 3 ) , Claude Vorilhon claims that on 13 December 1973 , he found a spacecraft shaped like a flattened bell that landed inside Puy de <unk> , a volcano near the capital city of Auvergne . A 25 @,@ 000 @-@ year @-@ old human @-@ like extraterrestrial inside the spacecraft named Yahweh said that Elohim was the name that primitive people of Earth called members of his extraterrestrial race — who were seen as " those who came from the sky " . Yahweh explained that Earth was originally void of life , with thick clouds and shallow seas , but the Elohim came , broke apart the clouds , exposed the seas to sunlight , built a continent , and synthesized a global ecosystem . Solar astronomy , terraformation , nanotechnology , and genetic engineering allowed Elohim to adapt life to Earth 's thermal and chemical makeup . 
 Yahweh gave materialistic explanations of the following : 
 the Garden of Eden : a large laboratory that was based on an artificially constructed continent 
 Noah 's Ark : a spaceship that preserved DNA that was used to resurrect animals through cloning 
 the Tower of Babel : a rocket that was supposed to reach the creators ' planet ; 
 the Great Flood : the byproduct of a nuclear missile explosion that the Elohim sent . After tidal wave floods following the explosions receded , Elohim scattered the Israelites and had them speak the language of other tribes . 
 According to Vorilhon , Elohim contacted about forty people to act as their prophets on Earth , including Moses , Elijah , Ezekiel , Buddha , John the Baptist , Jesus , Muhammad , and Joseph Smith . The religions thought to be from <unk> origins include Judaism , Buddhism , Christianity , Islam , and Mormonism . 
 From the Raëlian point of view , religious texts indicate that the Elohim would return at the age of Apocalypse or Revelation ( unveiling of the truth ) . Humans from another world would appear to drop down from the sky and meet in the embassy they have asked Raël to build for them and share their advanced scientific knowledge with humanity . Thus , one of the stated main goals of the Raëlian movement is to inform as many people as possible about this extraterrestrial race . 
 = = = = Humanity 's chance of creating life on other planets = = = = 
 Raëlians believe that humanity would be able to create life on other planets only if humanity is peaceful enough to stop war . In that case , humanity could travel the distances between stars and create life on another planet . Progress in terraforming , molecular biology , and cloning would enable these teams to create continents and life from scratch . Progress in social engineering would ensure that this creation would have a better chance of both surviving and having the potential to understand its creators . Research on how civilization would occur on another planet would allow scientists to decide what traces of their origin should be left behind so that their role in life creation would someday be revealed . The progress achieved by the science teams would ultimately sustain a perpetual chain of life . 
 = = = A coming judgment = = = 
 Raëlians do not believe that an ethereal soul exists free of physical confinement . Raëlians believe that advanced supercomputers of the Elohim are right now recording the memories and DNA of human beings . When Elohim release this information for the coming resurrection , people would be brought back from the dead and the judgments upon them would be realized based on actions in their past life . People excluded from physical re @-@ creation would include those who achieved nothing positive but were not evil . Vorilhon expressed an interest in cloning Hitler for war trials and retroactive punishment . Raël also mentioned cloning as the solution to terrorism by suicide attacks , as the perpetrators would not be able to escape punishment by killing themselves if the Elohim recreated them after their attacks . 
 = = = Embassy for Extraterrestrials = = = 
 Raëlians believe that life on Earth — as well as many religions of the world — was the work of extraterrestrials . They believe these were scientists and that ancient people saw them as " gods " and gave the name " Elohim " . Raëlians believe that the Embassy for Extraterrestrials or " Third Temple " is to support an official contact with Extraterrestrial Elohim and their messengers of the main religions at the " New Jerusalem " . 
 The Raëlian Embassy for Extraterrestrials is the vision of the International Raëlian Movement to establish an embassy , at a base cost of $ 20 million , with a landing pad that would serve as spaceport for extraterrestrial spaceships . Its location is intended to be in neutral territory , preferably Jerusalem , and would be surrounded by acres of campground capable of supporting about 144 @,@ 000 people or more than twice the estimated Raëlian membership as of 2005 . 
 On 16 April 1987 , the Chicago Sun @-@ Times estimated the funding for the " cosmic kibbutz " at $ 1 million . In 1997 – 1998 , the funding had risen to $ 7 million . By 2001 , $ 9 million had been saved for the embassy , and in October 2001 , the funding had reached $ 20 million . 
 = = = = Proposed architecture and location = = = = 
 The International Raëlian Movement envisions having an entrance with an aseptic chamber leading to a conference room for twenty @-@ one people as well as a dining room of the same capacity . In the plan are seven rooms for the purpose of receiving human guests into the embassy . The embassy building , along with the swimming pool , would be in the center of a large park and protected from trespassing by a wall — a maximum of two stories — to surround the entire complex 's circumference . Trees and bushes are to be planted in the outskirts of the wall 's area . The walls are to have a northern and southern entrance . The landing pad for the embassy should be able fit a spaceship of twelve meters of diameter or 39 ' 4 " on its terrace . The terrace is to be above the rooms in the torus , which are for extraterrestrials only . The seven rooms directly underneath the landing pad would be protected from occupants of other rooms with a thick metal door . Finally , the International Raëlian Movement wants to avoid military and radar surveillance of the airspace above the embassy . Buildings for administration , food and water provisions , and state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art sanitation and communication systems are part of this vision . A nearby replica of the Raëlian Embassy for Extraterrestrials open to the public is expected to show visitors what it is like inside the real one . 
 On 13 December 1997 , the leader of the International Raëlian Movement had decided to extend the possibility of building the embassy outside of Jerusalem and also allow that a significant portion of the embassy property be covered with water . The area of the proposed embassy property is still envisioned at a minimum of 3 @.@ 47 square kilometers , with a radius of at least 1 @.@ 05 kilometers . 
 = = = A form of meritocracy = = = 
 In his book Geniocracy , Raël outlined his plan for a peaceful worldwide political union that , while democratic , would require members of the electorate to meet a minimum standard of intelligence . The thresholds proposed by the Raëlians are 50 % above average for a candidate and 10 % above average for a voter . The world government would also have a global currency , a common language , and a transformation of militaries of the world into civil police . 
 Raelians deride the current state @-@ system as inadequate for dealing with contemporary global issues that are typical of Globalisation , such as Environmentalism , Social Justice , Human Rights , and the current economic system . In line with this , Geniocracy proposes a different economic model called Humanitarianism . 
 Raël recommends a world government with 12 regions . Inhabitants would vote for which region they want to be part of . After the regions are defined , they are further divided into 12 sectors after the same principle of democracy is applied . While sectors of the same region are defined as having equal numbers of inhabitants , the regions themselves may have different levels of population , which would be proportional to its voting power . 
 = = = = Status = = = = 
 The current difficulty in the ideas of Geniocracy is that the means of assessing intelligence are ill @-@ defined . One idea offered by Rael in Geniocracy is to have specialists such as psychologists , neurologists , ethnologists , etc . , perfect or choose among existing ones , a series of tests that would define each person 's level of intelligence . They should be designed to measure intellectual potential rather than accumulation of knowledge . 
 The lack of scientific rigour necessary for inclusion of Geniocracy as properly testable political ideology can be noted in number of modern and historical dictatorships as well as oligarchies . Because of the controversies surrounding Geniocracy , Raël presents the idea as a classic utopia or provocative ideal and not necessarily a model that humanity will follow . 
 In Raël 's book , Extraterrestrials took me to their planet , Raël claims that an extraterrestrial gave him the idea of Economic Humanitarianism . Under the establishment of Economic Humanitarianism , people would not have ownership of businesses or exploitable goods created by others . Instead , people would rent each of them for a period of 49 years . The founders would be able to receive the rents for up to 49 years or when they die , whichever is later . Any rents not inherited by relatives after 49 years would go to the State . By balancing inheritances , children would be born with enough financial means to forsake menial tasks for endeavors that may benefit the whole of humanity . Family houses could be inherited from generation to generation , free of rent . 
 In his much later book , Maitreya , Raël says the road to a world without money is capitalism and globalisation , as opposed to communism . Capitalism would allow those who contribute much to society to also contribute to its scientific and technological development . Under capitalism , society would produce as much money as it can . The money would become important in the short run as nanotechnology quickly lowers the cost of goods while putting many people out of work . 
 = = = Religious symbol = = = 
 Raelians believe in reclaiming the swastika by restoring its historical meaning as a symbol of peace and good luck . Swastika has been used for millennia in the East as a religious symbol of peace and harmony . 
 In 1991 , a Montreal anti @-@ cult organization called Info @-@ Cult made statements against the Raëlian Church with an article on Le Devoir , branding Raëlians as promoters of fascism and racism , due to the church 's use of the swastika as part of their logo and the Raëlian description of an extraterrestrial global government in which those less than ten percent above average intelligence are excluded from the electorate . Outside Info @-@ Cult 's office , Raëlians spoke against the act of discriminating against a religious minority . On 2 January 1992 , a dozen people protested against the use of the swastika in the Raëlian logo in Miami 's Eden Roc Hotel . The use of the swastika and other Raelian practices has led to criticism from the group <unk> of Florida , a Jewish anti @-@ cult organization . 
 In February 1991 , the Raëlian Church modified their symbol . The official reason given was a request from the Elohim to change the symbol in order to help in negotiations with Israel for the building of the Extraterrestrial Embassy to greet the anticipated Elohim space vessels , although the country continued to deny their request . In 2005 , the Israeli Raëlian Guide Kobi Drori stated that the Lebanese government was discussing proposals by the Raëlian movement to build their interplanetary embassy in Lebanon . However , one condition was that the Raëlians not display their logo on top of the building because it mixes a swastika and a Star of David . According to Drori , the Raëlians involved declined this offer , as they wished to keep the symbol as it was . From 1991 to 2007 , the official Raëlian symbol in Europe and America did not have the original swastika , but Raël , founder and leader of the Raëlian Movement decided to make the original symbol , the Star of David intertwined with a swastika , the only official symbol of the Raelian Movement worldwide . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In 1995 , a parliamentary commission issued a report through the National Assembly of France that categorized the Raelian Movement ( Mouvement <unk> ) as a secte ( French word for " cult " ) , but did not give reasons for this classification . In 1997 , a parliamentary inquiry commission issued a report through the Belgian Chamber of Representatives that categorized the Belgian Raelian Movement ( Mouvement <unk> Belge ) as a sect . Glenn McGee , professor at the University of New Haven , stated that part of the sect is a cult while the other part is a commercial website that collects large sums of money from those interested in human cloning . The Bureau of Democracy , Human Rights , and Labor of the United States Department of State and sociologist Susan J. Palmer have classified the International Raëlian Movement as a religion . 
 In 2005 , two Wired News reporters were welcomed into a Raëlian seminar and had permission to videotape it . They believe the footage they took makes it clear that the Raelian Movement is a cult which should disband . A Raëlian guide said in a Wired interview that he was not ashamed of what is shown and that he has no concerns about this incident . 
 The estranged former wife of Vorilhon characterised him as a " cult leader " and claimed he brought groups of female Raëlians home and held orgies which affected the children from an early age . 
 = Russula virescens = 
 Russula virescens is a basidiomycete mushroom of the genus Russula , and is commonly known as the green @-@ cracking russula , the quilted green russula , or the green brittlegill . It can be recognized by its distinctive pale green cap that measures up to 15 cm ( 6 in ) in diameter , the surface of which is covered with darker green angular patches . It has crowded white gills , and a firm , white stipe that is up to 8 cm ( 3 in ) tall and 4 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) thick . Considered to be one of the best edible mushrooms of the genus Russula , it is especially popular in Spain and China . With a taste that is described variously as mild , nutty , fruity , or sweet , it is cooked by grilling , frying , sautéeing , or eaten raw . Mushrooms are rich in carbohydrates and proteins , with a low fat content . 
 The species was described as new to science in 1774 by Jacob Christian Schaeffer . Its distribution encompasses Asia , North Africa , Europe , and Central America . Its presence in North America has not been clarified , due to confusion with the similar species Russula parvovirescens and R. crustosa . R. virescens fruits singly or scattered on the ground in both deciduous and mixed forests , forming mycorrhizal associations with broadleaf trees such as oak , European beech , and aspen . In Asia , it associates with several species of tropical lowland rainforest trees of the family Dipterocarpaceae . R. virescens has a ribonuclease enzyme with a biochemistry unique among edible mushrooms . It also has biologically active polysaccharides , and a laccase enzyme that can break down several dyes used in the laboratory and in the textile industry . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Russula virescens was first described by German polymath Jacob Christian Schaeffer in 1774 as Agaricus virescens . The species was subsequently transferred to the genus Russula by Elias Fries in 1836 . According to the nomenclatural authority MycoBank , Russula furcata var. aeruginosa ( published by Christian Hendrik Persoon in 1796 ) and Agaricus <unk> ( published by Karl Friedrich Wilhelm Wallroth in 1883 ) are synonyms of Russula virescens . The variety <unk> , defined by Claude Casimir Gillet in 1876 , is no longer considered to have independent taxonomic significance . According to Rolf Singer 's 1986 classification of Russula , R. virescens is the type species of subsection <unk> in section <unk> , a grouping of mushrooms characterized by a cap surface that breaks into patches of bran @-@ like ( furfuraceous ) particles . In a molecular phylogenetic analysis of European Russula , R. virescens formed a clade with R. mustelina ; these two species were sister to a clade containing R. <unk> and R. <unk> . 
 The specific epithet virescens is Latin for " becoming green " . The characteristic pattern of the cap surface has earned the species common names such as the green @-@ cracking russula , the quilted green russula , and the green brittlegill . In the mid @-@ Atlantic United States , it is also known locally as the moldy russula . 
 = = Description = = 
 Described by mushroom enthusiast Antonio Carluccio as " not exactly nice to look at " , the cap is at first dome or barrel @-@ shaped , becoming convex and flattened with age with a diameter of up to 15 cm ( 6 in ) . The cap center is often depressed . The cuticle of the cap is green , most profoundly in the center , with patches of the same color dispersed radially around the center in an areolate pattern . The color of the cuticle is often of variable shade , ranging from gray to verdigris to grass @-@ green . The extent of the patching of the cuticle is also variable , giving specimens with limited patches a resemblance to other green @-@ capped species of Russula , such as R. aeruginea . The green patches of the cap lie on a white to pale green background . The cap , while frequently round , may also exhibit irregular lobes and cracks . The cap cuticle is thin , and can be readily peeled off the surface to a distance of about halfway towards the cap center . The gills are white to cream colored , and fairly crowded together ; they are mostly free from attachment to the stipe . Gills are interconnected at their bases by veins . The stipe is cylindrical , white , and of variable height , up to 8 cm ( 3 in ) tall and 4 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) wide ; it is roughly the same thickness at both the top and the base . The top portion of the stipe may be farinose — covered with a white , mealy powder . It may turn slightly brown with age , or when it is injured or bruised from handling . Like other mushrooms in the Russulales , the flesh is brittle , owing to the <unk> cytoarchitecture — cylindrical cells that contrast with the typical fibrous , filamentous hyphae present in other orders of the <unk> . 
 The spores of R. virescens are elliptical or ellipsoid with warts , translucent ( hyaline ) , and produce a white , pale or pale yellow spore print ; the spore dimensions are 6 – 9 by 5 – 7 µm . A partial reticulum ( net @-@ like pattern of ridges ) interconnects the warts . The spore @-@ bearing cells , the basidia , are club @-@ shaped and have dimensions of 24 – 33 by 6 – 7 @.@ 5 µm ; they are colorless , and each hold from two to four spores . The pleurocystidia ( cystidia on the gill face ) are 40 – 85 by 6 – 8 µm and end abruptly in a sharp point . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Russula parvovirescens , found in the eastern United States , can be distinguished from R. virescens by its smaller stature , with caps measuring 4 – 8 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 – 3 @.@ 1 in ) wide and stipe up to 6 cm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) long by 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) thick . Compared to R. virescens , it tends to be more bluish @-@ green , the patches on its cap are larger , and it has a lined cap margin . Microscopically , the terminal cells in the cap cuticle of R. parvovirescens are more swollen than those of R. virescens , which has tapered and elongated terminal cells . Another green @-@ capped Russula is R. aeruginea , but this species may be distinguished from R. virescens by its smaller size and smooth cap . Other green <unk> with a smooth cap include R. heterophylla and R. <unk> var. <unk> . Russula crustosa , like R. virescens , also has an areolate cap , but the cap becomes sticky ( viscid ) when moist , and its color is more variable , as it may be reddish , yellowish , or brown . Also , the spore print of R. crustosa is a darker yellow than R. virescens . R. <unk> has a cap that is " drab @-@ green to blue @-@ green " , but unlike R. virescens , is smooth . R. <unk> has an unpleasant taste and smells of parsley . 
 = = Edibility = = 
 Russula virescens is an edible mushroom considered to be one of the best of the genus Russula , and is popular in Europe , particularly in Spain . In an 1875 work on the uses of fungi , English mycologist Mordecai Cubitt Cooke remarked about the mushroom that " the peasants about Milan are in the habit of putting [ it ] over wood embers to toast , and eating [ it ] afterwards with a little salt . " The mushroom is often sold as a dried product in Asia , and in China , it can be found in roadside markets . Its smell is not distinctive , but its taste has been described as mild , nutty , fruity , or even sweet . Old specimens may smell of herrings . Drying the mushrooms enhances the nutty flavor . Mushrooms can be sautéed ( the green color disappears with cooking ) , and young specimens that are prepared this way have a potato taste that pairs well with shallots . They are also fried or grilled , or used raw in salads . Young specimens are pale and can be hard to identify , but the characteristic pattern of older fruit bodies makes them hard to confuse with other species . When collecting R. virescens for consumption , caution is of vital importance to avoid confusion with the dangerously poisonous Amanita phalloides ( known as the death cap ) , a mushroom that can be most easily identified by its volva and ring . 
 A lady amateur <unk> of the writer 's acquaintance , ... who is especially fond of the green Russula , is never at a loss for this especially prized <unk> as a reward for her daily stroll among the trees . A visitor may often see upon her buffet a small glass dish filled with the mushrooms , nicely scraped and cut in pieces — an ever @-@ present relish between meals . For even in their natural state , as she <unk> says , they are " as sweet as chestnuts " . This is especially the case with the " buttons " or younger specimens . 
 The nutritional components of R. virescens mushrooms have been characterized . Fresh mushrooms contain about 92 @.@ 5 % moisture . A 100 @-@ gram ( 3 @.@ 5 oz ) sample of dried mushroom ( 100 g dw ) has 365 kcal ( 1527 kilojoules ) . Carbohydrates make up the bulk of the fruit bodies , comprising 62 % of the dry weight ; 11 @.@ 1 % of the carbohydrates are sugars , the large majority of which ( 10 @.@ 9 % ) is mannitol . The total lipid , or crude fat , content makes up 1 @.@ 85 % of the dry matter of the mushroom . The proportion of fatty acids ( expressed as a percentage of total fatty acids ) are 28 @.@ 78 % saturated , 41 @.@ 51 % monounsaturated , and 29 @.@ 71 % polyunsaturated . The most prevalent fatty acids include : palmitic acid , 17 @.@ 3 % of total fatty acids ; stearic acid , 7 @.@ 16 % ; oleic acid , 40 @.@ 27 % ; and linoleic acid , 29 @.@ 18 % . Several bioactive compounds are present in the mushroom . One hundred grams ( dry weight ) contains 49 @.@ 3 micrograms ( µg ) of tocopherols ( 20 @.@ 0 µg alpha , 21 @.@ 3 µg beta , and 8 @.@ 0 µg gamma ) and 0 @.@ 19 milligrams ( mg ) of the carotenoid pigment lycopene . There are 4 @.@ 46 g of organic acids per 100 g of dry mushrooms , including oxalic acid ( 0 @.@ 78 g ) , malic acid ( 2 @.@ 71 g ) , citric acid ( 0 @.@ 55 g ) , and fumaric acid ( 0 @.@ 23 g ) . Mushrooms have 22 @.@ 6 mg / 100 g dw of the phenolic compound 4 @-@ <unk> acid , and 15 @.@ 8 mg / 100 g dw of cinnamic acid . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Russula virescens can be found fruiting on soil in both deciduous forests and mixed forests , forming ectomycorrhizal symbiotic relationships with a variety of trees , including oaks ( Quercus ) , European beech ( Fagus sylvatica ) , and aspen ( Populus <unk> ) . Preliminary investigations suggest that the fungus also associates with at least ten species of Dipterocarpaceae , an important tree family prevalent in the tropical lowland forests of Southeast Asia . Fruit bodies may appear singly or in groups , reappear in the same spots year after year , and are not common . In Europe , fruiting occurs mainly during the months of summer to early autumn . A Mexican study of the seasonal occurrence of several common mushroom species in subtropical forests in Xalapa showed that the fruiting period of R. virescens occurred in April , before the onset of the rainy season . 
 The distribution of R. virescens in North America is subject to debate , where a number of similar species such as R. parvovirescens and R. crustosa are also recognized . One author even suggests that R. virescens " is strictly a European species " , citing <unk> and collaborators ( 2006 ) , who say " the virescens @-@ crustosa group is much more complex than suspected and embraces at least a dozen taxa in the eastern US " . As in Europe , Russula virescens has a widespread distribution in Asia , having been recorded from India , Malaysia , Korea , the Philippines , Nepal , China , Thailand , and Vietnam . It is also found in North Africa and Central America . 
 = = Chemistry = = 
 Russula virescens has a limited capacity to bioaccumulate the micronutrients iron , copper , and zinc from the soil . The concentration of these trace metals is slightly higher in the caps than the stipes . A 300 @-@ gram ( 11 oz ) meal of fresh mushroom caps would supply 16 % of the recommended daily allowance ( RDA ) of copper for an adult male or female ( ages 19 – 50 ) ; 16 % or 7 @.@ 3 % of the RDA of iron for an adult male or female , respectively ; and 16 – 22 % of the adult RDA of zinc . The mushroom is a poor <unk> of the toxic heavy metals arsenic , cadmium , lead , mercury , and nickel . 
 <unk> active mushroom polysaccharides have been a frequent research topic in recent decades due to their possible stimulatory effect on innate and cell @-@ mediated immune responses , antitumor activities , and other activities . <unk> activity , antioxidant activity , cholesterol @-@ lowering , and blood sugar @-@ lowering effects have been detected in extracts of R. virescens fruit bodies , which are attributed to polysaccharides . A water @-@ insoluble beta @-@ glucan , <unk> @-@ II , has been isolated from the fruit bodies . <unk> derivatives of this compound have antitumor activities against sarcoma tumor cell lines . <unk> , a water @-@ soluble polysaccharide present in the mushroom , is made largely of <unk> subunits and has antioxidant activity . 
 <unk> ( or RNases ) are enzymes that catalyze the hydrolysis of ribonucleic acid ( RNA ) , and collectively they play a critical role in many biological processes . A RNase from R. virescens was shown to be biochemically unique amongst seven edible mushroom species in several ways : it has a co @-@ specificity towards cleaving RNA at poly A and poly C , compared to the monospecific RNases of the others ; it can be adsorbed on chromatography columns containing <unk> – cellulose as the adsorbent ; it has a pH optimum of 4 @.@ 5 , lower than all other species ; and , it has a " distinctly different " N @-@ terminal amino acid sequence . The mushroom contains a unique laccase enzyme that can break down several dyes used in the laboratory and in the textile industry , such as <unk> blue , <unk> black T , malachite green , and reactive brilliant blue . <unk> are being used increasingly in the textile industry as environmental biocatalysts for the treatment of dye wastewater . 
 = Manhattan Project = 
 The Manhattan Project was a research and development project that produced the first nuclear weapons during World War II . It was led by the United States with the support of the United Kingdom and Canada . From 1942 to 1946 , the project was under the direction of Major General Leslie Groves of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers ; physicist J. Robert Oppenheimer was the director of the Los Alamos Laboratory that designed the actual bombs . The Army component of the project was designated the Manhattan District ; " Manhattan " gradually superseded the official codename , Development of Substitute Materials , for the entire project . Along the way , the project absorbed its earlier British counterpart , Tube Alloys . The Manhattan Project began modestly in 1939 , but grew to employ more than 130 @,@ 000 people and cost nearly US $ 2 billion ( about $ 26 billion in 2016 dollars ) . Over 90 % of the cost was for building factories and producing the fissile materials , with less than 10 % for development and production of the weapons . Research and production took place at more than 30 sites across the United States , the United Kingdom and Canada . 
 Two types of atomic bomb were developed during the war ; a relatively simple gun @-@ type fission weapon was made using uranium while a more complex plutonium implosion @-@ type weapon was designed concurrently . For the Gun @-@ Type weapon development uranium @-@ 235 ( an isotope that makes up only 0 @.@ 7 percent of natural uranium ) was required . Chemically identical to the most common isotope , uranium @-@ 238 , and with almost the same mass , it proved difficult to separate the two . Three methods were employed for uranium enrichment : electromagnetic , gaseous and thermal . Most of this work was performed at Oak Ridge , Tennessee . In parallel with the work on uranium was an effort to produce plutonium . Reactors were constructed at Oak Ridge and Hanford , Washington , in which uranium was irradiated and transmuted into plutonium . The plutonium was then chemically separated from the uranium . The gun @-@ type design proved impractical to use with plutonium so the implosion @-@ type weapon was developed in a concerted design and construction effort at the project 's principal research and design laboratory in Los Alamos , New Mexico . 
 The project was also charged with gathering intelligence on the German nuclear weapon project . Through Operation Alsos , Manhattan Project personnel served in Europe , sometimes behind enemy lines , where they gathered nuclear materials and documents , and rounded up German scientists . Despite the Manhattan Project 's tight security , Soviet atomic spies still penetrated the program . 
 The first nuclear device ever detonated was an implosion @-@ type bomb at the Trinity test , conducted at New Mexico 's Alamogordo Bombing and Gunnery Range on 16 July 1945 . Little Boy , a gun @-@ type weapon , and Fat Man , an implosion @-@ type weapon , were used in the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki , respectively . In the immediate postwar years , the Manhattan Project conducted weapons testing at Bikini Atoll as part of Operation Crossroads , developed new weapons , promoted the development of the network of national laboratories , supported medical research into radiology and laid the foundations for the nuclear navy . It maintained control over American atomic weapons research and production until the formation of the United States Atomic Energy Commission in January 1947 . 
 = = Origins = = 
 The discovery of nuclear fission by German chemists Otto Hahn and Fritz Strassmann in 1938 , and its theoretical explanation by Lise Meitner and Otto Frisch , made the development of an atomic bomb a theoretical possibility . There were fears that a German atomic bomb project would develop one first , especially among scientists who were refugees from Nazi Germany and other fascist countries . In August 1939 , physicists Leó Szilárd and Eugene Wigner drafted the Einstein – Szilárd letter , which warned of the potential development of " extremely powerful bombs of a new type " . It urged the United States to take steps to acquire stockpiles of uranium ore and accelerate the research of Enrico Fermi and others into nuclear chain reactions . They had it signed by Albert Einstein and delivered to President Franklin D. Roosevelt . Roosevelt called on Lyman Briggs of the National Bureau of Standards to head the Advisory Committee on Uranium to investigate the issues raised by the letter . Briggs held a meeting on 21 October 1939 , which was attended by Szilárd , Wigner and Edward Teller . The committee reported back to Roosevelt in November that uranium " would provide a possible source of bombs with a destructiveness vastly greater than anything now known . " 
 Briggs proposed that the National Defense Research Committee ( NDRC ) spend $ 167 @,@ 000 on research into uranium , particularly the uranium @-@ 235 isotope , and the recently discovered plutonium . On 28 June 1941 , Roosevelt signed Executive Order 8807 , which created the Office of Scientific Research and Development ( OSRD ) , with Vannevar Bush as its director . The office was empowered to engage in large engineering projects in addition to research . The NDRC Committee on Uranium became the S @-@ 1 Uranium Committee of the OSRD ; the word " uranium " was soon dropped for security reasons . 
 In Britain , Frisch and Rudolf Peierls at the University of Birmingham had made a breakthrough investigating the critical mass of uranium @-@ 235 in June 1939 . Their calculations indicated that it was within an order of magnitude of 10 kilograms ( 22 lb ) , which was small enough to be carried by a bomber of the day . Their March 1940 Frisch – Peierls memorandum initiated the British atomic bomb project and its Maud Committee , which unanimously recommended pursuing the development of an atomic bomb . In July 1940 , Britain had offered to give the United States access to its scientific research , and the Tizard Mission 's John Cockcroft briefed American scientists on British developments . He discovered that the American project was smaller than the British , and not as far advanced . 
 As part of the scientific exchange , the Maud Committee 's findings were conveyed to the United States . One of its members , the Australian physicist Mark Oliphant , flew to the United States in late August 1941 and discovered that data provided by the Maud Committee had not reached key American physicists . Oliphant then set out to find out why the committee 's findings were apparently being ignored . He met with the Uranium Committee , and visited Berkeley , California , where he spoke persuasively to Ernest O. Lawrence . Lawrence was sufficiently impressed to commence his own research into uranium . He in turn spoke to James B. Conant , Arthur H. Compton and George B. Pegram . Oliphant 's mission was therefore a success ; key American physicists were now aware of the potential power of an atomic bomb . 
 At a meeting between President Roosevelt , Vannevar Bush , and Vice President Henry A. Wallace on 9 October 1941 , the President approved the atomic program . To control it , he created a Top Policy Group consisting of himself — although he never attended a meeting — Wallace , Bush , Conant , Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson , and the Chief of Staff of the Army , General George C. Marshall . Roosevelt chose the Army to run the project rather than the Navy , as the Army had the most experience with management of large @-@ scale construction projects . He also agreed to coordinate the effort with that of the British , and on 11 October he sent a message to Prime Minister Winston Churchill , suggesting that they correspond on atomic matters . 
 = = Feasibility = = 
 = = = Proposals = = = 
 The S @-@ 1 Committee held its first meeting on 18 December 1941 " pervaded by an atmosphere of enthusiasm and urgency " in the wake of the attack on Pearl Harbor and the subsequent United States declaration of war upon Japan and then on Germany . Work was proceeding on three different techniques for isotope separation to separate uranium @-@ 235 from uranium @-@ 238 . Lawrence and his team at the University of California , Berkeley , investigated electromagnetic separation , while Eger Murphree and Jesse Wakefield Beams 's team looked into gaseous diffusion at Columbia University , and Philip Abelson directed research into thermal diffusion at the Carnegie Institution of Washington and later the Naval Research Laboratory . Murphree was also the head of an unsuccessful separation project using gas centrifuges . 
 Meanwhile , there were two lines of research into nuclear reactor technology , with Harold Urey continuing research into heavy water at Columbia , while Arthur Compton brought the scientists working under his supervision from Columbia , California and Princeton University to join his team at the University of Chicago , where he organized the Metallurgical Laboratory in early 1942 to study plutonium and reactors using graphite as a neutron moderator . Briggs , Compton , Lawrence , Murphree , and Urey met on 23 May 1942 to finalize the S @-@ 1 Committee recommendations , which called for all five technologies to be pursued . This was approved by Bush , Conant , and Brigadier General Wilhelm D. Styer , the chief of staff of Major General Brehon B. Somervell 's Services of Supply , who had been designated the Army 's representative on nuclear matters . Bush and Conant then took the recommendation to the Top Policy Group with a budget proposal for $ 54 million for construction by the United States Army Corps of Engineers , $ 31 million for research and development by OSRD and $ 5 million for contingencies in fiscal year 1943 . The Top Policy Group in turn sent it to the President on 17 June 1942 and he approved it by writing " OK FDR " on the document . 
 = = = Bomb design concepts = = = 
 Compton asked theoretical physicist J. Robert Oppenheimer of the University of California , Berkeley , to take over research into fast neutron calculations — the key to calculations of critical mass and weapon detonation — from Gregory Breit , who had quit on 18 May 1942 because of concerns over lax operational security . John H. Manley , a physicist at the Metallurgical Laboratory , was assigned to assist Oppenheimer by contacting and coordinating experimental physics groups scattered across the country . Oppenheimer and Robert Serber of the University of Illinois examined the problems of neutron diffusion — how neutrons moved in a nuclear chain reaction — and hydrodynamics — how the explosion produced by a chain reaction might behave . To review this work and the general theory of fission reactions , Oppenheimer and Fermi convened meetings at the University of Chicago in June and at the University of California , Berkeley , in July 1942 with theoretical physicists Hans Bethe , John Van Vleck , Edward Teller , Emil Konopinski , Robert Serber , Stan Frankel , and Eldred C. Nelson , the latter three former students of Oppenheimer , and experimental physicists Emilio Segrè , Felix Bloch , Franco Rasetti , John Henry Manley , and Edwin McMillan . They tentatively confirmed that a fission bomb was theoretically possible . 
 There were still many unknown factors . The properties of pure uranium @-@ 235 were relatively unknown , as were those of plutonium , an element that had only been discovered in February 1941 by Glenn Seaborg and his team . The scientists at the Berkeley conference envisioned creating plutonium in nuclear reactors where uranium @-@ 238 atoms absorbed neutrons that had been emitted from fissioning uranium @-@ 235 atoms . At this point no reactor had been built , and only tiny quantities of plutonium were available from cyclotrons . Even by December 1943 , only two milligrams had been produced . There were many ways of arranging the fissile material into a critical mass . The simplest was shooting a " cylindrical plug " into a sphere of " active material " with a " tamper " — dense material that would focus neutrons inward and keep the reacting mass together to increase its efficiency . They also explored designs involving spheroids , a primitive form of " implosion " suggested by Richard C. Tolman , and the possibility of <unk> methods , which would increase the efficiency of the bomb as it exploded . 
 Considering the idea of the fission bomb theoretically settled — at least until more experimental data was available — the Berkeley conference then turned in a different direction . Edward Teller pushed for discussion of a more powerful bomb : the " super " , now usually referred to as a " hydrogen bomb " , which would use the explosive force of a detonating fission bomb to ignite a nuclear fusion reaction in deuterium and tritium . Teller proposed scheme after scheme , but Bethe refused each one . The fusion idea was put aside to concentrate on producing fission bombs . Teller also raised the speculative possibility that an atomic bomb might " ignite " the atmosphere because of a hypothetical fusion reaction of nitrogen nuclei . Bethe calculated that it could not happen , and a report co @-@ authored by Teller showed that " no self @-@ propagating chain of nuclear reactions is likely to be started . " In Serber 's account , Oppenheimer mentioned it to Arthur Compton , who " didn 't have enough sense to shut up about it . It somehow got into a document that went to Washington " and was " never laid to rest " . 
 = = Organization = = 
 = = = Manhattan District = = = 
 The Chief of Engineers , Major General Eugene Reybold , selected Colonel James C. Marshall to head the Army 's part of the project in June 1942 . Marshall created a liaison office in Washington , D.C. , but established his temporary headquarters on the 18th floor of 270 Broadway in New York , where he could draw on administrative support from the Corps of Engineers ' North Atlantic Division . It was close to the Manhattan office of Stone & Webster , the principal project contractor , and to Columbia University . He had permission to draw on his former command , the Syracuse District , for staff , and he started with Lieutenant Colonel Kenneth Nichols , who became his deputy . 
 Because most of his task involved construction , Marshall worked in cooperation with the head of the Corps of Engineers Construction Division , Major General Thomas M. Robbins , and his deputy , Colonel Leslie Groves . Reybold , Somervell and Styer decided to call the project " Development of Substitute Materials " , but Groves felt that this would draw attention . Since engineer districts normally carried the name of the city where they were located , Marshall and Groves agreed to name the Army 's component of the project the Manhattan District . This became official on 13 August , when Reybold issued the order creating the new district . Informally , it was known as the Manhattan Engineer District , or MED . Unlike other districts , it had no geographic boundaries , and Marshall had the authority of a division engineer . Development of Substitute Materials remained as the official codename of the project as a whole , but was supplanted over time by " Manhattan " . 
 Marshall later conceded that , " I had never heard of atomic fission but I did know that you could not build much of a plant , much less four of them for $ 90 million . " A single TNT plant that Nichols had recently built in Pennsylvania had cost $ 128 million . Nor were they impressed with estimates to the nearest order of magnitude , which Groves compared with telling a caterer to prepare for between ten and a thousand guests . A survey team from Stone & Webster had already scouted a site for the production plants . The War Production Board recommended sites around Knoxville , Tennessee , an isolated area where the Tennessee Valley Authority could supply ample electric power and the rivers could provide cooling water for the reactors . After examining several sites , the survey team selected one near Elza , Tennessee . Conant advised that it be acquired at once and Styer agreed but Marshall temporized , awaiting the results of Conant 's reactor experiments before taking action . Of the prospective processes , only Lawrence 's electromagnetic separation appeared sufficiently advanced for construction to commence . 
 Marshall and Nichols began assembling the resources they would need . The first step was to obtain a high priority rating for the project . The top ratings were AA @-@ 1 through AA @-@ 4 in descending order , although there was also a special AAA rating reserved for emergencies . Ratings AA @-@ 1 and AA @-@ 2 were for essential weapons and equipment , so Colonel Lucius D. Clay , the deputy chief of staff at Services and Supply for requirements and resources , felt that the highest rating he could assign was AA @-@ 3 , although he was willing to provide a AAA rating on request for critical materials if the need arose . Nichols and Marshall were disappointed ; AA @-@ 3 was the same priority as Nichols ' TNT plant in Pennsylvania . 
 = = = Military Policy Committee = = = 
 Bush became dissatisfied with Colonel Marshall 's failure to get the project moving forward expeditiously , specifically the failure to acquire the Tennessee site , the low priority allocated to the project by the Army and the location of his headquarters in New York City . Bush felt that more aggressive leadership was required , and spoke to Harvey Bundy and Generals Marshall , Somervell , and Styer about his concerns . He wanted the project placed under a senior policy committee , with a prestigious officer , preferably Styer , as overall director . 
 Somervell and Styer selected Groves for the post , informing him on 17 September of this decision , and that General Marshall ordered that he be promoted to brigadier general , as it was felt that the title " general " would hold more sway with the academic scientists working on the Manhattan Project . Groves ' orders placed him directly under Somervell rather than Reybold , with Colonel Marshall now answerable to Groves . Groves established his headquarters in Washington , D.C. , on the fifth floor of the New War Department Building , where Colonel Marshall had his liaison office . He assumed command of the Manhattan Project on 23 September . Later that day , he attended a meeting called by Stimson , which established a Military Policy Committee , responsible to the Top Policy Group , consisting of Bush ( with Conant as an alternate ) , Styer and Rear Admiral William R. Purnell . Tolman and Conant were later appointed as Groves ' scientific advisers . 
 On 19 September , Groves went to Donald Nelson , the chairman of the War Production Board , and asked for broad authority to issue a AAA rating whenever it was required . Nelson initially balked but quickly caved in when Groves threatened to go to the President . Groves promised not to use the AAA rating unless it was necessary . It soon transpired that for the routine requirements of the project the AAA rating was too high but the AA @-@ 3 rating was too low . After a long campaign , Groves finally received AA @-@ 1 authority on 1 July 1944 . According to Groves , " In Washington you became aware of the importance of top priority . Most everything proposed in the Roosevelt administration would have top priority . That would last for about a week or two and then something else would get top priority " . 
 One of Groves ' early problems was to find a director for Project Y , the group that would design and build the bomb . The obvious choice was one of the three laboratory heads , Urey , Lawrence , or Compton , but they could not be spared . Compton recommended Oppenheimer , who was already intimately familiar with the bomb design concepts . However , Oppenheimer had little administrative experience , and , unlike Urey , Lawrence , and Compton , had not won a Nobel Prize , which many scientists felt that the head of such an important laboratory should have . There were also concerns about Oppenheimer 's security status , as many of his associates were Communists , including his brother , Frank Oppenheimer ; his wife , Kitty ; and his girlfriend , Jean Tatlock . A long conversation on a train in October 1942 convinced Groves and Nichols that Oppenheimer thoroughly understood the issues involved in setting up a laboratory in a remote area and should be appointed as its director . Groves personally waived the security requirements and issued Oppenheimer a clearance on 20 July 1943 . 
 = = = Collaboration with the United Kingdom = = = 
 The British and Americans exchanged nuclear information but did not initially combine their efforts . Britain rebuffed attempts by Bush and Conant in 1941 to strengthen cooperation with its own project , codenamed Tube Alloys , because it was reluctant to share its technological lead and help the United States develop its own atomic bomb . An American scientist who brought a personal letter from Roosevelt to Churchill offering to pay for all research and development in an Anglo @-@ American project was poorly treated , and Churchill did not reply to the letter . The United States as a result decided as early as April 1942 that if its offer was rejected , they should proceed alone . The British , who had made significant contributions early in the war , did not have the resources to carry through such a research program while fighting for their survival . As a result , Tube Alloys soon fell behind its American <unk> and on 30 July 1942 , Sir John Anderson , the minister responsible for Tube Alloys , advised Churchill that : " We must face the fact that ... [ our ] pioneering work ... is a dwindling asset and that , unless we capitalise it quickly , we shall be outstripped . We now have a real contribution to make to a ' merger . ' Soon we shall have little or none . " That month Churchill and Roosevelt made an informal , unwritten agreement for atomic collaboration . 
 The opportunity for an equal partnership no longer existed , however , as shown in August 1942 when the British unsuccessfully demanded substantial control over the project while paying none of the costs . By 1943 the roles of the two countries had reversed from late 1941 ; in January Conant notified the British that they would no longer receive atomic information except in certain areas . While the British were shocked by the abrogation of the Churchill @-@ Roosevelt agreement , head of the Canadian National Research Council C. J. Mackenzie was less surprised , writing " I can 't help feeling that the United Kingdom group [ over ] emphasizes the importance of their contribution as compared with the Americans . " As Conant and Bush told the British , the order came " from the top " . 
 The British bargaining position had worsened ; the American scientists had decided that the United States no longer needed outside help , and they wanted to prevent Britain exploiting post @-@ war commercial applications of atomic energy . The committee supported , and Roosevelt agreed to , restricting the flow of information to what Britain could use during the war — especially not bomb design — even if doing so slowed down the American project . By early 1943 the British stopped sending research and scientists to America , and as a result the Americans stopped all information sharing . The British considered ending the supply of Canadian uranium and heavy water to force the Americans to again share , but Canada needed American supplies to produce them . They investigated the possibility of an independent nuclear program , but determined that it could not be ready in time to affect the outcome of the war in Europe . 
 By March 1943 Conant decided that British help would benefit some areas of the project . James Chadwick and one or two other British scientists were important enough that the bomb design team at Los Alamos needed them , despite the risk of revealing weapon design secrets . In August 1943 Churchill and Roosevelt negotiated the Quebec Agreement , which resulted in a resumption of cooperation between scientists working on the same problem . Britain , however , agreed to restrictions on data on the building of large @-@ scale production plants necessary for the bomb . The subsequent Hyde Park Agreement in September 1944 extended this cooperation to the postwar period . The Quebec Agreement established the Combined Policy Committee to coordinate the efforts of the United States , United Kingdom and Canada . Stimson , Bush and Conant served as the American members of the Combined Policy Committee , Field Marshal Sir John Dill and Colonel J. J. Llewellin were the British members , and C. D. Howe was the Canadian member . Llewellin returned to the United Kingdom at the end of 1943 and was replaced on the committee by Sir Ronald Ian Campbell , who in turn was replaced by the British Ambassador to the United States , Lord Halifax , in early 1945 . Sir John Dill died in Washington , D.C. , in November 1944 and was replaced both as Chief of the British Joint Staff Mission and as a member of the Combined Policy Committee by Field Marshal Sir Henry Maitland Wilson . 
 When cooperation resumed after the Quebec agreement , the Americans ' progress and expenditures amazed the British . The United States had already spent more than $ 1 billion ( $ 13 @,@ 700 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 today ) , while in 1943 , the United Kingdom had spent about £ 0 @.@ 5 million . Chadwick thus pressed for British involvement in the Manhattan Project to the fullest extent and abandon any hopes of a British project during the war . With Churchill 's backing , he attempted to ensure that every request from Groves for assistance was honored . The British Mission that arrived in the United States in December 1943 included Niels Bohr , Otto Frisch , Klaus Fuchs , Rudolf Peierls , and Ernest Titterton . More scientists arrived in early 1944 . While those assigned to gaseous diffusion left by the fall of 1944 , the 35 working with Lawrence at Berkeley were assigned to existing laboratory groups and stayed until the end of the war . The 19 sent to Los Alamos also joined existing groups , primarily related to implosion and bomb assembly , but not the plutonium @-@ related ones . Part of the Quebec Agreement specified that nuclear weapons would not be used against another country without mutual consent . In June 1945 , Wilson agreed that the use of nuclear weapons against Japan would be recorded as a decision of the Combined Policy Committee . 
 The Combined Policy Committee created the Combined Development Trust in June 1944 , with Groves as its chairman , to procure uranium and thorium ores on international markets . The Belgian Congo and Canada held much of the world 's uranium outside Eastern Europe , and the Belgian government in exile was in London . Britain agreed to give the United States most of the Belgian ore , as it could not use most of the supply without restricted American research . In 1944 , the Trust purchased 3 @,@ 440 @,@ 000 pounds ( 1 @,@ 560 @,@ 000 kg ) of uranium oxide ore from companies operating mines in the Belgian Congo . In order to avoid briefing US Secretary of the Treasury Henry Morgenthau Jr. on the project , a special account not subject to the usual auditing and controls was used to hold Trust monies . Between 1944 and the time he resigned from the Trust in 1947 , Groves deposited a total of $ 37 @.@ 5 million into the Trust 's account . 
 Groves appreciated the early British atomic research and the British scientists ' contributions to the Manhattan Project , but stated that the United States would have succeeded without them . He also said that Churchill was " the best friend the atomic bomb project had [ as ] he kept Roosevelt 's interest up ... He just stirred him up all the time by telling him how important he thought the project was . " 
 The British wartime participation was crucial to the success of the United Kingdom 's independent nuclear weapons program after the war when the McMahon Act of 1946 temporarily ended American nuclear cooperation . 
 = = Project sites = = 
 = = = Oak Ridge = = = 
 The day after he took over the project , Groves took a train to Tennessee with Colonel Marshall to inspect the proposed site there , and Groves was impressed . On 29 September 1942 , United States Under Secretary of War Robert P. Patterson authorized the Corps of Engineers to acquire 56 @,@ 000 acres ( 23 @,@ 000 ha ) of land by eminent domain at a cost of $ 3 @.@ 5 million . An additional 3 @,@ 000 acres ( 1 @,@ 200 ha ) was subsequently acquired . About 1 @,@ 000 families were affected by the condemnation order , which came into effect on 7 October . Protests , legal appeals , and a 1943 Congressional inquiry were to no avail . By mid @-@ November U.S. Marshals were tacking notices to vacate on farmhouse doors , and construction contractors were moving in . Some families were given two weeks ' notice to vacate farms that had been their homes for generations ; others had settled there after being evicted to make way for the Great Smoky Mountains National Park in the 1920s or the Norris Dam in the 1930s . The ultimate cost of land acquisition in the area , which was not completed until March 1945 , was only about $ 2 @.@ 6 million , which worked out to around $ 47 an acre . When presented with Public Proclamation Number Two , which declared Oak Ridge a total exclusion area that no one could enter without military permission , the Governor of Tennessee , Prentice Cooper , angrily tore it up . 
 Initially known as the Kingston Demolition Range , the site was officially renamed the Clinton Engineer Works ( CEW ) in early 1943 . While Stone and Webster concentrated on the production facilities , the architectural and engineering firm Skidmore , Owings & Merrill designed and built a residential community for 13 @,@ 000 . The community was located on the slopes of Black Oak Ridge , from which the new town of Oak Ridge got its name . The Army presence at Oak Ridge increased in August 1943 when Nichols replaced Marshall as head of the Manhattan Engineer District . One of his first tasks was to move the district headquarters to Oak Ridge although the name of the district did not change . In September 1943 the administration of community facilities was outsourced to Turner Construction Company through a subsidiary , the Roane @-@ Anderson Company ( for Roane and Anderson Counties , in which Oak Ridge was located ) . Chemical engineers , including William J. Wilcox Jr. and Warren Fuchs , were part of " frantic efforts " to make 10 % to 12 % enriched uranium 235 , known as the code name " <unk> tetroxide " , with tight security and fast approvals for supplies and materials . The population of Oak Ridge soon expanded well beyond the initial plans , and peaked at 75 @,@ 000 in May 1945 , by which time 82 @,@ 000 people were employed at the Clinton Engineer Works , and 10 @,@ 000 by Roane @-@ Anderson . 
 Respected fine @-@ arts photographer , Josephine Herrick , and her colleague , Mary Steers , helped document the developing stages of the bomb in Oak Ridge . 
 = = = Los Alamos = = = 
 The idea of locating Project Y at Oak Ridge was considered , but in the end it was decided that it should be in a remote location . On Oppenheimer 's recommendation , the search for a suitable site was narrowed to the vicinity of Albuquerque , New Mexico , where Oppenheimer owned a ranch . In October 1942 , Major John H. Dudley of the Manhattan Project was sent to survey the area , and he recommended a site near Jemez Springs , New Mexico . On 16 November , Oppenheimer , Groves , Dudley and others toured the site . Oppenheimer feared that the high cliffs surrounding the site would make his people feel claustrophobic , while the engineers were concerned with the possibility of flooding . The party then moved on to the vicinity of the Los Alamos Ranch School . Oppenheimer was impressed and expressed a strong preference for the site , citing its natural beauty and views of the Sangre de Cristo Mountains , which , it was hoped , would inspire those who would work on the project . The engineers were concerned about the poor access road , and whether the water supply would be adequate , but otherwise felt that it was ideal . 
 Patterson approved the acquisition of the site on 25 November 1942 , authorizing $ 440 @,@ 000 for the purchase of the site of 54 @,@ 000 acres ( 22 @,@ 000 ha ) , all but 8 @,@ 900 acres ( 3 @,@ 600 ha ) of which were already owned by the Federal Government . Secretary of Agriculture Claude R. Wickard granted use of some 45 @,@ 100 acres ( 18 @,@ 300 ha ) of United States Forest Service land to the War Department " for so long as the military necessity continues " . The need for land for a new road , and later for a right of way for a 25 @-@ mile ( 40 km ) power line , eventually brought wartime land purchases to 45 @,@ 737 acres ( 18 @,@ 509 @.@ 1 ha ) , but only $ 414 @,@ 971 was spent . Construction was contracted to the M. M. Sundt Company of Tucson , Arizona , with Willard C. Kruger and Associates of Santa Fe , New Mexico , as architect and engineer . Work commenced in December 1942 . Groves initially allocated $ 300 @,@ 000 for construction , three times Oppenheimer 's estimate , with a planned completion date of 15 March 1943 . It soon became clear that the scope of Project Y was greater than expected , and by the time Sundt finished on 30 November 1943 , over $ 7 million had been spent . 
 Because it was secret , Los Alamos was referred to as " Site Y " or " the Hill " . Birth certificates of babies born in Los Alamos during the war listed their place of birth as PO Box 1663 in Santa Fe . Initially Los Alamos was to have been a military laboratory with Oppenheimer and other researchers commissioned into the Army . Oppenheimer went so far as to order himself a lieutenant colonel 's uniform , but two key physicists , Robert Bacher and Isidor Rabi , balked at the idea . Conant , Groves and Oppenheimer then devised a compromise whereby the laboratory was operated by the University of California under contract to the War Department . 
 = = = Argonne = = = 
 An Army @-@ OSRD council on 25 June 1942 decided to build a pilot plant for plutonium production in Red Gate Woods southwest of Chicago . In July , Nichols arranged for a lease of 1 @,@ 025 acres ( 415 ha ) from the Cook County Forest Preserve District , and Captain James F. Grafton was appointed Chicago area engineer . It soon became apparent that the scale of operations was too great for the area , and it was decided to build the plant at Oak Ridge , and keep a research and testing facility in Chicago . 
 Delays in establishing the plant in Red Gate Woods led Compton to authorize the Metallurgical Laboratory to construct the first nuclear reactor beneath the bleachers of Stagg Field at the University of Chicago . The reactor required an enormous amount of graphite blocks and uranium pellets . At the time , there was a limited source of pure uranium . Frank Spedding of Iowa State University were able to produce only two short tons of pure uranium . Additional three short tons of uranium metal was supplied by Westinghouse Lamp Plant which was produced in a rush with makeshift process . A large square balloon was constructed by Goodyear Tire to encase the reactor . On 2 December 1942 , a team led by Enrico Fermi initiated the first artificial self @-@ sustaining nuclear chain reaction in an experimental reactor known as Chicago Pile @-@ 1 . The point at which a reaction becomes self @-@ sustaining became known as " going critical " . Compton reported the success to Conant in Washington , D.C. , by a coded phone call , saying , " The Italian navigator [ Fermi ] has just landed in the new world . " 
 In January 1943 , Grafton 's successor , Major Arthur V. Peterson , ordered Chicago Pile @-@ 1 dismantled and reassembled at Red Gate Woods , as he regarded the operation of a reactor as too hazardous for a densely populated area . At the Argonne site , Chicago Pile @-@ 3 , the first heavy water reactor , went critical on 15 May 1944 . After the war , the operations that remained at Red Gate moved to the new Argonne National Laboratory about 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) away . 
 = = = Hanford = = = 
 By December 1942 there were concerns that even Oak Ridge was too close to a major population center ( Knoxville ) in the unlikely event of a major nuclear accident . Groves recruited DuPont in November 1942 to be the prime contractor for the construction of the plutonium production complex . DuPont was offered a standard cost plus fixed fee contract , but the President of the company , Walter S. Carpenter , Jr . , wanted no profit of any kind , and asked for the proposed contract to be amended to explicitly exclude the company from acquiring any patent rights . This was accepted , but for legal reasons a nominal fee of one dollar was agreed upon . After the war , DuPont asked to be released from the contract early , and had to return 33 cents . 
 DuPont recommended that the site be located far from the existing uranium production facility at Oak Ridge . In December 1942 , Groves dispatched Colonel Franklin Matthias and DuPont engineers to scout potential sites . Matthias reported that Hanford Site near Richland , Washington , was " ideal in virtually all respects " . It was isolated and near the Columbia River , which could supply sufficient water to cool the reactors that would produce the plutonium . Groves visited the site in January and established the Hanford Engineer Works ( HEW ) , codenamed " Site W " . 
 Under Secretary Patterson gave his approval on 9 February , allocating $ 5 million for the acquisition of 40 @,@ 000 acres ( 16 @,@ 000 ha ) of land in the area . The federal government relocated some 1 @,@ 500 residents of White Bluffs and Hanford , and nearby settlements , as well as the Wanapum and other tribes using the area . A dispute arose with farmers over compensation for crops , which had already been planted before the land was acquired . Where schedules allowed , the Army allowed the crops to be harvested , but this was not always possible . The land acquisition process dragged on and was not completed before the end of the Manhattan Project in December 1946 . 
 The dispute did not delay work . Although progress on the reactor design at Metallurgical Laboratory and DuPont was not sufficiently advanced to accurately predict the scope of the project , a start was made in April 1943 on facilities for an estimated 25 @,@ 000 workers , half of whom were expected to live on @-@ site . By July 1944 , some 1 @,@ 200 buildings had been erected and nearly 51 @,@ 000 people were living in the construction camp . As area engineer , Matthias exercised overall control of the site . At its peak , the construction camp was the third most populous town in Washington state . Hanford operated a fleet of over 900 buses , more than the city of Chicago . Like Los Alamos and Oak Ridge , Richland was a gated community with restricted access , but it looked more like a typical wartime American boomtown : the military profile was lower , and physical security elements like high fences , towers and guard dogs were less evident . 
 = = = Canadian sites = = = 
 = = = = British Columbia = = = = 
 Cominco had produced electrolytic hydrogen at Trail , British Columbia , since 1930 . Urey suggested in 1941 that it could produce heavy water . To the existing $ 10 million plant consisting of 3 @,@ 215 cells consuming 75 MW of hydroelectric power , secondary electrolysis cells were added to increase the deuterium concentration in the water from 2 @.@ 3 % to 99 @.@ 8 % . For this process , Hugh Taylor of Princeton developed a platinum @-@ on @-@ carbon catalyst for the first three stages while Urey developed a nickel @-@ <unk> one for the fourth stage tower . The final cost was $ 2 @.@ 8 million . The Canadian Government did not officially learn of the project until August 1942 . Trail 's heavy water production started in January 1944 and continued until 1956 . Heavy water from Trail was used for Chicago Pile 3 , the first reactor using heavy water and natural uranium , which went critical on 15 May 1944 . 
 = = = = Ontario = = = = 
 The Chalk River , Ontario , site was established to rehouse the Allied effort at the Montreal Laboratory away from an urban area . A new community was built at Deep River , Ontario , to provide residences and facilities for the team members . The site was chosen for its proximity to the industrial manufacturing area of Ontario and Quebec , and proximity to a rail head adjacent to a large military base , Camp Petawawa . Located on the Ottawa River , it had access to abundant water . The first director of the new laboratory was John Cockcroft , later replaced by Bennett Lewis . A pilot reactor known as ZEEP ( zero @-@ energy experimental pile ) became the first Canadian reactor , and the first to be completed outside the United States , when it went critical in September 1945 , ZEEP remained in use by researchers until 1970 . A larger 10 MW NRX reactor , which was designed during the war , was completed and went critical in July 1947 . 
 = = = = Northwest Territories = = = = 
 The Eldorado Mine at Port Radium was a source of uranium ore . 
 = = = Heavy water sites = = = 
 Although DuPont 's preferred designs for the nuclear reactors were helium cooled and used graphite as a moderator , DuPont still expressed an interest in using heavy water as a backup , in case the graphite reactor design proved infeasible for some reason . For this purpose , it was estimated that 3 long tons ( 3 @.@ 0 t ) of heavy water would be required per month . The P @-@ 9 Project was the government 's code name for the heavy water production program . As the plant at Trail , which was then under construction , could produce 0 @.@ 5 long tons ( 0 @.@ 51 t ) per month , additional capacity was required . Groves therefore authorized DuPont to establish heavy water facilities at the Morgantown Ordnance Works , near Morgantown , West Virginia ; at the Wabash River Ordnance Works , near Dana and Newport , Indiana ; and at the Alabama Ordnance Works , near Childersburg and Sylacauga , Alabama . Although known as Ordnance Works and paid for under Ordnance Department contracts , they were built and operated by the Army Corps of Engineers . The American plants used a process different from Trail 's ; heavy water was extracted by distillation , taking advantage of the slightly higher boiling point of heavy water . 
 = = Uranium = = 
 = = = Ore = = = 
 The key raw material for the project was uranium , which was used as fuel for the reactors , as feed that was transformed into plutonium , and , in its enriched form , in the atomic bomb itself . There were four known major deposits of uranium in 1940 : in Colorado , in northern Canada , in Joachimstal in Czechoslovakia , and in the Belgian Congo . All but Joachimstal were in allied hands . A November 1942 survey determined that sufficient quantities of uranium were available to satisfy the project 's requirements . Nichols arranged with the State Department for export controls to be placed on uranium oxide and negotiated for the purchase of 1 @,@ 200 long tons ( 1 @,@ 200 t ) of uranium ore from the Belgian Congo that was being stored in a warehouse on Staten Island and the remaining stocks of mined ore stored in the Congo . He negotiated with Eldorado Gold Mines for the purchase of ore from its refinery in Port Hope , Ontario , and its shipment in 100 @-@ ton lots . The Canadian government subsequently bought up the company 's stock until it acquired a controlling interest . 
 While these purchases assured a sufficient supply to meet wartime needs , the American and British leaders concluded that it was in their countries ' interest to gain control of as much of the world 's uranium deposits as possible . The richest source of ore was the Shinkolobwe mine in the Belgian Congo , but it was flooded and closed . Nichols unsuccessfully attempted to negotiate its reopening and the sale of the entire future output to the United States with Edgar Sengier , the director of the company that owned the mine , Union Minière du Haut Katanga . The matter was then taken up by the Combined Policy Committee . As 30 percent of Union Minière 's stock was controlled by British interests , the British took the lead in negotiations . Sir John Anderson and Ambassador John Winant hammered out a deal with Sengier and the Belgian government in May 1944 for the mine to be reopened and 1 @,@ 720 long tons ( 1 @,@ 750 t ) of ore to be purchased at $ 1 @.@ 45 a pound . To avoid dependence on the British and Canadians for ore , Groves also arranged for the purchase of US Vanadium Corporation 's stockpile in <unk> , Colorado . Uranium mining in Colorado yielded about 800 long tons ( 810 t ) of ore . 
 Mallinckrodt Incorporated in St. Louis , Missouri , took the raw ore and dissolved it in nitric acid to produce uranyl nitrate . Ether was then added in a liquid – liquid extraction process to separate the impurities from the uranyl nitrate . This was then heated to form uranium trioxide , which was reduced to highly pure uranium dioxide . By July 1942 , Mallinckrodt was producing a ton of highly pure oxide a day , but turning this into uranium metal initially proved more difficult for contractors Westinghouse and Metal Hydrides . Production was too slow and quality was unacceptably low . A special branch of the Metallurgical Laboratory was established at Iowa State College in Ames , Iowa , under Frank Spedding to investigate alternatives . This became known as the Ames Project , and its Ames process became available in 1943 . 
 = = = Isotope separation = = = 
 Natural uranium consists of 99 @.@ 3 % uranium @-@ 238 and 0 @.@ 7 % uranium @-@ 235 , but only the latter is fissile . The chemically identical uranium @-@ 235 has to be physically separated from the more plentiful isotope . Various methods were considered for uranium enrichment , most of which was carried out at Oak Ridge . 
 The most obvious technology , the centrifuge , failed , but electromagnetic separation , gaseous diffusion , and thermal diffusion technologies were all successful and contributed to the project . In February 1943 , Groves came up with the idea of using the output of some plants as the input for others . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 The centrifuge process was regarded as the only promising separation method in April 1942 . Jesse Beams had developed such a process at the University of Virginia during the 1930s , but had encountered technical difficulties . The process required high rotational speeds , but at certain speeds harmonic vibrations developed that threatened to tear the machinery apart . It was therefore necessary to accelerate quickly through these speeds . In 1941 he began working with uranium hexafluoride , the only known gaseous compound of uranium , and was able to separate uranium @-@ 235 . At Columbia , Urey had Cohen investigate the process , and he produced a body of mathematical theory making it possible to design a centrifugal separation unit , which Westinghouse undertook to construct . 
 Scaling this up to a production plant presented a formidable technical challenge . Urey and Cohen estimated that producing a kilogram ( 2 @.@ 2 lb ) of uranium @-@ 235 per day would require up to 50 @,@ 000 centrifuges with 1 @-@ meter ( 3 ft 3 in ) rotors , or 10 @,@ 000 centrifuges with 4 @-@ meter ( 13 ft ) rotors , assuming that 4 @-@ meter rotors could be built . The prospect of keeping so many rotors operating continuously at high speed appeared daunting , and when Beams ran his experimental apparatus , he obtained only 60 % of the predicted yield , indicating that more centrifuges would be required . Beams , Urey and Cohen then began work on a series of improvements which promised to increase the efficiency of the process . However , frequent failures of motors , shafts and bearings at high speeds delayed work on the pilot plant . In November 1942 the centrifuge process was abandoned by the Military Policy Committee following a recommendation by Conant , Nichols and August C. Klein of Stone & Webster . 
 = = = = Electromagnetic separation = = = = 
 Electromagnetic isotope separation was developed by Lawrence at the University of California Radiation Laboratory . This method employed devices known as calutrons , a hybrid of the standard laboratory mass spectrometer and cyclotron . The name was derived from the words California , university and cyclotron . In the electromagnetic process , a magnetic field deflected charged particles according to mass . The process was neither scientifically elegant nor industrially efficient . Compared with a gaseous diffusion plant or a nuclear reactor , an electromagnetic separation plant would consume more scarce materials , require more manpower to operate , and cost more to build . Nonetheless , the process was approved because it was based on proven technology and therefore represented less risk . Moreover , it could be built in stages , and rapidly reach industrial capacity . 
 Marshall and Nichols discovered that the electromagnetic isotope separation process would require 5 @,@ 000 short tons ( 4 @,@ 500 tonnes ) of copper , which was in desperately short supply . However , silver could be substituted , in an 11 : 10 ratio . On 3 August 1942 , Nichols met with Under Secretary of the Treasury Daniel W. Bell and asked for the transfer of 6 @,@ 000 tons of silver bullion from the West Point Bullion Depository . " Young man , " Bell told him , " you may think of silver in tons but the Treasury will always think of silver in troy ounces ! " Eventually , 14 @,@ 700 short tons ( 13 @,@ 300 tonnes ; 430 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 troy ounces ) were used . 
 The 1 @,@ 000 @-@ troy @-@ ounce ( 31 kg ) silver bars were cast into cylindrical billets and taken to Phelps Dodge in Bayway , New Jersey , where they were extruded into strips 0 @.@ 625 inches ( 15 @.@ 9 mm ) thick , 3 inches ( 76 mm ) wide and 40 feet ( 12 m ) long . These were wound onto magnetic coils by Allis @-@ Chalmers in Milwaukee , Wisconsin . After the war , all the machinery was dismantled and cleaned and the floorboards beneath the machinery were ripped up and burned to recover minute amounts of silver . In the end , only 1 / 3,600,000th was lost . The last silver was returned in May 1970 . 
 Responsibility for the design and construction of the electromagnetic separation plant , which came to be called Y @-@ 12 , was assigned to Stone & Webster by the S @-@ 1 Committee in June 1942 . The design called for five first @-@ stage processing units , known as Alpha racetracks , and two units for final processing , known as Beta racetracks . In September 1943 Groves authorized construction of four more racetracks , known as Alpha II . Construction began in February 1943 . 
 When the plant was started up for testing on schedule in October , the 14 @-@ ton vacuum tanks crept out of alignment because of the power of the magnets , and had to be fastened more securely . A more serious problem arose when the magnetic coils started shorting out . In December Groves ordered a magnet to be broken open , and handfuls of rust were found inside . Groves then ordered the racetracks to be torn down and the magnets sent back to the factory to be cleaned . A pickling plant was established on @-@ site to clean the pipes and fittings . The second Alpha I was not operational until the end of January 1944 , the first Beta and first and third Alpha I 's came online in March , and the fourth Alpha I was operational in April . The four Alpha II racetracks were completed between July and October 1944 . 
 Tennessee Eastman was hired to manage Y @-@ 12 on the usual cost plus fixed fee basis , with a fee of $ 22 @,@ 500 per month plus $ 7 @,@ 500 per racetrack for the first seven racetracks and $ 4 @,@ 000 per additional racetrack . The calutrons were initially operated by scientists from Berkeley to remove bugs and achieve a reasonable operating rate . They were then turned over to trained Tennessee Eastman operators who had only a high school education . Nichols compared unit production data , and pointed out to Lawrence that the young " hillbilly " girl operators were outperforming his PhDs . They agreed to a production race and Lawrence lost , a morale boost for the Tennessee Eastman workers and supervisors . The girls were " trained like soldiers not to reason why " , while " the scientists could not refrain from time @-@ consuming investigation of the cause of even minor fluctuations of the dials . " 
 Y @-@ 12 initially enriched the uranium @-@ 235 content to between 13 % and 15 % , and shipped the first few hundred grams of this to Los Alamos in March 1944 . Only 1 part in 5 @,@ 825 of the uranium feed emerged as final product . Much of the rest was splattered over equipment in the process . Strenuous recovery efforts helped raise production to 10 % of the uranium @-@ 235 feed by January 1945 . In February the Alpha racetracks began receiving slightly enriched ( 1 @.@ 4 % ) feed from the new S @-@ 50 thermal diffusion plant . The next month it received enhanced ( 5 % ) feed from the K @-@ 25 gaseous diffusion plant . By August K @-@ 25 was producing uranium sufficiently enriched to feed directly into the Beta tracks . 
 = = = = Gaseous diffusion = = = = 
 The most promising but also the most challenging method of isotope separation was gaseous diffusion . Graham 's law states that the rate of effusion of a gas is inversely proportional to the square root of its molecular mass , so in a box containing a semi @-@ permeable membrane and a mixture of two gases , the lighter molecules will pass out of the container more rapidly than the heavier molecules . The gas leaving the container is somewhat enriched in the lighter molecules , while the residual gas is somewhat depleted . The idea was that such boxes could be formed into a cascade of pumps and membranes , with each successive stage containing a slightly more enriched mixture . Research into the process was carried out at Columbia University by a group that included Harold Urey , Karl P. Cohen and John R. Dunning . 
 In November 1942 the Military Policy Committee approved the construction of a 600 @-@ stage gaseous diffusion plant . On 14 December , M. W. Kellogg accepted an offer to construct the plant , which was codenamed K @-@ 25 . A cost plus fixed fee contract was negotiated , eventually totaling $ 2 @.@ 5 million . A separate corporate entity called Kellex was created for the project , headed by Percival C. Keith , one of Kellogg 's vice presidents . The process faced formidable technical difficulties . The highly corrosive gas uranium hexafluoride would have to be used , as no substitute could be found , and the motors and pumps would have to be vacuum tight and enclosed in inert gas . The biggest problem was the design of the barrier , which would have to be strong , porous and resistant to corrosion by uranium hexafluoride . The best choice for this seemed to be nickel . Edward Adler and Edward Norris created a mesh barrier from electroplated nickel . A six @-@ stage pilot plant was built at Columbia to test the process , but the Norris @-@ Adler prototype proved to be too brittle . A rival barrier was developed from powdered nickel by Kellex , the Bell Telephone Laboratories and the Bakelite Corporation . In January 1944 , Groves ordered the Kellex barrier into production . 
 Kellex 's design for K @-@ 25 called for a four @-@ story 0 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) long U @-@ shaped structure containing 54 contiguous buildings . These were divided into nine sections . Within these were cells of six stages . The cells could be operated independently , or consecutively within a section . Similarly , the sections could be operated separately or as part of a single cascade . A survey party began construction by marking out the 500 @-@ acre ( 2 @.@ 0 km2 ) site in May 1943 . Work on the main building began in October 1943 , and the six @-@ stage pilot plant was ready for operation on 17 April 1944 . In 1945 Groves canceled the upper stages of the plant , directing Kellex to instead design and build a 540 @-@ stage side feed unit , which became known as K @-@ 27 . Kellex transferred the last unit to the operating contractor , Union Carbide and Carbon , on 11 September 1945 . The total cost , including the K @-@ 27 plant completed after the war , came to $ 480 million . 
 The production plant commenced operation in February 1945 , and as cascade after cascade came online , the quality of the product increased . By April 1945 , K @-@ 25 had attained a 1 @.@ 1 % enrichment and the output of the S @-@ 50 thermal diffusion plant began being used as feed . Some product produced the next month reached nearly 7 % enrichment . In August , the last of the 2 @,@ 892 stages commenced operation . K @-@ 25 and K @-@ 27 achieved their full potential in the early postwar period , when they eclipsed the other production plants and became the prototypes for a new generation of plants . 
 = = = = Thermal diffusion = = = = 
 The thermal diffusion process was based on Sydney Chapman and David Enskog 's theory , which explained that when a mixed gas passes through a temperature gradient , the heavier one tends to concentrate at the cold end and the lighter one at the warm end . Since hot gases tend to rise and cool ones tend to fall , this can be used as a means of isotope separation . This process was first demonstrated by H. Clusius and G. Dickel in Germany in 1938 . It was developed by US Navy scientists , but was not one of the enrichment technologies initially selected for use in the Manhattan Project . This was primarily due to doubts about its technical feasibility , but the inter @-@ service rivalry between the Army and Navy also played a part . 
 The Naval Research Laboratory continued the research under Philip Abelson 's direction , but there was little contact with the Manhattan Project until April 1944 , when Captain William S. Parsons , the naval officer who was in charge of ordnance development at Los Alamos , brought Oppenheimer news of encouraging progress in the Navy 's experiments on thermal diffusion . Oppenheimer wrote to Groves suggesting that the output of a thermal diffusion plant could be fed into Y @-@ 12 . Groves set up a committee consisting of Warren K. Lewis , Eger Murphree and Richard Tolman to investigate the idea , and they estimated that a thermal diffusion plant costing $ 3 @.@ 5 million could enrich 50 kilograms ( 110 lb ) of uranium per week to nearly 0 @.@ 9 % uranium @-@ 235 . Groves approved its construction on 24 June 1944 . 
 Groves contracted with the H. K. Ferguson Company of Cleveland , Ohio , to build the thermal diffusion plant , which was designated S @-@ 50 . Groves ' advisers , Karl Cohen and W. I. Thompson from Standard Oil , estimated that it would take six months to build . Groves gave Ferguson just four . Plans called for the installation of 2 @,@ 142 48 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 15 m ) diffusion columns arranged in 21 racks . Inside each column were three concentric tubes . Steam , obtained from the nearby K @-@ 25 powerhouse at a pressure of 100 pounds per square inch ( 690 kPa ) and temperature of 545 ° F ( 285 ° C ) , flowed downward through the innermost 1 @.@ 25 @-@ inch ( 32 mm ) nickel pipe , while water at 155 ° F ( 68 ° C ) flowed upward through the outermost iron pipe . Isotope separation occurred in the uranium hexafluoride gas between the nickel and copper pipes . 
 Work commenced on 9 July 1944 , and S @-@ 50 began partial operation in September . Ferguson operated the plant through a subsidiary known as Fercleve . The plant produced just 10 @.@ 5 pounds ( 4 @.@ 8 kg ) of 0 @.@ 852 % uranium @-@ 235 in October . Leaks limited production and forced shutdowns over the next few months , but in June 1945 it produced 12 @,@ 730 pounds ( 5 @,@ 770 kg ) . By March 1945 , all 21 production racks were operating . Initially the output of S @-@ 50 was fed into Y @-@ 12 , but starting in March 1945 all three enrichment processes were run in series . S @-@ 50 became the first stage , enriching from 0 @.@ 71 % to 0 @.@ 89 % . This material was fed into the gaseous diffusion process in the K @-@ 25 plant , which produced a product enriched to about 23 % . This was , in turn , fed into Y @-@ 12 , which boosted it to about 89 % , sufficient for nuclear weapons . 
 = = = Aggregate U @-@ 235 production = = = 
 About 50 kilograms ( 110 lb ) of uranium enriched to 89 % uranium @-@ 235 was delivered to Los Alamos by July 1945 . The entire 50 kg , along with some 50 % <unk> , averaging out to about 85 % enriched , were used in Little Boy 
 = = Plutonium = = 
 The second line of development pursued by the Manhattan Project used the fissile element plutonium . Although small amounts of plutonium exist in nature , the best way to obtain large quantities of the element is in a nuclear reactor , in which natural uranium is bombarded by neutrons . The uranium @-@ 238 is transmuted into uranium @-@ 239 , which rapidly decays , first into neptunium @-@ 239 and then into plutonium @-@ 239 . Only a small amount of the uranium @-@ 238 will be transformed , so the plutonium must be chemically separated from the remaining uranium , from any initial impurities , and from fission products . 
 = = = X @-@ 10 Graphite Reactor = = = 
 In March 1943 , DuPont began construction of a plutonium plant on a 112 @-@ acre ( 0 @.@ 5 km2 ) site at Oak Ridge . Intended as a pilot plant for the larger production facilities at Hanford , it included the air @-@ cooled X @-@ 10 Graphite Reactor , a chemical separation plant , and support facilities . Because of the subsequent decision to construct water @-@ cooled reactors at Hanford , only the chemical separation plant operated as a true pilot . The X @-@ 10 Graphite Reactor consisted of a huge block of graphite , 24 feet ( 7 @.@ 3 m ) long on each side , weighing around 1 @,@ 500 long tons ( 1 @,@ 500 t ) , surrounded by 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) of high @-@ density concrete as a radiation shield . 
 The greatest difficulty was encountered with the uranium slugs produced by Mallinckrodt and Metal Hydrides . These somehow had to be coated in aluminum to avoid corrosion and the escape of fission products into the cooling system . The <unk> Chemical Company attempted to develop a hot dipping process without success . Meanwhile , Alcoa tried canning . A new process for flux @-@ less welding was developed , and 97 % of the cans passed a standard vacuum test , but high temperature tests indicated a failure rate of more than 50 % . Nonetheless , production began in June 1943 . The Metallurgical Laboratory eventually developed an improved welding technique with the help of General Electric , which was incorporated into the production process in October 1943 . 
 Watched by Fermi and Compton , the X @-@ 10 Graphite Reactor went critical on 4 November 1943 with about 30 long tons ( 30 t ) of uranium . A week later the load was increased to 36 long tons ( 37 t ) , raising its power generation to 500 kW , and by the end of the month the first 500 milligrams ( 0 @.@ 018 oz ) of plutonium was created . Modifications over time raised the power to 4 @,@ 000 kW in July 1944 . X @-@ 10 operated as a production plant until January 1945 , when it was turned over to research activities . 
 = = = Hanford reactors = = = 
 Although an air @-@ cooled design was chosen for the reactor at Oak Ridge to facilitate rapid construction , it was recognized that this would be impractical for the much larger production reactors . Initial designs by the Metallurgical Laboratory and DuPont used helium for cooling , before they determined that a water @-@ cooled reactor would be simpler , cheaper and quicker to build . The design did not become available until 4 October 1943 ; in the meantime , Matthias concentrated on improving the Hanford site by erecting accommodations , improving the roads , building a railway switch line , and upgrading the electricity , water and telephone lines . 
 As at Oak Ridge , the most difficulty was encountered while canning the uranium slugs , which commenced at Hanford in March 1944 . They were pickled to remove dirt and impurities , dipped in molten bronze , tin , and aluminum @-@ silicon alloy , canned using hydraulic presses , and then capped using arc welding under an argon atmosphere . Finally , they were subjected to a series of tests to detect holes or faulty welds . Disappointingly , most canned slugs initially failed the tests , resulting in an output of only a handful of canned slugs per day . But steady progress was made and by June 1944 production increased to the point where it appeared that enough canned slugs would be available to start Reactor B on schedule in August 1944 . 
 Work began on Reactor B , the first of six planned 250 MW reactors , on 10 October 1943 . The reactor complexes were given letter designations A through F , with B , D and F sites chosen to be developed first , as this maximised the distance between the reactors . They would be the only ones constructed during the Manhattan Project . Some 390 long tons ( 400 t ) of steel , 17 @,@ 400 cubic yards ( 13 @,@ 300 m3 ) of concrete , 50 @,@ 000 concrete blocks and 71 @,@ 000 concrete bricks were used to construct the 120 @-@ foot ( 37 m ) high building . 
 Construction of the reactor itself commenced in February 1944 . Watched by Compton , Matthias , DuPont 's Crawford Greenewalt , Leona Woods and Fermi , who inserted the first slug , the reactor was powered up beginning on 13 September 1944 . Over the next few days , 838 tubes were loaded and the reactor went critical . Shortly after midnight on 27 September , the operators began to withdraw the control rods to initiate production . At first all appeared well but around 03 : 00 the power level started to drop and by 06 : 30 the reactor had shut down completely . The cooling water was investigated to see if there was a leak or contamination . The next day the reactor started up again , only to shut down once more . 
 Fermi contacted Chien @-@ Shiung Wu , who identified the cause of the problem as neutron poisoning from xenon @-@ 135 , which has a half @-@ life of 9 @.@ 2 hours . Fermi , Woods , Donald J. Hughes and John Archibald Wheeler then calculated the nuclear cross section of xenon @-@ 135 , which turned out to be 30 @,@ 000 times that of uranium . Fortunately , DuPont engineer George Graves had deviated from the Metallurgical Laboratory 's original design in which the reactor had 1 @,@ 500 tubes arranged in a circle , and had added an additional 504 tubes to fill in the corners . The scientists had originally considered this <unk> a waste of time and money , but Fermi realized that by loading all 2 @,@ 004 tubes , the reactor could reach the required power level and efficiently produce plutonium . Reactor D was started on 17 December 1944 and Reactor F on 25 February 1945 . 
 = = = Separation process = = = 
 Meanwhile , the chemists considered the problem of how plutonium could be separated from uranium when its chemical properties were not known . Working with the minute quantities of plutonium available at the Metallurgical Laboratory in 1942 , a team under Charles M. Cooper developed a lanthanum fluoride process for separating uranium and plutonium , which was chosen for the pilot separation plant . A second separation process , the bismuth phosphate process , was subsequently developed by Seaborg and <unk> G. Thomson . This process worked by toggling plutonium between its + 4 and + 6 oxidation states in solutions of bismuth phosphate . In the former state , the plutonium was precipitated ; in the latter , it stayed in solution and the other products were precipitated . 
 Greenewalt favored the bismuth phosphate process due to the corrosive nature of lanthanum fluoride , and it was selected for the Hanford separation plants . Once X @-@ 10 began producing plutonium , the pilot separation plant was put to the test . The first batch was processed at 40 % efficiency but over the next few months this was raised to 90 % . 
 At Hanford , top priority was initially given to the installations in the 300 area . This contained buildings for testing materials , preparing uranium , and assembling and calibrating instrumentation . One of the buildings housed the canning equipment for the uranium slugs , while another contained a small test reactor . Notwithstanding the high priority allocated to it , work on the 300 area fell behind schedule due to the unique and complex nature of the 300 area facilities , and wartime shortages of labor and materials . 
 Early plans called for the construction of two separation plants in each of the areas known as 200 @-@ West and 200 @-@ East . This was subsequently reduced to two , the T and U plants , in 200 @-@ West and one , the B plant , at 200 @-@ East . Each separation plant consisted of four buildings : a process cell building or " canyon " ( known as 221 ) , a concentration building ( 224 ) , a purification building ( 231 ) and a magazine store ( 213 ) . The canyons were each 800 feet ( 240 m ) long and 65 feet ( 20 m ) wide . Each consisted of forty 17 @.@ 7 @-@ by @-@ 13 @-@ by @-@ 20 @-@ foot ( 5 @.@ 4 by 4 @.@ 0 by 6 @.@ 1 m ) cells . 
 Work began on 221 @-@ T and 221 @-@ U in January 1944 , with the former completed in September and the latter in December . The 221 @-@ B building followed in March 1945 . Because of the high levels of radioactivity involved , all work in the separation plants had to be conducted by remote control using closed @-@ circuit television , something unheard of in 1943 . Maintenance was carried out with the aid of an overhead crane and specially designed tools . The 224 buildings were smaller because they had less material to process , and it was less radioactive . The 224 @-@ T and 224 @-@ U buildings were completed on 8 October 1944 , and 224 @-@ B followed on 10 February 1945 . The purification methods that were eventually used in 231 @-@ W were still unknown when construction commenced on 8 April 1944 , but the plant was complete and the methods were selected by the end of the year . On 5 February 1945 , Matthias hand @-@ delivered the first shipment of 80 grams ( 2 @.@ 6 ozt ) of 95 % <unk> plutonium nitrate to a Los Alamos courier in Los Angeles . 
 = = = Weapon design = = = 
 In 1943 , development efforts were directed to a gun @-@ type fission weapon with plutonium called Thin Man . Initial research on the properties of plutonium was done using cyclotron @-@ generated plutonium @-@ 239 , which was extremely pure , but could only be created in very small amounts . Los Alamos received the first sample of plutonium from the Clinton X @-@ 10 reactor in April 1944 and within days Emilio Segrè discovered a problem : the reactor @-@ bred plutonium had a higher concentration of plutonium @-@ 240 , resulting in up to five times the spontaneous fission rate of cyclotron plutonium . Seaborg had correctly predicted in March 1943 that some of the plutonium @-@ 239 would absorb a neutron and become plutonium @-@ 240 . 
 This made reactor plutonium unsuitable for use in a gun @-@ type weapon . The plutonium @-@ 240 would start the chain reaction too quickly , causing a predetonation that would release enough energy to disperse the critical mass with a minimal amount of plutonium reacted ( a fizzle ) . A faster gun was suggested but found to be impractical . The possibility of separating the isotopes was considered and rejected , as plutonium @-@ 240 is even harder to separate from plutonium @-@ 239 than uranium @-@ 235 from uranium @-@ 238 . 
 Work on an alternative method of bomb design , known as implosion , had begun earlier at the instigation of the physicist Seth Neddermeyer . Implosion used explosives to crush a subcritical sphere of fissile material into a smaller and denser form . When the fissile atoms are packed closer together , the rate of neutron capture increases , and the mass becomes a critical mass . The metal needs to travel only a very short distance , so the critical mass is assembled in much less time than it would take with the gun method . Neddermeyer 's 1943 and early 1944 investigations into implosion showed promise , but also made it clear that the problem would be much more difficult from a theoretical and engineering perspective than the gun design . In September 1943 , John von Neumann , who had experience with shaped charges used in armor @-@ piercing shells , argued that not only would implosion reduce the danger of predetonation and fizzle , but would make more efficient use of the fissionable material . He proposed using a spherical configuration instead of the cylindrical one that Neddermeyer was working on . 
 By July 1944 , Oppenheimer had concluded plutonium could not be used in a gun design , and opted for implosion . The accelerated effort on an implosion design , codenamed Fat Man , began in August 1944 when Oppenheimer implemented a sweeping reorganization of the Los Alamos laboratory to focus on implosion . Two new groups were created at Los Alamos to develop the implosion weapon , X ( for explosives ) Division headed by George Kistiakowsky and G ( for gadget ) Division under Robert Bacher . The new design that von Neumann and T ( for theoretical ) Division , most notably Rudolf Peierls , had devised used explosive lenses to focus the explosion onto a spherical shape using a combination of both slow and fast high explosives . 
 The design of lenses that detonated with the proper shape and velocity turned out to be slow , difficult and frustrating . Various explosives were tested before settling on composition B as the fast explosive and <unk> as the slow explosive . The final design resembled a soccer ball , with 20 hexagonal and 12 pentagonal lenses , each weighing about 80 pounds ( 36 kg ) . Getting the detonation just right required fast , reliable and safe electrical detonators , of which there were two for each lens for reliability . It was therefore decided to use exploding @-@ bridgewire detonators , a new invention developed at Los Alamos by a group led by Luis Alvarez . A contract for their manufacture was given to Raytheon . 
 To study the behavior of converging shock waves , Robert Serber devised the RaLa Experiment , which used the short @-@ lived radioisotope lanthanum @-@ 140 , a potent source of gamma radiation . The gamma ray source was placed in the center of a metal sphere surrounded by the explosive lenses , which in turn were inside in an ionization chamber . This allowed the taking of an X @-@ ray movie of the implosion . The lenses were designed primarily using this series of tests . In his history of the Los Alamos project , David Hawkins wrote : " RaLa became the most important single experiment affecting the final bomb design " . 
 Within the explosives was the 4 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 110 mm ) thick aluminum pusher , which provided a smooth transition from the relatively low density explosive to the next layer , the 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) thick tamper of natural uranium . Its main job was to hold the critical mass together as long as possible , but it would also reflect neutrons back into the core . Some part of it might fission as well . To prevent predetonation by an external neutron , the tamper was coated in a thin layer of boron . A polonium @-@ beryllium modulated neutron initiator , known as an " urchin " because its shape resembled a sea urchin , was developed to start the chain reaction at precisely the right moment . This work with the chemistry and metallurgy of radioactive polonium was directed by Charles Allen Thomas of the Monsanto Company and became known as the Dayton Project . Testing required up to 500 curies per month of polonium , which Monsanto was able to deliver . The whole assembly was encased in a duralumin bomb casing to protect it from bullets and flak . 
 The ultimate task of the metallurgists was to determine how to cast plutonium into a sphere . The difficulties became apparent when attempts to measure the density of plutonium gave inconsistent results . At first contamination was believed to be the cause , but it was soon determined that there were multiple allotropes of plutonium . The brittle α phase that exists at room temperature changes to the plastic β phase at higher temperatures . Attention then shifted to the even more malleable δ phase that normally exists in the 300 ° C to 450 ° C range . It was found that this was stable at room temperature when alloyed with aluminum , but aluminum emits neutrons when bombarded with alpha particles , which would exacerbate the pre @-@ ignition problem . The metallurgists then hit upon a plutonium @-@ gallium alloy , which stabilized the δ phase and could be hot pressed into the desired spherical shape . As plutonium was found to corrode readily , the sphere was coated with nickel . 
 The work proved dangerous . By the end of the war , half the experienced chemists and metallurgists had to be removed from work with plutonium when unacceptably high levels of the element appeared in their urine . A minor fire at Los Alamos in January 1945 led to a fear that a fire in the plutonium laboratory might contaminate the whole town , and Groves authorized the construction of a new facility for plutonium chemistry and metallurgy , which became known as the DP @-@ site . The hemispheres for the first plutonium pit ( or core ) were produced and delivered on 2 July 1945 . Three more hemispheres followed on 23 July and were delivered three days later . 
 = = = Trinity = = = 
 Because of the complexity of an implosion @-@ style weapon , it was decided that , despite the waste of fissile material , an initial test would be required . Groves approved the test , subject to the active material being recovered . Consideration was therefore given to a controlled fizzle , but Oppenheimer opted instead for a full @-@ scale nuclear test , codenamed " Trinity " . 
 In March 1944 , planning for the test was assigned to Kenneth Bainbridge , a professor of physics at Harvard , working under Kistiakowsky . Bainbridge selected the bombing range near Alamogordo Army Airfield as the site for the test . Bainbridge worked with Captain Samuel P. Davalos on the construction of the Trinity Base Camp and its facilities , which included barracks , warehouses , workshops , an explosive magazine and a commissary . 
 Groves did not relish the prospect of explaining the loss of a billion dollars worth of plutonium to a Senate committee , so a cylindrical containment vessel codenamed " Jumbo " was constructed to recover the active material in the event of a failure . Measuring 25 feet ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) long and 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) wide , it was fabricated at great expense from 214 long tons ( 217 t ) of iron and steel by Babcock & Wilcox in Barberton , Ohio . Brought in a special railroad car to a siding in Pope , New Mexico , it was transported the last 25 miles ( 40 km ) to the test site on a trailer pulled by two tractors . By the time it arrived , however , confidence in the implosion method was high enough , and the availability of plutonium was sufficient , that Oppenheimer decided not to use it . Instead , it was placed atop a steel tower 800 yards ( 730 m ) from the weapon as a rough measure of how powerful the explosion would be . In the end , Jumbo survived , although its tower did not , adding credence to the belief that Jumbo would have successfully contained a fizzled explosion . 
 A pre @-@ test explosion was conducted on 7 May 1945 to calibrate the instruments . A wooden test platform was erected 800 yards ( 730 m ) from Ground Zero and piled with 100 long tons ( 100 t ) of TNT spiked with nuclear fission products in the form of an irradiated uranium slug from Hanford , which was dissolved and poured into tubing inside the explosive . This explosion was observed by Oppenheimer and Groves 's new deputy commander , Brigadier General Thomas Farrell . The pre @-@ test produced data that proved vital for the Trinity test . 
 For the actual test , the weapon , nicknamed " the gadget " , was hoisted to the top of a 100 @-@ foot ( 30 m ) steel tower , as detonation at that height would give a better indication of how the weapon would behave when dropped from a bomber . Detonation in the air maximized the energy applied directly to the target , and generated less nuclear fallout . The gadget was assembled under the supervision of Norris Bradbury at the nearby McDonald Ranch House on 13 July , and precariously winched up the tower the following day . Observers included Bush , Chadwick , Conant , Farrell , Fermi , Groves , Lawrence , Oppenheimer and Tolman . At 05 : 30 on 16 July 1945 the gadget exploded with an energy equivalent of around 20 kilotons of TNT , leaving a crater of <unk> ( radioactive glass ) in the desert 250 feet ( 76 m ) wide . The shock wave was felt over 100 miles ( 160 km ) away , and the mushroom cloud reached 7 @.@ 5 miles ( 12 @.@ 1 km ) in height . It was heard as far away as El Paso , Texas , so Groves issued a cover story about an ammunition magazine explosion at Alamogordo Field . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 In June 1944 , the Manhattan Project employed some 129 @,@ 000 workers , of whom 84 @,@ 500 were construction workers , 40 @,@ 500 were plant operators and 1 @,@ 800 were military personnel . As construction activity fell off , the workforce declined to 100 @,@ 000 a year later , but the number of military personnel increased to 5 @,@ 600 . Procuring the required numbers of workers , especially highly skilled workers , in competition with other vital wartime programs proved very difficult . In 1943 , Groves obtained a special temporary priority for labor from the War Manpower Commission . In March 1944 , both the War Production Board and the War Manpower Commission gave the project their highest priority . 
 Tolman and Conant , in their role as the project 's scientific advisers , drew up a list of candidate scientists and had them rated by scientists already working on the project . Groves then sent a personal letter to the head of their university or company asking for them to be released for essential war work . At the University of Wisconsin – Madison , Stanislaw Ulam gave one of his students , Joan Hinton , an exam early , so she could leave to do war work . A few weeks later , Ulam received a letter from Hans Bethe , inviting him to join the project . Conant personally persuaded the explosives expert George Kistiakowsky to join the project . 
 One source of skilled personnel was the Army itself , particularly the Army Specialized Training Program . In 1943 , the MED created the Special Engineer Detachment ( SED ) , with an authorized strength of 675 . Technicians and skilled workers drafted into the Army were assigned to the SED . Another source was the Women 's Army Corps ( WAC ) . Initially intended for clerical tasks handling classified material , the WACs were soon tapped for technical and scientific tasks as well . On 1 February 1945 , all military personnel assigned to the MED , including all SED detachments , were assigned to the <unk> Technical Service Unit , except at Los Alamos , where military personnel other than SED , including the WACs and Military Police , were assigned to the <unk> Service Command Unit . 
 An Associate Professor of Radiology at the University of Rochester School of Medicine , Stafford L. Warren , was commissioned as a colonel in the United States Army Medical Corps , and appointed as chief of the MED 's Medical Section and Groves ' medical advisor . Warren 's initial task was to staff hospitals at Oak Ridge , Richland and Los Alamos . The Medical Section was responsible for medical research , but also for the MED 's health and safety programs . This presented an enormous challenge , because workers were handling a variety of toxic chemicals , using hazardous liquids and gases under high pressures , working with high voltages , and performing experiments involving explosives , not to mention the largely unknown dangers presented by radioactivity and handling fissile materials . Yet in December 1945 , the National Safety Council presented the Manhattan Project with the Award of Honor for Distinguished Service to Safety in recognition of its safety record . Between January 1943 and June 1945 , there were 62 fatalities and 3 @,@ 879 disabling injuries , which was about 62 percent below the rate of private industry . 
 = = Secrecy = = 
 A 1945 Life article estimated that before the Hiroshima and Nagasaki bombings " probably no more than a few dozen men in the entire country knew the full meaning of the Manhattan Project , and perhaps only a thousand others even were aware that work on atoms was involved . " The magazine wrote that the more than 100 @,@ 000 others employed with the project " worked like moles in the dark " . Warned that disclosing the project 's secrets was punishable by 10 years in prison or a $ 10 @,@ 000 ( $ 131 @,@ 000 today ) fine , they saw enormous quantities of raw materials enter factories with nothing coming out , and monitored " dials and switches while behind thick concrete walls mysterious reactions took place " without knowing the purpose of their jobs . 
 Oak Ridge security personnel considered any private party with more than seven people as suspicious , and residents — who believed that US government agents were secretly among them — avoided repeatedly inviting the same guests . Although original residents of the area could be buried in existing cemeteries , every coffin was reportedly opened for inspection . Everyone , including top military officials , and their automobiles were searched when entering and exiting project facilities . One Oak Ridge worker stated that " if you got inquisitive , you were called on the carpet within two hours by government secret agents . Usually those summoned to explain were then escorted bag and baggage to the gate and ordered to keep going . " Nonetheless , despite being told that their work would help end the war and perhaps all future wars , not seeing or understanding the results of their often tedious duties — or even typical side effects of factory work such as smoke from smokestacks — and the war in Europe ending without the use of their work , caused serious morale problems among workers and caused many rumors to spread . One manager stated after the war : 
 Well it wasn 't that the job was tough ... it was confusing . You see , no one knew what was being made in Oak Ridge , not even me , and a lot of the people thought they were wasting their time here . It was up to me to explain to the dissatisfied workers that they were doing a very important job . When they asked me what , I 'd have to tell them it was a secret . But I almost went crazy myself trying to figure out what was going on . 
 Another worker told of how , working in a laundry , she every day held " a special instrument " to uniforms and listened for " a clicking noise " . She learned only after the war that she had been performing the important task of checking for radiation with a geiger counter . To improve morale among such workers Oak Ridge created an extensive system of intramural sports leagues , including 10 baseball teams , 81 softball teams , and 26 football teams . 
 = = = Censorship = = = 
 Voluntary censorship of atomic information began before the Manhattan Project . After the start of the European war in 1939 American scientists began avoiding publishing military @-@ related research , and in 1940 scientific journals began asking the National Academy of Sciences to clear articles . William L. Laurence of The New York Times , who wrote an article for The Saturday Evening Post in September 1940 on atomic fission , later learned that government officials asked librarians nationwide in 1943 to withdraw the issue . The Soviets noticed the silence , however . In April 1942 nuclear physicist Georgy Flyorov wrote to Josef Stalin on the absence of articles on nuclear fission in American journals ; this resulted in the Soviet Union establishing its own atomic bomb project . 
 The Manhattan Project operated under tight security lest its discovery induce Axis powers , especially Germany , to accelerate their own nuclear projects or undertake covert operations against the project . The government 's Office of Censorship , by contrast , relied on the press to comply with a voluntary code of conduct it published , and the project at first avoided notifying the office . By early 1943 newspapers began publishing reports of large construction in Tennessee and Washington based on public records , and the office began discussing with the project how to maintain secrecy . In June the Office of Censorship asked newspapers and broadcasters to avoid discussing " atom smashing , atomic energy , atomic fission , atomic splitting , or any of their equivalents . The use for military purposes of radium or radioactive materials , heavy water , high voltage discharge equipment , cyclotrons . " The office also asked to avoid discussion of " polonium , uranium , ytterbium , hafnium , protactinium , radium , rhenium , thorium , deuterium " ; only uranium was sensitive , but was listed with other elements to hide its importance . 
 = = = Soviet spies = = = 
 The prospect of sabotage was always present , and sometimes suspected when there were equipment failures . While there were some problems believed to be the result of careless or disgruntled employees , there were no confirmed instances of Axis @-@ instigated sabotage . However , on 10 March 1945 , a Japanese fire balloon struck a power line , and the resulting power surge caused the three reactors at Hanford to be temporarily shut down . With so many people involved , security was a difficult task . A special Counter Intelligence Corps detachment was formed to handle the project 's security issues . By 1943 , it was clear that the Soviet Union was attempting to penetrate the project . Lieutenant Colonel Boris T. Pash , the head of the Counter Intelligence Branch of the Western Defense Command , investigated suspected Soviet espionage at the Radiation Laboratory in Berkeley . Oppenheimer informed Pash that he had been approached by a fellow professor at Berkeley , Haakon Chevalier , about passing information to the Soviet Union . 
 The most successful Soviet spy was Klaus Fuchs , a member of the British Mission who played an important part at Los Alamos . The 1950 revelation of his espionage activities damaged the United States ' nuclear cooperation with Britain and Canada . Subsequently , other instances of espionage were uncovered , leading to the arrest of Harry Gold , David Greenglass and Ethel and Julius Rosenberg . Other spies like George Koval and Theodore Hall remained unknown for decades . The value of the espionage is difficult to quantify , as the principal constraint on the Soviet atomic bomb project was a shortage of uranium ore . The consensus is that espionage saved the Soviets one or two years of effort . 
 = = Foreign intelligence = = 
 In addition to developing the atomic bomb , the Manhattan Project was charged with gathering intelligence on the German nuclear energy project . It was believed that the Japanese nuclear weapons program was not far advanced because Japan had little access to uranium ore , but it was initially feared that Germany was very close to developing its own weapons . At the instigation of the Manhattan Project , a bombing and sabotage campaign was carried out against heavy water plants in German @-@ occupied Norway . A small mission was created , jointly staffed by the Office of Naval Intelligence , OSRD , the Manhattan Project , and Army Intelligence ( G @-@ 2 ) , to investigate enemy scientific developments . It was not restricted to those involving nuclear weapons . The Chief of Army Intelligence , Major General George V. Strong , appointed Boris Pash to command the unit , which was codenamed " Alsos " , a Greek word meaning " grove " . 
 The Alsos Mission to Italy questioned staff of the physics laboratory at the University of Rome following the capture of the city in June 1944 . Meanwhile , Pash formed a combined British and American Alsos mission in London under the command of Captain Horace K. Calvert to participate in Operation Overlord . Groves considered the risk that the Germans might attempt to disrupt the Normandy landings with radioactive poisons was sufficient to warn General Dwight D. Eisenhower and send an officer to brief his chief of staff , Lieutenant General Walter Bedell Smith . Under the codename Operation Peppermint , special equipment was prepared and Chemical Warfare Service teams were trained in its use . 
 Following in the wake of the advancing Allied armies , Pash and Calvert interviewed Frédéric Joliot @-@ Curie about the activities of German scientists . They spoke to officials at Union Minière du Haut Katanga about uranium shipments to Germany . They tracked down 68 tons of ore in Belgium and 30 tons in France . The interrogation of German prisoners indicated that uranium and thorium were being processed in Oranienburg , 20 miles north of Berlin , so Groves arranged for it to be bombed on 15 March 1945 . 
 An Alsos team went to <unk> in the Soviet Occupation Zone and retrieved 11 tons of ore from <unk> . In April 1945 , Pash , in command of a composite force known as T @-@ Force , conducted Operation <unk> , a sweep behind enemy lines of the cities of Hechingen , Bisingen and Haigerloch that were the heart of the German nuclear effort . T @-@ Force captured the nuclear laboratories , documents , equipment and supplies , including heavy water and 1 @.@ 5 tons of metallic uranium . 
 Alsos teams rounded up German scientists including Kurt Diebner , Otto Hahn , Walther Gerlach , Werner Heisenberg and Carl Friedrich von Weizsäcker , who were taken to England where they were interned at Farm Hall , a bugged house in Godmanchester . After the bombs were detonated in Japan , the Germans were forced to confront the fact that the Allies had done what they could not . 
 = = Bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki = = 
 = = = Preparations = = = 
 Starting in November 1943 , the Army Air Forces Materiel Command at Wright Field , Ohio , began Silverplate , the codename modification of B @-@ 29s to carry the bombs . Test drops were carried out at Muroc Army Air Field , California , and the Naval Ordnance Test Station at Inyokern , California . Groves met with the Chief of United States Army Air Forces ( USAAF ) , General Henry H. Arnold , in March 1944 to discuss the delivery of the finished bombs to their targets . The only Allied aircraft capable of carrying the 17 @-@ foot ( 5 @.@ 2 m ) long Thin Man or the 59 @-@ inch ( 150 cm ) wide Fat Man was the British Avro Lancaster , but using a British aircraft would have caused difficulties with maintenance . Groves hoped that the American Boeing B @-@ 29 Superfortress could be modified to carry Thin Man by joining its two bomb bays together . Arnold promised that no effort would be spared to modify B @-@ 29s to do the job , and designated Major General Oliver P. Echols as the USAAF liaison to the Manhattan Project . In turn , Echols named Colonel Roscoe C. Wilson as his alternate , and Wilson became Manhattan Project 's main USAAF contact . President Roosevelt instructed Groves that if the atomic bombs were ready before the war with Germany ended , he should be ready to drop them on Germany . 
 The 509th Composite Group was activated on 17 December 1944 at Wendover Army Air Field , Utah , under the command of Colonel Paul W. Tibbets . This base , close to the border with Nevada , was codenamed " Kingman " or " W @-@ 47 " . Training was conducted at Wendover and at Batista Army Airfield , Cuba , where the 393d Bombardment Squadron practiced long @-@ distance flights over water , and dropping dummy pumpkin bombs . A special unit known as Alberta was formed at Los Alamos under Captain William S. Parsons as part of the Manhattan Project to assist in preparing and delivering the bombs . Commander Frederick L. Ashworth from Alberta met with Fleet Admiral Chester W. Nimitz on Guam in February 1945 to inform him of the project . While he was there , Ashworth selected North Field on the Pacific Island Tinian as a base for the 509th Composite Group , and reserved space for the group and its buildings . The group deployed there in July 1945 . Farrell arrived at Tinian on 30 July as the Manhattan Project representative . 
 Most of the components for Little Boy left San Francisco on the cruiser USS Indianapolis on 16 July and arrived on Tinian on 26 July . Four days later the ship was sunk by a Japanese submarine . The remaining components , which included six uranium @-@ 235 rings , were delivered by three C @-@ 54 Skymasters of the 509th Group 's 320th Troop Carrier Squadron . Two Fat Man assemblies travelled to Tinian in specially modified 509th Composite Group B @-@ 29s . The first plutonium core went in a special C @-@ 54 . A joint targeting committee of the Manhattan District and USAAF was established to determine which cities in Japan should be targets , and recommended Kokura , Hiroshima , Niigata and Kyoto . At this point , Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson intervened , announcing that he would be making the targeting decision , and that he would not authorize the bombing of Kyoto on the grounds of its historical and religious significance . Groves therefore asked Arnold to remove Kyoto not just from the list of nuclear targets , but from targets for conventional bombing as well . One of Kyoto 's substitutes was Nagasaki . 
 = = = Bombings = = = 
 In May 1945 , the Interim Committee was created to advise on wartime and postwar use of nuclear energy . The committee was chaired by Stimson , with James F. Byrnes , a former US Senator soon to be Secretary of State , as President Harry S. Truman 's personal representative ; Ralph A. Bard , the Under Secretary of the Navy ; William L. Clayton , the Assistant Secretary of State ; Vannevar Bush ; Karl T. Compton ; James B. Conant ; and George L. Harrison , an assistant to Stimson and president of New York Life Insurance Company . The Interim Committee in turn established a scientific panel consisting of Arthur Compton , Fermi , Lawrence and Oppenheimer to advise it on scientific issues . In its presentation to the Interim Committee , the scientific panel offered its opinion not just on the likely physical effects of an atomic bomb , but on its probable military and political impact . 
 At the Potsdam Conference in Germany , Truman was informed that the Trinity test had been successful . He told Stalin , the leader of the Soviet Union , that the US had a new superweapon , without giving any details . This was the first official communication to the Soviet Union about the bomb , but Stalin already knew about it from spies . With the authorization to use the bomb against Japan already given , no alternatives were considered after the Japanese rejection of the Potsdam Declaration . 
 On 6 August 1945 , a Boeing B @-@ 29 Superfortress ( Enola Gay ) of the 393d Bombardment Squadron , piloted and commanded by Colonel Paul Tibbets , lifted off from North Field , and Little Boy in its bomb bay . Hiroshima , the headquarters of the 2nd General Army and Fifth Division and a port of embarkation , was the primary target of the mission , with Kokura and Nagasaki as alternatives . With Farrell 's permission , weaponeer Captain William S. Parsons completed the bomb assembly in the air to minimize the risks during takeoff . The bomb detonated at an altitude of 1 @,@ 750 feet ( 530 m ) with a blast that was later estimated to be the equivalent of 13 kilotons of TNT . An area of approximately 4 @.@ 7 square miles ( 12 km2 ) was destroyed . Japanese officials determined that 69 % of Hiroshima 's buildings were destroyed and another 6 – 7 % damaged . About 70 @,@ 000 to 80 @,@ 000 people , of whom 20 @,@ 000 were Japanese combatants and 20 @,@ 000 were Korean slave laborers , or some 30 % of the population of Hiroshima , were killed immediately , and another 70 @,@ 000 injured . 
 On the morning of 9 August 1945 , a second B @-@ 29 ( Bockscar ) , piloted by the 393d Bombardment Squadron 's commander , Major Charles W. Sweeney , lifted off with Fat Man on board . This time , Ashworth served as weaponeer and Kokura was the primary target . Sweeney took off with the weapon already armed but with the electrical safety plugs still engaged . When they reached Kokura , they found cloud cover had obscured the city , prohibiting the visual attack required by orders . After three runs over the city , and with fuel running low , they headed for the secondary target , Nagasaki . Ashworth decided that a radar approach would be used if the target was obscured , but a last @-@ minute break in the clouds over Nagasaki allowed a visual approach as ordered . The Fat Man was dropped over the city 's industrial valley midway between the Mitsubishi Steel and Arms Works in the south and the Mitsubishi @-@ Urakami Ordnance Works in the north . The resulting explosion had a blast yield equivalent to 21 kilotons of TNT , roughly the same as the Trinity blast , but was confined to the Urakami Valley , and a major portion of the city was protected by the intervening hills , resulting in the destruction of about 44 % of the city . The bombing also crippled the city 's industrial production extensively and killed 23 @,@ 200 – 28 @,@ 200 Japanese industrial workers and 150 Japanese soldiers . Overall , an estimated 35 @,@ 000 – 40 @,@ 000 people were killed and 60 @,@ 000 injured . 
 Groves expected to have another atomic bomb ready for use on 19 August , with three more in September and a further three in October . Two more Fat Man assemblies were readied , and scheduled to leave Kirtland Field for Tinian on 11 and 14 August . At Los Alamos , technicians worked 24 hours straight to cast another plutonium core . Although cast , it still needed to be pressed and coated , which would take until 16 August . It could therefore have been ready for use on 19 August . On 10 August , Truman secretly requested that additional atomic bombs not be dropped on Japan without his express authority . Groves suspended the third core 's shipment on his own authority on 13 August . 
 On 11 August , Groves phoned Warren with orders to organize a survey team to report on the damage and radioactivity at Hiroshima and Nagasaki . A party equipped with portable Geiger counters arrived in Hiroshima on 8 September headed by Farrell and Warren , with Japanese Rear Admiral Masao Tsuzuki , who acted as a translator . They remained in Hiroshima until 14 September and then surveyed Nagasaki from 19 September to 8 October . This and other scientific missions to Japan would provide valuable scientific and historical data . 
 The necessity of the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki became a subject of controversy among historians . Some questioned whether an " atomic diplomacy " would not have attained the same goals and disputed whether the bombings or the Soviet declaration of war on Japan was decisive . The Franck Report was the most notable effort pushing for a demonstration but was turned down by the Interim Committee 's scientific panel . The Szilárd petition , drafted in July 1945 and signed by dozens of scientists working on the Manhattan Project , was a late attempt at warning President Harry S. Truman about his responsibility in using such weapons . 
 = = After the war = = 
 Seeing the work they had not understood produce the Hiroshima and Nagasaki bombs amazed the workers of the Manhattan Project as much as the rest of the world ; newspapers in Oak Ridge announcing the Hiroshima bomb sold for $ 1 ( $ 13 today ) . Although the bombs ' existence was public , secrecy continued , and many workers remained ignorant of their jobs ; one stated in 1946 , " I don 't know what the hell I 'm doing besides looking into a — — — and turning a — — — alongside a — — — . I don 't know anything about it , and there 's nothing to say " . Many residents continued to avoid discussion of " the stuff " in ordinary conversation despite it being the reason for their town 's existence . 
 In anticipation of the bombings , Groves had Henry DeWolf Smyth prepare a history for public consumption . Atomic Energy for Military Purposes , better known as the " Smyth Report " , was released to the public on 12 August 1945 . Groves and Nichols presented Army – Navy " E " Awards to key contractors , whose involvement had hitherto been secret . Over 20 awards of the Presidential Medal for Merit were made to key contractors and scientists , including Bush and Oppenheimer . Military personnel received the Legion of Merit , including the commander of the Women 's Army Corps detachment , Captain Arlene G. <unk> . 
 At Hanford , plutonium production fell off as Reactors B , D and F wore out , " poisoned " by fission products and swelling of the graphite moderator known as the Wigner effect . The swelling damaged the charging tubes where the uranium was irradiated to produce plutonium , rendering them unusable . In order to maintain the supply of polonium for the urchin initiators , production was curtailed and the oldest unit , B pile , was closed down so at least one reactor would be available in the future . Research continued , with DuPont and the Metallurgical Laboratory developing a redox solvent extraction process as an alternative plutonium extraction technique to the bismuth phosphate process , which left unspent uranium in a state from which it could not easily be recovered . 
 Bomb engineering was carried out by the Z Division , named for its director , Dr. Jerrold R. Zacharias from Los Alamos . Z Division was initially located at Wendover Field but moved to Oxnard Field , New Mexico , in September 1945 to be closer to Los Alamos . This marked the beginning of Sandia Base . Nearby Kirtland Field was used as a B @-@ 29 base for aircraft compatibility and drop tests . By October , all the staff and facilities at Wendover had been transferred to Sandia . As reservist officers were demobilized , they were replaced by about fifty hand @-@ picked regular officers . 
 Nichols recommended that S @-@ 50 and the Alpha tracks at Y @-@ 12 be closed down . This was done in September . Although performing better than ever , the Alpha tracks could not compete with K @-@ 25 and the new K @-@ 27 , which had commenced operation in January 1946 . In December , the Y @-@ 12 plant was closed , thereby cutting the Tennessee Eastman payroll from 8 @,@ 600 to 1 @,@ 500 and saving $ 2 million a month . 
 Nowhere was demobilization more of a problem than at Los Alamos , where there was an exodus of talent . Much remained to be done . The bombs used on Hiroshima and Nagasaki were like laboratory pieces ; work would be required to make them simpler , safer and more reliable . Implosion methods needed to be developed for uranium in place of the wasteful gun method , and composite uranium @-@ plutonium cores were needed now that plutonium was in short supply because of the problems with the reactors . However , uncertainty about the future of the laboratory made it hard to induce people to stay . Oppenheimer returned to his job at the University of California and Groves appointed Norris Bradbury as an interim replacement . In fact , Bradbury would remain in the post for the next 25 years . Groves attempted to combat the dissatisfaction caused by the lack of amenities with a construction program that included an improved water supply , three hundred houses , and recreation facilities . 
 Two Fat Man – type detonations were conducted at Bikini Atoll in July 1946 as part of Operation Crossroads to investigate the effect of nuclear weapons on warships . Able was detonated on 1 July 1946 . The more spectacular Baker was detonated underwater on 25 July 1946 . 
 After the bombings at Hiroshima and Nagasaki , a number of Manhattan Project physicists founded the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists , which began as an emergency action undertaken by scientists who saw urgent need for an immediate educational program about atomic weapons . In the face of the destructiveness of the new weapons and in anticipation of the nuclear arms race several project members including Bohr , Bush and Conant expressed the view that it was necessary to reach agreement on international control of nuclear research and atomic weapons . The Baruch Plan , unveiled in a speech to the newly formed United Nations Atomic Energy Commission ( UNAEC ) in June 1946 , proposed the establishment of an international atomic development authority , but was not adopted . 
 Following a domestic debate over the permanent management of the nuclear program , the United States Atomic Energy Commission ( AEC ) was created by the Atomic Energy Act of 1946 to take over the functions and assets of the Manhattan Project . It established civilian control over atomic development , and separated the development , production and control of atomic weapons from the military . Military aspects were taken over by the Armed Forces Special Weapons Project ( AFSWP ) . Although the Manhattan Project ceased to exist on 31 December 1946 , the Manhattan District would remain until it too was abolished on 15 August 1947 . 
 = = Cost = = 
 The project expenditure through 1 October 1945 was $ 1 @.@ 845 billion , equivalent to less than nine days of wartime spending , and was $ 2 @.@ 191 billion when the AEC assumed control on 1 January 1947 . Total allocation was $ 2 @.@ 4 billion . Over 90 % of the cost was for building plants and producing the fissionable materials , and less than 10 % for development and production of the weapons . 
 A total of four weapons ( the Trinity gadget , Little Boy , Fat Man , and an unused bomb ) were produced by the end of 1945 , making the average cost per bomb around $ 500 million in 1945 dollars . By comparison , the project 's total cost by the end of 1945 was about 90 % of the total spent on the production of US small arms ( not including ammunition ) and 34 % of the total spent on US tanks during the same period . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The political and cultural impacts of the development of nuclear weapons were profound and far @-@ reaching . William Laurence of the New York Times , the first to use the phrase " Atomic Age " , became the official correspondent for the Manhattan Project in spring 1945 . In 1943 and 1944 he unsuccessfully attempted to persuade the Office of Censorship to permit writing about the explosive potential of uranium , and government officials felt that he had earned the right to report on the biggest secret of the war . Laurence witnessed both the Trinity test and the bombing of Nagasaki and wrote the official press releases prepared for them . He went on to write a series of articles extolling the virtues of the new weapon . His reporting before and after the bombings helped to spur public awareness of the potential of nuclear technology and motivated its development in the United States and the Soviet Union . 
 The wartime Manhattan Project left a legacy in the form of the network of national laboratories : the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory , Los Alamos National Laboratory , Oak Ridge National Laboratory , Argonne National Laboratory and Ames Laboratory . Two more were established by Groves soon after the war , the Brookhaven National Laboratory at Upton , New York , and the Sandia National Laboratories at Albuquerque , New Mexico . Groves allocated $ 72 million to them for research activities in fiscal year 1946 – 1947 . They would be in the vanguard of the kind of large @-@ scale research that Alvin Weinberg , the director of the Oak Ridge National Laboratory , would call Big Science . 
 The Naval Research Laboratory had long been interested in the prospect of using nuclear power for warship propulsion , and sought to create its own nuclear project . In May 1946 , Nimitz , now Chief of Naval Operations , decided that the Navy should instead work with the Manhattan Project . A group of naval officers were assigned to Oak Ridge , the most senior of whom was Captain Hyman G. Rickover , who became assistant director there . They immersed themselves in the study of nuclear energy , laying the foundations for a nuclear @-@ powered navy . A similar group of Air Force personnel arrived at Oak Ridge in September 1946 with the aim of developing nuclear aircraft . Their Nuclear Energy for the Propulsion of Aircraft ( NEPA ) project ran into formidable technical difficulties , and was ultimately cancelled . 
 The ability of the new reactors to create radioactive isotopes in previously unheard @-@ of quantities sparked a revolution in nuclear medicine in the immediate postwar years . Starting in mid @-@ 1946 , Oak Ridge began distributing radioisotopes to hospitals and universities . Most of the orders were for iodine @-@ 131 and phosphorus @-@ 32 , which were used in the diagnosis and treatment of cancer . In addition to medicine , isotopes were also used in biological , industrial and agricultural research . 
 On handing over control to the Atomic Energy Commission , Groves bid farewell to the people who had worked on the Manhattan Project : 
 Five years ago , the idea of Atomic Power was only a dream . You have made that dream a reality . You have seized upon the most nebulous of ideas and translated them into actualities . You have built cities where none were known before . You have constructed industrial plants of a magnitude and to a precision heretofore deemed impossible . You built the weapon which ended the War and thereby saved countless American lives . With regard to peacetime applications , you have raised the curtain on vistas of a new world . 
 In 2014 , the United States Congress passed a law providing for a national park dedicated to the history of the Manhattan Project . The Manhattan Project National Historical Park was established on 10 November 2015 . 
 = Jane Joseph = 
 Jane Marian Joseph ( 31 May 1894 – 9 March 1929 ) was an English composer , arranger and music teacher . She was a pupil and later associate of the composer Gustav Holst , and was closely concerned in the organisation and management of various of the music festivals which Holst sponsored . Many of her works were composed for performance at these festivals and similar occasions . Her early death , which prevented the full realisation of her talents , was considered by her contemporaries as a considerable loss to English music . 
 Holst first observed Joseph 's potential when he was teaching her composition at St Paul 's Girls ' School . She began to act as his amanuensis in 1914 , when he was composing The Planets , her special responsibility being the preparation of the score for the " Neptune " movement . She continued to assist Holst with transcriptions , arrangements and translations , and was his librettist for the choral ballet The Golden Goose . During her short professional life she became an active member of the Society of Women Musicians , was the prime mover behind the first Kensington Musical Competition Festival , and helped to found the Kensington Choral Society . She also taught music at a girls ' school , where Holst 's daughter Imogen was one of her pupils , and became a leading figure in the musical life of Morley College . 
 Much of Joseph 's compositional oeuvre was never published and has been lost . Of her published works , two early short orchestral pieces , Morris Dance and Bergamask won considerable critical praise , although neither became part of the general orchestral repertory . Two choral works , A Festival Venite and A Hymn for Whitsuntide were admired during her lifetime , but seldom performed thereafter . Her carol " A Little Childe There is <unk> " was thought by Holst to be among the best of its kind . In the eight decades after her death there were no commercial recordings of Joseph 's music , but there have been occasional broadcast performances . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Family background and early childhood = = = 
 Jane Joseph was born on 31 May 1894 at 23 <unk> Gardens , in the Notting Hill district of the Borough of Kensington , London , to a prosperous Jewish family . Her father , George Solomon Joseph ( 1844 – 1917 ) , a solicitor in his family 's firm , had married Henrietta , née Franklin ( 1861 – 1938 ) in 1880 . Jane was their fourth child ; the youngest of her three brothers was seven years older than her . George Joseph had a deep interest in music , which he passed on to his children ; two sons , Frank ( 1881 – 1944 ) and Edwin ( 1887 – 1975 ) , became competent string players , while Jane learned piano ( she took her first examination at the age of seven ) and later , double @-@ bass . In time , Frank 's musical children , with Jane and friends , formed the basis of a " Josephs orchestra " that performed concerts at Frank 's home for many years . 
 = = = St Paul 's Girls ' School and Gustav Holst = = = 
 In 1909 Joseph won a scholarship to St Paul 's Girls ' School ( SPGS ) in Hammersmith . The school had opened in 1904 , as an offshoot of the long @-@ established St Paul 's School for boys . Its high mistress , Frances Ralph Gray , was a formidable figure with traditional views about female education , who nevertheless provided a lively and varied learning environment in which Joseph excelled . Apart from her academic successes , Joseph played double @-@ bass in the school orchestra , gave an acclaimed piano performance of Bach 's D minor keyboard concerto , began to compose , and won a prize for sight @-@ reading . While at the school she composed " The Carrion Crow " , a song setting which , in 1914 , became her first published work . Outside music she supported the school 's Literary Society , where she presented papers on Charlotte Brontë and Samuel Taylor Coleridge . She also won Honours in the examinations of the Royal Drawing Society . 
 Among the music teachers at SPGS , most significantly in terms of her musical development , Joseph encountered the emergent composer Gustav Holst , then little known , who taught her composition . After leaving the Royal College of Music in 1898 Holst had earned his living as an organist , and as a trombonist in various orchestras , while awaiting critical recognition as a composer . In 1903 he gave up his orchestral appointments to concentrate on composing , but found that he needed a regular income . He became a music teacher , initially at the James Allen 's Girls ' School in Dulwich ; in 1905 he was recommended to Frances Gray by <unk> O 'Neill , a former pupil of Clara Schumann , who taught piano at SPGS . He was first appointed on a part @-@ time basis to teach singing , and later extended his activities to cover the school 's wider music curriculum including conducting and composition . According to the composer Alan Gibbs , Joseph quickly came under Holst 's spell , and adopted his principles as her own . Holst later described her as the best girl pupil he ever had : " From the first she showed an individual attitude of mind and an eagerness to absorb all that was beautiful " . 
 = = = Student , scribe and teacher , 1913 – 18 = = = 
 = = = = Girton = = = = 
 In the autumn of 1913 , at the age of 19 , Joseph began studying Classics at Girton College , Cambridge . At that time , under Cambridge University regulations that were not fully repealed until 1948 , women were ineligible to receive degrees , although they could sit the degree examinations , in Joseph 's case the Classical Tripos . She soon found much in the university 's life to divert her from her regular studies : debating , drama and , above all , music . In her first term she became a double @-@ bass player in the Cambridge University Musical Society orchestra , under its conductor Cyril <unk> . She also sang alto in the society 's choir , and may have participated in a performance of Berlioz 's La damnation de Faust that was praised in the Cambridge Review of 17 June 1914 . During vacations she continued her composition studies under Holst ; in 1916 her " Wassail Song " , a companion piece to " The Carrion Crow " , was published . At Girton she wrote incidental music for a performance of W. B. Yeats 's verse play The Countess Cathleen , in which she acted the part of the First Dragon . 
 From 1915 Joseph 's association with Holst became closer . Overextended by his teaching duties and other commitments , Holst required assistance in the task of organising his music for publication and performance , and used a group of young women volunteers — his " scribes " — to make fair copies of his scores , write out instrumental or vocal parts , or prepare piano arrangements . In 1915 the composer was working on his largest and best @-@ known work , the orchestral suite The Planets , and invited Joseph , in her vacations , to join his scribes . Among these were Vally Lasker , a piano teacher from SPGS , and Nora Day , who had been a pupil with Joseph at the school and since 1913 had been teaching there . Joseph 's main assignment for The Planets was to copy the " Neptune " movement , of which almost the entire original manuscript is written in her hand . For the rest of her career she remained one of Holst 's most regular <unk> , and he came to rely on her more than on any other . Her commitments to musical activities at Girton , combined with her work for Holst , had an adverse effect on her formal studies . In the 1916 Classical Tripos examinations she was awarded only a Class III pass , a disappointing result duly noted in her parting testimonial from the college . 
 = = = = Early career = = = = 
 When Joseph left Girton , the First World War was at a critical state ; the Battle of the Somme had begun on 1 July 1916 . Joseph wanted to assist the war effort , and after considering work on the land or in a munitions factory , took up part @-@ time welfare work in Islington . In the autumn of 1916 she began teaching at Eothen , a small private school for girls in Caterham , founded and run by the Misses Catharine and Winifred Pye . In 1917 Holst 's ten @-@ year @-@ old daughter Imogen started at the school ; soon , under Joseph 's guidance the young pupil was composing her own music . Joseph extended her own musical activities by joining the orchestra at Morley College , where Holst was the director of music and where her brother Edwin had played the cello before the war . At first she played the double @-@ bass , but later took French horn lessons , possibly from Adolph Borsdorf ; later still , at very short notice , she taught herself the timpani part for a summer concert . By 1918 she was a member of the Morley committee that on 9 March organised and produced an opera burlesque , English Opera as She is Wrote , in which English , Italian , German , French and Russian opera styles were parodied in successive scenes . The performance was a great success and was repeated at several venues . It may have inspired Holst to use parody in his own opera , The Perfect Fool , which he began composing in 1918 . In her spare time Joseph founded and ran a choir for Kensington nannies , which took part in local singing contests as the " Linden Singers " . 
 Joseph increased her teaching commitments by often deputising for Holst , both at James Allen 's and at SPGS . She also continued in her role of the composer 's amanuensis , and was invited to attend the private premiere of The Planets , on 29 September 1918 at the Queen 's Hall , where Adrian Boult conducted the Queen 's Hall orchestra . She later wrote : " From the moment of Mars ... to the last sound of Neptune , it was a big thing that will last all our lives , I think " . She was able to draw on her classical education at Girton when she helped to translate the apocryphal work The Acts of John from the original Greek , to provide the text for Holst 's Hymn of Jesus ( 1917 ) ; for the same work she prepared a vocal score and an arrangement for piano , strings and organ . She and Holst combined to produce a women 's voices version ( two sopranos and an alto ) of William Byrd 's Mass for Three Voices , and Joseph worked alone to produce an orchestral accompaniment for Samuel Wesley 's Sing Aloud with <unk> . This latter work was prepared for the 1917 Whitsun musical festival , one of an annual series of such festivals that Holst masterminded , first at his home town of Thaxted , in later years at assorted venues including Dulwich , Chichester and Canterbury . Joseph became a key figure in these festivals , as organiser , performer and composer . At Thaxted in 1918 two of her compositions were performed : Hymn for female voices ( now lost ) , and an orchestral piece , Barbara Noel 's Morris , which Joseph wrote to mark her friendship with the daughter of Conrad Noel , Thaxted 's vicar . 
 The years 1917 and 1918 also brought personal sadness . On 22 October 1917 Joseph 's father died from a heart attack . On 27 May the following year , just after the Whitsun festival , her brother William was killed in action on the western front ; in September , Edwin was severely wounded in the final Allied offensive of the war . In his monograph on Joseph 's life and music , the composer Alan Gibbs writes that " there is no hint in Jane 's letters of the effect these events had on her " . Gibbs quotes Duff Cooper , who wrote of those times : " ... if we wept — as weep we did — we wept in secret " . 
 = = = Teacher , facilitator and composer , 1918 – 28 = = = 
 = = = = Postwar years = = = = 
 In 1919 , seeking to consolidate her musical career , Joseph joined the Society of Women Musicians ( SWM ) , founded in 1911 by the violinist and musicologist Marion Scott and others to promote the interests of women in music . Scott was known to Joseph , having been leader of the Morley orchestra . Joseph became a member of the SWM 's Composers ' Sectional Committee , and occasionally gave lectures to the society on subjects such as " The Necessity of Practical Experience for Composers " , and " The Composer as Pupil " . In the summer of 1919 she took conducting lessons from Adrian Boult , whom she described as " the most chinless man I have ever met " . The purpose of the lessons was to enable her to conduct her orchestral work Bergamask , which was performed at the Coliseum Theatre under a scheme devised by Sir Oswald Stoll to showcase new British music . In that same summer she met Ralph Vaughan Williams , a close friend of Holst . She played him some of her music , probably a piano reduction of Bergamask , and described him as " a very appreciative critic " . 
 Towards the end of 1918 Holst had asked Joseph to provide a libretto for his opera The Perfect Fool , feeling that she might possess the required light touch that he thought his own writing lacked . It is not clear whether she declined , or whether Holst changed his mind , but he eventually wrote the text himself . Joseph did , however , write the story for a ballet based on Holst 's music The Sneezing Charm ; the ballet , entitled A Magic Hour , was performed at Morley in October 1920 . Meantime , Joseph 's works were being performed at SWM concerts : two songs , probably from her Mirage cycle , in January 1920 , and some of her settings of Walter de la Mare poems in December . 
 At Eothen , Joseph continued to supervise Imogen Holst 's musical education , aspects of which had earlier been causing Holst some concern . In a letter to his wife dated February 1919 , written when he was serving as YMCA musical organiser for British troops stationed in the Eastern Mediterranean , Holst reported that " I 've had a very kind and wise letter from Jane about Imogen " . Whatever issues had troubled Holst were resolved satisfactorily , and Joseph became Imogen 's theory teacher : " Theory with Jane is ripping " , the young pupil enthused . In the summer term of 1920 , with help from Joseph , Imogen devised and composed a " Dance of Nymphs and Shepherds " which was performed at the school on 9 July . At the beginning of 1921 Imogen started at SPGS ; before becoming a boarder at Bute House ( one of the school 's residences for pupils ) , she stayed in the Joseph family home . 
 The Whitsun festivals , suspended during Holst 's absence , resumed at Dulwich in 1920 . Joseph 's part in this event is unrecorded , but she made a major contribution to the following year 's festivities , which began beside the Thames at Isleworth and concluded on Whit Monday at SPGS in the gardens of Bute House . For the Monday 's celebrations Joseph devised a presentation of Purcell 's semi @-@ opera from 1690 , Dioclesian . Writing of the occasion after Joseph 's death , Holst recalled that she had woven Purcell 's music and Thomas Betterton 's text , both long neglected , " into a delightful out @-@ door pageant founded on a fairy story , complete with lost princess , dragon and princely hero " . Not satisfied with planning every aspect of the outdoor performance , Joseph prepared an indoors version of the entertainment , should the weather require this . The production was a great success , and was repeated that summer in Hyde Park and , in October 1921 , at the Old Vic theatre . Throughout this considerable organisational task , Holst wrote , " Jane gave the minimum of worry to each person concerned by giving herself the maximum of hard work and forethought " . 
 = = = = Career zenith = = = = 
 In November 1921 Joseph organised the Morley forces to perform a large @-@ scale pageant , celebrating the bicentenary of the church of St Martin @-@ in @-@ the @-@ Fields . The text was by Laurence Housman and the music , directed by Holst , was taken from the Morley repertory . In the following year Joseph 's increasing recognition as a composer was confirmed when her Seven Two @-@ Part Songs were performed at a SWM concert that included works by Ethel Smyth and other women composers . Two of Joseph 's works , A Hymn for Whitsuntide and A Festival Venite were introduced during the 1922 Whitsun festival at All Saints ' church , Blackheath , with Holst conducting . After the Venite premiere Joseph wrote appreciatively to Holst : " Do you suppose for one moment that any other conductor takes trouble like that ? If you do , you are quite wrong " . The Venite was performed on 13 June 1923 at the Queen 's Hall , by the Philharmonic Choir under Charles Kennedy Scott ; the Spectator 's critic thought it a " very notable addition to modern British music " . Amidst her compositional and other activities , Joseph found time , in 1922 , to organise the first Kensington Musical Competition Festival , and to orchestrate many of the competition songs . In due course this festival became an important annual event in Kensington ; Vaughan Williams was among the adjudicators . On 12 October 1922 , Vaughan Williams 's 50th birthday , Joseph organised a choir which gave an early @-@ morning surprise performance in the composer 's garden of a song she had written to mark the occasion . 
 As early as 1919 , Joseph had written to her brother Edwin expressing concern about Holst 's health . When following a physical breakdown in 1923 Holst gave up his duties at Morley College , Joseph wrote him a supportive letter congratulating him on his decision which would enable him to concentrate on composition . The following years were particularly fruitful for Holst , and Joseph assisted in many of the works he produced in the 1924 – 28 period . She helped him prepare the score for his Choral Symphony , for which assistance he presented her with his original draft sketches , as a gesture of gratitude . Together with Lasker and Day she worked to prepare vocal and full scores for the opera At the Boar 's Head , and attended the rehearsals in March 1925 . After the opera 's premiere on 3 April she wrote to Holst with mildly critical comments on some of the singers , though with praise for the conductor , the young Malcolm Sargent . When Holst composed a short choral piece to celebrate the 21st birthday of the Oriana Madrigal Society , Joseph provided words which humorously reflected the conductor Kennedy Scott 's working methods ; the work was greatly appreciated by the choir . In that same year , 1925 , she helped to found the Kensington Choral Society . By this time the Joseph home in Kensington , where Jane lived for her whole life , was becoming a recognised musical gathering @-@ place ; a visitor recalled meeting Vaughan Williams , Boult , and the harpist <unk> Goossens there , among others . 
 In 1926 Joseph provided Holst with the libretto for his choral ballet The Golden Goose , based on a story by the Brothers Grimm , and arranged its first performance at the 1926 Whitsun festival , held at the James Allen school . Joseph also assisted Holst and the librettist Steuart Wilson in the production of a second choral ballet , The Morning of the Year — the first work commissioned by the BBC 's newly formed music department — which was performed at the Royal Albert Hall in March 1927 . The Morley College Annual Report of 1927 recorded the formation of a folk dance club , and noted Joseph 's " skilful direction " of the group . Her increasing interest in dance led her , that year , to join the English Folk Dance Society and the Kensington Dance Club . 
 = = = Illness , death and tributes = = = 
 The main feature of the 1928 Whitsun festival , held at Canterbury , was a religious drama , The Coming of Christ , commissioned by George Bell , then Dean of Canterbury , and written by John Masefield . Holst provided the incidental music . In a photograph described by Gibbs , taken of the festival 's organisers and performers , Joseph is sitting between Holst and Mrs Bell , " taller than either , an efficient @-@ looking lady in her early thirties , clearly of some importance to the festival " . This was Joseph 's last Whitsun . Towards the end of the year her health began to fail ; there is a mention in Holst 's diary for 29 November 1928 , " Jane 's concert 8 @.@ 15 " , but no indication is given of whether she was a performer . In February 1929 she paid off the final amount owing to the piano manufacturer C. Bechstein , for Morley 's new piano for which she had been fundraising since 1926 . On 9 March 1929 Joseph died at home , in Kensington , of kidney failure . After a private funeral she was buried in Willesden Jewish Cemetery . 
 Holst was in Venice when the news of Joseph 's death reached him ; although Imogen records that he received it stoically , he was privately devastated . Joseph had , wrote Imogen , " come nearest to his ideal of clear thinking and clear feeling " . In his own tribute , Holst drew attention to Joseph 's " infinite capacity for taking pains which amounts to genius " . No Whitsun festival was held in 1929 , but in early July , at an open @-@ air production of Holst 's The Golden Goose at Warwick Castle , a special performance of his St Paul 's Suite was played in Joseph 's memory . On 5 December 1929 , at a competitive music festival , Vaughan Williams conducted the choir in Joseph 's Hymn for Whitsuntide while the audience stood in tribute . The same hymn was played at the first resumed Whitsun festival , at Chichester in May 1930 . In July 1931 Holst included her music in a concert that he conducted at Chichester Cathedral , alongside works by William Byrd , Thomas Weelkes and Vaughan Williams . Over the course of the next few years Joseph 's works were played at concerts and events organised by Morley College , the SWM , SPGS and the English Folk Dance Society . At Eothen a " Jane Joseph Memorial Prize " was established , and music scholarships were endowed in her name at Eothen and SPGS . 
 A friend who expressed personal sadness on hearing of Joseph 's death revealed another aspect of her character : " England won 't be the same without Jane . She was terribly difficult to get to know at all , and awfully lonely , I thought , in spite of all her friends — don 't you think so ? — but I can 't imagine Music without her " . 
 = = Music = = 
 Much of Joseph 's music was written for performances at modest @-@ scale events by amateur performers . As such it was never published , and over the years many works have been lost . The published works and the few others that survive , Gibbs believes , place Joseph in the category of " progressive " English composers . Although her first few compositions were mainly songs , she demonstrated early abilities as an orchestral composer . Gibbs finds in her two short pieces , Morris Dance ( 1917 ) ( originally Barbara Noel 's Morris ) and Bergamask ( 1919 ) , three and five minutes respectively , a " fine feeling for orchestral sound " . The Morris Dance has added sparkle from a glockenspiel , while Bergamask has a festive Italianate feel . The music writer Philip Scowcroft praises Joseph 's confident handling of the sizeable orchestral forces required for the Morris Dance , while the composer Havergal Brian , Holst 's contemporary , found Bergamask " exhilarating " and " full of promise " . Gibbs suggests that these two works presage Holst 's late choral ballets , and comments : " That these carefree pieces did not find a permanent place in the repertory is unfortunate " . 
 In Joseph 's Mirage song cycle of 1921 ( five songs with string quartet accompaniment ) , a Holstian influence is evident alongside her own distinctive compositional voice . Gibbs highlights the first in the cycle , " Song " , which initially echoes " To Varuna " from Holst 's Rig Veda hymns , but evolves into " a different creation , distinguished by its own uncluttered quartet writing in which the viola has a special part to play " . The final song , " Echo " , has as much in common with Brahms as with Holst . Joseph 's Festival Venite from 1922 is an example of her use of the Modern Dorian mode ( an ascending scale from D to the next D on the white piano keys ) , which became a feature of some of her later works . Scowcroft and Gibbs both point to Tudor influences in the Venite in which also , says Gibbs , " the congenial influence of Vaughan Williams in melody and harmony is felt " . The orchestral score for this work lost , but an organ accompaniment has been devised . Joseph 's unaccompanied choral Hymn for Whitsuntide also uses the Dorian Mode in what Holst described as a " flawless little motet " ; this was first work of Joseph 's to be broadcast , in 1968 . A Short String Quartet in A minor was performed by the Winifred Smith Quartet in December 1922 and was accepted for publication by J.B. Cramer and Co . However , it was not published , and subsequently disappeared . 
 Joseph 's carol " A Little Childe There is <unk> " , is a setting of a 15th @-@ century poem for three female voices and piano or strings . Holst considered this " the best of Jane 's many carols , and perhaps the hardest to perform well . " Written in alternate bars of five and seven beats , it was praised by Brian for its originality . It was eventually broadcast by the BBC on 21 December 1995 . Brian was also an admirer of Joseph 's many instructional piano pieces : " pleasingly simple and unaffected " . These were published between 1920 and 1925 ; Gibbs writes that these pieces " focus on technical aspects in tuneful and often modal contexts " , with occasional excursions into other forms such as chaconne and rondo . 
 = Washington State Route 302 = 
 State Route 302 ( SR 302 ) is a 16 @.@ 87 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 27 @.@ 15 km ) state highway in the U.S. state of Washington , connecting the communities of Allyn @-@ Grapeview and Purdy on the Kitsap Peninsula , located in Mason and Pierce counties . The highway travels southeast from SR 3 in Allyn @-@ Grapeview along North Bay and turns east along Henderson Bay to Purdy . SR 302 intersects its spur route and turns south , ending at an interchange with SR 16 at the north end of Gig Harbor . The highway was created during the 1964 highway renumbering to replace Secondary State Highway 14A ( SSH 14A ) between Allyn and Purdy . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR 302 begins as the Victor Cutoff Road at an intersection with SR 3 south of North Mason High School , located in the community of Allyn @-@ Grapeview in Mason County . The highway travels south along the North Bay of Case Inlet into Pierce County and east across the Key Peninsula toward Henderson Bay . SR 302 continues east through <unk> and across a sandspit on the 550 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 170 m ) Purdy Bridge into the community of Purdy ; the two @-@ lane hollow box girder bridge crosses Burley Lagoon and is listed on the National Register of Historic Places . In Purdy , the highway turns south onto Purdy Drive at an intersection with its spur route and ends at a semi @-@ directional T interchange with SR 16 , located within Gig Harbor city limits . 
 Every year , the Washington State Department of Transportation ( WSDOT ) conducts a series of surveys on its highways in the state to measure traffic volume . This is expressed in terms of average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) , which is a measure of traffic volume for any average day of the year . In 2011 , WSDOT calculated that the busiest section of the highway was Purdy Drive between the Purdy Bridge and SR 16 , serving 26 @,@ 000 vehicles , while the least busiest section of the highway was in the Allyn @-@ Grapeview area , serving 1 @,@ 500 vehicles . 
 = = History = = 
 The Purdy Bridge , serving the community of Purdy on the Burley Lagoon , was constructed as a wooden swing bridge in 1892 by Pierce County . The wooden bridge was replaced in 1905 after the timber pilings collapsed and rebuilt in 1920 to include a steel swing span . The current two @-@ lane hollow box girder span was opened on September 29 , 1937 at a cost of $ 62 @,@ 000 and became part of SSH 14A during the creation of the primary and secondary state highways . SSH 14A was extended west from Allyn to Belfair in 1955 , extending along a 19 @.@ 45 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 31 @.@ 30 km ) route to connect Belfair and Allyn to Purdy . SSH 14A was replaced by SR 3 from Belfair to Allyn and SR 302 from Allyn to SR 16 in Purdy during the 1964 highway renumbering as part of the creation of a new state highway system . SR 16 was moved to a freeway bypass of Purdy in the late 1970s and the old alignment on Purdy Drive was split between SR 302 , heading south , and a new spur route , heading north . During the 2001 Nisqually earthquake , a 6 @.@ 2 magnitude earthquake that occurred on February 28 , 2001 , a section of SR 302 between Allyn and the Key Peninsula was damaged and closed . The highway was repaired with federal emergency relief funds and state funding at a cost of $ 1 million , opening to traffic in 2003 after being replaced by a temporary gravel road . WSDOT is , as of January 2013 , planning to widen SR 302 between the Key Peninsula and Purdy and SR 302 Spur within Purdy as part of safety and congestion improvements scheduled to begin construction in spring 2014 . A corridor study was conducted by WSDOT between 2008 and 2012 and proposed that a new highway north of Henderson Bay to bypass Purdy and have a more direct connection with SR 16 be constructed . 
 = = Spur route = = 
 SR 302 Spur , known locally as Purdy Drive , begins its short , 1 @.@ 28 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 2 @.@ 06 km ) route through Purdy at the east end of the Purdy Bridge , which carries SR 302 from <unk> . The highway travels north along Burley Lagoon from Peninsula High School before ending at a semi @-@ directional T interchange with SR 16 . WSDOT conducted a series of surveys to measure traffic volume in terms of AADT and calculated that between 1 @,@ 900 and 11 @,@ 000 vehicles per day used the spur route in 2011 . 
 The spur route was originally part of a Primary State Highway 14 ( PSH 14 ) branch connecting Port Orchard to Tacoma that later became SR 16 during the 1964 highway renumbering . SR 16 was moved to a freeway bypass of Purdy in the late 1970s and the former route was split between SR 302 and the newly created SR 302 Spur . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Meet the Quagmires = 
 " Meet the Quagmires " is the 18th and final episode of the fifth season of the animated comedy series Family Guy . It originally aired on Fox on May 20 , 2007 . The episode features Peter after he goes back in time , in order to live the single life a little longer , before he meets future wife Lois . This causes Quagmire to make his own move on Lois , and they ultimately end up marrying and having children ; Peter is horrified by this " alternate timeline " and resolves to go back in time again and set things right . 
 The episode was written by Mark Hentemann and directed by Dan Povenmire and Chris Robertson . It received mostly positive reviews from critics for its storyline and many cultural references . According to Nielsen ratings , it was viewed in 9 @.@ 1 million homes in its original airing . The episode featured guest performances by Luke Adams , Jeff Bergman , Adam Carolla , Beth Littleford and Will Sasso , along with several recurring guest voice actors for the series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After hearing Quagmire brag about his sexual exploits , Peter feels that he has missed out on enjoying the single lifestyle . Death is summoned to The Drunken Clam on a false alarm ( thinking that Horace had died ) , and decides to grant Peter 's wish by sending him , along with Brian , back to 1984 for one night . He notices his friend Cleveland , in his ' 80s look , who high @-@ fives him around the pool . He then sees 18 @-@ year @-@ old Lois Pewterschmidt walking around the country club pool , taking her high @-@ heeled shoes off and jumping off the diving board into the pool with " Mr. Night " playing in the background , a reference to the movie , Caddyshack . Appearing to others as his 18 @-@ year @-@ old self , Peter cancels his scheduled movie date to see <unk> ! with Lois , instead accepting an invitation from Cleveland to go and party at a bar . Peter enjoys the evening , and ends up making out with actress Molly Ringwald before Death appears to return him to the present . 
 Back in the present day , Peter discovers that his past actions have had drastic effects on the world : he and Molly have been married for 20 years ; Judd Nelson crashes at their house once or twice a week ; Lois is married to Quagmire ; Al Gore is now President ; Chris , Meg , and Stewie have Quagmire 's chin , nose , and mannerisms ; and Chevy Chase is the host of The Tonight Show . Brian explains to Peter that by missing out on his date with Lois and making out with Molly , he altered the time line . Despite Brian 's objections about leaving the " perfect " world ( in which there are flying cars that run on vegetable oil and Gore has killed Osama bin Laden by strangling him with his bare hands ) , Peter wants to go back to the past so he can undo his mistake . Brian says that this is impossible because Death can only be summoned if someone dies and thanks to Gore 's universal health care , people are living much longer along with a strong , well @-@ funded educational system and zero tolerance gun control that has eliminated street crime . However , when Jane Jetson suddenly falls on the sidewalk and dies , Death arrives and again grants Peter 's wish to return to the past . Back in the past , Peter is determined to accept Lois ' invitation but repeatedly blows his opportunity and ends up repeatedly asking Death for a do @-@ over . When Peter finally gets it right , he forgets a few hours later and parties with Cleveland instead of keeping the date . He asks Death for another chance but Death , fed up with Peter 's continued blunders , tells him that he will have to fix the problem on his own . 
 When Peter tries to apologize the next day , Lois is still upset with him for missing their date and has decided to go to the country club dance with Quagmire . Later that night , Peter and Brian sneak into the dance to prevent the kiss that caused Lois to fall in love with Quagmire . They get in by crawling through the air vent , but crash through and kill one of the guys playing in the band on the stage , so Brian has to play guitar and sing . Peter tries to convince Lois that they belong together but she stubbornly informs Peter that he had his chance and blew it , and therefore she loves Quagmire now . Peter almost gives up but Brian notices Chris , Stewie , and Meg disappearing from a family picture , indicating that they have fallen off the plane of existence and tells Peter it is his last chance to do something that proves he loves Lois . Peter then demonstrates his passion by punching Quagmire and kissing Lois , showing that he cares deeply for her and wins back her love . He asks her to marry him and she accepts . In honor of this success , Brian and the band play " Never Gonna Give You Up " by Rick Astley . The episode ends with things seemingly back to normal , with the exception of Roger from American Dad ! apparently living with the family . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by series regular and future showrunner Mark Hentemann , and directed by Chris Robertson and series regular Dan Povenmire , who left the series after completing the episode , in order to create his own series for the Disney Channel entitled Phineas and Ferb , which has since been nominated for three Emmy Awards . Peter Shin , James Purdum and Chris Robertson acted as supervising director . Series creator Seth MacFarlane , David A. Goodman , Danny Smith , Mark Hentemann , Steve Callaghan and Chris Sheridan acted as executive producers . Alec Sulkin , Wellesley Wild , Alex Borstein and Mike Henry worked as supervising producers . Cherry Chevapravatdumrong and Patrick Meighan worked as executive story editors . The episode 's original premise was based on Cleveland 's divorce from his wife , Loretta , with Cleveland going on to become a hot bachelor in Quahog , causing Peter to become jealous , and desiring to become single again . Due to Warner Bros. ' s ownership of Hanna – Barbera , the scene involving The Jetsons was completely reanimated by Povenmire , including the backgrounds and scenery for the sequence . 
 Meet the Quagmires , along with four other episodes from the fifth season , and the first seven episodes of the sixth season , were released under the title " Volume 6 " by 20th Century Fox in the United States and Canada on October 21 , 2008 , five months after they had completed broadcast on television . The DVD release also features bonus material including deleted scenes , commentaries , and a ' making of ' featurette . 
 In addition to the regular cast , the episode featured guest performances by voice actors Luke Adams and Jeff Bergman , actors Adam Carolla and Beth Littleford , and comedian and actor Will Sasso . Recurring guest voices include Alex Breckenridge , voice actors Johnny Brennan and Chris Cox , and writers Mark Hentemann , Alec Sulkin , and John Viener . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 In the opening scene of the episode , Horace the bartender is suddenly knocked unconscious after falling off a ladder , causing Death to appear . After it is discovered that Horace is not actually dead , Death complains that he never likes to be too far from journalist Mike Wallace . Wallace was still alive as of the original airing date . 
 The Back to the Future trilogy is parodied and referenced throughout the episode , along with many other movies and famous people throughout the 1980s . Other cultural references include how after going back in time , Peter becomes excited about his new prospects in life , and states to Cleveland that he is going to " raise more hell than Hellraiser " from the 1987 horror film Hellraiser . It also depicts Pinhead as weak and ridiculous , stating that the worst he can do is unscrew a salt shaker and trick someone into using it , causing salt to come out all over their food . The first scene where Lois appears at the swimming pool is a reference to a scene from the 1980 film Caddyshack , featuring the song " Mr. Night " by Kenny Loggins . Once Lois appears , she asks Peter if he would like to see the 1982 film <unk> ! . Rejecting her offer , Peter decides to go partying with Cleveland instead and play the video game Menstrual Ms. Pac @-@ Man , in addition to making out with actress Molly Ringwald . While there , Brian gets into a fight , and instructs the bar patron to meet him on top of the World Trade Center to fight him at eight A.M. on September 11 , 2001 . While downstairs in the alternate universe , Peter makes a reference to the Twilight Zone episode , " The Eye of the Beholder . " The joke about the World Trade Center has been edited from current versions of the show accessible on Netflix as of January 2012 . Returning to the present , Peter and Brian decide to watch television , and are shocked to discover that actor Chevy Chase is now the host of The Tonight Show . They also discover that former Vice President Al Gore is now President of the United States , and flying cars running on vegetable oil exist . A parody of the 1962 ABC animated series , Hanna @-@ Barbera 's The Jetsons , is then shown . In the alternate reality , Death refers to the Dick Cheney hunting accident , explaining that the " Chairman of Halliburton " accidentally shot and killed Karl Rove , Antonin Scalia , and Tucker Carlson ( Brian groans that Peter and he can 't change this wonderful future , but Peter flatly says " I don 't know who any of those people are " ) . The main plot of the episode , complete with the scene in which Peter and Brian are in the living room , with Brian explaining to Peter what happened using a chalk board , is a reference to the alternate universe scene in Back to the Future Part II . 
 In the past once again , Peter suggests to Lois that they see the 1983 film Krull instead . Later , Peter and Cleveland , dressed up as Michael Jackson in the iconic red jacket of his video clip " Thriller , " dance to the Beverly Hills Cop theme . In order to make everything right about the future , Peter and Brian decide to sneak into the prom through a vent . While inside it , Peter recites a line from the 1988 action film Die Hard . The sequence that follows is a parody of the 1985 film Back to the Future . After crashing through the vent to the stage , the band begins playing " Earth Angel " by The Penguins , and , after Peter kisses Lois , Brian sings the 1987 single " Never Gonna Give You Up " by musician Rick Astley . While Brian sings " Never Gonna Give You Up " , Rick Astley 's cousin Marvin calls him to say he 's found the " mediocre , generic sound " that Astley has been looking for , a reference to Back to the Future . In the closing scene of the episode Roger the alien from series creator Seth MacFarlane 's second show American Dad ! suddenly appears in the Griffin family home , inquiring about Pecan <unk> . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In a significant improvement over the previous week , the episode was viewed in 9 @.@ 15 million homes in its original airing , according to Nielsen ratings . The episode also acquired a 3 @.@ 2 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , slightly being edged out by The Simpsons , while significantly winning over American Dad ! , in both rating and total viewership . 
 Reviews of the episode were mostly positive , noting its ability to " capture some of the appeal from the pre @-@ cancellation days . " Ahsan Haque of IGN praised the episode 's story , writing that it had " a great storyline and the right combination of irrelevant and relevant jokes " , giving the episode an 8 @.@ 4 out of 10 . In another positive review , Brett Love of TV Squad called the episode " solid , " and praised the scenes set in 1984 , and the alternate world . Love went on to state , " The show has lost a little of the luster that it once had , but that 's no reason to count them out . There were enough bright spots to give hope for a return to that old form when season six comes around in the fall . " He graded " Meet the Quagmires " 5 out of 7 . 
 The episode was voted # 10 on BBC Three 's list of Top Ten Family Guy episodes . 
 = Tiberius = 
 Tiberius ( Latin : Tiberius Caesar <unk> <unk> <unk> Augustus ; 16 November 42 BC – 16 March 37 AD ) was a Roman Emperor from 14 AD to 37 AD . Born Tiberius Claudius Nero , a Claudian , Tiberius was the son of Tiberius Claudius Nero and Livia Drusilla . His mother divorced Nero and married Octavian , later known as Augustus , in 39 BC , making him a step @-@ son of Octavian . 
 Tiberius would later marry Augustus ' daughter ( from his marriage to Scribonia ) , Julia the Elder , and even later be adopted by Augustus , by which act he officially became a Julian , bearing the name Tiberius Julius Caesar . The subsequent emperors after Tiberius would continue this blended dynasty of both families for the following thirty years ; historians have named it the Julio @-@ Claudian dynasty . In relations to the other emperors of this dynasty , Tiberius was the stepson of Augustus , grand @-@ uncle of Caligula , paternal uncle of Claudius , and great @-@ grand uncle of Nero . 
 Tiberius was one of Rome 's greatest generals ; his conquest of Pannonia , Dalmatia , Raetia , and temporarily , parts of Germania , laid the foundations for the northern frontier . But he came to be remembered as a dark , reclusive , and sombre ruler who never really desired to be emperor ; Pliny the Elder called him <unk> hominum , " the gloomiest of men . " 
 After the death of Tiberius ’ son Drusus Julius Caesar in 23 AD , he became more reclusive and aloof . In 26 AD Tiberius removed himself from Rome and left administration largely in the hands of his unscrupulous Praetorian Prefects Lucius Aelius Sejanus and Quintus Naevius Sutorius Macro . 
 Caligula , Tiberius ' grand @-@ nephew and adopted grandson , succeeded Tiberius upon his death . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Tiberius was born in Rome on 16 November 42 BC to Tiberius Claudius Nero and Livia Drusilla . In 39 BC his mother divorced his biological father and remarried Gaius Julius Caesar Octavianus shortly thereafter , while still pregnant with Tiberius Nero 's son . In 38 BC his brother , Nero Claudius Drusus , was born . 
 Little is recorded of Tiberius 's early life . In 32 BC Tiberius made his first public appearance at the age of nine , delivering the eulogy for his biological father . In 29 BC , both he and his brother Drusus rode in the triumphal chariot along with their adoptive father Octavian in celebration of the defeat of Antony and Cleopatra at Actium . 
 In 23 BC Emperor Augustus became gravely ill and his possible death threatened to plunge the Roman world into chaos again . Historians generally agree that it is during this time that the question of Augustus ' heir became most acute , and while Augustus had seemed to indicate that Agrippa and Marcellus would carry on his position in the event of his death , the ambiguity of succession became Augustus ' chief problem . 
 In response , a series of potential heirs seem to have been selected , among them Tiberius and his brother Drusus . In 24 BC at the age of seventeen Tiberius entered politics under Augustus ' direction , receiving the position of quaestor , and was granted the right to stand for election as praetor and consul five years in advance of the age required by law . Similar provisions were made for Drusus . 
 = = = Civil and military career = = = 
 Shortly thereafter Tiberius began appearing in court as an advocate , and it is presumably here that his interest in Greek rhetoric began . In 20 BC , Tiberius was sent East under Marcus Agrippa . The Parthians had captured the standards of the legions under the command of Marcus Licinius Crassus ( 53 BC ) ( at the Battle of Carrhae ) , <unk> Saxa ( 40 BC ) , and Marc Antony ( 36 BC ) . 
 After a year of negotiation , Tiberius led a sizable force into Armenia , presumably with the goal of establishing it as a Roman client @-@ state and ending the threat it posed on the Roman @-@ Parthian border . Augustus was able to reach a compromise whereby the standards were returned , and Armenia remained a neutral territory between the two powers . 
 After returning from the East in 19 BC , Tiberius was married to Vipsania Agrippina , the daughter of Augustus ’ s close friend and greatest general , Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa . He was appointed to the position of praetor , and sent with his legions to assist his brother Drusus in campaigns in the west . While Drusus focused his forces in Gallia Narbonensis and along the German frontier , Tiberius combated the tribes in the Alps and within Transalpine Gaul , conquering Raetia . In 15 BC he discovered the sources of the Danube , and soon afterwards the bend of the middle course . Returning to Rome in 13 BC , Tiberius was appointed as consul , and around this same time his son , Drusus Julius Caesar , was born . 
 Agrippa 's death in 12 BC elevated Tiberius and Drusus with respect to the succession . At Augustus ’ request in 11 BC , Tiberius divorced Vipsania and married Julia the Elder , Augustus ' daughter and Agrippa 's widow . This event seems to have been the breaking point for Tiberius ; his new marriage with Julia was never a happy one , and produced only a single child who died in infancy . 
 Reportedly , Tiberius once ran into Vipsania again , and proceeded to follow her home crying and begging forgiveness ; soon afterwards , Tiberius met with Augustus , and steps were taken to ensure that Tiberius and Vipsania would never meet again . Tiberius continued to be elevated by Augustus , and after Agrippa 's death and his brother Drusus ' death in 9 BC , seemed the clear candidate for succession . As such , in 12 BC he received military commissions in Pannonia and Germania ; both areas highly volatile and of key importance to Augustan policy . 
 In 6 BC , Tiberius launched a pincer movement against the Marcomanni . Setting out northwest from Carnuntum on the Danube with four legions , Tiberius passed through Quadi territory in order to invade the Marcomanni from the east . Meanwhile , general Gaius <unk> Saturninus would depart east from Moguntiacum on the Rhine with two or three legions , pass through newly annexed <unk> territory , and attack the Marcomanni from the west . The campaign was a resounding success , but Tiberius could not subjugate the Marcomanni because he was soon summoned to the Rhine frontier to protect Rome 's new conquests in Germania . 
 He returned to Rome and was consul for a second time in 7 BC , and in 6 BC was granted tribunician power ( tribunicia potestas ) and control in the East , all of which mirrored positions that Agrippa had previously held . However , despite these successes and despite his advancement , Tiberius was not happy . 
 = = = Retirement to Rhodes ( 6 BC ) = = = 
 In 6 BC , on the verge of accepting command in the East and becoming the second most powerful man in Rome , Tiberius suddenly announced his withdrawal from politics and retired to Rhodes . The precise motives for Tiberius 's withdrawal are unclear . Historians have speculated a connection with the fact that Augustus had adopted Julia 's sons by Agrippa Gaius and Lucius , and seemed to be moving them along the same political path that both Tiberius and Drusus had trodden . 
 Tiberius 's move thus seemed to be an interim solution : he would hold power only until his stepsons would come of age , and then be swept aside . The promiscuous , and very public , behavior of his unhappily married wife , Julia , may have also played a part . Indeed , Tacitus calls it Tiberius ' intima causa , his innermost reason for departing for Rhodes , and seems to ascribe the entire move to a hatred of Julia and a longing for Vipsania . Tiberius had found himself married to a woman he loathed , who publicly humiliated him with nighttime escapades in the Forum , and forbidden to see the woman he had loved . 
 Whatever Tiberius 's motives , the withdrawal was almost disastrous for Augustus 's succession plans . Gaius and Lucius were still in their early teens , and Augustus , now 57 years old , had no immediate successor . There was no longer a guarantee of a peaceful transfer of power after Augustus 's death , nor a guarantee that his family , and therefore his family 's allies , would continue to hold power should the position of princeps survive . 
 Somewhat apocryphal stories tell of Augustus pleading with Tiberius to stay , even going so far as to stage a serious illness . Tiberius 's response was to anchor off the shore of Ostia until word came that Augustus had survived , then sailing straightway for Rhodes . Tiberius reportedly regretted his departure and requested to return to Rome several times , but each time Augustus refused his requests . 
 = = = Heir to Augustus = = = 
 With Tiberius 's departure , succession rested solely on Augustus ' two young grandsons , Lucius and Gaius Caesar . The situation became more precarious in AD 2 with the death of Lucius . Augustus , with perhaps some pressure from Livia , allowed Tiberius to return to Rome as a private citizen and nothing more . In AD 4 , Gaius was killed in Armenia , and Augustus had no other choice but to turn to Tiberius . 
 The death of Gaius in AD 4 initiated a flurry of activity in the household of Augustus . Tiberius was adopted as full son and heir and in turn , he was required to adopt his nephew , Germanicus , the son of his brother Drusus and Augustus ' niece Antonia Minor . Along with his adoption , Tiberius received tribunician power as well as a share of Augustus 's maius imperium , something that even Marcus Agrippa may never have had . 
 In AD 7 , Agrippa Postumus , a younger brother of Gaius and Lucius , was disowned by Augustus and banished to the island of <unk> , to live in solitary confinement . Thus , when in AD 13 , the powers held by Tiberius were made equal , rather than second , to Augustus 's own powers , he was for all intents and purposes a " co @-@ princeps " with Augustus , and in the event of the latter 's passing , would simply continue to rule without an interregnum or possible upheaval . 
 However , according to Suetonius , after a two @-@ year stint in Germania , which lasted from 10 − 12 AD , " Tiberius ' returned and celebrated the triumph which he had postponed , accompanied also by his generals , for whom he had obtained the triumphal regalia . And before turning to enter the Capitol , he dismounted from his chariot and fell at the knees of his father , who was presiding over the ceremonies . ” " Since the consuls caused a law to be passed soon after this that he should govern the provinces jointly with Augustus and hold the census with him , he set out for Illyricum on the conclusion of the <unk> ceremonies . " 
 Thus according to Suetonius , these ceremonies and the declaration of his " co @-@ princeps " took place in the year 12 AD , after Tiberius return from Germania . " But he was at once recalled , and finding Augustus in his last illness but still alive , he spent an entire day with him in private . " Augustus died in AD 14 , at the age of 75 . He was buried with all due ceremony and , as had been arranged beforehand , deified , his will read , and Tiberius confirmed as his sole surviving heir . 
 = = Emperor ( 14 – 37 AD ) = = 
 = = = Early reign = = = 
 The Senate convened on 18 September , to validate Tiberius 's position as Princeps and , as it had done with Augustus before , extend the powers of the position to him . These proceedings are fully accounted by Tacitus . Tiberius already had the administrative and political powers of the Princeps , all he lacked were the titles — Augustus , Pater Patriae , and the Civic Crown ( a crown made from laurel and oak , in honor of Augustus having saved the lives of Roman citizens ) . 
 Tiberius , however , attempted to play the same role as Augustus : that of the reluctant public servant who wants nothing more than to serve the state . This ended up throwing the entire affair into confusion , and rather than humble , he came across as derisive ; rather than seeming to want to serve the state , he seemed obstructive . He cited his age as a reason why he could not act as Princeps , stated he did not wish the position , and then proceeded to ask for only a section of the state . Tiberius finally relented and accepted the powers voted to him , though according to Tacitus and Suetonius he refused to bear the titles Pater Patriae , Imperator , and Augustus , and declined the most solid emblem of the Princeps , the Civic Crown and laurels . 
 This meeting seems to have set the tone for Tiberius 's entire rule . He seems to have wished for the Senate and the state to simply act without him and his direct orders were rather vague , inspiring debate more on what he actually meant than on passing his legislation . In his first few years , Tiberius seemed to have wanted the Senate to act on its own , rather than as a servant to his will as it had been under Augustus . According to Tacitus , Tiberius derided the Senate as " men fit to be slaves . " 
 = = = Rise and fall of Germanicus = = = 
 Problems arose quickly for the new Princeps . The Roman legions posted in Pannonia and in Germania had not been paid the bonuses promised them by Augustus , and after a short period of time mutinied when it was clear that a response from Tiberius was not forthcoming . Germanicus and Tiberius 's son , Drusus Julius Caesar , were dispatched with a small force to quell the uprising and bring the legions back in line . 
 Rather than simply quell the mutiny however , Germanicus rallied the mutineers and led them on a short campaign across the Rhine into Germanic territory , stating that whatever treasure they could grab would count as their bonus . Germanicus 's forces crossed the Rhine and quickly occupied all of the territory between the Rhine and the Elbe . Additionally , Tacitus records the capture of the Teutoburg forest and the reclaiming of Roman standards lost years before by Publius <unk> Varus , when three Roman legions and its auxiliary cohorts had been ambushed by Germanic tribes . 
 Germanicus had managed to deal a significant blow to Rome 's enemies , quell an uprising of troops , and returned lost standards to Rome , actions that increased the fame and legend of the already very popular Germanicus with the Roman people . 
 After being recalled from Germania , Germanicus celebrated a triumph in Rome in AD 17 , the first full triumph that the city had seen since Augustus 's own in 29 BC . As a result , in AD 18 Germanicus was granted control over the eastern part of the empire , just as both Agrippa and Tiberius had received before , and was clearly the successor to Tiberius . Germanicus survived a little over a year before dying , accusing Gnaeus Calpurnius Piso , the governor of Syria , of poisoning him . 
 The <unk> had been longtime supporters of the <unk> , and had allied themselves with the young Octavian after his marriage to Livia , the mother of Tiberius . Germanicus 's death and accusations indicted the new Princeps . Piso was placed on trial and , according to Tacitus , threatened to implicate Tiberius . Whether the governor actually could connect the Princeps to the death of Germanicus is unknown ; rather than continuing to stand trial when it became evident that the Senate was against him , Piso committed suicide . 
 Tiberius seems to have tired of politics at this point . In AD 22 , he shared his tribunician authority with his son Drusus , and began making yearly excursions to Campania that reportedly became longer and longer every year . In AD 23 , Drusus mysteriously died , and Tiberius seems to have made no effort to elevate a replacement . Finally , in AD 26 , Tiberius retired from Rome altogether to the island of Capri . 
 = = = Tiberius in Capri , with Sejanus in Rome = = = 
 Lucius Aelius Sejanus had served the imperial family for almost twenty years when he became Praetorian Prefect in AD 15 . As Tiberius became more embittered with the position of Princeps , he began to depend more and more upon the limited secretariat left to him by Augustus , and specifically upon Sejanus and the Praetorians . In AD 17 or 18 , Tiberius had trimmed the ranks of the Praetorian Guard responsible for the defense of the city , and had moved it from encampments outside of the city walls into the city itself , giving Sejanus access to somewhere between 6000 and 9000 troops . 
 The death of Drusus elevated Sejanus , at least in Tiberius 's eyes , who thereafter refers to him as his ' <unk> <unk> ' ( Partner of my labours ) . Tiberius had statues of Sejanus erected throughout the city , and Sejanus became more and more visible as Tiberius began to withdraw from Rome altogether . Finally , with Tiberius 's withdrawal in AD 26 , Sejanus was left in charge of the entire state mechanism and the city of Rome . 
 Sejanus 's position was not quite that of successor ; he had requested marriage in AD 25 to Tiberius 's niece , Livilla , though under pressure quickly withdrew the request . While Sejanus 's Praetorians controlled the imperial post , and therefore the information that Tiberius received from Rome and the information Rome received from Tiberius , the presence of Livia seems to have checked his overt power for a time . Her death in AD 29 changed all that . 
 Sejanus began a series of purge trials of Senators and wealthy equestrians in the city of Rome , removing those capable of opposing his power as well as extending the imperial ( and his own ) treasury . Germanicus 's widow Agrippina the Elder and two of her sons , Nero Caesar and Drusus Caesar were arrested and exiled in AD 30 and later all died in suspicious circumstances . In Sejanus 's purge of Agrippina the Elder and her family , Caligula , Agrippina the Younger , Julia Drusilla , and Julia Livilla were the only survivors . 
 = = = = Plot by Sejanus against Tiberius = = = = 
 In 31 , Sejanus held the consulship with Tiberius in absentia , and began his play for power in earnest . Precisely what happened is difficult to determine , but Sejanus seems to have covertly attempted to court those families who were tied to the Julians , and attempted to ingratiate himself with the Julian family line with an eye towards placing himself , as an adopted Julian , in the position of Princeps , or as a possible regent . Livilla was later implicated in this plot , and was revealed to have been Sejanus 's lover for a number of years . 
 The plot seems to have involved the two of them overthrowing Tiberius , with the support of the Julians , and either assuming the Principate themselves , or serving as regent to the young Tiberius Gemellus or possibly even Gaius Caligula . Those who stood in his way were tried for treason and swiftly dealt with . 
 In AD 31 Sejanus was summoned to a meeting of the Senate , where a letter from Tiberius was read condemning Sejanus and ordering his immediate execution . Sejanus was tried , and he and several of his colleagues were executed within the week . As commander of the Praetorian Guard , he was replaced by Naevius Sutorius Macro . 
 Tacitus claims that more treason trials followed and that whereas Tiberius had been hesitant to act at the outset of his reign , now , towards the end of his life , he seemed to do so without compunction . Hardest hit were those families with political ties to the Julians . Even the imperial magistracy was hit , as any and all who had associated with Sejanus or could in some way be tied to his schemes were summarily tried and executed , their properties seized by the state . As Tacitus vividly describes , 
 Executions were now a stimulus to his fury , and he ordered the death of all who were lying in prison under accusation of complicity with Sejanus . There lay , singly or in heaps , the unnumbered dead , of every age and sex , the illustrious with the obscure . <unk> and friends were not allowed to be near them , to weep over them , or even to gaze on them too long . Spies were set round them , who noted the sorrow of each mourner and followed the rotting corpses , till they were dragged to the Tiber , where , floating or driven on the bank , no one dared to burn or to touch them . 
 However , Tacitus ' portrayal of a tyrannical , vengeful emperor has been challenged by several modern historians . The prominent ancient historian Edward Togo Salmon notes in his work , A history of the Roman world from 30 BC to AD 138 : 
 " In the whole twenty two years of Tiberius ' reign , not more than fifty @-@ two persons were accused of treason , of whom almost half escaped conviction , while the four innocent people to be condemned fell victims to the excessive zeal of the Senate , not to the Emperor 's tyranny " . 
 While Tiberius was in Capri , rumours abounded as to what exactly he was doing there . Suetonius records the rumours of lurid tales of sexual perversity , including graphic depictions of child molestation , and cruelty , and most of all his paranoia . While heavily sensationalized , Suetonius ' stories at least paint a picture of how Tiberius was perceived by the Roman senatorial class , and what his impact on the Principate was during his 23 years of rule . 
 = = = Final years = = = 
 The affair with Sejanus and the final years of treason trials permanently damaged Tiberius ' image and reputation . After Sejanus 's fall , Tiberius ' withdrawal from Rome was complete ; the empire continued to run under the inertia of the bureaucracy established by Augustus , rather than through the leadership of the Princeps . Suetonius records that he became paranoid , and spent a great deal of time brooding over the death of his son . Meanwhile , during this period a short invasion by Parthia , incursions by tribes from Dacia and from across the Rhine by several Germanic tribes occurred . 
 Little was done to either secure or indicate how his succession was to take place ; the Julians and their supporters had fallen to the wrath of Sejanus , and his own sons and immediate family were dead . Two of the candidates were either Caligula , the sole surviving son of Germanicus , or his own grandson , Tiberius Gemellus . However , only a half @-@ hearted attempt at the end of Tiberius ' life was made to make Caligula a quaestor , and thus give him some credibility as a possible successor , while Gemellus himself was still only a teenager and thus completely unsuitable for some years to come . 
 = = = = Death ( 37 AD ) = = = = 
 Tiberius died in Misenum on 15 March AD 37 , in his seventy eighth year . Tacitus records that upon the news of his death the crowd rejoiced , only to become suddenly silent upon hearing that he had recovered , and rejoiced again at the news that Caligula and Macro had smothered him . This is not recorded by other ancient historians apart from Suetonius and is most likely apocryphal , but some historians consider it indicative of how the senatorial class felt towards the Emperor at the time of his death . After his death , the Senate refused to vote him divine honors , and mobs filled the streets yelling " To the Tiber with Tiberius ! " — in reference to a method of disposal reserved for the corpses of criminals . Instead the body of the emperor was cremated and his ashes were quietly laid in the Mausoleum of Augustus , later to be scattered in AD 410 during the Sack of Rome . 
 In his will , Tiberius had left his powers jointly to Caligula and Tiberius Gemellus . Caligula 's first act on becoming Princeps was to void Tiberius ' will and have Gemellus executed . 
 Tiberius ' heir Caligula not only spent Tiberius ' fortune of 2 @,@ 700 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 sesterces but would also begin the chain of events which would bring about the downfall of the Julio @-@ Claudian dynasty in AD 68 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Historiography = = = 
 Were he to have died prior to AD 23 , he might have been hailed as an exemplary ruler . Despite the overwhelmingly negative characterization left by Roman historians , Tiberius left the imperial treasury with nearly 3 billion sesterces upon his death . Rather than embark on costly campaigns of conquest , he chose to strengthen the existing empire by building additional bases , using diplomacy as well as military threats , and generally refraining from getting drawn into petty squabbles between competing frontier tyrants . 
 The result was a stronger , more consolidated empire . Of the authors whose texts have survived , only four describe the reign of Tiberius in considerable detail : Tacitus , Suetonius , Cassius Dio and Velleius Paterculus . Fragmentary evidence also remains from Pliny the Elder , Strabo and Seneca the Elder . Tiberius himself wrote an autobiography which Suetonius describes as " brief and sketchy , " but this book has been lost . 
 = = = = Publius Cornelius Tacitus = = = = 
 The most detailed account of this period is handed down to us by Tacitus , whose Annals dedicate the first six books entirely to the reign of Tiberius . Tacitus was a Roman senator , born during the reign of Nero in 56 AD , and consul suffect in AD 97 . His text is largely based on the acta senatus ( the minutes of the session of the Senate ) and the acta <unk> populi Romani ( a collection of the acts of the government and news of the court and capital ) , as well as speeches by Tiberius himself , and the histories of contemporaries such as Cluvius Rufus , Fabius Rusticus and Pliny the Elder ( all of which are lost ) . 
 Tacitus ' narrative emphasizes both political and psychological motivation . The characterisation of Tiberius throughout the first six books is mostly negative , and gradually worsens as his rule declines , identifying a clear breaking point with the death of his son Drusus in 23 AD . 
 The rule of Julio @-@ <unk> is generally described as unjust and ' criminal ' by Tacitus . Even at the outset of his reign , he seems to ascribe many of Tiberius ' virtues merely to hypocrisy . Another major recurring theme concerns the balance of power between the Senate and the Emperors , corruption , and the growing tyranny among the governing classes of Rome . A substantial amount of his account on Tiberius is therefore devoted to the treason trials and persecutions following the revival of the <unk> law under Augustus . Ultimately , Tacitus ' opinion on Tiberius is best illustrated by his conclusion of the sixth book : 
 His character too had its distinct periods . It was a bright time in his life and reputation , while under Augustus he was a private citizen or held high offices ; a time of reserve and crafty assumption of virtue , as long as Germanicus and Drusus were alive . Again , while his mother lived , he was a compound of good and evil ; he was infamous for his cruelty , though he veiled his debaucheries , while he loved or feared Sejanus . Finally , he plunged into every wickedness and disgrace , when fear and shame being cast off , he simply indulged his own inclinations . 
 = = = = Suetonius <unk> = = = = 
 Suetonius was an equestrian who held administrative posts during the reigns of Trajan and Hadrian . The Twelve Caesars details a biographical history of the principate from the birth of Julius Caesar to the death of Domitian in AD 96 . Like Tacitus , he drew upon the imperial archives , as well as histories by <unk> Bassus , Cluvius Rufus , Fabius Rusticus and Augustus ' own letters . 
 His account is more sensationalist and anecdotal than that of his contemporary . The most famous sections of his biography delve into the numerous alleged debaucheries Tiberius remitted himself to while at Capri . Nevertheless , Suetonius also reserves praise for Tiberius ' actions during his early reign , emphasizing his modesty . 
 = = = = Velleius Paterculus = = = = 
 One of the few surviving sources contemporary with the rule of Tiberius comes from Velleius Paterculus , who served under Tiberius for eight years ( from AD 4 ) in Germany and Pannonia as <unk> of cavalry and legatus . Paterculus ' Compendium of Roman History spans a period from the fall of Troy to the death of Livia in AD 29 . His text on Tiberius lavishes praise on both the emperor and Sejanus . How much of this is due to genuine admiration or prudence remains an open question , but it has been conjectured that he was put to death in AD 31 as a friend of Sejanus . 
 = = = Gospels , Jews , and Christians = = = 
 The Gospels mention that during Tiberius ' reign , Jesus of Nazareth preached and was executed under the authority of Pontius Pilate , the Roman governor of Judaea province . In the Bible , Tiberius is mentioned by name only once , in Luke 3 : 1 , which states that John the Baptist entered on his public ministry in the fifteenth year of his reign . Many references to Caesar ( or the emperor in some other translations ) , without further specification , would seem to refer to Tiberius . Similarly , the " Tribute Penny " referred to in Matthew and Mark is popularly thought to be a silver denarius coin of Tiberius . 
 During Tiberius ' reign Jews had become more prominent in Rome and Jewish and Gentile followers of Jesus began proselytizing Roman citizens , increasing long @-@ simmering resentments . Tiberius in 19 AD ordered Jews who were of military age to join the Roman Army . Tiberius banished the rest of the Jews from Rome and threatened to enslave them for life if they did not leave the city . 
 There is considerable debate among historians as to when Christianity was differentiated from Judaism . Most scholars believe that Roman distinction between Jews and Christians took place around 70 AD . Tiberius most likely viewed Christians as a Jewish sect rather than a separate , distinct faith . 
 = = = Archaeology = = = 
 The palace of Tiberius at Rome was located on the Palatine Hill , the ruins of which can still be seen today . No major public works were undertaken in the city during his reign , except a temple dedicated to Augustus and the restoration of the theater of Pompey , both of which were not finished until the reign of Caligula . In addition , remnants of Tiberius ' villa at <unk> , which includes a grotto where the important <unk> sculptures were found in fragments , and the Villa Jovis on top of Capri have been preserved . The estate at Capri is said by Tacitus to have included a total of twelve villas across the island , of which Villa Jovis was the largest . 
 Tiberius refused to be worshipped as a living god , and allowed only one temple to be built in his honor at Smyrna . The town Tiberias , in modern Israel on the western shore of the Sea of Galilee was named in Tiberius 's honour by Herod Antipas . 
 = = = In fiction = = = 
 Tiberius has been represented in fiction , in literature , film and television , and in video games , often as a peripheral character in the central storyline . One such modern representation is in the novel I , Claudius by Robert Graves , and the consequent BBC television series adaptation , where he is portrayed by George Baker . George R. R. Martin , the author of The Song of Ice and Fire series , has stated that central character Stannis Baratheon is partially inspired by Tiberius Caesar , and particularly the portrayal by Baker . 
 In the 1968 ITV historical drama The Caesars , Tiberius ( by André Morell ) is the central character for much of the series and is portrayed in a much more balanced way than in I , Claudius . 
 He also appears as a minor character in the 2006 film The Inquiry , in which he is played by Max von Sydow . In addition , Tiberius has prominent roles in Ben @-@ Hur ( played by George Relph in his last starring role ) , and in A.D. ( played by James Mason ) . 
 Played by Ernest Thesiger , he featured in The Robe ( 1953 ) . He was featured in the 1979 film Caligula , portrayed by Peter O 'Toole . He was an important character in Taylor Caldwell 's 1958 novel , Dear and Glorious Physician , a biography of St Luke the Evangelist , author of the third canonical Gospel . 
 = = Children and family = = 
 Tiberius was married two times , with only his first union producing a child who would survive to adulthood : 
 Vipsania Agrippina , daughter of Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa ( 16 – 11 BC ) 
 Drusus Julius Caesar ( 13 BC – 23 AD ) 
 Julia the Elder , only daughter of Augustus ( 11 – 6 BC ) 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 ( See also Julio @-@ Claudian family tree ) 
 = = = Secondary material = = = 
 Ehrenberg , V. ; Jones , A.H.M. ( 1955 ) . Documents Illustrating the Reigns of Augustus and Tiberius . Oxford . 
 Capes , William Wolfe , Roman History , Longmans , Green , and Co . , 1897 
 Levick , Barbara ( 1999 ) . Tiberius the Politician . Routledge . ISBN 0 @-@ 415 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 Mason , Ernst ( 1960 ) . Tiberius . New York : Ballantine Books . ( Ernst Mason was a pseudonym of science fiction author Frederik Pohl ) 
 Seager , Robin ( 1972 ) . Tiberius . London : Eyre Methuen . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 413 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 Seager , Robin ( 2005 ) . Tiberius . Blackwell Publishing . ISBN 1 @-@ 4051 @-@ 1529 @-@ 7 . 
 Shotter , David ( 1992 ) . Tiberius Caesar . London : Routledge . ISBN 0 @-@ 415 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 Salmon , Edward ( 1968 ) . History of the Roman World , 30 <unk> , Part II : Tiberius . Methuen . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 416 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 Southern , Pat ( 1998 ) . Augustus . London : Routledge . ISBN 0 @-@ 415 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 Syme , Ronald ( 1986 ) . The Augustan Aristocracy . Oxford : Clarendon Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 = Hurricane Gustav ( 2002 ) = 
 Hurricane Gustav was a Category 2 hurricane that paralleled the East Coast of the United States in September 2002 during the 2002 Atlantic hurricane season . It was the seventh named storm and first hurricane of the season . Initially a subtropical depression north of the Bahamas , Gustav passed slightly to the east of the Outer Banks of North Carolina as a tropical storm before moving northeastward and making two landfalls in Atlantic Canada as a Category 1 hurricane . The storm was responsible for one death and $ 100 @,@ 000 in damage , mostly in North Carolina . The interaction between Gustav and a non @-@ tropical system produced strong winds that caused an additional $ 240 @,@ 000 ( 2002 USD ) in damage in New England , but this damage was not directly attributed to the hurricane . 
 Gustav spent the early part of its existence as a subtropical storm , and was the first such storm to be named from the current lists by the National Hurricane Center . Previously , subtropical storms were not given names . The cyclone was also the latest @-@ forming first hurricane of the season since 1941 . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 An area of disturbed weather in association with a weak surface trough and a stronger upper @-@ level trough between the Bahamas and Bermuda developed on September 6 . High pressure ridging strengthened by Tropical Storm Fay caused the trough to become more organized and close off into a broad non @-@ tropical low on September 7 . By September 8 , the system had developed enough convection near its center of circulation to be classified Subtropical Depression Eight while located southeast of Cape Hatteras , North Carolina . Later that day , data from a Hurricane Hunter reconnaissance aircraft indicated that the system had strengthened into a subtropical storm , and the depression was upgraded to Subtropical Storm Gustav . 
 Gustav moved erratically to the west @-@ northwest toward the North Carolina @-@ South Carolina border over the next two days , it slowly strengthened , acquiring more tropical characteristics . On September 10 , a poorly organized band of stronger winds developed around the center , and Gustav was designated a fully tropical storm shortly before turning toward the north and brushing Cape Hatteras , then accelerating toward the northeast and away from the coast . On September 11 , while under the influence of a non @-@ tropical system over New England , Gustav quickly strengthened into a hurricane , in a process similar to the intensification of Hurricane Michael in 2000 . Gustav reached its peak intensity of 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) later that day . 
 The hurricane began to slowly weaken and lose tropical characteristics on early September 12 as it moved over colder waters and encountered increasing wind shear . However , the storm was moving quickly enough to make landfall over Cape Breton , Nova Scotia as a Category 1 hurricane on September 12 . Later that morning , Gustav made a second landfall in Newfoundland and became extratropical shortly after . The extratropical low continued moving slowly to the northeast before dissipating over the Labrador Sea on September 15 . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 On September 8 , forecasters at the National Hurricane Center predicted that Gustav would approach the North Carolina coast , and issued a tropical storm watch from Cape Fear to the North Carolina – Virginia border . The tropical storm watch was upgraded to a tropical storm warning on September 9 , and a new tropical storm watch was issued later that day for areas of southeastern Virginia , from the North Carolina – Virginia border to New Point Comfort . The new watch was upgraded to a tropical storm warning on September 10 . As Gustav began to turn to the northeast and away from the Mid @-@ Atlantic coast , the tropical storm warnings were gradually discontinued . The last warning was discontinued on September 11 . 
 As Gustav approached Atlantic Canada , Environment Canada and the Canadian Hurricane Centre issued heavy rain and wind warnings for southern New Brunswick , Prince Edward Island , Nova Scotia , and Newfoundland . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = North Carolina and Virginia = = = 
 Although the center of Gustav passed just to the east of Cape Hatteras , areas of North Carolina and southeastern Virginia experienced heavy rain and tropical storm force winds . Parts of the Outer Banks received 2 – 5 inches ( 50 – 125 mm ) of rain and winds of up to 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) , and the Coast Guard station at Cape Hatteras reported a wind gust of 78 mph ( 125 km / h ) . The storm produced storm surges of 3 – 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) along the Outer Banks , and 1 – 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) along the southeastern coast of Virginia . These surges , combined with strong winds and high sea swells , resulted in minor flooding , mainly in Ocracoke and Hatteras Village , North Carolina . A weak waterspout also touched down on Silver Lake near Ocracoke and moved onshore , but only minor roof damage was reported . Sporadic power outages were also reported . One person died after suffering injuries in the high surf , and 40 other people had to be rescued from riptides and storm surges . Damage in the region amounted to $ 100 @,@ 000 ( 2002 USD ) . 
 = = = New Jersey = = = 
 Although the center of Gustav remained well offshore , the difference in pressure between it and a high pressure area over the central United States caused strong winds in areas of New Jersey on September 11 . Wind gusts ranged from 35 – 45 mph ( 55 – 70 km / h ) , with stronger winds reported near the coast . A maximum wind gust of 60 mph ( 100 km / h ) was reported at Keansburg . The strong winds downed trees and power lines throughout the eastern half of the state , damaging homes and blocking streets . At least 14 @,@ 000 homes in the vicinity of Burlington and Ocean Counties were left without power . In West Windsor Township , a man was killed when the upper section of a concrete wall he was working on blew over and crushed him . The other death occurred in West Amwell Township , where a tree limb fell on two elderly women , killing one and injuring the other . Elsewhere , while there were reports of trees falling on vehicles , no other serious injuries or deaths were reported . 
 = = = New York and New England = = = 
 The interaction between Gustav and the non @-@ tropical system caused strong winds that affected areas of coastal New England , mainly in eastern New York and Massachusetts . Some areas reported storm @-@ force wind gusts of over 55 mph ( 90 km / h ) , and a maximum wind gust of 67 mph ( 108 km / h ) was reported by a weather spotter in Catskill , New York . Wind gusts of up to 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) were reported in areas of Massachusetts . The winds downed trees and power lines , and several homes and cars were damaged by fallen trees . Over 29 @,@ 000 homes were left without power in eastern New York , and 19 @,@ 000 homes lost power in Massachusetts . In all , the winds caused $ 240 @,@ 000 ( 2002 USD ) in damage , but this damage was not directly attributed to Gustav in the National Hurricane Center 's analysis . 
 In the New York City area , a peak wind gust of 60 mph ( 100 km / h ) was reported at John F. Kennedy International Airport . The winds caused some minor roof damage to buildings , and forced officials in New York City to cordon off parts of Manhattan as debris ranging from wrapping paper to crushed soda cans was blown about . This debris injured four people , one critically , and disrupted a 9 / 11 memorial service , though it continued as planned . 
 Sustained winds of 25 – 35 mph ( 40 – 55 km / h ) , with gusts up to 55 mph ( 90 km / h ) , were reported throughout Long Island . Damage on the island was mainly limited to downed trees and power lines , although the Long Island Power Authority reported that at least 93 @,@ 000 homes lost power during the day on September 11 . One person was killed when his boat capsized in the Long Island Sound . 
 = = = Atlantic Canada = = = 
 Despite gradually losing its tropical characteristics , Gustav brought heavy rain , storm and hurricane force winds , and storm surges to areas of Atlantic Canada for several days . Strong winds knocked down trees and damaged docks in Nova Scotia , and a wind gust of 75 mph ( 122 km / h ) was reported on Sable Island . Gusts to over 60 mph ( 100 km / h ) were reported in Newfoundland for several days after the center of Gustav moved out of the area . Rainfall amounts generally ranged from 0 @.@ 3 – 2 @.@ 7 inches ( 10 – 70 mm ) , with a maximum of 4 inches ( 102 mm ) in Ashdale , Nova Scotia . Several locations set new daily rainfall records . Localized flooding was reported in areas of Prince Edward Island , and 4 @,@ 000 people in Halifax , Nova Scotia and Charlottetown , Prince Edward Island were left without power . Despite the heavy rain and wind , there were no reports of deaths or significant damage in Atlantic Canada . 
 = = Naming and records = = 
 Gustav was the first subtropical storm to be given a name from the current name lists by the National Hurricane Center . Prior to the 2002 season , Atlantic subtropical storms were either not named or given a number from a separate numbering list than tropical cyclones . 
 When Gustav attained hurricane status on September 11 , it became the latest first hurricane to form in any season since the 1941 season , when the first hurricane developed on September 16 . According to climatology , an average of three hurricanes form by September 11 of each year . 
 = Neferhotep I = 
 <unk> Neferhotep I was an Egyptian pharaoh of the mid Thirteenth Dynasty ruling in the second half of the 18th century BC during a time referred to as the late Middle Kingdom or early Second Intermediate Period , depending on the scholar . One of the best attested rulers of the 13th Dynasty , Neferhotep I reigned for 11 years . 
 The grandson of a non @-@ royal townsman from a Theban family with a military background , Neferhotep I 's relation to his predecessor Sobekhotep III is unclear and he may have usurped the throne . Neferhotep I was likely contemporaneous with kings Zimri @-@ Lim of Mari and Hammurabi of Babylon . Little is known of his activities during his decade @-@ long reign and the most important document surviving from his rule is a stela from Abydos recounting the fashion of an image of Osiris and Neferhotep 's determination that it be made " as instructed by the gods at the beginning of time " . 
 Toward the end of his reign , Neferhotep I shared the throne with his brother Sihathor , a coregency that lasted a few months to a year . Sihathor died shortly before Neferhotep , who may have then appointed another brother , Sobekhotep IV , as coregent . In any case , Sobekhotep IV succeeded Neferhotep I soon afterwards , and reigned over Egypt for almost a decade . The reigns of the two brothers mark the apex of the 13th Dynasty . 
 = = Family = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 Neferhotep I seems to have come from a non @-@ royal family of Thebes with a military background . His grandfather , <unk> , held the title " officer of a town regiment " . <unk> was married to a woman called <unk> . Nothing is known about her other than that she held the common title " lady of the house " . Their only known son was called Haankhef . 
 Haankhef always appears in the sources as " God 's father " and " royal sealer " and his wife Kemi as " king 's mother " indicating that neither of them was of royal birth . The parentage of Neferhotep and Haankhef is directly confirmed by a number of scarab seals from El @-@ Lahun where the latter is said to be the father of the former . Haankhef is also explicitly recorded as the father of Neferhotep I in the Turin canon , a king list redacted during the early Ramesside era and which serves as the primary historical source for the rulers of this time period . This is an extremely rare occurrence as the Turin canon normally only names the pharaohs while non @-@ royal people are excluded from the list . Beyond Haankhef , the only other exception to this rule is the father of Sobekhotep II . 
 Egyptologists have noted that instead of hiding their non @-@ royal origins , Neferhotep I , his predecessor Sobekhotep III , and his successor Sobekhotep IV , remarkably proclaimed them on their stelae and scarab seals . This is at odds with the traditional Egyptian system where the legitimation of the new king rests mainly on his filiation . These proclamations of non @-@ royal origins were possibly made to dissociate these kings from their immediate predecessors , in particular Seth <unk> whose monuments have been usurped and defaced . The reason for this remains unknown . 
 = = = Descendants and succession = = = 
 Inscriptions from Aswan indicate that Neferhotep I had at least two children named Haankhef and Kemi like his parents , whom he had with a woman called <unk> . He also possibly had another son named Wahneferhotep . In spite of this , Neferhotep I named his brother Sihathor as coregent in the last months of his reign and when both Sihathor and Neferhotep I died around the same time , they were succeeded by another brother , Sobekhotep IV . 
 Sobekhotep IV , whose reign marks the apex of the 13th Dynasty , mentions on a stela ( Cairo JE <unk> ) that was placed in the temple of Amun at Karnak that he was born in Thebes : 
 My majesty [ came ] to the Southern City since I wanted to see the august god ; it is my city in which I was born . ... I saw the vigor of his majesty ( i.e. Amun ) at every single feast when I was a child who could not yet conceive . 
 Similarly , Neferhotep I could well have been born in Thebes ; even though the capital of Egypt during the 13th Dynasty was still Itjtawy in the north , near the modern village of el @-@ Lisht . 
 = = Reign = = 
 = = = Attestations = = = 
 Artefacts 
 Neferhotep I is known from a relatively high number of objects found over a large area , from Byblos to the North to the Egyptian fortresses of Buhen and <unk> in Lower Nubia to the South through all parts of Egypt , especially in the southern portion of Upper Egypt . A single attestation is known from Lower Egypt , a scarab from Tell el @-@ <unk> . Other attestations include over 60 scarab seals , 2 cylinder @-@ seals , a statue from Elephantine , and 11 rock inscriptions from Wadi el Shatt el @-@ Rigal , <unk> Island , <unk> and Philae . The inscriptions record the members of Neferhotep 's family as well as two high officials serving him " The royal acquaintance <unk> " and the " Treasurer <unk> " . Two stelae are known from Abydos one of which , usurped from king <unk> and dated to his 4th regnal year , forbids the construction of tombs on the sacred processional way of <unk> . Two <unk> housing two statues each of Neferhotep as well as a pedestal bearing Neferhotep 's and Sobekhotep IV 's cartouches have been found in Karnak . There are also a few attestations from the Faiyum region where the capital of Egypt was located at the time , in particular a statuette of the king dedicated to Sobek and Horus of <unk> , now on display in the Archaeological Museum of Bologna . 
 King lists 
 Beyond these contemporary attestations , Neferhotep is listed on the 34th entry of the Karnak king list as well as the 7th column , 25th row of the Turin canon . The Turin king list credits Neferhotep with a reign of 11 years and 1 to 4 months , the second or third longest of the dynasty after <unk> Ay ( 23 years ) and Sobekhotep IV ( 9 – 12 years ) . 
 = = = Chronology = = = 
 Neferhotep I 's relative chronological position is secured thanks to the Turin canon as well as contemporary attestations . He was the successor of Sobekhotep III and predecessor of Sobekhotep IV . Since his father Haankhef and mother Kemi are also well attested and not known to have had any title beyond those of " God 's father " and " King 's mother " , respectively , Egyptologists such as Kim Ryholt and Darrell Baker believe that Neferhotep I was of non @-@ royal birth and usurped the throne . The military background of his family may have played a role in this . 
 At the opposite , the absolute chronological position of Neferhotep is debated with Ryholt and Baker seeing him respectively as the 26th and 27th pharaoh of the 13th Dynasty while Detlef Franke and Jürgen von Beckerath contend that he was only the 22nd ruler . Similarly , the absolute <unk> of Neferhotep 's reign varies by as much as 40 years between the scholars , with Kim Ryholt dating the beginning of his reign c . 1740 BC and Thomas Schneider c . 1700 BC . 
 = = = Extent of rule = = = 
 Whether Neferhotep I usurped the throne at the expense of Sobekhotep III or inherited it , he possibly acceded to power over a fragmented Egypt . The Egyptologist Kim Ryholt believes that the Canaanite 14th Dynasty was already in existence at the time , forming an independent realm controlling at least the Eastern Nile Delta . This could explain why Neferhotep 's only attestation in Lower Egypt is a single scarab seal . While this analysis is accepted by some scholars , among whom are Gae Callender , Janine <unk> and Darrell Baker , it is rejected by others , including Manfred Bietak , Daphna Ben @-@ Tor and James and Susan Allen , who contend that Neferhotep I reigned over the whole of Egypt . Possible <unk> of this are the several attestations of Neferhotep found northeast of Egypt , in the Levant , in particular the stela of the Governor of Byblos Yantinu and 4 scarab seals from Canaan , indicating that he retained enough power to maintain trade relations with this region . 
 Alternatively , recent excavations have yielded seals of Neferhotep 's brother Sobekhotep IV in proximity with seals of the powerful Hyksos king Khyan of the 15th Dynasty ( c.1650 – 1550 BC ) in a closed archaeological context , possibly indicating that the two were contemporary . If this is so , Neferhotep I would have been contemporary with either Khyan or one of his predecessors , such as Sakir @-@ Har , and would not have reigned over the Nile Delta . This conclusion is strongly debated at the moment since Sobekhotep IV and Khyan are separated by c . 100 years in the conventional Egyptian chronology . 
 = = = Activities = = = 
 In spite of the numerous attestations left by Neferhotep I , relatively little is known of the activities he undertook during his decade @-@ long reign . The pedestal of Neferhotep I and Sobekhotep IV as well as the naos of Neferhotep discovered by Georges <unk> in Karnak indicate that he undertook some building works there . This is further confirmed by the 2005 discovery in Karnak of a second naos housing a 1 @.@ 80 m ( 5 @.@ 9 ft ) tall double statue of Neferhotep holding hands with himself . The naos was located beneath the foundations of the northern obelisk of Hatshepsut . 
 The most important monument of the king surviving to this day is a large , heavily eroded stela dating to the second regnal year of Neferhotep and found in Abydos . The inscription on the stela is one of the few ancient Egyptian royal texts to record how a king might conceive of and order the making of a sculpture . As usual , the stela begins with Neferhotep 's titulary : 
 The Majesty of the Horus : Founder of the Two Lands , He of the Two Ladies : Revealing the Truth , Falcon of Gold : Lasting of Love , King of Upper and Lower Egypt <unk> , Son of Ra Neferhotep , born to the king 's mother Kemi , granted life , stability , and dominion like Ra forever . 
 It then describes how Neferhotep , residing in his palace " Exalted of Beauty " likely located in Itjtawy , desires that an image of Osiris be made in order for it to participate in the yearly festival held in the god 's honour in Abydos in Upper Egypt . To this end , Neferhotep first enquires to his officials about instructions regarding the making of divine images said to be contained in " the primeval writings of Atum " . His officials then bring him to a temple library where the writings are located and he orders a messenger , the " Custodian of the Royal Property " , to be sent to the Abydos festival . Meanwhile , or possibly before sending the messenger , the statue of Osiris is made of silver , gold and copper , the work being carried out under the supervision of the king . Finally , the king himself goes to Abydos to celebrate the festival of Osiris . 
 More generally , Neferhotep 's time on the throne was likely prosperous as there are many private monuments datable to his reign and that of his brother , and especially in sculpture some remarkably high quality art works were produced . 
 = = = Tomb = = = 
 As of 2014 , the tomb of Neferhotep I has not been located yet . Nicolas Grimal proposes that he was buried in a pyramid at el @-@ Lisht , close to that of Senusret I , an opinion shared by Michael Rice . This remains conjectural , as no artefact permitting the identification of Neferhotep as the owner of such a pyramid has been found . Grimal 's hypothesis relies only on indirect evidence : the presence of scarabs of Neferhotep in Lisht as well as the discovery of a <unk> of a prince Wahneferhotep " ( King ) Neferhotep endures " close to the northern gateway of the mortuary temple of the pyramid complex of Senusret I. The <unk> was wrapped in linen and placed in a miniature coffin , which is dated to the 13th Dynasty on stylistic grounds . This together with the name of Wahneferhotep and his title of " King 's son " indicate that Wahneferhotep was likely a son of Neferhotep I , who may have been buried in the vicinity of his father 's pyramid . 
 Dawn <unk> @-@ McCormack suggested that the Southern South Saqqara pyramid could have been a candidate for Neferhotep 's burial site . This pyramid , datable to the middle 13th Dynasty , was provided with two elaborate sarcophagus chambers which might have been destined for two wealthy brother kings of the dynasty such as Neferhotep I and Sobekhotep IV . 
 In 2015 Josef W. Wegner of the University of Pennsylvania suggested that Sobekhotep IV could have been buried in Abydos in a tomb ( S10 ) belonging to a late Middle Kingdom @-@ Second Intermediate Period royal necropolis which is located just next to the funerary complex of Senusret III of the 12th Dynasty , at the foothills of the so @-@ called Mountain of Anubis ; on that basis , Wegner suggested that the anonymous , large , neighboring tomb S9 could have belonged to Neferhotep I. 
 = = <unk> = = 
 It is not known under which circumstances Neferhotep I died after his reign of eleven years . His successor was his brother , Sobekhotep IV , who is perhaps the most important ruler of the 13th Dynasty . Another brother , Sihathor , appears in the Turin canon as successor , but it seems that he only reigned for a few months as coregent with Neferhotep I and never became an independent ruler , likely because he predeceased his elder brother . After this , it is possible that Neferhotep I designated his younger brother Sobekhotep IV as coregent . There are two inscriptions from <unk> showing Neferhotep I , Sihathor and Sobekhotep IV , which could mean that they reigned for some time together , although Sihathor is declared dead on both lists . Another piece of evidence is an inscription from the Wadi <unk> showing the cartouches of Neferhotep I and Sobekhotep IV on par , next to each other . Some Egyptologists see this as evidence of a coregency between these two kings , while others , including Ryholt , reject this interpretation and believe the inscription was made by Sobekhotep to honour his deceased brother . 
 = = Historical synchronism = = 
 A stela bearing Neferhotep I 's name is of great importance to archaeologists and historians alike as it enables a concordance between the Egyptian and Near Eastern chronologies . This stela depicts the " Governor of Byblos , Yantinu ... who was begotten by Governor Yakin " seated upon a throne in front of which are the nomen and prenomen of Neferhotep I. This is significant for two reasons : first , Yakin is plausibly identifiable with a Yakin @-@ Ilu of Byblos known from a cylinder seal of <unk> , indicating that this king and Neferhotep are separated by a generation . Second , a " King of Byblos <unk> ' Ammu " is known from the archives of Mari who is most likely the same person as the Governor of Byblos Yantinu of the stela . Indeed , Byblos was a semi @-@ autonomous Egyptian governorate at the time and " the king of Byblos " must be the Semitic king of the city ruling it in the name of the pharaoh . The archives of Mari predominantly date to the reign of the last king of the city , Zimri @-@ Lim , a contemporary of Hammurabi who ultimately sacked Mari . This provides the synchronism Neferhotep I – Yantinu – Zimri @-@ Lim – Hammurabi . 
 Egyptologist David Rohl in his alternative New Chronology identifies this pharaoh as the one whose daughter adopted Moses . 
 = Banksia aemula = 
 Banksia aemula , commonly known as the wallum banksia , is a shrub of the family Proteaceae . Found from Bundaberg south to Sydney on the Australian east coast , it is encountered as a shrub or a tree to 8 m ( 26 ft ) in coastal heath on deep sandy soil , known as <unk> . It has wrinkled orange bark and shiny green serrated leaves , with green @-@ yellow flower spikes , known as inflorescences , appearing in autumn . The flower spikes turn grey as they age and large grey follicles appear . Banksia aemula resprouts from its woody base , known as a lignotuber , after bushfires . 
 First described by the botanist Robert Brown in the early 19th century , it derives its specific name " similar " from its resemblance to the closely related Banksia serrata . No varieties are recognised . It was known for many years in New South Wales as Banksia serratifolia , contrasting with the use of B. aemula elsewhere . However , the former name , originally coined by Richard Anthony Salisbury , proved invalid , and Banksia aemula has been universally adopted as the correct scientific name since 1981 . A wide array of mammals , birds , and invertebrates visit the inflorescences and are instrumental in pollination ; honeyeaters are particularly prominent visitors . Grown as a garden plant , it is less commonly seen in horticulture than its close relative B. serrata . 
 = = Description = = 
 Banksia aemula is generally a gnarled shrub or small tree to 8 m ( 26 ft ) , although usually smaller . Conversely , individual wallum banksias have been measured at 8 @.@ 3 – 12 @.@ 1 m ( 27 – 40 ft ) high , with a maximum diameter at breast height of 44 cm ( 17 in ) in forest on North Stradbroke Island . The trunk has thick orange @-@ brown wrinkled and warty bark , and the new growth is hairy but becomes smooth as it ages . New shoot growth is in spring and summer . The shiny green leaves are obovate to oblong in shape and measure 3 – 22 cm ( 1 1 ⁄ 4 – 8 3 ⁄ 4 in ) in length , and 1 – 2 cm ( 1 ⁄ 2 – 3 ⁄ 4 in ) in width . The leaf ends are truncate and the margins flat and serrated . Flowering is in autumn , from March to June ; the green @-@ yellow flower spikes , known as inflorescences , are terminal , found on the ends of branches and emerging from the foliage . Measuring 4 to 20 cm ( 1 1 ⁄ 2 to 8 in ) in height and 8 to 9 cm ( 3 1 ⁄ 4 to 3 1 ⁄ 2 in ) in width , they are various shades of pale and greenish yellow . Anywhere from 800 to 1700 individual small flowers arise from a central woody spike ( or rachis ) . Initially tipped with white conical pollen presenters , the flowers open sequentially from the bottom to the top of the flower spike over one to two weeks , in a process known as sequential anthesis . Each flower produces nectar for around seven days after opening . The flower spikes turn grey as they age and up to 25 finely furred grey follicles appear , which can be very large , measuring 3 – 4 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 1 ⁄ 4 – 1 3 ⁄ 4 in ) long , 2 – 3 @.@ 5 cm ( 3 ⁄ 4 – 1 1 ⁄ 2 in ) high , and 2 – 3 @.@ 5 cm ( 3 ⁄ 4 – 1 1 ⁄ 2 in ) wide . They split open either after bushfire or spontaneously , and release oval seeds 4 – 4 @.@ 7 cm ( 1 1 ⁄ 2 – 1 3 ⁄ 4 in ) in length , composed of a wedge @-@ shaped body 1 – 1 @.@ 5 cm ( 3 ⁄ 8 – 5 ⁄ 8 in ) long and 1 @.@ 1 – 1 @.@ 6 cm ( 3 ⁄ 8 – 5 ⁄ 8 in ) wide , and curved wing 2 – 3 @.@ 2 cm ( 3 ⁄ 4 – 1 1 ⁄ 4 in ) wide . Banksia aemula resprouts from its woody lignotuber after fire . 
 B. aemula closely resembles Banksia serrata , but the latter can be distinguished by a greyer , not orange @-@ brown , trunk , and adult leaves wider than 2 cm ( 3 ⁄ 4 in ) in diameter . Inflorescences of serrata are generally a duller grey @-@ yellow in colour , and have longer ( 2 – 3 mm ) , more fusiform ( spindle @-@ shaped ) or cylindrical pollen presenters tipping unopened flowers . Finally , the follicles are smaller . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Banksia aemula was called wallum by the <unk> people of the Sunshine Coast , giving rise not only to its common name of wallum banksia but also to the name of the ecological community it grows in . Frederick Manson Bailey reported in 1913 that the indigenous people of Stradbroke Island knew it as <unk> . <unk> is another aboriginal name for the species . 
 Banksia aemula was collected by Scottish botanist Robert Brown in June 1801 in the vicinity of Port Jackson , and published by him in his 1810 work Prodromus Florae Novae Hollandiae et Insulae Van Diemen . The specific name , Latin for " similar " , refers to its similarity to B. serrata . Brown also collected a taller tree @-@ like specimen from Sandy Cape which he called Banksia elatior ; the specific name is the comparative form of the Latin adjective <unk> " elevated " . 
 For many years in New South Wales , the wallum banksia had gone by the scientific name of Banksia serratifolia . Richard Anthony Salisbury had published this binomial name in 1796 , which was followed by Otto Kuntze , and then Karel Domin in 1921 . Botanist and banksia authority Alex George conclusively established aemula as the correct name to be used in his 1981 revision of the genus . He pointed out that Salisbury 's original described the leaves only , was insufficient to diagnose the species and is hence a nomen dubium — the description could have fit juvenile leaves of B. paludosa as well . In fact , Brown himself had been unsure whether serratifolia applied to what he called Banksia aemula . Salisbury 's taxon appeared as Banksia <unk> in Knight 's 1809 work On the cultivation of the plants belonging to the natural order of Proteeae , but that entry might also refer to serrata . Where Salisbury got his material is unclear , but John White had sent material to James Edward Smith now held in the Linnean Society marked as B. serratifolia <unk> as well as B. aemula R.Br. 
 Under Brown 's taxonomic arrangement , B. aemula and B. elatior were placed in subgenus Banksia verae , the " True Banksias " , because the inflorescence is a typical Banksia flower spike . Banksia verae was renamed Eubanksia by Stephan Endlicher in 1847 , and demoted to sectional rank by Carl Meissner in his 1856 classification . Meissner further divided Eubanksia into four series , with B. aemula placed in series Quercinae on the basis of its toothed leaves . When George Bentham published his 1870 arrangement in Flora Australiensis , he discarded Meissner 's series , replacing them with four sections . B. aemula was placed in Orthostylis , a somewhat heterogeneous section containing 18 species . This arrangement would stand for over a century . 
 In 1891 , German botanist Otto Kuntze challenged the generic name Banksia L.f. , on the grounds that the name Banksia had previously been published in 1775 as Banksia J.R.Forst & G.Forst , referring to the genus now known as Pimelea . Kuntze proposed Sirmuellera as an alternative , republishing B. aemula as Sirmuellera serratifolia . The challenge failed , and Banksia L.f. was formally conserved . 
 = = = Current placement = = = 
 Alex George published a new taxonomic arrangement of Banksia in his classic 1981 monograph The genus Banksia L.f. ( Proteaceae ) . Endlicher 's Eubanksia became B. subg . Banksia , and was divided into three sections . B. aemula was placed in B. sect . Banksia , and this was further divided into nine series , with B. aemula placed in B. ser . Banksia . He thought its closest relative was clearly Banksia serrata and then B. ornata , and that the three formed a link with western species . Since Brown 's original publication had treated all of Fraser 's specimens as syntypes ( shared type specimens ) for the species , George also chose a lectotype ( a single specimen to serve as the type specimen ) . 
 In 1996 , Kevin Thiele and Pauline Ladiges published a new arrangement for the genus , after cladistic analyses yielded a cladogram significantly different from George 's arrangement . Thiele and Ladiges ' arrangement retained B. aemula in series Banksia , placing it in B. subser . Banksia along with serrata as its sister taxon ( united by their unusual seedling leaves ) and ornata as next closest relative . This arrangement stood until 1999 , when George effectively reverted to his 1981 arrangement in his monograph for the Flora of Australia series . 
 Under George 's taxonomic arrangement of Banksia , B. aemula 's taxonomic placement may be summarised as follows : 
 Genus Banksia 
 Subgenus Banksia 
 Section Banksia 
 Series Banksia 
 B. serrata 
 B. aemula 
 B. ornata 
 B. baxteri 
 B. speciosa 
 B. menziesii 
 B. candolleana 
 B. sceptrum 
 In 2002 , a molecular study by Austin Mast again showed the three eastern species to form a group , but they were only distantly related to other members of the series Banksia . Instead , they formed a sister group to a large group comprising the series Prostratae , Ochraceae , Tetragonae ( including Banksia elderiana ) , Banksia lullfitzii and Banksia baueri . 
 In 2005 , Mast , Eric Jones and Shawn Havery published the results of their cladistic analyses of DNA sequence data for Banksia . They inferred a phylogeny greatly different from the accepted taxonomic arrangement , including finding Banksia to be paraphyletic with respect to Dryandra . A new taxonomic arrangement was not published at the time , but early in 2007 Mast and Thiele initiated a rearrangement by transferring Dryandra to Banksia , and publishing B. subg . Spathulatae for the species having spoon @-@ shaped cotyledons ; in this way they also redefined the autonym B. subg . Banksia . They foreshadowed publishing a full arrangement once DNA sampling of Dryandra was complete . In the meantime , if Mast and Thiele 's nomenclatural changes are taken as an interim arrangement , then B. aemula is placed in B. subg . Banksia . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Banksia aemula is found along the east coast of Australia from around 70 km ( 43 mi ) north of Bundaberg in central Queensland down to Sydney . Specifically , its southernmost occurrence is at La Perouse on the northern side of Botany Bay . It is also found on Fraser , Moreton and North Stradbroke Islands . Almost all populations are within a few kilometres of the coast , except for one at Agnes Banks in western Sydney , and two just north and south of Grafton at Coaldale and <unk> , and a last around 30 km ( 19 mi ) southwest of Bundaberg . 
 B. aemula is most commonly found in deep sandy soils , either on dunes or flattish areas which may be seasonally wet . On coastal dunes in southern Queensland , it replaces Banksia serrata , which occupies the same niche to the south . The latter areas , with open woodland or heathland , are known as wallum . In Queensland it is found with Banksia robur , with the latter species found in flatter wetter areas and B. aemula found on rises . It is also found with Banksia oblongifolia in Queensland . In some areas of wallum , it may grow as a small tree , along with mallee forms of the red bloodwood ( Corymbia gummifera ) . In <unk> National Park , it is an occasional emergent plant ( along with Melaleuca quinquenervia and Eucalyptus umbra ) in closed <unk> heathland , a community of shrubs 0 @.@ 5 – 2 m ( 1 3 ⁄ 4 – 6 1 ⁄ 2 ft ) high containing Xanthorrhoea fulva , Empodisma minus , <unk> <unk> , and Hakea and Leptospermum species . On the New South Wales Central Coast , it generally grows as a 1 – 2 m ( 3 1 ⁄ 4 – 6 1 ⁄ 2 ft ) high shrub and is a canopy component of Banksia aemula open heathland , located on coastal headlands on highly leached Pleistocene white sands overlying Triassic and Permian strata . Areas include <unk> Head in <unk> State Conservation Area , and near Myall Lakes . Other plants it grows in association with include <unk> pinifolius , Brachyloma <unk> , Dillwynia <unk> , D. <unk> , Allocasuarina distyla , <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> phylicoides , and Empodisma minus . <unk> has eradicated much of the community around Redhead . In less leached yellower sands , the community ( and B. aemula ) is replaced by a taller heath containing B. serrata and B. oblongifolia . 
 At the southern end of its range , B. aemula is a component of the Eastern Suburbs Banksia Scrub ( <unk> ) , designated an endangered ecological community . This community is found on younger , windblown sands than the heathlands to the north . 
 The Agnes Banks Woodland in western Sydney has been recognised by the New South Wales Government as an Endangered Ecological Community . Here Banksia aemula is an understory plant in low open woodland , with scribbly gum ( Eucalyptus sclerophylla ) , narrow @-@ leaved apple ( Angophora bakeri ) and B. serrata as canopy trees , and B. oblongifolia , Conospermum <unk> , <unk> pinifolius , Dillwynia sericea and nodding geebung ( Persoonia nutans ) as other understory species . 
 On North Stradbroke Island , B. aemula is one of three canopy tree species of Eucalyptus signata @-@ dominated forest 12 – 15 m ( 39 1 ⁄ 4 – 49 1 ⁄ 4 ft ) high , the third species being E. umbra . This forest is found on a ridge 100 m ( 330 ft ) above sea level formed from an ancient sand dune . Here bracken ( Pteridium esculentum ) dominates the understory . Other tall shrubs associated include Persoonia <unk> and Acacia <unk> . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Most Proteaceae and all Banksia species , including B. aemula , have proteoid roots , roots with dense clusters of short lateral rootlets that form a mat in the soil just below the leaf litter . These roots are particularly efficient at absorbing nutrients from nutrient @-@ poor soils , such as the phosphorus @-@ deficient native soils of Australia . A study of six wallum species , including B. aemula , found they have adapted to very low levels of phosphorus and are highly sensitive to increased levels of the element , leading to phosphorus toxicity . Some evidence suggests they are efficient at using potassium , and sensitive to calcium toxicity as well . A field study on North Stradbroke Island noted increased root growth in autumn ( around April ) , but that overall root growth was more constant than other species looked at , possibly because its deeper roots had more regular access to groundwater . 
 A 1998 study in Bundjalung National Park in northern New South Wales found that B. aemula inflorescences are foraged by a variety of small mammals , including marsupials such as yellow @-@ footed antechinus ( Antechinus flavipes ) , and rodents such as pale field rat ( Rattus <unk> ) , Australian swamp rat ( R. <unk> ) and grassland <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) and even the house mouse ( Mus musculus ) . These animals carry pollen loads comparable to those of nectarivorous birds , making them effective pollinators . Grey @-@ headed flying foxes ( Pteropus poliocephalus ) were also observed visiting B. aemula and their heads and bellies were noted to contact stigmas while feeding . Bird species that have been observed feeding at the flowers of B. aemula include rainbow lorikeet and scarlet and Lewin 's honeyeaters . Several other honeyeaters were recorded on B. aemula inflorescences for The Banksia Atlas , including the New Holland , brown , white @-@ cheeked , and tawny @-@ crowned honeyeaters , noisy miner , little wattlebird and noisy friarbird . The Bundjalung field study found the brown honeyeater carried much higher loads of B. aemula pollen than other species measured , which included white @-@ cheeked and yellow @-@ faced honeyeaters and silvereyes . Insects such as ants and bees ( including the introduced honeybee ) have also been recorded . 
 Banksia aemula resprouts from a lignotuber or shoots from epicormic buds after fire . Fire management of Banksia aemula heath in Southeast Queensland recommends 7- to 20 @-@ year fire intervals . Intervals of 10 – 15 years are recommended for the Eastern Suburbs Banksia Scrub , as longer leads to overgrowth by Leptospermum laevigatum . Experimenting with seed germination and early growth of B. aemula showed that phosphorus was toxic to seedlings , inhibiting growth at double normal soil concentrations and causing seedling death at quadruple normal soil concentrations . The addition of potassium or magnesium ameliorated these effects a little although potassium in high concentrations impacted on growth as well . Overall , seedlings grow slowly over the first 21 weeks of life compared with other plant species , the reasons for which are unclear , although it may be that it offers an increased chance of survival in a <unk> or water @-@ poor environment . Seed was killed by exposure to 150 ° C , but survived seven @-@ minute exposure to 100 ° C. 
 A study of coastal heaths on Pleistocene sand dunes around the Myall Lakes found B. aemula grew on ridges ( dry heath ) and B. oblongifolia on slopes ( wet heath ) , and the two species did not overlap . Manipulation of seedlings in the same study area showed that B. aemula grows longer roots seeking water and that seedlings do grow in wet heath , but it is as yet unclear why the species does not grow in wet heath as well as dry heath . Unlike similar situations with banksia species in Western Australia , the two species did not appear to impact negatively on each other . A field study on seedling recruitment conducted at Broadwater National Park and <unk> Reserve on the New South Wales North Coast showed that generally Banksia aemula produced seedlings in low numbers but the attrition rate was low , and that seedlings had a greater survival rate on dry rather than wet heaths . Field work including the experimental planting out of seedlings at Crowdy Bay National Park showed that Banksia aemula seedling roots reach the water table within six months of germination , and that they can germinate in the presence or absence of recent bushfire . The reasons for <unk> ( that is fewer seeds with greater percentage of survival ) is unclear , but may be a defence against seed @-@ eating animals . Similarly in field work on North Stradbroke Island , B. aemula was noted to shed its winged seeds over time between ( as well as after ) fire , and germinate and grow readily with little predation by herbivores . 
 = = Cultivation = = 
 In 1788 , Banksia aemula was one of the first banksias to be cultivated in England , where it was illustrated in Curtis 's Botanical Magazine and its rival , The Botanical Register . Its shiny green leaves , showy flower spikes , huge follicles , and wrinkled bark are attractive horticultural features . It is also a <unk> and insect @-@ attracting plant . 
 Trials in Western Australia and Hawaii have shown B. aemula to be resistant to Phytophthora cinnamomi dieback . It requires a well drained slightly acid ( pH 5 @.@ 5 – 6 @.@ 5 ) soil , preferably fairly sandy and a sunny aspect . Summer watering is also prudent , as it does not suffer water stress well . Slow @-@ growing , the plant takes four to six years to flower from seed . It is less commonly grown than Banksia serrata . An investigation into optimum temperatures for germination found a nighttime temperature of 20 – 28 ° C , and a daytime of 24 – 33 ° C gave best results , and recommended summer planting times . 
 It has also been used as a rootstock for grafting Banksia speciosa , and has potential in bonsai . The red textured timber has been used in cabinet @-@ making . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Although Banksia attenuata was the common banksia in Australian children 's author May Gibbs ' own childhood in Western Australia , the old flower spikes of Banksia aemula with their large follicles are thought to have been the inspiration for the villains of her <unk> and <unk> books , the " Big Bad Banksia Men " . 
 = Maryland Toleration Act = 
 The Maryland Toleration Act , also known as the Act Concerning Religion , was a law mandating religious tolerance for Trinitarian Christians . Passed on April 21 , 1649 , by the assembly of the Maryland colony , in St. Mary 's City . It was the second law requiring religious tolerance in the British North American colonies and created one of the pioneer statutes passed by the legislative body of an organized colonial government to guarantee any degree of religious liberty . Specifically , the bill , now usually referred to as the Toleration Act , granted freedom of conscience to all Christians . ( The colony which became Rhode Island passed a series of laws , the first in 1636 , which prohibited religious persecution including against non @-@ <unk> ; Rhode Island was also the first government to separate church and state . ) Historians argue that it helped inspire later legal protections for freedom of religion in the United States . The Calvert family , who founded Maryland partly as a refuge for English Catholics , sought enactment of the law to protect Catholic settlers and those of other religions that did not conform to the dominant Anglicanism of Britain and her colonies . 
 The Act allowed freedom of worship for all Trinitarian Christians in Maryland , but sentenced to death anyone who denied the divinity of Jesus . It was revoked in 1654 by William Claiborne , a Virginian who had been appointed as a commissioner by Oliver Cromwell and was a staunch advocate for the Anglican Church . When the Calverts regained control of Maryland , the Act was reinstated , before being repealed permanently in 1692 following the events of the Glorious Revolution , and the Protestant Revolution in Maryland . As the first law on religious tolerance in the British North America , it influenced related laws in other colonies and portions of it were echoed in the writing of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution , which enshrined religious freedom in American law . 
 = = Origin of the law = = 
 The Maryland colony was founded by Cecil Calvert in 1634 . Like his father George Calvert , who had originated the efforts that led to the colony 's charter , Cecil Calvert was Catholic at a time when England was dominated by the Anglican Church . The Calverts intended the colony as a haven for Catholics fleeing England and as a source of income for themselves and their descendants . Many of Maryland 's first settlers were Catholic , including at least two Catholic priests , one of whom became the earliest chronicler of the colony 's history . But whatever Calvert 's intentions , Maryland was a colony of an Anglican nation . Its charter had been granted by an Anglican king and seems to have assumed that the Church of England would be its official church . Anglican and later Puritan newcomers quickly came to outnumber the early Catholic settlers . Thus , by 1649 when the law was passed , the colonial assembly was dominated by Protestants , and the law was in effect an act of Protestant tolerance for Catholics , rather than the reverse . 
 From Maryland 's earliest days , Cecil Calvert had enjoined its colonists to leave religious rivalries behind . Along with giving instructions on the establishment and defense of the colony , he asked the men he appointed to lead it to ensure peace between Protestants and Catholics . He also asked the Catholics to practice their faith as privately as possible , so as not to disturb that peace . The Ordinance of 1639 , Maryland 's earliest comprehensive law , expressed a general commitment to the rights of man , but did not specifically detail protections for religious minorities of any kind . Peace prevailed until the English Civil War , which opened religious rifts and threatened Calvert 's control of Maryland . In 1647 , after the death of Governor Leonard Calvert , Protestants seized control of the colony . Cecil Calvert , 2nd Baron Baltimore , quickly regained power , but recognized that religious tolerance not specifically enshrined in law was vulnerable . This recognition was combined with the arrival of a group of Puritans whom Calvert had induced to establish Providence , now Annapolis , by guaranteeing their freedom of worship . Partially to confirm the promises he made to them , Calvert wrote the Maryland Toleration Act and encouraged the colonial assembly to pass it . They did so on April 21 , 1649 . 
 = = Description = = 
