 The Maryland Toleration Act was an act of tolerance , allowing specific religious groups to practice their religion without being punished , but retaining the ability to revoke that right at any time . It also only granted tolerance to Christians who believed in the Trinity . The law was very explicit in limiting its effects to Christians : 
 ... no person or persons ... professing to believe in Jesus Christ , shall from henceforth be anyways troubled , <unk> or <unk> for or in respect of his or her religion nor in the free exercise thereof within this Province ... 
 Settlers who blasphemed by denying either the Trinity or the divinity of Jesus Christ could be punished by execution or the seizure of their lands . That meant that Jews , Unitarians , and other dissenters from Trinitarian Christianity were practicing their religions at risk to their lives . Any person who insulted the Virgin Mary , the apostles , or the evangelists could be whipped , jailed , or fined . Otherwise , Trinitarian Christians ' right to worship was protected . The law outlawed the use of " heretic " and other religious insults against them . This attempt to limit the use of religious slurs and insults has been described as the first attempt in the world to limit the use of hate speech . 
 The law was used in at least one attempt to prosecute a non @-@ Christian . In 1658 a Jew named Jacob <unk> was accused of blasphemy after saying that Jesus was not the son of God and that the miracles described in the New Testament were conjuring tricks . <unk> did not deny having said such things , but argued that he had only been responding to questions asked of him . He was held for trial but the case was later dismissed , and he was given full citizenship as a condition of the restoration of Calvert 's rule following the English Civil War . 
 The law had its detractors , even among those groups protected by it . Puritans were concerned that the act and the proprietary government in general were royalist . They were also concerned that by swearing allegiance to Calvert , who was Catholic , they were being required to submit to the Pope , whom they considered to be the antichrist . Some Anglicans also opposed the law , believing that the Church of England should be the colony 's sole established church . 
 = = Repeal and legacy = = 
 In 1654 , only five years after its passage , the Act was repealed . Two years earlier the colony had been seized by Protestants following the execution of King Charles I of England and the outbreak of the English Civil War . In the early stages of that conflict , the colonial assembly of Maryland and its neighbors in Virginia had publicly declared their support for the King . Parliament appointed Protestant commissioners loyal to their cause to subdue the colonies , and two of them , the Virginian William Claiborne and Puritan leader Richard Bennett , took control of the colonial government in St. Mary 's City in 1652 . In addition to repealing the Maryland Toleration Act with the assistance of Protestant assemblymen , Claiborne and Bennett passed a new law barring Catholics from openly practicing their religion . Calvert regained control after making a deal with the colony 's Protestants , and in 1658 the Act was again passed by the colonial assembly . This time , it would last more than thirty years , until 1692 . 
 Following the Glorious Revolution of 1688 in England , when the Catholic King James II of England was deposed and the Protestant William III ascended the throne , a rebellion of Maryland Puritan Protestants overthrew Calvert 's rule . They quickly rescinded the Toleration Act and banned public practice of Catholicism , and it would never be reinstated under colonial rule . In fact , the colony established the Church of England as its official church in 1702 and explicitly barred Catholics from voting in 1718 . The Calvert family regained control over the colony in 1715 , but only after Benedict Calvert converted to Protestantism . His political control remained tenuous enough that he did not risk an attempt to reinstate protections for Catholics . It took until the era of the American Revolution for religious tolerance or freedom to again become the practice in Maryland . 
 While the law did not secure religious freedom , and while it included severe limitations , it was nonetheless a significant milestone . It predates the Enlightenment , which is generally considered to be when the idea of religious freedom took root , and stands as the first legal guarantee of religious tolerance in American and British history . Later laws ensuring religious tolerance and freedom , including the British Act of Toleration of 1689 , the Holy Experiment in Pennsylvania , and laws concerning religion in other colonies such as South Carolina , may have been influenced by its example . According to historian Robert <unk> , " ... the measure marked a notable departure from Old World oppression . " It was not until the passage of the First Amendment to the Constitution over a century later that religious freedom was enshrined as a fundamental guarantee , but even that document echoes the Toleration Act in its use of the phrase , " free exercise thereof " . Thus , despite its lack of a full guarantee of religious freedom or broad @-@ based tolerance , the law is , " a significant step forward in the struggle for religious liberty . " 
 = The Time of Angels = 
 " The Time of Angels " is the fourth episode in the fifth series of British science fiction television series Doctor Who , first broadcast on 24 April 2010 on BBC One . It is the first episode of a two @-@ part story written by showrunner Steven Moffat and directed by Adam Smith ; the second episode was " Flesh and Stone " . Moffat utilised the two @-@ part episode to bring back a couple of his previous creations : the Weeping Angels from his series three episode " Blink " , and River Song ( Alex Kingston ) from the series four episodes " Silence in the Library " and " Forest of the Dead " . The episode is partly set in the 51st century . 
 The Doctor — a time travelling alien played by Matt Smith — and his companion Amy Pond ( Karen Gillan ) are summoned by River Song , a mysterious woman from the Doctor 's future . She takes them to the planet Alfava Metraxis , where the spaceship Byzantium has crashed . Hidden inside is a Weeping Angel , a creature that can only move when unobserved by others . With the help of Father Octavian ( Iain Glen ) and his militarised clerics , the Doctor , Amy and River Song travel through a stone labyrinth to reach the ship . On the way , they discover that all the statues in the maze are Angels , which are slowly restoring and planning to trap them in the labyrinth . 
 Inspired by the relationship between the film Alien and its sequel , Aliens , Moffat wrote the episode as a more action @-@ oriented sequel to " Blink " . It was the first episode to be filmed in the series ; filming began 20 July 2009 at Southerndown beach , Vale of Glamorgan which was used as the surface of Alfava Metraxis . The episode was watched by 8 @.@ 59 million viewers in the United Kingdom , received the highest Appreciation Index given to the fifth series at time of broadcast and was acclaimed by critics as one of the best episodes of the series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The Doctor and Amy travel to the Delirium Archive , a museum in the distant future and discover a message from Dr. River Song , engraved in Old High Gallifreyan , the language of the Doctor 's home planet , on a damaged flight recorder from the starship Byzantium 12 @,@ 000 years in the relative past . The Doctor takes the TARDIS to rescue her before the ship crashes on the planet Alfava Metraxis . After the TARDIS lands on the planet via River 's guidance , Amy learns from both the Doctor and River that they have a unique relationship owing to the nature of time travel ; Dr. Song has met the Doctor numerous times before in her timestream , while the Doctor still barely knows who she is . 
 River warns the Doctor that the Byzantium 's cargo hold contains a deadly Weeping Angel , which can move only when unobserved by others . She calls down the orbiting Father Octavian and his militarised " clerics " to help her capture the Angel before the radiation leaked from the ship makes it too powerful , and to protect a large human colony on the planet . River , the Doctor and Amy review a four @-@ second loop of security footage of the Angel in the Byzantium vault as the soldiers set up base camp . Outside the trailer , the Doctor and River look through a book written by a madman about the Angels and find the words , " That which holds the image of an Angel becomes itself an Angel " . Meanwhile , Amy has returned to the viewing room ; each time she turns away the Angel from the footage moves and it begins to emerge from the screen , trapping her in the room . The Doctor and River attempt to free Amy ; the Doctor warns Amy not to look directly into the eyes of the Angel because the book compared eyes to the doors of the soul and the Angels may enter there . Amy is able to turn off the image on a loop break , causing the Angel to disappear and saving herself . As they head toward the crashed ship , Amy continually feels something in her eye . 
 To access the Byzantium and locate the Angel , the group must travel through a " Maze of the Dead " , a stone labyrinth with numerous statues erected by the native race , among which the Angel could easily hide . After launching a gravity globe near the roof of the Maze to provide illumination , the group splits up , with some soldiers left to guard the entrance . While the Doctor and River Song discuss the two @-@ headed natives who built the catacombs , it suddenly occurs to them that all the statues have only one head : they must therefore be Weeping Angels . Each of these is slower and weaker than the Byzantium 's captured Angel , having had no beings to consume over the centuries , but they are now absorbing energy from the crashed ship ; the Doctor surmises that the Angel purposely crashed the Byzantium to rescue its kind . As the group tries to escape , Amy believes that she cannot move because her hand has become stone and she cannot release its grip on the wall of the cave . The Doctor explains that her perception has been influenced by the Angel through her direct eye contact , and she is still fine ; he proves it by biting her hand , which allows her to flee . The group soon finds that the Angels have killed their rear guard and are using the consciousness of one soldier , Bob , to speak to the Doctor . The Angels reveal they have lured the group to the highest point of the maze , directly under the crashed ship , and are planning to kill and use their essences to further regenerate . The Doctor tells the Angels that they should have never put him in the trap , and prepares the group to jump once he destroys the gravity globe . 
 = = = Continuity = = = 
 This episode sees the return of River Song , the woman from the Doctor 's future who was previously seen in " Silence in the Library " and " Forest of the Dead " . " The Time of Angels " takes place in her relative past , where she is a doctor , having not yet become a professor . She shows the ability to fly the TARDIS , which she says she learned from " the best " and then teases the Doctor it was not him . ( In " Let 's Kill Hitler " , it will be shown that the TARDIS taught her to fly it . ) In addition , the words she inscribed on the home box in Old High Gallifreyan ( " Hello , Sweetie ! " ) are the same words by which she greets the Tenth Doctor in " Silence in the Library " . The crash of the Byzantium was first mentioned in " Silence in the Library " , when River asks the Tenth Doctor , after consulting her diary , if they 've done that yet . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 The episode was written by lead writer and executive producer Steven Moffat . He designed the two @-@ part episode as a more action @-@ oriented sequel to " Blink " , an episode he had written for the third series . He compared the relationship to the film Alien and its sequel Aliens , with the former being more low @-@ key and the latter more " highly coloured " . Moffat thought that Aliens was " the best conceived movie sequel ever " and decided to use it as a model . He also intended to portray the Angels and their actions differently ; in " Blink " they were barely surviving and resembled scavengers , while in " The Time of Angels " he wanted them to have a plan that could become " almost like a war " . The two @-@ part story was intended to show the worst possible instance that could occur with the Weeping Angels , which was the inability to see , as explored in the second part , " Flesh and Stone " , when Amy must keep her eyes closed . Executive producer Piers Wenger thought that the Delirium Archive , the museum the Doctor and Amy visited at the beginning of the episode , needed to be explained , therefore Moffat named it " the final resting place of the Headless Monks " and sent it to him via text message . The Headless Monks themselves appeared in the mid @-@ series finale of the next series , " A Good Man Goes to War " . 
 Moffat also brought back the character of River Song from his fourth series episodes " Silence in the Library " and " Forest of the Dead " . In the former , River asks the Doctor if he had done the " crash of the Byzantium " with her yet . Actress Alex Kingston did not expect the return , but stated that Moffat " always intended that she would come back " . Moffat was influenced by Audrey Niffenegger 's novel , The Time Traveler 's Wife , in which a woman falls in love with a man who unintentionally moves through time . Moffat used this inspiration in his episode " The Girl in the Fireplace " , but Alex Kingston , as well as reviewers have compared River to The Time Traveler 's Wife . 
 = = = Filming and effects = = = 
 " The Time of Angels " was the first episode of the series to be produced . The read @-@ through for the episode took place on 15 July 2009 . Filming began on 20 July 2009 on Southerndown beach , Vale of Glamorgan , which was used as the surface of Alfava Metraxis . Torrential rain halted filming the following day , and about three pages of the script were never filmed , including the scene Gillan had read for her audition . The gap was replaced by the scene of River flying the TARDIS after the Byzantium , which was filmed as a pick @-@ up . Steven Moffat later reflected on the replacement being " a lovely scene , and a much better start to the show " . During the CGI shot of the TARDIS flying through the Time Vortex in that scene , an older TARDIS model from the David Tennant era was accidentally used instead of the new one . 
 Director Adam Smith , new to Doctor Who , felt pressure in making the episode be a worthy sequel to " Blink " , which he called a " brilliant , brilliant , brilliant episode " , but also said that it was great to work with the Weeping Angels . He decided to have the interaction between the Doctor and River Song resemble that of an old married couple , bickering like " mum and dad arguing over directions in the car " . Actress Alex Kingston stated that it was " great fun " on set and she enjoyed working with Matt Smith , although her relationship with Smith was different from his predecessor and her former co @-@ star , David Tennant . In the script it was not written in that River would land on the Doctor when she flew into the TARDIS ; it was an idea that Matt Smith came up with in rehearsal that proved difficult to film . In the episode , there is a moment in the viewing room where the Doctor hangs on a strap attached to the ceiling and it breaks . This was originally an accident during one of the takes , but director Adam Smith liked it and filmed it again , with Matt Smith doing it on purpose . 
 Most of the Weeping Angels are not statue props but young women wearing masks , costumes , and paint that took two to three hours to apply . Adam Smith called them " an absolute nightmare to film with " because it took a long time for them to get ready and they had to stand still for long periods of time . Smith wished River Song 's entrance to be a shocking surprise to the audience . A stunt double was used for some shots of the scene where River flies out of the Byzantium 's airlock , but Kingston wished to do some of it herself . The scene was filmed on a greenscreen with Kingston hooked up on wires that pulled her up and backwards as a wind machine was blown to create the effect of the airlock . Kingston said she " absolutely loved " filming the scene . For the scene in which sand pours out of Amy 's eye as she rubs it , an eye patch containing sand that would be released when Gillan rubbed it was placed over her eye . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " The Time of Angels " was first broadcast on BBC One on Saturday , 24 April 2010 from 6 : 20 p.m. to 7 : 05 p.m. In the United States it was shown on sister station BBC America on 8 May 2010 . In the UK , preliminary overnight viewing figures showed that 6 @.@ 8 million viewers watched the episode , which made it second for the night behind Britain 's Got Talent . This was also the second highest overnight figure for a fourth episode over the last five series , " The Girl in the Fireplace " taking the top position . When final consolidated ratings were calculated , another 1 @.@ 81 million timeshifted viewers were added , bringing the total up to 8 @.@ 59 million , the highest viewing figure for the series since " The Eleventh Hour " . This made it the fifth most watched programme on BBC One and the 12th most watched across all UK TV channels for the week ending 25 April 2010 . It was also given an Appreciation Index of 87 , the highest for the fifth series so far at its time of broadcast . 
 A Region 2 DVD and Blu @-@ ray containing " The Time of Angels " together with the following episodes " Flesh and Stone " and " The Vampires of Venice " was released on 5 July 2010 . It was re @-@ released as part of the complete series five DVD on 8 November 2010 . 
 = = = Banner incident = = = 
 During the cliffhanger ending of the first broadcast of " The Time of Angels " , an animated graphic was shown in some regions , showing Graham Norton revealing a banner trailing his show Over the Rainbow . According to the BBC , the overlay graphic was run 20 seconds too early . The BBC apologised after receiving over five thousand complaints . The incident received attention on Twitter , with SFX magazine reporting that it had " caused a minor Twitter earthquake " , citing tweets from Charlie Brooker , Matthew Graham and Simon Pegg . The incident was lampooned on Brooker 's panel game You Have Been Watching , where he described it as " a travesty " . BBC drama writer and co @-@ creator of Life on Mars and Ashes to Ashes Matthew Graham criticised the BBC for " cheapen [ ing ] " itself and mentioned he wrote emails to " a few interested parties " . 
 Graham Norton himself went on to parody the incident in his own show by placing a similar banner at the bottom of the screen and having a Dalek exterminate his own cartoon caricature . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The episode received widespread acclaim from television critics . Daniel Martin , writing for The Guardian called it " an astonishing achievement " and " absolutely bloody terrifying " . He praised the way Moffat handled River Song 's story , as well as for making it an " intricate romp jammed with ideas that make a truly cinematic piece of drama " . Gavin Fuller 's review for The Daily Telegraph praised the suspense and " the revelation that all the statues were Angels " which he called " genuinely shocking " . Though he commented it " took a while to get going " , once it did he thought it had turned into the " first genuine chiller " of the series . He wrote that the " only real disappointment " was the " inference that the TARDIS doesn 't really have to make its celebrated ' vworp , vworp ' noise on landing " , asking " How can you do that to us long @-@ time fans , Steven Moffat – that sound is part of the warp and weft of the programme ! " . 
 Patrick Mulkern , writing for the Radio Times , described the episode as " simply superb television " and claimed that " Matt Smith really is shaping up to be the best Doctor since Tom Baker " , praising him for being " simultaneously intense and subtle " . He thought it started out with " arguably the most impressive opener to any Doctor Who yet " and also praised Amy for being " cheerfully free of the emotional baggage that mired her predecessors " so far . Matt Wales of IGN gave the episode a 10 out of 10 rating , calling it " huge , silly , scary , gorgeous , gripping and – most importantly – fun " . Although he wrote it " never quite matched the relentless tension of ' Blink ' " , he commented that it was " flawlessly paced and , when it mattered , genuinely scary " . Unlike Fuller , he praised the TARDIS " vworp vworp " joke , asking " Who could possibly not love the sheer audacity in suggesting the TARDIS 's iconic whirring noise was the result of the Doctor leaving the brakes on for the last 45 years ? " 
 SFX magazine reviewer Dave Golder gave the episode five out of five stars , praising it for being " superbly paced , the changes in tone happening gradually and organically " . He also commended the directing and sound effects . Keith Phipps of The A.V. Club gave the episode a grade of A- , praising the scary atmosphere and the development of the Weeping Angels . He commented that he was a little " fuzzy " on the Doctor and River Song 's relationship , but he expected that he was supposed to be . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " The Time of Angels " / " Flesh and Stone " reviews at The Doctor Who Ratings Guide 
 = Michael Tritter = 
 Detective Michael Tritter is a recurring fictional character in the medical drama series House , portrayed by David Morse . He is the main antagonist of the third season , which ran between 2006 and 2007 . Tritter is a police detective , who tries to get Dr. Gregory House ( Hugh Laurie ) to apologize for leaving him in an examination room with a thermometer in his rectum . After House refuses to apologize , Tritter researches House 's background and discovers his Vicodin addiction . Tritter turns people close to House against him and forces House to go to rehab . When the case ultimately comes to court , the judge sentences House to one night in jail , for contempt of court , and to finish his rehabilitation , telling Tritter that she believes House is not the drug addict he tried to make him out to be . 
 The character was created as somebody who could go " toe @-@ to @-@ toe " with House . Morse , who had never seen the show before , was unsure if he could portray the character and was not impressed after familiarizing himself with the show . The excited reaction of his friends to the opportunity convinced him to take the role . Initial critical responses to the character were mostly positive , but critics later felt that the seven @-@ episode Tritter story arc became " boring " ; however , Morse was praised for his portrayal and gained an Outstanding Guest Actor in a Drama Series Emmy Award nomination for his appearance in the episode " Finding Judas " . Morse stated in a 2006 TV Guide interview that , although he had discussed it with writers of the show , bringing the character back on the show would be " practically impossible " . 
 = = Storyline = = 
 Tritter first appears in the episode " Fools for Love " . His character is a police detective who suffers from a severe irritation in the area of his groin , which he believes to be caused by a sexually transmitted disease , and who becomes a patient of the walk @-@ in clinic . Although House diagnoses Tritter with dry skin , a common side effect of the nicotine gum that Tritter is chewing , Tritter requests that a sample be tested . House declines on the grounds that he has already met this month 's quota for indulging " stubborn idiots " . After Tritter causes House to trip , the doctor feigns acquiescence , but insists he has to take Tritter 's temperature rectally . After inserting the thermometer , House leaves the room , with no intention of returning . Tritter later complains about his treatment to House 's boss , Lisa Cuddy ( Lisa Edelstein ) , saying that he would rather " beat the crap out of " House than sue him ; however , House refuses to apologize . Later that night , Tritter pulls House over for a traffic violation and arrests him after finding Vicodin pills in his pocket . 
 In the next episode , " Que Será Será " , Tritter searches House 's apartment and finds a large quantity of Vicodin pills and two apparently forged prescriptions that bear the name of House 's friend James Wilson ( Robert Sean Leonard ) . During " Son of Coma Guy " and " Whac @-@ A @-@ Mole " , Tritter pressures Wilson and members of House 's diagnostic team to testify against him , but they all refuse . In " Finding Judas " , Cuddy finds Tritter spending his day off looking through the hospital 's log for evidence against House . She accuses him of not having a life and " personalizing every slight " . Tritter responds that " nobody [ at the hospital ] is innocent " , as everyone allows House to treat patients despite knowing of his Vicodin addiction and that it takes a police detective to uncover what the doctors are deliberately hiding . At the end of the episode , Wilson visits Tritter and indicates his willingness to testify . 
 In " Merry Little Christmas " , Tritter and Wilson work out a deal to allow House to continue practicing medicine if he pleads guilty and spends two months in rehab . Meanwhile , House uses a dead patient 's name to obtain <unk> pills as a Vicodin replacement drug . When he visits Tritter early the next morning to agree to the deal , Tritter says the deal is off , after going through the pharmacy 's log and reading that House signed for a dead man 's drugs . 
 In the final days leading up to House 's court case , House realizes the severity of the situation and finally apologizes to Tritter ( episode " Words and Deeds " ) . When Tritter refuses to accept the apology , House goes into rehab , putting on a show for Tritter and the judge , but Tritter cites his experiences with addicts as evidence House has not changed . The judge tells Tritter that she does not believe House to be the drug dealer that Tritter tried to show him to be and orders Tritter to move on after House is exonerated due to Cuddy committing perjury . Just before the bailiff escorts House out of the courtroom , Tritter tells him : " Good luck . I hope I 'm wrong about you . " 
 = = Personality = = 
 The main antagonist of the third season , Tritter is a " stubborn " , " vengeful " , and extremely determined police detective . According to David Morse , the offensive thermometer incident in " Fools for Love " made it easy for Tritter to stand up to House ; as House 's equal , Tritter " gets who House is on all levels and can really shake his foundation " . Tritter 's experiences with drug addicts color his view of House , and he becomes so obsessed with House that , according to executive producer Katie Jacobs , the story arc turns into " a battle of egos " between them . The character shows a manipulative streak when he forms a plan to coerce each member of House 's team to testify separately in " Finding Judas " . Robert Bianco of USA Today described Tritter as an initially " legitimately , if belligerently , aggrieved adversary " character who later morphs into " some kind of insane <unk> , tearing his way through the hospital and the Constitution at will " . 
 = = Creation and casting = = 
 The Tritter character was created as someone to go " toe @-@ to @-@ toe " with House . The producers envisioned a character with an inner strength , intelligence , and single @-@ mindedness to match that of House . In 2006 , House creator David Shore contacted actor David Morse , with whom he had previously worked on Hack , for a guest @-@ starring episode arc on the show . According to Ellen Gray of the Philadelphia Daily News , Morse 's earlier portrayals of " scary " cops ( in 16 Blocks and Hack ) helped him clinch the role . 
 Morse was unfamiliar with the show . After watching several House episodes , he was surprised that the show had a strong audience with " [ such ] a total jerk " as the lead character . It was not until Morse told a few long @-@ time friends about the job offer that their enthusiastic reaction convinced him to take the role . Katie Jacobs , executive producer of House , was impressed by Morse 's performance . In a 2006 TV Guide interview , Morse said that , although he discussed the possibility with House writers , it would be " practically impossible " to get the character to return in any later seasons . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Initial responses to the character were mostly positive . Maureen Ryan of the Chicago Tribune declared Tritter the best male villain of the fall of 2006 . Lisa Edelstein , who portrays Lisa Cuddy on House , named David Morse as one of her favorite House guest stars , saying that he did a great job portraying the character . Barbara Barnett from Blog Critics Magazine and Charles McGrath of The New York Times compared Tritter to Inspector Javert of Les Misérables , and Alynda Wheat from Entertainment Weekly stated that Tritter annoyed House more than any other character , surpassing other antagonists such as Amber Volakis ( Anne Dudek ) , Stacy Warner ( Sela Ward ) , and Lucas Douglas ( Michael Weston ) . Variety 's Stuart Levine considered Tritter a " worthy foe " for House . 
 However , the continued character arc increasingly bored critics . Staci Krause of IGN found the first few episodes of Season 3 , in which House recovers from being shot , more interesting . In a review of " Que Sera Sera " , Entertainment Weekly 's Michelle Kung noted that while David Morse is a fine actor , " his cop is so ridiculously one @-@ note and revenge @-@ bent that his scenes are often just excruciating to sit through " . In a review for " Fools for Love " , Sara Morrison of Television Without Pity doubted that Tritter 's revenge on House was worth his time and aggravation , and later called the Tritter arc an " insane quest for ass @-@ thermometer justice " . The Star @-@ Ledger 's Alan Sepinwall stated that " pitting House against a comedy @-@ impaired cop was both dull and not a fair fight " . 
 The show 's fans had shown dislike for other antagonists with multi @-@ episode guest @-@ starring arcs , and critics suspected that Tritter 's character would receive similar disdain . The conclusion of the storyline , and Tritter 's departure from the show , were described by USA Today critic Robert Bianco as a Christmas gift for fans of the show . Morse jokingly stated after his departure that various fans had told him of their hate for Tritter after what the character had done to Dr. House . 
 Morse , however , gained mainly positive responses to his portrayal of Tritter . The Star @-@ Ledger 's Alan Sepinwall called Morse a " superb actor " , and Maureen Ryan of the Chicago Tribune stated that Morse 's " understated performance " made Tritter all the more scary . Zap2it 's Daniel Fienberg regarded Morse as " one of our very best character actors " . Cynthia Littleton of Variety , who already considered Morse 's work in St. Elsewhere Emmy @-@ worthy , was glad that Morse 's submission of the episode " Finding Judas " for a 2007 Emmy Awards consideration was accepted in the category of " Outstanding Guest Actor in a Drama Series " . The award eventually went to John Goodman for Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip . 
 = Paul Gondjout = 
 Paul Marie <unk> Gondjout ( 4 June 1912 – 1 July 1990 ) was a Gabonese politician and civil servant , and the father of Laure Gondjout , another prominent Gabonese politician . Gondjout was a member of the Mpongwe ethnic group , and served in the French colonial administration from 1928 , and founded the Cercle <unk> et <unk> des évolués de Port @-@ Gentil in 1943 . He was a delegate to the French Senate from 1949 to 1958 , and founded the Gabonese Democratic Bloc ( BDG ) . In 1954 , Léon M 'ba joined the party and eventually overthrew Gondjout as leader . 
 In 1960 , then President M 'ba reshuffled the government without consulting Parliament . When Gondjout filed a motion of censure he was charged with attempting a coup d 'état and sentenced to two years in prison . Following his release , M 'ba appointed him to the largely symbolic post of President of the Economic Council , in part to silence the threat he represented . 
 Gondjout served as Minister of State during the abortive 1964 Gabon coup d 'état but was acquitted of all charges during his subsequent trial . He lived outside public view from his 1966 acquittal to his death on 1 July 1990 and there is little record of his life during this period . 
 = = Early life and political career = = 
 Gondjout was born on 4 June 1912 , to a Mpongwe family . He had a younger brother named Edouard . The elder Gondjout began his service in the French colonial administration in 1928 . In 1943 he founded the Cercle <unk> et <unk> des évolués de Port @-@ Gentil ( roughly translated as Mutual Friends for the Evolution of Port @-@ Gentil ) , an organization that <unk> and utilised the talents of educated Gabonese . With the assistance of Mpongwe businesspeople , In 1945 he established the Gabonese Democratic Party alongside Emile <unk> . 
 Gondjout was elected to the Senate of France on 24 July 1949 and re @-@ elected on 18 May 1952 — both times as an independent candidate — serving until the end of his term on 7 June 1958 . On 18 December 1953 , he became the father of Laure Gondjout . She would later become a prominent politician as would his son , Vincent de Paul Gondjout , and nephew , Georges <unk> . 
 In August 1953 Gondjout 's <unk> merged with the Gabonese Mixed Committee to form the Gabonese Democratic Bloc ( BDG ) . Over the course of the following seven years , the party published a newspaper which caught the eye of the aspiring politician Léon M 'ba , whom Gondjout had earlier helped to elect to the Gabonese council of government . The two formed an alliance supported by the Mpongwe business community , the wealthy coastal Fangs ( like M 'ba ) , and the French , which managed to overpower Jean @-@ Hilaire Aubame and fellow members of the Gabonese Democratic and Social Union . Gondjout , the self @-@ appointed secretary of the BDG , decreed M 'ba to be the secretary @-@ general . He and M 'ba both believed that Gabon should not have full political independence , stating shortly before it was obtained : 
 I affirm my belief that it would be premature now for Gabon to achieve total independence , for this would precipitate it irreparably into anarchy or , what would be even worse , into a sort of neocolonialism . 
 M 'ba overthrew Gondjout as head of the BDG and <unk> aligned with Aubame on several issues , such as opposing M 'ba 's amount of power . Nonetheless , when Gabon gained its independence on 17 August 1960 Gondjout was named President of the National Assembly by the new President of Gabon , Leon M 'ba . In November 1960 or 1961 , Gondjout called for a constitutional amendment to allow him more executive power . When M 'ba reshuffled his cabinet without consulting Parliament , Gondjout filed a motion of censure . He supposedly hoped to benefit from a balance of power modified to his own advantage , and to model Gabon after the Western democracies . M 'ba , who did not share these ideas , reacted <unk> . 
 On 16 November , under the pretext of a conspiracy , M 'ba declared a state of emergency , ordering the internment of eight BDG opponents and the dissolution of the National Assembly the day after . Electors were asked to vote again on 12 February 1961 . Gondjout himself was sentenced to two years in prison . He was imprisoned in a remote village under house arrest , where he was supplied , according to U.S. ambassador to Gabon , Charles Darlington , " with all the whisky and beer he [ could ] drink and all the girls he want [ ed ] " . Unable to fulfill his position , it was given to Louis Bigmann . Upon Gondjout 's release , M 'ba appointed him to the mostly symbolic post of President of the Economic Council , in part to silence any threat to M 'ba 's power . 
 = = 1964 Gabon coup d 'état = = 
 During the night of 17 February and the early morning of 18 February 1964 , 150 members of the Gabonese military , gendarmerie , and police , headed by Lieutenant Jacques Mombo and Valére Essone , seized the presidential palace . They arrested President of the National Assembly Louis Bigmann , French commanders Claude Haulin and Major Royer , several ministers , and President M 'ba , who was dragged from his bed at gunpoint . On Radio Libreville , the military announced to the Gabonese people that a coup d 'état had taken place , asked for technical assistance , and told the French not to interfere in this matter . M 'ba was forced to broadcast a speech acknowledging his defeat , in which he said , " The D @-@ Day is here , the injustices are beyond measure , these people are patient , but their patience has limits . It came to a boil . " 
 No blood was shed during the event , and when the Gabonese people did not respond violently the military interpreted this as a sign of approval . Aubame was offered the presidency of the newly formed provisional government . The government was composed of civilian politicians from both the UDSG and BDG , such as Gondjout . During the coup , he served as Minister of State . The coup 's leaders were content at restoring security for the civilians . The small Gabonese army did not intervene ; composed mostly of French officers , they remained in their barracks . 
 Second Lieutenant Ndo Edou gave instructions to transfer M 'ba to Ndjolé , Aubame 's electoral stronghold . However , due to heavy rain , the deposed president and his captors took shelter in an unknown village . The next morning they decided to take him over the easier road to Lambaréné . Several hours later , they returned to Libreville . The new head of government contacted French ambassador Paul Cousseran , to assure him that the property of foreign nationals would be protected and to request against French military intervention . In Paris , President Charles de Gaulle decided against the plea . 
 M 'ba was one of France 's most loyal African allies , and during a visit to France in 1961 , declared , " all Gabonese have two fatherlands : France and Gabon . " Moreover , under his regime , Europeans were particularly well treated . The French authorities therefore decided , in accordance with signed Franco @-@ Gabon agreements , to restore the legitimate government . Intervention could not commence without a formal request to the Head of State of Gabon . Since M 'ba was imprisoned , the French contacted the Vice President of Gabon , Paul @-@ Marie Yembit , who had not been arrested . However , he remained unaccounted for ; therefore , they decided to compose a predated letter confirming their intervention , that Yembit would later sign . Less than 24 hours later , French troops stationed in Dakar and Brazzaville landed in Libreville and restored M 'ba to power . During the operation , a French soldier and 15 to 25 Gabonese died . 
 = = Post coup d 'état = = 
 Aubame and Gondjout fled Libreville , but were captured sometime before 20 February . In August a trial of the rebels and provisional government was opened in Lambaréné . A " state of precations " was imposed , which decreed that local government keep surveillance on suspected troublemakers and , if necessary , order curfew , and special permits were required to travel through the town . The trial was held in a school building overlooking the Ogooue River , which was near Albert Schweitzer 's hospital . Space at the hearing was limited , so members of the public were disallowed from attending . Permits were required to attend the trial , and family members were restricted to one permit each . Press coverage was limited , and journalists were allowed only if they represented a high @-@ profile news agency . In addition , there were restrictions on the defence of the accused . 
 During a trial which carried the death sentence as a maximum , the prosecution called 64 separate witnesses . Aubame claimed he had formed his provisional government in a constitutional manner ; at the request of members of the " putschists " . He argued that the French intervention was effectively an illegal act of interference ; a belief shared by both Gondjout and the former education minister , Jean Mare Ekoh . On 9 September , without consulting M 'ba , Leon Auge handed down a verdict acquitting both Ekoh and Gondjout of all charges . 
 Little is known of <unk> 's life between his 1966 acquittal and death on 1 July 1990 , in Libreville . He is buried in Libreville near his wife Odette ( d . 2006 ) , a former fashion model . A secondary school has been established in his name . 
 = Rape during the Bangladesh Liberation War = 
 During the 1971 Bangladesh war for independence , members of the Pakistani military and supporting Bihari and Bengali <unk> militias from Jamaat e Islami raped between two and four hundred thousand Bangladeshi women in a systematic campaign of genocidal rape . During the war , a fatwa in Pakistan declared that the Bengali ' freedom fighters ' were Hindus and that their women could be taken as the ' booty of war ' . Imams and Muslim religious leaders publicly declared that the Bengali women were ' <unk> <unk> ' ( war booty ) and thus they openly supported the rape of Bengali women by the Pakistani Army . The activists and leaders of Islamic parties were also involved in the rapes and abduction of women . Scholars have suggested that rape was used to terrorise both the Bengali @-@ speaking Muslim majority and the Hindu minority of Bangladesh . The rapes caused thousands of pregnancies , births of war babies , abortions , incidents of infanticide and suicide , and , in addition , led to <unk> of the victims . Recognised as one of the major occurrences of war crimes anywhere , the atrocities ended after surrender of the Pakistani military and supporting <unk> militias . Initially India claimed its support for the Mukti Bahini and later intervention was on humanitarian grounds , but after the UN rejected this argument , India claimed intervention was needed to protect its own security , and it is now widely seen as a humanitarian move . Despite the Pakistani government 's attempts to censor news during the conflict , reports of atrocities filtered out , attracting international media and public attention , and drawing widespread outrage and criticism . 
 During the war Bengali nationalists also committed mass rape of ethnic Bihari Muslim women , since the Bihari Muslim community supported Pakistan . 
 In 2009 , almost 40 years after the events of 1971 , a report published by the War Crimes Fact Finding Committee of Bangladesh accused 1 @,@ 597 people of war crimes , including rape . Since 2010 the International Crimes Tribunal ( ICT ) has indicted , tried and sentenced several people to life imprisonment or death for their actions during the conflict . 
 The stories of the rape victims have been told in movies and literature , and depicted in art . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following the partition of India and the creation of Pakistan the East and West wings were not only separated geographically , but also culturally . The authorities of the West viewed the Bengali Muslims in the East as " too Bengali " and their application of Islam as " inferior and impure " , and this made them unreliable . To this extent the West began a strategy to forcibly assimilate the Bengalis culturally . The Bengali @-@ speaking people of East Pakistan were chiefly Muslim , but their numbers were interspersed with a significant Hindu minority . Very few spoke Urdu , which in 1948 had been declared the national language of Pakistan . To express their opposition , activists in East Pakistan founded the Bengali language movement in February 1952 . Earlier , in 1949 , other activists had founded the Awami League as an alternative to the ruling Muslim League in West Pakistan . In the next decade and half , Bengalis became gradually disenchanted with the balance of power in Pakistan , which was under military rule during much of this time ; eventually some began to call for secession . By the late 1960s , a perception had emerged that the people of East Pakistan were second @-@ class citizens . It did not help that General A. A. K. <unk> , head of Pakistani Forces in East Pakistan , called East Pakistan a " low @-@ lying land of low , lying people " . 
 There had been opposition to military rule in West Pakistan as well . Eventually the military relented , and in December 1970 the first ever elections were held . To the surprise of many , East Pakistan 's Awami League , headed by Sheikh Mujibur Rahman , won a clear majority . The West Pakistani establishment was displeased with the results . In Dacca following the election a general said " Don 't worry , we will not allow these black bastards to rule over us " . Soon President Yahya Khan banned the Awami League and declared martial law in East Pakistan . 
 With the goal of putting down Bengali nationalism , the Pakistan Army launched Operation Searchlight on 25 March 1971 . According to Eric Heinze the Pakistani forces targeted both Hindus and Bengali @-@ speaking Muslims . In the ensuing 1971 Bangladesh genocide , the army caused the deaths of up to 3 million people , created up to 10 million refugees who fled to India , and displaced a further 30 million within East Pakistan . 
 <unk> Jahan alleges elements of racism in the Pakistan army , who he says considered the Bengalis " racially inferior — a non @-@ martial and physically weak race " , and has accused the army of using organised rape as a weapon of war . According to the political scientist R J Rummel , the Pakistani army looked upon the Bengalis as " subhuman " and that the Hindus were " as Jews to the Nazis , scum and vermin that best be exterminated " . This racism was then expressed in that the Bengalis , being inferior , must have their gene pool " fixed " through forcible impregnation . Belén Martín Lucas has described the rapes as " ethnically motivated " . 
 = = Pakistani Army actions = = 
 The attacks were led by General <unk> Khan , who was the architect of Operation Searchlight and was given the name the " butcher of Bengal " by the Bengalis for his actions . Khan said — when reminded on 27 March 1971 that he was in charge of a majority province — " I will reduce this majority to a minority " . Bina D 'Costa believes an anecdote used by Khan is significant , in that it provides proof of the mass rapes being a deliberate strategy . In Jessore , while speaking with a group of journalists Khan was reported to have said , " Pehle <unk> <unk> karo " ( First , make them Muslim ) . D 'Costa argues that this shows that in the highest echelons of the armed forces the Bengalis were perceived as being disloyal Muslims and unpatriotic Pakistanis . 
 The perpetrators conducted nighttime raids , assaulting women in their villages , often in front of their families , as part of the terror campaign . Victims aged 8 to 75 were also kidnapped and held in special camps where they were repeatedly assaulted . Many of those held in the camps were murdered or committed suicide , with some taking their own lives by using their hair to hang themselves , the soldiers responded to these suicides by cutting the women 's hair off . Time magazine reported on 563 girls who had been kidnapped and held by the military ; all of them were between three and five months pregnant when the military began to release them . Some women were forcibly used as prostitutes . While the Pakistani government estimated the number of rapes in the hundreds , other estimates range between 200 @,@ 000 and 400 @,@ 000 . The Pakistani government had tried to censor reports coming out of the region , but media reports on the atrocities did reach the public worldwide , and gave rise to widespread international public support for the liberation movement . 
 In what has been described by <unk> Arens as a deliberate attempt to destroy an ethnic group , many of those assaulted were raped , murdered and then bayoneted in the genitalia . Adam Jones , a political scientist , has said that one of the reasons for the mass rapes was to undermine Bengali society through the " <unk> " of Bengali women and that some women were raped until they died or were killed following repeated attacks . The Pakistani army also raped Bengali males . The men , when passing through a checkpoint , would be ordered to prove they were circumcised , and this is where the rapes usually happened . The International Commission of Jurists concluded that the atrocities carried out by the Pakistan armed forces " were part of a deliberate policy by a disciplined force " . The writer Mulk Raj Anand said of the Pakistani army actions , " The rapes were so systematic and pervasive that they had to be conscious Army policy , " planned by the West Pakistanis in a deliberate effort to create a new race " or to dilute Bengali nationalism " . Amita Malik , reporting from Bangladesh following the Pakistan armed forces surrender , wrote that one West Pakistani soldier said : " We are going . But we are leaving our Seed behind " . 
 Not all Pakistani military personnel supported the violence : General <unk> Yaqub Khan , who advised the president against military action , and Major <unk> Sehgal both resigned in protest , as did Air Marshal Asghar Khan . <unk> Bakhsh <unk> , a <unk> politician , and Khan Abdul Wali Khan , leader of the National Awami Party , protested over the actions of the armed forces . Those imprisoned for their dissenting views on the violence included <unk> <unk> and I. A. Rahman , who were both journalists , the Sindhi leader G. M. Syed , the poet Ahmad Salim , Anwar <unk> , who was a member of the air force , Professor M. R. Hassan , <unk> Mazhar and Imtiaz Ahmed . Malik Ghulam Jilani , who was also arrested , had openly opposed the armed action in the East ; a letter he had written to Yahya Khan was widely publicised . Altaf Hussain <unk> , the editor of the Dawn newspaper , was also imprisoned . In 2013 Jilani and Faiz Ahmad Faiz , a poet , were honoured by the Bangladeshi government for their actions . 
 = = = Militias = = = 
 According to Peter <unk> , a political scientist , Pakistan 's secret service the Directorate for Inter @-@ Services Intelligence , in conjunction with the political party Jamaat @-@ e @-@ Islami , formed militias such as Al @-@ Badr ( " the moon " ) and the Al @-@ Shams ( " the sun " ) to conduct operations against the nationalist movement . These militias targeted non @-@ combatants and committed rapes as well as other crimes . Local collaborators known as Razakars also took part in the atrocities . The term has since become a pejorative akin to the western term " Judas " . 
 Members of the Muslim League , such as Nizam @-@ e @-@ Islam , Jamaat @-@ e @-@ Islami and Jamiat Ulema Pakistan , who had lost the election , collaborated with the military and acted as an intelligence organisation for them . Members of Jamaat @-@ e @-@ Islami and some of its leaders collaborated with the Pakistani forces in rapes and targeted killings . The atrocities by Al @-@ Badr and the Al @-@ Shams garnered worldwide attention from news agencies ; accounts of massacres and rapes were widely reported . 
 = = International reaction = = 
 There is an academic consensus that the events of the nine @-@ month conflict were a genocide . The atrocities in East Pakistan were the first instances of war rape to attract international media attention , and Sally J. Scholz has written that this was the first genocide to capture the interest of the mass media . The women 's human rights organisation Bangladesh Mahila Parishat took part in the war by publicising the atrocities being carried out by the Pakistani army . 
 Owing to the scale of the atrocities , US embassy staff had sent telegrams indicating that a genocide was occurring . One , which became known as the Blood telegram , was sent by Archer Blood , the US Consul General in Dhaka , and was signed by him as well as US officials from USAID and USIS who at the time were serving in Dhaka . In it , the signatories denounced American " complicity in Genocide " . In an interview in 1972 , Indira Gandhi , the Indian prime minister , justified the use of military intervention , saying , " Shall we sit and watch their women get raped ? " The events were discussed extensively in the British House of Commons . John Stonehouse proposed a motion supported by a further 200 members of parliament condemning the atrocities being carried out by the Pakistani armed forces . Although this motion was presented twice before parliament , the government did not find time to debate it . 
 Before the end of the war the international community had begun to provide aid in large quantities to the refugees living in India . Although humanitarian aid was given , there was little support for the war crimes trials which Bangladesh proposed at the end of the war . Critics of the United Nations have used the atrocities of 1971 to argue that military intervention was the only thing to stop the mass murder . Writing to The New York Times , a group of women said in response to women being shunned by family and husbands , " It is unthinkable that innocent wives whose lives were virtually destroyed by war are now being totally destroyed by their own husbands " . International aid was also forthcoming owing to the issue of war rape . 
 According to Susan Brownmiller , mass rape during wartime is not a new phenomenon . She argues that what was unique to the Bangladesh Liberation War was that the international community , for the first time , recognised that systematic rape could be used as a weapon to terrorise the people . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In the immediate aftermath of the war , one pressing problem was the very high number of unwanted pregnancies of rape victims . Estimates of the number of pregnancies resulting in births range from 25 @,@ 000 to the Bangladeshi government 's figure of 70 @,@ 000 , while one publication by the Centre for Reproductive Law and Policy gave a total of 250 @,@ 000 . A government @-@ mandated victim relief programme was set up with the support of the World Health Organization and International Planned Parenthood Federation , among whose goals it was to organise abortion facilities to help rape victims terminate unwanted pregnancies . A doctor at a rehabilitation centre in Dhaka reported 170 @,@ 000 abortions of pregnancies caused by the rapes , and the births of 30 @,@ 000 war babies during the first three months of 1972 . Dr. Geoffrey Davis , an Australian doctor and abortion specialist who worked for the programme , estimated that there had been about 5 @,@ 000 cases of self @-@ induced abortions . He also said that during his work he heard of numerous infanticides and suicides by victims . His estimate of the total number of rape victims was 400 @,@ 000 , twice as high as the official estimate of 200 @,@ 000 cited by the Bangladeshi government . Most of the victims also contracted sexual infections . Many suffered from feelings of intense shame and humiliation , and a number were ostracised by their families and communities or committed suicide . 
 The feminist writer Cynthia <unk> has written that some pregnancies were intended by the soldiers and perhaps their officers as well . A report from the International Commission of Jurists said , " Whatever the precise numbers , the teams of American and British surgeons carrying out abortions and the widespread government efforts to persuade people to accept these girls into the community , testify to the scale on which raping occurred " . The commission also said that Pakistani officers not only allowed their men to rape , but enslaved women themselves . 
 Following the conflict the rape victims were seen as a symbol of " social pollution " and shame . Few were able to return to families or old homes because of this . Sheikh Mujibur Rahman called the victims birangona ( " heroine " ) , but this served as a reminder that these women were now deemed socially unacceptable as they were " dishonored " , and the term became associated with <unk> ( " prostitute " ) . The official strategy of marrying the women off and encouraging them to be seen as war heroines failed as few men came forward , and those who did expected the state to provide a large dowry . Those women who did marry were usually mistreated , and the majority of men , once having received a dowry , abandoned their wives . 
 On 18 February 1972 the state formed the Bangladesh Women 's Rehabilitation Board , which was tasked with helping the victims of rape and to help with the adoption programme . Several international agencies took part in the adoption programme , such as Mother Teresa 's Sisters of Charity . The majority of the war babies were adopted in the Netherlands and Canada as the state wished to remove the reminders of Pakistan from the newly formed nation . However , not all women wanted their child taken , and some were forcibly removed and sent for adoption , a practice which was encouraged by Rahman , who said , " I do not want those polluted blood in this country " . While many women were glad for the abortion programme , as they did not have to bear a child conceived of rape , others had to go full term , filled with hatred towards the child they carried . Others , who had their children adopted out so as to return to " mainstream life " , would not look at their newborn as it was taken from them . In the 1990s many of these children returned to Bangladesh to search for their birth mothers . In 2008 , D 'Costa attempted to find those who had been adopted , however very few responded , one who did said " I hated being a kid , and I am angry at Bangladesh for not taking care of me when I needed it most . I don ’ t have any roots and that makes me cry . So that is why I am trying to learn more about where I was born . " 
 Forty years after the war , two sisters who had been raped were interviewed by Deutsche Welle . <unk> stated she had been taken by the Pakistani army when she was thirteen , and was gang raped repeatedly for seven months . She states she was tortured and was five months pregnant when she returned to her home . Her sister , <unk> , says she was pregnant when she was taken by the armed forces , and lost the child . Later she fought alongside the Mukti Bahini . Both say that the state has failed the birangona , and that all they received was " humiliation , insults , hatred , and ostracism . " 
 = = = Pakistani government reaction = = = 
 After the conflict , the Pakistani government decided on a policy of silence regarding the rapes . They set up the <unk> Rahman Commission , a judicial commission to prepare an account of the circumstances surrounding the atrocities of the 1971 war and Pakistan 's surrender . The commission was highly critical of the army . The chiefs of staff of the army and the Pakistan Air Force were removed from their positions for attempting to interfere with the commission . The Commission based its reports on interviews with politicians , officers and senior commanders . The final reports were submitted in July 1972 , but all were subsequently destroyed except for one held by <unk> Ali Bhutto , the Pakistani president . The findings were never made public . 
 In 1974 the commission was reopened and issued a supplementary report , which remained classified for 25 years until published by the magazine India Today . The report said that 26 @,@ 000 people were killed , rapes numbered in the hundreds , and that the Mukti Bahini rebels engaged in widespread rape and other human rights abuses . Sumit Ganguly , a political scientist , believes that the Pakistani establishment has yet to come to terms with the atrocities carried out , saying that , in a visit to Bangladesh in 2002 , Pervez Musharraf expressed regret for the atrocities rather than accepting responsibility . 
 = = = War Crimes prosecutions = = = 
 In 2008 , after a 17 @-@ year investigation , the War Crimes Fact Finding Committee released documentation identifying 1 @,@ 597 people who had taken part in the atrocities . The list included members of the Jamaat @-@ e @-@ Islami and the Bangladesh Nationalist Party , a political group founded in 1978 . In 2010 the government of Bangladesh set up the ICT to investigate the atrocities of that era . While Human Rights Watch has been supportive of the tribunal , it has also been critical of reported harassment of lawyers representing the accused . Brad Adams , director of the Asia branch of Human Rights Watch , has said that those accused must be given the full protection of the law to avoid the risk of the trials not being taken seriously , and Irene Khan , a human rights activist , has expressed doubt about whether the mass rapes and killings of women will be addressed . Khan has said of her government 's reaction : 
 A conservative Muslim society has preferred to throw a veil of negligence and denial on the issue , allowed those who committed or colluded with gender violence to thrive , and left the women victims to struggle in anonymity and shame and without much state or community support . 
 The deputy leader of Jamaat @-@ e @-@ Islami , <unk> Hossain <unk> , the first person to face charges related to the conflict , was indicted by the ICT on twenty counts of war crimes , which included murder , rape and arson . He denied all charges . On 28 February 2013 , <unk> was found guilty of genocide , rape and religious persecution , and was sentenced to death by hanging . Four other members of Jamaat @-@ e @-@ Islami Bangladesh , including <unk> Rahman Nizami , have also been indicted for war crimes . Abul Kalam Azad , a member of the Razakars , was the first person to be sentenced for crimes during the war . He was found guilty of murder and rape in absentia , and was sentenced to death . Muhammad <unk> , senior assistant secretary general of Bangladesh Jamaat @-@ e @-@ Islami , faced seven charges of war crimes , including planning and advising on the rape of women in the village of <unk> on 25 July 1971 . The ICT sentenced him to death by hanging on 9 May 2013 . In July 2013 Ghulam Azam was given a ninety @-@ year sentence for rape and mass murder during the conflict . Abdul <unk> Molla , A member of the <unk> militia during the war was charged with abetting the Pakistani army and actively participating in the 1971 Bangladesh atrocities : rape ( including the rape of minors ) and mass murder of Bangladeshis in the Mirpur area of Dhaka during the Bangladesh Liberation War . After the government had amended the war crimes law to allow a sentence to be appealed based on leniency of punishment , prosecutors appealed to the Supreme Court of Bangladesh and asked for it to upgrade Molla 's sentence from life in prison to death . On 17 September 2013 , the Supreme Court accepted the appeal and sentenced Molla to death . Finally he was hanged in Dhaka Central Jail on 12 December 2013 at 22 : 01 . 
 = = In literature and media = = 
 A photograph taken during the conflict of a woman who had been assaulted featured in an exhibition in London . Titled Shamed Woman , but also called Brave Woman , the image was taken by a Bangladeshi photographer , <unk> Uddin Ahmed . The image is considered by John Tulloch to be as " classical a pose as any Madonna and Child " . One of the more emotive photographs at the exhibition , the woman has her hands clenched , her face completely covered by her hair . Tulloch describes the image as having the " Capability to reveal or suggest what is <unk> " 
 <unk> <unk> ( Pledge to a New Dawn ) , the first film about the war , was screened in 1972 on the first Bangladeshi Independence Day celebration . It draws on the experiences of an actor called Altaf . While trying to reach safe haven in Calcutta , he encounters women who have been raped . The images of these birangona , stripped and vacant @-@ eyed from the trauma , are used as testimony to the assault . Other victims Altaf meets are shown committing suicide or having lost their minds . 
 In 1995 Gita Sahgal produced the documentary War Crimes File , which was screened on Channel 4 . In 2011 the film <unk> was shown at the Guwahati International Film Festival . It explores the war from two perspectives : that of a woman who loved a Pakistani soldier and that of a person born from rape . 
 In 1996 the book Ami <unk> <unk> ( The Voices of War Heroines ) written by <unk> Ibrahim was released . It is a collection of eyewitness testimony from seven rape victims , which she documented while working in rehabilitation centres . The narratives of the survivors in this work , is heavily critical of pre war Bangladeshi <unk> failure to support the victims of rape . 
 Published in 2012 , the book Rising from the Ashes : Women 's Narratives of 1971 includes oral testimonies of women affected by the Liberation War . As well as an account from <unk> Bibi , who fought and was awarded the Bir <unk> ( Symbol of Valour ) for her actions , there are nine interviews with women who were raped . The book 's publication in English at the time of the fortieth anniversary of the war was noted in the New York Times as an " important oral history " . 
 The 2014 movie Children of War tries to capture this horror on celluloid . The film By <unk> <unk> starring Farooq Sheikh , Victor Banerjee , Raima Sen , among others is meant to " send shivers down the viewers ' spine . We want to make it so repulsive that no one even entertains the thought of pardoning rapists , let alone commit the crime . The shoot took its toll on all of us . " 
 = Arthur W. Radford = 
 Arthur William Radford ( 27 February 1896 – 17 August 1973 ) was a United States Navy admiral and naval aviator . In over 40 years of military service , Radford held a variety of positions including Vice Chief of Naval Operations , commander of the United States Pacific Fleet and later the second Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff . 
 With an interest in ships and aircraft from a young age , Radford saw his first sea duty aboard the battleship USS South Carolina during World War I. In the inter @-@ war period he earned his pilot wings and rose through the ranks in duties aboard ships and in the Bureau of Aeronautics . After the U.S. entered World War II , he was the architect of the development and expansion of the Navy 's aviator training programs in the first years of the war . In its final years he commanded carrier task forces through several major campaigns of the Pacific War . 
 Noted as a strong @-@ willed and aggressive leader , Radford was a central figure in the post @-@ war debates on U.S. military policy , and was a staunch proponent of naval aviation . As commander of the Pacific Fleet , he defended the Navy 's interests in an era of shrinking defense budgets , and was a central figure in the " Revolt of the Admirals , " a contentious public fight over policy . As Chairman of the Joint Chiefs , he continued to advocate for aggressive foreign policy and a strong nuclear deterrent in support of the " New Look " policy of President Dwight Eisenhower . 
 Retiring from the military in 1957 , Radford continued to be a military adviser to several prominent politicians until his death in 1973 . For his extensive service , he was awarded many military honors , and was the namesake of the Spruance @-@ class destroyer USS Arthur W. Radford . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Arthur William Radford was born on 27 February 1896 in Chicago , to John Arthur Radford , a Canadian @-@ born electrical engineer , and Agnes Eliza Radford ( née Knight ) . The eldest of four children , he was described as bright and energetic in his youth . When Arthur was six years old the family moved to Riverside , Illinois , where his father took a job as a managing engineer with Commonwealth Edison Company . John Radford managed the first steam turbine engines in the United States , at the Fisk Street Generating Station . 
 Arthur began his school years at Riverside Public School , where he expressed an interest in the United States Navy from a young age . He gained an interest in aviation during a visit to the 1904 World 's Fair in St. Louis , Missouri . By fourth grade , he frequently drew detailed cross @-@ section diagrams of the USS Maine . He was shy , but performed very well in school . In mid @-@ 1910 , Radford moved with his family to Grinnell , Iowa , and attended Grinnell High School for a year and a half , before deciding to apply to the United States Naval Academy . He obtained the local congressman 's recommendation for an appointment to the academy , and was accepted . After several months of tutoring at Annapolis , Maryland , he entered the academy in July 1912 , at the age of sixteen . 
 Although Radford 's first year at the academy was mediocre he applied himself to his studies in his remaining years there . He participated in summer cruises to Europe in 1913 and 1914 and passed through the Panama Canal to San Francisco in 1916 . Radford , known as " <unk> " to his fellow students , graduated 59th of 177 in the class of 1916 , and was commissioned as an ensign in the U.S. Navy during the First World War . 
 = = Military career = = 
 Radford 's first duty was aboard the battleship USS South Carolina , as it escorted a transatlantic convoy to France in 1918 . In his second post he was an aide @-@ de @-@ camp to a battleship division commander , and in his third , a flag lieutenant for another battleship division commander . 
 In 1920 , Radford reported to Pensacola , Florida , for flight training , and was promoted to lieutenant soon thereafter . During the 1920s and 1930s his sea duty alternated among several aircraft squadrons , fleet staffs , and tours in the U.S. with the Bureau of Aeronautics . It was during this time , while he served under Rear Admiral William Moffett , that he frequently interacted with politicians and picked up the political acumen that would become useful later in his career . While he did not attend the Naval War College , as other rising officers did , Radford established himself as an effective officer who would speak his mind frankly , even to superiors . 
 Radford achieved the rank of lieutenant commander by 1927 , and served with aircraft units aboard USS Colorado , USS Pennsylvania , and USS Wright . In 1936 , he was promoted to commander and took charge of fighter squadron VF @-@ 1B aboard USS Saratoga . By 1939 , he was given command of Naval Air Station Seattle in Seattle , Washington . On 22 April 1939 , he married Miriam Jean ( Caro ) Spencer at Vancouver Barracks , Washington . Spencer ( 1895 – 1997 ) was a daughter of Simon Caro , and the former wife of ( 1 ) Albert Cressey Maze ( 1891 – 1943 ) , with whom she had a son , Robert Claude Maze Sr. , Major , USMC who was killed in action in 1945 and ( 2 ) Earl Winfield Spencer , Jr . In May 1940 , Radford was appointed executive officer of the USS Yorktown , a post he served in for one year . 
 In July 1941 , Radford was appointed commander of the Naval Air Station in Trinidad , British West Indies . He protested this appointment because he feared he would remain there for years , sidelined as World War II loomed . In the event he only remained in this station for three months , following an organizational shift in the Bureau of Aeronautics . By mid @-@ 1941 , thanks to a large expansion in the naval aviator program , squadrons could no longer train newly arrived aviators . Further , at that time , the vast difference in the performance of combat aircraft over training aircraft meant that pilots needed more time in combat aircraft before becoming proficient in them . Radford was subsequently visited by Artemus L. Gates , Assistant Secretary of the Navy for Air . The latter was so impressed that he ordered Rear Admiral John H. Towers , chief of the Bureau of Aeronautics , to transfer Radford to a newly formed training division . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 = = = = Aviation Training Division = = = = 
 Radford took command of the Aviation Training Division in Washington , D.C. on 1 December 1941 , seven days before the attack on Pearl Harbor that brought the United States into World War II . He was appointed as Director of Aviation Training for both the Office of the Chief of Naval Operations and the Bureau of Navigation ; the double appointment helped to centralize training coordination for all naval aviators . With the U.S. mobilizing for war , Radford 's office worked long hours six days a week in an effort to build up the necessary training infrastructure as quickly as possible . For several months , this around @-@ the @-@ clock work took up all of his time , and he later noted that walking to work was his only form of exercise for several months . During this time , he impressed colleagues with a direct and no @-@ nonsense approach to work , while maintaining a demeanor that made him easy to work for . He was promoted to captain soon after . 
 Throughout 1942 he established and refined the administrative infrastructure for aviation training . Radford oversaw the massive growth of the training division , establishing separate sections for administration ; Physical Training Service Schools ; and training devices ; and sections to train various aviators in flight , aircraft operation , radio operation , and gunnery . The section also organized technical training and wrote training literature . He also engineered the establishment of four field commands for pilot training . Air Primary Training Command commanded all pre @-@ flight schools and Naval reserve aviation bases in the country . Air Intermediate Training Command administered Naval Air Station Pensacola and Naval Air Station Corpus Christi where flight training was conducted . Air Operational Training Command was in charge of all education of pilots between pilot training and their first flying assignments . Finally , Air Technical Training Command trained enlisted men for support jobs in aviation such as maintenance , engineering , <unk> , and parachute operations . Radford sought to integrate his own efficient leadership style into the organization of these schools . 
 Radford was noted for thinking progressively and innovatively to establish the most effective and efficient training programs . He sought to integrate sports conditioning programs into naval aviator training . Radford brought in athletic directors from Ohio State University , Harvard University and Penn State University under football player and naval aviator Tom Hamilton , to whom he gave the remit to develop the conditioning programs . Radford also suggested integrating women into intricate but repetitive tasks , such as running flight simulators . When commanders rejected the idea of bringing women into the service , he convinced Congressman Carl Vinson , chair of the House Naval Affairs Committee of the merit of the idea . This effort eventually led to the employment of the " Women Accepted for Volunteer Emergency Service " , and 23 @,@ 000 WAVES would assist in aeronautical training in the course of the war . Radford also sought to best use the assets of businessmen and professionals who had volunteered for military service , establishing the Aviation Indoctrination School and Air Combat Intelligence School at Naval Air Station Quonset Point so as to enable these advanced recruits to become more experienced naval officers . 
 = = = = Sea duty = = = = 
 By early 1943 , with Radford 's training programs established and functioning efficiently , he sought combat duty . In April of that year , he was ordered to report to the office of Commander , Naval Air Forces , Pacific Fleet where he was promoted to rear admiral and tapped to be a carrier division commander . This was an unusual appointment , as most carrier division commanders were appointed only after duty commanding a capital ship . He then spent May and June 1943 on an inspection party under Gates , touring U.S. bases in the south Pacific . Following this , he was assigned under Rear Admiral Frederick C. Sherman , commander of Carrier Division 2 at Pearl Harbor . Radford spent several weeks observing flight operations and carrier tactics for various ships operating out of Hawaii . He was particularly impressed with how carrier doctrine had evolved in the time since his own assignment on a carrier , and in June 1943 , he was ordered to observe operations on the light aircraft carrier USS Independence , learning the unique challenges of using light carriers . 
 On 21 July 1943 , Radford was given command of Carrier Division Eleven , which consisted of the new Essex @-@ class carrier USS Lexington as well as the light carriers USS Independence and USS Princeton . These carriers remained at Pearl Harbor through August , training and refining their operations . Radford got his first operational experience on 1 September 1943 , covering a foray to Baker and Howland Islands as part of Task Force 11 under Rear Admiral Willis A. Lee . Radford commanded Princeton , USS Belleau Wood and four destroyers to act as a covering force for Lee 's marines , who built an airfield on the islands . After this successful operation , and at the direction of Admiral Chester W. Nimitz , Task Force 11 was joined by Task Force 15 , with Lexington , under Rear Admiral Charles A. Pownall . The two task forces then steamed for Tarawa Atoll to strike it . On the night of 17 September , the carriers launched six strikes of fighter aircraft , dive bombers , and torpedo planes to work over the Japanese defenses . 
 Next , Radford and his carriers took part in an air attack and cruiser bombardment of Wake Island on 5 to 6 October 1943 . He shifted his flag to Lexington for the operation , which took two days . Though the effects on Japanese positions were not known , Radford and other leaders considered the operations useful for preparing their forces for the major battles to come in the Central Pacific . 
 = = = = Major combat operations = = = = 
 Major operations in the Central Pacific began that November . Radford 's next duty was in Operation Galvanic , a campaign into the Gilbert Islands with the objective of capturing Tarawa as well as Makin Island and Apamama Atoll . It would be one of the first times that American carriers would be operating against Japanese land @-@ based air power in force , as U.S. Army troops and U.S. Marines fought the Japanese on the ground . For this mission , Radford 's carrier division was designated Task Group 50 @.@ 2 , the Northern Carrier Group , which consisted of USS Enterprise , Belleau Wood and USS Monterey . He did not agree with this strategy , maintaining until his death that the force should have gone on an offensive to strike Japanese air power instead of being tied to the ground forces . Despite his objections , the force left Pearl Harbor for the Gilbert Islands on 10 November . 
 The invasion began on 20 November . Radford 's force was occupied with air strikes on Japanese ground targets , and faced frequent attack by Japanese aircraft in night combat , which U.S. aircrews were not well prepared or equipped for . He improvised a unit to counter Japanese night raids , and was later credited with establishing routines for nighttime combat air patrols to protect carriers ; these were adopted fleetwide . He commanded Carrier Division Eleven around Tarawa for several more days , returning to Pearl Harbor on 4 December . 
 Returning from Tarawa , Radford was reassigned as chief of staff to Towers , who was Commander , Air Force , Pacific Fleet . He assisted in planning upcoming operations , including Operation Flintlock , the invasion of the Marshall Islands . He had hoped to return to combat duty at the end of this assignment , but in March 1944 he was ordered to Washington , D.C. and appointed as Deputy Chief of Naval Operations . He assumed this new duty on 1 April , a role which was primarily administrative in nature . His duties included establishing a new integrated system for aircraft maintenance , supply , and retirement , for which he was appointed the head of a board to study aircraft wear and tear . After six months in this duty , Radford was returned to the Pacific theater by Admiral Ernest J. King , the Chief of Naval Operations ( CNO ) and Commander in Chief , United States Fleet . 
 Radford returned to Pearl Harbor on 7 October 1944 , where he was appointed as commander of First Carrier Task Force , Carrier Division Six . While flying to his new command , he was held over in Kwajalein and then Saipan , missing the Battle of Leyte Gulf which took place in the Philippines during the layover . He flew to Ulithi where he reported to Vice Admiral John S. McCain , Sr. , commander of Task Force 58 . For the next two months , Radford remained on " make learn " status , again under Sherman 's command , observing the operations and employment of carrier @-@ based air power as a passenger aboard USS Ticonderoga , part of Task Group 38 @.@ 3 . During this time , he observed the strikes on Luzon and the Visayas , as well as air attacks on Japanese shipping and Typhoon Cobra . 
 On 29 December 1944 , Radford was unexpectedly ordered to take command of Task Group 38 @.@ 1 after its commander , Rear Admiral Alfred E. Montgomery , was injured . The next day the fleet sortied from Ulithi and headed for scheduled air strikes on Luzon and Formosa ( Taiwan ) . Throughout January 1945 , Radford 's fleet operated in the South China Sea striking Japanese targets in French Indochina and Hong Kong . In February , the U.S. Third Fleet was re @-@ designated the U.S. Fifth Fleet , and as a part of this reorganization Radford 's force was redesignated Task Group 58 @.@ 4 . He continued striking Japanese targets in the Inland Sea during March . On 1 April , the force was moved to support the Battle of Okinawa . Over the course of the next two months , his force continued its use of night raids , which by this point were effective in repelling Japanese attacks on U.S. Navy ships . After two months supporting ground forces on Okinawa , Radford 's fleet was detached from that operation . 
 Returning to the Third Fleet and being re @-@ designated Task Group 38 @.@ 4 , the force began operating off the Japanese Home Islands in July 1945 . It began an intense airstrike campaign against military targets on Honshu and Hokkaido , striking Japanese airfields , merchant shipping , and ground targets . Radford commanded the force in this duty until V @-@ J Day , the end of the war in the Pacific . Upon receipt of the orders to end hostilities , he signaled his ships that he was proud of their accomplishments . 
 = = = Post @-@ war years = = = 
 Radford was promoted to vice admiral in late 1945 . For a time he was Deputy Chief of Naval Operations for Air under Secretary of the Navy James V. Forrestal . In the post @-@ war period Radford was a strong advocate that naval aviation programs be maintained . When Fleet Admiral Ernest J. King issued a post @-@ war plan calling for the U.S. to maintain nine active aircraft carriers , Radford suggested he double the number , a politically unrealistic proposal . 
 After the war , Radford was a principal opponent to a plan to merge the uniformed services . A plan existed to split the Army and the Army Air Forces into separate branches and unite them and the Navy under one Cabinet @-@ level defense organization . Fearing the loss of their branch 's influence , Navy commanders opposed the formation of a separate Air Force and favored a more loose defense organization . Radford was picked by Forrestal to form the Secretary 's Committee of Research and Reorganization . Months of discussion resulted in the National Security Act of 1947 , a political victory for the Navy because it created the U.S. Air Force while resulting in a coordinated , not unified , U.S. Department of Defense with limited power and with the Navy maintaining control of its air assets . In 1947 , Radford was briefly appointed commander of the Second Task Fleet , a move he felt was to distance him from the budget negotiations in Washington , but nonetheless preferred . 
 In 1948 , Radford was appointed by President Harry S. Truman as the Vice Chief of Naval Operations ( VCNO ) . Debates continued with military leaders about the future of the armed forces as Truman sought to trim the defense budget . Radford was relied on by Navy leaders as an expert who would fiercely defend the Navy 's interests from budget restrictions , but his appointment as VCNO was opposed by Fleet Admiral Chester Nimitz , who feared his hard @-@ line stance on the budget would alienate the generals in the other branches of the military . Some historians contend Radford brought strong leadership to the role . Naval aviation assets grew from 2 @,@ 467 aircraft to 3 @,@ 467 during this time , almost all aircraft for fast @-@ attack carriers . He also oversaw the implementation of the " Full Air Program " which envisioned 14 @,@ 500 total aircraft in the naval air force . Along with his predecessor John Dale Price , he favored reducing naval ship strength in order to develop stronger naval aviation capabilities . Then , in 1949 , Truman appointed him as the High Commissioner of the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands . 
 = = Commander of the U.S. Pacific Fleet = = 
 In April 1949 , Truman appointed Radford to the position of Commander of the U.S. Pacific Fleet . A staunch anticommunist , Radford saw the greatest threat to U.S. security coming from Asia , not Europe . He traveled extensively throughout the Pacific as well as South Asia and the Far East . He became acquainted with political and military leaders in New Zealand , Australia , the Philippines , Vietnam , Thailand , Malaya , Burma , India , Pakistan , Hong Kong , Formosa , and Japan , and learned about the sociopolitical issues facing each nation and the region as a whole . 
 = = = " Revolt of the Admirals " = = = 
 Despite his new office , Radford was soon recalled to Washington to continue hearings on the future of the U.S. military budget . He became a key figure in what would later be called the " Revolt of the Admirals " , which took place during April 1949 when the supercarrier USS United States was cancelled . 
 At the request of Vinson , Radford strongly opposed plans by Secretary of Defense Louis Johnson and Secretary of the Navy Francis P. Matthews to make the Convair B @-@ 36 the Air Force 's principal bomber , calling it a " billion dollar blunder . " Radford also questioned the Air Force 's plan to focus on nuclear weapons delivery capabilities as its primary deterrent to war and called nuclear war " morally reprehensible " . While the United States remained cancelled and the post @-@ war cuts to the Navy were intact , funding was increasing during the Cold War era for conventional forces . 
 = = = Korean War = = = 
 Shortly after the outbreak of the Korean War in June 1950 , control of Vice Admiral Arthur D. Struble 's U.S. Seventh Fleet was transferred from Radford to Vice Admiral C. Turner Joy , who was serving as Commander , Naval Forces , Far East . Joy 's superior was General of the Army Douglas MacArthur of the United Nations Command Korea ( UNC ) . As such , Radford exercised no direct responsibility over forces involved in the conflict . 
 Radford was an admirer of MacArthur and a proponent of his " Asia First " strategy . He supported Operation Chromite in October 1950 , as well as the United Nations mission of Korean reunification . He attended the Wake Island Conference between MacArthur and Truman on 15 October , and later recalled his belief that , should the Chinese intervene in the war , the U.S. could still prevail provided it was able to strike Chinese bases in Manchuria with air power . When the People 's Volunteer Army did intervene in favor of North Korea the next month , Radford shared MacArthur 's frustration at restrictions placed on the UN force in the war preventing it from striking Chinese soil . Once Truman relieved MacArthur in April 1951 , Radford reportedly gave the general a " hero 's welcome " in Hawaii as he was returning to the United States . 
 As commander of U.S. forces in the Philippines and Formosa , Radford accompanied President @-@ elect Dwight D. Eisenhower on his three @-@ day trip to Korea in December 1952 . Eisenhower was looking for an exit strategy for the stalemated and unpopular war , and Radford suggested threatening China with attacks on its Manchurian bases and the use of nuclear weapons . This view was shared by Secretary of State John Foster Dulles and UNC Commander General Mark W. Clark , but had not been acted on when the armistice came in July 1953 , at a time when the Chinese were struggling with domestic unrest . Still , Radford 's frankness during the trip and his knowledge of Asia made a good impression on Eisenhower , who nominated Radford to be his Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff . 
 = = Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff = = 
 Eisenhower 's official nomination for Radford came in mid @-@ 1953 . Eisenhower was initially cautious about him because of his involvement in the inter @-@ service rivalry and " revolt " in 1949 . Radford 's anticommunist views , however , as well as his knowledge of Asia and his support of Eisenhower 's " New Look " defense policy , made him an attractive nominee , particularly among Republicans , to replace Omar Bradley . Eisenhower was also impressed with his " intelligence , dedication , tenacity , and courage to speak his mind . " During his nomination , Radford indicated a changed outlook from the positions he had taken during the " Revolt of the Admirals " . As chairman , he was eventually popular with both the president and Congress . 
 = = = Military budget = = = 
 Radford was integral in formulating and executing the " New Look " policy , reducing spending on conventional military forces to favor a strong nuclear deterrent and a greater reliance on airpower . In this time , he had to overcome resistance from Army leaders who opposed the reduction of their forces , and Radford 's decisions , unfettered by inter @-@ service rivalry , impressed Eisenhower . In spite of his support of the " New Look " , he disagreed with Eisenhower on several occasions when the president proposed drastic funding cuts that Radford worried would render the U.S. Navy ineffective . In late 1954 , for example , Radford testified privately before a congressional committee that he felt some of Eisenhower 's proposed defense cuts would limit the military 's capability for " massive retaliation " , but he kept his disagreements out of public view , working from within and seeking the funding to save specific strategic programs . 
 In 1956 , Radford proposed protecting several military programs from funding cuts by reducing numbers of conventional forces , but the proposal was leaked to the press , causing an uproar in Congress and among U.S. military allies , and the plan was dropped . In 1957 , after the other Joint Chiefs of Staff again disagreed on how to downsize force levels amid more budget restrictions , Radford submitted ideas for less dramatic force downsizing directly to Secretary of Defense Charles Erwin Wilson , who agreed to pass them along to Eisenhower . 
 = = = Foreign military policy = = = 
 While Radford remained Eisenhower 's principal adviser for the budget , they differed on matters of foreign policy . Radford advocated the use of nuclear weapons and a firm military and diplomatic stance against China . Early in his tenure , he suggested to Eisenhower a preventive war against China or the Soviet Union while the U.S. possessed a nuclear advantage and before it became entangled in conflicts in the Far East . Eisenhower immediately dismissed this idea . 
 After France requested U.S. assistance for its beleaguered force at Dien Bien Phu in 1954 , Radford suggested an aggressive stance toward the Viet Minh , recommending the U.S. threaten them with nuclear weapons as it had with the Chinese in Korea . He also advocated U.S. military intervention in the 1955 First Taiwan Strait Crisis as well as the 1956 Suez Crisis , but Eisenhower favored diplomatic approaches and threats of force . 
 = = Later life = = 
 After his second term as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs , Radford opted to retire from the Navy in 1957 to enter the private sector . The same year Radford High School in Honolulu was named in his honor . Radford was called upon to serve as military campaign advisor for Richard Nixon in the 1960 presidential election , and again for Barry Goldwater in the 1964 election . 
 Radford died of cancer at age 77 on 17 August 1973 at Bethesda Naval Medical Center in Bethesda , Maryland . He was buried with the full honors accorded to a former Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff in Section 3 of the Arlington National Cemetery in Arlington , Virginia . In 1975 , the Navy launched the anti @-@ submarine Spruance @-@ class destroyer USS Arthur W. Radford , named in his honor . 
 = = Awards and decorations = = 
 Radford 's awards and decorations include the following : 
 = M11 link road protest = 
 The M11 link road protest was a major anti @-@ road protest in Leytonstone , London , United Kingdom , in the early to mid @-@ 1990s opposing the construction of the " A12 Hackney to M11 link road " , also known as the M11 Link Road , which was part of a significant local road scheme to connect traffic from the East Cross Route to the M11 , avoiding urban streets . 
 The road had been proposed since the 1960s , as part of the London Ringways , and was an important link between central London and the Docklands to East Anglia . Over the years , though , road protests elsewhere had become increasingly visible , and urban road building had fallen out of favour with the public . Local Member of Parliament Harry Cohen had been a particular vocal opponent of this scheme . 
 The protests reached a new level of visibility during 1993 as part of a grassroots campaign where protesters came from outside the area to support the local opposition of the road . The initial focus was on the removal of a tree on George Green , east of Wanstead , that attracted the attention of local , then national media . The activity peaked in 1994 with several high @-@ profile protesters setting up <unk> on property scheduled for demolition , most notably on Claremont Road in Leyton . The final stage of the protest was a single building on Fillebrook Road in Leytonstone , which , due to a security blunder , became occupied by squatters . 
 The road was eventually built as planned , and opened to traffic in 1999 , but the increased costs involved in management and policing of protesters raised the profile of such campaigns in the United Kingdom , and contributed to several road schemes being cancelled or reviewed later on in the decade . Those involved in the protest moved on to oppose other schemes in the country , while opinions of the road as built have since been mixed . By 2014 , the road had become the ninth most congested in the entire country . 
 = = Background = = 
 The origin of the link road stems from what were two major arterial roads out of London ( the A11 to Newmarket and Norwich , and the A12 to Colchester , Ipswich and Great Yarmouth ) and subsequent improvements . The first of these was the Eastern Avenue improvement , that opened on 9 June 1924 , which provided a bypass of the old road through Ilford and Romford . 
 Proposals for the route first arose in the 1960s as part of the London Ringways plan , which would have seen four concentric circular motorways built in the city , together with radial routes , with the M11 motorway ending on Ringway 1 , the innermost Ringway , at Hackney Marsh . 
 A section of Ringway 1 known as the East Cross Route was built to motorway standards in the late 1960s and early 1970s and designated as the A102 ( M ) . A section of the M11 connecting Ringway 2 ( now part of the North Circular Road ) and Eastern Avenue to Harlow was completed in the late 1970s , opening to traffic in 1977 . 
 The Ringways scheme met considerable opposition ; there were protests when the Westway , an urban motorway elevated over the streets of Paddington , was opened in 1970 , with local MP John Wheeler later describing the road 's presence within 15 metres of properties as " completely unacceptable environmentally , " and the Archway Road public inquiry was repeatedly abandoned during the 1970s as a result of protests . The first Link Road Action Group to resist the M11 link road was formed in 1976 , and for the next fifteen years activists fought government plans through a series of public inquiries . Their alternative was to build a road tunnel , leaving the houses untouched , but this was rejected on grounds of cost . By 1974 , the Greater London Council announced it would not be completing Ringway 1 . Drivers travelling in the areas where the new roads would have been built had to continue using long stretches of urban single @-@ carriageway roads . In particular , the suburbs of Leyton , Leytonstone and Wanstead suffered serious traffic congestion . 
 The Roads for Prosperity white paper published in 1989 detailed a major expansion of the road building programme and included plans for the M12 Motorway between London and Chelmsford , as well as many other road schemes . Although Harry Cohen , MP for Leyton and Wanstead suggested in May 1989 that the government should scrap the scheme , a public enquiry was held for the scheme in November . 
 = = The protest campaign in East London = = 
 By the 1980s , planning blight had affected the area and many of the houses had become home to a community of artists and squatters . Eventually , contractors were appointed to carry out the work and a compulsory purchase of property along the proposed route was undertaken . In March 1993 , in preparation for the construction of the road , the Earl of Caithness , then the Minister of State for Transport , estimated that there would be 263 properties scheduled for demolition , displacing 550 people , of which he estimated 172 were seeking rehousing . Several original residents , who had in some cases lived in their homes all their lives , refused to sell or move out of their properties . 
 Protesters from the local area against the link road scheme were joined by large numbers of anti @-@ road campaigners from around the UK and beyond , attracted by the availability of free housing along the route . These experienced protesters , who had participated in earlier events such as the Anti @-@ Nazi League riots in Welling , gave impetus to the campaign . The new arrivals used the skills they had developed during prior protests to construct " defences " , blocking the original entrances to the houses and creating new routes directly between them . 
 Sophisticated techniques were used to delay the construction of the road . Sit @-@ ins and site invasions were combined with sabotage to stop construction work temporarily . This led to large numbers of police and constant security patrols being employed to protect the construction sites , at great expense . By December 1994 , the total cost of construction had been estimated at £ 6 million and rising by £ 500 @,@ 000 every month . 
 The protesters were successful in publicising the campaign , with most UK newspapers and TV news programmes covering the protests on a regular basis . Desktop publishing , then in its infancy , was used to produce publicity materials for the campaign and send out faxes to the media . When the government began evicting residents along the route and demolishing the empty houses , the protesters set up so @-@ called " autonomous republics " such as " <unk> " in some groups of the houses . Extreme methods were used to force the engineers to halt demolition , including underground tunnels with protesters secured within by concrete . 
 = = = The chestnut tree on George Green = = = 
 Until late 1993 , local opposition to the M11 extension had been relatively limited . While opposition had been going for nearly ten years , institutional avenues of protest had been exhausted , and local residents were largely resigned to the road being built . When outside protesters arrived in September 1993 , few residents saw their mission as " their campaign " . 
 One section of the M11 extension was due to tunnel under George Green in Wanstead . Residents had believed that this would save their green , and a 250 @-@ year @-@ old sweet chestnut tree that grew upon it , but because this was a cut and cover tunnel , this required the tree to be cut down . 
 Support for the protests started to extend to the local community when Jean Gosling , a lollipop lady in Wanstead , upon learning of the tree 's impending destruction , rallied the support of local children ( and was later fired from her job for doing so while wearing her uniform ) , who in turn recruited their parents into the protests . It was then that the non @-@ resident radicals realised that they had significant local support . When local residents gathered for a tree dressing ceremony on 6 November , they found their way barred by security fencing . With support from the protesters , they pulled it down . 
 Protesters continued to delay the destruction of the tree . Solicitors for the campaign had even argued in court that receipt of a letter addressed to the tree itself gave it the status of a legal dwelling , causing a further delay , . In the early morning of 7 December 1993 , several hundred police arrived to evict the protesters , which took ten hours to carry out . Protesters made numerous complaints against the police ; police , in turn , denied these allegations , attributing any misbehaviour to the protesters . Media attention started to increase regarding the protest , with several daily newspapers putting pictures of the tree on their front pages . 
 Local MP Cohen started to become scathing about the scheme and its progress . In March 1994 , he said " the Department of Transport 's pig @-@ headed approach to the M11 link road has been a shambles , and a costly one at that , " and described the ongoing police presence as " a miniature equivalent of the Iraqi occupation of Kuwait . " According to him , squatter Hugh Jones had been threatened by demolition men wielding sledgehammers and pickaxes , adding " the project has cost £ 500 @,@ 000 in police time alone , to take over and demolish a 250 @-@ year @-@ old chestnut tree and half a dozen houses " 
 = = = Claremont Road = = = 
 By 1994 , properties scheduled for demolition had been compulsory purchased , and most were made uninhabitable by removing kitchens , bathrooms and staircases . The notable exception was in one small street , Claremont Road , which ran immediately next to the Central line and consequently required every property on it to be demolished . The street was almost completely occupied by protesters except for one original resident who had not taken up the Department for Transport 's offer to move , 92 @-@ year @-@ old Dolly Watson , who was born in number 32 and had lived there nearly all her life . She became friends with the anti @-@ road protesters , saying " they 're not dirty hippy squatters , they 're the grandchildren I never had . " The protesters named a watchtower , built from scaffold poles , after her . 
 A vibrant and harmonious community sprung up on the road , which even won the begrudging respect of the authorities . The houses were painted with extravagant designs , both internally and externally , and sculptures erected in the road ; the road became an artistic spectacle that one said " had to be seen to be believed " . 
 In November 1994 , the eviction of Claremont Road took place , bringing an end to the M11 link road resistance as a major physical protest . Bailiffs , accompanied by the police in full riot gear , carried out the eviction over several days , and the Central line , running adjacent to the road , was suspended . As soon as eviction was completed , the remaining properties were demolished . In the end , the cost to the taxpayer was over a million pounds in police costs alone . Quoting David Maclean , " I understand from the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis that the cost of policing the protest in order to allow bailiffs to take possession of the premises in Claremont road was £ 1 @,@ 014 @,@ 060 . " Cohen complained in parliament about police brutality , stating " were not many of my constituents bullied — including vulnerable people , and others whose only crime was living on the line of route ? " The then Secretary of State for Transport , Brian Mawhinney , pointed out that there had already been three public enquiries at which protesters could have lodged their objections against the line of the route . 
 = = = Towards the end = = = 
 Following the Claremont Road eviction , non @-@ resident protesters moved on to other sites such as Newbury . Meanwhile , Fillebrook Road near Leytonstone tube station had already had several houses demolished on it due to problems with vandalism . By 1995 , the only house left standing was number 135 . The house was originally scheduled for demolition at the same time as the others , but had been left standing in order to give the tenant additional time to relocate . After they had done so , on 11 April 1995 , the Department for Transport removed the water supply and part of the roof , and left two security guards on duty . When the guards decided to sleep overnight in their cars that evening , leaving the house unoccupied , the protesters moved in . The house was renamed <unk> ( after The Munsters , thanks to its spooky appearance ) . Like " <unk> " , they proclaimed themselves a micro @-@ nation and designed their own national anthem and flag , though author Joe Moran mentions their legitimacy was complicated by the protesters continuing to claim unemployment benefits from the " mother country . " 
 A tower was built out of the remains of the roof , similar to one that had existed at Claremont Road , and a system of defences and blockades were built . A core of around 30 protesters ensured that there were always people staying there ( a legal requirement for a squatted home , as well as a defence against eviction ) . They were finally evicted on 21 June 1995 , whereupon , as at Claremont Road , the building was immediately demolished . The total cost of removing the protesters from <unk> was given to be £ 239 @,@ 349 @.@ 52 , not including additional costs of security guards . 
 Construction of the road , already under way by this stage , was then free to continue largely unhindered , although systematic sabotage of building sites by local people continued . It was completed in 1999 and given the designation A12 ; its continuation , the former A102 ( M ) , was also given this number as far as the Blackwall Tunnel . 
 The official opening of the road in October 1999 took place without fanfare , being opened by the Highways Agency Chief Executive rather than a politician , with only journalists with passes being admitted to the ceremony . 
 = = Consequences of the protest campaign = = 
 The M11 link road protest was ultimately unsuccessful in its aim to stop the building of the link road . The total cost of compensation for the project was estimated to be around £ 15 million . 
 Proposals for the M12 motorway were cancelled in 1994 during the first review of the trunk road programme . The most significant response from the government occurred when Labour came into office following the 1997 general election , with the announcement of the New Deal for Trunk Roads in England . This proposal cancelled many previous road schemes , including the construction of the <unk> over the Pennines , increased fuel prices , and ensured that road projects would only be undertaken when genuinely necessary , stating " there will be no presumption in favour of new road building as an answer . " 
 Some protesters went on to join the direct action campaign Reclaim the Streets . A protester arrested and detained on the grounds of breach of the peace unsuccessfully challenged the UK Government 's legislation at the European Court of Justice . 
 In 2002 , in response to a major new road building programme and expansion of aviation , a delegation of road protest veterans visited the Department for Transport to warn of renewed direct action in response , delivering a D @-@ lock as a symbol of the past protests . One such protestor , Rebecca Lush Blum went on to found Road Block to support road protesters and challenge the government . In 2007 , Road Block became a project within the Campaign for Better Transport 
 In 2007 , the BBC reported that the cost of the M11 link road doubled due to the intervention of protesters . 
 Residents in Leytonstone have complained that , following the completion of the road , their streets became rat runs for commuters trying to get ahead of queues . 
 = Zoe Carpenter = 
 Zoe Carpenter is a fictional character from the British Channel 4 soap opera Hollyoaks , played by Zoë Lister . The character first appeared on @-@ screen on 1 September 2006 , as one of three new students at Hollyoaks Community College . It was announced in 2009 that Lister had quit her role in order to pursue other projects ; she subsequently left the series in January 2010 . During Zoe 's time in Hollyoaks she has been portrayed as a bubbly tomboy who often makes the wrong choices in life and has had a number of failed relationships . 
 Zoe has been involved in storylines including being stalked , entering a relationship with an older man , having sexual relations with her female best friend , being wrongfully imprisoned for the murder of Sarah Barnes and the being victim of a stabbing . Lister 's portrayal saw her nominated for the " Sexiest Female " award at the 2008 British Soap Awards , and also attracted critical praise for her exit storyline . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Actress and dancer Zoë Lister was cast in the role of Zoe . On 8 June 2009 , media entertainment website Digital Spy revealed that Lister had quit the soap and would leave towards the end of the year . Speaking of her decision to quit , Lister stated : " It 's scary but also very , very exciting . I think three years in a soap is enough to do and you get to a point where you either make a decision that this is what you do or you want to try something different . " She also revealed that she had been planning to leave the series one year prior to announcement . Lister 's decision to quit matched that of co @-@ star Loui Batley ( Sarah Barnes ) . Hollyoaks officially announced on 23 July 2009 that both Lister and Batley would leave towards the end of the year in a storyline that would see " A tragic curtain call for one of them " , later revealing that either Sarah or Zoe would be killed off in a dramatic storyline . Lister also revealed in an interview with Heat magazine that she was " nervous " , but " very excited " about leaving the show . 
 Almost a year after filming her final scenes , Lister explained that she felt her exit was the right choice , saying : " It felt it was time to go so I just ran with my instincts . Looking back , I was nervous but now I know I 've done the right thing . I love theatre work . It gives me such a buzz . [ Hollyoaks ] was the break I 'd been praying for . I threw myself into the part and enjoyed every minute of it . I had three superb years and it was brilliant . " 
 = = = Characterisation = = = 
 Zoe is a former student at Hollyoaks Community College , where she studied Film Studies . Channel 4 publicity describe Zoe as " the bubbly student " and make note of her many bad choices in life and failed relationships . Discussing these failed relationships , Lister commented during an interview in June 2009 that she believed her character was having a break from men in order to sort out her problems : " I think she 's been in and out of so many relationships and her life is at a bit of a juncture ; she probably needs to sort her head out , sort her career , knuckle down really and not get bogged down into a relationship because everything takes a backseat when you 're in one . " 
 Zoe is also portrayed as having a tomboy persona . Lister was asked about this " tomboy " personality during an interview with Maxim magazine , agreeing with the label and stating her character doesn 't " glam up " as much as the other Hollyoaks characters . Maxim also noted the character was " pretty popular with the boys " . Lister has also commented that her character is not a stereotypical dizzy blonde , reiterated her character 's tomboy status and added that she is a " very street @-@ smart type of woman . " 
 = = = Early storylines = = = 
 One of Zoe 's first and main storylines was being stalked by fellow student Will Hackett ( Oliver Farnworth ) . Lister later commented on the storyline , deciding it was her most memorable : " The most memorable for me was the one with my weird boyfriend Will who stalked me . Like I said , it was a bit weird , but I quite liked it as a storyline . " During a fire safety promotion undertaken with co @-@ star Lena Kaur ( who plays Leila Roy ) , Lister referenced the storyline , commenting : " It 's much easier to test your smoke alarm once a week and plan your escape from fire than it is to escape from a psycho ! " . 
 In early 2008 during an interview with the Daily Mail , Lister expressed her feelings on the subject of lesbian storylines , stating : " I 'd definitely do a lesbian love scene in Hollyoaks . That would be a really good story . " It was later confirmed by Channel 4 that Lister 's character would be involved in a sexual relationship with Sarah during the new late night series Hollyoaks Later . After the screening of the scenes , Lister explained : " It was quite nerve @-@ wracking actually as I 'm good friends with Loui — it 's quite a strange thing to smooch a really good friend so we had to get over the giggles and think ' right , just do it ! ' " Also commenting on her worries about the scenes , she said : " I thought it was hilarious ! I thought it 'd be interesting , though . I was obviously quite worried about them . Loui [ Batley ] and I chatted a lot when we found out that it was going to be in the late @-@ night eps and we were wondering ' oh no , what does this mean ? ! ' But in the end , they weren 't graphic or anything like that , so it was fine . " She continued : " It was completely mental filming them . Loui and I just had a massive attack of the giggles . I think the crew were more embarrassed than we were ! We were kind of ignored for the day . " 
 Speaking to entertainment news website Digital Spy about Sarah and Zoe 's relationship , Lister explained : " I don 't think they do have feelings for each other in that way . Last year happened and Zoe put it down to history and experience — one of those things that teenagers get up to occasionally and she was quite happy to leave it there . They 've got through a lot and their relationship is really quite special . There 's a lot of love there but Zoe 's not got anything sexual for Sarah — it 's purely a deep friendship . " Meanwhile , Batley said : " I think that for Sarah , Zoe 's the best friend she 's ever had — a lot of people in her life have let her down but Zoe 's her rock . Even though they 've had their fall @-@ outs , she 's always been there for her and she loves her as a friend . I think Zoe feels the same . But for Sarah it 's something more — she completely relies on her and that turns into love for her as well . " 
 = = = Imprisonment and exit = = = 
 After the announcement of Lister 's departure , it was that revealed Loui Batley , who played Sarah Barnes , would also leave the show in a tragic skydiving death , caused by a jealous Lydia Hart ( Lydia Kelly ) . Before the skydiving plot aired , Lister explained the storyline during an interview with Sky TV , stating that at the time Lydia severed a parachute to end her own life , later deciding to cut Zoe 's parachute so she could have Sarah to herself , further explaining that viewers were not permitted to know who would have parachute after they became mixed up in the storyline 's dramatic twist . Speaking on how Zoe 's relationship with Sarah causes Lydia to commit her actions , Lister stated : 
 Lister explained that she and her fellow cast members filmed on many locations , including army barracks . They filmed at Tatenhill Airfield , where staff had been told to remain secretive about the storyline . She also revealed that she was the only cast member out of her , Batley and Kelly who performed the aired skydiving for real . A Hollyoaks producer released two pictures of funeral wreaths , one reading ' Zoe ' and the other ' Sarah ' , in order to confuse viewers further as to whom the victim would be . On @-@ screen after the skydive and Sarah 's subsequent death , Lydia framed Zoe for the murder she committed , leading to her arrest . 
 Speaking of Sarah 's death and Zoe 's false imprisonment , Lister stated : " She 's in a very difficult place . She 's lost her best friend and there 's so much history there and she 's finished her degree — well she didn 't even finish her degree , she failed that — so she 's in a limbo land anyway . She 's working silly jobs and she 's not in a very good place at all in any aspect of her life . Oh , and she 's in prison on suspicion of murder ... " When asked during another interview with Digital Spy about how the character is coping with being in prison , Lister stated : " Not very well ! It 's all completely overwhelming for her . She can 't get her head around the fact that her best friend 's dead and the fact that she 's being accused of murdering her is ridiculous . She 's worried that because it 's got this far its ludicrous , so who 's to say that she won 't be sent down ? " 
 When the character was ultimately found not guilty and was released , Lister stated in an interview with E4 : " I think this is a great storyline , I 've really enjoyed doing it . When Zoe 's obviously released , it 's like a whole new scenario for her because there are people who haven 't really trusted her or believed in her . People that have really let her down , and plus the fact she hasn 't got over Sarah [ ... ] being killed yet either . She hasn 't had the chance to deal with that , so that 's really interesting , and she still wants Lydia to go down ! " The character of Zoe then set out to expose Lydia as Sarah 's killer . She befriended her , and even seduced her in order to gain a confession . During an interview about Zoe 's new scheme , Lister said : 
 Lister continued , " It all gets really messy from here ! Because Lydia 's really deranged , Lydia starts thinking that because she loved Sarah and Sarah loved Zoe , if she gets with Zoe , that 'll be the final piece in the puzzle and it 'll all work out . " She explained : " Lydia starts becoming obsessed with Zoe and to keep control , Zoe has to go with it . There 's a point where Lydia kisses her ! And then Mike walks in and kicks Zoe out . " 
 Lydia discovered Zoe 's true intentions for befriending her , and set out to take revenge . In a second interview with E4 , Lister stated : " I was really surprised when I learned about Zoe 's ' master plan ' to get Lydia to confess because I think after everything that Zoe 's been through [ ... ] the last thing she wants to do is ever see Lydia again , let alone try and make friends with her ! But that is her only way , so I think it 's really interesting . " She continued : " The fight and the chase stuff with Lydia in the graveyard was really good , we filmed it at night . I was dressed as Madonna . We were in a cemetery , it was brilliant ! ... " 
 The culmination of the plot saw Lydia stab Zoe . The storyline was described as a " brutal attack " and at the time producers refused to reveal if Zoe would survive . Describing the terror Lydia causes for Zoe , a spokesperson for the serial stated : " Zoe can ’ t believe it when Lydia admits the parachute was meant for her . As soon as she realises Lydia wanted her dead she tries to run . That ’ s when Lydia pulls out a knife and stabs her . " This led to a fight between Lydia and Charlotte who arrives with Dave Colburn ( Elliot James Langridge ) . They both fight to grab the knife while an unconscious Zoe bleeds , ultimately leading to the arrest of Lydia when the police arrive . She is later charged with the murder of Sarah and the attempted murder of Zoe . Several weeks after the character was stabbed , she was seen feeling as if no one wanted to be in her company . After three of her longtime friends snubbed her ideas to make a fresh start elsewhere , ultimately she was she went travelling with her former boyfriend Mike Barnes ( Tony Hirst ) and Gilly Roach ( Anthony Quinlan ) . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 = = = Backstory = = = 
 Born in 1987 to Graham ( Paul Clarkson ) and Christine Carpenter ( Race Davies ) , Zoe is the older sister of Archie Carpenter ( Stephen Beard ) . During her time at secondary school , Zoe was overweight and self @-@ conscious . She sought comfort in her teacher and fell in love . The pair began an affair , which was never discovered . While at school , Zoe also had a relationship with Joe Spencer ( Matt Millburn ) , who had arrived in Hollyoaks as a student three years before her arrival . 
 = = = 2006 – 2010 = = = 
 Zoe arrives as a new student at the college , studying Film Studies . She eventually grows closer to her ex @-@ boyfriend Joe . Zoe , Kris Fisher ( Gerard McCarthy ) , Joe and Olivia Johnson ( Rochelle Gadd ) are in The Dog in the Pond bar when Sam Owen ( Louis <unk> ) sets it on fire . Zoe escapes but Joe and Olivia die . Zoe has a one @-@ night stand with Zak Ramsey . After rejecting the advances of Will and entering a relationship with Will , Zoe is abused and manipulated by him . He stops Zoe from leaving to study in New York City , resorting to stealing her passport and breaking her hand . He spies on her via web @-@ cam , and drugs her , making it look like a suicide attempt . When Zoe discovers that Will has been spying on her , he ties her up on the college roof and confesses his love for her . Will eventually lets Zoe go and is arrested . A traumatised Zoe leaves to stay with her parents . 
 Zoe starts a relationship with Darren Osborne ( Ashley Taylor Dawson ) . When Frankie Osborne ( Helen Pearson ) fosters a seven @-@ year @-@ old child called Daisy , Zoe gets on well with her and is angry when Darren has her sent away . Zoe ends their relationship , although they go on to reconcile . Darren becomes addicted to gambling and begins to steal Zoe 's money . He sleeps with Jessica Harris ( Jennifer Biddall ) after they win at a casino . When Zoe discovers this , she ends their relationship again , though helps him through his gambling addiction . 
 Sarah invites Zoe to move in with her , however her father Mike is angry to find Zoe using Sarah 's sister Amy Barnes ' ( Ashley Slanina @-@ Davies ) room . Kathy Barnes ( Sarah Jane Buckley ) begins to suspect an affair between Zoe and Mike , and throws all Zoe 's clothes out into the street . Mike then asks Kathy to move out . He and Zoe sleep together , unknowingly recorded by Ste Hay ( Kieron Richardson ) , who exposes them . Sarah lashes out at Mike and Zoe . She flaunts her older boyfriend Roger <unk> ( Quentin <unk> ) in Mike 's face , which backfires when Roger makes a pass at Zoe and they become an official couple . Sarah is able to forgive Zoe , and comforts her when she has a pregnancy scare . Mike is very upset about the idea of Zoe being pregnant . 
 Zoe visits her old school with Sarah and Nancy Hayton ( Jessica Fox ) , recalling her relationship with her former teacher . She and Sarah get drunk and sleep together , which they both regret and agree to keep quiet . Their one @-@ night stand is later revealed , however , leaving Mike devastated . He throws them both out , before realising how much he loves Zoe and offering to take her back , only for her to refuse . 
 When Archie destroys Zoe 's film project , essential for her graduation , lecturer Adrian P. Kennedy ( Richard Lawrence ) gives her an extension . Zoe finds a script belonging to Mike which he wrote 20 years ago about his decision to give Sarah up for adoption . Zoe uses the script and films it , and Adrian screens it in the SU Bar . At the screening , Sarah discovers the planned adoption and is in turmoil . Mike goes to see Adrian to tell him of the plagiarism . Adrian says that if she sleeps with him , he will not tell the university . Zoe considers Adrian 's offer but later claims she would rather be a failure than sleep with him , leading to him failing her project . Zoe then has a brief relationship with Natty ( Danny Tennant ) . 
 Zoe goes on a parachute jump with Fernando Fernandez ( Jeronimo Best ) , Steph Cunningham ( Carley Stenson ) , Gilly and Sarah . Sarah 's ex @-@ girlfriend Lydia appears and is jealous of Sarah and Zoe 's friendship . Lydia lies to Zoe , telling her that Sarah had attempted suicide after their affair the previous year , and warns her to stay away from Sarah . That night , Sarah and Zoe get drunk and return to their tent , where Sarah makes a pass at Zoe . Sarah reveals that whilst she had not intended to kiss her , Zoe was the only person she had ever been able to rely upon . Zoe and Sarah later discover Lydia 's lies and Sarah decides to end their relationship for good during a discussion with Zoe . Lydia overhears the conversation and sabotages Zoe 's parachute before the jump in an attempt to kill her . When the parachutes are mixed up by accident , Zoe 's deploys successfully , but Sarah falls to her death . Upset , Zoe ends up sleeping with a grieving Mike for comfort . Lydia slits her wrists after planting the knife she had sabotaged the parachute with behind Zoe 's bed . Zoe is then arrested in front of Mike under suspicion of Sarah 's murder and is later charged . 
 Mike visits Zoe in prison , despite Lydia manipulating him , and Zoe is able to convince him that she was not to blame for Sarah 's death . During her trial , Mike tells the court he believes his daughter committed suicide , and Zoe is found not guilty and is released . She then decides to expose Lydia as Sarah 's killer . Zoe moves in with Mike and Lydia , and tells Lydia that her feelings towards her have changed . The pair share a kiss , just as Mike and Amy walk in . Mike then tells Zoe to leave . Lydia discovers that Zoe is using her , and plots revenge . On New Year 's Eve , she gets Zoe to meet her in a church , so they can admit their ' relationship ' to Sarah . Zoe initially goes along with this , but then changes her mind , runs out and is knocked unconscious . Zoe is able to get a confession from Lydia , before running away again . She is startled to see Sarah 's grave for the first time . Lydia finds Zoe and stabs her as Charlotte Lau ( Amy Yamazaki ) , Dave Colburn ( Elliot James Langridge ) and Mike arrive . Mike then cradles Zoe as he calls an ambulance . 
 Zoe recovers , and after inspiration from Hannah Ashworth ( Emma Rigby ) , she decides to go travelling , along with Kris and Zak . Kris and Zak change their minds , however , due to their girlfriends Nancy and Michaela McQueen ( Hollie @-@ Jay Bowes ) . Zoe plans to leave herself , but as she packs her belongings to leave , Mike is convinced to join her . Zoe , Mike and Gilly say their goodbyes and leave the village . In August , six months after leaving Hollyoaks , Zoe gives Kris an offer to come to London and help her organise a party for a rich person . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In 2008 , Lister 's role as Zoe saw her nominated for the " Sexiest Female " award at The British Soap Awards , however she lost to co @-@ star Roxanne McKee . Lister was asked in an interview if she was disappointed to not win the award . She replied : " Not at all ! It was lovely to be nominated , and also a bit hilarious , but beyond that , I wasn 't desperate to win . I really wasn 't bothered ! I was more than happy that Roxanne [ McKee ] won it — and I guessed she might do anyway . " When Zoe 's affair with Mike Barnes ( Tony Hirst ) began , there was some controversy over the storyline , due to the age gap between the pair . However , Hirst stated : " I think the controversy has subsided somewhat . It 's not an illicit affair , it 's known about now . It was shocking to some people at the beginning but it wasn 't by any means illegal . There were some complications but they are both grown @-@ ups ! " The parachute stunt won ' Spectacular Scene Of The Year ' at the 2010 British Soap Awards . At the 2010 Inside Soap Awards the storyline gained nominations in the category of " Best Stunt " . Kris Green of Digital Spy described the skydive as one of the best stunts he had seen in a long time , commenting that Zoe 's reaction to Sarah 's death made him shed a tear , and that the episode on a whole was " amazing " . The parachute stunt won ' Spectacular Scene Of The Year ' at the 2010 British Soap Awards . The Daily Mail opined that Zoe took an " interesting turn " when she slept with Sarah . Asian News International included Sarah and Zoe second on their top ten " girl @-@ on @-@ girl kisses on TV " list . 
 Grace Dent of The Guardian commented on the realism of Zoe 's storyline involving Adrian stating : " hapless Zoe failed her exams after refusing to shag dismal tutor Adrian . Predatory lecturers taking advantage of gullible women ? Actually , that 's a plot line I can get my head around . The problem with being an academic <unk> these days is that one day sooner or later , the truth will out . " Lesbian culture website AfterEllen.com opined " she doesn 't seem like the type of woman to give up without a fight " where Sarah and Mike are concerned . They also branded her storyline " scandalous " and said " It appears that in the UK , some television writers actually pay attention to what their actors want . " This was in response to Lister suggesting the storyline . 
 = Wildfire = 
 A wildfire or wildland fire is an uncontrolled fire in an area of combustible vegetation that occurs in the countryside ( i.e. , not in an urban area ) . Depending on the type of vegetation that is burnt , a wildfire can also be classified as a brush fire , bush fire , forest fire , desert fire , grass fire , hill fire , peat fire , vegetation fire , or veld fire . A wildfire differs from other fires by its extensive size , the speed at which it can spread out from its original source , its potential to change direction unexpectedly , and its ability to jump gaps such as roads , rivers and fire breaks . Wildfires are characterized in terms of the cause of ignition , their physical properties such as speed of propagation , the combustible material present , and the effect of weather on the fire . 
 Bushfires in Australia are a common occurrence ; because of the generally hot and dry climate , they pose a great risk to life and infrastructure during all times of the year , though mostly throughout the hotter months of summer and spring . In the United States , there are typically between 60 @,@ 000 and 80 @,@ 000 wildfires that occur each year , burning 3 million to 10 million acres ( 12 @,@ 000 to 40 @,@ 000 square kilometres ) of land depending on the year . Fossil records and human history contain accounts of wildfires , as wildfires can occur in periodic intervals . Wildfires can cause extensive damage , both to property and human life , but they also have various beneficial effects on wilderness areas . Some plant species depend on the effects of fire for growth and reproduction , although large wildfires may also have negative ecological effects . 
 Strategies of wildfire prevention , detection , and suppression have varied over the years , and international wildfire management experts encourage further development of technology and research . One of the more controversial techniques is controlled burning : permitting or even igniting smaller fires to minimize the amount of flammable material available for a potential wildfire . While some wildfires burn in remote forested regions , they can cause extensive destruction of homes and other property located in the wildland @-@ urban interface : a zone of transition between developed areas and undeveloped wilderness . 
 The name wildfire was once a synonym for Greek fire but now refers to any large or destructive conflagration . Wildfires differ from other fires in that they take place outdoors in areas of grassland , woodlands , bushland , scrubland , peatland , and other wooded areas that act as a source of fuel , or combustible material . All wildfires can be characterized by their physical properties , fuel type , or weather 's effect on the fire , regardless of the fire 's cause or outcome . Wildfire behaviour and severity result from the combination of factors such as available fuels , physical setting , and weather . While wildfires can be large , uncontrolled disasters that burn through 0 @.@ 4 to 400 square kilometres ( 100 to 100 @,@ 000 acres ) or more , they can also be as small as 0 @.@ 001 square kilometres ( 0 @.@ 25 acres ; 1 @,@ 000 m2 ) or less . Although smaller events may be included in wildfire modeling , most do not earn press attention . This can be problematic because public fire policies , which relate to fires of all sizes , are influenced more by the way the media portrays catastrophic wildfires than by small fires . 
 = = Causes = = 
 Unlike entirely natural features ( such as volcanoes , earthquakes and tropical storms ) , wildfires <unk> as " quasi @-@ natural " hazards - humans play a role in their causation . Four major natural causes of wildfire ignitions exist : 
 lightning 
 volcanic eruption 
 sparks from rockfalls 
 spontaneous combustion 
 The coal seam fires that burn in their thousands around the world - such as those in Centralia , Burning Mountain , and several coal @-@ sustained fires in China - can also flare up and ignite nearby flammable material . The most common directly human sources of wildfires include arson , discarded cigarettes , sparks from equipment , and power @-@ line arcs ( as detected by arc mapping ) . Ignition of wildland fires via contact with hot rifle @-@ bullet fragments is possible under the right conditions . In societies experiencing shifting cultivation where land is cleared quickly and farmed until the soil loses fertility , slash and burn clearing is often considered the least expensive way to prepare land for future use . Forested areas cleared by logging encourage the dominance of flammable grasses , and abandoned logging roads overgrown by vegetation may act as fire corridors . Annual grassland fires in southern Vietnam stem in part from the destruction of forested areas by US military herbicides , explosives , and mechanical land @-@ clearing and <unk> operations during the Vietnam War . 
 The most common cause of wildfires varies throughout the world . In Canada and northwest China , for example , lightning operates as the major source of ignition . In other parts of the world , human involvement is a major contributor . In Mexico , Central America , South America , Africa , Southeast Asia , Fiji , and New Zealand , wildfires can be attributed to human activities such as animal husbandry , agriculture , and land @-@ conversion burning . Human carelessness is a major cause of wildfires in China and in the Mediterranean Basin . In the United States and Australia , the source of wildfires can be traced both to lightning strikes and to human activities ( such as machinery sparks and cast @-@ away cigarette butts ) . " 
 In any given year there could be far more acres burnt by wildfires that are started by natural means than by human means - or vice versa . For example , in 2010 human @-@ caused wildfires burned almost 1 @.@ 4 million acres , with over 2 million acres devastated by naturally @-@ caused wildfires . However , in 2011 , almost 5 @.@ 4 million acres were burnt by human @-@ caused wildfires while only about 3 @.@ 4 million acres burnt due to naturally @-@ derived wildfires . 
 = = Spread = = 
 The spread of wildfires varies based on the flammable material present and its vertical arrangement . For example , fuels uphill from a fire are more readily dried and warmed by the fire than those downhill , yet burning logs can roll downhill from the fire to ignite other fuels . Fuel arrangement and density is governed in part by topography , as land shape determines factors such as available sunlight and water for plant growth . Overall , fire types can be generally characterized by their fuels as follows : 
 Ground fires are fed by subterranean roots , duff and other buried organic matter . This fuel type is especially susceptible to ignition due to spotting . Ground fires typically burn by smoldering , and can burn slowly for days to months , such as peat fires in Kalimantan and Eastern Sumatra , Indonesia , which resulted from a <unk> creation project that unintentionally drained and dried the peat . 
 Crawling or surface fires are fueled by low @-@ lying vegetation such as leaf and timber litter , debris , grass , and low @-@ lying shrubbery . 
 Ladder fires consume material between low @-@ level vegetation and tree canopies , such as small trees , downed logs , and vines . Kudzu , Old World climbing fern , and other invasive plants that scale trees may also encourage ladder fires . 
 Crown , canopy , or aerial fires burn suspended material at the canopy level , such as tall trees , vines , and mosses . The ignition of a crown fire , termed crowning , is dependent on the density of the suspended material , canopy height , canopy continuity , and sufficient surface and ladder fires in order to reach the tree crowns . For example , ground @-@ clearing fires lit by humans can spread into the Amazon rain forest , damaging ecosystems not particularly suited for heat or arid conditions . 
 = = Physical properties = = 
 Wildfires occur when all of the necessary elements of a fire triangle come together in a susceptible area : an ignition source is brought into contact with a combustible material such as vegetation , that is subjected to sufficient heat and has an adequate supply of oxygen from the ambient air . A high moisture content usually prevents ignition and slows propagation , because higher temperatures are required to evaporate any water within the material and heat the material to its fire point . Dense forests usually provide more shade , resulting in lower ambient temperatures and greater humidity , and are therefore less susceptible to wildfires . Less dense material such as grasses and leaves are easier to ignite because they contain less water than denser material such as branches and trunks . Plants continuously lose water by evapotranspiration , but water loss is usually balanced by water absorbed from the soil , humidity , or rain . When this balance is not maintained , plants dry out and are therefore more flammable , often a consequence of droughts . 
 A wildfire front is the portion sustaining continuous flaming combustion , where unburned material meets active flames , or the smoldering transition between unburned and burned material . As the front approaches , the fire heats both the surrounding air and woody material through convection and thermal radiation . First , wood is dried as water is vaporized at a temperature of 100 ° C ( 212 ° F ) . Next , the pyrolysis of wood at 230 ° C ( 450 ° F ) releases flammable gases . Finally , wood can smoulder at 380 ° C ( 720 ° F ) or , when heated sufficiently , ignite at 590 ° C ( 1 @,@ 000 ° F ) . Even before the flames of a wildfire arrive at a particular location , heat transfer from the wildfire front warms the air to 800 ° C ( 1 @,@ 470 ° F ) , which pre @-@ heats and dries flammable materials , causing materials to ignite faster and allowing the fire to spread faster . High @-@ temperature and long @-@ duration surface wildfires may encourage flashover or torching : the drying of tree canopies and their subsequent ignition from below . 
 Wildfires have a rapid forward rate of spread ( <unk> ) when burning through dense , uninterrupted fuels . They can move as fast as 10 @.@ 8 kilometres per hour ( 6 @.@ 7 mph ) in forests and 22 kilometres per hour ( 14 mph ) in grasslands . Wildfires can advance tangential to the main front to form a flanking front , or burn in the opposite direction of the main front by backing . They may also spread by jumping or spotting as winds and vertical convection columns carry firebrands ( hot wood embers ) and other burning materials through the air over roads , rivers , and other barriers that may otherwise act as firebreaks . <unk> and fires in tree canopies encourage spotting , and dry ground fuels that surround a wildfire are especially vulnerable to ignition from firebrands . Spotting can create spot fires as hot embers and firebrands ignite fuels downwind from the fire . In Australian bushfires , spot fires are known to occur as far as 20 kilometres ( 12 mi ) from the fire front . 
 Especially large wildfires may affect air currents in their immediate vicinities by the stack effect : air rises as it is heated , and large wildfires create powerful updrafts that will draw in new , cooler air from surrounding areas in thermal columns . Great vertical differences in temperature and humidity encourage <unk> clouds , strong winds , and fire whirls with the force of tornadoes at speeds of more than 80 kilometres per hour ( 50 mph ) . Rapid rates of spread , prolific crowning or spotting , the presence of fire whirls , and strong convection columns signify extreme conditions . 
 The thermal heat from wildfire can cause significant weathering of rocks and boulders , heat can rapidly expand a boulder and thermal shock can occur , which may cause an object 's structure to fail . 
 = = Effect of weather = = 
 Heat waves , droughts , cyclical climate changes such as El Niño , and regional weather patterns such as high @-@ pressure ridges can increase the risk and alter the behavior of wildfires dramatically . Years of precipitation followed by warm periods can encourage more widespread fires and longer fire seasons . Since the mid @-@ 1980s , earlier snowmelt and associated warming has also been associated with an increase in length and severity of the wildfire season in the Western United States . However , one individual element does not always cause an increase in wildfire activity . For example , wildfires will not occur during a drought unless accompanied by other factors , such as lightning ( ignition source ) and strong winds ( mechanism for rapid spread ) . A 2015 study indicates that the increase in fire risk in California is attributable to human @-@ induced climate change . 
 Intensity also increases during daytime hours . Burn rates of smoldering logs are up to five times greater during the day due to lower humidity , increased temperatures , and increased wind speeds . Sunlight warms the ground during the day which creates air currents that travel uphill . At night the land cools , creating air currents that travel downhill . Wildfires are fanned by these winds and often follow the air currents over hills and through valleys . Fires in Europe occur frequently during the hours of 12 : 00 p.m. and 2 : 00 p.m. Wildfire suppression operations in the United States revolve around a 24 @-@ hour fire day that begins at 10 : 00 a.m. due to the predictable increase in intensity resulting from the daytime warmth . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Wildfires are common in climates that are sufficiently moist to allow the growth of vegetation but feature extended dry , hot periods . Such places include the vegetated areas of Australia and Southeast Asia , the veld in southern Africa , the fynbos in the Western Cape of South Africa , the forested areas of the United States and Canada , and the Mediterranean Basin . Fires can be particularly intense during days of strong winds , periods of drought , and during warm summer months . Global warming may increase the intensity and frequency of droughts in many areas , creating more intense and frequent wildfires . 
 Although some ecosystems rely on naturally occurring fires to regulate growth , many ecosystems suffer from too much fire , such as the chaparral in southern California and lower elevation deserts in the American Southwest . The increased fire frequency in these ordinarily fire @-@ dependent areas has upset natural cycles , destroyed native plant communities , and encouraged the growth of fire @-@ intolerant vegetation and non @-@ native weeds . Invasive species , such as Lygodium microphyllum and Bromus tectorum , can grow rapidly in areas that were damaged by fires . Because they are highly flammable , they can increase the future risk of fire , creating a positive feedback loop that increases fire frequency and further destroys native growth . 
 In the Amazon Rainforest , drought , logging , cattle ranching practices , and slash @-@ and @-@ burn agriculture damage fire @-@ resistant forests and promote the growth of flammable brush , creating a cycle that encourages more burning . Fires in the rainforest threaten its collection of diverse species and produce large amounts of CO2 . Also , fires in the rainforest , along with drought and human involvement , could damage or destroy more than half of the Amazon rainforest by the year 2030 . Wildfires generate ash , destroy available organic nutrients , and cause an increase in water runoff , eroding away other nutrients and creating flash flood conditions . A 2003 wildfire in the North Yorkshire Moors destroyed 2 @.@ 5 square kilometers ( 600 acres ) of heather and the underlying peat layers . Afterwards , wind erosion stripped the ash and the exposed soil , revealing archaeological remains dating back to 10 @,@ 000 BC . Wildfires can also have an effect on climate change , increasing the amount of carbon released into the atmosphere and inhibiting vegetation growth , which affects overall carbon uptake by plants . 
 In tundra there is a natural pattern of accumulation of fuel and wildfire which varies depending on the nature of vegetation and terrain . Research in Alaska has shown fire @-@ event return intervals , ( <unk> ) that typically vary from 150 to 200 years with dryer lowland areas burning more frequently than wetter upland areas . 
 = = = Plant adaptation = = = 
 Plants in wildfire @-@ prone ecosystems often survive through adaptations to their local fire regime . Such adaptations include physical protection against heat , increased growth after a fire event , and flammable materials that encourage fire and may eliminate competition . For example , plants of the genus Eucalyptus contain flammable oils that encourage fire and hard sclerophyll leaves to resist heat and drought , ensuring their dominance over less fire @-@ tolerant species . Dense bark , shedding lower branches , and high water content in external structures may also protect trees from rising temperatures . Fire @-@ resistant seeds and reserve shoots that sprout after a fire encourage species preservation , as embodied by pioneer species . Smoke , charred wood , and heat can stimulate the germination of seeds in a process called serotiny . Exposure to smoke from burning plants promotes germination in other types of plants by inducing the production of the orange <unk> . 
 Grasslands in Western Sabah , Malaysian pine forests , and Indonesian Casuarina forests are believed to have resulted from previous periods of fire . <unk> deadwood litter is low in water content and flammable , and the shrub quickly sprouts after a fire . Cape lilies lie dormant until flames brush away the covering , then blossom almost overnight . Sequoia rely on periodic fires to reduce competition , release seeds from their cones , and clear the soil and canopy for new growth . Caribbean Pine in Bahamian <unk> have adapted to and rely on low @-@ intensity , surface fires for survival and growth . An optimum fire frequency for growth is every 3 to 10 years . Too frequent fires favor herbaceous plants , and infrequent fires favor species typical of Bahamian dry forests . 
 = = = Atmospheric effects = = = 
 Most of the Earth 's weather and air pollution resides in the troposphere , the part of the atmosphere that extends from the surface of the planet to a height of about 10 kilometers ( 6 mi ) . The vertical lift of a severe thunderstorm or <unk> can be enhanced in the area of a large wildfire , which can propel smoke , soot , and other particulate matter as high as the lower stratosphere . Previously , prevailing scientific theory held that most particles in the stratosphere came from volcanoes , but smoke and other wildfire emissions have been detected from the lower stratosphere . <unk> clouds can reach 6 @,@ 100 meters ( 20 @,@ 000 ft ) over wildfires . Satellite observation of smoke plumes from wildfires revealed that the plumes could be traced intact for distances exceeding 1 @,@ 600 kilometers ( 1 @,@ 000 mi ) . Computer @-@ aided models such as <unk> may help predict the size and direction of wildfire @-@ generated smoke plumes by using atmospheric dispersion modeling . 
 Wildfires can affect climate and weather and have major impacts on atmospheric pollution . To determine climate variability and its impact , tools such as remote sensing , fire danger rating systems , and fire behavior models have been used . Wildfire emissions contain fine particulate matter which can cause cardiovascular and respiratory problems . Increased fire byproducts in the troposphere can increase ozone concentration beyond safe levels . Forest fires in Indonesia in 1997 were estimated to have released between 0 @.@ 81 and 2 @.@ 57 gigatonnes ( 0 @.@ 89 and 2 @.@ 83 billion short tons ) of CO2 into the atmosphere , which is between 13 % – 40 % of the annual global carbon dioxide emissions from burning fossil fuels . Atmospheric models suggest that these concentrations of sooty particles could increase absorption of incoming solar radiation during winter months by as much as 15 % . 
 = = History = = 
 In the Welsh Borders , the first evidence of wildfire is <unk> plant fossils preserved as charcoal , dating to the Silurian period ( about 420 million years ago ) . <unk> surface fires started to occur sometime before the Early Devonian period 405 million years ago . Low atmospheric oxygen during the Middle and Late Devonian was accompanied by a decrease in charcoal abundance . Additional charcoal evidence suggests that fires continued through the Carboniferous period . Later , the overall increase of atmospheric oxygen from 13 % in the Late Devonian to 30 @-@ 31 % by the Late Permian was accompanied by a more widespread distribution of wildfires . Later , a decrease in wildfire @-@ related charcoal deposits from the late Permian to the Triassic periods is explained by a decrease in oxygen levels . 
 Wildfires during the Paleozoic and Mesozoic periods followed patterns similar to fires that occur in modern times . Surface fires driven by dry seasons are evident in Devonian and Carboniferous <unk> forests . <unk> forests dating to the Carboniferous period have charred peaks , evidence of crown fires . In Jurassic gymnosperm forests , there is evidence of high frequency , light surface fires . The increase of fire activity in the late Tertiary is possibly due to the increase of C4 @-@ type grasses . As these grasses shifted to more mesic habitats , their high flammability increased fire frequency , promoting grasslands over woodlands . However , fire @-@ prone habitats may have contributed to the prominence of trees such as those of the genera Eucalyptus , Pinus and Sequoia , which have thick bark to withstand fires and employ serotiny . 
 = = = Human involvement = = = 
 The human use of fire for agricultural and hunting purposes during the Paleolithic and Mesolithic ages altered the preexisting landscapes and fire regimes . Woodlands were gradually replaced by smaller vegetation that facilitated travel , hunting , seed @-@ gathering and planting . In recorded human history , minor allusions to wildfires were mentioned in the Bible and by classical writers such as Homer . However , while ancient Hebrew , Greek , and Roman writers were aware of fires , they were not very interested in the uncultivated lands where wildfires occurred . Wildfires were used in battles throughout human history as early thermal weapons . From the Middle ages , accounts were written of occupational burning as well as customs and laws that governed the use of fire . In Germany , regular burning was documented in 1290 in the Odenwald and in 1344 in the Black Forest . In the 14th century Sardinia , firebreaks were used for wildfire protection . In Spain during the 1550s , sheep husbandry was discouraged in certain provinces by Philip II due to the harmful effects of fires used in transhumance . As early as the 17th century , Native Americans were observed using fire for many purposes including cultivation , signaling , and warfare . Scottish botanist David Douglas noted the native use of fire for tobacco cultivation , to encourage deer into smaller areas for hunting purposes , and to improve foraging for honey and grasshoppers . Charcoal found in sedimentary deposits off the Pacific coast of Central America suggests that more burning occurred in the 50 years before the Spanish colonization of the Americas than after the colonization . In the post @-@ World War II Baltic region , socio @-@ economic changes led more stringent air quality standards and bans on fires that eliminated traditional burning practices . 
 Wildfires typically occurred during periods of increased temperature and drought . An increase in fire @-@ related debris flow in alluvial fans of northeastern Yellowstone National Park was linked to the period between AD 1050 and 1200 , coinciding with the Medieval Warm Period . However , human influence caused an increase in fire frequency . Dendrochronological fire scar data and charcoal layer data in Finland suggests that , while many fires occurred during severe drought conditions , an increase in the number of fires during 850 BC and 1660 AD can be attributed to human influence . Charcoal evidence from the Americas suggested a general decrease in wildfires between 1 AD and 1750 compared to previous years . However , a period of increased fire frequency between 1750 and 1870 was suggested by charcoal data from North America and Asia , attributed to human population growth and influences such as land clearing practices . This period was followed by an overall decrease in burning in the 20th century , linked to the expansion of agriculture , increased livestock grazing , and fire prevention efforts . A meta @-@ analysis found that 17 times as much land burned annually in California before 1800 compared to today ( 1 @,@ 800 @,@ 000 hectares / year compared to 102 @,@ 000 hectares / year ) . 
 Invasive species moved by humans have in some cases increased the intensity of wildfires , such as Eucalyptus in California and gamba grass in Australia . 
 = = Prevention = = 
 Wildfire prevention refers to the preemptive methods of reducing the risk of fires as well as lessening its severity and spread . Effective prevention techniques allow supervising agencies to manage air quality , maintain ecological balances , protect resources , and to limit the effects of future uncontrolled fires . North American firefighting policies may permit naturally caused fires to burn to maintain their ecological role , so long as the risks of escape into high @-@ value areas are mitigated . However , prevention policies must consider the role that humans play in wildfires , since , for example , 95 % of forest fires in Europe are related to human involvement . Sources of human @-@ caused fire may include arson , accidental ignition , or the uncontrolled use of fire in land @-@ clearing and agriculture such as the slash @-@ and @-@ burn farming in Southeast Asia . 
 In the mid @-@ 19th century , explorers from the HMS Beagle observed Australian Aborigines using fire for ground clearing , hunting , and regeneration of plant food in a method later named fire @-@ stick farming . Such careful use of fire has been employed for centuries in the lands protected by Kakadu National Park to encourage biodiversity . In 1937 , U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt initiated a nationwide fire prevention campaign , highlighting the role of human carelessness in forest fires . Later posters of the program featured Uncle Sam , leaders of the Axis powers of World War II , characters from the Disney movie Bambi , and the official mascot of the U.S. Forest Service , Smokey Bear . 
 Wildfires are caused by a combination of natural factors such as topography , fuels and weather . Other than reducing human infractions , only fuels may be altered to affect future fire risk and behavior . Wildfire prevention programs around the world may employ techniques such as wildland fire use and prescribed or controlled burns . Wildland fire use refers to any fire of natural causes that is monitored but allowed to burn . Controlled burns are fires ignited by government agencies under less dangerous weather conditions . 
 Vegetation may be burned periodically to maintain high species diversity and frequent burning of surface fuels limits fuel accumulation , thereby reducing the risk of crown fires . Using strategic cuts of trees , fuels may also be removed by <unk> in order to clean and clear the forest , prevent fuel build @-@ up , and create access into forested areas . Chain saws and large equipment can be used to thin out ladder fuels and shred trees and vegetation to a mulch . Multiple fuel treatments are often needed to influence future fire risks , and wildfire models may be used to predict and compare the benefits of different fuel treatments on future wildfire spread . 
 However , controlled burns are reportedly " the most effective treatment for reducing a fire 's rate of spread , fireline intensity , flame length , and heat per unit of area " according to Jan Van <unk> , a biologist at the Yellowstone Field Station . Additionally , while fuel treatments are typically limited to smaller areas , effective fire management requires the administration of fuels across large landscapes in order to reduce future fire size and severity . 
 Building codes in fire @-@ prone areas typically require that structures be built of flame @-@ resistant materials and a defensible space be maintained by clearing flammable materials within a prescribed distance from the structure . Communities in the Philippines also maintain fire lines 5 to 10 meters ( 16 to 33 ft ) wide between the forest and their village , and patrol these lines during summer months or seasons of dry weather . Fuel buildup can result in costly , devastating fires as new homes , ranches , and other development are built adjacent to wilderness areas . Continued growth in fire @-@ prone areas and rebuilding structures destroyed by fires has been met with criticism . 
 However , the population growth along the wildland @-@ urban interface discourages the use of current fuel management techniques . Smoke is an irritant and attempts to thin out the fuel load is met with opposition due to desirability of forested areas , in addition to other wilderness goals such as endangered species protection and habitat preservation . The ecological benefits of fire are often overridden by the economic and safety benefits of protecting structures and human life . For example , while fuel treatments decrease the risk of crown fires , these techniques destroy the habitats of various plant and animal species . Additionally , government policies that cover the wilderness usually differ from local and state policies that govern urban lands . 
 = = Policy = = 
 = = = History of wildfire policy in the U.S. = = = 
 Since the turn of the 20th century , various federal and state agencies have been involved in wildland fire management in one form or another . In the early 20th century , for example , the federal government , through the U.S. Army and the U.S. Forest Service , solicited fire suppression as a primary goal of managing the nation 's forests . At this time in history fire was viewed as a threat to timber , an economically important natural resource . As such , the decision was made to devote public funds to fire suppression and fire prevention efforts . For example , the Forest Fire Emergency Fund Act of 1908 permitted deficit spending in the case of emergency fire situations . As a result , the U.S. Forest Service was able to acquire a deficit of over $ 1 million in 1910 due to emergency fire suppression efforts . Following the same tone of timber resource protection , the U.S. Forest Service adopted the " 10 AM Policy " in 1935 . Through this policy , the agency advocated the control of all fires by 10 o 'clock of the morning following the discovery of a wildfire . Fire prevention was also heavily advocated through public education campaigns such as Smokey Bear . Through these and similar public education campaigns the general public was , in a sense , trained to perceive all wildfire as a threat to civilized society and natural resources . The negative sentiment towards wildland fire prevailed and helped to shape wildland fire management objectives throughout most of the 20th century . 
 Beginning in the 1970s public perception of wildland fire management began to shift . Despite strong funding for fire suppression in the first half of the 20th century , massive wildfires continued to be prevalent across the landscape of North America . Ecologists were beginning to recognize the presence and ecological importance of natural , lightning @-@ ignited wildfires across the United States . It was learned that suppression of fire in certain ecosystems may in fact increase the likelihood that a wildfire will occur and may increase the intensity of those wildfires . With the emergence of fire ecology as a science also came an effort to apply fire to ecosystems in a controlled manner ; however , suppression is still the main tactic when a fire is set by a human or if it threatens life or property . By the 1980s , in light of this new understanding , funding efforts began to support prescribed burning in order to prevent catastrophic wildfire events . In 2001 , the United States implemented a National Fire Plan , increasing the budget for the reduction of hazardous fuels from $ 108 million in 2000 to $ 401 million . 
 In addition to using prescribed fire to reduce the chance of catastrophic wildfires , mechanical methods have recently been adopted as well . Mechanical methods include the use of <unk> and other machinery to remove hazardous fuels and thereby reduce the risk of wildfire events . Today the United States ' maintains that , " fire , as a critical natural process , will be integrated into land and resource management plans and activities on a landscape scale , and across agency boundaries . Response to wildfire is based on ecological , social and legal consequences of fire . The circumstance under which a fire occurs , and the likely consequences and public safety and welfare , natural and cultural resources , and values to be protected dictate the appropriate management response to fire " ( United States Department of Agriculture Guidance for Implementation of Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy , 13 February 2009 ) . The five federal regulatory agencies managing forest fire response and planning for 676 million acres in the United States are the Department of the Interior , the Bureau of Land Management , the Bureau of Indian Affairs , the National Park Service , the United States Department of Agriculture @-@ Forest Service and the United States Fish and Wildlife Services . Several hundred million U.S. acres of wildfire management are also conducted by state , county , and local fire management organizations . In 2014 , legislators proposed The Wildfire Disaster Funding Act to provide $ 2 @.@ 7 billion fund appropriated by congress for the USDA and Department of Interior to use in fire suppression . The bill is a reaction to United States Forest Service and Department of Interior costs of Western Wildfire suppression appending that amounted to $ 3 @.@ 5 billion in 2013 . 
 = = = The Condition Class System = = = 
 The Condition Class System is used in the United States to provide " national @-@ level data on the current condition of fuel and vegetation . " The USDA Forest Service developed this for the purpose of allocating fire funding and resources , prioritizing fuel usage and restoration activities , and evaluating wildfire management progress . There are primary and secondary determinants used to rank forest systems into condition class and fire regimes . Condition Class " indicates the departure from normal fire return intervals " and is categorized as low , medium , or high . The more a fire departs from normal pattern , the higher is its condition class . A fire regime is the " historical pattern of fire in forests " and the Roman numerals I , II , III , IV and V are used for the classification . Primary determinants are the structure of the forest , the amount of trees , tree density and the characteristics of the combustible fuel . The United States Department of Agriculture and the United States Department of Interior use the Condition Class System in the <unk> project to make assessments of federal land . However , the <unk> project revealed in 2003 that this type of analysis is not detailed enough to use at a local level . Federal agencies are required to take record and report " acres treated " , using different prevention tactics , under the National Fire Plan Operations Reporting System ( <unk> ) . 
 = = = Wildland @-@ urban interface policy = = = 
 An aspect of wildfire policy that is gaining attention is the wildland @-@ urban interface ( WUI ) . More and more people are living in " red zones , " or areas that are at high risk of wildfires . FEMA and the NFPA develop specific policies to guide homeowners and builders in how to build and maintain structures at the WUI and how protect against catastrophic losses . For example , NFPA @-@ 1141 is a standard for fire protection infrastructure for land development in wildland , rural and suburban areas and NFPA @-@ 1144 is a standard for reducing structure ignition hazards from wildland fire . For a full list of these policies and guidelines , see http : / / <unk> / <unk> ? <unk> = 124 & URL = Codes % 20 & % <unk> . Compensation for losses in the WUI are typically negotiated on an incident @-@ by @-@ incident basis . This is generating discussion about the burden of responsibility for funding and fighting a fire in the WUI , in that , if a resident chooses to live in a known red zone , should he or she retain a higher level of responsibility for funding home protection against wildfires . 
 One initiative aimed at helping U.S. WUI communities live more safely with fire is called fire @-@ adapted communities . 
 = = = Economics of fire management policy = = = 
 Similar to that of military operations , fire management is often very expensive in the U.S. and the rest of the world . Today , it is not uncommon for suppression operations for a single wildfire to exceed costs of $ 1 million in just a few days . The United States Department of Agriculture allotted $ 2 @.@ 2 billion for wildfire management in 2012 . Although fire suppression offers many benefits to society , other options for fire management exist . While these options cannot completely replace fire suppression as a fire management tool , other options can play an important role in overall fire management and can therefore affect the costs of fire suppression . 
 The application of fire management tools requires making certain tradeoffs . Below is a sample of some costs and benefits associated with the tools currently used in fire management . Current approaches to fire management are an almost complete turnaround compared to historic approaches . In fact , it is commonly accepted that past fire suppression , along with other factors , has resulted in larger , more intense wildfire events which are seen today . In economic terms , expenditures used for wildfire suppression in the early 20th century have contributed to increased suppression costs which are being realized today . As is the case with many public policy issues , costs and benefits associated with particular fire management tools are difficult to accurately quantify . Ultimately , costs and benefits should be weighed against one another on a case @-@ by @-@ case basis in planning wildland fire management operations . 
 Depending on the tradeoffs that a land manager is willing to make , a combination of the following fire management tools could be used . For instance , prescribed fire and / or mechanical fuels reduction could be used to help prevent or lessen the intensity of a wildfire thereby reducing or eliminating suppression costs . In addition , prescribed fire and / or mechanical fuels reduction could be used to improve soil conditions in fields or in forests to the benefit of wildlife or natural resources . On the other hand , the use of prescribed fire requires much advanced planning and can have negative impacts on human health in nearby communities . 
 Costs and Benefits of Wildland Fire Management Tools 
 = = Detection = = 
 Fast and effective detection is a key factor in wildfire fighting . Early detection efforts were focused on early response , accurate results in both daytime and nighttime , and the ability to prioritize fire danger . Fire lookout towers were used in the United States in the early 20th century and fires were reported using telephones , carrier pigeons , and heliographs . Aerial and land photography using instant cameras were used in the 1950s until infrared scanning was developed for fire detection in the 1960s . However , information analysis and delivery was often delayed by limitations in communication technology . Early satellite @-@ derived fire analyses were hand @-@ drawn on maps at a remote site and sent via overnight mail to the fire manager . During the Yellowstone fires of 1988 , a data station was established in West Yellowstone , permitting the delivery of satellite @-@ based fire information in approximately four hours . 
 Currently , public hotlines , fire lookouts in towers , and ground and aerial patrols can be used as a means of early detection of forest fires . However , accurate human observation may be limited by operator fatigue , time of day , time of year , and geographic location . Electronic systems have gained popularity in recent years as a possible resolution to human operator error . A government report on a recent trial of three automated camera fire detection systems in Australia did , however , conclude " ... detection by the camera systems was slower and less reliable than by a trained human observer " . These systems may be semi- or fully automated and employ systems based on the risk area and degree of human presence , as suggested by GIS data analyses . An integrated approach of multiple systems can be used to merge satellite data , aerial imagery , and personnel position via Global Positioning System ( GPS ) into a collective whole for near @-@ realtime use by wireless Incident Command Centers . 
 A small , high risk area that features thick vegetation , a strong human presence , or is close to a critical urban area can be monitored using a local sensor network . Detection systems may include wireless sensor networks that act as automated weather systems : detecting temperature , humidity , and smoke . These may be battery @-@ powered , solar @-@ powered , or tree @-@ rechargeable : able to recharge their battery systems using the small electrical currents in plant material . Larger , medium @-@ risk areas can be monitored by scanning towers that incorporate fixed cameras and sensors to detect smoke or additional factors such as the infrared signature of carbon dioxide produced by fires . Additional capabilities such as night vision , brightness detection , and color change detection may also be incorporated into sensor arrays . 
 Satellite and aerial monitoring through the use of planes , helicopter , or UAVs can provide a wider view and may be sufficient to monitor very large , low risk areas . These more sophisticated systems employ GPS and aircraft @-@ mounted infrared or high @-@ resolution visible cameras to identify and target wildfires . Satellite @-@ mounted sensors such as Envisat 's Advanced Along Track Scanning Radiometer and European Remote @-@ Sensing Satellite 's Along @-@ Track Scanning Radiometer can measure infrared radiation emitted by fires , identifying hot spots greater than 39 ° C ( 102 ° F ) . The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 's Hazard Mapping System combines remote @-@ sensing data from satellite sources such as Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite ( GOES ) , Moderate @-@ Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer ( MODIS ) , and Advanced Very High Resolution Radiometer ( <unk> ) for detection of fire and smoke plume locations . However , satellite detection is prone to offset errors , anywhere from 2 to 3 kilometers ( 1 to 2 mi ) for MODIS and <unk> data and up to 12 kilometers ( 7 @.@ 5 mi ) for GOES data . Satellites in geostationary orbits may become disabled , and satellites in polar orbits are often limited by their short window of observation time . Cloud cover and image resolution and may also limit the effectiveness of satellite imagery . 
 in 2015 a new fire detection tool is in operation at the U.S. Department of Agriculture ( USDA ) Forest Service ( USFS ) which uses data from the Suomi National Polar @-@ orbiting Partnership ( NPP ) satellite to detect smaller fires in more detail than previous space @-@ based products . The high @-@ resolution data is used with a computer model to predict how a fire will change direction based on weather and land conditions . The active fire detection product using data from Suomi NPP 's Visible Infrared Imaging Radiometer Suite ( VIIRS ) increases the resolution of fire observations to 1 @,@ 230 feet ( 375 meters ) . Previous NASA satellite data products available since the early 2000s observed fires at 3 @,@ 280 foot ( 1 kilometer ) resolution . The data is one of the intelligence tools used by the USFS and Department of Interior agencies across the United States to guide resource allocation and strategic fire management decisions . The enhanced VIIRS fire product enables detection every 12 hours or less of much smaller fires and provides more detail and consistent tracking of fire lines during long duration wildfires – capabilities critical for early warning systems and support of routine mapping of fire progression . Active fire locations are available to users within minutes from the satellite overpass through data processing facilities at the USFS Remote Sensing Applications Center , which uses technologies developed by the NASA Goddard Space Flight Center Direct <unk> Laboratory in Greenbelt , Maryland . The model uses data on weather conditions and the land surrounding an active fire to predict 12 – 18 hours in advance whether a blaze will shift direction . The VIIRS fire detection product has been applied to these models , successfully verifying the wildfire simulations . The state of Colorado decided to incorporate the weather @-@ fire model in its firefighting efforts beginning with the 2016 fire season . 
 In 2014 , an international campaign was organized in South Africa 's Kruger National Park to validate fire detection products including the new VIIRS active fire data . In advance of that campaign , the <unk> Institute of the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research in Pretoria , South Africa , an early adopter of the VIIRS <unk> fire product , put it to use during several large wildfires in Kruger . 
 The demand for timely , high @-@ quality fire information has increased in recent years . Wildfires in the United States burn an average of 7 million acres of land each year . For the last 10 years , the USFS and Department of Interior have spent a combined average of about $ 1 @.@ 5 billion annually on wildfire suppression . Large catastrophic wildfires have become common , especially in association with extended drought and extreme weather . 
 = = Suppression = = 
 Wildfire suppression depends on the technologies available in the area in which the wildfire occurs . In less developed nations the techniques used can be as simple as throwing sand or beating the fire with sticks or palm fronds . In more advanced nations , the suppression methods vary due to increased technological capacity . Silver iodide can be used to encourage snow fall , while fire retardants and water can be dropped onto fires by unmanned aerial vehicles , planes , and helicopters . Complete fire suppression is no longer an expectation , but the majority of wildfires are often extinguished before they grow out of control . While more than 99 % of the 10 @,@ 000 new wildfires each year are contained , escaped wildfires can cause extensive damage . Worldwide damage from wildfires is in the billions of euros annually . Wildfires in Canada and the US burn an average of 54 @,@ 500 square kilometers ( 13 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 acres ) per year . 
 Above all , fighting wildfires can become deadly . A wildfire 's burning front may also change direction unexpectedly and jump across fire breaks . Intense heat and smoke can lead to disorientation and loss of appreciation of the direction of the fire , which can make fires particularly dangerous . For example , during the 1949 Mann Gulch fire in Montana , USA , thirteen smokejumpers died when they lost their communication links , became disoriented , and were overtaken by the fire . In the Australian February 2009 Victorian bushfires , at least 173 people died and over 2 @,@ 029 homes and 3 @,@ 500 structures were lost when they became engulfed by wildfire . 
 = = = Wildland firefighting safety = = = 
 Wildland fire fighters face several life @-@ threatening hazards including heat stress , fatigue , smoke and dust , as well as the risk of other injuries such as burns , cuts and scrapes , animal bites , and even rhabdomyolysis . 
 Especially in hot weather condition , fires present the risk of heat stress , which can entail feeling heat , fatigue , weakness , vertigo , headache , or nausea . Heat stress can progress into heat strain , which entails physiological changes such as increased heart rate and core body temperature . This can lead to heat @-@ related illnesses , such as heat rash , cramps , exhaustion or heat stroke . Various factors can contribute to the risks posed by heat stress , including strenuous work , personal risk factors such as age and fitness , dehydration , sleep deprivation , and burdensome personal protective equipment . Rest , cool water , and occasional breaks are crucial to mitigating the effects of heat stress . 
 Smoke , ash , and debris can also pose serious respiratory hazards to wildland fire fighters . The smoke and dust from wildfires can contain gases such as carbon monoxide , sulfur dioxide and formaldehyde , as well as particulates such as ash and silica . To reduce smoke exposure , wildfire fighting crews should , whenever possible , rotate firefighters through areas of heavy smoke , avoid downwind firefighting , use equipment rather than people in holding areas , and minimize mop @-@ up . Camps and command posts should also be located upwind of wildfires . Protective clothing and equipment can also help minimize exposure to smoke and ash . 
 Firefighters are also at risk of cardiac events including strokes and heart attacks . Fire fighters should maintain good physical fitness . Fitness programs , medical screening and examination programs which include stress tests can minimize the risks of firefighting cardiac problems . Other injury hazards wildland fire fighters face include slips , trips and falls , burns , scrapes and cuts from tools and equipment , being struck by trees , vehicles , or other objects , plant hazards such as thorns and poison ivy , snake and animal bites , vehicle crashes , electrocution from power lines or lightning storms , and unstable building structures . 
 = = Fire retardant = = 
 Fire retardants are used to help slow wildfires , coat fuels , and lessen oxygen availability as required by various firefighting situations . They are composed of nitrates , ammonia , phosphates and sulfates , as well as other chemicals and thickening agents . The choice of whether to apply retardant depends on the magnitude , location and intensity of the wildfire . Fire retardants are used to reach inaccessible geographical regions where ground firefighting crews are unable to reach a wildfire or in any occasion where human safety and structures are endangered . In certain instances , fire retardant may also be applied ahead of wildfires for protection of structures and vegetation as a precautionary fire defense measure . 
 The application of aerial fire retardants creates an atypical appearance on land and water surfaces and has the potential to change soil chemistry . Fire retardant can decrease the availability of plant nutrients in the soil by increasing the acidity of the soil . Fire retardant may also affect water quality through leaching , eutrophication , or misapplication . Fire retardant 's effects on drinking water remain inconclusive . Dilution factors , including water body size , rainfall , and water flow rates lessen the concentration and potency of fire retardant . Wildfire debris ( ash and sediment ) clog rivers and reservoirs increasing the risk for floods and erosion that ultimately slow and / or damage water treatment systems . There is continued concern of fire retardant effects on land , water , wildlife habitats , and watershed quality , additional research is needed . However , on the positive side , fire retardant ( specifically its nitrogen and phosphorus components ) has been shown to have a fertilizing effect on nutrient @-@ deprived soils and thus creates a temporary increase in vegetation . 
 Current USDA procedure maintains that the aerial application of fire retardant in the United States must clear waterways by a minimum of 300 feet in order to safeguard effects of retardant runoff . Aerial uses of fire retardant are required to avoid application near waterways and endangered species ( plant and animal habitats ) . After any incident of fire retardant misapplication , the U.S. Forest Service requires reporting and assessment impacts be made in order to determine mitigation , remediation , and / or restrictions on future retardant uses in that area . 
 = = = Modeling = = = 
 Wildfire modeling is concerned with numerical simulation of wildfires in order to comprehend and predict fire behavior . Wildfire modeling can ultimately aid wildfire suppression , increase the safety of firefighters and the public , and minimize damage . Using computational science , wildfire modeling involves the statistical analysis of past fire events to predict spotting risks and front behavior . Various wildfire propagation models have been proposed in the past , including simple ellipses and egg- and fan @-@ shaped models . Early attempts to determine wildfire behavior assumed terrain and vegetation uniformity . However , the exact behavior of a wildfire 's front is dependent on a variety of factors , including windspeed and slope steepness . Modern growth models utilize a combination of past ellipsoidal descriptions and Huygens ' Principle to simulate fire growth as a continuously expanding polygon . Extreme value theory may also be used to predict the size of large wildfires . However , large fires that exceed suppression capabilities are often regarded as statistical outliers in standard analyses , even though fire policies are more influenced by catastrophic wildfires than by small fires . 
 Cellular automata models have increasingly been used to model forest fire events . The initial model proposed by <unk> @-@ <unk> ( 1992 ) identified forest fires as self @-@ organised critical systems because the frequency @-@ size distribution adheres to a power law relationship . More highly <unk> models have since supported this initial power law claim within forest fire models and real data obtained from forest fires in Australia and the US have shown the power law relationship to hold over a certain range . This has implications for predicting the size of forest fires based on observed frequency in areas where environmental conditions make the area susceptible to wildfire . Cellular automata models have also been used to model the response of forest fire events to changes in type , amount and distribution of combustible material , as well as weather conditions . 
 = = Human risk and exposure = = 
 Wildfire risk is the chance that a wildfire will start in or reach a particular area and the potential loss of human values if it does . Risk is dependent on variable factors such as human activities , weather patterns , availability of wildfire fuels , and the availability or lack of resources to suppress a fire . Wildfires have continually been a threat to human populations . However , human induced geographical and climatic changes are exposing populations more frequently to wildfires and increasing wildfire risk . It is speculated that the increase in wildfires arises from a century of wildfire suppression coupled with the rapid expansion of human developments into fire @-@ prone <unk> . Wildfires are naturally occurring events that aid in promoting forest health . The consequence of suppressing wildfires has led to an overgrowth in forest vegetation , which provides excess fuel that increases the severity , range , and duration of a wildfire . Global warming and climate changes are causing an increase in temperatures and more droughts nationwide which also contributes to an increase in wildfire risk . 
 = = = Regional burden of wildfires in the United States = = = 
 Nationally , the burden of wildfires is disproportionally heavily distributed in the southern and western regions . The Geographic Area Coordinating Group ( <unk> ) divides the United States and Alaska into 11 geographic areas for the purpose of emergency incident management . One particular area of focus is wildland fires . A national assessment of wildfire risk in the United States based on <unk> identified regions ( with the slight modification of combining Southern and Northern California , and the West and East Basin ) ; indicate that California ( 50 @.@ 22 % risk ) and the Southern Area ( 15 @.@ 53 % risk ) are the geographic areas with the highest wildfire risk . The western areas of the nation are experiencing an expansion of human development into and beyond what is called the wildland @-@ urban interface ( WUI ) . When wildfires inevitably occur in these fire @-@ prone areas , often communities are threatened due to their proximity to fire @-@ prone forest . The south is one of the fastest growing regions with 88 million acres classified as WUI . The south consistently has the highest number of wildfires per year . More than 50 , 000 communities are estimated to be at high to very high risk of wildfire damage . These statistics are greatly attributable to the South 's year @-@ round fire season . 
 = = = Wildfires risk to human health = = = 
 The most noticeable adverse effect of wildfires is the destruction of property and biomass . However , the release of hazardous chemicals from the burning of wildland fuels significantly impacts health in humans . Wildfire smoke is composed primarily of carbon dioxide and water vapor . Other common smoke components present in lower concentrations are carbon monoxide , formaldehyde , acrolein , <unk> hydrocarbons , and benzene . Small particulates suspended in air which come in solid form or in liquid droplets are also present in smoke . 80 <unk> % of wildfire smoke , by mass , is within the fine particle size class of 2 @.@ 5 micrometers in diameter or smaller . Despite carbon dioxides high concentration in smoke , it poses low health risk due to its low toxicity . Carbon monoxide and fine particulate matter , particularly 2 @.@ 5 µm in diameter and smaller , have been identified as the major health threats . Other chemicals are considered to be significant hazards but are found in concentrations that are too low to cause detectable health effects . 
 The degree of wildfire smoke exposure to an individual is dependent on the length , severity , duration , and proximity of the fire . People are exposed directly to smoke via the respiratory tract though inhalation of air pollutants . Indirectly , communities are exposed to wildfire debris that can contaminate soil and water supplies . Firefighters are at the greatest risk for acute and chronic health effects resulting from wildfire smoke exposure . Due to firefighter 's occupational duties , they are frequently exposed to hazardous chemicals at a close proximity for longer periods of time . A case study on the exposure of wildfire smoke among wildland firefighters , show that firefighters are exposed to significant levels of carbon monoxide and respiratory irritants above OSHA permissible exposure limits ( PEL ) and <unk> threshold limit values ( TLV ) . 5 – 10 % are overexposed . The study obtained exposure concentrations for one wildland firefighter over a 10 @-@ hour shift spent holding down a fireline . The firefighter was exposed to a wide range of carbon monoxide and respiratory irritant ( combination of particulate matter 3 @.@ 5 µm and smaller , acrolein , and <unk> ) levels . Carbon monoxide levels reached up to <unk> and the TLV irritant index value reached a high of 10 . In contrast , the OSHA PEL for carbon monoxide is <unk> and for the TLV respiratory irritant index , the calculated threshold limit value is 1 ; any value above 1 exceeds exposure limits . 
 Residents in communities surrounding wildfires are exposed to lower concentrations of chemicals , but they are at a greater risk for indirect exposure through water or soil contamination . Exposure to residents is greatly dependent on individual susceptibility . Vulnerable persons such as children ( ages 0 – 4 ) , the elderly ( ages 65 and older ) , smokers , and pregnant women are at an increased risk due to already compromised body systems , even when the exposures are present at low chemical concentrations and for relatively short exposure periods . The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) developed the Air Quality Index ( AQI ) , a public resource that provides national air quality standard concentrations for common air pollutants . The public can use this index as a tool to determine their exposure to hazardous air pollutants based on visibility range . Additionally , there is evidence of an increase in material stress , as documented by researchers M.H. O 'Donnell and A.M. <unk> , thus affecting birth outcomes . In Australia , studies show that the male infants born with drastically higher average birth weights were born in mostly severely fire @-@ affected areas . This is attributed to the fact that maternal signals directly affect fetal growth patterns . 
 = = Health effects = = 
 Inhalation of smoke from a wildfire can be a health hazard . Wildfire smoke is primarily composed of carbon dioxide , water vapor , particulate matter , organic chemicals , nitrogen oxides and other compounds . The principle health concern is the inhalation of particulate matter and carbon monoxide . 
 <unk> matter ( PM ) is a type of air pollution made up of particles of dust and liquid droplets . They are characterized into two categories based on the diameter of the particle . Coarse particles are between 2 @.@ 5 micrometers and 10 micrometers and fine particles measure 2 @.@ 5 micrometers and less . Both sizes can be inhaled . Coarse particles are filtered by the upper airways and can cause eye and sinus irritation as well as sore throat and coughing . The fine particles are more problematic because , when inhaled , they can be deposited deep into the lungs , where they are absorbed into the bloodstream . This is particularly hazardous to the very young , elderly and those with chronic conditions such as asthma , chronic obstructive pulmonary disease ( COPD ) , cystic fibrosis and cardiovascular conditions . The illnesses most commonly with exposure to fine particle from wildfire smoke are bronchitis , exacerbation of asthma or COPD , and pneumonia . Symptoms of these complications include wheezing and shortness of breath and cardiovascular symptoms include chest pain , rapid heart rate and fatigue . 
 Carbon monoxide ( CO ) is a colorless , odorless gas that can be found at the highest concentration at close proximity to a smoldering fire . For this reason , carbon monoxide inhalation is a serious threat to the health of wildfire firefighters . CO in smoke can be inhaled into the lungs where it is absorbed into the bloodstream and reduces oxygen delivery to the body 's vital organs . At high concentrations , it can cause headache , weakness , dizziness , confusion , nausea , disorientation , visual impairment , coma and even death . However , even at lower concentrations , such as those found at wildfires , individuals with cardiovascular disease may experience chest pain and cardiac arrhythmia . A recent study tracking the number and cause of wildfire firefighter deaths from 1990 – 2006 found that 21 @.@ 9 % of the deaths occurred from heart attacks . 
 Another important and somewhat less obvious health effect of wildfires is psychiatric diseases and disorders . Both adults and children from countries ranging from the United States and Canada to Greece and Australia who were directly and indirectly affected by wildfires were found by researchers to demonstrate several different mental conditions linked to their experience with the wildfires . These include post @-@ traumatic stress disorder ( PTSD ) , depression , anxiety , and phobias . 
 In a new twist to wildfire health effects , former uranium mining sites were burned over in the summer of 2012 near North Fork , Idaho . This prompted concern from area residents and Idaho State Department of Environmental Quality officials over the potential spread of radiation in the resultant smoke , since those sites had never been completely cleaned up from radioactive remains . 
 = = = Epidemiology = = = 
 The EPA has defined acceptable concentrations of particulate matter in the air , through the National Ambient Air Quality Standards and monitoring of ambient air quality has been mandated . Due to these monitoring programs and the incidence of several large wildfires near populated areas , epidemiological studies have been conducted and demonstrate an association between human health effects and an increase in fine particulate matter due to wildfire smoke . 
 An increase in PM emitted from the Hayman fire in Colorado in June 2002 , was associated with an increase in respiratory symptoms in patients with COPD . Looking at the wildfires in Southern California in October 2003 in a similar manner , investigators have shown an increase in hospital admissions due to asthma during peak concentrations of PM . Children participating in the Children 's Health Study were also found to have an increase in eye and respiratory symptoms , medication use and physician visits . Recently , it was demonstrated that mothers who were pregnant during the fires gave birth to babies with a slightly reduced average birth weight compared to those who were not exposed to wildfire during birth . Suggesting that pregnant women may also be at greater risk to adverse effects from wildfire . Worldwide it is estimated that 339 @,@ 000 people die due to the effects of wildfire smoke each year . 
 = = Types of wildfires = = 
 There are many types of wildfires , most commonly classified as ground , surface , or crown wildfires . Ground fires burn in the humus , and usually burn out by themselves . These burn the roots of plants , mycelium , and other matter in the humus . Only some manage to become surface or crown fires . Surface fires burn above the humus but do not burn tall trees . If they manage to spread into the tallest of trees they are called crown wildfires . <unk> are another type of wildfire , but they are not one of the base types of wildfires . They have strong gusts of wind created by the way of heat transfer called convection . 
 = = Notable wildfires = = 
 Landes Forest 1949 wildfire in South West France ; 50 @,@ 000 hectares ( 500 km2 ; 190 sq mi ) of forest land were burnt and 82 people were killed . 
 2003 Portuguese wildfires 
 1988 Yellowstone wildfires 
 Peshtigo Fire , 1871 ; most loss of life in a US wildfire . 
 Great Fire of 1910 in the US ; shaped 20th @-@ century wildfire policy 
 2009 SE Australia bushfires 
 2010 Bolivian forest fires 
 2010 Russian wildfires 
 2011 Texas wildfires 
 2013 Beaver Creek Fire 
 2015 Southeast Asian haze caused by a wildfire in Riau 
 2016 Fort McMurray wildfire 
 = Dunham Massey = 
 Dunham Massey is a civil parish in the Metropolitan Borough of Trafford , Greater Manchester , England . The parish includes the villages of Sinderland Green , Dunham Woodhouses and Dunham Town , along with Dunham Massey Park , formerly the home of the last Earl of Stamford and owned by the National Trust since 1976 . Dunham Massey was historically in the county of Cheshire , but since 1974 has been part of Trafford Metropolitan Borough ; the nearest town is Altrincham . At the 2001 census , the parish had a population of 475 . 
 Dunham Massey 's history is reflected in its 45 listed buildings . It was a regionally important place during the medieval period , and the seat of the Massey barons . The Georgian mansion with the remains of an castle in its grounds is a popular tourist attraction . There are two Sites of Special Scientific Interest in Dunham Massey : Dunham Park , located south of Dunham Town , and Brookheys Covert . 
 = = History = = 
 The Roman road between Chester and York passing between the Dunham Massey and Bowdon forms the boundary between the two . The name Dunham is derived from the Anglo @-@ Saxon dun , meaning hill . The Massey element of the name is a result of its ownership by the Massey family . The manor of Dunham is recorded in the Domesday Book of 1086 as having belonged to Aelfward , a Saxon thegn , before the Norman Conquest and to Hamo de <unk> afterwards . The Barons de <unk> also had control over the manors of Baguley , Bowdon , Hale , Partington , and Timperley . The suffix of " Massey " to the name Dunham reflects the manor 's importance ; Dunham was the seat of the Masseys . The importance of Dunham is further exemplified by the former existence of two de Massey castles : Dunham Castle and Watch Hill Castle on the border with Bowdon ; a third , <unk> Castle , was near Hale . The Masseys remained lords of Dunham and its environs until the 14th century , when the family 's male line became extinct . The Booth family inherited most of the Massey family land in 1409 , with Dunham Massey remaining at the heart of the estate . 
 By the Elizabeth period , Dunham Massey Castle had been demolished . Probably during the medieval period , Dunham Massey Hall became the home of the manorial lord , and a centre of power in the area . The hall was rebuilt in 1616 , leaving no remains of the old medieval manor house . A mill at Dunham was documented in 1353 , although the its present structure dates to the 1860s . It lies on the River Bollin , opposite Little Bollington . The first record of Dunham 's deer park was also in 1353 . The settlement at Dunham Woodhouse ( named after an outlying lodge on the estate ) dates from the 15th century . During the medieval period , the primary source of employment was agriculture , mainly arable farming . 
 The Warrington and Stockport Railway was constructed through Dunham during 1853 / 54 . Dunham Massey railway station served the area between 1854 and its closure in 1962 . Dunham grew as a result , the population increasing by 57 @.@ 5 % between 1851 and 1881 . Otherwise , the industrial revolution had little effect on Dunham Massey , and it remained a predominantly agricultural area . 
 = = Dunham Massey Hall = = 
 The present hall was built in 1616 by Sir George Booth , who received one of the first baronetcies to be created by James I in 1611 ; it was remodelled by John Norris for his descendant , George , 2nd Earl of Warrington between 1732 and 1740 ; it was further altered by John Hope towards the end of the 18th century and again by Joseph Compton Hall between 1905 and 1908 . The hall , stables , and the carriage house of Dunham Massey are all Grade I listed buildings , three of six such buildings in Trafford . 
 The site is moated and lies immediately west of the village of Dunham , with its deer park to the south . The hall was donated to the National Trust by Roger Grey , 10th and last Earl of Stamford in 1976 . The hall was used as a military hospital during the First World War . Inside is a significant collection of Huguenot silver , the carving The Crucifixion by 17th @-@ century wood carver Grinling Gibbons , and a white marble bust of the Emperor Hadrian ; the head is antique , but the neck and shoulders are 18th @-@ century ; it was probably acquired by the George , Earl of Stamford and Warrington . The hall 's collection of paintings include Allegory with Venus , Mars , Cupid and Time by Guercino ; The Cascade at Terni by Louis <unk> ; and portraits by William Beechey , Francis Cotes , Michael Dahl , A. R. <unk> , Sir Joshua Reynolds , George Romney , Enoch Seeman , and Zoffany . George Harry , Earl of Stamford and Warrington removed a selection of paintings to <unk> Hall in the late @-@ 1850s , and it was not until Roger Grey , 10th Earl of Stamford succeeded as Earl , that some were <unk> by the family after sales in 1929 and 1931 . The deer park is the only surviving medieval park in Trafford or the surrounding area . The hall and grounds are open to the public and are a popular tourist attraction , with 340 @,@ 000 visitors in 2014 . 
 = = Governance = = 
 Dunham Massey was historically in the ecclesiastical parish of Bowdon and the county of Cheshire . 
 The civil parish of Dunham Massey was created in 1894 , under the Local Government Act 1894 , and has its own parish council . Dunham Massey became part of the Metropolitan Borough of Trafford in 1974 upon the borough 's creation , but was previously in Bucklow Rural District . The village is part of the Bowdon electoral ward . The Councillors for Bowdon Ward are Sean <unk> , Karen Barclay , and Michael Hyman , all members of the Conservative Party . Dunham Massey is also a part of the Altrincham and Sale West constituency , and is in the North West England constituency for the European Parliament . Since the formation of the Altrincham and Sale West constituency in 1997 , it has been represented in the House of Commons by the Conservative MP , Graham Brady . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Dunham Massey lies to the east of Warburton , and to the west of Bowdon , with Altrincham approximately 2 miles ( 3 km ) to the northeast . The landscape is predominantly flat , with some mossland . Dunham Park occupies 192 @.@ 7 acres ( 78 @.@ 0 ha ) of the area . The Roman road running from Chester to York forms the boundary between Dunham and Bowdon . The River Bollin runs to the south , with the Bridgewater Canal running through the area . The local geology is lower <unk> marl , with a ridge of sand and gravel running from Dunham to Warburton . 
 = = Demography = = 
 At the 2001 UK census , Dunham Massey had a total population of 475 . For every 100 females , there were 96 @.@ 3 males . The average household size was 2 @.@ 36 . According to the census , 0 @.@ 01 % were unemployed and 19 @.@ 24 % were economically inactive . 17 @.@ 89 % of the population were under the age of 16 , and 9 @.@ 89 % were aged 75 and over ; the mean age of the residents of Dunham Massey was 43 @.@ 71 . 75 @.@ 79 % of residents described their health as ' good ' . 
 = = = Population change = = = 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 = = = Site of Special Scientific Interest = = = 
 Brookheys Covert 
 Brookheys Covert is a Site of Special Scientific Interest in the Dunham Park Estate ( grid reference <unk> ) . The site is a semi @-@ natural wood consisting mainly of ash , birch , and rowan , with a wetland habitat and several marl pits , which have flooded to form ponds . The reserve spans 5 @.@ 8 acres ( 2 @.@ 3 ha ) and is managed by the Dunham Massey Estates . Brookheys Covert provides a habitat for many animals , including foxes , rabbits , squirrels , and 57 species of bird . 
 Dunham Park 
 Dunham Park covers an area of 192 @.@ 7 acres ( 78 @.@ 0 ha ) and is part of the Dunham Park Estate , run by the National Trust ( grid reference <unk> ) . The park is mostly " pasture @-@ woodland or park @-@ woodland " and has been since the Middle Ages . Many of the oak trees , which make up the larger part of the woodland , date back to the 17th century . Dunham Park is the only place in the northwest of England with such a concentration of old trees , and one of only a few remaining in England , making it a site of national importance . The park supports a range of animals , including fallow deer and over 500 species of insect . 
 = = = Grade II listed buildings = = = 
 Dunham Massey has many grade II listed buildings ; among the most striking is the 18th @-@ century sandstone obelisk at the end of the north vista from Dunham Massey Hall . Tradition has it that it marks the burial site of a race horse . 
 There are many listed residences in Dunham Massey , most dating from the 18th or early @-@ 19th century , and many feature Flemish bond brickwork and slate roofs . They include : Dunham Massey Lodge , on Dunham Road ; Willow Cottage ; numbers 1 and 2 Barns Lane ; number 1 Orchard View ; The Hollies , on Station Road ; numbers 1 , 3 and 4 Woodhouse Lane ; Big Tree Cottages , on Woodhouse Lane . <unk> View , also on Woodhouse Lane , dates from 1725 and has both garden wall bond and Flemish bond brickwork . Big Tree House , on Charcoal Road , dates from the mid @-@ 18th century and features English bond brickwork . Yew Tree Cottage and Lime Tree Cottage are also on Charcoal Lane ; both houses date to the 17th century and exhibit garden wall bond brickwork with slate roofs . Ivy House , on Woodhouse Lane , was built in the early 18th century . Kitchen Garden cottage was built in 1702 . Rose Cottage and Farm Cottage are late @-@ 18th- or early @-@ 19th @-@ century . The Meadows , on School Lane , was built in the 17th century and features garden wall bond brickwork and a thatched roof . 
 The farm buildings of Home Farm , including its dovecote , were built in the early @-@ 19th century , and feature Flemish bond brickwork . Sinderland House , also dating from the early @-@ 19th century , is another of Dunham Massey 's listed farmhouses . Manor Farmhouse , on Station Road , was built by George Booth , 2nd Earl of Warrington ; the building dates from the mid @-@ 18th century and features both Flemish and garden wall bond brickwork . The farmhouse on Station Road was built in 1752 . The barn on Woodhouse Lane dates from the early 18th century and features garden wall bond brickwork , a slate roof , and upper cruck frames . Dog Farmhouse , also on Woodhouse Lane , was built in the early 19th century ; however it may have been an adaptation of an earlier , possibly 18th @-@ century , farmhouse . 
 Dunham School was built in 1759 , with additions in 1860 and the 20th century . Above the door is an engraved panel reading " This School was Erected in 1759 For the Benefit of the Township of Dunham Massey . According to the Will of Thomas Walton Gent " . The school is now used as the parish hall . The nearby Dunham School Bridge , over the Bridgewater Canal , was built in 1776 by John Gilbert , who also built the aqueduct for the Bridgewater Canal over the River Bollin , which was opened in 1776 . The other listed bridge , Brick Kiln Lane Bridge , was also built in the 18th century . Bollington watermill , constructed in the 1860s , has an undershot waterwheel . 
 There are a number of listed structures in the grounds of Dunham Massey Hall , including the 1720 wellhouse that supplied water to the hall until the 1860s , and the early @-@ 18th @-@ century ornamental sundial in front of the hall , depicting a black slave clad in leaves , carrying the sundial above his head . The stable buildings , the slaughterhouse , the deer house , the orangery , and an ashlar shelter to the west of the hall , all date from the 17th or 18th century . Barn Cottages date from at least 1751 . The cottages were originally a single barn , which was converted in the 19th century . Other grade II listed structures in the grounds of the hall include : the lakeside wall ( 18th century ) ; two small piers south of the garden forecourt ( 18th century ) ; a pier north west of the garden forecourt ( 18th century ) ; the gateway opposite the kitchen ( 1750 ) ; the piers at the south of forecourt garden topped with lions ( 18th century ) ; and an obelisk erected by George , 2nd Earl of Warrington , in 1714 in memory of his mother . Near the hall there is a Grade II * listed sawmill , probably built in 1616 . 
 = Us Tareyton smokers would rather fight than switch ! = 
 " Us Tareyton smokers would rather fight than switch ! " is the enduring slogan that appeared in magazine , newspaper , and television advertisements for Tareyton cigarettes from 1963 until 1981 . It was the American Tobacco Company 's most visible ad campaign in the 1960s and 1970s . 
 = = Beginnings = = 
 The slogan was created by James Jordan of the BBDO advertising agency . The first print advertisement appeared in Life magazine on October 11 , 1963 . The advertisements would appear solely in print between 1963 and 1966 . In 1966 , the first television advertisements with the slogan aired . 
 The target of the campaign was to create a sense of loyalty amongst Tareyton smokers . That led to the " rather fight than switch " campaign , in which the makeup the models wore made it seem as if they were sporting black eyes , presumably earned in battles with smokers of other cigarettes . 
 = = Television advertisements = = 
 Each commercial would begin in a predictable manner ; the protagonist would do something that would be considered defiant ( in one commercial , an old woman rocked sternly in her chair on her porch , while the rest of her development was being razed to make room for a condominium ) . In each commercial , the protagonist would say " Us Tareyton smokers would rather fight than switch ! " , usually only showing their side profile to the camera . After uttering the slogan , viewers would see the smoker 's face , which had a noticeable " black eye " ( in reality makeup ) , proving their willingness to fight for what they believed in , whether it be their tough decision of the day , or their choice to smoke Tareyton cigarettes . In the aforementioned example , the old woman 's fighting spirit won out , and her house remained where it was , although the condominium was built alarmingly close to her property . Her son came to visit her , and it was revealed that he was a Tareyton smoker as well — he also had a black eye . 
 = = Later years = = 
 Due to the success of the advertisement , Tareyton briefly enjoyed robust sales , which put them in the Top 10 of all American cigarette brands , in the mid to late 1960s . The brand declined somewhat , to thirteenth , when the slogan waned in 1979 . 
 In 1971 , radio and television advertisements for tobacco products were banned from American broadcasting stations , and Tareyton 's television jingles ended . However , after the ban , the slogan continued to be used in magazines and newspapers , due to the slogan and the name recognition the brand received . In 1975 , the slogan was used to advertise for the Tareyton " 100 " . 
 In 1976 , the American Tobacco Company , which made Tareyton cigarettes , introduced Tareyton Light cigarettes . In the new advertisements , men and women sported " white eyes , " with an updated slogan : " Us Tareyton smokers would rather light than fight ! " The two slogans would be used to sell the two separate variations until 1981 , when market value declined . 
 This slogan was notable in that it was the final slogan used for the Tareyton brand . Declining sales led to an end of advertising the brand . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 The then @-@ fresh slogan was adopted by supporters of Barry Goldwater during the 1964 campaign for the presidency . Goldwater appeared to have the nomination in hand as the primary season closed , but supporters of the moderate Republican William Scranton tried to mount a " Draft Scranton " reply . " Goldwater Girls " ( mostly adult women ) were seen at Scranton events wearing bandages and sporting signs saying " We 'd rather fight than switch ! " . 
 A 1964 single released on the Camp Records label parodied the slogan with the song " I 'd Rather Fight Than <unk> , " using the slang term swish , meaning to behave <unk> . 
 Thomas " TNT " Todd , a civil rights activist , parodied the slogan to make a point regarding the Vietnam War in a 1967 speech . Todd was quoted as saying , " ... Yet our best trained , best educated , best equipped , best prepared troops refuse to fight ! Matter of fact , it 's safe to say that they would rather switch than fight ! " The audio clip of his speech was later used as the prelude to the 1989 Public Enemy single " Fight the Power . " 
 In April 2013 , an advertisement for the Windows Phone pictured camps of fighting Samsung Galaxy and Apple iPhone users along with the slogan " Don 't fight . Switch . " 
 = = Famous " Tareyton fighters " = = 
 Many actors who would later become well known for other reasons appeared in the Tareyton ads . Examples include future entrepreneur Martha Stewart , who appeared in a print ad , and actor Lyle Waggoner , who was featured in a television commercial in 1966 . 
 = M @-@ 50 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 50 is a state trunkline highway in the US state of Michigan . Although designated as an east – west highway , it is nearly a diagonal northwest – southeast route . The western terminus is at exit 52 along Interstate 96 ( I @-@ 96 ) near Alto a few miles east of the metro Grand Rapids area , and its eastern terminus is in downtown Monroe at US Highway 24 ( US 24 , Telegraph Road ) . In between the trunkline runs through seven counties of the southern part of the Lower Peninsula mostly through rural farm fields and small communities . The highway also runs through downtown Jackson to connect between two freeway sections of US 127 . In the Irish Hills area of the state southeast of Jackson , M @-@ 50 runs next to Michigan International Speedway . 
 Dating back to the early days of the state highway system , M @-@ 50 was first signed in the southeastern corner of the state in 1919 . During the 1920s , the highway was extended to the Grand Rapids area and beyond to Lake Michigan , making it a trans @-@ peninsular route connecting that Great Lake with Lake Erie . A rerouting of highways including M @-@ 50 through Grand Rapids in the 1950s created Business M @-@ 50 ( Bus . M @-@ 50 ) , a business loop through that city that lasted for eight years . Additional changes made during the 1960s rerouted M @-@ 50 to replace its business loop until the highway was shortened to its present western terminus south of Lowell . A pair of truncations in Monroe in 1996 and 2006 are responsible for the present @-@ day eastern terminus . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Lowell to Jackson = = = 
 M @-@ 50 begins at an interchange with I @-@ 96 at exit 52 south of Lowell in southeastern Kent County . The highway proceeds south along with Alden Nash Avenue and turns east on 92nd Street through farms and fields in the rural southeastern corner of the county . As the trunkline runs to the east , it crosses into Ionia County . M @-@ 50 follows Thompson Road , Nash Highway and Tupper Lake Road into Lake Odessa . In Lake Odessa , the road bends around the north side of Jordan Lake , curving to the south into the extreme northeastern Barry County . The highway turns back to the east as it heads towards a junction with M @-@ 66 and M @-@ 43 at the Barry – Eaton county line . 
 After meeting M @-@ 43 , the two trunklines run concurrently for about a mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) before M @-@ 50 breaks off to the southwest near Woodbury . From there , the road continues in its southeasterly path along Clinton Trail through the northeast part of Eaton County as it runs through fields to Charlotte . Just prior to entering the city , the road bends to the south and near the middle of town it has a junction with M @-@ 79 and Business Loop I @-@ 69 ( BL I @-@ 69 ) . After this intersection , M @-@ 50 continues south concurrent with the business loop for a several blocks before turning eastward . On the eastern end of town , it has an interchange with I @-@ 69 at exit 60 . 
 After heading east past the junction with I @-@ 69 , the highway turns southeast as it heads through rural fields toward Eaton Rapids . Once it reaches the city , M @-@ 50 converges with M @-@ 99 , and the two intersect M @-@ 188 on the south side of the Grand River . The two highways run south out of the city . Immediately prior to entering Jackson County , the two trunklines diverge with M @-@ 99 heading off to the southwest and M @-@ 50 to the southeast . 
 M @-@ 50 continues its journey through Jackson County , winding its way to the southeast through rural fields and small forests . The landscape transitions to residential neighborhoods as the road approaches the US 127 freeway north of Jackson . In Blackman Township , M @-@ 50 merges with US 127 to run concurrently into the north side of Jackson . After an interchange with I @-@ 94 at exit 138 , US 127 exits to run east on I @-@ 94 for four miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) , M @-@ 50 and Business US 127 ( Bus . US 127 ) run concurrently into the city as West Avenue passing by the Jackson Crossing shopping mall . The road then proceeds south through the northern side of the city before turning east on Michigan Avenue as it heads towards downtown . 
 = = = Jackson to Monroe = = = 
 In downtown Jackson , Michigan Avenue continues into downtown while M @-@ 50 is routed around the city center along paired one @-@ way streets . Washington Street carries eastbound traffic and the Louis Glick Highway . On the east side of downtown , the roads merge near the Jackson Amtrak station and a junction with M @-@ 106 on Cooper Street , where M @-@ 50 turns south and then southeast as Brooklyn Road . On the south side of Jackson , M @-@ 50 and US 127 meet up once again just east of <unk> Lake . M @-@ 50 follows the US 127 freeway through a pair of conjoined partial interchanges before M @-@ 50 heads east away from <unk> Lake . 
 The trunkline then heads southeast to Napoleon , where the road then turns south and heads towards Brooklyn , part of the Irish Hills area of Lenawee County , a region known for its scenery . The road serves as main street for downtown Brooklyn as well as the primary thoroughfare for drivers headed to Michigan International Speedway . M @-@ 50 curves around the north and east side of the race track before intersecting US 12 in Cambridge Junction . After crossing US 12 , the road passes between several lakes of the Irish Hills area including Washington , Little Stony and Marrs lakes before continuing on its southeasterly journey towards Tecumseh . 
 After leaving the Brooklyn area , the road returns to a rural environment as it cuts through agricultural fields . Before passing through Tipton , M @-@ 50 passes the entrance to Hidden Lake Gardens , a botanical garden and arboretum operated by Michigan State University . After passing Hidden Lake , the road intersects M @-@ 52 and continues into Tecumseh . Known as Chicago Boulevard , the road serves as the main route through the city . After leaving Tecumseh , the highway passes through the communities of Ridgeway and Britton before leaving Lenawee County . 
 M @-@ 50 begins the final leg of its journey , as it crosses into Monroe county , passing through land that is mostly fields . Prior to reaching its interchange with US 23 , the highway passes to the south of Cabela 's , a 225 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 20 @,@ 900 m2 ) outdoor sports retailer in Dundee . After leaving town , the trunkline continues to the southeast , running to the south of the River Raisin , through rural areas as South Custer Road before entering the outskirts of Monroe where it finally ends its journey at a junction with US 24 ( Telegraph Road ) a few miles inland from Lake Erie . 
 M @-@ 50 is maintained by the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) like other state highways in Michigan . As a part of these maintenance responsibilities , the department tracks the volume of traffic that uses the roadways under its jurisdiction . These volumes are expressed using a metric called annual average daily traffic , which is a statistical calculation of the average daily number of vehicles on a segment of roadway . MDOT 's surveys in 2011 showed that the highest traffic levels along M @-@ 50 were the 25 @,@ 770 vehicles daily south of the Springport Road interchange in the Jackson area ; the lowest counts were the 2 @,@ 055 vehicles per day south of the M @-@ 99 concurrency . The only sections of M @-@ 50 that have been listed on the National Highway System ( NHS ) are the two US 127 concurrencies in the Jackson area and the connection between them through downtown . The NHS is a network of roads important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 When the state highway system was first signed in 1919 , M @-@ 50 started at an intersection with M @-@ 23 ( present @-@ day US 12 ) in Cambridge Junction , south of Brooklyn . From there it ran to the southeast , similar to its present @-@ day routing , through Dundee and Tecumseh into downtown Monroe where it intersected M @-@ 56 . There was a concurrency between M @-@ 50 and M @-@ 65 between Dundee and the Ida area which became an overlap with US 23 after 1926 . By the end of 1927 , M @-@ 50 underwent a major lengthening as its western terminus was extended through Jackson to Eaton Rapids , Charlotte , and Vermontville before intersecting M @-@ 39 just east of Woodbury . From this point , M @-@ 50 was routed over M @-@ 39 to US 16 near Alto . M @-@ 50 then ran concurrently with US 16 into Grand Rapids where it turned to the west and traveled through Allendale before terminating at a junction with US 31 in Agnew . A few years later in 1929 , the route between Charlotte and Woodbury was changed as M @-@ 50 was routed north out of Charlotte to the former M @-@ 39 and replaced it east to Woodbury ; the former routing was turned over to local control . 
 In 1953 , the route was realigned onto the south and west beltline to bypass Grand Rapids ; the old routing through downtown became Business M @-@ 50 ( Bus . M @-@ 50 ) . In the late 1950s , when the US 127 freeway bypass east of Jackson opened up , the old routing through town became Bus . US 127 / M @-@ 50 . At the same time , the concurrency with US 23 between Dundee and the Ida area was dropped after the new US 23 freeway opened ; the old route becomes solely designated M @-@ 50 . 
 In 1961 , when the I @-@ 96 / US 16 / M @-@ 50 freeway was extended to the northwest in Grand Rapids , the old M @-@ 50 routing around the city became M @-@ 11 and M @-@ 50 was returned to its former alignment along Lake Michigan Drive and Fulton Street , supplanting Bus . M @-@ 50 . In 1964 , the western end of M @-@ 50 was truncated from its junction with US 31 back to I @-@ 96 south of Lowell at exit 52 . The former alignment from exit 40 to Agnew was given the M @-@ 45 designation . 
 In 1996 , the highway was truncated as the terminus was scaled back to M @-@ 125 in Monroe . Finally on October 4 , 2006 , the section of M @-@ 50 between M @-@ 125 and US 24 was also removed , shortening the highway by about a mile ( 1 @.@ 9 km ) . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = = Business route = = 
 Business M @-@ 50 ( Bus . M @-@ 50 ) was a 11 @.@ 084 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 17 @.@ 838 km ) business loop that ran through Grand Rapids . The state trunkline highway was created when M @-@ 50 was rerouted to follow 28th Street and Wilson Avenue around the south and west sides of the city in 1953 . The business loop was decommissioned when M @-@ 50 was returned to its former routing in 1961 . The highway followed Lake Michigan Drive ( now M @-@ 45 ) from the <unk> neighborhood of Walker easterly to Fulton Street in Grand Rapids . From there it followed Fulton easterly through downtown Grand Rapids and the east side of the city to a junction with Cascade Road in Grand Rapids Township The last segment followed Cascade Road to the I @-@ 96 / M @-@ 50 freeway where it connected with its parent highway and terminated . 
 = Grand Palace = 
 The Grand Palace ( Thai : <unk> , rtgs : Phra Borom Maha Ratcha Wang ) is a complex of buildings at the heart of Bangkok , Thailand . The palace has been the official residence of the Kings of Siam ( and later Thailand ) since 1782 . The king , his court and his royal government were based on the grounds of the palace until 1925 . The present monarch , King Bhumibol Adulyadej ( Rama IX ) , currently resides at <unk> Royal Villa in the Dusit Palace , but the Grand Palace is still used for official events . Several royal ceremonies and state functions are held within the walls of the palace every year . The palace is one of the most popular tourist attractions in Thailand . 
 Construction of the palace began on May 6 , 1782 , at the order of King Buddha <unk> <unk> ( Rama I ) , the founder of the Chakri Dynasty , when he moved the capital city from Thonburi to Bangkok . Throughout successive reigns , many new buildings and structures were added , especially during the reign of King Chulalongkorn ( Rama V ) . By 1925 , the king , the Royal Family and the government were no longer permanently settled at the palace , and had moved to other residences . After the abolition of absolute monarchy in 1932 , all government agencies completely moved out of the palace . 
 In shape , the palace complex is roughly rectangular and has a combined area of 218 @,@ 400 square metres ( 2 @,@ 351 @,@ 000 sq ft ) , surrounded by four walls . It is situated on the banks of the Chao Phraya River at the heart of the Rattanakosin Island , today in the Phra Nakhon District . The Grand Palace is bordered by Sanam Luang and Na Phra Lan Road to the north , Maharaj Road to the west , Sanamchai Road to the east and Thai Wang Road to the south . 
 Rather than being a single structure , the Grand Palace is made up of numerous buildings , halls , pavilions set around open lawns , gardens and courtyards . Its asymmetry and eclectic styles are due to its organic development , with additions and rebuilding being made by successive reigning kings over 200 years of history . It is divided into several quarters : the Temple of the Emerald Buddha ; the Outer Court , with many public buildings ; the Middle Court , including the Phra Maha Monthien Buildings , the Phra Maha Prasat Buildings and the Chakri Maha Prasat Buildings ; the Inner Court and the Siwalai Gardens quarter . The Grand Palace is currently partially open to the public as a museum , but it remains a working palace , with several royal offices still situated inside . 
 = = History = = 
 The construction of the Grand Palace began on 6 May 1782 , at the order of King Buddha <unk> <unk> ( Rama I ) . Having seized the crown from King Taksin of Thonburi , King Rama I was intent on building a capital city for his new Chakri Dynasty . He decided to move the seat of power from the city of Thonburi , on the west side of the Chao Phraya river , to the east side at Bangkok . The new capital city was turned into an artificial island when canals were dug along the east side . The island was given the name ' Rattanakosin ' . The previous royal residence was the <unk> Palace , constructed for King Taksin in 1768 . 
 The new palace was built on a rectangular piece of land on the very west side of the island , between Wat Pho to the south , Wat <unk> to the north and with the Chao Phraya river along the west . This location was previously occupied by a Chinese community , whom King Rama I had ordered to relocate to an area south and outside of the city walls ; the area is known today as <unk> ( Chinatown ) . 
 Desperate for materials and short on funds , the palace was initially built entirely out of wood , its various structures surrounded by a simple log palisade . On 10 June 1782 , the king ceremonially crossed the river from Thonburi to take permanent residence in the new palace . Three days later on 13 June , the king held an abbreviated coronation ceremony , thus becoming the first monarch of the new Rattanakosin Kingdom . Over the next few years the king began replacing wooden structures with masonry , rebuilding the walls , forts , gates , throne halls and royal residences . This rebuilding included the royal chapel , which would come to house the Emerald Buddha . 
 To find more material for these constructions , King Rama I ordered his men to go upstream to the old capital city of Ayutthaya , which was destroyed in 1767 during a war between Burma and Siam . They were tasked with the dismantling and removal of as many bricks as they could find , while not removing any from the temples . They began by taking materials from the forts and walls of the city ; by the end they had completely levelled the old royal palaces . The bricks were ferried down the Chao Phraya by barges , where they were eventually incorporated into the walls of Bangkok and the Grand Palace itself . Most of the initial construction of the Grand Palace during the reign of King Rama I was carried out by conscripted or corvée labour . After the final completion of the ceremonial halls of the palace , the king held a full traditional coronation ceremony in 1785 . 
 The layout of the Grand Palace followed that of the Royal Palace at Ayutthaya in location , organization , and in the divisions of separate courts , walls , gates and forts . Both palaces featured a proximity to the river . The location of a pavilion serving as a landing stage for barge processions also corresponded with that of the old palace . To the north of the Grand Palace there is a large field , the <unk> Phra Men ( now called Sanam Luang ) , which is used as an open space for royal ceremonies and as a parade ground . There was also a similar field in Ayutthaya , which was used for the same purpose . The road running north leads to the Front Palace , the residence of the Second King of Siam . 
 The Grand Palace is divided into four main courts , separated by numerous walls and gates : the Outer Court , the Middle Court , the Inner Court and the Temple of the Emerald Buddha . Each of these court 's functions and access are clearly defined by laws and traditions . The Outer Court is situated on the northwestern part of the Grand Palace ; within are the royal offices and ( formerly ) state ministries . To the northeast is the Temple of the Emerald Buddha , the royal chapel and home of the Emerald Buddha . The Middle Court housed the most important state apartments and ceremonial throne halls of the king . The Inner Court , situated at the most southern end of the complex , was reserved only for females , as it housed the king 's harem . 
 During the reign of King Buddha <unk> <unk> ( Rama II ) , the total area of the Grand Palace was expanded southwards up to the walls of Wat Pho . Previously this area was home to offices of various palace officials . This expansion increased the area of the palace from 213 @,@ 674 square metres ( 2 @,@ 299 @,@ 970 sq ft ) to 218 @,@ 400 square metres ( 2 @,@ 351 @,@ 000 sq ft ) . New walls , forts and gates were constructed to accommodate the enlarged compound . Since this expansion , the palace has remained within its walls with new construction and changes being made only on the inside . 
 In accordance with tradition , the palace was initially referred to only as the Phra Ratcha Wang Luang ( <unk> ) or ' Royal Palace ' , similar to the old palace in Ayutthaya . However , during the reign of King Mongkut ( Rama IV ) the name Phra Boromma Maha Ratcha Wang or ' Grand Palace ' was first used in official documents . This change of name was made during the elevation of Prince <unk> ( the king 's younger brother ) to the title of Second King <unk> in 1851 . The proclamation of his title described the royal palace as the ' supreme ' ( <unk> ; Borom ) and ' great ' ( <unk> ; Maha ) palace . This title was given in order to distinguish the palace from the Second King 's palace ( the Front Palace ) , which was described as the Phra Bovorn Ratcha Wang ( <unk> ) or the ' glorious ' ( <unk> ; Bovorn ) palace . 
 Throughout the period of absolute monarchy , from 1782 to 1932 , the Grand Palace was both the country 's administrative and religious centre . As the main residence of the monarch , the palace was also the seat of government , with thousands of inhabitants including guardsmen , servants , concubines , princesses , ministers and courtiers . The palace 's high whitewashed castellated walls and extensive forts and guard posts mirrored those of the walls of Bangkok itself , and thus the Grand Palace was envisioned as a city within a city . For this reason a special set of Palace Laws were created to govern the inhabitants and to establish hierarchy and order . 
 By the 1920s a series of new palaces were constructed elsewhere for the king 's use ; these included the more modern Dusit Palace , constructed in 1903 , and <unk> Thai Palace in 1909 . These other Bangkok residences began to replace the Grand Palace as the primary place of residence of the monarch and his court . By 1925 this gradual move out of the palace was complete . The growth and centralization of the Siamese state also meant that the various government ministries have grown in size and were finally moved out of the Grand Palace to their own premises . Despite this the Grand Palace remained the official and ceremonial place of residence as well as the stage set for elaborate ancient ceremonies of the monarchy . The end of the absolute monarchy came in 1932 , when a revolution overthrew the ancient system of government and replaced it with a constitutional monarchy . 
 Today the Grand Palace is still a centre of ceremony and of the monarchy , and serves as a museum and tourist attraction as well . 
 = = Outer Court = = 
 The Outer Court or Khet Phra Racha Than Chan Nork ( เขตพระราชฐานชั ้ <unk> ) of the Grand Palace is situated to the northwest of the palace ( the northeast being occupied by the Temple of the Emerald Buddha ) . Entering through the main <unk> Gate , the Temple of the Emerald Buddha is located to the left , with many public buildings located to the right . 
 These buildings include the headquarters and information centre of the Grand Palace , the Bureau of the Royal Household and the Office of His Majesty 's Principal Private Secretary . Other important buildings inside the court include the Sala <unk> Samakhom ( <unk> ) , used for important receptions and meetings . The Sala Luk Khun Nai ( <unk> ) is an office building housing various departments of the Royal Household . The main office of the Royal Institute of Thailand was also formerly located here . The Outer Court has a small museum called the Pavilion of Regalia , Royal Decorations and Coins . The <unk> Gate opens directly unto the Chakri Maha Prasat Throne Hall and is the main portal from the Outer Court into the Middle Court . 
 Historically this court was referred to as Fai Na ( <unk> ่ <unk> ้ <unk> , literally In the front ) , and also served as the seat of the royal government , with various ministerial offices , a theatre , stables for the king 's elephants , barracks for the royal guards , the royal mint and an arsenal . By 1925 , all government agencies and workers had vacated the site and all of the buildings were converted for use by the Royal Household . 
 = = Temple of the Emerald Buddha = = 
 The Temple of the Emerald Buddha or Wat Phra Kaew ( <unk> ้ ว ) ( known formally as Wat Phra Si Rattana <unk> , <unk> ) is a royal chapel situated within the walls of the palace . Incorrectly referred to as a Buddhist temple , it is in fact a chapel ; it has all the features of a temple except for living quarters for monks . Built in 1783 , the temple was constructed in accordance with ancient tradition dating back to Wat <unk> , a royal chapel within the grounds of the royal palace at Sukhothai , and Wat Phra Sri <unk> at Ayutthaya . The famed Emerald Buddha is kept within the grounds of the temple . 
 The temple is surrounded on four sides by a series of walled cloisters , with seven different gates . Like those ancient royal temples of Sukhothai and Ayutthaya , the Wat Phra Kaew complex is separated from the living quarters of the kings . Within these walls are buildings and structures for diverse purposes and of differing styles , reflecting the changing architecture during the various reigns of the kings . Despite this , most of the buildings within adhere strictly to classical Thai architecture . The establishment of the Temple of the Emerald Buddha dates to the very founding of the Grand Palace and Bangkok itself . 
 = = Middle Court = = 
 The largest and most important court is the Middle Court or the Khet Phra Racha Than Chan Klang ( เขตพระราชฐานชั ้ <unk> ) is situated in the central part of the Grand Palace , where the most important residential and state buildings are located . The court is considered the main part of the Grand Palace and is fronted by the <unk> Road , which cuts right across from east to west . The court is further divided into three groups of ' Throne halls ' ( Phra Thinang ; พระที ่ นั ่ ง ; rtgs : Phra Thi Nang ) and one Siwalai Garden quarter . 
 = = = Phra Maha Monthien group = = = 
 The Phra Maha Monthien ( <unk> ) group of buildings are located roughly at the centre of the Middle Court , therefore at the very heart of the Grand Palace itself . The traditional Thai style building group is enclosed by a low wall , as this was once the residential and sleeping abode of kings . Thus it is considered the most important set of throne halls in the entire Grand Palace . All of the buildings within the Maha Monthien face north and are arranged from front to back with the public reception hall being at the front , ceremonial halls in the middle and residential halls at the back , all of them inter @-@ connected to each other . 
 All Royal coronations since that of King Rama II have taken place within the walls of this building group . Construction began in 1785 at the order of King Rama I , the original buildings only included the Chakraphat <unk> Throne Hall and the Phaisan Thaksin Throne Hall . Later King Rama II carried out major constructions including the Amarin Winitchai Throne Hall and other extensions . Later in his reign he added the Sanam Chan Pavilion and the <unk> Chinese Pavilion . King Nangklao ( Rama III ) renamed the buildings from Chakraphat Phiman ( meaning ' Abode of the Chakravartin ' ) to Maha Monthien ( meaning ' Great Royal Residence ' ) . He carried out major renovations and spent most of his reign residing in these buildings . King Rama IV later added two arch @-@ ways at the north and west side of the walls called the <unk> and <unk> Gate respectively . King Vajiravudh ( Rama VI ) added two portico extensions to eastern and western sides of the Amarin Winitchai Hall . Since then most buildings in its original plan remain , with occasional renovations being made before important anniversaries such as the Bangkok Bicentennial Celebrations in 1982 . Except for the Amarin Winitchai Throne Hall , the rest of the complex is closed to the public . 
 The <unk> Gate is the central entrance to the hall , however the central doorway is reserve exclusively for use by the king , others must enter through the two other doors on either side . The gate is guarded by Chinese @-@ style statues , including mythical warriors and lions . The gate is topped by three Thai @-@ style spires covered in Chinese ceramics . 
 = = = = Phra Thinang Amarin Winitchai = = = = 
 The Phra Thinang Amarin Winitchai <unk> Phiman ( พระที ่ นั ่ <unk> ) or , in brief , the Phra Thinang Amarin Winitchai ( พระที ่ นั ่ <unk> ) is the northernmost and forward building of the Maha Monthien buildings , It is also perhaps the most important . The throne hall was constructed in Thai style as a royal audience chamber , for receiving foreign ambassadors and for conducting important state businesses and ceremonies . 
 The large throne hall stands on a 50 cm high base , the roof is covered in green and orange tiles . The pediment is decorated with a mural depicting the Hindu god Indra . The main central door is reserved for use by royalty , while others must enter through the adjacent side doors . Within the hall there are two rows of square columns , five on the left and six on the right , adorned with Thai floral designs . The coffered ceiling is decorated with glass mosaic stars . 
 At the back of the hall is the <unk> Mala Maha Chakraphat Phiman Throne ( พระที ่ นั ่ <unk> ; rtgs : <unk> Mala Maha Chakkraphat Phiman ) , flanked by two gilded seven tiered umbrellas . The throne is shaped like a boat with a spired pavilion in the middle . This elevated pavilion represents Mount Meru , the centre of Buddhist and Hindu cosmology . The throne is decorated with coloured enamels and stones as well as deva and garuda figures . The throne was once used for giving royal audiences . 
 In the front of throne sits another , called the <unk> <unk> Throne ( พระที ่ นั ่ <unk> ์ ) . The throne is topped by the massive Royal Nine @-@ Tiered Umbrella , an important symbol of Thai kingship . The different tiers represents the king 's power and prestige which extends in eight directions : the four cardinal directions and the four sub cardinal directions . The final and ninth tier represents the central direction descending into the earth . These giant umbrellas usually deposited above important royal thrones , and out of the seven of which are currently in Bangkok , six of these umbrellas are situated within the vicinity of the Grand Palace and another is situated above the throne within the Ananta Samakhom Throne Hall of the Dusit Palace . The throne is made up of multi @-@ layered squared platforms with a seat in the middle . The throne is used for the first royal audience of each king 's reign and for annual birthday celebrations and other royal receptions . It was from this throne that King Rama II received John Crawfurd ( the first British Envoy to Siam in almost 200 years ) in 1821 . Crawfurd was sent to Bangkok by the Governor @-@ General of India Lord Hastings to negotiate a trade treaty . 
 = = = = Phra Thinang Phaisan Thaksin = = = = 
 Directly behind is the Phra Thinang Phaisan Thaksin ( พระที ่ นั ่ <unk> ) . The rectangular @-@ shaped hall is a ceremonial functions hall , where the most important religious and state ceremonies are held . It is the main venue where royal coronations are performed at the beginning of each king 's reign , the last coronation ceremony held here was on 5 May 1950 for King Rama IX . Formerly the hall was a private reception hall and living space of King Rama I. He often hosted meetings and dinners for his closest ministers and other trusted courtiers here . After his death the hall was converted into a ceremonial space . The long rectangular hall is decorated in rich murals depicting scenes from Buddhist and Hindu mythology . 
 The hall houses two thrones . The <unk> <unk> Raja <unk> Throne ( พระที ่ นั ่ <unk> ์ ; rtgs : <unk> U @-@ <unk> Ratcha At ) or the Octagonal Throne is situated to the eastern part of the hall . This unusually shaped wooden throne is in the form of an octagonal prism and is decorated with golden lacquer , topped by a white seven @-@ tiered umbrella . It is used during the first part of the coronation ceremony where the king is anointed with holy water , just prior to the crowning ceremony ; all Chakri kings have gone through this ancient ritual . 
 Across the hall to the western side is the <unk> Throne ( พระที ่ นั ่ <unk> ; rtgs : <unk> ) . The throne is a chair with a footstool ( more akin to its European counterparts ) with two high tables to its sides . The throne is topped by another Royal Nine @-@ tiered Umbrella . This throne is used during the main part of the coronation ceremony , where the King is presented with the various objects , which make up the Royal Regalia and Royal Utensils of Thailand . The king will crown himself , then be ceremonially presented with the objects of the regalia , each reminding him of his duties and responsibilities as king . The regalia are presented to the king by Royal Brahmins . These include : the Great Crown of Victory , the Sword of Victory , the Royal Staff , the Royal <unk> , the Royal Fan and the Royal Slippers . 
 Apart from being the setting of these important ceremonies , the hall houses the Phra Siam <unk> ( <unk> ; rtgs : Phra <unk> <unk> ) figure . This figure was created during the reign of King Rama IV to symbolise and embody the Kingdom ( of Siam ) , its well @-@ being and safety . It exists as the personification of the nation to be used as a palladium for worship . The golden figure depicts a standing deity , dressed in royal regalia , wearing a crown and holding a sword in its right hand . The figure is about 8 inches tall , and is housed in a Chinese @-@ style cabinet in the middle of the Phaisan Thaksin Hall facing south . There are also other figures of the same scale depicting other Hindu gods and goddesses . The figure was once worshipped almost daily ; today however religious ceremonies are only held to worship the figure during times of great crisis . 
 = = = = Phra Thinang Chakraphat Phiman = = = = 
 The Phra Thinang Chakraphat Phiman ( พระที ่ นั ่ <unk> ; rtgs : Phra Thi Nang Chakkraphat Phiman ) is situated behind the Phaisan Thaksin Throne Hall and is at the very centre of the Maha Monthien buildings . The hall was built during the reign of King Rama I as the primary apartment and sleeping quarter of the monarch , and is the inner most part of the Grand Palace . The residential hall was formed out of three identical rectangular buildings , all inter @-@ connected to each other . The middle section of the residential hall ( out of the three ) , is a reception room while the other two sections , to the east and west , are divided into the personal apartments of the king . The east section is the primary bedchamber of the monarch ; the hall is divided into two rooms by a golden screen . The northern room contains a canopied bed originally belonging to King Rama I ; above this bed hangs a Royal Nine @-@ tiered Umbrella . The southern room contains the dressing and privy chamber , above which hangs another Nine @-@ tiered Umbrella . The west section was used as a multi @-@ purpose hall for minor ceremonies and audiences ; however in the reign of King Rama III the hall was converted into a bedroom . After his death it became the storage place for the various weapons and accoutrements of the monarch . The Royal Regalia of Thailand is kept here . 
 When the Chakraphat Phiman Hall was first built it was entirely roofed with palm leaves ; later these were replaced with ceramic tiles , then with glazed tiles during the reign of King Rama V. There is a tradition that no uncrowned kings are allowed to sleep within this hall . However once they were crowned they were required to sleep there , if only for a few nights , literally on the bed of their forefathers . In 1910 , prior to his coronation , King Rama VI had a well @-@ concealed modern toilet installed near the bedchamber . The king spent many nights here near the end of his life and died here in 1925 . King <unk> ( Rama VII ) and King Rama IX only spent a few nights here after their respective coronations in accordance with tradition . 
 Between the Chakraphat Phiman and Phaisan Thaksin Halls is a small Front Reception Hall , where the king could receive courtiers while sitting on a small platform . There are two doors on either side of the platform leading into the royal apartments behind . To the rear and south of the Chakraphat Phiman Hall is the Back Reception Hall . This rear hall is flanked by two residential halls . These are reserved for members of the Royal Family and royal consorts from the Inner Court . They are called : <unk> <unk> Hall ( พระที ่ นั ่ <unk> ) ( to the east ) and the <unk> <unk> Hall ( พระที ่ นั ่ <unk> ์ <unk> ; rtgs : <unk> At <unk> ) ( to the west ) . 
 = = = = Phra Thinang Dusidaphirom = = = = 
 Apart from these grand state buildings , there are also several minor structures and pavilions surrounding the Phra Maha Monthien structures . These include four smaller halls at the sides of the Amarin Winitchai Throne hall . 
 Aside the wall to the northwest is the Phra Thinang Dusidaphirom ( พระที ่ นั ่ <unk> ์ ; rtgs : Phra Thi Nang <unk> ) . Built on a raised platform , the one @-@ storied hall was used as a robing chamber for the king when arriving and departing the palace either by palanquin or by elephant . Hence the elephant @-@ mounting platform to the west and a palanquin @-@ mounting platform to the north . At first the structure was an open pavilion ; the walls covered with rich murals were added later by King Rama III . The entrance is situated to the east and is lined with steps leading from the Amarin Winitchai Throne Hall . The hall is the only structure within the Grand Palace with exterior decorations . The golden lacquer and blue glass mosaic depicts angels carrying a sword . 
 = = = = Phra Thinang <unk> = = = = 
 To the southeast is the Phra Thinang <unk> ( พระที ่ นั ่ <unk> ; rtgs : Phra Thi Nang Ratcha <unk> ) , a Thai @-@ style pavilion constructed during the reign of King Rama VI as an outdoor audience chamber . The pavilion was constructed for use especially during the birthday celebrations of the king . Originally King Rama IV had a two @-@ storied European @-@ style building constructed . Its purpose was to display gifts from foreign nations ; however when this building became dilapidated King Rama V replaced it with a Chinese @-@ style pavilion which was again dismantled and rebuilt . The present pavilion measures 12 by 7 @.@ 80 metres ( 39 @.@ 4 ft × 25 @.@ 6 ft ) . The pediments are decorated with a gilded figures of Narayana on a garuda against a white mosaic background . 
 = = = = Phra Thinang Sanam Chan = = = = 
 The southwest structure is the Phra Thinang Sanam Chan ( พระที ่ นั ่ <unk> ์ ) . Built during the reign of King Rama II , the pavilion is a traditional Thai pavilion with a raised platform inside . King Rama II used the pavilion for relaxation and for sitting when supervising construction projects . Measuring only 3 @.@ 30 by 4 @.@ 50 metres ( 10 @.@ 8 ft × 14 @.@ 8 ft ) , the pavilion was portable and could be moved to different sites . The wooden pediments are decorated with gilded carvings and glass mosaic in a floral design with Chinese and Western influences . The eight columns are inlaid with glass mosaic . The inner platform is decorated with black lacquer and glass mosaic . The top of the platform is made out of a single panel of teak measuring 1 @.@ 50 by 2 metres ( 4 @.@ 9 ft × 6 @.@ 6 ft ) . The pavilion was strengthened and given a marble base by King Rama IX in 1963 . 
 = = = = Ho <unk> = = = = 
 To the northeast is the Ho <unk> ( <unk> ; rtgs : Ho <unk> ) or the Ho Phra Parit ( <unk> ) , The hall is the same size as the Dusidaphirom Hall and the two appear to have been constructed concurrently . In accordance with ancient tradition , the hall was built for the use of Mon monks to create Holy water , which was then sprinkled around the palace ground every evening ; this practice was discontinued during the reign of King Rama VII for financial reasons . Currently the ritual is only practiced during Buddhist holy days by Mon monks from Wat <unk> . The hall is divided into two rooms ; the northern room is a prayer and ritual room for monks , including closets built into the walls for religious texts . The southern room is a storage room for Buddha images and religious artifacts . 
 During times of war , the potency of weapons was enhanced by the holy water in a special ceremony . The weapons and special amulets were then distributed to soldiers before battle . As a result of this function the windows and doors of the hall are decorated with depictions of ancient weapons . 
 = = = = Ho Suralai Phiman and Ho Phra That Monthien = = = = 
 On each side of the Phaisan Thaksin Throne Hall is a Buddha image hall . On the east side is the Ho Suralai Phiman ( <unk> ; rtgs : Ho Phra Suralai Phiman ) , which then connects to the <unk> Gate . The Ho Sulalai Phiman is a small Thai @-@ style building which is attached to the Phaisan Thaksin Throne Hall through a short corridor . The hall houses important and valuable Buddha images and figures , including one representing each and every reign of the Chakri Dynasty . Some relics of the Buddha are also reportedly kept here . 
 The Ho Phra That Monthien ( <unk> ) is located to the west side of the Phaisan Thaksin Hall and is also connected by a corridor in symmetry to the Suralai Phiman on the other side . The Phra That <unk> hall contains several small gilded pagodas containing the ashes of Royal ancestors . Originally named Ho Phra Chao , the name was changed by King Rama II , who installed several valuable and ancient Buddha images in 1812 . King Rama III and King Rama IV also have their own Buddha images installed here and carried out extensive renovations to the interior and exterior . 
 = = = Phra Thinang Chakri Maha Prasat group = = = 
 The Phra Thinang Chakri Maha Prasat buildings are composed of nine major and minor halls , structured in a similar scheme to the Maha Monthien Halls from north to south , however the two building groups contrasts greatly in styles . This group of palaces is situated at the centre , between the Maha <unk> and Maha Prasat groups . The whole of the Chakri Maha Prasat group was the work of King Rama V and foreign architects in the 19th century . During the reign of King Rama I the area was once an expansive garden , later named Suan Sai ( <unk> ้ <unk> ) or ' Left Garden ' , the twin of Suan <unk> ( <unk> ) or right garden , now the Siwalai Gardens . The two gardens were named according to their location on the left and the right of the Maha Monthien buildings . During the reign of King Rama III a new residential pavilion called Phra <unk> <unk> ( <unk> ) was constructed for his mother , Princess Mother Sri Sulalai . The new residence was composed of several low @-@ lying buildings and pavilions . King Rama IV expanded the residence and gave it to his consort Queen <unk> . Within these buildings King Rama V was born ( in 1853 ) and lived as a child . 
 When King Rama V ascended the throne in 1868 , he decided to build a new group of grander throne halls to replace the old structures . The first phase of construction began in 1868 , then again in 1876 , and the final phase between 1882 and 1887 . King Rama V resided in the palace until 1910 when he gradually moved to the new Dusit Palace , to the north of the Grand Palace . King Rama VI occasionally stayed in the palace ; however he preferred his other residences in the country . By the reign of King Rama VII the buildings were in dire need of renovations , but due to economic constraints only the Chakri Maha Prasat Throne Hall was renovated . This work was carried out by Prince <unk> <unk> , an architectural graduate of the École des Beaux @-@ Arts in Paris . Many of his works can still be seen today . During the present reign ( King Rama IX ) , many of the buildings once more became so dilapidated that they needed to be demolished altogether . In their stead new halls were constructed in 2004 to replace them . 
 Formerly the site hosted eleven different residential halls and pavilions ; in 2012 only three are left ( even though they have been completely reconstructed ) : The Chakri Maha Prasat Throne Hall , the Moon Satharn Borom Ard Hall and the Sommuthi Thevaraj Uppabat Hall . Behind these structures lie the grand Borom Ratchasathit Mahoran Hall , which has been recently rebuilt . None of the rooms are opened to the public , as state functions are still carried out within . The changing of the guards occurs at the front courtyard every two hours . 
 = = = = Phra Thinang Chakri Maha Prasat = = = = 
 The Phra Thinang Chakri Maha Prasat ( พระที ่ นั ่ <unk> ; rtgs : Phra Thi Nang <unk> Maha Prasat ) is situated on the northernmost part of the Phra Thinang Chakri group . The throne hall forms the front or the façade of the entire building group . In front of the throne hall is the <unk> Field ; on either side of the throne hall are the <unk> Sopha Gates . The throne hall is constructed in an eclectic style , a blend of Thai and European ( more specifically Renaissance or Italianate ) styles . The lower part of the structure is European , while the upper part is in Thai @-@ styled green and orange tiled roofs and gilded spires or <unk> ( <unk> ) . 
 After a trip to Singapore and Java , in the East Indies ( present day Indonesia ) in 1875 , King Rama V brought back with him two Englishmen , the architect John <unk> and his helper Henry C. Rose to design and construct the Chakri Maha Prasat Throne Hall . Construction began on the 7 May 1876 . At first the King wanted an entirely European structure with domes . However at the insistence of Chao Phraya Si <unk> ( Chuang <unk> ) , his Chief Minister , the King decided to add the gilded spires and Thai roofs . In 1878 the King personally supervised the raising of the final central spire of the building . The throne hall was completed in 1882 , on the centenary of the House of Chakri and the Grand Palace . Thus the new throne hall was given the name Phra Thinang Chakri , meaning literally ' the seat of the <unk> ' . 
 The throne was constructed as part of a building group in a rotated ' H ' shape plan , with two parallel buildings running on an east to west axis . In between is an intersecting hall , with an axis running north to south . The northerly end of the structure is the Chakri Maha Prasat Throne Hall ; all other buildings are hidden behind it . The throne hall consists of three stories , with three seven tiered <unk> on each of the three major pavilions along the axis . The central pavilion with its portico and roof extensions is taller and larger than the other two on the sides . Owing to a mix of Thai and European styles , the exterior decoration is a mixture of orders and does not follow strict classical lines . The Thai roofs are decorated with the same green and orange titles as the other throne halls , in order for the new building to blend in harmoniously to the existing skyline . The external pediments and gates of the throne hall are decorated with the emblem of the Chakri Dynasty , an intertwined Chakra and Trishula . Above the middle floor windows the western style coat of arms of Siam is used . On the semi @-@ circle pediment at the central hall there is also a portrait of King Rama V. 
 The incongruous make @-@ up between the Western lower half and Thai roof has been compared with a <unk> ( Western ) lady clothed in Victorian costume while wearing a Thai crown . The symbolism of this juxtaposition is the emphasis of the superiority of Thai architecture ( as a crown upon the head ) over those of the West ( the lower half of the body ) . This stylistic innovation was more than an artistic coincidence , as it was supposed to convey a significant political message of Siamese resistance over Western imperialism , both of sovereignty and style . From another perspective , the building itself epitomizes the internal political struggle between the ideas of Westernization and modernity ( led by King Rama V ) against those of the traditional ruling elites ( as led by some of his early ministers ) . 
 Within the interior , the upper and middle floors are State floors ; they are in turn divided into several reception rooms , throne rooms and galleries complete with royal portraits of every Chakri Monarchs ( including Second King <unk> ) and their consorts . More specifically , to the east gallery are Buddhist Images and other religious images , while to the west are reception rooms for State guests and other foreign dignitaries . In other parts of the throne hall there are also libraries and rooms where the ashes of Kings ( Rama IV to Rama VIII ) and their Queens are housed . Many of the European @-@ made chandeliers inside the Hall initially belonged to Chao Phraya Si <unk> ; however they proved too big for his own residence and he eventually gave them to King <unk> as gifts . The throne hall was also the first structure in Thailand in which electricity was installed , at the insistence of Prince <unk> <unk> . The lower floor or ground floor is reserved for servants and the Royal Guards . Currently there is a museum displaying old weapons . 
 Inside the main hall ( throne room ) , situated at the very centre of the Chakri Maha Prasat Hall , is the <unk> Thom Throne ( พระที ่ นั ่ <unk> ; rtgs : <unk> Thom ) , a chair on a raised platform . The Throne is flanked by two seven @-@ tiered umbrellas , while the throne itself is topped by a Royal Nine @-@ Tiered Umbrella . Behind the throne is a tapestry depicting a fiery intertwined chakra and trishula or the ' Chakri ' , the emblem of the dynasty . The throne has been used by the king during important state occasions , such as the welcoming or accrediting of foreign diplomats and missions . The room itself has also been used by King Rama IX to welcome foreign dignitaries and heads of state , such as Queen Elizabeth II , President Bill Clinton and Pope John Paul II . Recently the King welcomed over 21 world leaders inside the room during the Asia @-@ Pacific Economic Cooperation ( APEC Summit ) held in Bangkok in 2003 . The wall of the throne room is decorated with four paintings , depicting important scenes in the history of Thai foreign relations . On the east wall hang two paintings called ' Queen Victoria receiving King Mongkut 's Ambassador ' and ' King Louis XIV receiving the Ambassador of King <unk> of Ayutthaya in the Hall of Mirrors at Versailles ' . On the west hangs ' King Mongkut receiving British Envoy Sir John Bowring ' and ' Napoleon III receiving the Siamese Ambassadors at <unk> ' . 
 = = = = Phra Thinang Moon Satharn Borom Ard = = = = 
 The Phra Thinang Moon Satharn Borom Ard ( พระที ่ นั ่ <unk> ์ ; rtgs : Phra Thi Nang Mun <unk> Boromma At ) is situated behind the Chakri Maha Prasat Hall to the east side and was built as a separate wing in 1869 . The hall encompasses the original area where King Rama V was born and had lived as a child . Previously King Rama I had the area set aside as a small mango tree garden . Currently the hall is set out as a small banqueting and reception venue . 
 = = = = Phra Thinang Sommuthi Thevaraj Uppabat = = = = 
 The Phra Thinang Sommuthi Thevaraj Uppabat ( พระที ่ นั ่ <unk> ; rtgs : Phra Thi Nang <unk> <unk> <unk> ) is situated on the opposite side of the Moon <unk> Borom Ard Hall to the west of the Chakri Maha Prasat Hall , the wing was also built in 1868 . The hall is divided into several state rooms , for used by the king , there is a reception room and a council room . It was in this hall on the 12th of July 1874 that King Rama V stated to his ministers his intention to abolish slavery in Siam . 
 = = = = Phra Thinang Borom Ratchasathit Mahoran = = = = 
 The Phra Thinang Borom Ratchasathit Mahoran ( พระที ่ นั ่ <unk> ; rtgs : Phra Thi Nang Boromma Ratcha <unk> <unk> ) , is a massive square shaped structure at the very back of the Chakri Maha Prasat group . Formerly the <unk> Sawad <unk> Hall and the <unk> <unk> Hall . The two halls were also built by King Rama V as a banqueting hall to host foreign guests and dignitaries . By the reign of King Rama IX the building was so run down that the king ordered it to be demolished . Construction of a new hall began in 1996 , but was interrupted by the 1997 Asian financial crisis . Construction was eventually resumed on 1 April 2004 . The new throne hall was built on a raised platform and is composed of several inter @-@ connected buildings forming two internal courtyards . These rooms function as a new banqueting hall and is use for important state functions . On the 13 June 2006 the hall welcomed the royal representatives of 25 monarchies worldwide for the celebration of King Rama IX 's 60th Anniversary on the Throne . This included 12 ruling monarchs , 8 royal consorts and 7 crown princes . 
 = = = Phra Maha Prasat group = = = 
 The Phra Maha Prasat ( <unk> ) group is situated on the westernmost part of the Middle Court . The main buildings within this area dates from the reign of King Rama I and contains some of the oldest existing edifice within the Grand Palace . The entire throne hall group is contained within a walled and paved courtyard . Similarly to the other two groups , the Maha Prasat buildings were built , embellished and refurbished over successive reigns . The building formed a single axis from north to south , with the public throne hall to the front and residential halls behind . Surrounding them are lesser functional halls and pavilion for used by the king and his court . 
 Initially after the construction of the Grand Palace , King Rama I ordered that on this location a copy of the Phra Thinang <unk> Maha Prasat ( พระที ่ นั ่ <unk> ) should be built . The ancient throne hall was once located at the old palace in Ayutthaya , which had been destroyed 15 years earlier . This new throne hall was given the name Phra Thinang Amarinthara Pisek Maha Prasat ( พระที ่ นั ่ <unk> ; rtgs : Phra Thi Nang <unk> Maha Prasat ) . Construction began in 1782 and was finished in 1784 . This was the hall where King Rama I celebrated his full coronation ceremony . However , in 1789 the entire hall was struck by lighting and burnt to the ground . In its place King Rama I ordered the construction of a new hall , however under a different design and name . 
 As a result of this disaster King Rama I predicted that the Chakri dynasty would last only 150 years from its foundation . This prophecy was recorded in a diary of a princess of the first reign , after reading it many years later , King Rama V remarked that 150 years was too short and that the princess must have inadvertently dropped a nought . This prophecy was again present in the minds of many people , when only three months after the dynasty 's 150th anniversary celebrations the Siamese revolution of 1932 was carried out . The revolution replaced the absolute monarchy of the Chakri monarchs with a constitutional monarchy with Siam 's first constitution . 
 The ceremonial and residential part was divided between two new halls , the Dusit Maha Prasat and the Phiman Rattaya . Ever since then no coronations were held inside the hall . Upon the king 's death , the hall was used for his official lying @-@ in @-@ state . It has since become a custom that the remains of kings , queens and other high @-@ ranking members of the royal family are to be placed with the hall for an official mourning period . 
 The entrance to this building group is through one of the three gates at the northern end of the wall . These gates are decorated with Chinese porcelain in floral patterns . Only the Dusit Maha Prasat Throne Hall is open to the public . 
 = = = = Phra Thinang Dusit Maha Prasat = = = = 
 The Phra Thinang Dusit Maha Prasat ( พระที ่ นั ่ <unk> ) dominates the Maha Prasat group . The throne hall was built on a symmetrical cruciform plan , the roof is topped with a tall gilded spire . The hall is considered an ideal archetype of Thai traditional architecture . Every aspect of the exterior decoration of the throne hall is <unk> with symbolism . The hall is build in the shape of a tall mountain to represent Mount Meru , the mythological centre of the universe . 
 The spire can be divided into three sections . The lower section , which is the base , is formed of seven superimposed layers , each layer representing a level of heaven in accordance with the <unk> Buddhist cosmology . The middle section is in the shape of a bell ; however the roundness has been flattened to create a four sided shape . This represents the stupa in which the Buddha 's ashes have been interred . The top section is similar to the top of <unk> , depicting a tapered lotus bud or the crystal dew drop signifying the escape from the Saṃsāra or cycle of rebirths . The spire is supported by garudas on its four sides ; as well as being the symbol of kingship , the garuda represents the mythical creatures of the <unk> forest surrounding Mount Meru . 
 The pediments are decorated with the figure of Narayana riding on the back of a garuda , this figure symbolizes kingship and the king 's association with the Hindu deity . According to legend Narayana descended from heaven in human form to help mankind by alleviating them from suffering . Thus the deity represents all the ideal qualities in a king . The throne hall stands on a high base with convex and concave moldings . The bottom layer , according to Thai beliefs resembles a lion 's foot , the lion is a symbol of the Buddha 's family and alludes to the Buddha 's own royal heritage . 
 The most unusual feature of the throne hall is the small porch , projecting out at the front of the building . Under this porch stands the Busabok Mala Throne ( พระที ่ นั ่ <unk> ) , whose spire echoes that of the larger building itself . The high base of the throne is surrounded by praying deities . During the reign of King Rama I , the throne was used when the king appeared before his vassal states ; later it was used for certain ceremonies . The two doors to the hall is situated at the sides of the throne . 
 The interior walls of the throne hall are painted with a lotus bud design arranged in a geometric pattern . Within the lotus buds are seated praying deities , a common Thai motif often associated with holy places . The ceiling , which has a coffered octagonal shape section directly below the spire , is decorated with glass mosaic stars . This reinforces the impression of being in a heavenly abode . The interior panel of the door and window shutters depicted standing deities facing each other holding weapons as guards for the king . The thickness of the walls allow further spaces between the shutters and the wall to be decorated , these are decorated with murals depicting trees in Chinese style . 
 The two arms of the cruciform plan contains different thrones for use in different royal functions ; these included the Mother @-@ of @-@ Pearl Throne ( พระแท ่ <unk> ์ <unk> ) which stands almost at the centre of the hall between the intersecting points of the four arms . The square @-@ shaped throne is entirely inlaid with mother @-@ of @-@ pearl , dating from the reign of King Rama I. It was saved from the Amarinthara Pisek Maha Prasat , when the throne hall burnt down in 1789 . The throne is topped by the Royal Nine @-@ tiered Umbrella . 
 To the eastern transept is the Mother @-@ of @-@ Pearl Bed ( พระแท ่ <unk> ) which was made to match the Mother @-@ of @-@ Pearl Throne . The bed was once the king 's personal bed and was kept inside the Phra Thinang Phiman Rattaya ; however once it was no longer used it was transferred to the Dusit Maha Prasat Throne Hall . The bed is in the form of a high platform with many layers , and small steps leading to the top . When royal ceremonies are carried out within the throne hall , member of the royal family take their seat in the southern transept , while government officials sit to the north , Buddhist monks to the east ; the funeral urn is to the west . During such times the throne and bed were used as altars for Buddha images . 
 Behind the Mother @-@ of @-@ Pearl Throne is the Phra <unk> Busabok Mala Throne ( <unk> ; rtgs : Phra <unk> <unk> Mala ) . This half throne protrudes from the southern wall of the throne hall and opens like a window into the hall . The style of the throne is similar to Busabok Mala Throne on the porch outside . The throne was built during the reign of King Rama IV , in order for the palace women to attend important ceremonies through the window but behind a screen , separating them from men arriving from the outside . 
 = = = = Phra Thinang Phiman Rattaya = = = = 
 The Phra Thinang Phiman Rattaya ( พระที ่ นั ่ <unk> ) is located directly behind the Dusit Maha Prasat Throne Hall . The Phiman Rattaya Throne Hall is a residential palace and was built for King Rama I as the main royal apartment . Over time the residential use of the palace declined and was eventually ended . Now the hall is only used as a ceremonial venue . The throne hall was built in the traditional Thai @-@ style of a rectangular shape . The east , west and south sides of the hall are surrounded by a colonnade of columns on the outside . Surrounding the hall are two gardens . During the reign of King Rama VI it was used as a meeting hall for members of the royal family and other familial functions . The hall also provided a venue for the investiture ceremonies where individuals are awarded with State orders and decorations by a member of the royal family . Now the hall is only used , in conjunction with the Dusit Maha Prasat , as the main venue for state funerals . 
 = = = = Phra Thinang <unk> Phimok Prasat = = = = 
 The Phra Thinang <unk> Phimok Prasat ( พระที ่ นั ่ <unk> ์ <unk> ์ <unk> ; rtgs : Phra Thi Nang <unk> Phimok Prasat ) is an open pavilion , built on a platform on the east wall of the Maha Prasat group . The pavilion was built by King Rama IV as a robing pavilion for the king to change his regalia when entering the Maha Prasat premises . The pavilion was also used as the king 's royal <unk> mounting platform . The pavilion is considered the epitome of the finest qualities of Thai traditional architecture in proportion , style and detail . A smaller replica of the pavilion was exhibited at the Brussels World Fair in 1958 . 
 The pavilion is built on a cruciform layout with the northern and southern ends being longer . The roof is topped with a spire of five @-@ tiers , making it a prasat rather than a ' maha prasat ' ( which has seven ) . The spire is supported by swans as opposed to the traditional garudas . The eastern pediment depicts the Hindu god Shiva standing on a plinth with one foot raised , holding a sword in his left hand and right hand raised to a blessing . The columns of the pavilion are decorated with gold and silver glass mosaic in a floral pattern ; the capital of these columns take the form of long lotus petals . 
 = = = = Phra Thinang <unk> <unk> = = = = 
 The Phra Thinang <unk> <unk> ( พระที ่ นั ่ <unk> ; rtgs : Phra Thi Nang Ratcha <unk> ) is located on the southern end of the eastern wall . The closed rectangular building was built as a council chamber for use by the king and his ministers . In 1897 on his first trip to Europe , King Rama V installed Queen <unk> <unk> as regent , and she presided over privy council meetings here . This tradition was repeated in 1956 when Queen Sirikit , as regent presided over the privy council while King Rama IX briefly entered the Sangha as a monk . Occasionally the building is still used by the king for private audiences . The peculiar characteristic of this building was the projecting pediments over the roof line . This feature was common during the Ayutthaya period . 
 = = = = Ho <unk> <unk> = = = = 
 The Ho <unk> <unk> ( <unk> ้ <unk> ่ <unk> ) is a closed pavilion , situated on the western wall of the Maha Prasat group . The pavilion was built by King Rama VI as a robing room . The building is a two @-@ storied Thai style rectangular shaped hall with a walkway leading from the top floor towards the Dusit Maha Prasat Throne Hall . 
 = = = = Mount Kailasa = = = = 
 The miniature model of Mount Kailasa ( <unk> ; rtgs : Khao <unk> <unk> ) , the mythical abode of Shiva , was built during the reign of King Rama IV . The miniature mountain was used as a setting for an important ceremony called the Royal <unk> Ceremony . This ancient rite of passage would be performed for the royal prince and princess around the age of thirteen . The ceremony , sometimes lasting seven days of festivities , involves a purifying bath and the cutting of the traditional topknot hair of the royal child . The latter act was done by the king himself , the hair is later thrown into the Chao Phraya river as an offering . For this purpose there is a miniature palace on the summit for the ceremony to take <unk> the lower part of the mountain is populated with stone sculptures of miniature mythical animals of the <unk> Forest . The mount is situated behind the walk way between the Dusit Maha Prasat Throne Hall and Ho <unk> <unk> . This area is considered part of the Inner Court and is not opened to the public . 
 = = = Siwalai Garden = = = 
 The Siwalai Garden ( <unk> , Suan Siwalai ) is situated to the easternmost part of the Middle court and is considered separate from the other state buildings and throne halls . The garden has been in its present form , since King Rama V , and contains both royal residences and religious buildings . Throughout the years several structures were built and demolished by various kings . The garden was first created at the behest of King Rama I as a private retreat called the Suan Kaew ( <unk> ้ ว ) or ' Crystal Garden ' . The name was changed by Rama II to Suan <unk> or ' Right Garden ' , who also embellished the garden and transformed it into a pleasure garden for the inhabitants of the Inner Court . 
 The greatest change to the area occurred during the reign of King Rama IV , when the entire garden was turned into a new residential palace . This palace was composed of several interconnected buildings of various styles and sizes for the king 's use . This buildings complex was named the Phra Abhinaowas Niwet ( <unk> ์ <unk> ์ ; rtgs : Phra <unk> Niwet ) . The building group are on an east to west axis , with reception halls to the east and residential halls in the west . These buildings were built in a combination of Thai and Western styles ; the principal building of the Phra Abhinaowas Niwet group was the Phra Thinang Ananta Samakhom ; this European style grand audience chamber was used by the king to receive various foreign missions . Other buildings included King Rama IV 's primary residential hall , observatory and banqueting hall . By the reign of King Rama V the Phra Abhinaowas Niwet building group became so dilapidated that most were eventually demolished ; the names of some of the halls were later assumed by new royal buildings ( for example the new Ananta Samakhom Throne Hall in the Dusit Palace ) . King Rama V had the area turned once more into a private garden for use by the Inner Court and also gave the garden its present name . The new garden contained some of the old buildings as well as new additions , such as a small lawn in the south western corner called the Suan Tao or ' Turtle Garden ' . The layout of the Siwalai Garden remained mostly unchanged until the present day . 
 = = = = Phra Thinang Boromphiman = = = = 
 The Phra Thinang Boromphiman ( พระที ่ นั ่ <unk> ; rtgs : Phra Thi Nang Boromma Phiman ) is the largest structure within the Siwalai Garden ; it is located at the northernmost end . The two @-@ storey Neo @-@ Renaissance residence was constructed during the reign of King Rama V from 1897 to 1903 . The new palace was built over the site of an old armoury , after King Rama V had it demolished . The new palace was intended as a gift to the first Crown Prince of Siam , Prince Maha <unk> . It was originally named Phra Thinang <unk> <unk> ( พระที ่ นั ่ <unk> ) . However , before the construction was finished the prince died of typhoid at the age of 16 . Once completed the palace was handed to the next heir , Crown Prince Maha Vajiravudh , who ascended the throne in 1910 as Rama VI . He later gave the palace its present name . 
 Under the supervision of foreign architects , namely the German C. <unk> , the Boromphiman Throne Hall became the most modern building within the Grand Palace ; it was also the first to be designed to accommodate carriages and motorcars . The exterior walls are embellished with pilasters and elaborate plaster designs . The triangular and semi @-@ circular pediments are decorated with stuccoed floral motifs . The palace 's distinctive Mansard roof is covered in dark grey slate tiles . On the façade of the building , the main and central pediment show the emblem of the crown prince . 
 Even though the architectural style and exterior decoration of the building is entirely Western , the interior decorations is entirely Thai . The central hall , situated under a dome , is decorated with murals of the god Indra , Varuna , Agni and Yama — all depicted in Thai style . Below them are Thai inscriptions composed by King Rama VI himself . 
 After his accession to the throne , King Rama VI occasionally stayed at the palace . King Rama VII stayed at the palace for a few nights before his coronation in 1925 , while King Ananda <unk> ( Rama VIII ) made the palace his main place of residence upon his return to Thailand from Switzerland in December 1945 . He lived in this palace with his younger brother Prince Bhumibol Adulyadej ( later King Rama IX ) and his mother Princess Sri Sangwan . On the morning of 9 June 1946 the palace bore witness to his mysterious and unexplained death by gunshot . King Rama IX later refurbished the palace and added an extra wing extending south . 
 Currently the palace is not open to the public , and serves as the official guest house for visiting Heads of State and their entourage . To the southeast of the Boromphiman Throne Hall , there are also two guest houses for use by the entourage of state visitors . 
 = = = = Phra Thinang <unk> Prasat = = = = 
 The Phra Thinang <unk> Prasat ( พระที ่ นั ่ <unk> ) is a small pavilion built on the wall between the Siwalai Garden and the Maha Monthien buildings . The pavilion has a <unk> style roof and a gilded spire , decorated in glass mosaic . The pavilion was built by King Rama IV as a monument to his father King Rama II . After its completion the ashes of King Rama II was moved and was housed in the pavilion . After the death of King Rama IV the ashes was moved back to the Ho Phra That Monthien Buddha Image Hall , currently the pavilion houses several Buddha images . 
 = = = = Phra Thinang Siwalai Maha Prasat = = = = 
 The Phra Thinang Siwalai Maha Prasat ( พระที ่ นั ่ <unk> ) is located on the southern @-@ eastern end of the Siwalai Garden . The Siwalai Maha Prasat is a Thai @-@ style edifice with a <unk> style spire of seven tiers . Built during the reign of King Rama V in 1878 to house the metal statues of his four predecessors , which were cast in 1869 . The hall was to be used as a royal pantheon , where the lives of previous monarchs were to be commemorated and worshiped . Later King Rama VI had the statues removed and rehoused at the Prasat Phra <unk> <unk> in the Temple of the Emerald Buddha compound , where they would be more <unk> to the public . On 6 April 1918 the first ceremony of worship was inaugurated , this ceremony continues to be performed annually . Since the removal of the statues , the Siwalai Maha Prasat has been left vacant . 
 = = = = Phra Thinang <unk> = = = = 
 The Phra Thinang <unk> ( พระที ่ นั ่ <unk> ์ ) is a small open pavilion made of wood , built by King Rama VI . The pavilion is situated on the northern edge of the lawn south of the Boromphiman palace . The pavilion is decorated with a flame motif in gilded black lacquer . The gables bear the insignia of King Rama VI . The king used the pavilion as a place of rest and as a seat during garden parties . 
 = = = = Phra Buddha <unk> = = = = 
 The Phra Buddha <unk> ( <unk> ) is a Phra ubosot ( or ordination hall ) , situated at the very centre of the Siwalai Garden . The religious building is a shrine to a Buddha image called the Phra Buddha <unk> Chakraphat <unk> <unk> ( <unk> ์ <unk> ; rtgs : Phra <unk> <unk> Chakkraphat <unk> <unk> ) which was brought from <unk> in Laos . The ubosot was built for this purpose by King Rama IV . The ubosot is built of grey stone and has a two @-@ tier green title roof . At the front there is a portico of pillars . Running around the outside of the ubosot is an open pillared gallery . Religious ceremonies have been performed here in the past . 
 = = Inner Court = = 
 The Inner Court or the Khet Phra Racha Than Chan Nai ( เขตพระราชฐานชั ้ <unk> ) , referred to simply as Fai Nai ( <unk> ่ <unk> ; rtgs : Fai Nai ; literally ' The Inside ' ) , occupies the southernmost part of the Grand Palace complex . This area is reserved exclusively for use by the king and his harem of queens and consorts ( minor wives ) . These women were often called ' forbidden women ' or Nang harm ( <unk> ้ <unk> ; rtgs : nang ham ) by the general populace . Other inhabitants of the court were the king 's children and a multitude of ladies @-@ in @-@ waiting and servants . The king 's royal consorts were drawn from the ranks of the Siamese : royalty and nobility . Usually there were also the daughters of rulers of tributary states . Royal polygamy ended in practice during the reign of King Rama VI , who refused to keep a polygamous household . It was ended officially by King Rama VII in the early 20th century , when he outlawed the practice for all and took only one consort : Queen Rambhai Barni . By this time the inhabitants of the court had dwindled to only a few and finally disappeared within a few decades afterwards . Historically the Inner Court was a town complete within itself , divided by narrow streets and lawns . It had its own shops , government , schools , warehouses , laws and law courts , all exclusively controlled by women for the royal women . Men on special repair work and doctors were admitted only under the watchful eyes of its female guards . The king 's sons were permitted to live inside until they reached puberty ; after their tonsure ceremonies they were sent outside the palace for further education . There are currently no inhabitants within the Inner Court and the buildings within are not used for any purpose ; nevertheless , the entire court is closed to the public . 
 The population of the Inner Court varied over different periods , but by all accounts it was large . Each queen consort had her own household of around 200 to 300 women . Her various ladies @-@ in @-@ waiting were usually recruited from noble families ; others were minor princesses who would also have a retinue of servants . Each minor wife or consort ( เจ ้ <unk> ; Chao Chom ) had a fairly large household ; this would increase significantly if she gave birth to the king 's child , as she would be elevated to the rank of consort mother ( เจ ้ <unk> ; Chao Chom Manda ) . Each royal lady had a separate establishment , the size of which was in proportion to her rank and status in accordance with palace law . Altogether the population of the Inner Court numbered nearly 3 @,@ 000 inhabitants . 
 The Inner Court was once populated by small low @-@ lying structures surrounded by gardens , lawns and ponds . Over the course of the late 19th century new residential houses were constructed in this space , resulting in overcrowded conditions . Most of the buildings that remain were constructed during the reign of King Rama V in Western styles , mostly Italianate . The residences vary in size and are divided into three categories ; small royal villas or Phra <unk> ( <unk> ; rtgs : <unk> <unk> ) , villas or <unk> ( <unk> ; rtgs : <unk> ) and houses or <unk> ( <unk> ; rtgs : <unk> ) . Each was distributed to the inhabitants in accordance with their rank and stature . The court is surrounded and separated from the rest of the Grand Palace by a second set of walls within , parallel to those that ring around the palace as a whole . These walls are punctuated by a set of gates that connects the Middle the Inner Courts to the outside and to each other ; the entrance through these gates were strictly monitored . The three main building groups in the Middle Court are built so that the residential halls of each are situated to the south and straddled the boundary between the Middle and Inner Court . Thus these residential spaces of the king became the focal point of palace life and the lives of the palace women on the inside . Immediately behind these residential halls are the large royal villas of high @-@ ranking consorts such as Queen <unk> <unk> and Queen <unk> <unk> . Surrounding them are smaller villas belonging to other consorts such as those belonging to Princess Consort Dara <unk> . Finally at the lower end ( the southernmost part ) are the row houses or Tao Teng ( <unk> <unk> ง ; rtgs : <unk> teng ) for the middle- and low @-@ ranking consorts . These residences also functioned as a de facto secondary layer of surveillance , at the very edges of the Inner Court . 
 The Inner Court was governed by a series of laws known as the Palace Laws ( <unk> , Kot Monthien Ban ; literally ' Palace Maintenance Law ' ) . Some of the laws dated back to the times of the Kingdom of Ayutthaya . Most of them deal with the hierarchy and status of the women , while others deal with their behaviour and conduct . The order and discipline of the inhabitants were enforced by a regiment of all @-@ female guards ( <unk> , Krom <unk> ; rtgs : <unk> <unk> ) . These guards were described by Prince Chula <unk> as " tough looking amazons " . The head of this body was known as the <unk> Fai Nai ( <unk> ่ <unk> ; rtgs : <unk> Fai Nai ) the <unk> of the inside , under her command were various officials . These officials had specific responsibilities concerning every facet of life within the Inner Court . These responsibilities included duties concerning : discipline and jails , the maintenance of Buddhist images , the guarding of gates , the inner treasury and expenditure . One of their main duties was to accompany men , once they were admitted into the area , and to remain with them until they left . They controlled the traffic of the court and were drilled like regular soldiers . When any person of importance passed along the streets they ran ahead and cleared the way for them . At night they patrolled the streets with lamps or torches . <unk> or indiscretion on behalf of the wives was punishable by death , for the women and the man . The last such punishment was met out in 1859 to a young nobleman and a minor wife , who were having an affair . 
 Only the children of the king could be born inside the Inner Court . Every detail of the birth of the royal child was recorded , including the time of birth , which was to be used later by court astrologers to cast his or her horoscope . Ceremonies concerning the birth and the rites of passage of the child was performed within the walls of the Inner Court . The birth of a royal child was first announced by a succession of women who proclaimed the news along the Inner Court 's streets . There were two waiting orchestras , one on the inside made of women and one on the outside of men , who would then carry out the official proclamation with conch shell fanfares . If the child was a prince the Gong of Victory was to be struck three times . The children would live with their respective mothers and be educated in special schools within the court . 
 Although the women of ' The Inside ' could never have the same level of freedom to those on the outside , life inside the Inner Court was not disagreeable , as life was easier than the outside and most necessities were provided for . The women usually entered the palace as girls and remained inside for the rest of their lives . As girls they would be assigned certain duties as pages ; as they grew older and became wives and mothers they would have a household to look after . During the reign of King Rama IV , the women of the palace were for the first time allowed to leave ; however they were required to obtain permission from the <unk> first and were strictly chaperoned . Dr. Malcolm A. Smith , physician to Queen <unk> <unk> from 1914 to 1919 , wrote that , " there is no evidence to show that they longed for freedom or were unhappy in their surroundings . Even Mrs. Leonowens , fanatical opponent of polygamy that she was , does not tell us that " . Indeed , Anna Leonowens ' book The English Governess at the Siamese Court , published in 1873 , was set inside the Inner Court . 
 = = Defensive walls = = 
 The castellated walls of the Grand Palace were constructed during the reign of King Rama I in 1782 . Later during the reign of King Rama II the Grand Palace and its walls were extended towards the south . Cannon emplacements were replaced with guard houses and were given rhyming names . The northern wall measures 410 metres , the east 510 metres , the south 360 metres and the west 630 metres , a total of 1 @,@ 910 metres ( 6 @,@ 270 ft ) . There are 12 gates in the outer walls . Inside the palace , there were over 22 gates and a labyrinth of inner walls ; however some of these has already been demolished . Around the outer walls there are also 17 small forts . On the eastern wall , facing Sanamchai Road , there are two throne halls . 
 = = = Phra Thinang Chai <unk> = = = 
 The Phra Thinang Chai <unk> ( พระที ่ นั ่ <unk> ; rtgs : Phra Thi Nang Chai Chumphon ) is located on the north of the eastern wall , opposite the Temple of the Emerald Buddha . The small rectangular pavilion was built on the top of the wall of the palace . The pavilion has a roof of two tiers and is covered with tiles . The exterior is decorated with black lacquer and glass mosaic . The pavilion was built by King Rama IV as a viewing platform , where he could observe royal and religious processions going by along the Sanamchai Road . The pavilion was also used for a time as the main shrine of the Phra Siam <unk> figure , before it was moved to its current shrine in the Phaisan Thaksin Hall . 
 = = = Phra Thinang <unk> Prasat = = = 
 Situated on the south eastern wall of the Grand Palace is the Phra Thinang <unk> Prasat ( พระที ่ นั ่ <unk> ) ; the hall sits between the Deva Phitak and <unk> Chaisit Gates on the eastern wall . It was first built by King Rama I in imitation of the " Phra Thinang <unk> <unk> " ( พระที ่ นั ่ <unk> ์ <unk> ์ ; rtgs : ' Phra Thi Nang <unk> <unk> ) on the walls of the Royal Palace in Ayutthaya . Originally called the <unk> Sung or high pavilion , it was made entirely of wood and was an open @-@ air structure . During the reign of King Rama III , a new structure was built out of brick and mortar . This new structure was renamed Phra Thinang <unk> ( พระที ่ นั ่ <unk> ์ ; rtgs : Phra Thi Nang <unk> Sawan ) . The hall is used by the king to give audiences to the public and view military parades . 
 The new structure consists of two @-@ stories , the lower in Western style and the top level in Thai design . The central pavilion has a wooden balcony , which is used by the king and royal family for the granting of public audiences . The roof over the central pavilion is topped by a five @-@ tier prasat in <unk> style , decorated in glass mosaic . The hall 's wings stretching from the north to the south , each has nine large windows along the exterior . Later in the reign of King Rama V , the entire structure was refurbished and finally given its present name . 
 = = = Gates = = = 
 The Grand Palace has twelve gates ( <unk> , <unk> , literally a door ) , three along each of the four walls . These massive gates are built of brick and mortar and are topped with a Prang style spire . These gates are all painted in white , with gigantic red doors . Each of these outer gates were given rhyming names , starting from the north west in a clockwise direction around . 
 North wall 
 Phiman <unk> ( <unk> ์ ; rtgs : Wiman <unk> ) 
 <unk> <unk> ( <unk> ; rtgs : <unk> Chai Si ) 
 <unk> <unk> ( <unk> ์ ; rtgs : Mani <unk> ) 
 East wall 
 <unk> Sopha ( <unk> ; rtgs : <unk> Sopha ) 
 Deva Phitak ( <unk> ์ ; rtgs : <unk> <unk> ) 
 <unk> Chaisit ( <unk> ์ <unk> ์ ; rtgs : Sak Chaisit ) 
 South wall 
 <unk> <unk> ( <unk> ; rtgs : <unk> <unk> ) 
 <unk> <unk> ( <unk> ์ ; rtgs : <unk> ) 
 Phitak Bovorn ( <unk> ์ <unk> ; rtgs : <unk> <unk> ) 
 West wall 
 <unk> <unk> ( <unk> ; rtgs : <unk> <unk> ) 
 Deva <unk> ( <unk> ์ ; rtgs : <unk> ) 
 Udom <unk> ( <unk> ์ ) 
 = = = Forts = = = 
 Along the walls of the Grand Palace there are seventeen forts ( ป ้ <unk> , Pom ) ; originally there were only ten , with later additions made . These small structures are usually small battlements with cannon placements and watchtower . The forts were also given rhyming names . 
 North wall 
 <unk> <unk> ( ป ้ <unk> ์ ; rtgs : In <unk> ) 
 Khan <unk> ( ป ้ <unk> ์ <unk> ่ <unk> ; rtgs : Khan <unk> Phet ) 
 <unk> <unk> ( ป ้ <unk> ็ <unk> ; rtgs : <unk> <unk> ) ( corner fort ) 
 East wall 
 <unk> <unk> ( ป ้ <unk> ; rtgs : <unk> Chai Wing ) 
 Sing <unk> ( ป ้ <unk> ์ ; rtgs : <unk> Khan ) 
 Kayan <unk> ( ป ้ <unk> ; rtgs : <unk> Ying Yut ) 
 <unk> <unk> ( ป ้ <unk> ; rtgs : <unk> Rut Rom Ran ) 
 Ananda Kiri ( ป ้ <unk> ; rtgs : Ananta Khiri ) 
 <unk> <unk> ( ป ้ <unk> ; rtgs : Mani Prakan ) ( corner fort ) 
 South wall 
 <unk> Sima ( ป ้ <unk> ; rtgs : <unk> Sima ) 
 <unk> <unk> ( ป ้ <unk> ์ ; rtgs : Phu Pha <unk> ) ( corner fort ) 
 West wall 
 <unk> <unk> ( ป ้ <unk> ; rtgs : <unk> <unk> ) 
 Solos Sila ( ป ้ <unk> ; rtgs : <unk> Sila ) 
 Maha Santha <unk> ( ป ้ <unk> ; rtgs : Maha <unk> <unk> ) 
 <unk> <unk> ( ป ้ <unk> ; rtgs : <unk> Nikon ) 
 = = Museum of the Emerald Buddha Temple = = 
 The Museum of the Emerald Buddha Temple ( <unk> ์ <unk> ) , despite its name , is the main artefacts repository of both the Grand Palace and Temple of the Emerald Buddha complex . The museum is located between the Outer and Middle Court and sits opposite the Phra Thinang Maha Prasat Group . A building was constructed on the present location in 1857 during the reign of King Rama IV as the Royal Mint ( <unk> ์ <unk> , Rong <unk> <unk> ; rtgs : Rong <unk> <unk> ) . King Rama V ordered the mint to be enlarged , but not long after this the building was destroyed by fire and needed to be rebuilt . 
 The two @-@ storied structure is rectangular in plan . The portico has four Ionic columns with fluted stems and cabbage leaf capitals . The front gables of the building have Renaissance style plaster moulding . The lower part of the exterior walls are made of plastered brick . The upper windows have semi @-@ circular French windows , with pilasters on both sides . In 1902 a new royal mint department was constructed outside the palace 's walls and the old mint building was left vacant . The building was then first converted for use as a royal guards barracks and later as a royal guards officer 's club . 
 In 1982 , on the bicentennial anniversary year of the founding of Bangkok and the building of the Grand Palace , the building was selected as the site of a new museum . It was established at the instigation of Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn to hold certain architectural elements , which had to be replaced ; various artefacts and Buddha images that were donated to the Grand Palace by the general public . 
 The ground floor of the museum displays a varied selection of artefacts . These included certain architectural elements , which were removed from various buildings within the Grand Palace during different renovations , as well as were the stone Buddha images and Chinese statues . They included many figures from Thai literature , the Ramakien , such as <unk> and Hanuman . The stone figures date from the reign of King Rama III , and were later moved to the museum to prevent damage . In the central hall are the bones of white elephants . These elephants were not actually white but have certain special characteristics such as pinkish colouring and cream eyes . The White elephant was an important symbol of kingship ; the more the monarch possessed the greater was his prestige . This belief and veneration of the animal is common to many other South @-@ east Asian cultures . 
 The upper floor rooms display more artistic and precious objects . In the main hall are two architectural models of the Grand Palace , the first representing the Grand Palace during the reign of King Rama I , and another in the reign of King Rama V. Behind these are numerous Buddha images and commemorative coins . In the doorway leading to the main hall is a small mother @-@ of @-@ pearl seating platform known as Phra Thaen Song Sabai ( พระแท ่ <unk> ) , which was once located in the Phra Thinang Phiman Rattaya Throne Hall . The platform was used for informal audiences and dates from the time of King Rama I. At the end of the main hall stands the Phra Thaen <unk> Throne ( พระแท ่ <unk> ์ ; rtgs : Phra Thaen <unk> Sila At ) , which is believed to date to the Sukhothai Kingdom and was brought back to Bangkok , from Sukhothai , by King Rama IV , when he was still a monk . Against the walls on either side of the hall are four different Buddha images of Javanese style ; they were purchased by King Rama V. The room to the right of the <unk> Throne displays the various seasonal robes of the Emerald Buddha . To the left of the main hall is an lacquer ware screen depicting the crowning of Shiva , king of the gods . The screen was formerly kept in the Phra Thinang Amarinthara Pisek Maha Prasat ; it was saved from the fire apparently by the hands of King Rama I himself . The rest of the upper floor displays various objets d ′ art ( such as a model of Mount Kailasa ) and more Buddha images . 
 = Upminster Bridge tube station = 
 Upminster Bridge is a London Underground station on Upminster Road in the Upminster Bridge neighbourhood of the London Borough of Havering in northeast London , England . The station is on the District line and is the penultimate station on the eastern extremity of that line . The station was opened on 17 December 1934 by the London , Midland and Scottish Railway on the local electrified tracks between Upminster and Barking that were constructed in 1932 . The main station building is of a distinctive polygonal design . It has relatively low usage for a suburban station with approximately 1 million entries and exits during 2011 . 
 = = History = = 
 The London , Tilbury and Southend Railway from Fenchurch Street and Barking was constructed through the Upminster Bridge area in 1885 , with stations at Hornchurch and Upminster . The Whitechapel and Bow Railway opened in 1902 and allowed through services of the District Railway to operate to Upminster . The Metropolitan District converted to electric trains in 1905 and services were cut back to East Ham . Delayed by World War I , electrified tracks were extended by the London , Midland and Scottish Railway to Upminster and through services resumed in 1932 . The District Railway was incorporated into London Transport in 1933 , and became known as the District line . 
 The new tracks built by the London , Midland and Scottish Railway allowed additional intermediate stations to be constructed on the local lines between 1932 and 1935 . Increased local demand was caused by the expansion of the built up area of suburban London during the interwar period . The station at Upminster Bridge opened with platforms on the local electric lines on 17 December 1934 . The station was operated by the London , Midland and Scottish Railway but was only served by District line trains . After nationalisation of the railways in 1948 management of the station passed to British Railways and in 1969 ownership transferred to the London Underground . 
 = = Design = = 
 The station consists of a central island platform between the tracks that are elevated on a railway embankment . There are four tracks through the site although there are no platforms for the c2c lines . The full length of the platform is covered by a single station canopy with a central waiting room . The Art Deco red brick ticket office is located below platform level to which it is connected by a subway and stairway . Although similar to the other single @-@ storey station buildings on this part of the route , it is notable for its high atrium roof and polygonal shape . The floor is tiled with a reversed swastika pattern , a popular decorative design at the time the station was constructed . The station is listed as a building of local heritage interest by Havering London Borough Council . 
 As part of the public – private partnership arrangement for maintenance of the London Underground , the station was refurbished by Metronet during 2005 and 2006 . Works included provision of tactile strips and colour contrasted handrails for the visually impaired , installation of closed @-@ circuit television cameras , passenger help points , new electronic departure information displays on the platforms , a new public address system , and improved lighting . The station does not have step free access from the platforms to the street . 
 = = Location = = 
 The station is named after a nearby crossing of the River Ingrebourne . The river was the boundary between the ancient parishes of Hornchurch and Upminster and the station is located on the western Hornchurch side . The station is situated on Upminster Road in the London Borough of Havering and is flanked by a parade of shops . It is situated in a primarily residential area and is near to Havering Sixth Form College and Hornchurch Stadium . London bus routes 248 , 370 and <unk> route 26 serve the site of the station , providing connections to Hornchurch , Lakeside , Romford and Upminster . The London Loop key walking route passes outside the station , and it forms the end point of section 22 from Harold Wood and the starting point of section 23 to Rainham . The station is located on the eastern extremity of the District line and is the penultimate station before the terminus at Upminster . Upminster station is 1 @.@ 24 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 77 mi ) to the east of the station and Hornchurch is 1 @.@ 26 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 78 mi ) to the west . 
 = = Services = = 
 The station is in London fare zone 6 . The typical off @-@ peak service from the station is twelve District line trains per hour to Upminster and twelve to Earl 's Court , of which six continue to Ealing Broadway and six continue to Richmond . At peak periods the number of trains per hour increases to fifteen and some trains continue from Earl 's Court to Wimbledon . Services towards central London operate from approximately 05 : 00 to 23 : 30 and services to Upminster operate from approximately 06 : 00 to 01 : 30 . The journey time to Upminster is two minutes ; to Barking is approximately 20 minutes , and to Tower Hill is approximately 42 minutes . Since 2006 , the station has been one of the first on the network to operate without a staffed ticket office . Total number of passenger entries and exits at the station during the year is as follows : 
 During 2011 there were 990 @,@ 000 passenger entries and exits at the station , continuing a trend of growth over the preceding eight years , but lower than neighbouring stations on the route . 
 = Three @-@ dollar piece = 
 The three @-@ dollar piece was a gold coin produced by the United States Bureau of the Mint from 1854 to 1889 . Authorized by the Act of February 21 , 1853 , the coin was designed by Mint Chief Engraver James B. Longacre . The obverse bears a representation of Lady Liberty wearing a headdress of a Native American princess and the reverse a wreath of corn , wheat , cotton , and tobacco . 
 In 1851 , Congress had authorized a silver three @-@ cent piece so that postage stamps of that value could be purchased without using the widely disliked copper cents . Two years later , a bill was passed which authorized a three @-@ dollar coin . By some accounts , the coin was created so larger quantities of stamps could be purchased . Longacre , in designing the piece , sought to make it as different as possible from the quarter eagle or $ 2 @.@ 50 piece , striking it on a thinner planchet and using a distinctive design . 
 Although over 100 @,@ 000 were struck in the first year , the coin saw little use . It circulated somewhat on the West Coast , where gold and silver were used to the exclusion of paper money , but what little place it had in commerce in the East was lost in the economic disruption of the Civil War , and was never regained . The piece was last struck in 1889 , and Congress ended the series the following year . Although many dates were struck in small numbers , the rarest was produced at the San Francisco Mint in 1870 ( 1870 @-@ S ) ; only one is known with certainty to exist . 
 = = Inception = = 
 In 1832 , New York Congressman Campbell P. White sought a means of returning American gold coins to circulation — as gold was overvalued with respect to silver by the government , gold coins had been routinely exported since the start of the 19th century . White 's solution was to have the silver dollar and gold eagle struck at full value , but to have smaller gold and silver coins , including a $ 3 piece , which contained less than their face value in metal . Although Congress , in passing the Coinage Act of 1834 , made adjustments to the ratio between gold and silver , it did not authorize a $ 3 coin at that time . 
 The Act of March 3 , 1845 authorized the first United States postage stamps and set the rate for local prepaid letters at five cents . In the years following , this rate was seen as too high and an impediment to commerce . Accordingly , Congress on March 3 , 1851 authorized both a three @-@ cent stamp and a three @-@ cent silver coin . Kentucky Representative Richard Henry Stanton believed that the need to make change from a silver half dime with large copper cents might defeat the new scheme , writing to Mint Director Robert M. Patterson that " reduced postage [ rates ] depended on a three @-@ cent coin for use in those states where copper does not circulate . " According to numismatic historian Walter Breen , " the main purpose of the new 3 ¢ piece would be to buy postage stamps without using the unpopular , heavy , and often filthy copper cents . 
 By 1853 , silver was overvalued with respect to gold . This was due to large discoveries of gold , especially in California , and silver was heavily exported . To correct this situation , Secretary of the Treasury Thomas Corwin advocated reducing the precious @-@ metal content of most silver coins to prevent their export . The opposition to the bill was led by Tennessee Representative Andrew Johnson , who believed that Congress had no authority to alter the gold / silver price ratio and , if it did , it should not exercise it . Nevertheless , Congress passed the bill , which became law on February 21 , 1853 . That bill also authorized a three @-@ dollar gold coin ; according to numismatic writer Don Taxay , provision for it had been inserted at the behest of gold interests . 
 According to Breen , Congress believed the new coin " would be convenient for exchange for rolls or small bags of silver 3 ¢ pieces , and for buying sheets of 3 ¢ stamps — always bypassing use of copper cents " . In 1889 , then @-@ Mint Director James P. Kimball wrote that " it is supposed that the three @-@ dollar piece was designed to be a multiple of the three @-@ cent piece , for the convenience of postal transactions " . Numismatist Walter Hagans in his 2003 article on the three @-@ dollar coin notes and dismisses the postal explanation , writing " the actual reason for the gold $ 3 coin was the abundant supply of gold discovered in California . " Coin dealer and author Q. David Bowers notes that " whether or not the $ 3 denomination was actually necessary or worthwhile has been a matter of debate among numismatists for well over a century . " 
 = = Preparation and design = = 
 Much of what is known of the design process for the three @-@ dollar piece is from an August 21 , 1858 , letter from the Mint 's chief engraver , James B. Longacre , the coin 's designer , to the then @-@ Mint director , James Ross Snowden . This letter is apparently in response to some criticism , and in it , Longacre discussed his views on coin design , especially regarding the three @-@ dollar piece . He noted that he was initially perplexed as to what to put on the coin ; the three @-@ dollar piece was the first time he had been allowed to choose a design . Although he had designed the three @-@ cent piece and other issues before Snowden 's directorship , he had been told what to put on those pieces . The coin weighed 64 @.@ 5 grams , and had a fineness of 900 . 
 Longacre noted that although those in charge of coinage design had usually dictated adaptations of Roman or Greek art , for the three @-@ dollar coin , he was minded to create something truly American : 
 Why should we in seeking a type for the illustration or symbol of a nation that need not hold itself lower than the Roman virtue or the Science of Greece prefer the barbaric period of a remote and distant people , from which to draw an emblem of nationality : to the aboriginal period of our own land : especially when the latter presents us with a characteristic distinction not less interesting , and more peculiar than that which still casts its chain over the civilized portion of the older continent ? Why not be American from the spring @-@ head within our own domain ? ... From the copper shores of Lake Superior to the silver mountains of Potosi , from the Ojibwa to the <unk> , the feathered tiara is a characteristic of the primitiveness of our hemisphere as the turban is of the Asiatic . 
 Representations of America as a female Native American , or Indian princess , dated back to the 16th century ; cartographers would place a native woman , often wearing a feathered headdress , upon their version of the North American continent . This evolved into an image of an Indian queen , then an Indian princess , and although Columbia eventually came to be the favored female embodiment of the United States , the image of the Indian princess survives in the popular view of such figures as Pocahontas and Sacagawea . 
 Some sources suggest that Longacre may have based the features of Liberty on those of his daughter , Sarah . This story would be more often associated with Longacre 's Indian Head cent , but the features of Liberty on both coins ( and also the Type I gold dollar , the double eagle , and the three @-@ cent nickel piece ) are nearly identical . To help distinguish the new coin from the quarter eagle or $ 2 @.@ 50 piece , Longacre used a thinner planchet , or blank , to make the piece greater in diameter . He also flattened the planchet of the gold dollar to enlarge it , and gave it the same Indian princess design . The reverse originates Longacre 's " agricultural wreath " of corn , tobacco , cotton , and wheat which would also appear on the gold dollar , Flying Eagle cent , and his revised reverse for the Seated Liberty dime and half dime . This blended the produce of the South and North at a time of intersectional tension . Numismatist Walter Hagans deems the wreathed reverse " as uniquely American as is the Indian maiden on the obverse . " 
 Art historian Cornelius Vermeule stated that " the one area in which Longacre gave free rein to his imagination was in the matter of fancy headdress for his renderings of Liberty . His caps of feathers , his bonnets of freedom , and his starry diadems are a joy to behold . " Nevertheless , Vermeule disliked the figure on the obverse , " the princess of the gold coins is a banknote engraver 's elegant version of folk art of the 1850s . The plumes or feathers are more like the crest of the Prince of Wales than anything that saw the Western frontier , save perhaps on a music hall beauty . " 
 At the time of the authorization of the three @-@ dollar piece , the Whig administration of Millard Fillmore was still in office , but two weeks later , Fillmore was succeeded by Democrat Franklin Pierce , and Mint Director George N. Eckert yielded his place to Thomas M. Pettit . Longacre submitted two designs to Pettit , and before the latter died on May 31 , 1853 , he selected one of the two ; relief models quickly followed the approval . Longacre 's models , both for the obverse and reverse , did not have lettering on them , as the legends and numbers were to be punched once a reduction was made . This allowed them to be used multiple times for different denominations . As Longacre was busy with the reduced @-@ weight silver coins ordered by Congress in the same act that had authorized the three @-@ dollar piece , work on dies did not begin until 1854 . 
 = = Production = = 
 The first three @-@ dollar pieces were 15 proof coins , delivered to the Secretary of the Treasury , James Guthrie , by Mint Director Snowden on April 28 , 1854 , most likely for distribution to legislators . The Philadelphia Mint then began the largest production of three @-@ dollar pieces the denomination would ever see . Chief Coiner Franklin Peale delivered 23 @,@ 140 pieces on May 8 and 29 @,@ 181 pieces four days later . However , after June 8 , there was only one further delivery by Peale , on November 10 , when the last 22 @,@ 740 of the mintage of 138 @,@ 618 were delivered . In addition to the strikings at Philadelphia , there was branch mint production , with 24 @,@ 000 pieces struck at the New Orleans Mint ( 1854 @-@ O ) and 1 @,@ 120 at Dahlonega ( 1854 @-@ D ) . A pair of dies was sent from Philadelphia to the Charlotte Mint on June 1 , but they were not used . A pair was sent to Dahlonega the same day , arriving on June 10 , with gauges and other necessary equipment following on July 15 . The coinage of the 1854 @-@ D took place in August ; the piece is today a rarity as few were put aside and it was not until decades later that mintmarked coins were saved as distinct varieties . Dies were sent to New Orleans in 1855 , 1856 , 1859 , and 1861 , only to remain unused ; no further strikings took place at any of the three southern branch mints . 
 Beginning in 1855 , the letters of the word " Dollars " were enlarged , following complaints from the public . The same year , coinage began at the San Francisco Mint , where 6 @,@ 600 were struck as opposed to 50 @,@ 555 at Philadelphia . Mintages at Philadelphia declined for the remainder of the decade , to 7 @,@ 036 by 1860 ; pieces were also struck at San Francisco in 1856 , 1857 , and 1860 . In 1859 , early numismatic writer <unk> W. <unk> wrote of the three @-@ dollar piece , " it is very unpopular , being frequently mistaken for a quarter eagle , and often counted as a five @-@ dollar piece . It is exceedingly annoying to that portion of the human family whose vision is dependent on artificial aid , and we think its retirement would meet with public approbation . " Perhaps a dozen contemporary numismatists collected three @-@ dollar pieces ; those who were serious ordered proof coins from the Mint . Coins in this condition became easier to obtain from Philadelphia as officials responded to the rise in interest in coin collecting which followed the introduction of the Flying Eagle cent in 1857 . 
 The coins saw some circulation in the East and Midwest , at least until 1861 , when the economic turmoil caused by the American Civil War caused gold and silver to vanish from commerce there . With gold being hoarded , in December 1861 , banks , and subsequently the Treasury , ceased to pay out gold at face value . The three @-@ dollar piece would never return to circulation in the eastern part of the country . On the West Coast , where gold and silver remained in use , the coin continued in commerce , and might be occasionally encountered . The San Francisco Mint issues were most commonly seen there . Despite the failure to circulate , three @-@ dollar pieces continued to be struck at Philadelphia as it was the policy of Mint Director James Pollock that each denomination should be struck every year , whether it circulated or not . Some Philadelphia Mint pieces migrated west in payment for transactions , as only gold and silver was acceptable money on the West Coast . Until the resumption of specie payments at the end of 1878 , gold pieces were only available from the Philadelphia Mint by paying a premium in banknotes . Pieces not sold were stored there . 
 In 1870 , a set of dies for the three @-@ dollar piece was sent from the Bureau of the Mint 's Engraving Department at the Philadelphia Mint to San Francisco . On May 14 , 1870 , Oscar Hugh La Grange , superintendent of the San Francisco Mint , sent a telegram to Mint Director Pollock , informing him that dies for the one- and three @-@ dollar pieces had been received , but lacked the customary " S " mint mark , and asking for guidance . The dies were , per Pollock 's instructions , returned to Philadelphia , but LaGrange informed Pollock that to secure a three @-@ dollar piece to place in the cornerstone of the new San Francisco Mint building , Coiner J.B. <unk> had engraved an " S " on the reverse die . It is not certain what became of the piece to be placed in the cornerstone , but <unk> also struck a piece for himself , which was mounted as jewelry at one time , and the existence of which was not known until 1907 . The only unique regular @-@ issue U.S. gold piece by date and mint mark , it last came on the market in 1982 , when it sold for $ 687 @,@ 500 . Today it forms part of the Harry W. Bass , Jr . Collection in the Money Museum of the American Numismatic Association in Colorado Springs . No other three @-@ dollar pieces were struck at San Francisco in 1870 ; dies were sent there most years between 1861 and 1873 , but , with the exception of 1870 , were not used . 
 On January 18 , 1873 , Philadelphia Mint Chief Coiner Archibald Loudon Snowden complained that the " 3 " in the date , as struck by the Mint , too closely resembled an " 8 " , especially on the smaller @-@ sized denominations . In response , Pollock ordered Chief Engraver William Barber to re @-@ engrave the date , opening the arms of the " 3 " wider on most denominations , including the three @-@ dollar piece . Both the Closed 3 and Open 3 varieties are extremely rare , though the official mintage of 25 pieces for 1873 is understated , since more specimens than that are known to exist . In 1875 and 1876 , no pieces were struck for circulation , with only pieces in proof condition being made available to collectors . The official mintage is 20 for 1875 and 45 for 1876 , though an unknown number of pieces may have been later illicitly restruck for each date . Numismatic writer R.W. Julian believes that there were no later restrikes , but as proof pieces were not counted until sold , employees substituted common @-@ date pieces when unsold coins were to be melted . These pieces had been made available to the public only as part of a proof set of all gold denominations , at a price of $ 43 ( a premium of $ 1 @.@ 50 over face value ) . Julian suggests that the relatively large mintages of almost 42 @,@ 000 in 1874 and some 82 @,@ 000 in 1878 were struck in anticipation of the resumption of specie payments , but when this finally occurred at the end of 1878 , " there was a loud yawn from the public and the Mint kept most of the pieces on hand , paying them out slowly as stocking <unk> . 
